"*00409*.*
"# Lecture Transcript: Janmāṣṭamī in Moscow (1989)

We are pledged to give freedom to religious propaganda and to introduce as much religious literature as desired. However, at present, 200,000 books are lying at the Moscow customs, which delighted all of humanity regarding *Bhagavad-gītā*, the most ancient book that is intended for everyone. This is what the director of the Lenin Library writes: "I was indebted to *Bhagavad-gītā* for a wonderful day. This is the first of the books. It seems that the entire empire is speaking to you. There is nothing small, insignificant in it; everything is large, consistent, serene. This is the voice of the most ancient mind. Reflect on another era in a different climate, but on the same questions—what worries us too? These books will be a valuable addition to the collection of Indian works in our library." — Director of the Lenin State Library, Kartasheva.

In this book, I talk about the very main questions that now worry humanity. Here you can see representatives of all the nations of the Soviet Union who do not require unification. Besides this, the Soviet Union also pledged to quietly allow followers of religious faith to travel to places of pilgrimage on religious holidays abroad. At present, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is disrupting the trip of 140 pilgrims to Sweden to their spiritual teacher in order to more deeply understand this ancient knowledge and present it to people. Therefore, we are here in protest, and we ask everyone who wishes to have this ancient knowledge in any way: how can he support our demands?

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

This evening we celebrate the most auspicious holiday. This morning during class, we noted that this is the most important event in the entire history of the universe. This is important because the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, comes to this earth to teach us *sanātana-dharma*. The appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is noted in all the holy scriptures. The Supreme Personality of Godhead appears once in the day of Brahmā at the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, the 28th era of the seventh Manu, and Lord Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of God. 

Many incarnations of God also come to this world. There are so many avatāras of God, like waves in the ocean. All these incarnations of God come to establish the principles of religion according to time and circumstances. But Kṛṣṇa is the source of all these different incarnations. There are many avatāras, but Kṛṣṇa is called the *avatārī*, that is, the source of all avatāras. It is said that all other incarnations are complete parts or parts of complete parts, but Kṛṣṇa is the source of all. Sometimes the Lord leaves the spiritual world and comes to this material world personally. Sometimes He comes as a son, like Jesus Christ. Sometimes He comes as a representative of one living entity so that it acts on His behalf. But the purpose of all these personalities is one: to restore religious principles. 

Therefore, we can clearly understand and appreciate that the Lord is one and religion is also one. There are no two or three Gods. God is the one who supports the desires of all others. So, the purpose of the appearance of all these personalities is the awakening of our dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The Lord or His representatives speak at a certain period of history in such a way that people can understand. But we, being devotees of Kṛṣṇa, fully understand spiritual life by what we hear directly from Lord Kṛṣṇa. When, 5,000 years ago on the field of Kurukṣetra, the Lord led Arjuna, then all the principles of other religions were included there; they automatically entered there. Therefore, the words of Lord Kṛṣṇa are a perfect, ideal representation of spiritual knowledge. He does not teach on just some kind of religious principles; He teaches the perfection of religion: "Leave everything; just surrender to Me. I will free you from all sinful reactions. Do not be afraid." 

In some other religious traditions, God inspires the living entity to gradually advance along this path. He says, "Do not kill, do not steal, be clean, do not lie." But in *Bhagavad-gītā*, the Lord tells us about the perfection of religion. Therefore, the message of *Bhagavad-gītā* is intended for people of the highest level, and those who truly want to achieve success in spiritual life can read *Bhagavad-gītā* and reach the spiritual world. 

Just as a father is concerned that his children are always surrounded by care and that they are always advancing in their studies, similarly, the Lord is always concerned that people in human society make spiritual progress. The occupation of a human being is that which gives him devoted, loving service to the Lord. The Lord is displeased when a human being acts like an animal. He is not particularly impressed when a human being simply uses his life to sleep, eat, copulate, and defend. He wants to see human beings make spiritual progress through the medium of authoritative spiritual teachers. 

When the father returns home, he asks his son how he was doing at school, what progress he made. He does not ask how he played in the sandbox today; he is not interested in these pranks. He is interested in how much his son has become smarter, what he has learned. When children come, they want to be sure that the children are getting a good education, but real education is learning how to love God, to exchange with the Lord, so that religion is supported in society and people can take advantage of this opportunity to make progress. 

He says in the *Gītā*, "When there is an absence of religion on earth, when religion declines, I come to destroy the unbelievers." He wants to establish religious principles correctly so that pious people can come to them and use them. When religion is presented to dishonest people, crooks, then frank, sincere people will not be able to make progress. Just like in the economy, if, for example, the black market is too thriving, then real businessmen cannot do anything. How can ordinary people return back to God? Just as the state’s duty is to ensure that there is no black market, so the Lord feels obliged to ensure that religion is in its purest form. Namely, pure religion is the real path to God. If you want to travel from Moscow to Leningrad, then there must be a good road so that you can travel along it. And if there is no good road, if there are not sufficient conditions, then you simply cannot get there. Therefore, if there is no true religion, then people cannot return to God. 

One result is obtained when a person worships God, and a completely different result when a person does not worship God. For example, in India, many people worship the demigods as the Supreme Being. They are absolutely sure that Brahmā is the Absolute Truth or Śiva is the Absolute Truth. But in India, it is very noticeable that people worship demigods in order to make spiritual advancement. But what kind of spiritual advancement can one make by worshiping demigods? From the demigods, one can only receive benefits in the form of material gains, for example, money, a good wife, or relief from illness. All this is achieved through the worship of demigods. But since they themselves are not immortal, since they themselves are also mortal, they cannot bestow immortality as a blessing. 

But Kṛṣṇa is called Mukunda, which means "one who gives liberation." Only by the grace of Lord Kṛṣṇa can one receive the grace of liberation and return back to the spiritual world. Not a single person, even the most powerful person in this world, can do this. Lord Rāmacandra fought in the last battle in Sri Lanka. It became clear to Him that Rāvaṇa would soon be killed. Despite the fact that Rāvaṇa was very powerful, he still fought with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Rāmacandra pulled His bow and aimed an arrow at the heart of this demon. At that moment, Lord Śiva and his wife Pārvatī were watching the battle from the heavenly planets. It so happened that Rāvaṇa was a great devotee of Lord Śiva. Many demons worship Lord Śiva in order to gain strength and power in order to then commit evil deeds. Pārvatī turned to her husband and said, "Your bhakta, your devotee, is in great difficulty. You must help him, save him. He will now be killed by Lord Rāmacandra." 

Then Lord Śiva turned to his wife Pārvatī and said, "My dear wife, if the Supreme Lord wants to kill someone, then no one can protect him. But if the Supreme Lord wants to save someone, then no one can kill him." Even Lord Śiva could not protect Rāvaṇa at the time of death because the Lord, the Supreme Lord, decided that it was time for this demon to die. By worshiping Lord Śiva, one can get many different benefits, but no one can get immortality—what to speak of directly meaning love of God. 

Of course, if someone worships Lord Śiva as a great devotee, then Lord Śiva will give us his blessings and help us achieve the Supreme, because Kṛṣṇa himself says: "He who says that he is My devotee is not My devotee. But he who says that he is a devotee of My devotee is truly My devotee." Thus, we can get the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, but first we need to understand that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, the original Personality of Godhead. 

It is a very important point that Kṛṣṇa comes personally. When some kind of disorder reigns, it is so important that the Lord Himself personally comes here in order to restore order. Because some people are trying to achieve the spiritual world by wrong means, and stupid people follow such blind leaders and also deviate. For example, in this country, I met people—representatives of various so-called yoga societies. I don't know many names, but I know that devotees probably know these various yoga groups. Since we know that all these teachings are not based on scriptures, then to a greater or lesser extent, there is deviation everywhere. True religion cannot be made by man; it comes from God. True religion comes to us along the path of disciplic succession of teachers. If some teachers or gurus are not on the direct line of transmission of knowledge that comes from Kṛṣṇa, do not accept them, no matter what miracles they perform. 

Let's say, for example, if a sincere person seeking the path by chance—or not by some bad luck—ends up meeting with such a group of non-authoritative people, then what is his hope? What is his faith? The Lord Jesus Christ spoke very well about this; He said, "When the blind lead the blind, all fall into the ditch." The same applies to the road to hell, even if it is paved with good intentions. Even if a person is sincere, but he follows someone who is not sincere, an unpleasant fate awaits him. Lord Kṛṣṇa cannot withstand such a situation, and in order to teach us what is true *sanātana-dharma*, He comes and says, "Here I am, the Supreme Lord. You want to know what true religion is? I will free you from all sinful reactions. True religion consists in surrendering to God and learning to love God." 

True religion does not mean that we should become God. To whom should we surrender? Because Kṛṣṇa is just a manifestation of Brahman and the personal Brahman? "Behind Kṛṣṇa is the light of Brahman; therefore, there is no need to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. You need to surrender to what is behind Kṛṣṇa." It sounds very poetic, but what does this mean? It means nonsense, because Kṛṣṇa quite clearly in His transcendental form declares, "Arjuna, surrender to Me." He doesn't say, "Give up to what is behind Me." 

Today is a fast, and in order to drink milk, I need to wait another hour and a half because we are fasting until midnight. The Lord says, "Surrender to Me," and this is the main problem with religion today. Today, everyone is trying to invent their own interpretation of their religion. Therefore, we see that modern society does not educate or create people with the qualities of saints because there is no true religion in society now. We are not talking about belonging to different faiths; we are simply talking about eternal religious principles. It is necessary to practice the religion that best gives you the opportunity to develop love. A religion in which there are no religious principles is useless and meaningless. 

True religion means that we must change our hearts, that we must leave nonsense and understand that we are devotees of the Lord. We must understand that we are eternal servants of God; in this is our true identity, our individuality. But when there are no religious principles in society, then we just produce dogs and cats. This may be a harsh statement, but you can read about it in the newspapers. For example, if you go to a doctor who is not qualified, you are given some kind of sugar powder—sugary little tablets—instead of real medicine. The taste is pleasant, but will they cure your disease? No, this medicine will not cure your disease. 

Therefore, unfortunately, we see in public life in the world these are diseases: in this concept that "I am this body," and since a person thinks that I am this body, then the purpose of life is to satisfy the senses. This is very good, and if not, then I will be an atheist. Instead of producing people with the qualities of saints, we produce something impossible and terrible. The next qualities mean to be friendly towards all living beings, to be peaceful and not have enemies. No need to think that "this person is my friend and this is my enemy," "I love this country, I hate this country," "I love this race, I do not like this race." We cannot think like this, but one who has equal vision to everyone, he perceives everyone—even animals—well. He sees and loves all beings created by God, and therefore we need women and men who possess these qualities of saints. 

But these qualities cannot be acquired if we simply send people to university, and we will not be able to develop these qualities by watching TV. We cannot develop these qualities by reading all kinds of worldly literature. We can acquire these qualities only through the practice of eternal religion. This is precisely what the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is intended for. 

Just as 5,000 years ago the Lord appeared to correct the situation, in the same way, He appeared in the form of this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement. We see that this movement of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, because whoever comes into contact with this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement develops all the good qualities. This means that a devotee develops all the wonderful qualities, and the Lord loves to decorate a devotee with all the wonderful qualities. 

For example, in military service, soldiers are given medals, and you can recognize by these medals that he is a soldier who gave his life for his Motherland. The Lord comes to destroy the unbelievers and establish His devotees, because in the absence of the Lord, whom should we follow? And when the Lord leaves, to whom should we turn for the sake of true religion? Follow the *Bhagavad-gītā*. We need a *Bhagavad-gītā* devotee of the Lord. Along with the fact that Kṛṣṇa destroys His enemies, the unbelievers, He establishes His devotees in power, because what a great man does is followed by an ordinary person, and the example he shows is followed by the whole world. Religion also means establishing devotees. 

The Lord asks Kṛṣṇa, "How can I know who is a transcendentalist? How he sits, how he burns, how he talks?" He wants to know all these details in order to recognize a devotee and take shelter of him. How do we know? We can recognize him by the fact that he is decorated with all the beautiful qualities, because he is a holy person. We can identify devotees, and now we know where we can take shelter. For example, like we gave a garland of flowers to Viṣṇu Mahārāja. Now we can easily recognize that this is a holy devotee, and we know where we can take shelter. In fact, all devotees have beautiful qualities because all devotees carry Kṛṣṇa in their hearts, and devotees show respect to all the Vaiṣṇavas. The first thing we do in the morning is offer my respectful obeisances to all Vaiṣṇavas all over the world, because they are like a desire tree; they can fulfill everyone's desire, and they are full of compassion for the fallen, conditioned souls. 

So the Lord comes to destroy the demons, establish His devotees, and make sure that there are no deviations, because if you make even a small mistake in religion, it may mean that you will not return back to God. 

I had one friend who had a major operation, and so he went to the hospital; they did the operation and they stitched it up. The doctor said, "The operation went great, everything was top notch." But after a few months, he started having some sharp pains near his stomach. The doctor said, "I don't know what the problem is, the operation went great." Let's X-ray him. So they took a picture of his stomach cavity, and when the doctor looked at the picture, he said, "No, this is impossible to believe. Look, he left one of the forceps inside." It was a small one, it remained inside, so it caused a lot of pain. 

If a person is attentive in fulfilling his religious principles, then he can live perfectly. But if he makes a small mistake, then he hurts himself right away. If I love God, then we cannot compromise. The definition was given here: devotional service is completely free from the desire for various speculations and karmic fruits. Kṛṣṇa constantly comes and tells us that there is real religion. We gave an example this morning: if you go to the city center, you see a long line for bread because bread is inexpensive, but when you see that diamonds are sold, then find one or two buyers for the whole week because it is too expensive. To pay for everything, one must make a sacrifice. For example, Śrīla Prabhupāda asked us: no illicit sex, intoxication, gambling, and 16 rounds every day, and take only *prasādam*, communicate with devotees. What a huge sacrifice! But when a person enters this true path, then he does not feel that this is generally asceticism or a great sacrifice; on the contrary, he feels how he is freed from all sinful activity, and he feels joy. He becomes free from all complaints and aspirations; he becomes simply happy. Kṛṣṇa says, "Don't be afraid. Just surrender to Me; everything will be wonderful." 

And this must be experienced personally. When, for example, there was an earthquake in Armenia, I am absolutely sure that the president personally went there to see what was happening there and what to do. When the situation is bad, then God comes Himself, because only the Supreme Lord with His personal presence can restore the situation. People say that God comes to this world. Yes, He comes. In fact, Kṛṣṇa has a huge number of wonderful qualities—an infinite number of these qualities. He is the most beautiful, He has the most knowledge, He has the highest glory, the highest intelligence, the highest renunciation—Bhagavān. Of all the wonderful qualities, what is His most wonderful quality? What is the best of all divine qualities? His compassion for all the fallen souls, the poor in this material world. This is the most wonderful quality, because it is out of compassion that God comes into this world. Kṛṣṇa personally came 5,000 years ago. We can hardly appreciate this compassion—that He came to us in order to take us back to Himself again. 

And what does He do when He comes to this world? He attracts us with the help of His wonderful, transcendental pastimes. As yesterday we said, the pastimes of the Lord in this material world are so interesting, so attractive, that we can do nothing but surrender at His feet. In reality, everyone is looking for Kṛṣṇa, the source of eternal pleasure. He said everyone is looking for Kṛṣṇa; some know this and some do not. Because Kṛṣṇa means the perfection of eternity and bliss. If you have any desires, then everyone can be satisfied with these three facts: gaining eternity, knowledge, and bliss. So everyone is looking for Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa means the source of all pleasure. 

So Kṛṣṇa comes to this world and shows us His transcendental activities. If it is enough to hear about them, then one has the opportunity to achieve perfection and go back to God. Kṛṣṇa says that His appearance, His activities, His games—they are all transcendental and divine. How do all these games of Kṛṣṇa begin? They begin with His divine appearance in this world. The Lord begins His transcendence in the most wonderful way. The appearance of Kṛṣṇa is at midnight. Why do we celebrate the appearance of Kṛṣṇa? Because it is transcendental and divine. It is not just some ordinary birth in ignorance, a birth due to one's past sins. Of His own free will, He first appeared before His devotees, Devakī and Vasudeva. 

And when the time came for Him to be born, He was not born like everyone else is born, but He appeared in a beautiful form, Nārāyaṇa. He appeared in His original transcendental form which is not subject to destruction. He had garlands of black, curly hair, beautiful eyes, and a peacock feather. He would hold various types of weapons in His hands and blissfully smiled at His devotees. Such is the appearance of God. What is the result of hearing about such a phenomenon? "Whoever understands the transcendental nature of My appearance never again takes birth in this material world and returns to God." 

What is the result of participating in this Janmāṣṭamī festival? We just take another step on the path back to God. This is not a small step; this is a big jump. As said, such holy days as Janmāṣṭamī are the mothers of devotion for those devotees who truly respect them. We respect these holy days of Janmāṣṭamī because we practice as described for our age, for the Lord, with the help of the congregational chanting of the name of Lord Hari, Kṛṣṇa. We talk about the transcendental appearance of Kṛṣṇa and His activities; we appreciate the transcendental activities of the Lord, and with this, we approach Kṛṣṇa. Then at midnight, we will celebrate all this with a big feast. 

The Lord appeared 5,000 years ago, but even today we celebrate His wonderful pastimes, because talking about Kṛṣṇa is as important now as it was when Kṛṣṇa appeared here on earth personally 5,000 years ago. What is material disappears and worsens over time, but every year we celebrate this holiday, the appearance of Kṛṣṇa, and with each year everything will become sweeter. In general, we can celebrate every day. Kṛṣṇa is always present in this movement, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and when devotees practice this knowledge, then the mercy of Kṛṣṇa comes. The Lord will appear before us as He did; He will appear before us every moment. He will be present in the form of His name, and this festival gives us some idea. 

Why should we practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness every day? Because on days like today, we are completely engaged in devotional service, and since everyone was engaged in transcendental activities, the time of the day passed very quickly. We almost didn't even notice, and this is the standard of devotional service. If we learn to acquire such skill—to be constantly engaged in serving God at every moment—then we have the opportunity to go back to God within this life. Therefore, such festivals are very important, and therefore devotees say that it is necessary to follow such a holiday. It is a great offense not to celebrate such holidays. 

Such festivals increase our faith in God, and nothing seems more beautiful than chanting the Holy Name and dancing. All our material attachments—everything goes away—and this gives us an idea of what pure devotional service is. This should be the standard of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As Śrīla Prabhupāda said, a person must chant Hare Kṛṣṇa 24 hours a day. Chanting is repeating the Holy Name. Also, chanting God, one form of service—translating and printing books—is also *kīrtana*. Beautiful worship of the deities is also *kīrtana*, managing the temple is also *kīrtana*, cleaning the temple is also *kīrtana*, raising children in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is also *kīrtana*. Everything, any service that we perform, is a source of satisfaction. 

On such days of Janmāṣṭamī, each of us takes a step forward, and we all, as a movement, collectively must also take one big step forward. Because, as we have already said many times, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is blissful when it increases, when it expands. For example, like people, ordinary worldly people on New Year's Day, January 1st, take some vows—they say, "I'm stopping smoking," "I'm stopping beating my wife." They take many different material vows, and on such a day we must take a vow in the best sense of the word. We must swear that we will become better devotees, toast material attachments that hinder our service. I want to understand even more my devotees, to understand God, my guru, and God. I want to understand the mercy that I have received in this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and I want to share it with others. 

As we have already said, religion means a change of heart, and here religion—chanting, dancing, and a feast—is religion. It is a wonderful process. She cleans her ears; she can hear perfectly well. We say she starts with preliminary religious principles because purification is very important to communicate with us. That this process is so wonderful that even a cat or a dog can gain Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One way or another, this lucky cat came to the festival; she is looking for some nectar. Well, I think we will have to feed the millet. So the creation of Kṛṣṇa is for everyone. Let's share this nectar with everyone, even a cat, and let's remember that on this day we will take a big step on the path to God, so that next year we need a hall 10 times larger than this one. Because ultimately, this is our goal: God's goal is to take devotees back to God.""