Hare Krishna, everyone. In our travels, our wanderings throughout Orissa, we have come to a very, very ancient and very, very beautiful temple, a temple of Lord Jagannath that was established in the 17th century by a king whose name was Jagannath Maharaja.

He was a great devotee of Lord Jagannath, but because his kingdom is so far from Jagannath Puri – we're about a four-hour drive these days, you can imagine how long it would take in those days to get to Jagannath Puri, and many dangers on the way – he very rarely visited Jagannath Puri.

So he was feeling so much separation from Lord Jagannath, just it was it's described he was burning in separation. So one night he was talking with his wife and he was saying, "You know, well, we can't go to Jagannath Puri, so maybe we can replicate Jagannath Puri here.

We can build a temple just like Jagannath Puri." And she said, "Yes, but it won't be the same because Jagannath's not here, he's there." So like that, the king was lamenting. He went to sleep that night, and in his dream, Lord Jagannath appeared because he was such a great devotee and he was feeling so much separation, and Lord Jagannath said, "I know your heart, you're missing me, and you were thinking to build a replica of my temple in Puri.

So if you build that temple, I'll come and live with you." To see how kind the Lord is to fulfill the desires of his devotee, He'll come to live with you. So the king woke up, he told his wife, he told the subjects like this, and they started construction on this temple which you'll see here in the video.

It actually took three centuries to build, but a good portion was built in that king's lifetime. And his desire was fulfilled, and the Lord's desire was fulfilled. This is love. Love is reciprocal. The Lord, the devotee likes to be with the Lord, and the Lord likes to be with his devotee.

So the king, this temple was built as a replica of the temple in Jagannath Puri, of course not on the same size, but it's pretty big. It's pretty big. And I was speaking with the, we were communicating with the guru, the Raj Guru of the king of Puri.

He's giving us some direction where to go and to film, et cetera, going around Orissa. And he said, "You know, you can't come into the Jagannath temple in Puri, but you can get the experience if you go to this, this Kalikote.

The kingdom is called Kalikoti, and the town's also called Kalikoti now. If you go there, you can walk in. You can get the same impression of what it's like to be in the Puri temple." And Jagannath and Subhadra are there as well.

So that's the experience we're having here. It was so thrilling to, you know, my disciple Vishnu Top was walking in with me. He's born in Vṛndāvana and he's been to Jagannath Puri, saying, "Gurudev, it's exactly like it is when you walk in the Jagannath Puri temple." And old, not as old as the Puri temple, but 17th century, that's pretty old.

And that king, he was famous for the fact that he ruled his kingdom like a sadhu. We call that a Raja Rishi, a saintly person sitting on the throne who knows how to rule in such a way as to provide everyone their material needs, but is also as much, if not more, concerned for their spiritual needs.

This is a Raja Rishi. So he was a real Raja Rishi. He didn't live in his palace, he lived in a humble dwelling, and therefore the people nicknamed him. They nicknamed him Sadhuraj. That's a nice name, Sadhuraj. So this is a very historic place, and we feel very blessed to come here to see Lord Jagannath in a replica of his temple.

Of course, we know that Lord Jagannath is so kind that many cannot come to see Him from different parts of India, or because of their birth, or whatever the case may be. But Lord Jagannath is very kind. Here in Jagannath Puri, here in Jagannath, He comes out once a year on the parade route, anyone can see Him.

And in Bhakti-rasamrta Sindhu, Rupa Goswami states that if the chariot of Lord Jagannath is passing by during Ratha Yatra, and someone just, you know, out of respect, just stands up to receive Him or as He goes by, seeing Him as an important person, Rupa Goswami says, Shastra says elsewhere, that person from that point on is considered an eternal associate of Vishnu.

That's amazing. He's very, very merciful. Like we think of Lord Chaitanya, we know He's very merciful. Jagannath is in the same mood. He's very, very kind. If you just stand up, perhaps some beggars there and everyone's standing up, and oh, we have an eternal associate of Vishnu.

We should never think that the glories of the holy name or the statements in Shastra are exaggeration. Not only that, Lord Jagannath is so kind that He leaves the temple in Jagannath Puri. He's actually, our International Society for Krishna Consciousness has established Jagannath deities throughout India.

So Jagannath has left the state of Orissa and gone to other parts of India, and by His causeless mercy, and on the request of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, is now in every major city of the world in our ISKCON temples.

This just shows how eager He is that we come back home, back to Godhead. I heard Prabhupāda say one time, we were in Rome, and Prabhupāda was lecturing, and he made one statement that just touched my heart.

He said that the Lord is more desirous that we come back to the spiritual world than we are ourselves at this particular point. So if we match that enthusiasm of the Lord and we develop a strong desire to go back home, back to Godhead, that's a powerful combination.

That can take us back to the spiritual world. So yes, this ancient, ancient temple, it's just, it's just so, so beautiful, so magnificent. We came in and we had a little kirtan. They said, you can't have kirtan in the temple, you have to have kirtan outside.

That's one of the rules also in Jagannath Puri. But one of my disciples, Sanjivani Parvati Dasi, she recently took initiation here. She's a very expert Odissi dancer. So we arranged that she could go in the temple with the music, a little bit back from the deities, and dance for Jagannath, Subhadra, and Balaram.

This is the desire of every Odissi dancer because in ancient days, the Devadasis were dancers who would do the Odissi dance just for Jagannath and Lady Subhadra and Balaram. In fact, they never married, they gave their hearts to Lord Jagannath and they expressed their love and devotion through dancing.

What a wonderful experience. So much culture, so much history, so much devotion, so much nectar. You can imagine what it's like to have kirtan in these places, because many of the places we're going, Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Himself visited, and we feel the potency of His mercy there, in the mercy of Jagannath and Radha and Krishna.

So all this is by the grace of our beloved spiritual master, and we will keep you informed of the next destination and share with you the pastimes there. Hare Krishna.

Love. Am. Second. Go.