
"Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hi Misaki-san, hi Christina. We are just finishing a four-hour Ratha-yātrā here at Pol'and'Rock Festival 2019. It has been an incredible experience; I think it equals anything at the annual Jagannātha Purī. Ratha-yātrā is really meant for the people. Devotees have the association of the Lord all the time, and they go to the temple, and so forth. But in Kali-yuga, let’s call it Kali-yuga, people have become less pious, less spiritual. So, the Lord wants us to come back home more than we want to come back home, so He is so kind that He leaves His temple and He comes onto the streets of now most major cities of the world by the mercy of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. So no matter what happens in the world, how downward it spirals, just throughout the Ratha-yātrā festivals, it is there to give hope to the people. It is said in *The Nectar of Devotion* that if someone—anyone—is just sitting somewhere and he stands up to have darśana as the Lord passes by in His chariot, that person is considered an eternal associate of Lord Viṣṇu. One time a devotee read that and he went to Prabhupāda; he said, "Prabhupāda, it says in the *Nectar* that if you stand up to receive the Lord’s chariot, you become an eternal associate of Viṣṇu." And Prabhupāda said, "Where is that said?" And the devotee said, "*Nectar of Devotion*." And Prabhupāda said, "Oh, yes, so it must be true."

Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa.

Incredible mercy is happening out here. And as we know, by definition, Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive; that is what His name is—all-attractive. So, everything connected to Him is also very attractive, especially when there is a festival atmosphere, which is very much part of the mood of the spiritual world. So here at Kṛṣṇa’s Village of Peace, dead center in the Pol'and'Rock Woodstock Festival 2019, with 2.2 million people, we are having Ratha-yātrā. There is one thoroughfare that goes through the whole event, and we are going back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. So people are seeing Jagannātha, but more important is the Lord seeing the people. When we go to the temple, it is for darśana, to see the Lord, but really what counts is that the Lord sees us. So out here, the Lord is so kind, He is so merciful, that He doesn't blink; He can’t miss a conditioned soul. So we are very happy out here because we are His servants and we are helping Him give His mercy to the others. We are very poor, humble servants; we are the servants of a glorious master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, who brought this Ratha-yātrā to the West, and His Lord and Master, Jagannātha, Lady Subhadrā, and Lord Balarāma. Our mood out here is that you look around and a lot of people look very fallen, like a lot of Jagāi and Mādhāi, but they are all devotees of Kṛṣṇa ultimately in their heart of hearts. Just as He is the seed-giving father of all living entities. So when we come out here, we mix with the people because we don’t think that we’re better than them; we just think we’re a little more fortunate. *Sadhu-saṅga, sadhu-saṅga, sarva-śāstre kaya, lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya*. We have been touched by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, we have been touched by the mercy of Prabhupāda’s representatives, by Prabhupāda’s devotees, all generations of the Prabhupāda family. We got some mercy, so we are a little more fortunate. So we want to come out here and just embrace these people—maybe not literally, but in the form of kīrtana and chanting and dancing—and you see that the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so powerful.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa, please... [inaudible].

The Kṛṣṇa Caitanya—there is no difficulty. Kṛṣṇa and His name, He is all-powerful. You see, where His Holy Name is, there to awaken that Kṛṣṇa consciousness. These people sing with us, they dance with us, they laugh with us, they cry with us. So potent, the saṅkīrtana movement, especially in its condensed form of Ratha-yātrā, especially when it is meant for the people. Nowadays Ratha-yātrās, you know, we have them for our communities, but it is really potent when you bring it to the people and you bring them into the kīrtana, and they look at Jagannātha and they smile, they’re happy. This is our satisfaction. So we are going to be doing this for more days in a row; I don’t know how this material body can keep up with the spiritual happiness we’re experiencing. We don’t know what is love of God, but we know what it is to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness and our hearts are completely satisfied. So stay with us; we have many activities we’re going to be sharing with you at Kṛṣṇa’s Village of Peace with tens and tens and tens of thousands of people. The whole world should be watching. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! All glories to Jagannātha Swami, Lady Subhadrā, and Lord Balarāma!

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.""