Hare Krishna, we're standing here on the perimeter of our Festival of India on the Baltic Sea coast here in Poland, coming to the end of the summer. We've done about 45, almost 50 festivals by the time we finish.

We do the festivals in different villages and towns along the coast, and we average about 5 to 10,000 people every day. Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive, and when people come to our program here, we have many tents. You can see different tents depicting different aspects of India's culture, and we have our stage show.

It's kind of the heart of our Festival of India. It's a five-and-a-half-hour stage show. It's a long time for people to sit, so therefore we have other attractions as well. A cooking demonstration, we have face painting, we teach yoga, haṭha yoga, bhakti yoga, questions and answers.

We have a tent called the Art of Happiness. So when people come to an outdoor event like this, they can sit for some time and watch the stage show. If they get a little restless, they can walk around, find something interesting to do, etcetera.

So we find that generally people come and they stay the whole five and a half hours. This is quite remarkable. Yeah, our movement is very attractive. It's not we're not really presenting the culture of India; we're presenting the culture of the spiritual world.

The spiritual world appeared in India, and Prapañcha, when Kṛṣṇa came five thousand years ago, He displayed His various transcendencies. He performed in the spiritual world, and it just melted everyone's heart, and that's what a festival like this is meant to do.

It's meant to melt everyone's heart, introducing them to the spiritual world, essentially. One time, Śrīla Prabhupāda had said that our movement would take the world over by culture.

It's a strong, big statement. We'll take the world over by culture. If you think about it, culture meaning music, dance, theater, art, food, etcetera. It's the best that any country can show the world or any civilization can share with the world.

What do we think of French culture, English culture, Greek culture, Roman culture?

We find something unique. It's those elements that are the best part of any civilization. Usually, they are sponsored by the kings or the government. They're an opulence, actually. So we are presenting the culture of the spiritual world, and because everyone's ultimately a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, people can relate to it.

Maybe not immediately, but it just has—it brings a chord in the heart. Kṛṣṇa consciousness culture, because it's all connected to Kṛṣṇa, it's all connected to God. Most cultures are material cultures. They may be a little interesting; people become curious.

But the real culture people are searching for is the culture of the spiritual world. And so, in the beginning of our movement, Śrīla Prabhupāda was very encouraged.

For instance, an example: the Vaikunṭha Players, some of my godbrothers and godsisters, very talented in those days, and they did different theatrical performances. And Prabhupāda supported that many times.

He went to see the Vaikunṭha Players performing, and he loved it. They were talented devotees, and the message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness was there. Prabhupāda supported that.

So we're taking up that theme of presenting the culture of the spiritual world. So we have theater, we have dance, we have music. We have many different items in between to keep the people attentive. We have, you know, martial arts and demonstrations from South India, and we have sometimes we have magicians and so forth.

It's all to keep the people there. And in the middle of that, I come, I give a talk for about 40 minutes from the Bhagavad-gītā. We kind of consider that like, you know, you have a ring, and there's a valuable diamond, and then you have different emeralds or sapphires around it to augment the beauty of that diamond.

So we consider the real essence of the festival when we can actually present the philosophy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in an attractive way. God. Ha ha ha. It's not. We've taken our show to many countries in the world. We were in America last year, and one of the mayors in a prominent town, I can't remember which city we were in, he attended, and afterwards, he came up to me.

Said, "Mahārāja," he said, "your show is as good as Broadway." I said, "Yeah, thanks." He said, "No, seriously. I... I have your ballerinas, your gymnasts, your poets. It's... I can see a lot of these devotees of yours, they come from, they're trained in acting, they're trained in ballet, ballet, they're trained in modern dance.

You know, you put it all together. You have your Rāmāyaṇa, your Mahābhārata. You put it together very nicely." And so it's as good as Broadway. I said, "Thanks, that would give us something to aim for." He said, "But actually, it's better." I said, "Better?" He said, "Yes, because you have all these dramatic performances, but you have a message.

You have a message of a very deep spiritual message. You're reminding us the importance of the human form of life, how we have to, you know, awaken our love for God, and we should take spiritual life seriously. It comes through in a very palatable way." Thank you.

I thought that was very nice. He appreciated the professionalism because we practice months and months and months every year before we go on the stage, and part of our performing, the success of our performance, is purity of heart. The devotees take their sādhanā very seriously.

Just like Śrīla Prabhupāda, he told us one time that he, when he was in university, in college, actually, he and his friends put together a play about Lord Caitanya.

This is really interesting. And Prabhupāda played the role of a director.

Chaitanya, and they were just about ready to put on, whatever the particular date was, for the student body, a thousand students. And at the last minute, they canceled. And the headmaster said, "Why did you cancel?

All the students are here." So Prabhupāda and his friends, they said, "We're not quite ready yet." He said, "I've seen you practicing." He said, "No, our hearts are not ready.

We're not pure enough to present the pastimes to really touch the hearts of the audience." So what they did, they kept practicing, but they went deeply into their sādhanā. Trivandrum kirtan. Ambition. This is meditation and hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa.

Lord Caitanya at that time. So six months later, Prabhupāda said, they did the performance, and their acting was good, but their, the purity of their hearts was there.

They wanted to touch the people with the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, and as much as Prabhupāda said, many, many people in the audience were crying.

And I see that at our shows, especially this year. We have one particular performance called "Song of Grace." It's about a young girl and her grandmother, and their intimate loving relationship, and then Grandma gets sick, and then she's about to pass away, and she gives some spiritual instructions, actually straight from the Bhagavad-gītā, to her daughter.

And then she passes away, and the daughter remembers her and, you know, sings and dances for her and so forth. So these, these type of performances that are meant to elicit that spiritual emotion in the heart. And many times I've seen people crying in our performances.

And I think this is the perfection of the saṅkīrtana movement. The Nectar of Devotion, Rūpa Gosvāmī says, one should learn the art of crying. So we think of that in the sense of an exalted stage of pure devotional service, that, you know, tears of love flow from our hearts like torrents of rain.

But one can feel some deep sentiment for Kṛṣṇa even in the beginning. One can feel grateful that the spiritual master delivered me from material existence. That can bring emotions. Emotions are there that we have the topmost philosophy, the best food, wonderful association.

We know our goal. That can bring emotions. But when we do our plays, Kṛṣṇa is the center point, Mahāprabhu is the center point, Prabhupāda is the center point.

And even those people are ignorant of what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they don't really know. This process works very quickly. So powerful. Kṛṣṇa is not. Ha ha. Now. The sharpest eye. That is nice. All glories to this Śrī Kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtana movement.

It's very, very potent. So chanting is potent, harināma is potent, devotee association is potent, and the cultural presentation should also be potent. It means the theater should be professional, first-class, but the hearts of the performers should be pure, and people somehow they sense that.

And they, there, that bhakti that's there in the heart, it keeps out, it comes up a little bit, and they feel some spiritual emotion. You can say it's always just sentiment. They're crying, they don't know, but the object of their sentiment is Kṛṣṇa.

That's devotion. Like a green mango. You can say, right mangoes better. Green mango is also good because you can make chutney. So the beginning sentiments of devotional service are also valid, verdant. That's what we're after, to give people the experience of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And I think that's the success. When I see people crying, the other day we did a puppet show about Kṛṣṇa. It's a simple puppet show for the children, but we made Kṛṣṇa the object of everyone's attention. We did His childhood pastimes.

At the end of the play, there was like this pause, and one little girl jumped up from the benches and she said, "Mommy, I want Kṛṣṇa." So that melted my heart. That brought tears to my eyes. Oh, she just wants a puppet.

Oh, something there. It was a valid pastime. "Mommy, I want Kṛṣṇa." So that's, that's the fruit of all our endeavors here to put on these festivals. We have to go out five, six hours a day and chant Hari Kṛṣṇa and give out invitations, organize, and get permission from the city halls.

And it's hot and it's cold, and we're sleeping in crowded rooms. And there are so many things. When I see the tears of the people, this was it. All plus standing ovations. So we're making progress out here, and we hope that we're contributing to Prabhupāda's statement in our very humble way that we will take the world over by culture.

It's a nice way to present Kṛṣṇa consciousness, easy for people to come and sit and take food and enjoy and watch. Seats are also into it around Kṛṣṇa. So that's the essence of our traveling festival program, our Festival of India, our Festival of the Spiritual World, to introduce people to spiritual life, but specifically to introduce them to Goloka Vṛndāvana.

How did Kṛṣṇa?

Thank you very much. Your Pod... My.