"*00302*.*
"Mayapura is a transcendental abode. If we had the eyes to see—if we had spiritual eyes to see—we would see Mahāprabhu going by with His kīrtana party, with Nitāi and Advaita Ācārya, Nitāi, they would all be there. We don’t have that vision, but we should accept that fact on the basis of guru, śāstra, and sādhu: this is a transcendental abode. Unfortunately, it is Kali-yuga, and the abodes become covered. You can never cover matter; matter can never cover spirit. But according to our vision, the dhāma is covered by improper activity and so forth and so on, so it needs to be purified. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda told my dear godbrother, Bhakti Cāru Mahārāja, that he had gone to the West to fulfill the order of his spiritual master, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the English language, which really meant the whole world because English is a common language all over the world; so that meant everywhere, actually. And Prabhupāda did that. He planted the seed, and if you plant a seed in fertile soil, that seed has to grow by nature’s law. So Prabhupāda planted the seed of Lord Caitanya’s desire that the saṅkīrtana movement go to every town and village. And just as a seed is meant to grow, this movement will grow because it is the desire of Mahāprabhu. He said He wanted His name heard in every town and village of the world. So, if God says something, it’s not like an ordinary man—he says something, maybe it’ll happen, maybe it won’t. If God says it, in time, it will come to pass. So, it is only a matter of time till the whole world becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious. That sounds inexplicable to all of us, but we have to have faith. The movement will spread, and Prabhupāda did that. 

But then Prabhupāda told Bhakti Cāru Mahārāja—who told me this in confidence—that Prabhupāda said to him, “Now that I’ve planted the seeds of Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world, I’ve come back to Bengal to revive Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the land of Gaurāṅga.” 

So this was his desire. He said, “This is my desire,” because Prabhupāda was born in Bengal. He said, “I’m a Calcutta boy.” He grew up in the streets of Calcutta, so he had special affection. That’s why we see when a very qualified person like Bhakti Cāru Mahārāja came forward, Prabhupāda gave him first initiation, second initiation, and sannyāsa very quickly because he saw, “Here is a capable boy.” And Prabhupāda wanted to revive it in Bengal because, like everywhere else in the world, in many ways it has gone to hell. This is the land of Gaurāṅga; everyone should have Vaiṣṇava tilaka, kaṇṭhī-mālā, they should be chanting the holy names of the Lord, reading Caitanya-caritāmṛta—it’s not happening. 

So, those of you who are here preaching, going out and doing festivals, going out and doing book distribution, going out and speaking about Kṛṣṇa to the people, you are fulfilling a personal desire of Prabhupāda. His Guru Mahārāja’s desire was to go all over the world—that was also Prabhupāda’s desire—but I’m just saying here is a very intimate service for all of you: to build this Māyāpura community. That means—well, there is so much we could go on for hours—to build the Temple of the Vedic Planetarium, to prepare the world to come and see such a magnificent, magnificent structure. This is not built for us; this is built for the world, for the world to see and become inspired in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

So you have a very intimate service. You have to take away that veil of illusion that has come here in the form of greed and so forth and so on. People come to Bengal to make money or become famous. You just want to serve Prabhupāda’s personal desire to revive Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the land of Gaurāṅga. You are blessed just to be here, whether you’re born here or whether you’ve adopted Bengal as your Prabhupāda-deśa, your place of service. You can be Australian, American, Chinese, Russian, whatever; if you make this your mission here, you’ll get Prabhupāda’s personal blessings. You have no reason, no excuse for not going back to Godhead in this lifetime. You have a lot of mercy here. 

Prabhupāda wanted this. He said, “Every year,” he told us, “saṅkīrtana devotees come to Māyāpura every year.” The GBC said, “Prabhupāda, how will the saṅkīrtana movement go on? There’ll be no money.” Prabhupāda said, “They should all come every year to Māyāpura for the festival.” He wanted devotees to come, and he wanted non-devotees to come—not just Bengali non-devotees, he wanted Chinese, he wanted New Zealanders, he wanted Canadians, he wanted Eskimos, he wanted everyone to come to Māyāpura, the birthplace of Mahāprabhu. So you have to create that. By going out and preaching, you are blessed to be a preacher here in Māyāpura. Oh my gosh, you are going to get so much mercy. Prabhupāda wanted to revive Gaurāṅga’s movement here in Bengal. So these saṅkīrtana vans are the perfect way to do it. These are like Vaikuṇṭha chariots; they are going out and picking up people and taking them back to the spiritual world. So Prabhupāda wanted every town and village, including Bengal.""