"*00479*.*
"### A Downpour of Bliss - A Visit to Varśāṇā

Dear devotees, I hope that it doesn't become too warm for you. I actually scheduled this curriculum a little bit later in our schedule, like today, in hopes it would be a little cooler. But if you find it gets a little too warm, you can always move into a shady area; you can even go over there. We want you to be comfortable so you can hear this transcendental nectar of this very special place in Vṛndāvana, which is very dear to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas—the very home of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Varśāṇā. And I have a background chorus here that is going on to remind me that I am in Vṛndāvana—it stands 22 hours a day here.

As we know, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī made her appearance in the village of Rāval. But curiously, when Kṛṣṇa and His family moved from Gokula to Nandagrāma, somehow or other, Rādhārāṇī and her family, they moved to nearby Varśāṇā. And that is the sacred hill behind us. Her father’s name is King Vṛṣabhānu. He mostly plays with Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys. Now, I found a very beautiful description of Aṅgā Mañjarī; it describes that she shadows—as little girls often do their big sisters—their big sister. The little sisters are kind of behind the big sisters, so it’s like everything in Braja, to churn the devotion in our heart, is put in a poetic way that shadows Rādhārāṇī as little girls often do their elder sisters. It’s so beautiful.

So, as a young girl, Rādhā lived on top of Varśāṇā Hill in a palace that had 32 elegant rooms. Again, these details of Braja, of the Divine Couple, these are the details we want to imprint—we want to press—into our hearts. These are the kind of tattoos that I authorize. One of my best friends has tattoos all over his body; that’s okay, but for disciples, to have this tattoo—these details of Braja—within your heart is essential. Now I’d like to give you some details of the palace in which she lived until she got married and had to go to Jāvaṭ, but that’s another pastime we’ll tell when we go there. 

You know, she is a young girl, so it is described that there was always a joyous, unparalleled atmosphere in that palace. The joyful ecstasy of the residents of that palace in Varśāṇā made their marble walls soft. That doesn't happen in the material world where the atmosphere doesn't affect the walls, but because *bhakti* is so potent, the joyful atmosphere in the Varśāṇā palace made the marble walls soft. It made the golden doors more effulgent, it made the pearl-laced curtains more delicate, and the inlaid jeweled decoration more intriguing. So, the palace was famed not only for its beauty and its grandeur but also for its cheerful nature, which the visitors absorbed with all their senses, making them sway like intoxicated elephants. If you came to that palace, because of this cheerful nature, all your senses would become enlivened and you would sway like an intoxicated elephant. In the Varśāṇā palace, who wants to go there? Yes. 

You know, children, they don't have the problems we have as adults, so they are very often kind of lighthearted and cheerful. Life is easy, right? Look at the crowd and just give your biggest smile to all the devotees. Varśāṇā always resounded with Śrī Rādhā’s carefree laughter, which was like a spring breeze carrying the aroma of blossoming flowers and the sounds of chirping birds. And I read that her laughter inspired even the eldest of King Vṛṣabhānu’s guests with youthful exuberance and filled even the palace servants with the kind of bliss unknown to the inhabitants of Nandagrāma. Isn’t that beautiful? If you want, I can tell you more about Rādhā’s laughter. The concert of Rādhā’s laughter, mixed with the tinkling of her ankle bells and the song of her Vīṇā, shamed the warbling of Brahmā’s celebrated swan and defeated even the vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. Oh, she wins, He loses! Her laughter defeats the vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. She wins, He loses, but we all win just by hearing this nectar.

#### A Brief History of Varśāṇā
It is written that at the end of the Satya-yuga, Lord Brahmā was performing austerities. We all know about his original austerities; when the creation appeared, he was the only person in creation. He found himself sitting on a lotus flower, the stem of which went into Padmanābha, the abdomen of the Lord. He thought, "What am I doing here? I'm the only person; I'm the first created person." In his search, he climbed down the stem of the lotus flower into the Garbhodaka Ocean. He was swimming around there and he heard this word, *tapa*, which means austerity. Okay, he climbed back up the stem, sat on the lotus flower for a thousand years by the calculation of the demigods, and he did austerities. Kṛṣṇa enlightened him with the sound of the Gāyatrī coming from His flute, going into his right ear and into his heart, by which he realized, according to Bhakti Siddhānta Sarasvatī, that he was an eternal maidservant of Kṛṣṇa—*mañjarī-bhāva*. 

It’s described that at the end of the Dvapara-yuga, he had this very strong desire in his heart to become a hill by which Kṛṣṇa and the *gopīs* would perform their pastimes when they appeared in Vṛndāvana. "I want to be there; I want to be the hill on which they all walk. All their lotus feet will be on my head." This was Brahmā’s desire—a very nice desire. What do you want to be when you grow up? A hill. Not just any hill—I want to be a hill on which Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa walk and the dust of Their lotus feet is always covering my head. If it doesn’t exactly click in your brain, it’s okay; we shouldn't speculate. Nārada of course sings, *vaiṣṇavera kriyā-mudrā vijñeha nā bujhaya*—no one should try to understand the mind or the behavior of a Vaiṣṇava. It’s beyond us. Just go, "That’s cool," okay? Be a hill, just a clump of grass, so that the lotus feet of Vṛndāvaneśvarī may walk over me and put the red lac of her feet on my head. That’s how I’ll become an ant in Vṛndāvana. Anything, just Braja. Let me take birth in Braja, not in New York or Sydney.

*Nāsti vṛndāvanaṁ samam*—there is no forest like Vṛndāvana, no village like Nandagrāma, no tree like Vamśīvaṭa, and no name like Rādhā’s name. You can repeat after me:
*   There's no forest like Vṛndāvana.
*   No village like Nandagrāma.
*   No tree like Vamśīvaṭa.
*   And no name like Rādhā’s name.

And you say, "Hare Kṛṣṇa," they say, "Rādhe." By Rādhārāṇī’s mercy, we can approach Kṛṣṇa. And although Kṛṣṇa is the supreme controller, He is controlled by the love of Rādhā. So many devotees want to become *rādhā-dāsī*; it’s kind of deep, esoteric, but that’s an absolute fact. The whole world is chanting the names of Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā, but Lord Śiva and Brahmā are aspiring to live in Braja and chant the name of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is aspiring to be in Braja to chant the names of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. 

What a statement! The whole world is chanting the names of Śiva and Brahmā, but Śiva and Brahmā are aspiring to live in Vṛndāvana and chant the name of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is aspiring to be in Braja to chant the names of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. There’s no name like Rādhārāṇī’s because she has the greatest love for Kṛṣṇa. *Bhakti*, when condensed, becomes *bhāva*; *bhāva*, when condensed, becomes *prema*; *prema*, when condensed, becomes *mahābhāva*. You keep cooking it, and when it becomes condensed, it becomes *mādana-ākhya mahābhāva*, and the only example of that is Śrī Rādhā. 

Brahmā was thinking, "How do I get her mercy? I just want her mercy on my head; I want to be a hill." So Brahmā did austerities at the end of the Dvapara-yuga, and Kṛṣṇa fulfills our spiritual desires. Our material desires may be fulfilled, maybe not—it’s all a game—but if you have a spiritual desire and you’re sincere about it, it will be fulfilled, guaranteed. Why take a chance? Why play around with material desires? Why not be sure? We pray to Kṛṣṇa, "My friend, my friend, I’m drowning in the fabulous whirlpool of material existence. O You who give shelter to the shelterless, please, just one time, can You extend Your hand to save me?" He’s been waiting millions of lives for you. Here’s ISKCON, here’s Śrīla Prabhupāda, come back home, back to Godhead. 

Before the Dvapara-yuga ended and just before Kali-yuga began, Brahmā appeared as Varśāṇā, which has four peaks, like the heads of Brahmā. So be respectful when you’re walking on Varśāṇā Hill. *Māṅgaḍa, Mor-kuṭīra, Vilāsa-gaḍha*—these are holy places. You’ll see many *sādhus* sitting there chanting like this, all day, all night, until they leave this body and go to Goloka. He’s going to Goloka; where else is he going to go? You go to where your heart takes you, and if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, you’ll melt your heart eventually in ecstatic love of God. 

So, when it came time to move from Rāval, he thought, "Where shall I go?" Oh, there’s a nice hill, so he went there and his palace was built on the top of Varśāṇā. We’re going to go to that palace, or a simulation of it. So why this name Varśāṇā? Well, the local explanation—though he only appeared a few hundred years ago—is that he writes, and I quote: "Because a downpour (*varṣa*) of bliss, she is called Varśāṇā, and for this reason, the place of her childhood residence is also called Varśāṇā after her." It means a downpour of bliss. Just like you’re hot and then it rains, we are burning up in the fire of material existence, and we come in contact just with Rādhārāṇī’s name—ah, even in this world, we can be happy. 

She arranges all these pastimes. You can see Nandagrāma has a Moon Tower; it means they use it to go up a little bit higher and see the moon. So she uses the Moon Tower to spy on Kṛṣṇa, what He’s doing at Nandagrāma. So it was arranged by Pourṇamāsī that every day Śrī Rādhā and her girlfriends would go from Varśāṇā to Nandagrāma, where she and her maidservants would cook breakfast for Kṛṣṇa. She heard the fact that Durvāsā Muni blessed Śrī Rādhā that whatever she cooked would taste like nectar, and whoever partook of the food that she cooked for Kṛṣṇa would never be ill. So she arranged with Yaśodā-devī, "I hear your little girl is a great cook; can she cook for my little boy Kṛṣṇa?" She comes in with her maidservants, and they’re serving the *prasādam*. So Kṛṣṇa looks up and He gets a glance at Rādhā, and as Rādhārāṇī passes by, boom, she throws a sidelong glance at Kṛṣṇa, and He has trouble swallowing. And when that would happen, all of her maidservants, they would experience these eight symptoms of ecstatic love of God—like perspiring, voice faltering, hair standing on end—but they had to control those emotions because the elders might think, "Well, maybe you’re sick or something." 

Their sole purpose of existence has nothing to do with themselves; it’s everything for Kṛṣṇa, nothing for me. They’re always thinking and scheming, "How can we bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together?" That’s when the *sakhīs* and the *mañjarīs* are most happy. That’s how Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are associated. Their love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is hidden in their hearts; that’s what the term *gopī* comes from. They have to hide their love, *gupta*; the love is hidden in their hearts. 

One day, for whatever reason, they didn't go. That morning, Kṛṣṇa was so sad that He couldn't start His day without Rādhā. Yeah, some people can't start the day without tea or coffee or a biscuit or turning on the news, but Kṛṣṇa can't start His day without seeing Śrī Rādhā. We should be the same; we can’t start our day without worshipping our deities or Kṛṣṇa in the form of His holy names. "I can’t go to school; I haven't finished my 16 rounds." "But you’re chanting them so slowly." "Yeah, I know, I’m *ruci*." 

So that day, Rādhā didn't come, so Mother Yaśodā cooked very Krishna-prasādam, but He fasted that day instead. He said, "Mā, Mā, I can’t eat so much. I’m a little sick; I have a tummy ache. I’m going back to my room." "Okay, Lālā, you go take rest." So Kṛṣṇa got back in bed, He covered Himself with the covers and the pillow, and Mother Yaśodā came to check, and you know, He’s sleeping. But Yaśodā is dissatisfied, so she closes the door, and Kṛṣṇa madly jumps up, throws off the covers, jumps out the window, and starts going to Varśāṇā. He couldn't start His day until He saw His deity. So who’s the most worshipable person for Kṛṣṇa? Rādhārāṇī. He couldn't start His day without seeing Rādhārāṇī. He’s given us a program for *sādhakas*, for aspiring devotees—we’re just kind of like imitating, like a child walking his parents—but He’s given us the same facility to awaken our love: deity worship. You go to the temple to see Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, Gaura-Nitāi; you have home deities, you wake up—what’s the first thing you do? Turn on the TV and watch the news? No, you do *maṅgala-ārati* to your deities. Same principle. We are practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but in the spiritual world, it’s so spontaneous. We’re doing the same thing they do in the spiritual world, but we’re *sādhakas*, and practice makes perfect.

When He arrived at Varśāṇā, He climbed into a tree—a special tree—where He could see into most of the rooms of the palace, but He couldn't find her anywhere. So He started to imitate the sound of a cooing peacock. In the morning, if you stayed here, you hear so many peacocks. But Kṛṣṇa did it just like the peacocks do because we know from *Nectar of Devotion* that one of Kṛṣṇa’s 64 qualities is that He is expert in all languages. You think of any language on this planet, Kṛṣṇa knows it; He is expert in all languages. What to speak of that, He can speak the language of birds, the language of demigods, the language of bees—I don't know what it means, but He can speak to the bees. One of His 64 transcendental qualities is that He can speak the language of all creatures. 

So, somewhere in the palace, she heard this cooing of a peacock. Of course, she heard it every day in Vṛndāvana, but she was thinking, "Hmm, there’s something special about this cooing." To hear the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa from the lips of a pure devotee has a special effect on your heart. Therefore, we should very often hear Prabhupāda’s *bhajanas*. There is a special effect from hearing the vibration of a pure devotee because it’s done in pure *bhāva*. She thought, "I’m gonna go out and feed the peacocks, okay?" And she came out, and sure enough, there was Kṛṣṇa, bent in three places—the neck, the waist, and the ankles—three lines like a conch shell, His white teeth looking like rows of pearls, and His lotus eyes extending almost to His ears. Hanging from His neck to His ankles was a *vaijayantī* garland—which means five types of flowers—but it never wilts. Govinda was standing there, but He wasn't playing His flute. 

Then they went for a walk and they went to one of their secret caves. Now, Rādhā was gone for quite some time, so Mother Kīrtidā-devī got concerned. "Feed the peacocks? She’s been gone for five hours!" She asked all the maidservants, "Have you seen her?" "No, no, she went outside to feed the peacocks." So cute. She followed Rādhārāṇī’s footprints outside through the dust of Vṛndāvana and to the entrance of this cave where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were. So cute. They entered the cave, "Rādhā, are you here? I saw your footprints, come to this cave, are you here?" And Rādhārāṇī became afraid and she said to Kṛṣṇa, "Mā is here." 

And this is quite amazing—Kṛṣṇa transformed Himself into a beautiful, gorgeous peacock, and He jumped into Rādhārāṇī’s lap. Just in your minds, try to envision it: there’s Kṛṣṇa and there’s Rādhā, and then there’s Kīrtidā-devī coming through the dark, like "What’s going on?" So Kṛṣṇa turns Himself into a peacock and He jumps into Rādhārāṇī’s lap. Rādhārāṇī is sitting there petting this peacock, and the peacock’s going, "Coo, coo." So cute. She said, "What are you doing in this cave?" So Rādhārāṇī explained, "We’re sitting in my room early in the morning and I heard the peacocks coming, so I came out, I found this nice little peacock, so I brought her here to the cave and I’m just petting her." "All right, come home now, but you leave the peacock here; the peacock can’t come in the house. You just give that peacock one long hug to show your affection for him, and then you come on." So Rādhārāṇī gave a very long, loving embrace to that peacock, and Kīrtidā said, "Um, Lālī, that’s a pretty long time; I mean it’s been half an hour, let’s go, put the peacock down." They left the cave. If the peacock was going to say, "That peacock’s very attached to you!" Rādhārāṇī smiled, "Yes, Mā." 

Now, I have another short pastime and I have a few more minutes, but if you’re getting restless or if you’ve heard enough, we can get up and take a little *prasādam* and go on our walk, come on. But who amongst you would like to sit and relish this nourishment? This nourishes our *bhakti-latā-bīja*. Who would like to hear another pastime? Yes, *gurukula* boys, stand up, show how eager you are. Just put your hands—now face the audience, show them a big smile, one of those beautiful smiles. Look at that, *ki jaya!* 

So, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives us this very sweet pastime, one of my favorites actually; I was saving it for this pilgrimage. He says one fine spring day in Vṛndāvana, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, through their messengers, made a plan to meet at Surabhi-kuṇḍa. You know there’s Varśāṇā and Nandagrāma, they’re pretty close, so if they both took off at the same time going in the same direction, people might become suspicious. So, to avoid attracting attention, they planned that Kṛṣṇa would come alone from the south and Rādhā, with one of her maidservants, would come from the north, and voilà, by Pourṇamāsī and Vṛndā-devī’s arrangement, they would meet at Surabhi-kuṇḍa. 

So you should know where it is, Govardhana. Now, according to the *ācāryas*, Kṛṣṇa arrived at the appointed time, but Rādhikā was late. So although, you know, Kṛṣṇa is always late—He said something to the cowherd boys—He said, "Yes, ladies are often late; now it’s my time to become angry." But as time went on, it turned out Rādhārāṇī was very late. He became a little impatient and then He became concerned for Rādhārāṇī’s safety. And for a specific reason, He became nervous about her safety: a rumor had reached Him that Kaṁsa had heard of Rādhārāṇī’s breathtaking beauty and was making plans to kidnap her and take her to Mathurā. "Oh my God, Kaṁsa is going to kidnap Rādhārāṇī and take her to Mathurā?" That’s another pastime I’ll tell you later, actually, the kidnapping—but He’s thinking, "I can’t wait any longer; I have to go out and try to find Rādhārāṇī. Why is she late?" 

But your hearts can be peaceful now, don’t worry, don’t start crying—poor Rādhikā is coming, that’s what you should be doing, you should be feeling this emotion, "Oh no, no!" And you’re crying, that’s what happens sometimes in audiences when they have these *kathās*; the devotee is crying, "Oh, Kaṁsa is going to come." But don’t worry, it’s not the case here. But Rādhārāṇī wasn’t late because of Kaṁsa or any danger; Rādhārāṇī was late because she had taken a detour through a forest called Vilāsa-vana—"Vilāsa" means like a pleasure pastime—so a forest of pleasure pastimes. She went there to collect some flowers, and while doing so, she lost one of her ankle bells. 

So you might think, you know, she’s a princess/queen, right? As a princess, she has so many ankle bells at Varśāṇā. Why would she feel so much separation for this one ankle bell? Well, I’ll tell you why: because Kṛṣṇa gave her that ankle bell at a very special moment. This is the art of giving gifts; you have some special gift, it’s good to give it at the best moment. Just as I was leaving for France to help ignite the *saṅkīrtana* movement—and I didn't speak a word of French—when [Prabhupāda] gave me his *dhoti*, that *dhoti*, it was the moment that also made it so special. 

Or a man wants to propose to a girl to be his wife, so he picks a little Moon Tower near some lawn or something, and then he goes down on one knee and says, "Will you please marry me?" and she gets that ring—show us the ring—she gets this 10-carat diamond ring. I picked the right moment in the little Moon Tower in the housing complex. You’re all right now. Śrīla Prabhupāda, on the day of Govardhana Pūjā, but he waited till the end of the day because she’d asked for it. I felt she was qualified, so she’s probably thinking, "Why is he included in giving it to me today?" So I waited till nine o'clock at night, then I called her and I gave it to her. River of tears. The moment is very important. This is the intricacies of the science of devotional service: to pick the right moment. But any time is good for chanting. 

Still, she was standing there. I don't know what the moment was, but it’s just grabbing a special moment, and this was a very delicate golden chain studded with jewels; it had tiny golden bells hanging from it, and they were constantly singing. But she couldn't find it, so she started calling out to it, "O Ratna-nūpura, where are you?" Because everything in the spiritual world is personal; her ankle bells are fully conscious—they are persons. Try to understand Braja. So she said, "O Ratna-nūpura, where are you? Where are you?" 

Remember Kṛṣṇa is looking for her, so He’s walking near that forest, Vilāsa-vana; He hears her. He said, "That’s Rādhārāṇī’s voice." Kṛṣṇa ran like the wind into the forest, and there He saw Śrī Rādhā and her girlfriends intensely searching, their eyes fixed to the ground. Ordinarily, if Kṛṣṇa entered the scene, because of the loving devotion they have, she would immediately recognize Him, if only because of the transcendental scent of His body, which can be smelled miles away. Wood, sandalwood, camphor, musk—Kṛṣṇa’s body sometimes gives His hiding place away. Gopis are looking for Him, they can’t find Him, but then they smell Him. 

So intent in finding this gift she received from her lover, she didn't even notice because she was standing there. "Hello, Śrī Rādhā." She’s looking around, she sees two blue feet, showing bluish-black like a monsoon cloud. "Oh, Śyāma, I’m so happy You’ve come!" So Kṛṣṇa, "What are you doing? What are you looking for?" Something? She said, "I lost my favorite ankle bell, the one You gave me at that special moment." So, Kṛṣṇa starts looking around. After two minutes, He says, "Look, it’s not here. Let’s go to Surabhi-kuṇḍa where we’re going to have our pastimes; we’ll get you another one to replace this." 

And she, Śrī Rādhā, put her hands on her hips. She said, "Absolutely not! I will not leave my dear anklet alone in the woods, boy!" Remember, everything in Braja is conscious; even the milk that’s boiling in the pot is conscious; even the ground is conscious. Everyone has a *sevā*. There is very satisfying to hear that Rādhārāṇī will never abandon us if we become her pure devotee. And that means Kṛṣṇa will never abandon us because her name is *anapāyinī*—she’s never separated from Kṛṣṇa. So, by her mercy, we’re introduced to Kṛṣṇa, our service is maintained to Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa becomes ours only by Śrī Rādhā’s mercy. 

"Come on, Rādhā, let’s just, we’ll look for it another time," then she frowned. And Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh, Mā is coming, she’s getting angry!" And He has to go through a whole pastime to appease her. So He said, "Okay, let’s keep looking." Kṛṣṇa was like, kind of interrupting the whole thing, so she said, "Go, go look in the flower garden over there by the lake, you know, you go over there; we’ll keep looking here." "You say where’d you lose it? Maybe somewhere, but you go, you over there." Over in the flower garden, it wasn't anywhere where she lost it. He’s kind of like, "What am I doing here?" Sometimes the devotee says like, "What am I doing here?" but Kṛṣṇa always has a plan for His devotee, unknown to us. There’s always a reason for being where we are because Kṛṣṇa directs us from within the heart. 

So Kṛṣṇa was getting impatient looking in this flower bed, so He wanted to bring this whole pastime to a conclusion. He was looking at this, it’s called a "desire vine." A desire vine is actually a vine of very beautiful flowers that you can please Kṛṣṇa with, fulfill His desires by giving these flowers. So this desire vine, He thought, "Oh, and it’s so aromatic," so He cut off a piece of the vine and made it into—what? A flower anklet. He made an ankle bell out of flowers. "Look, look what I found! A flower anklet! It’s so nice, it’s so beautiful, so aromatic!" She said, "Kṛṣṇa, why don't You look for my precious jewelry instead of playing with flowers?" She wasn't impressed. "Go back to the flower garden and look there." 

So Kṛṣṇa went back; He said, "I’ve got to finish this pastime." From His belt, He started digging in the ground over where the flowers were, digging in the ground with His flute. He took it down, and He prayed, "Dear Bhūmi, dear Mother Earth, please return my beloved’s lost ankle bell at once!" And lo and behold, as soon as He said that, that hole that He dug with His flute, it filled up with thousands, millions of ankle bells that were all identical to the one that Rādhārāṇī lost. 

So Kṛṣṇa called out, "I found it!" And all the *sakhīs* are shocked; they all came running over. Now then they saw these anklets, said, "I mean, I mean, I found them." It’s described as a greedy king with jewels in his treasure chest of royal jewels, Kṛṣṇa was running His fingers through heaps of ankle bells on the ground, each one more dazzling and ornate than the one before. So Kṛṣṇa picked one out and He says, "Here it is." Looking at this ankle bell, all the other ones look the same. So she said, "Like where do all the other ones come from?" Then He smiled, "By the constant touch of your lotus foot, a lost anklet became a *cintāmaṇi* gem and transformed the earth it touched into many millions of ankle bells. Your one ankle bell touched the *dhāma* and produced so many," then He said, "Dearest, if you don't put it on at once, then the whole event will be paved everywhere with ankle bells. Hurry up before it turns the whole of Vṛndāvana into ankle bells!" She said, "Okay, I’ll put it on, but I think it’s better You put it on me Yourself." So this time it doesn't fall off. Very carefully, He fastened it around her ankle, taking as much time as He could. 

Maybe we could go there, but it’s a long walk in the hot sun. I can take you there some other time, but that forest is still there, it’s still there, and there’s a flower garden around it, and there’s a part of the forest that the *gopīs* were looking unsuccessfully, the whole deal is there. I can show you. And you know what some Vaiṣṇavas say? We say that many anklets with tiny golden bells can still be found on the banks of around this hole in Vilāsa-vana, and you look and you’ll find little golden ankle bells. That’s what they have said in the dust in that forest. But they say that such anklets can only be found by those who have unflinching and deep faith in the Divine Couple of Braja. So who would like to go to Vilāsa-vana and try to find His little ankle bells? Therefore, who would like to have unflinching and deep faith? 

Okay, so I’ll finish with one saying they have here in Vṛndāvana: "All things lost are easily found there." Even souls who have lost their eternal identities as servants of Kṛṣṇa can find them, but the grace of that forest and the holy names. So even if we don’t feel we have the qualification, we can go, and by the grace of that forest and the singing of "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare," we can find things that have been lost. But the most important thing we have lost is our *bhakti*, our love for the Divine Couple. So by going there, perhaps we will realize who we are, who is Kṛṣṇa, and by Prabhupāda’s grace, what is our service to the Divine Couple. Because Prabhupāda is the revealer of the *dhāma*. 

Thank you very much. Please enjoy your *prasādam*, and then Rasika will inform us if we’re going to have another *kīrtana* or we start our walk up to see the palace.""