"*00458*.*
"So today, on the invitation of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we find ourselves in the village of Citra Sakhī, who is one of the eight Aṣṭa-sakhīs—the maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. You could say with confidence this is one of the most favorite places for devotees to visit because it is the home of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. As I mentioned earlier, Rādhārāṇī actually made her appearance in Rāval; it is a small, small little village. We won't be going there this year. You could say she spent her infancy there.

And where did Kṛṣṇa spend his infancy? At Gokula. So when Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā decided that there were too many demons coming every day sent by Kaṃsa nearby in Mathurā—because Gokula is just across the river, the Yamunā River—every day a demon was coming. So, Nanda Bābā decided they would move someplace more safe, and where did they move to? Nandagrām. So, Rāval and Gokula, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and then Kṛṣṇa moved to Nandagrām and Rādhārāṇī moved nearby to Varṣāṇā. So, bigger mountains, bigger palaces.

And because Vṛṣabhānu was a king in the sense that he had a lot of land, a lot of cows, he also had a big palace. So, Rādhārāṇī grew up in her youth in the palace. So, again, her father’s name was Vṛṣabhānu and her mother’s name is Kīrtidā, and she has a brother. Do any of you know what the name of Rādhārāṇī’s brother is? Śrīdāmā. A lot of devotees don't know that, but her brother’s name is Śrīdāmā. And she also has a younger sister—most devotees don't relate, but she has a younger sister. Who knows the name of Rādhārāṇī’s younger sister? It is described by the ācāryas: Anaṅga-mañjarī. She shadows Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as little girls do their elder sisters. I thought that was a beautiful description. Much, much can be said about Anaṅga-mañjarī, but she shadows Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as little girls often do their elder sisters.

Now, when you go up the hill, it is not too difficult to walk. I think Rasika made it sound like, you know, you’re climbing Mount Everest or something; it is not like that. It is a pleasant walk, and when you get up there, you’ll pass one temple called the Lāḍalī-jī temple, and then you’ll come to Rādhārāṇī’s palace. So, it is not the original palace; it is a replica of the original palace because 5,000 years is a long time—things pass by. So, it is not the original palace, but I would like to describe what the original palace is like. Of course, it is a detail; you don’t generally ask someone, "Can you describe in detail your house?" But because it is Tādātmya, because it is in relationship to Śrī Rādhā, it is worshipable and relishable to hear about her palace.

So, her palace has 32 elegant royal rooms, and it is described that the joyous, unparalleled atmosphere of the palace makes marble walls soft, the golden doors more refulgent, the pearl-laced curtains more delicate, and the inlaid jeweled decors more intriguing. So, listen carefully. I’ve been to several palaces around the world—there are kings and queens, and in the past, they had palaces—I never visited a palace where the joyous, unparalleled atmosphere made these things as they are. Never went to a place where there is a joyful, unparalleled atmosphere, except for a Hare Kṛṣṇa temple. Real joy is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, where it creates a joyous, unparalleled atmosphere where we just give up our conditioning and ego, and we just start dancing like liberated souls. So, that joyful, devotional atmosphere in the palace makes marble walls soft. Some things are hard to understand: marble walls soft, the golden doors they’re more refulgent, and the pearl-laced curtains become more delicate, and the inlaid jeweled doors more intriguing. "Wow, look at that jeweled door, it’s so intriguing!" It’s all because of bhakti. Your devotion.

Would you like to know more about the palace? The palace is famed not only for its beauty and its grandeur but also for its cheerful nature, which visitors absorb through their senses, making them sway like intoxicated elephants. We say in Polish, *uwaga*, be careful when you go to the palace that you don’t start swaying like an intoxicated elephant. I’ve never been in a place like this. Yes, that’s why we come to Vraja.

Then the ācāryas give a comparison between where Rādhārāṇī moved when she got married to Abhimanyu. She moved to Yāvaṭa. The atmosphere in Yāvaṭa was much different because she’d given her heart to Kṛṣṇa, but by social custom, she had to be married to Abhimanyu, who was basically just a cowherd boy. So, the ācāryas give an analogy to explain the difference between the atmosphere in Varṣāṇā compared to the atmosphere when Rādhārāṇī moved to Yāvaṭa. They write: "Unlike Yāvaṭa, where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was always somber"—somber means kind of grave—"Varṣāṇā resounded with her carefree laughter, which was like a spring breeze carrying the aroma of blossoming flowers and the sound of chirping birds."

Carefree laughter. We hear in Varṣāṇā she has carefree laughter. This is you. Next time you see Rādhārāṇī next to Kṛṣṇa on the altar, you know, think of her in this mood of carefree laughter in Varṣāṇā. In this laughter, we laugh at one of Kṛṣṇa's jokes or something, but "carefree"—you are carefree, you just laugh in a different way. She’s free to associate with Kṛṣṇa, of course in a restricted way, but she’s free there. In Yāvaṭa, she’s married, so what’s her carefree laughter like? The ācāryas say it’s like a spring breeze carrying the aroma of blossoming flowers and the sound of chirping birds. We’re analyzing Rādhārāṇī’s laughter here; it’s a detail, but what else do you want to talk about? The mundane news? Mathematics? No way.

And the ācāryas go on to give more details about her laughter. They write: "In the palace, Rādhārāṇī’s laughter inspires even the eldest of King Vṛṣabhānu’s guests with youthful exuberance and fills even the palace servants with the kind of bliss unknown to the inhabitants of Nandagrām." You know, Vṛṣabhānu is a king, he has important people coming to see him, there’s different moods. So when the elder person comes, Rādhārāṇī’s laughter inspires them with youthful exuberance; they become, you know, the youth, just to hear her laughter. And there’s servants. Every palace has servants; they carry the bowl here, they wash the plate there, they clean, so servants. But when the servants hear Rādhārāṇī laugh, it gives them a kind of bliss that is unknown even to the inhabitants of Nandagrām. And in Nandagrām, all the inhabitants are Kṛṣṇa bhaktas, they’re fully devoted to Kṛṣṇa, but here, the servants in the palace, they feel a higher bliss hearing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s laughter. So, next time you see your Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities or the deities that Prabhupāda personally installed in the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple, when you see Rādhā, remember these details. It makes you appreciate her more. This is remembering.

So, one more description about her laughter given by one of our ācāryas. This is so beautiful, you may faint when you hear this. Nothing in this material creation, this vast material creation, can compare to the beauty of this scholar’s description of Rādhārāṇī’s laughing: "The concert of Rādhārāṇī’s laughter mixed with the tinkling of her anklets and the song of her vīṇā shames the warbling of Brahmā’s celebrated swan and defeats even the vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute." Her laughter surpasses the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s flute playing. Oh my gosh. So please repeat after me, in English and then in Russian, then Hindi, then Spanish, then French, then German, then Zulu, so we can hear it, absorb it in many ways. We could sit here for millenniums and just discuss these things and be perfectly happy. So please repeat: "The concert of Rādhārāṇī’s laughter, mixed with the tinkling of her anklets and the song of her vīṇā, shames the warbling of Brahmā’s celebrated swan and defeats even the vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute."

Now, the history of this palace that you’ll see on the hill is also very interesting. It’s written that at the end of Satya-yuga, Lord Brahmā, he was performing austerities. He had a very strong desire in his heart to become a hill on which Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs would perform their upcoming pastimes in Vṛndāvana. Of course, you might think that Lord Brahmā—he’s the head of our sampradāya—for all practical purposes, we look to him as an example, as we do for all of our ācāryas in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We often discuss his pastimes, our Brahmā, because it’s not every Brahmā who is a pure devotee, but fortunately, our Brahmā is a pure devotee. And he has four heads; he’s like really intelligent, and he’s managing this universe quite well, I must say. From the atom up to the universe, things are going on pretty good; it’s just we make a mess of it.

So, when I mentioned this fact, that he wanted to become a hill on which Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs would perform their pastimes in the Dvāpara-yuga, one of the guests said, "If he’s so great a personality, like, what does he want to become a hill for? Who wants to become a hill?" You know, before I graduated from high school, when I was, uh, 16 or 17—you graduate from secondary school, I think you call it high school—we were all called into the principal’s office, and we had to make a decision what we wanted to be in life in order to choose which university we would go to. The principal said, "What do you want to be when you grow up?" One of my friends said he wanted to be a businessman, others said they wanted to go into the military, somebody else wanted to go into farming. And what if I said what I want to be in life? "I want to be a hill." Like, hello, you want to be a hill? But our Brahmā, he wanted to be a hill.

But don’t doubt Lord Brahmā because he was enlightened by the flute of Kṛṣṇa. You know, after he performed austerities, we know that the whole pastime, he’s sitting on the lotus flower, the stem going into the Garbhodaka ocean, he did austerities. Then Kṛṣṇa, appreciating, he appeared, and he didn’t speak to him; he played his flute. And the flute music was Gāyatrī-mantra, and it went into the right ear of Brahmā, into his heart. And according to Bhakti-śāstrī, at that moment, he understood he was an eternal maidservant of Kṛṣṇa. Maidservant! What does that mean? Like a gopī. That’s our siddhānta. How powerful the Gāyatrī-mantra is. Let us not just become familiar with it, but it’s a very powerful mantra.

But how to understand Brahmā’s desire? Like, well, you can’t. You just have to accept. He warns us: all of the previous great devotees have said no one can understand the behavior of a great soul. So it’s very clear he wanted to become a hill so he could, you know, he knew that Kṛṣṇa was coming at Dvāpara-yuga. So he’s saying, "If I become a hill there in Vṛndāvana, then Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet and the lotus feet of the gopīs will touch my head and I’ll become purified." Imagine if Kṛṣṇa came and put his feet on your head. That’s all you need! You don’t have to go through many lifetimes of, you know, saṃsāra, just, "Okay, back home, back to Godhead." One devotee of Rādhārāṇī, he put it very clearly, said that Lord Brahmā becoming a hill in Vṛndāvana, he could experience the touch of the soft, pink lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her gopīs on his head. He didn’t mention Kṛṣṇa; he said he would get the touch of the soft, pink lotus feet of Rādhārāṇī and her gopīs on his head. That’s another class, but that’s what he said. I’m thinking he couldn’t get a higher benediction than getting the mercy of Śrī Rādhā.

There’s a beautiful saying they have here in Vṛndāvana. I was thinking that Cāru would be a good tattoo for him. Listen to this: "There is no forest like Vṛndāvana, no village like Nandagrām, no tree like Vamśīvaṭa, and no name like Rādhā’s name." I’ll pay for the tattoo! Please repeat: "There’s no forest like Vṛndāvana, no village like Nandagrām, no tree like Vamśīvaṭa, and no name like Rādhā’s name." So someone may say, "But the name of Kṛṣṇa is the highest, how can you say there’s no name like the name of Rādhā? We’re always chanting Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. We chant Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa." So how can you say there’s no name like Rādhā? As if there’s supposed to be some competition. But anyway, well, there’s another saying in Vṛndāvana to answer this question. Would you like to hear it? "The whole world is chanting the names of Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā, but Lord Śiva and Brahmā are aspiring to live in Vraja and chant the name of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is aspiring to be in Vraja to chant the names of Śrī Rādhārāṇī."

The whole world is chanting the names of Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā, but Lord Śiva and Brahmā are aspiring to live in Vraja and chant the name of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is aspiring to be in Vraja to chant the names of Rādhārāṇī. That’s what the Vrajavāsīs say. We take that. And what’s more, there’s no name like Rādhārāṇī’s name because she has the greatest love for Kṛṣṇa. The ācāryas say, bhakti when condensed becomes bhāva; bhāva when condensed becomes prema—love; prema when condensed becomes mahābhāva; and when mahābhāva becomes condensed, it becomes mādana-ākhya-mahābhāva. And the only example of mādana-ākhya-mahābhāva is Rādhārāṇī. It’s deep, but it’s the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help me God.

So with great determination, Brahmā performed again penance and austerity, and Lord Kṛṣṇa fulfilled his desire. So before Dvāpara-yuga ended—we’re not going too far past in time, but before the Dvāpara-yuga ended and Kali-yuga began—the four heads of Brahmā appeared as a hill with four peaks. He’s the hill there, but it has four peaks. It’s not just a hill like that; he appeared as a hill with his heads, four peaks like a crown, sort of. If you could go up in a helicopter and fly over Varṣāṇā, you see four peaks. Helicopter... okay, drone. Not this drone, you can hang on it. You, "Oh, I want to come back down." And on those four peaks, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have many beautiful pastimes. So those four peaks are Man-gaḍh, Bhan-gaḍh, Vilās-gaḍh, and Dān-gaḍh. So that’s where Vṛṣabhānu moved from Rāval; then they built their palace there between those peaks, and it’s called Varṣāṇā. We give that name, Varṣāṇā. And but you know what, what does it mean? We wouldn’t know anything in Kṛṣṇa consciousness without the mercy of our ācāryas. You say Varṣāṇā is a foreign word in the material world; it’s a word that exists in the spiritual world, in Goloka Vṛndāvana. It’s foreign to this world, so therefore, we need an explanation from someone who lives in the spiritual world or may have come here from the spiritual world, and that’s Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. He gives so many details about the spiritual world.

So he has given the meaning of the word or the name Varṣāṇā. He says, and I quote him—just to repeat his words, our hearts will be purified just by the sound vibration—he says, "Because Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī causes a downpour (varṣā) of bliss, she is called Varṣāṇā, and for this reason, the place of her childhood residence is also called Varṣāṇā." A downpour of bliss (varṣā) causes a downpour of bliss; she is called Varṣāṇā, and where she lives is also called Varṣāṇā. Isn’t that sweet? And lots and lots of pastimes. We could spend hours, weeks, days, months, years just discussing the pastimes, but I know you’re so eager to go and see the 32 rooms in the palace. Actually, you won’t see them, but I’ll share one pastime that happened at Varṣāṇā. And this pastime naturally concerns one of her confidants. We say in French, *confidante*; it means like those who are most dear to you. So those are the Aṣṭa-sakhīs, those are the eight girlfriends who know Rādhārāṇī’s desires, and their whole life is simply to fulfill those desires, nothing else. It’s all, it’s not about me, it’s all about you. They think, they never think of themselves. It’s not about me, it’s all about you. It’s just Śrī Rādhā.

So one of those sakhīs is Tuṅgavidyā. It’s longer in Russian, you get to relish it more than we do in English. So her village is near here, because this is a mountain, and all around the mountain hill, all the Aṣṭa-sakhīs have their villages. They’re ready to serve at a moment’s notice. They’re ready to serve. Service is their life and soul, and service is our life and soul. But between the villages of the sakhīs and the hill are the villages of the mañjarīs. Each of—remember, each of those sakhīs has eight mañjarīs who help her, and their village is closer because they do more confidential service than the sakhīs, but that’s, I’m not qualified to speak on that.

So the sakhīs are doing service like they get water for Rādhārāṇī, they arrange her clothes, their ornaments, they dress her, they put her cosmetics on, they dress her braid—braid, they braid her hair, dress her hair. So one time, Tuṅgavidyā, she went to a particular well to fetch water for Rādhārāṇī, and she was very surprised to see this rascal Kṛṣṇa there at the well. "Kṛṣṇa, what are you doing so near here?" Because you know, they think Kṛṣṇa is, you know, always bothering Rādhārāṇī and this and that. So it’s part of the pastime, you know: "You little rascal, you’re trying to get into... so what are you doing here?"

So Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear Tuṅgavidyā, I’m sorry, but this well belongs to me, and you cannot take water from it without paying a tax equivalent to the amount of water you take." So she didn’t even bother arguing; she became very upset and stormed off to Varṣāṇā to complain to her queen, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Tuṅgavidyā said to Rādhārāṇī, "We gopīs are fed up with Śyāmasundara’s activities! He asks us for taxes wherever we go. Sometimes he taxes us on the banks of the Yamunā, sometimes on the road to Varṣāṇā, and other times in the gardens when we come there to pick some flowers. Now he wants to tax us when we take water from water wells! The day is not far off when he will ask us to pay taxes for breathing air and eating food!"

Rādhārāṇī, Rādhārāṇī became very—you know, she’s being very quiet, she’s thinking, her eyebrows are frowning a little bit, all the sakhīs are like, "What? What’s she gonna say?" So she replied very slowly, with emphasis on each word: "Do not worry, Tuṅgavidyā, I will talk to Śyāmasundara about this." So okay, Rādhārāṇī will take care of this.

So after speaking with Rādhārāṇī, Tuṅgavidyā was walking on her way home through the Vṛndāvana forest when suddenly she heard this very beautiful bhajan. And looking around, she saw an effulgent lady ascetic, a young—you could say yoginī—sitting in saffron robes with an iktāra, iktāra instrument in her hands. Iktāra is, sometimes you see it, it’s a musical instrument with one string. And this yoginī, *binging, binging*. "Who is this? I haven’t seen this yoginī before." So this yoginī was singing a very beautiful bhajan in a sweet voice, a voice that Tuṅgavidyā had never heard before. It was so sweet. "This girl is singing so sweetly." So curious, Tuṅgavidyā approached this yoginī, this aesthetic, a woman ascetic. She said to her, "Dear one, you appear so exalted and charming, and your voice is mesmerizing. Please come with me, I will take you to the palace of King Vṛṣabhānu and Mother Kīrtidā. Surely they will give you a donation in charity."

But the yoginī, she said very angrily, "I am renounced, I have no desire for charity." So Tuṅgavidyā wanted to pacify her, so she said, "My dear yoginī, it will bring great pleasure to the king and queen of Varṣāṇā if you offer your service to them. So you please come with me." But the yoginī was playing, we say in English, "hard to get," because she knew after this incident at the water well, it might be hard for her, him, to ever meet Rādhārāṇī again. You get the picture.

So the yoginī said, "I am a renunciate, how can I enter a palace?" She wanted to make sure she got in. "No, no, please, you must come!" So the yoginī, she said, "Having accepted the renounced order of life, my home is this Vṛndāvana forest. My bed is the soft dust of Vṛndāvana. The sky of Vṛndāvana is my blanket, and the flowering creepers of Vṛndāvana are my only belongings. The moon over Vṛndāvana is the lamp of my hopes, and my chanting beads are counting the days until I meet the divine couple, Śrī-Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." I love that, you know? It’s—who’s it coming from? We know whose heart it’s coming from. What a beautiful description of what we want to be. The Vrajavāsīs were hoping against hope to become, you know, modern society, there’s that, what they call, a mission statement. You make a mission statement: "I am what I am now, but in my lifetime I want to achieve, I want to become like this, and I want to do this, and I want to become this." A mission statement. In my lifetime, I want to be, you know, a famous rock star, I want to be a successful businessman, I want to be a politician, you know—you’re young. But this is my mission statement, this is our mission statement. Nothing less, nothing more. Especially this is the ISKCON mission statement. But we’re all attempting to be renounced from this world, not just—gradually everyone wants to gradually renounce this world for what? Well, listen again carefully: "Having accepted the renounced order of life, my home is this Vṛndāvana forest. My bed is the soft dust of Vṛndāvana. The sky of Vṛndāvana is my blanket, and the flowering creepers of Vṛndāvana are my only belongings. The moon over Vṛndāvana is the lamp of my hopes, and my chanting beads are counting the days until I meet the divine couple, Śrī-Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." That’s everything to an ISKCON devotee, any Gauḍīya devotee, that’s everything.

Okay, here we go, repeat after me: "Having accepted the renounced order of life, my home is this Vṛndāvana forest. My bed is the soft dust of Vṛndāvana. The sky of Vṛndāvana is my blanket, and the flowering creepers of Vṛndāvana are my only belongings. The moon over Vṛndāvana is the lamp of my hopes, and my chanting beads are counting the days until I meet the divine couple, Śrī-Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." I think that says everything. I’ll just stop the lecture now. Okay, but promise me you’ll always remember that and never forget it. If you promise, put two hands up. You promise? In English: "I promise." And in Russian...

But with Tuṅgavidyā’s insistence, the yoginī, she relented. "Okay, I’ll go." So when they arrived—the yoginī and Tuṅgavidyā—they arrived at the palace, which you’re going to see. And Tuṅgavidyā ran inside the palace and called out to Mother, "Mother Kīrtidā, a most exalted young yoginī has come to your doorstep! Please come to greet her." So hearing this news, Mother Kīrtidā, she came quickly with, as described, countless maidservants to take the darśana of this yoginī. So then paid her obeisances to this yoginī, then washed her feet with milk and rosewater. So afterwards, the yoginī, she said, "Queen Kīrtidā, I am pleased with your service and your hospitality. Ask me whatever you want me to do, and I’ll do my best to give it to you." This makes a great theater.

So Kīrtidā replied, "My dear sādhu—we say sādhu—so, my dear sādhvī, I have everything. By your mercy, I have filled my home with riches and many items of good fortune. In every corner of my house, there is unlimited wealth. I ask only for your blessings. But let me share with you, I have a daughter in whom all the pleasures of the world reside, but she has been sick for many days. She has a chronic disease which causes me to worry, worry about her." Who’s she talking about? Who’s her daughter? Rādhārāṇī. "She has been sick for many days, she has a chronic disease."

So when the yoginī asked Kīrtidā for the name of the disease that her daughter was suffering from, Mother Kīrtidā replied as follows: "My dear yoginī, I have called many physicians, many doctors, but no one can understand what this disease is." So the yoginī said, "Well, what are the symptoms of this disease?" So Kīrtidā said, "Well, at night, she calls out in her sleep: 'Yamunā! Yamunā! Kuñja! Muralī! Muralī!' again and again and again. I’m so worried about her. It’s chronic, night, 'Yamunā! Yamunā!' She’s going mad, my daughter." So the yoginī asked Mother Kīrtidā, "I’m very expert in this matter. Does she sometimes call out 'Śyām! Śyām! Śyām!' in her sleep?" "Huh? Śyām? Śyām?" "Yeah, yeah, she does!" And then yoginī said... Kīrtidā said, "Yes, she does, but how do you know that? How did you know that she says 'Śyām, Śyām'?" So the yoginī replied, "I know this disease very well, and I can cure your daughter from this disease. So please call her here."

So Kīrtidā called all the sakhīs, "We found, I think we found the remedy for this!" You know, "Yamunā, Yamunā, Kuñja, Muralī, Muralī, Śyām..." Who wants that disease? Raise your hand! Madness calling out, chronically, chronically means always: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. Prabhupāda said one time, "You Western boys or girls, you’re so passionate that you can’t just sit and chant all day long, so I have to create so many services for you. But if we could, and ultimately we should, we should be able to sit down 22 hours a day, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare..." When, oh when will that day be ours?

So Rādhārāṇī came with all the sakhīs. She kept saying, "I’m not sick, I’m not." "Yes you are." "No, I’m not sick, everything’s perfectly okay, right?" So Rādhārāṇī came and she saw the yoginī, and she paid her obeisances. And the yoginī asked Rādhārāṇī about her well-being. Then the yoginī said to Mother Kīrtidā, a little unusual, but she said, "Please ask your daughter to dance with me." Like, Kīrtidā was like, "Wait a minute, you know, you’re a yoginī, you have some cure, and you want to dance with my daughter?"

So the yoginī said, "Yes, I know a few dance movements from the Vedas by which all negative energy and black magic can be banished forever, forever, from your daughter." So by the influence of yoga-māyā, Paurṇamāsī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī didn’t know what was going on either. So she said—Rādhārāṇī said, "I’m sorry, I will not dance with someone like this aesthetic yoginī." So you know, Kīrtidā really wanted her daughter to be cured, but she... this is a little odd, you want to dance with my daughter? So to, to kind of fix this, this dilemma here, Kīrtidā said to the yoginī, "Is it possible for me to dance with you on behalf of Rādhā?" The yoginī went, "Oh, I’m out of here!" She started running away, but Kīrtidā and all the sakhīs ran after her, "No, no, please!" With sweet words, "Please, please, I—we’re sorry, there’s some misunderstanding, please, please stay!" And the yoginī was like, adamant, you know, "If you want me to cure the queen’s daughter, I need to dance with her because I know some moves in the Vedas that will cure her."

Like, so you know how mothers are, okay? Whatever it takes, she agreed. But Rādhārāṇī... this aesthetic, she’s got matted hair and she’s this and that, some strange voice... so the dance began. The royal ballroom. Yoginī and Rādhārāṇī were dancing, and Rādhārāṇī is thinking, "This, how does this aesthetic know this dance? I do this dance with Kṛṣṇa! How does this... how does she know this dance?" And then another thing, she’s looking at the eyes of this aesthetic, and she—Rādhārāṇī said the following: "My dear aesthetic lady, how is it that you’re a renunciate, but your eyes are dark with mascara?" Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa both wear little mascara. The yoginī replied, "Well, one time when I was traveling in the Himalayan Mountains, I met a sādhu who told me if I put on kajal on my eyes each day made from almonds and different herbs, I will always be blessed with the association of the Lord’s devotees."

So Rādhārāṇī said—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said, "Dear yoginī, please tell me why you’re chewing betel nut?" You know, betel nut, "Why you’re... you’re a renunciate, why you’re chewing betel nut? Renunciates don’t chew betel nut." The yoginī replied, "My dear Rādhā, I was on my way to the Yamunā when a sādhu came up to me and gave me some betel from Lord Nityānanda. He said if I did not respect it, I would be making an offense to the Lord. That’s why I’m chewing betel."

So Rādhārāṇī, she kept... she’s getting a little suspicious here, dancing, and the clothes and the—she said to the renunciate, "Where are you from? Like, where, where are you from?" So that yoginī replied, "I am from the forest of Vraja." Then Rādhārāṇī asked, "And which sampradāya are you initiated into? You know, you’re practicing spiritual life, you’re an ascetic, which sampradāya are you initiated into?" So the yoginī smiled. She said, "I am initiated in the sampradāya of prema." So then Rādhārāṇī asked, "Well, who’s your guru? Who’s your guru?" So the aesthetic yoginī, she replied, "My guru is Premamūrti." That’s another nice name for initiation, right? Because actually, Premamūrti is Rādhārāṇī herself. Mūrti means like the form, or the personification, the person. She’s the form, or she is the person who has the highest prema. So "My guru is Premamūrti." It keeps going on, we’re going to be here for 4 hours, I’m just kidding! Rādhārāṇī will get...

So then Rādhārāṇī asked, "Why have you taken renunciation at such a young age?" The yoginī replied, "To find real love of God." So then Rādhā—Rādhārāṇī, you know, they’re dancing, but she comes even closer to the yoginī—"You’re a very interesting, attractive person, could you please tell me something more about yourself?" So the yoginī said, "Sure." She said, "I am from another country, but I left everything behind there: my pleasure, my sense gratification, my opulences, my comfort, my relatives, my family, everything I left behind. The truth is, I have left everything just to achieve the goddess of love." Wow. Who’s the goddess of love? So still not understanding who this yoginī was, Rādhārāṇī asked her more questions. She said, "My dear yoginī, you’re very young, and what will you do if later you somehow become attached to the material world again? Because you renounced the world at such a young age." So the yoginī said, "Because I have tasted the sweetest of all rasas, I will never fall back into the sour and bitter taste of this material world."

Rādhārāṇī, she like, "Wow," she paused for a moment. She, she asked the yoginī, "What, dear one, is the true reality of everything? What is the true reality of life, the meaning—the paramārtha—like, what, what is, what is reality? What is the highest thing to achieve? True reality?" The yoginī smiled, and she said, "True reality, Śrī Rādhā, is to sit next to you and appreciate that you have the most beautiful eyes in the three worlds." "True reality is to sit next to you and appreciate that you have the most beautiful eyes in the three worlds." And so then, the yoginī, she suddenly became very emotional, you know, after saying that, true reality, she—to sit next to Rādhā and gaze at her eyes, she became very emotional. Blood of tears started coming from her eyes, and she—quote-unquote—said, "Oh Rādhā, I am yours! I am yours! I am yours!" Please repeat after me: "Oh Rādhā, I am yours! I am yours! I am yours!" What more needs to be said? But to finish the pastime...

And then the yoginī fell unconscious. Everyone present—the sakhīs were there, the servants were there, Kīrtidā, everybody, you know, all the residents of Varṣāṇā—they stood like statues. It’s described, appreciating this yoginī’s deep love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Just see the love this yoginī has for our Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; she’s one of us! But the yoginī had fainted on the ground. Tuṅgavidyā, out of, you know, deep love and appreciation for this yoginī, you know, just—she was just bursting with love for this compatriot in love—she came forward to try to wake her up. You know, she’s trying to, all this move, do up here and move this there and, you know, wake her, wake her up. And as she’s trying to wake up the yoginī, there’s a little, little bag over her shoulder, and out of that bag is sticking out a flute. And Tuṅgavidyā had like mixed emotions, because remember Kṛṣṇa had tried to tax her at the water well and she was so angry and she went to complain to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and at the same time she fell in love with this yoginī, with Kṛṣṇa. So this is, you know, the, the, I described the turbulent emotions of bhakti are there in her heart, but love conquers all. And she gave way to that love, and, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, you are such a rascal!" You are none other than Kṛṣṇa disguised as a yoginī. So she and all the sakhīs and all the gopīs, the mañjarīs who were present, they started cheering, as they often do when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are united in their pastimes of love, because these devotees live only to bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together. That’s the life and soul of the sakhīs and the gopīs. They’re—separation is very hard, they bring it together, they cheer.

And one ācārya summarizes the whole pastime so nicely, and we’ll finish with this verse:
"I will worship disguised Kṛṣṇa, who entertained Rādhā and her sakhīs with his playful pastimes. I offer my respectful obeisances again and again to the sakhīs, whose ultimate goal is to reunite the divine couple in the beautiful forest of Śrī Varṣāṇā."

For Kārtika Parikrama 2023, kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa kī jaya! Śrī Varṣāṇā kī jaya! Thank you very much, Hare Kṛṣṇa.""