Hare Krishna, dear devotees, all glories at the moment!

I am in the most auspicious place in the universe, Śrī Rādhā Raman Temple, established by Śrīla Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Goswāmī for his very dear deity, Rādhā Raman. Once, it was said there were five thousand temples in Vṛndāvana; that was 30 or 40 or 50 years ago.

I think there are many more now, but there are seven prominent temples the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas visit when they come on pilgrimage or if they live here. Actually, when Śrīla Prabhupāda lived in Vṛndāvana for many years before coming to the West, I read in the *Prabhupāda Līlāmṛta* that he would visit all seven prominent temples in the morning and then go back in the evening and visit them as well.

Because deity worship is an integral part of our Vaiṣṇava tradition, our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition – chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, hearing *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam*, worshiping the deity, living in a holy place, and associating with devotees – and it was Śrīla Prabhupāda who very kindly brought deity worship to the Western world where we can see it's very much accepted now.

This temple is all over the world, which are visited by ISKCON temples that are visited by thousands or hundreds of thousands, or even millions, you could say, over the years. So, deity worship is so important. And this particular temple, the Rādhā Raman Temple, Śrīla Prabhupāda said one time that we could come here to learn the process of deity worship.

Apparently, with his association with this temple and the Goswāmīs who run this temple or oversee this temple, Prabhupāda was impressed with their *pūjā*, which was of course established by Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Goswāmī.

So he encouraged us to visit here and to learn about the deity worship, not only the rituals but the mood, the *bhāva*. So, I've taken that very seriously. I love to do deity worship. I've done deity worship most of my career; even as a traveling *sannyāsī*, I've always traveled with deities.

So, in my association with the temple here and the personalities who worship in this temple, I came in contact with one of the Goswāmīs. There are actually many Goswāmī families that do the worship here at different intervals during the year; many families, actually.

I think each Goswāmī family gets one week. And I came in contact with a very, now a very good friend of mine, Puṇḍarīk Goswāmī and his family. We've spent a lot of time together. He actually came to my Polish Festival, *Festival of India*, on the Baltic Sea coast with his family.

He spent two weeks with us. He went out on *harināma saṅkīrtana* with us every day, attended two festivals, sat in the audience, and heard my humble self lecture. He is a well-known speaker on the *Bhāgavatam* and Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava philosophy, and somehow or other, we became very close friends.

So, when it comes time for his one-week service at the Rādhā Raman Temple, he becomes very excited about that. His whole family, his whole entourage, he has many friends, etc., helpers. He's invited us to participate. Just like yesterday, it was his first day for his *sevā* to Rādhā Ramanjī.

So, the ceremony is, you know, when it comes time for a Goswāmī to do his worship to the deity, he comes to the temple. And the last Goswāmī was doing that worship. There's a whole ceremony; they bring the keys to the altar.

It's going back to the time of Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Goswāmī establishing the standard of worship here. So, we were present. He invited me to be there with him. There was a crowd of, I don't know, 800 people in the temple.

Somehow or other, people fit in; there's so many. This is a very popular temple, so thousands of people come, but we were there, and he received the keys. And he was very kind. He was touching the keys to the heads of different people who are in the temple.

I also got the keys around my neck like that. So, it's great mercy. There's a lot of mercy one can get a lot of mercy here in Śrī Rādhā Ramaṇa. And we did this; we were part of his worship last year as well, and we had a big *harināma saṅkīrtana* throughout Vṛndāvana as a celebration that he got the keys for the worship.

I brought with me about 40 or 50 of my disciples and friends and well-wishers, and together we all were glorifying Śrī Śrī Rādhā Ramanjī. And we're looking forward to this week. Actually, he has arranged many performances, famous dancers, famous speakers will be participating in his *pūjā* for this year.

We're invited. We've just come now; we feel like family, actually. This is the mood of Vṛndāvana, that the *brajabāsī* is here, regardless of who you are, where you come from, what is your language or country, we're all accepted as eternal servants of Rādhā Śyāma.

This is probably mercy. This is actually the peace formula for the world, that we all identify ourselves as one spiritual family under God, under Kṛṣṇa, because He is the Supreme Father. Everyone was created by Kṛṣṇa; we're all His sons and daughters.

We all have one Father. So, if you have the same Father, then you are brothers and sisters. And although you may quarrel with your brothers and sisters, it never gets too intense like we see in the world today, so much confusion and conflict going on.

So, we have the peace formula, and you feel that when you come here. When you come to hear Kṛṣṇa, in the very beginning, I think when Prabhupāda first brought his disciples here, maybe they were questioning, you know, the Westerners, how can they take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, etc., etc.

But I can say quite frankly now, the people of Vṛndāvana, they love the Western devotees.

They love the members of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, and they honor Śrīla Prabhupāda.

This is very satisfying to our hearts. So, we also are part of Vṛndāvana's life, which is seen by the fact that a very prominent Goswāmī here, Puṇḍarīk Goswāmī, is very appreciative of Śrīla Prabhupāda, very appreciative of how we're spreading the *saṅkīrtana* movement of the Lord all over the world.

He has embraced us; we've embraced him. So, in our own small way, we're participating in this very auspicious week. You'll see in this video so many things connected to this temple. It's a rare glimpse, actually. I don't know if documentaries have been done like this where we look deeply into the deity worship here, which Prabhupāda encouraged us to learn.

So please enjoy this video of the worship of Rādhā Ramanjī in this particular week of Puṇḍarīk Goswāmī's *sevā*. Hare Kṛṣṇa!

All glories to the revealer of the *dhāma*. Thank you. Started.