"*00428*.*
"### A Festival Every Day with Indradyumna Swami in Poland

I'm standing at the entrance to our Festival of India here on the Baltic Sea coast in Poland. We actually hold a festival every day for two months, except on Mondays. It is very satisfying to the heart because people get an experience of the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Rūpa Gosvāmī has a verse in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*: *adau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā*. That is the first part of that verse, where he describes how people take up the process of spiritual life—the *bhajana-kriyā*. Interestingly enough, he says *adau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo*: their *śraddhā*, or their faith in the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, comes about as a result of associating with *sādhus*, associating with devotees. So, by coming to this festival, people get the opportunity to associate with devotees who are from 14 different countries around the world.

The way that we engage them is, well, we have so many different tents depicting the different aspects of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and we have a stage program on our big stage going for five and a half to six hours every evening. Generally, people can't sit for more than two hours; most movies or theaters are two hours. So, how can people stay here for six hours? Because the entertainment is very nice. We try to increase the quality every year. We have different theatrical productions, different types of things to present on the stage. And if they get a little tired, they can get up and they can wander around the festival site, and we engage their senses in the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

Rūpa Gosvāmī says, "Somehow or other, get people to start practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Our senses are the way we come in contact with this world, and in the same way, our senses are the way that we come in contact with the spiritual world. Engaging your senses in material life means gradual degradation; engaging your senses in spiritual life means gradual elevation. So, here we have many tents where people can see the—well, in the main stage, the theaters and the puppet shows and the different dances, etc. They can go to the Puruṣottama tent, the restaurant; they can taste *prasādam*; you can hear the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa; they can touch the sarīs and the different parts of the festival. In this way, their senses come in contact. And what is the result? Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very potent. Just like if there's a live wire somewhere—there's a storm and a telephone wire falls down from the telephone pole—if you touch it, there's an immediate reaction. So, Kṛṣṇa, Lord Caitanya’s formula for this age, is as potent. It really is. We find that people come here and they have that experience, and maybe they don't understand everything at first, but it's a different experience. You could say it's a spiritual awakening, and their faith in the process begins to awaken. So, they come back every year, or they buy books and they take them home and study. We distribute or sell a lot of japa beads; people are chanting. They go to their homes afterwards; we cultivate them. So, this is, you could say, the initiation process, the initial step. Confucius said, "The longest journey begins with the first step." So, this is the first step into the Goloka Vṛndāvana. This is more than a Festival of India; this is a festival of the spiritual world. 

In order to make it attractive for the people, we innovate a little bit. Innovation is required from time to time. As the years go on, the decades go on, the centuries go on, Vaiṣṇavas have to be innovative to be able to attract the people into the original tradition. We have to be a little bit innovative, so we're very innovative here. Prabhupāda was innovative. He presented Kṛṣṇa consciousness in a little more liberal way, you could say, than his own spiritual master, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He allowed ladies, Vaiṣṇavīs, to live in the temple; men and women went out on the streets and distributed books in Western dress; like that, so many ways Prabhupāda innovated. So, we also have to innovate without compromising our original traditions. So, that's kind of our motto here.

We blend ancient spiritual culture from India with a little bit of the West. For example, in our stage shows, we blend in Indian music with Western music. We have ballet; we use ballet, we use hip-hop. You know, we're very, very innovative with the idea of bringing people in, making them feel comfortable so that they can get the deeper message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Where did I get this from—this spirit of innovation? Interestingly enough, from one of the most staunch devotees in our disciplic succession, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He was very innovative; therefore, I am very bold in innovating. Prabhupāda told me personally—he said to Indradyumna Swami at that time—he said, "You preach boldly and you have faith in the holy names." So, "bold" means to present it in such a way that people will take it up. 

How innovative was Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura? Would he put on festivals? Because Prabhupāda told us he had big—they called them exhibitions in those days. How innovative was he? It included riding in motorcars and wearing Western dress, which he did, and speaking in English. He had these huge, huge festivals. In order to get the general public to come for more than just hearing a *bhajana* or a discourse, but to get the masses of people to come listen—this is how he innovated. This is where we get our ideas from. This is from *Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Vaibhava* by another staunch devotee, Bhakti Vikāśa Mahārāja; it's the chapter called "Theistic Exhibitions," pages 355 to 356. This is from Mahārāja’s book:

"The exposition was divided into two sections, spiritual and secular, with items collected from every part of India and the whole extravaganza covering more than one square mile. The secular division demonstrated miscellaneous departments of human endeavor: medical, educational, agricultural, arts and crafts, cattle and livestock, child welfare, athletics, and several amusements."

Bear in mind, this is a festival like we're having here. "Several provincial governments sent materials to be displayed. Other attractions were performances of athletic feats such as gymnastics, wrestling, boxing, sword-stick play, and jujitsu. There were musical competitions, dramas, film shows, a circus—we haven't done that yet—and, in the words of *The Harmonist*, 'other varieties of innocent amusements.'"

So, when we innovate here, we consider them innocent amusements. "Prizes, medals, and certificates were awarded to deserving exhibitors and performers." We have a long way to go in innovation! 

"The spiritual section was even more elaborate. A museum contained figures of Viṣṇu and Kṛṣṇa and other religious objects, such as items formerly used by reputed sādhus. A book display featuring volumes produced by different religious sects in diverse languages and manuscripts of unpublished religious works. There were photos and paintings of eminent sādhus and sundry sacred places. A major draw was a huge relief map of India occupying over one-third of an acre, constructed on the ground with stone, cement, and brick and showing common holy places, the locations of all Gauḍīya Maṭha branches, and the routes of Śrī Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda. Dioramas—which is one thing Dr. Sarasvatī specialized in—dioramas in over 50 stalls depicted manifold religious practices of India, places with emphasis on Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teachings. The practices of pure Vaiṣṇavas, pseudo-Vaiṣṇavas, and other religious sects were illustrated by life-size dolls set against backgrounds of appropriate painted scenes, many representing incidences in the pastimes of Lord Caitanya. Another novelty for numerous visitors was the brilliant illumination of the entire grounds by recently installed electricity."

That's innovation at its best! So, we employ that in a tasteful way because, after all, this is a family event. This is the coast, the northern coast of Poland, the beaches, so naturally families come here. So, our festival is done in such a way that there is entertainment for the children, there is entertainment for the teenagers, there is entertainment for the adults, and even the older people. We have something for everyone here at our Festival of India. Everyone can come and experience in their own way the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, we hope that by seeing our presentation, you can imbibe some of these ideas in your own towns and villages and put on a big event like this. 

We've been developing this festival, of course, materially and spiritually for over 30 years. One time, my dear godbrother, Bhakti Vinga Govinda Mahārāja, came and he saw one of our shows, and he said, "This is the greatest show on earth." I said, "Oh no, it's the biggest, the greatest show on earth." But afterwards, I thought about it—it's big, it's professional, it's colorful, festive, it's devotional—but the most important thing is that it is devotional, it has a message. It has a message, and people come and their senses are enlivened in various ways, and *adau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā*. After some time, we find people taking up the process. So, the longest journey begins with the first step; this is a genuine first step in people's spiritual life in a very pleasant, entertaining, and devotionally satisfying way—the Festival of India, the festival of Goloka Vṛndāvana.

***

So, this is the pottery tent. I don't think you see many pottery tents—characters and vessels—but again, we want to keep people with "innocent amusements," as it's described in *The Harmonist*, the magazine of Dr. Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. This is an innocent amusement where people can come, and we have a devotee whose livelihood actually is making pottery. Here, he engages especially the children in making a pot from clay, and while there, there's a little philosophy—it's only a "simple living, high thinking." In old days, even here in Europe and Poland, people used to make their own handicraft. So, it's a nice way to engage people in making their own pottery; they take it home, and in the midst of it, to hear a little bit of philosophy, it helps add to the ultimate.

This is perhaps my favorite—this is the book tent where people can come after getting this experience. *Adau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā*. By coming and associating with devotees, and the way devotees live, seeing our culture, people naturally become more inquisitive, and they naturally are drawn to the book tent where all questions are answered. Prabhupāda said one time, "The chanting is particularly potent when heard from the lips of a pure devotee." So, in Prabhupāda’s Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the effect is immediate. Sometimes I'm giving my lecture, a 40-minute lecture, and in the back of my mind, I'm thinking, "My spiritual master said well, your 10-minute lecture, do." But if someone reads the right books, reads the beads of a sentence, even then their life can become perfect. So, we feel this is the result. It's like all rivers come to the ocean; all the exhibits and all the performances, the association people get here, the perfection to visit—the people flow to the book tent and they take a *Bhagavad-gītā* or *Teachings of Queen Kuntī* or *Upaniṣad* or one of Prabhupāda's books. This is one of our goals worth the investment.

This is our yoga tent where people can come and learn the process of Haṭha-yoga. We're a movement of Bhakti-yogīs, but we dovetail Haṭha-yoga because people are very interested in it these days. And many of our devotees are experts—they're Haṭha-yoga teachers as a livelihood, as a means of livelihood for their families. But, you know, through the process of Haṭha-yoga, we teach them that's a ladder—*haṭha-rāja-yoga*—it culminates in the yoga of love, Bhakti-yoga. *Yoga* actually means to connect with the Supreme. So, in the beginning, we control our mind and senses so as to not be engaged in material life; once that's done, we can focus on our spiritual eyes and connect to God through Bhakti-yoga. But no harm in doing Haṭha-yoga ourselves, no harm in teaching people Haṭha-yoga, because it makes one healthy physically, mentally, intellectually; it makes you healthy and strong. And in Prabhupāda’s letters, he would always sign his letters, "Hoping this meets you in the best of health, yours, A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda." So Prabhupāda didn't want devotees to get sick, because if you're sick, you can't perform devotional service. So, one way to remain healthy—a natural way, part of our tradition, part of our culture, Vedic culture—is yoga. So no problem in practicing or teaching, because it makes us healthy so we can perform our devotional services without any interruptions.

So this is the Indian makeup tent, face painting. In ISKCON, we call that *gopī-dots*, where people can come and get their faces painted. What does it have to do with *amala-bhakti*, pure devotion? Not so much; it's another innocent amusement, as Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's magazine called it. It's just a way for people to come and be entertained and stumble across the books, ask questions and answers, and meet devotees. It creates a nice atmosphere, the Vaikuṇṭha atmosphere. They get to face our—many of our ladies from Russia and Ukraine are very talented as musicians, as actors, as dancers, and as painters. So the best *gopī-dots* are actually painted by our girls here. You'll see how nice, how beautiful they are and everything. So, just another innocent amusement to keep people here and make the Kṛṣṇa conscious experience fun. East is East and West is West, and never the twain shall meet—but they're meeting here, and people like it. They can go to the tent nearby and they can put on an Indian sarī, wear it around the festival the whole evening, and kind of get that Indian experience or that Kṛṣṇa-conscious experience. All part of the package—Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive.

So, this is the theater tent, the puppet theater. This is especially for children. As I mentioned earlier, a festival means this is a festival for the family. When we did the Woodstock Festival, we participated in the Woodstock Festival, which was mainly young people from 20 years to 35 years, but this is the coast, so families come. So, we have something for everybody. And we have puppet shows for children; of course, the theme of the puppet shows is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We do Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, but there's always a little moral in there. We get a lot of ideas from Walt Disney; we go to Disneyland and we see how they market that, and we dovetail those things in a Kṛṣṇa-conscious way. Again, we try to make it at a very high level, like the Disney World people do, but the kids come and they really enjoy. And I find that when the kids, the children are enjoying the festival, the parents are enjoying the festival. These are three-day events; in each town, we stayed for three days. So, I've been told by the parents that it's the children who drag the parents back to the festival. So, another innocent amusement, but Kṛṣṇa conscious—very Kṛṣṇa conscious—because the puppets are of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and Rādhārāṇī and, you know, Jaṭilā, and so forth and so on. So, even at that young age, they get an impression in their own way about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, it's a family event, something for everybody.

So, several times I quoted the verse: *adau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā*. The whole process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness initiated—it begins when one comes into the association of devotees and learns about their lifestyle. What we're presenting here is actually the lifestyle of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the lifestyle of the spiritual world, the Goloka Vṛndāvana. So people come in, and it's something different, it's something very, very special. It's spiritual; they're actually getting a spiritual experience. They may not know that in the beginning, but actually that leads to *bhajana-kriyā*, which means inquiring. Like, if I'm interested in your lifestyle, what do I do? It comes to the point of asking questions. I was listening to a lecture recently, Prabhupāda said, "In human life, actually, it begins when we start asking questions: 'Who am I? Where have I come from? What happens at death? Does God exist?' That's your birthday." So, we find as a result of this event that *adau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā*—people are inquiring into the techniques, the process, what is a guru? That naturally comes about. 

So another place where people kind of flow into—older people, adults—is the questions and answers tent. And in here, we have a seminar on the side called "The Art of Happiness." Everybody wants to be happy, but this is a life of duality, so we're experiencing unhappiness and tragedy. Everyone has their story. So I find people really gravitate to these tents because all questions are answered; there's that book we have, *Perfect Questions, Perfect Answers*. And in my studies of theology and philosophy, you know, they have some ideas, with all due respect, but not as deep as Kṛṣṇa consciousness, not like Lord Caitanya introduced—the idea of going back to the playground of God, the Goloka Vṛndāvana, and one can have a very loving, intimate, loving relationship with God. People are hankering for this knowledge. So this is a very, very important part of our event, the book tent and the questions and answers, "Art of Happiness." This is where people really become connected, and they write down their addresses and their telephone numbers and emails, and we keep in contact with them and we cultivate them. But they really find this festival to be a high point in their year, many people tell me, because we've been coming for 30 years to many of the same towns; they consider this to be a high point in their year. They come here like we go to Vṛndāvana to get spiritually recharged. Prabhupāda said, "Vṛndāvana is for inspiration." People come to this festival for spiritual inspiration, have a deep experience, and they share that with you. They tell me—one lady came the other day, and she said she'd been coming to our festival for 20 years. She woke up that morning and said, "I think it's time for me to buy a book." "What was that book that that man always talks about?" *Bhagavad-gītā*. She came here just to buy—she came at the end of the festival just to buy the *Bhagavad-gītā*. That's the result of doing this festival year after year after year. People have their own pace; we're here to facilitate them in whatever pace they've come. Many of them come to the tents, and from there on, Kṛṣṇa will guide them.

So this is our cooking demonstration tent, also very popular. Everyone loves to eat, and nowadays I think people are more conscious about what they eat for their own personal health and also for the environment—what we eat affects the environment as well. So, they take this cooking demonstration tent very seriously. They come and they listen, or we have very excellent cooks, we cook, we go through several recipes with them here, and they listen very attentively. And then we offer the *prasādam* in front of them, and then whatever was cooked is distributed to the audience; they get to taste it and experience it themselves. So this is jam-packed all evening, and our ladies, our Vaiṣṇavīs, are very, very, very good cooks because we've been blessed over the years to have many ISKCON's most famous cooks come and visit us. Bhakti Vinga Govinda Mahārāja, Yamunā Devī, and Dinatarinī, they came, spent two weeks with us many, many years ago. Yamunā Devī shared philosophy and her talent and she taught the girls how to cook *kormā*. The famous cook, Kūrma Dāsa, he came and taught us to cook. So people know us in Poland also because of our *prasādam*. One man said to me one time—he met me, said, "I know, I know your people. I know your religion. Let's see, what's it called? It's called the 'kitchen religion.'" That's okay, because *prasādam* again is so important! 

Over here, we have our restaurant, which is also packed; you can see the lines there, people coming for *prasādam*. They just love to eat, and our cooks are cooking from four o'clock in the morning to ten o'clock in the morning—six hours for the restaurant. We cannot cook enough! We sell about 500 samosas plus other things every evening; we just can't keep up the pace. We need more mercy, please! Prabhupāda, just give us more mercy so we can facilitate the people's interest in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It's almost as if these material bodies cannot keep up with our desire to serve our spiritual master and spread the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. *Śrī Bhāgavata-prasādam*.""