"*00448*.*
"### A Fight to the Finish - Class on Kartik Parikrama 2022

Dear devotees, as promised, we welcome you to the wrestling capital of the universe. Wrestling is, of course, a very popular sport throughout the world, but if someone wants to understand what real wrestling is, they have to come here and wrestle with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. Within our audience here, we certainly have devotees who, deep in the heart, have different rosters of relationships with Kṛṣṇa, because Kṛṣṇa likes varieties. So, some of you are probably *sakhās*, and part of being a *sakhā* is to wrestle with Kṛṣṇa. This is only possible in Vṛndāvana, that you can compete with God, and He will be the loser out of His mercy because He is your best friend. Sometimes friends give in like that for the pleasure of other friends. This is the place where, right where you are sitting under this beautiful tree, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, the cowherd boys, would take a break from herding the cows and they would wrestle here. Besides knowing that, we also have very confidential knowledge—not confidential because it’s actually written by ācāryas—but we have some confidential pastimes where Kṛṣṇa would also wrestle, like real wrestling, with the gopīs, and in particular, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

One day, Rādhārāṇī became curious about Kṛṣṇa’s wrestling pastimes. Kṛṣṇa and She were just sitting here enjoying each other’s association very near to this wrestling arena, and Rādhārāṇī said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, what is that large square which is drawn in the sand here? What is that?" Kṛṣṇa, being Kṛṣṇa—boys will be boys and girls will be girls—probably didn't figure She would understand what wrestling was, but She insisted, "Tell me, what is this for?" 

Kṛṣṇa said, "Līlā, this is a wrestling arena where Me and My cowherd friends dress as wrestlers and engage each other in hand-to-hand combat." He figured that would put Her off. But Rādhārāṇī got very intrigued, and raising Her eyebrows, She asked, "And Kṛṣṇa, do you sometimes win?" The Italians say that Kṛṣṇa was a little surprised by Her question and perhaps a little hurt. "Do I sometimes win? Yeah," He replied, "Devī, no one knows how to wrestle like I do. I always win, yes, except for the times I pretend to lose to your brother, Śrīdāmā. He’s quite a poor loser." She very calmly replied, "My dear brother, Śrīdāmā, he tells me just the opposite. He says that he always wins and that you never take it very well."

Kṛṣṇa said, "Of course he would say that." So just then, Lalitā-sakhī stepped forward and She said, "Kṛṣṇa, why don't You show us Your wrestler's dress and the moves You use to defeat Your opponents? Come on, show us, Kṛṣṇa! We girls are curious; we want to see what You wear when You wrestle. Come on, Kṛṣṇa, show us!" Of course, He didn't want to waste His time talking to girls about wrestling. He just shook His head and said, "That’s impossible, because wrestlers only dress for live matches, like real matches. We don't model, even for royalty." 

Lalitā, who is always anxious to churn this ocean of devotion, said to Kṛṣṇa, "What if someone were to challenge You to a match? Would You accept?" 
"I am the son of a king; how can I refuse a challenge to fight? Which boy is it?" 
She said, "Then You should accept my challenge to fight with my friend, Śrī Rādhā, because She is the goddess of victory. *Jaya* means 'goddess of victory,' so You fight with Her." 
Then She said, "And we gopīs will join in the fight too; we’ll all fight You. What do you think about that, Kṛṣṇa?" 

Hearing Lalitā’s words, Kṛṣṇa nearly fainted in ecstasy. He thought to himself, "Is this a dream?" He pinched himself—no, I’m awake. Then He thought, "My pious life spent protecting cows has yielded the sweet request from the gopīs to wrestle with them. Hmm, this is incredible." Yes, Kṛṣṇa paused, and He said, "But Lalitā, how can I, a prince, wrestle with weak, untrained women, especially delicate princesses like Śrī Rādhā? No, it wouldn't be right." 

So it looked like this amazing wrestling match was not going to happen. We always see Śrī Rādhā with Lalitā on one side and Viśākhā on the other side. So, to further churn this ocean of devotion, this *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Viśākhā spoke up. Viśākhā turned to Kṛṣṇa and said, "But how can You, O noble one, refuse such a challenge? If the people are brought to hear about it, Your father will hide His face in shame." 

He said, "I see, I see. King Cupid, the enemy of pure brahmacārīs like myself, has sent you ladies to test Me. So be it, let’s wrestle." Then He stood up and He put His hand like this; He said, "Never let it be said that the son of Nanda Mahārāja ran away from a challenge." So then He started walking around Śrī Rādhā. He said, "Get ready to wrestle, Rādhārāṇī." She covered Her face with Her veil, just smiling and giggling. The gopīs are really fired up now. "This is our chance to get back at the boys, the head of the boys, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Now’s our chance!" 

Surrounding Śrī Rādhā, all of Her gopī friends took Her to a nearby grove where She and all the gopīs changed their clothes into wrestling clothes. Just like we know at Govardhana-pūjā, the gopīs dress in cowherd boy clothes; this time, it was wrestling clothes. Kṛṣṇa had saved a favorite wrestling attire for some special occasion. It just so happened that at that forest storehouse—because Vṛndā-devī, as you know, stores things in different places in Vṛndāvana forest to facilitate pastimes—in the middle of nowhere, Kṛṣṇa went to a forest storehouse and He took out a very colorful wrestling cloth, His favorite one that He’d never used before. He figured, "This will help Me beat Śrī Rādhā. Just look at Me and fall in love, and just fall on the ground. That’s it." 

So, just as Kṛṣṇa came out of His grove, the gopīs came out of their grove, everybody dressed in wrestling clothes. It’s very beautiful; our ācāryas actually describe the beautiful dress that Kṛṣṇa was wearing because, as we know, love is in the details. Just like when there’s darśana of the deity, an advanced devotee can’t pull himself away; he’s looking at every little detail—how Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā are, how the jewels are there, how the flower garlands are looking, how the gopī-candana was painted. This is deity darśana; we spend time in front of the deity, meditating on the transcendental form of the Lord. This evokes our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So Kṛṣṇa came out like, "Voila!" And the gopīs just went, "Okay, I know how to churn the ocean." Wait, look, they’re just looking at Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was wearing a golden cloth knotted in the front and in the back, and His legs were exposed up to the knee. Now, you’re going to wrestle, you have to pull your *dhoti* up, so He pulled up His cloth to His knee and He wore a very bright orange belt around His waist—golden orange—like, "Whoa, what a combo!" 

The gopīs, they had tied their lower cloth in the manner of kṣatriyas. Kṣatriyas wear their *dhoti* in a certain way; their knees weren't showing, just a little up from their ankles, like kṣatriyas wear because they have to fight. So they had their cloth up a little bit from their ankles, and each of them had a different color bright cloth around their waist, and their hair was tied neatly in top knots on their heads so it wouldn't get in the way of fighting. 

So Kṛṣṇa clapped His hands like this and He invited the gopīs to the wrestling arena. He, before they came, smeared ghee on the ground in worship of Bhūmi-devī, Mother Earth, because that’s where the wrestling match is going to take place. So to honor Her, He smeared ghee all over the wrestling arena. 

He positioned all the gopīs on one side; He stood alone on the other side of the wrestling arena. So He said, "My dear girls, before we begin, let me describe the rules that our wrestling school follows." He said, "To begin with, we cowherd boys concentrate on moves that cause pain to our opponents." Then He kind of made up something; He said, "Hanuman is our hero, so we follow the Hānumantī school described in the Mahā-Mālā Purāṇa." He was trying to get them scared. His eyes got very wide. He said, "In killing demons, I have been known to use knee strikes to the chest and punches to the head along with lots of hair pulling and strangleholds." 

Then it’s written that mild-mannered Citrā-devī—you know, one of the aṣṭa-sakhīs—Citrā-devī, she leaned over to Lalitā and she whispered, "Lalitā, what kind of game have we got ourselves involved in?" Kṛṣṇa stood upon His tiptoes and put His chest out. He said, "My wrestling style, girls, is similar to that used by the Vānara King Bālī in his defeat of Rāvaṇa." At this point, She whispered to the girls, "Now He’s comparing us to Rāvaṇa, oh dear."

Then Kṛṣṇa continued, "However, because you are the weaker sex, we will not engage in the combat wrestling I do with my friends. Instead, we’ll have pastime wrestling, or *krīḍā*, which is recommended for play and amusement. We’ll do that type of wrestling, okay girls?" So they went, "Oh, okay, very nice."

Then Kṛṣṇa, his mind is, He commanded, "You being women, it’s only fair that you fight Me all at once rather than one at a time. Let’s get it over with; instead of going one by one, I’ll fight you all at once. Let the wrestling match begin!" He stepped into the wrestling arena, He slapped the sides of His legs like wrestlers do, and He reached down and picked up some *braja-raja*, some dust, and rubbed it in His hands and yelled, "Jai Hanuman! Jai Hanuman! Jai Hanuman! Come on, girls!" 

So this intensity of Kṛṣṇa’s startled the gopīs, and so each girl tried to push another girl forward. "There you go." "No, you go." "No, no, you go first, you’re older than me." Nobody would go forward. So each girl kind of backed off, and after some time, only Śrī Rādhā was in front with Lalitā and Viśākhā on Her sides. And they were like this, "All right, let’s go!" And that gave confidence to the other girls because, again, She is the Empress of victory. 

So it’s getting late; I’ll wait till next year to finish the story. No? Who wants to hear the rest of the song? So the ācāryas say this, they actually describe this army of gopīs slowly advancing from their side of the arena towards Kṛṣṇa. As the combat began, Kṛṣṇa actually wrestled with all the gopīs at one time. He’s wrestling like this, and then they were grabbing Him, and suddenly He slipped out of their grasp and He came in front of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī at the center of the arena. They backed off—we’ve seen Him, know God’s stuff—and they were saying to Rādhā, "Victory, victory, get Him!" 

So as this wrestling match continued just between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā managed to pin Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders to the ground, causing the gopīs to cheer very loudly. But then He escaped, and they couldn't find Him. Then suddenly, without warning, He reappeared and caught each and every gopī simultaneously from behind and wrestled all those gopīs to the ground. So they said, "Kṛṣṇa, you can’t, that’s not the rules of wrestling! You have to come face-to-face, you can’t come behind like a cheater and throw us to the ground. Foul play!" they said, "Foul play!" 

So Kṛṣṇa said, "All right, come on, one by one now." Indulekha came, Kṛṣṇa pinned her to the ground; Raṅgadevī came, Kṛṣṇa pinned her to the ground; each of the aṣṭa-sakhīs, they came, and Kṛṣṇa pinned them to the ground. So there was only Rādhā left, and She stayed in top form. It’s described She was fighting Kṛṣṇa, making Him weaker and weaker and weaker, appearing here and then throwing Him to the ground. Finally, Kṛṣṇa became so fatigued He fell to the ground, and finally, you know, when you know about wrestling, if you’re in a certain hold, someone’s got you in a hold, you tap out—it’s called 'tap out.' So Rādhārāṇī had Kṛṣṇa like this, "You give up?" "No." "You give up?" Tighter, tighter, "Give up?" "No." And finally, *wham*, and they did the tap out. Throughout the entire creation, you could hear the gopīs cheering. 

Then all eyes were on Kṛṣṇa, so He stood up and He said in a very loud voice, so everyone in Vṛndāvana could hear, "Jaya Śrī! She is the goddess of victory!" This proclamation went throughout all of Vṛndāvana, like the wind goes to the trees, into the fields and the bushes. This proclamation went, and everyone is described—even the animals, birds, bees, and trees—smiled with great satisfaction that Vṛndāvaneśvarī, the queen of Vṛndāvana, had conquered Kṛṣṇa, not with Her wrestling skills, but Her bhakti, Her love for Kṛṣṇa. She has the *mahā-bhāva*. Because She has the deepest love for Kṛṣṇa, that *mahā-bhāva*, She’s in charge of devotional service. So therefore, we pray to Her to please be engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s service. We chant, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare."

I was thinking, how are we going to end this class? You know, I like to end the class with some kind of summary; it’s part of public speaking—you introduce the theme, you develop it, you have a proper conclusion. So I usually do that with a verse. I’m thinking, "What kind of verse am I going to find in śāstra about wrestling, about Rādhā’s wrestling with Kṛṣṇa?" This is a very deep, thoughtful point: that God, who by definition in the dictionary is the Supreme Controller, is controlled by love, controlled by the love of His greatest devotees. I think, "Well, maybe if I go to that devotee who has that ecstatic love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, who we were mentioning yesterday, spent 48 years at Rādhā-kuṇḍa—maybe just maybe, Gosvāmī has commented on this very deep, esoteric pastime." And sure enough, seek and ye shall find, I found a verse by Gosvāmī about this very pastime. Oh my God! I was up till two o'clock in the morning looking for this verse, and just before I fell asleep, I found it. So just before you fall asleep, after a long day now in the hot sun, I will share this nectarian verse with all of you. It’s amazing how Kṛṣṇa works.

"Where charming Śrī Rādhā, being eager to wrestle with Kṛṣṇa, dressed Herself and Her sakhīs in wrestling costumes for the pleasure of Her beloved Mādhava. She then cheerfully wrestled He who is also Bakāri, the enemy of Bakāsura, and who was dressed in a wrestler’s attire."

Now, I want to say something to all of you: did you enjoy that pastime? I hold within my palm, my five fingers, a pastime that’s just as good, or maybe better. I think this pastime may make tears roll down your cheeks; this wrestling pastime, it is so, oh my God, so special. So I can either tell this pastime now—it’s not quite as long—or I can hold it for another 12 months, and we can come here again and I can share this pastime that will make tears roll down your cheeks. Now I know we had a long day yesterday, oh my gosh. We walked all around the King’s Gardens today, and oh, it’s hot now, and there’s only one umbrella. Should we give in to our bodies, which we’re not, or should we continue to nourish our bhakti-latā-bīja? Because life is short and then you die. Should we hear the pastime of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s brother? I know how much Caturātma wants to go back because he’s a hungry boy; he’s like a cowherd boy, no matter how much you feed him, he’s hungry 10 minutes later. But he has that mood of a cowherd boy, so I think he’ll probably get permission because he’s going to be the first one to cry. And I have till one o'clock, that’s what Rūpa-sikhā said, and then we’ll go back to Vṛndāvana and *yum, yum, yum*. So please bear with me because this is the real nourishment.

One day, the cowherd boys were playing in two different teams; they often split into two different teams, you know, and they were having wrestling matches. The result of the wrestling match was that whoever lost in the wrestling match, he had to carry the winner on his back, like piggyback, around. Kṛṣṇa was on one side with some of the boys, and Balarāma was on the other side with some boys. Kṛṣṇa lost that day, and He had to carry Śrīdāmā, Rādhārāṇī’s brother, on His back. "Come on, all right, come on, get on My back! Where do you want me to go? Horsey! Woo!" 

There was this little riot; many cowherd boys, they objected to Kṛṣṇa having to carry anyone on His back. "He won, He beat Kṛṣṇa, but it’s not fair, Kṛṣṇa is too weak to carry you!" 
"Besides, He can't carry you, He’s the son of a king!" 
He said, "Yes, but Kṛṣṇa should abide by the rules just like everyone else. I mean, although He’s weak, He’s a king’s son, He tends cows, He milks them, and He carries pails of milk on His head; He’s not so weak. Come on, what’s the difference between carrying a pail of milk on one’s head and the son of a milkman on one’s shoulders? Come on!" 
So another boy spoke up, "If you make Kṛṣṇa carry you, we will not play with you anymore." 
"You could just go home, boys!" just, you know, arguing. Śrīdāmā said, "What makes you think I want to play with you guys anyway? Come on, Kṛṣṇa, carry me on your back!" Śrīdāmā climbed up on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders, and then Śrīdāmā raised his hands, his arms, as a sign of victory—this is the original victory sign—"Kṛṣṇa’s carrying me around!" Just Śrīdāmā, yes. Here, there, and everywhere. Till Kṛṣṇa got tired towards the evening. Kṛṣṇa put him down. 

Unfortunately for Śrīdāmā, after that, the boys just neglected him. He couldn't play, he couldn't come to the forest, couldn't take care of the cows, couldn't play games. He had to sit on the side, on the edge of the field, and just watch Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Poor Śrīdāmā. So a long time later, while the cows were grazing, the cowherd boys were playing, and so forth, and taking prasādam, Śrīdāmā was just sitting at the edge of the forest, just crying, crying, crying. It’s described his head was in his hands, and suddenly he felt a little tap on his shoulders, and he heard a voice say, "Friend, I am your property." 

Śrīdāmā opened his eyes; he looked around. It was Kṛṣṇa, smiling at Śrīdāmā. Kṛṣṇa continued—it’s so nice what He said to His friend—"My dear friend, no matter what the others may say about you, I am always yours to do with as you please. Even if you were as heavy as Mount Meru, even if my father was the emperor of the world, or even if I was Nārāyaṇa, I would consider it a privilege to always carry you." 

Śrīdāmā’s eyes filled with tears, and he looked at Kṛṣṇa; he said, "Am I not a burden to you like the others say?" Then Kṛṣṇa took his hand. He said, "Friend, it is not by the strength of muscles that I carry you, but by the strength of My love. My love for you is such that when you are on My shoulders, I feel that a flower is resting there." While they were playing their games, they suddenly saw this loving embrace, and seeing this amazing līlā, all the cowherd boys went over and they welcomed Śrīdāmā back into their group. Such is the sweet exchange of love in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Now, one short little pastime and we will conclude. I was reading that when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana on the invitation of King Kaṃsa to fight with the wrestlers, many of the cowherd men and boys, Śrīdāmā accompanied Kṛṣṇa to Mathurā to the wrestling match; he was part of that group. And after Kaṃsa was killed and Kṛṣṇa went on from Mathurā to Dvārakā, Śrīdāmā returned with the Brajavāsīs home in Vṛndāvana. And the ācāryas say he tried to continue life without Kṛṣṇa. He came here where he remembered the wonderful games he had played with Kṛṣṇa, and he maintained his life by *madhukarī*—begging—no, he maintained his life by chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names.

He looked straight into Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, and he could see, "You’re not going to come back." You could see, "No, no, you’re not going to come back." So why would Kṛṣṇa be so cruel? We’ve discussed that on many occasions—to increase His devotee’s attachment to Him, because separation makes the heart grow fonder. So when Kṛṣṇa said, "I’ll come back," so then Śrīdāmā, to put pressure on Kṛṣṇa, he said, "Brother, until You return, I will not eat or drink." 

Kṛṣṇa turned away, and He started walking towards Vṛndāvana. And as He got maybe a couple hundred yards away, He turned back and He said, "Kṛṣṇa, I’ll be waiting for you in Bāndīrvaṭa. When You return to Vṛndāvana, don’t forget Me." Now, there’s two versions: that Kṛṣṇa never came back; or when He did come back, the first thing He tried to do when He came back to Vṛndāvana was to find Śrīdāmā in Bāndīrvaṭa. Finally, He found him here, and He found him under that tree, and Śrīdāmā’s eyes were closed just like a great yogī. And his eyes were closed, he was just chanting as tears flowed down his cheeks, and he was very thin from fasting, and his hair was disheveled, and his clothes were all faded. Kṛṣṇa was shocked to see His friend’s appearance like this. 

So Kṛṣṇa approached Śrīdāmā under that tree and He bent down very quietly, He whispered in his ear, "Friend, I have returned." Śrīdāmā was indeed in meditation, and when he heard Kṛṣṇa’s voice, he thought it was part of his internal meditation, so he didn't wake up. So Kṛṣṇa had to keep saying, "My dear friend Śrīdāmā, open your eyes! I am here!" After all these years—which, you know, each moment’s more like a millennium—Śrīdāmā opened his eyes, and there was Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa said, "See? I told you I’d be back in a few days!" He touched his face, then his hair, then his lips and his neck with the three folds, and his chest, and his lotus feet, and he finally realized, "Yes, this is Kṛṣṇa!" So he just gave Him a big hug, and then he struck Kṛṣṇa’s arms, his back, his shoulder, to make sure it was really Kṛṣṇa, and then he really broke down crying.

Now, there were many trees here before in this forest, many, many trees. This is just one tree standing. But when Kṛṣṇa had left Vṛndāvana, all the trees had become barren out of the feeling of separation; there were no leaves, there were no flowers, it was as barren. But when all these trees saw Kṛṣṇa and Śrīdāmā embracing, they immediately became green like these trees are after the rain, and all kinds of flowers appeared, and all the flowers started showering down on Kṛṣṇa and Śrīdāmā. So this is a very beautiful example of *sakhya-rasa*, or friendship with Kṛṣṇa. And in conclusion, we found another verse also in *Rādhā-vilāsa-stava* by Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, who glorifies this love that Śrīdāmā has for Kṛṣṇa. We’ll finish with that.

"He is the most expert and clever of the cowherd boys of Braja. He is the abode of the most intense love for Kṛṣṇa. His complexion is dark, and he is proud that his qualities, age, clothing, and handsome features closely resembled those of his beloved friend. If for a single moment Śrīdāmā cannot see Kṛṣṇa, whom he considers more dear than his own life, he trembles with anxiety. I completely take shelter of Śrīdāmā, the constant companion of the Lord."

All the wrestling pastimes... 

This young boy from Nepal, yes, he was just transfixed this whole lecture, he didn't move an inch! His hands are still in the same position; he just loved hearing about this *sakhya-rasa* because he’s a young boy. So, I’m going to give my notes to him as a present.

2022, '23, '24, '25, forever, okay, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.""