"*00501*.*
"*Oṃ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.*

Dear Prabhu, we have all gathered here today on the auspicious occasion of Govardhana Pūjā. And there is so much we could discuss. In fact, the holy ṛṣis, ācāryas, and others have been discussing the glories of Girirāja Govardhana for thousands of years. In fact, over the last six years, in this lecture series that I started giving in my humble attempts, we have given about 10 or 15 lectures on Govardhana. We could easily sit here for 20 or 30 hours and discuss many things related to Girirāja. But I thought it would be good today to discuss three amazing things connected with this sacred mountain: the origin of Govardhana Hill in the spiritual world, the origin of Govardhana Hill in the material world, and how it came to our Śrī Vṛndāvan-dhāma. I have found this information in many śāstras, but a lot of the information comes from the *Garga-saṃhitā*, which is often quoted by Prabhupāda and our other ācāryas. Given today's situation, it would be right to quote the relevant verse of Girirāja to get into the right frame of mind.

This is a perfect verse, complete and perfect, because it was composed by Nanda Mahārāja’s younger brother, Sananda. This is a prayer that many Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas repeat before they begin their Govardhana Parikramā. Then they repeat it again halfway through, and then they conclude their parikramā with this Sananda verse: *“My respectful obeisances unto you, who are the crown of Goloka and who rest on the lap of Vṛndāvana. My respectful obeisances unto Govardhana, who is the servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”*

So, we will start with the origin of Girirāja in Goloka Vṛndāvana. In fact, this is a very deep and esoteric topic. In a sense, there is no question of the origin of Girirāja in the spiritual world, because everything there is eternally filled with the knowledge and bliss of *sac-cid-ānanda*. But our ācāryas say that for the sake of *rasa*, it seems that there is a beginning, a middle, and an end. One day, when I was a child, my nanny often read me different fairy tales, and they began with the words, "Once upon a time" or "Long ago." Whenever I hear this phrase, I start thinking about dinosaurs, monsters, and fairy tales. But actually, Śrīla Prabhupāda, in the book *Kṛṣṇa*, used this phrase to begin some sentences. 

Long ago in Goloka Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa, Rādhārāṇī, and the gopas were resting in a very beautiful grove—we prefer the term *kuñja*. This is a grove where, as we sing in the prayer, the *vihārī* (enjoyer)—the Rādhā-mādhavas—enjoy loving pastimes together. This verse was composed by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and Śrīla Prabhupāda said that this song contains the whole of Vṛndāvana. The Lord, His associates, Rādhārāṇī, the gopīs, Mañjarīs, the moon, and everything else is in this song. 

In this particular *kuñja* where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were resting, there were colorful umbrellas, flower canopies, and strings of pearls. Just picture in your mind colorful umbrellas, flower canopies, and strands of pearls. The atmosphere was filled with the sounds of the flute, mṛdaṅga, and cuckoos singing the fifth note. I can't repeat that fifth note, but it's perfect. When Kṛṣṇa plays on it, the whole of Vṛndāvana goes crazy. 

After some time, Śrī Rādhikā, surrounded by her beautiful friends, glanced out of the corner of her eye at her beloved Śyāmasundara. She caught Kṛṣṇa's attention, and then she spoke to Him tenderly: "My Lord, if You are pleased with me and our eternal dance festival, that is, rāsa-līlā, then please fulfill this one desire that has been burning in my heart for a very long time." Without hesitating for a moment—because their love is very deep—Kṛṣṇa said, "My beloved, what is your desire? I will gladly fulfill whatever you desire." Then Śrī Rādhikā leaned down and whispered in Kṛṣṇa's ear: "My beloved, somewhere in the forest of Vṛndāvana, on the bank of the Yamunā, please create a very beautiful and very secluded place where we can perform our pastimes." 

At this historic moment, Kṛṣṇa sat down with half-closed eyes in meditation, searching in His heart for the most perfect fulfillment of Rādhārāṇī’s request. A few moments passed. Then, as Rādhā and all the gopīs looked on in amazement, a golden drop of pure love manifested from Kṛṣṇa's heart. It hung in the air for a few moments and then fell to the ground, where it quickly turned into a mountain. Usually, we don’t think of Kṛṣṇa meditating—that is the work of yogīs—but here, Kṛṣṇa is meditating for the sake of Rādhārāṇī. Suddenly, a golden drop of pure love appeared from Kṛṣṇa's heart. This drop hung in the air for a few moments so that everyone could see it. It fell, and it turned into a mountain. Ācāryas describe that this mountain was filled with palace caves, crystal flowing streams, flowering trees, intertwined lianas, and many beautiful multi-colored singing birds that glorified the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. The ācāryas say that even Kṛṣṇa Himself was amazed at how He manifested this golden drop, which turned into this beautiful mountain.

What is even more astonishing is that a moment later, that same mountain expanded into 100 golden peaks, which surpassed the beauty of Lord Nārāyaṇa’s palaces in Vaikuṇṭha. Nothing is more opulent than what we have here on earth, nor is it comparable to what is in Vaikuṇṭha. Every Vrajavāsī greeted her. They, of course, were already accustomed to seeing miracles in Vṛndāvana with Kṛṣṇa. To welcome this mountain, they started discussing what we should call it. Some elderly senior gopas held a meeting and decided that we will call this mountain *Śataśṛṅga*, the mountain with a hundred majestic peaks. But there were some disputes, and finally, all the Vrajavāsīs decided to name this mountain *Govardhana*.

Why *Govardhana*? The ācāryas explain: *Go* means cows, and *vardhana* means to nourish. This mountain was filled with trees and greenery, which nourished what was most precious to the Vrajavāsīs: their cows. It is also described that the grass that grows on Govardhana Hill is the most beloved of Kṛṣṇa's cows, or rather, of Nanda Mahārāja’s 900,000 cows. Cows sometimes, when they eat grass, if it is sharp, it can cut their tongues. But the grass that grows on Govardhana Hill is extremely soft. That is why the milk the cows produce is extremely tasty, and Māta Yaśodā loves to use the best for Kṛṣṇa. 

Suddenly, right before everyone's eyes, the hill began to expand more and more. Soon it covered most of the Vraja-maṇḍala. When I read it, I wondered why Girirāja did this. Our ācāryas give an explanation that is truly filled with *rasa*: they say that since Girirāja came from Kṛṣṇa's heart as a manifestation of His love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the essence of Govardhana is *prema*. Since the nature of *prema* is such that it always increases, Girirāja expanded to the very limits of the Vraja-maṇḍala.

In this way, we can worship Girirāja as Kṛṣṇa Himself, or as some devotees like to worship Him: as the best of Kṛṣṇa's devotees. Lord Balarāma then stood up and pointed out that there was a problem because there was no room left in Goloka Vṛndāvana for anything other than Girirāja. There is a great variety of love in the spiritual world of Goloka Vṛndāvana. And even in this world, they say that variety is the spice of life. Balarāma complained: "Kṛṣṇa, there is not even room to move an inch here. Girirāja is everywhere." The *Garga-saṃhitā* says that Kṛṣṇa stood up and thought about this concern. It is so sweet that Kṛṣṇa actually concluded that Girirāja had gone a little too far. Kṛṣṇa reprimanded Girirāja: "Why have you expanded to such an extent without considering the feelings and needs of others who live here in the Goloka of Vṛndāvana?" The *Garga-saṃhitā* says that Kṛṣṇa then gave Girirāja a small slap on his cheek. As soon as He did, Girirāja smiled and shrank back to his normal size.

As soon as Girirāja was corrected, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī came to inspect this offering of love from Kṛṣṇa's heart. Next time you are in Vṛndāvana and go to Govardhana, remember that this is an offering of love and the heart of Kṛṣṇa. The nature of divine love is that it enchants. Rādhārāṇī did not just stand and look at this divine hill for some time; she then looked at Kṛṣṇa and said, "Thank you, my love." And then she took His hand and went to one of the many secluded places on Govardhana Hill to enjoy her transcendental pastimes. Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is the expert in all these transcendental pastimes, concludes that of all the holy places in creation, Vṛndāvana is the most auspicious, and of all the holy places in Vṛndāvana, the most sacred is Govardhana Hill. The most sacred places on Govardhana Hill are the sacred ponds of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa.

If you fly on a plane and look at Girirāja from above, you will see that it is in the form of a peacock, and the eyes of this peacock are Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Moreover, Prabhupāda writes in this connection that Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the best place for those who want to perfect themselves in devotional service, following in the footsteps of the *mañjarīs*, the intimate maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. 

This is the origin of Girirāja in the spiritual world. One can naturally ask how this amazing manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s love appeared in this material world, which Kṛṣṇa Himself describes as *mṛtyu-loka*, the place of death. The *Garga-saṃhitā* describes that just before Kṛṣṇa was going to this world for His games of saving the righteous, destroying the wicked, and restoring *dharma*, He approached Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and said: "O beloved, please come with me to the earthly planet." She said, "Kṛṣṇa, my heart cannot be happy in a place where there is no Vṛndāvana forest, no Yamunā River, and no Govardhana Hill." So, the śāstras say that at that moment, Lord Hari sent a portion of His abode to this blessed land.

It is mentioned that Govardhana appeared in Śālmalī-dvīpa. There are some references that this is southern India, near a mountain named Droṇa. And immediately, 33 koti (330 million) demigods showered flowers on this young hill. All the sacred mountains, headed by the Himalayas and Mount Sumeru, came to offer their respects to Govardhana. They all said: "Dear Govardhana, in Goloka, you are the mountain of Lord Kṛṣṇa Candra, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead. Your name is Govardhana. You have magnificently manifested in the world of Vṛndāvana, and you are the king of us all."

How did Girirāja get from southern India to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma in northern India? This is explained in *Garga-saṃhitā* (3.11.1). It says that when Kṛṣṇa was trying to convince the community to worship Govardhana Hill step-by-step instead of Lord Indra, He said: "He is the king of the kings of mountains. He was born from the chest of Lord Hari Himself. He came here by the power of Pulastya Muni." 

Pulastya Muni was born from the ears of Brahmā, and in many scriptures, he is described as one of the nine main ṛṣis in the universe. Pulastya is known as an expert in holy places. In the *Mahābhārata*, it is stated that from Pulastya came the rākṣasas, monkeys, and kinnaras. His descendants include Rāvaṇa and Kumbhakarṇa. But why do I revere Pulastya Muni? Because he is an expert on all the holy places. One day, while traveling through the holy places, he came to southern India, which our ācāryas sometimes call *Drāviḍa-deśa*. There he saw the son of Droṇa—Govardhana—who at that point was already a grown youth. 

Pulastya approached Droṇa and said: "O Droṇa, you are the king of the mountains. I have come to you with a request. I am a great sage. Please give me your son, Govardhana." The etiquette in Vedic culture is that when a sannyāsī ascetic comes to the house of a householder, he can ask for something, and it must be fulfilled. Droṇa was stunned. "Why do you want Govardhana?" Pulastya Muni said: "I want to take him to Vārāṇasī in Kāśī, because there are no hills or mountains there on which I could meditate. I will perform austerities on your son Govardhana. This is my wish." 

Droṇa turned to his son and said: "O son, go with this sage to the beautiful land of karma, where people achieve the three goals." Govardhana then said to the sage: "O sage, how will you carry me? I am a hundred yojanas long and wide." Pulastya said: "My son, please sit on my hand, and I will carry you." Govardhana then made a prediction: "I will remain where you place me, and I will not leave that place. I promise you this." Pulastya promised not to place him down until he reached Kāśī. Govardhana bowed down to his father and climbed onto the sage's hand. 

Moving very slowly, Pulastya soon found himself above the sacred Vraja-maṇḍala. In the mood of Haridāsa, Girirāja thought to himself: "Kṛṣṇa, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, will enter this place in Vraja and enjoy His childhood, playing with the cowherd boys, and then the līlā of youth. For this reason, I should not leave this place." Govardhana made himself even heavier in the hand of the sage. Pulastya had no choice but to place it on the ground in the Vraja-maṇḍala. 

After bathing, Pulastya came back and said to Govardhana: "Now, please get up, climb on my hand." But Govardhana did not get up. He was smiling, because he was home again. Pulastya tried to lift Girirāja, but he couldn't. He finally uttered a famous curse on Girirāja: "O arrogant mountain, you did not fulfill my wish; therefore, every day you will become smaller by one mustard seed." Indeed, our ācāryas confirm this, that since then, Girirāja has been decreasing by the size of a mustard or sesame seed daily.

The *Garga-saṃhitā* concludes this līlā with a beautiful śloka: "As long as the Ganges is present and as long as Mount Govardhana is present, the power of Kali-yuga will not affect the devotee." 

Before concluding, I would like to mention that Śrīla Prabhupāda attributed another reason why Girirāja is decreasing. He writes that after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs searched for Him all over Vraja-maṇḍala. As a last attempt, they came to Govardhana Hill. They circumambulated Him 12 times, but they could not find Him. Therefore, finally, the gopīs accepted this transcendental reality that Kṛṣṇa had left. Being humble souls, they thought that perhaps the women of Mathurā had shown deeper love for Kṛṣṇa, therefore Kṛṣṇa went there. Girirāja, seeing this transcendental mood and feeling compassion for the Vraja-gopīs, began to decrease by a mustard seed daily. 

We must conclude for today, because the sun is already shining on you. But we have some glimpse into the glory of his origin in the spiritual world, how he came to the material world, and why he went from southern India to northern India. 

We will conclude today with the following prayers from the *Garga-saṃhitā*, Canto Ten: "Glorious Govardhana, the king of the mountains, is the personal form of the Lord. Simply by seeing Him, one attains the highest goal of life. By staying at Govardhana Hill for just one month, one attains pious results millions of times greater than those attained by donating gold on the Malaya Hills. No other holy place is as sacred as Govardhana Hill. There has never been, is not, and never will be a holy place equal to Govardhana Hill."

Take advantage of today's opportunity and study the works of our ācāryas, where they glorify this hill. This is a beautiful, auspicious day. And it is wonderful that we can all sit here together this morning and discuss His glories. Let us remember and never forget that this is all by the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and he is the one who reveals the dhāma.

*Jaya Śrī Rādhē! Jaya Kṛṣṇa!*""