"*00303*.*
"Today’s lecture will be unique, not so much filled with philosophy as history. You can call it a transcendental history lesson in high school. When already in high school it was necessary to choose which direction we will study in colleges, in an interesting way, some of my friends decided to study history. And in fact, in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which is represented by the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, history lasts not just tens of centuries, but millennia, and history is a very important part of our spiritual tradition. The book *Mahābhārata* is the book with which we associate ourselves very strongly, and devotees are always very interested in reading the *Mahābhārata*, studying what happened many, many years ago. *Mahābhārata* actually literally translates as the ancient history of India. And in fact, when we say *Bhārata*, we do not mean only this continent or India; in fact, at one time the whole of this land was considered *Bhārata* and it was governed from the center of *Indraprastha* in the so-called New Delhi, and the previously famous city of Hastināpura.

In fact, even to this day, archaeologists find various artifacts in Asia, Europe, and even Australia that belong to the ancient Vedic culture. The whole world was under the banner of Emperor Yudhiṣṭhira. Once, Śrīla Prabhupāda spoke about Russia. In fact, when Śrīla Prabhupāda came to Russia, he was not only interested in introducing Kṛṣṇa consciousness in Russia, but also in awakening it. And he said that, in fact, the original name of Russia is *Rusi*, that is, the place where *ṛṣis* live. And about the names of cities, the real name refers to where *ṛṣis* live; so all these cities are attributed to this. This refers to ancient India. Śrīla Prabhupāda says that at one time, great yogīs and sages went to the north of the Himalayas and beyond to perform austerities, and thus, even some of them came to Siberia. And in fact, once, when we visited an ancient institute in the nineties, I still don’t remember in what exact place in Russia, in fact, one of the chairmen of the scientists of this institute said that, in fact, we have our own Russian Veda, and the Indian Veda is isolated from this—that’s how they think. And they say that the heroes of their Vedas are Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā; that is, the names are similar. And of course, we know, we understand that this is all speculation. But thus, a certain manifestation and pointing to the Vedic culture are present.

And why am I mentioning history? Because today we are in a very historical place. In fact, one can say that rarely does anyone come here. And in fact, this place in which we are is a *samādhi*, or one can say the burial place of various kings and also queens, including children who prematurely left this world. And in fact, many, if not all, of these kings were *rājarṣis*, so they consider this place sacred. *Rājā* means king, *ṛṣi* is a holy man, and *rājarṣi* is a holy man who acts fulfilling the role of king in the world based on truly real *dharma*. You will not find similar... We will not delve into the politics at this point, but I will simply tell you that we do have examples of true rulers. And in fact, some of the most important and most significant kings in history are located here. And in fact, even in order to come here, we had to write an appeal and a letter to the Queen who reigns here, and in fact, we did this yesterday evening, and she was very gracious and gave us permission. And in fact, even tourists or various pilgrimage groups cannot just come here; they will not be allowed in. But we knew the secret: the main thing is that we had to turn to the Queen. And she graciously agreed, saying that from time immemorial, "Yes, this is a very good movement, in fact, you support our tradition," and she also gave permission for us to honor the *prasāda* in the place where we honor it. So let’s thank her for her permission and mercy shed on us.

In fact, I can talk for hours about the various personalities that are here in the *samādhi*. In fact, the most famous and important personality, well, at least for me and other Vaiṣṇavas, is Sawai Jai Singh. In fact, he is the founder of this city, which now has 7 million inhabitants. I would like to tell you a little about his life so that later you could pass through that arch and see his large white *samādhi* there and pay respect to him, because the most important and primary point is that he was the protector of Govinda. Because if we go through history, we will see that it is thanks to him that they have been worshiping so wonderfully here in this temple for the past 300 years.

A little history: he was born a long time ago, on November 3, 1688, and of course, his parents were the King and Queen of Jaipur. After the death of his father, he took the position of ruler of this area. He was only 11 years old. And in fact, this sometimes happened when the ruler died prematurely, or one way or another, and the queen and children remained alive, and the eldest son took the position of ruler. And even despite his young age, from his earliest years, he was taught by the king himself, ministers, and other servants on how to be a king. They taught him how to be a ruler, how to divide and conquer; diplomats taught him if different sides had opposing points of view and opinions, how to deal with this, how to embrace it all so that everything would progress safely. It was necessary to know all the nuances of the treasury and tax collection, and also how to collect various reservoirs of water that would then be distributed not only to residents but also across the fields. He had many different responsibilities: how to protect forests, how to protect his kingdom from neighboring kingdoms that also want to conquer and plunder treasures. As an eleven-year-old boy, he had to learn a lot because often these young men, when they were twenty years old, they ruled countries, and as a young man he was doing all this.

And in fact, his distinctive feature from other rulers of India was that from an early age he proved his pious Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And in fact, this was not surprising because Kṛṣṇa consciousness was widespread, especially in the northern part of India, which is nearby. Let's say we got there in 3 hours by bus, and on horseback, you can get there in a day. And in fact, even if the rulers themselves could not go to the holy *dhāma*, various saints and sages, traveling throughout India, visited these places, showing glory and conveying the message of the Lord; thus they were representatives and one could meet them everywhere. And in our time, where are these *sādhus* in the Western world? At that time, they conveyed the message of reviving love for the Lord, and the ruler knew that it was necessary to maintain this spiritual culture because otherwise people would all decline and people would degrade. And one could often encounter a situation where a poor *sādhu*, wearing only a loincloth, held a *mālā* in his hands, repeating the holy names, entered the kingdom and the palace of the ruler, and he descended from his throne and offered obeisances to him. The *sādhu*, who had nothing, but a king adorned with various jewels in a crown with swords, gave it to the feet of this saint. And this ruler, who had all the power and glory, he gave it to the feet and washed the feet of this *sādhu*, asking him about the meaning and purpose of life. This is the beauty of Vedic culture. The King invited this *sādhu* to his palace so that he could tell *Kṛṣṇa-kathā*. Where is the president and prime minister who invite devotees from ancient times to talk about Kṛṣṇa consciousness in parliament? Of course, there are rare exceptions and examples of this, but still.

And due to the fact that Vṛndāvana is nearby and the *sādhus* they constantly traveled spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they supported him. This little boy, 11 years old, has already become a devotee throughout his life. He would go incognito, not as the king, because he wanted to go there in a mood of humility. "I am a servant of the Lord." He would wear a simple garment, he covered his hair with a turban, he goes around barefoot; nobody knew, just his minister would be somewhere behind protecting him. He wanders around in the dust. I heard the scriptures and following the example of the *sādhus*, we can recommend devotees to also roll in the dust of Vṛndāvana; it does a lot of good things, but still, you can take this example. And in fact, I read that in Vṛndāvana, only also in a simple *dhotī* with a *kaṇṭhī-mālā* on his neck, he hid his beautiful hair with a turban, in his hands he held a *mālā*, and in a humble mood, he entered Vṛndāvana, rolled in the dust, chanted holy names, took ablution, and his guards and prime ministers were nearby, but not in an obvious way, keeping a distance. If the *sādhus*, as you probably saw, in the morning they gather and chant *oṃ*, he joins them and listens. And he was known for the fact that he walked barefoot, visited various places, and on the full moon of Kārtika, he took ablution in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. And when the time came to give his daughter in marriage, he performed this ceremony. In fact, on the day of Janmāṣṭamī, a huge, grandiose wedding celebration, so many people. And then, immediately after the wedding, he disappears because the *rājarṣis* are wonderful; he left his royal attire, he took the form of a simple *sādhu* and wandered through the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana for several weeks. He did this. How is the king after all? Wow, the king of Vṛndāvana. Did he come to show what a wonderful king he is? No, he came to offer gold equal to his weight. This wonderful *rājarṣi* gathered all the inhabitants and, having called them, he sat on the scales and told his treasurer what volume of gold should be brought to distribute to all the *brāhmaṇas*. Then he also gave the order to build many different *ghāṭas* on the banks of the Yamunā so that the saints and the *brāhmaṇas* could receive the mercy of the Yamunā. He often went visiting. 

And one day he gave the order to build a temple of Sītā-Rāma there, and in 1700, some year, he also gave the order to build a temple in which serious worship of the Govardhana would take place. And the most interesting thing is that I learned that, in fact, he later took initiation into the Nimbārka Sampradāya. And now we will talk about how he built this wonderful city of Jaipur. It was his main achievement: the construction of this city for Govinda. In fact, I didn't sleep until late yesterday; in fact, I didn't sleep at all because I was so inspired. I could talk about this for hours, but I'll better quote you a poet who lived at that time and wrote a short poem about him. And he wrote that "Jai Singh II was like a prince bringing the flow of *dharma* back to earth after the evil deeds of Aurangzeb." And here the poet recalls the evil deeds of Aurangzeb during the reign of Jai Singh. India was ruled by Muslims, and in fact, the emperor was Aurangzeb, and he was a very evil tyrant. In short, at one point he gave orders that all the temples and all the deities of Vṛndāvana be destroyed, and of course this includes our beloved Govinda about whom we talked a lot yesterday. And fortunately, Śrīla Gosvāmī, then being the main priest, they transferred Govinda to safety and took care of Him, and he transferred not only Govinda but also other deities to safety, like Rādhā-Vinoda, and thus the servants tried to continue to search for these deities to destroy. And devotees, they realized that it was necessary to transfer further to a safe place, and from the Kuṇḍa they slowly transferred all these deities to Rajasthan, understanding and knowing that the help of the righteous and devoted king would be useful.

Aurangzeb was closing in on Vṛndāvana, it was not safe, and in fact, like any ruler, he also had spies. So, Jai Singh, he watched and monitored the movement of Govinda and other deities. And as they approached Rajasthan, and approached in fact at that time the capital was Amber city where various kings and rulers of this northern part of Rajasthan lived, he thought, "Govinda-jī is approaching, I want to give Him shelter and protection." And Jai Singh, he was thinking about how to protect Govinda from these marauders. So he decided to mount and ride a horse around the area to find the place where he could build a city and protect Govinda. Isn't it amazing? Politicians build cities for sense gratification, but he decided to build a city to protect the Lord. And in due time, Jai Singh went with his close ministers in search of a suitable place so that it would be naturally protected, in addition to something like mountains—just lift your head up, look around. And when we were driving from Vṛndāvana here, you could see the terrain was quite flat, but as we approached here, if you suddenly woke up a little early on the bus, you could find yourself surrounded by mountains. And thus, he wanted to find not only a mountainous area that would provide protection, but he also wanted to find a beautiful place because when visiting Vṛndāvana, he saw its beauty; it was not an easy task. After all, Rajasthan itself is a desert, and he wanted to find a place that would include both mountainous terrain and beautiful views and vegetation. And he knew that Govinda was getting closer and closer, so he needed to start building the city. 

In fact, there was only a desert, but one day, in the middle of the desert, he came across a beautiful place in which there were an abundance of Kadamba trees, blooming flowers, and also lakes full of lotuses. And wandering around this place, he thought that this would be an ideal place for Govinda. And returning to his city of Amber, which was 45 minutes away from here, he told his ministers to build a city here for Govinda. And interestingly, he also gave them an order to study the scriptures of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, because if we want to see and know the beauty of Vṛndāvana, we need to study it. Thousands of people were involved in building this city and temple, and many gardens were planted. But the temple was beautiful but small. 

And the one who built this wonderful city turned to the Lord with a question and a request to give a name to this place. And when he came here, he saw how everything was wonderfully manifested here. "What beautiful gardens," he thought, and said, "Kanak Vṛndāvana," golden Vṛndāvana. So if you pay attention, look at it, it has some golden glow, so he said, "Let's call it Kanak Vṛndāvana." We would like to see it. It's a beautiful place and it still exists. Who wants to go and see? You lucky ones, we're going there tomorrow. And in fact, when you arrive tomorrow, you will see how beautiful this place is, and the building itself, and also the nature, wonderful vegetation, gardens, and it really does have this golden glow. Tomorrow you will be there, remember this golden glow. 

And in fact, I have already told about this many times, but ultimately Aurangzeb made a lot of efforts to destroy Govinda and other deities for decades, but ultimately Jai Singh, he decided to bring Govinda to Amber. In fact, there was a luxurious, big, grand celebration at the time when Govinda came to Amber, and everyone came. He invited Govinda to the temple which is called the Malā. And in fact, in honor of this event and in honor of Govinda, Jai Singh, he decided to order a wonderful column to be installed in the temple; they called it Kīrti-stambha, the Column of Glory. And for two years Kṛṣṇa was worshiped there, of course, along with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, at a time when the temple, his main one, was still under construction. He also had a mind; he liked to study the Vedic scriptures. He especially liked to read the books of Rūpa Gosvāmī. And while studying them, he learned that Rādhārāṇī had a friend who helped her in various ways, and her name was Lalitā Sakhī. And he also learned that she was preparing and continuing to prepare some kind of *bhoga* or like a nut for Rādhārāṇī. He thought, "In my fort, in a protected place, there are beautiful deities for them, and in this fortress, Lalitā should also be invited here." I think, and in fact, he then gave orders to his masters to manifest the beautiful form of Lalitā Devī, which was manifested from a combination of eight metals called *aṣṭadhātu*, and then cover this deity with gold. I wonder when this incredible deity of Lalitā was completed. Jai Singh gave the order, and he installed this deity along with Rādhā-Govinda on the shore in this place, the Mān-Sarovar temple. Would you like to see this deity Lalitā? Already seen. And you have already seen; if you look from our point of view on the left-hand side of the altar, this is the same deity who manifested and established Jai Singh. And look what a wonderful ruler he is, and on the right there is Śakti. She came a little later. 

And then he chose the best cooks of all, the best servants in his kingdom, so that they properly serve Govinda with dignity, because for decades He was worshiped hiding Him in the forests, in lakes, in wooden boxes. And now He was offered the most luxurious worship. Vedic scriptures—in particular, he read Rūpa Gosvāmī—and the next place in which they worshiped after the first was under construction, then the next place of worship where they were transferred, it was Kanak Vṛndāvana, in which Jai Singh also built a wonderful temple for Rādhā-Govinda. And when he came to check the readiness of this place, Kanak Vṛndāvana, he saw that this place is finally ready. After all, it looked exactly like Vṛndāvana, and then he decided to bring the deities home. He knew Vṛndāvana because, as a king, he visited it undercover, so he manifested this *Kanak Vṛndāvana*, *Gupta Vṛndāvana* (hidden Vṛndāvana). But yes, still some devotees say that "I don’t want to leave Vṛndāvana to go to Jaipur," but we do this; we must do, because this is *Gupta Vṛndāvana*. 

And in fact, at the Indian research institute I discovered a scripture verse written by the court poet of Jai Singh describing the Kanak Vṛndāvana, which you will see tomorrow. And even if suddenly you are sick and decide to stay longer to rest and recover at home, no, still come and please keep this description in your mind and in your heart when you arrive tomorrow in Kanak Vṛndāvana. Of course, several centuries have passed, this place has changed, but through vision, see your mind, you can see this golden glow, this beautiful Kanak Vṛndāvana. Would like to hear a description of how it looked before, as described by this poet? In fact, a description, then listen to this. And if someone sitting next to you hears this and loses consciousness, help them. Sing them, and then tomorrow you will see Kanak Vṛndāvana; it will be described exactly like this because the holy man, he does not see through his eyes, he sees with his ears: "There is a grove of Kadamba trees covered with berry vines, *guñjā* flowers, and endless vines. There Govinda wanders alone with a sixth blanket under His arm, singing blissful songs." Righteous and noble Jai Singh, because of his ardent love for Govinda, placed Him forever in a jeweled palace; it seems this Vṛndāvana, Kanak Vṛndāvana, is even sweeter than that Vṛndāvana north of here. 

And in fact, Jai Singh visited Kanak Vṛndāvana on each *dvādaśī*, receives the gift of Rādhā-Govinda, and we are going there tomorrow. We are leaving; who can say with confidence that tomorrow will come? Even if you grab this virus, blocking your nose, sinuses, and giving uneasiness to your tummy, please equally come, see this golden radiance, Kanak Vṛndāvana. And thus, and now he thinks, "Well, that's it, now I'm ready, I will build a palace for Them." When you approach the *samādhi*, you can also offer obeisances; he is the king, he is the ruler, and he is a devotee, and he has done so much in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And thus we can worship him, worship Hari, Guru, Vaiṣṇava, and the garden. And in fact, he gave the order to begin building this wonderful city of Jaipur. And what he imagined and wanted to manifest... But in fact, from Amber this distance was 11 km; this is a big move for the capital, to move to another place. 

And sometimes we often do this if we have time in our schedule, *parikrama*, then we go to this place, which is made of white and yellow marble, a huge, wonderful courtyard, Śītalā mountains. Just this time, unfortunately, we don’t have time. For centuries, this is the place where the king was and lived, but they left this kingdom because it was not good enough for Govinda. One could say, "Well, it's a good, cool place. One could say, well, it's a good place. I can sit here quietly and live, collect taxes from subjects, it's generally beautiful." No, they realized that this place is not well protected and not well suited for Govinda, so they decided to leave it. Can you imagine? Jai Singh-ji. 

Okay, in fact, Jaipur is described as the first planned or built city, and Vidyādhara Bhaṭṭācārya, the famous architect, he showed this, and the entire city of Jaipur construction is based on the knowledge and principles of Vāstu-śāstra. And thus, buildings began to be built, they began to rise, the palace was also about to be built, and then Govinda appeared in the dream of Jai Singh. And one of the first pieces of knowledge in order to plan, administer, and manage this city, naturally, was construction of a palace in which the king himself would live, and first of all it was built. And one night Govinda appeared in a dream to the king and gave instructions: "Oh king, you are building such a big city, including a palace for yourself, could you also provide a small space there for Me?" And in fact, at that time, Jai Singh, he was receiving mentoring, guidance, instruction from Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and everything he did was based on what Viśvanātha told him. He wrote a letter, and after reading this... and in the same way, Jai Singh, he received guidance from Viśvanātha. I thought, "Wow, I would also like to write a letter to Viśvanātha and ask him, 'How can I progress in Kali-yuga spiritually?'" He would probably answer me, "Repeat Hare Kṛṣṇa." And the question he asked there, in which help and advice was needed, is whether he can build a small temple for Govinda before the main and large temple altar will be built, and he said yes. And from now on, you can actually build a frame for Him in his own *mahal*, that is, his own palace. And they built a small building, a wonderful palace for Rādhā-Govinda, and then he did something truly amazing. 

Jai Singh did something amazing: he built a small temple in his own house, in fact, to which he invited Śrīla Govinda, Lalitā, Govinda—the deity we listened to yesterday, the deity of Kāśīśvara. And imagine, he did this, actually bringing them home. I thought that, well, in principle, he is the ruler, a smart move, he can do anything, and he brought all these wonderful deities to his home. And it is described that for 2 years the deities lived in one of the rooms of his house, and every day was a festival because he is the ruler, there are such opportunities. And he continued to manifest various plans and work on the construction, ultimately, of the main temple for Govinda. One of these buildings was a summer palace for the queen, and in the summer, naturally, it is very hot here, so they made a special building in which there was a lot of free space, the breeze could walk there, giving coolness. And all this was done especially for the queen. 

And then Govinda appeared again in a dream: "Jai Singh, you are building a wonderful palace for your queen. Well, listen, I also in principle suits this place quite well, give it to Me." And he woke up and went to his wife, said, "Darling, I need to tell you something, you know that summer palace that Govinda-ji built for you? He wants it for Himself." And she immediately said, "Of course, give it to Him." Imagine such a wonderful king and queen. This is exactly the place where Rādhā-Govinda moved, and the place where they are to this day. Isn't it interesting? If we pay attention to this summer palace, because it really doesn't even look like a temple, because in India we know that there are at least walls in the temple, there is a special door through which you pass, a lot of things that are not in the building that we can see in Amber. There is a lot of spacious, open space because this is exactly the same summer house. Isn't it amazing? The walls were in the way, and thus there are not even any walls or anything, just entering the temple grounds, leaving your shoes; in fact, from this place you can already see through all this open space, see Govinda Himself. And Govinda—even in fact this building was not completely completed, yes, there is a small covering from above, a small shadow—but Govinda wanted this very summer palace of the queen so that the breeze would walk there, giving Him a good feeling. 

And then he decided that he would also move and live in the place from which he could first thing in the morning, waking up, opening the curtains of his room where he lives, he could see Govinda. And so that Govinda, waking up, first of all, He could see this king. This is a tank, this is how this temple in quotes was built, and so everything was organized. And what about you and me? What do people basically see first? They look at their phone. They watch the news about everything that is happening in the world, and all the disasters, robbery, all the other news. In fact, first of all, they see their ugly reflections of faces. Nothing personal, it's not about you, you are all wonderful. Jai Singh began his day by getting out of bed, taking ablutions, getting ready, and opening what? And looked, receiving a gift. And during the day he attended daytime *darśana*. And then he stood on the veranda of his house and looked at Govinda. And at that moment when the curtains and the altar curtain closed, and the last thing he saw that day was Govinda. What a king is, beauty and total theory for *sādhanā*. Come and take *darśana*. Tell "Hare Kṛṣṇa," "Hare Kṛṣṇa," "Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa," "Hare Hare," "Hare Rāma," "Hare Rāma," "Rāma Rāma," "Hare Hare." And thus Jai Singh, he did all these preparatory moments. And in an interesting way, this movement spread, that the Lord Himself... He gave the distribution of the holy name, all this mercy shown in a very serious attitude to the worship of deities; thus it prepared, organized. 

And in fact, devotees from Bengal, Vṛndāvana, they began to visit, a lot of time to spend. Previously mentioned, you said, because there was a lot, very Jai Singh, in fact, Sāmara moved everyone here to Jaipur, all the inhabitants of his city. And therefore, when we see... if you suddenly go, you will see this fortress Amber, very large, beautiful, but empty. In fact, Jaipur became one of the most favorite places of pilgrimage. And listen, I read this at 1:30 in the morning; I could not sleep. One day some students who lived in Vṛndāvana said, "Why should we leave Vṛndāvana, go to another place, even if Govinda is there? We can stop several new deities in Vṛndāvana and serve Kṛṣṇa." And Baba, he answered them in a very interesting way, just in one line, that is, they pushed him... and he briefly in one short sentence he said, "The place where these three deities are present is the real Vṛndāvana." Of course, any minded person would think Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa also becomes Vṛndāvana, but here it is interesting how it is described. So I concluded that you all should go to another place and get *darśana*. 

And thank you all very much for coming here to this *Gupta Vṛndāvana*, and we have these wonderful lectures and *kīrtanas*. We hope that this helps to expand your *kṛpā*. In fact, once I read that all the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they moved here to Jaipur to live here with Govinda-Gopīnātha. And in one of the places scientists, they, historians, mention that Jaipur, it also became the main place where devotees study. As a school, and devotees who remained in Vṛndāvana, they established *pratiṣṭhā* deities who were installed here so they could get *darśana*. And then they said that the glory of Vṛndāvana, she was again... a deity O never left Vṛndāvana. All glory is the land of the Vraja, thanks to which at one time Vṛndāvana became popular again. And we see that even to this day many people, they come and visit the temple, getting *darśana*. 

And we will conclude our lecture today with worthy prayers: "Glory to all the mercies of Rādhā and Mādhava. They lead me, lame and foolish, on the path of truth, and in the whole world for me there is nothing but their lotus feet. Vṛndāvana, in the temple of precious stones, standing by the wishing tree on a black throne, sit Rādhā-Govinda. They are surrounded by companions and confidants who serve them with love. I humbly bow before them. Identical sweetness of the dance *rāsa*, standing on the shore of the Yamunā, in a grove, He plays on His famous flute, attracting the attention of the cowherd girls. May they grant us their blessings. Rādhā-Rādhā."

Thank you very much.""