
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. By the mercy of my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, myself and a small group of devotees this time have come on parikramā to the city of Jaipur. In the tourist trade, they call it the "Pink City" because the walls of the city, which were established several hundred years ago by a Kṛṣṇa-conscious king, Jai Singh II, are a pinkish-saffron color. But we prefer to call it the city of Jaipur. Jaipur means the "City of Victory," and what is the victory? The victory is that the city was established to give shelter to and to protect many of the Vṛndāvana deities. As many devotees know, the village of Vṛndāvana at that time, some several hundred years ago, was attacked by invaders who were antagonistic to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. These things happen in this world, so the devotees had to move those deities to protect them. It is a long story, but eventually a number of those Vṛndāvana deities—worshipable deities of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas—came here. Govindajī, Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana, and other deities came as well, and they were given shelter. Of course, Kṛṣṇa is our shelter, but He allows us to serve Him in many different ways.

King Jai Singh II, he built this city to protect those deities and ultimately to worship those deities. If you look at the way the city was set up originally, the temple of Govindajī is right in the center of that planned city, and directly across from the temple, the king built his palace. So he would get up in the morning—this is a rāja-ṛṣi, a saintly person sitting on the throne—he would bathe, and then, just as the temple doors were opening and there was the heralding of the conch shells and the opening of the deities, he would come out on his veranda. His first thing he saw during the day was the Lord. He just built his palace so he could look directly into the temple of Govindajī and start his day. 

There is a great, very rich history here. So many beautiful temples. Many other deities are here established as well. And if one wants to get a sense of what is bhakti, what is devotion to the Lord, one simply has to come here and attend the maṅgala-ārati of Govindajī—or to come to the opening of the deities of Govindajī early in the morning, as thousands and thousands, literally every day, of the people of Jaipur come to see their Lord. That is how they start their day, following the footsteps of the previous kings. And then many of them come back in the evening; thousands and thousands of people come and take darśana of the Lord before they go to sleep. 

So, at least for myself, I know when I was a young devotee I came here in the early '70s and I walked into that temple room during maṅgala-ārati, and I was overwhelmed with the devotion of the people of the city. So, we would recommend you come here. In this video, you are going to see many of the beautiful aspects. Even the architecture—much of the architecture is still here—and tourists come to see the architecture. We also appreciate that, but we come to see our beloved Lordships here. 

So, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thanks to that King Jai Singh II who established the city, and his followers, and the pūjārīs, and the people of this great city, we can come and take darśana. It is like Gupta-Vṛndāvana, because the Vṛndāvana deities are here, and they are being served. It may not be so well known to the world, but it is a hidden Vṛndāvana. It is a place to come on your trip to India. Please come on parikramā to Vṛndāvana and Gupta-Vṛndāvana, the hidden Vṛndāvana here in Rajasthan, the city of victory, Jaipur. All glories to Prabhupāda.""