So we are in a very, very remote village in a jungle in Orissa, and we were told that in this area there is a very ancient deity of Lakshmi’s, Lakshmi Devi’s, that hardly anyone ever comes to see because the access to this village is very difficult.

Some rough roads, you have to walk a trail, etc. So when we came here, and I saw this deity, I just couldn't believe how magnificently beautiful He is, and Lakshmi Devi is. And we inquired from the local people, where did this deity come from?

So they said, in the year 2012, there's a little pond, not a very big pond, but a little lake, just maybe 100 meters from here. One person has a property on that, on the banks of that lake, he's a fisherman.

So he was fishing in the lake and, um, somehow he lost some of his fishing gear, so he had to dive down into the water to retrieve it. And when he dove down, he touched the bottom of this, the base of these, these deities, and it was something very hard, and you could tell it was carved.

So he called the other villagers, and they drained the lake a little bit, and then all the villagers together, I can only imagine how heavy this deity is, they took the deity out from under the water and brought Him up.

And then, in this, this was in 2012, and they brought Him here to this, it was just a hut before. There was hardly any cement or rocky, or mainly a grass hut, and they put Him here for all these years.

And, you know, some villagers would come sometimes and, you know, pray to Him, etc., etc. No one could steal Him because He’s so big and so heavy. But just last year, 12 months ago, they started to worship Him. They started to worship Him.

And the fisherman, he raised money through his humble trade, and he built this very small confinement, this cement temple. And he arranges, well, he comes and he worships, or he has a pundit come and worship. When there’s just a few of them trying to worship this deity with the little money they have, they get fruits, they get, you know, flowers, and they come in.

And we were in contact with one local archaeologist who said this deity is from the 13th century. 13th century. And most likely what happened is when invaders came into this part of Orissa, this part of, part of India, we know that many invaders would break the deities, break the temples.

So what probably happened was that the invaders were coming, so in the 13th century or 14th century, whenever this deity was taken to that kund, very quickly thrown in, very quickly thrown in. So He landed on His head in the mud because He was just the base was up here.

This is, this is the theory of what happened. So it's just a magnificent, just such a beautiful, very, uh, ancient deity. And I'm very glad that, um, that we discovered Him on our tour here in, in Orissa. And I, I, I'm going to adopt this deity.

I'd like Him to adopt me eventually, but I'm going to adopt this deity. My disciple, Vishnu Das, he's from a very nice Goswami family in Vrindavan, and his father is one of the main priests in the Govindaji temple in, in Jaipur.

So he had heard about this particular deity in this village. So we're going to contact him and ask him to help us in the proper way establish a nice worship here for this deity who hasn't really had any real significant worship since the 13th century.

And hopefully, you know, I'll also be able to raise some funds and build a temple here. It's actually in the middle of nowhere, but in my heart, it's somewhere very important. It's, it's here in this village, and I can render some service to Kṛṣṇa.

I heard Śrīla Prabhupāda say one time that we worship the, for the protection of the spiritual master and for the protection of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.

So in that mood, I'm going to, to serve Nṛsiṁha Deva. You know, Prabhupāda, of course, is in the spiritual world, in Goloka Vrindavan.

But His representatives, many of my godbrothers, and now several of my godsisters, they're initiating spiritual masters. So I'm going to pray for their protection, that they can continue preaching this wonderful movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and give blessings to the whole world and their followers as well.

Let's just pray for everyone, because Prabhupāda said, you know, we pray to the Nṛsiṁha Deva for protection of ISKCON.

ISKCON means the people in ISKCON. So I'm going to pray in that mood that this beautiful, ancient deity of Nṛsiṁha Deva protects our movement because we're at the forefront of preaching the saṅkīrtana movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu with the yuga dharma of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma, Rāma, Hare Hare.

So I just have a new service now. I'm so excited. And I'm going to take blessings. You know, generally we don't, um, come before deities like this here in India. But I'm going to take the liberty to place my head upon His feet and ask Him to just rip out of my heart any selfish material desires so that my love for my Vaisnavas, my love for Śrīla Prabhupāda, my love for the Lord, and my love for all the people of this world, because they're all Kṛṣṇa said, He's the seed-giving father of every living entity.

So everyone's a devotee, they just, some know and some don't. So we'll also pray that those people can become Kṛṣṇa conscious.