"*00142*.*
"I would like to welcome everyone today to the very, very sacred village of Kāmaī. This is the village of Viśākhā, and I feel very, very honored and privileged, but at the same time very unqualified, to speak about this divine personality. We are very fortunate to find ourselves in a very beautiful part of the village here, by Balarāma Māsī’s arrangement. It is just big enough for our parikrama party of 350 devotees, and it is nicely shaded as well. 

We have had darśana of Lord Balarāma, the elder brother of Kṛṣṇa. That is the temple that we visited just there. When I came here before, I asked the villagers, "There is a temple of Balarāma in the village of Viśākhā; how is that?" She is a gopī, and we have received our Lord’s—Lord Balarāma’s—mercy through our darśana. We will do our best to speak about Viśākhā, as we were discussing some villages before. Rādhārāṇī has eight very close girlfriends called sakhīs who attend to Her needs at every moment, which is just a stone’s throw from here. Similarly, those eight girls, they have their villages around the hill or the mountain of Varṣāṇā. 

Each of them has their own village. I can mention their villages: Lalitā’s village, which is not far away, is called Uncāgāṅ. Here we are in Viśākhā’s village, called Kāmaī. Tuṅgavidyā’s village is called Añjanokā; Indulekhā’s village is called Kārahalā; Raṅgadevī’s village is called Dabalā; Sudevī’s village is called—isn't that sweet? We know the names of the villages where the sakhīs live. Now, I did a little more research, and I found out that this village of Kāmaī is also sometimes called Kāmanā-vana. People ask, "Where did you go on parikrama?" You can say, "Well, I went to Kāmaī," or you can say, "I went to Kāmanā-vana." In the last couple of years, I was also able to find what we call the praṇāma-mantras for a number of these little stones or these holy places. A praṇāma-mantra encapsulates one’s particular qualities or one’s particular service to the saṅkīrtana movement; a mantra can also apply to a holy place as well. It is our great fortune that Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī gives us the praṇāma-mantra in his *Vraja-vilāsa-stava* for Kāmanā-vana or Kāmaī.

It is very beautiful; just by listening to this mantra, we can understand the essence of this village that we are sitting in right now. Still remaining in our conditioned nature, when we look around with our material eyes, we can't really grasp the essence of this village, but if we listen carefully, the praṇāma-mantra will reveal where we actually are at this very moment:

"Obeisances to the forest named Kāmanā-vana, which fulfills all desires and which is the personification of the perfection of all desires of the sakhīs, including Lalitā-sakhī, etc."

So, this village is sometimes referred to as a forest because it is so big and it includes many different types of trees, so it could be called a village or it could be called a forest; the two are interchangeable. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī goes on to recommend the best time for coming here. Of course, in the general sense, any time is the right time for going any place in Vraja. But still, being a seer of the truth, he was able to understand the best time to come here to get the best benefit of sitting in this auspicious place: 

"On the third day of the bright fortnight of the month of Bhādra, a person should go to the forest named Kāmanā-vana and pray there according to the proper direction of śāstra. By doing so, one fulfills all desires."

He also reveals to us—because we can't see it with these eyes—that very near to where we are sitting, there is a very special lake. Like this, we can see it with transcendental vision. The name of this lake, which is just again a stone’s throw from here, is called Vimala-kuṇḍa.

"O bathing place of Kṛṣṇa, O King of the holy places, obeisances to You, O Vimala-kuṇḍa!" 

Then he gives a little side note; he said, "Bathe in this lake and offer ācaman in the current while chanting this mantra six times. One who does so finds an increase in affection in their marriage. If you are having marital problems, just bathe there, do some ācaman, and then all problems are solved."

We have all seen the deity—if you go for darśana in the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandira, you see Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, with the sakhīs on one side and Lalitā on the other side. We are appreciating and coming to understand Śyāmasundara; we are coming to understand Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So, that darśana means so much to us because when we are standing in front of Them, we are remembering Their transcendental qualities and pastimes. But I see many devotees, when they look at Viśākhā or Lalitā, their mind kind of goes blank; they don’t know what to think, so they go back and look at Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So, I thought today I would speak a little—or a lot, depending on how much time we have—about Viśākhā, so when you go to darśana tonight or tomorrow morning, you can look at her and appreciate her even more, especially her service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

The ācāryas say that Viśākhā is the second most important of the eight sakhīs. First preference is given to Lalitā-sakhī because she is the first attendant of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, but we shouldn’t think that anyone in the spiritual world is less important; they are all important in the great scheme of loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world. 

Now, what is really interesting that I found is that Viśākhā was born at the exact same moment as your dear friend, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. When we study the characteristics of these divine personalities in Vṛndāvana, they are born at different times—before or after the divine couple—to facilitate their sevā, but she was born at the exact moment as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. When you look at her tomorrow, you can think, "Wow, you were born at the same time as Śrī Rādhā." That should ring a bell for those of you who have memorized how old Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is: 14 years, 2 months, and 15 days of age, eternally. 

How does she dress? The clothes she wears are always decorated with stars; she is very attractive like that. There is a saying: "One should dress for the pleasure of others, but eat for one's own pleasure." Why should we dress for ourselves? We walk around, we can't see ourselves; we have to look in the mirror to see ourselves, so you dress for the pleasure of others. You know, when your children dress very nicely, you look at them and your friends, but you eat according to your own pleasure. 

I like to look at Viśākhā because her clothes are decorated with stars, and her complexion—if you look at someone's complexion—is like lightning. We have all been in a storm, and you see the lightning like that, so when you look at her, her complexion is like lightning. But I was also reading that sometimes her complexion is described as cream-colored with a touch of red. Just close your eyes and envision cream-colored with a little accent of red. So, at tonight's darśana, when you go for darśana of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, look at Viśākhā and consider that cream-colored with a touch of red. 

These personal attendants have unique services which they share with the group of mañjarīs. Devotees have services which are very dear to them, but the real nectar is sharing their service with others. So, she has eight girls, eight mañjarīs, who help her in her service. Her main service is to advise Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in their exchanges of love. She is a love counselor! One of course should know everything about loving exchanges, but they give this service to others to facilitate their loving exchanges. 

She is described as the perfect counselor for the divine couple because sometimes she has to deal with transcendental disputes—lover's quarrels—between the divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes they quarrel: "I don’t love you anymore!" When you quarrel with someone, "I hate you!" No, you quarrel, "I love you even more!" This is Vraja. For this, the ācāryas say she is expert in knowing three things: how to appease an angered lover, how to bribe the angered lover, and how best to quarrel with him. 

In this regard, I found a very nice pastime that demonstrates this. A little distance from here, there is another sacred earth; it is called Mānagala-kunda. That is another nice name for someone. What name did your Guru Mahārāja give? That is a very sacred place in Vraja-maṇḍala. Kṛṣṇa once made Rādhārāṇī so angry there was nothing He could do to appease her anger. He just made her angry—sometimes He teases, sometimes He jokes, sometimes He comes late—He can make her as angry as possible. But rarely can He tease her. In this instance, even her closest friends couldn't pacify her; in fact, they were afraid to approach Rādhārāṇī. She was just boiling with anger: "Kṛṣṇa, You rascal!" 

Just like in the Seventh Canto of the Bhāgavatam, we hear when Nṛsiṁhadeva got angry, no one could approach Him, even Lakṣmī-devī. She was afraid; only Prahlāda could approach. In this particular instance, her girlfriends were so afraid to approach her; they feared she might exile them to a distant and remote corner of Vṛndāvana. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa asks the girls, "You can just go, go on My behalf and try to appease her; tell her I’m not so bad, I really love her." Not in this case; even the girls wouldn't approach her. So, as a last resort, Kṛṣṇa approached Viśākhā and He begged her, "Please, somehow resolve this situation; she is so angry, what do I do?" 

Viśākhā came up with this really interesting plan—you know, their whole life is just bringing the divine couple together—she said, "You go to the gopī Śyāmalā, whose home was nearby, and ask her to lend you some of her clothes and ornaments so you can disguise yourself to look like a gopī. Then you can approach Rādhārāṇī and ask her to forgive you, Kṛṣṇa, but you look like a gopī." 

We hear this pastime repeated in different places in different ways, but this is particularly interesting. You might say, "Why?" Because Kṛṣṇa's skin is darkest blue like a monsoon cloud, and gopīs are generally fair-skinned, so He really has to cover up with His uparī-vāsā like this. You see how the girls cover their faces here in the village; Kṛṣṇa had to cover His face like that so she couldn't see His transcendental color. But there was always the risk that somehow Rādhā would see through this ruse or this trick. "If this plan backfires, don't you dare mention My name! Don't you say I was the one who came up with this plan." 

Kṛṣṇa went to Śyāmalā’s home, and she was waiting there with some of her friends, and they actually dressed Kṛṣṇa up as a gopī because it says He didn't know what to do, how to put on the cādar, how to do the sarī, how to do their makeup. So all the gopīs, they dressed Kṛṣṇa as a gopī. Kṛṣṇa prays, and when they are finished, they step back and they said, "Wow, You really look like a gopī! What’s Your name?" 
"Śyāmasakhī; that's My name." 

So the gopīs said, "Go, see if it works." Kṛṣṇa went with the vīṇā, and the girls played music against Him—He went with the vīṇā with trembling hands—to a grove where Rādhārāṇī was sitting. And it is described how was she sitting: she was sitting cursing all things black and taking oath after oath to never see Kṛṣṇa again. Anything black, she cursed it; it reminded her of Kṛṣṇa. She was just angry in this mood of mind. As He came into the kuñja, He began to sing in a feminine voice, a very beautiful song. 

Right around here, in this beautiful voice, she looked up and she saw this fols—this beautiful gopī—just a little distance away, so she said to her friends, "Who is this girl? Her bodily features and soothing voice are both so beautiful; she appears to be a kinnarī." What’s a kinnarī? A kinnarī is like a type of demigoddess. So far, so good! So Kṛṣṇa is kind of hesitating, and He looks at Viśākhā; she says, "Go now, go." This is what happens every day; this is the world we want to go to, all these different exchanges of love. It’s all about love, divine love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

Her singing was so beautiful and so full of bhāva, so full of pure love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, that as Rādhārāṇī was sitting there, she closed her eyes, and suddenly teardrops one by one began falling from her cheeks, hearing the singing of this beautiful gopī. Then she very carefully took off a strand of pearls she had around her neck and offered it to Śyāmasakhī as a gift. She reached to place the necklace, the pearl necklace, around Kṛṣṇa’s neck; He reached up and grabbed her wrist like this. 

He said something very important because He hadn't come to get a pearl necklace, that's not why He came. So He grabbed the wrist and He looked into her eyes; He said the following: "If You want to reward Me, don't give Me a strand of pearls, but relinquish to Me the necklace of anger that is so dear to You, the one You wear so close to Your heart. That is the only gift I desire; give up Your anger." 

Viśākhā had instructed Kṛṣṇa to act in this quarrel, and it worked, because, as the ācāryas write, Kṛṣṇa’s touch and the tears glistening in His eyes wiped away every trace of anger from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s heart, just as storm clouds sometimes part suddenly to reveal blue skies and sunshine. If you are planning a journey, don't go to Sydney, Australia; don't go to Buenos Aires; don't go to New York and participate in these loving pastimes, because everyone wants to love and be loved, but that love is only fully experienced selflessly in Goloka Vṛndāvana. That’s our home; that’s where we belong. 

Seeing Rādhā and Śyāma together as a loving couple, all the gopīs present, they started calling out, "Rādhe-Śyāma! Rādhe-Śyāma!" So this was all arranged by Viśākhā, because today we are speaking about her. Hearing this, you can appreciate her more, and you can run for the darśana tonight and look at Viśākhā and remember this verse. 

Now, besides intervening when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have their lover's quarrels, another one of Viśākhā’s specialties is to console Rādhārāṇī when she is feeling intense separation from Kṛṣṇa, which, unfortunately or fortunately, is quite often. She is the one who says, "It’s going to be okay; you know at what range you can meet Him." She consoles Rādhārāṇī like that. 

Actually, all the gopīs, including the foremost ones, Lalitā and Viśākhā, they often feel intense separation from Kṛṣṇa. How is that? Because they are so attached to Śrī Rādhā; through that attachment, they experience the same feelings that Rādhā has. The analogy is a tree with these different vines—you see in Vṛndāvana these vines that go around the tree—so whatever the tree trunk experiences, because the vines are growing so close to the tree trunk, the vines also experience. In the same way, these girls are so attached to Rādhārāṇī that whatever feelings she has, they also experience. So when she is feeling intense separation, they are also feeling the same intense separation. 

It is beyond us because we are still attached to this world. Until we relinquish our attachments to this world, we can’t really understand these deeper sentiments of love, but through the writings of our ācāryas, we can get some appreciation. For example, how can we understand Viśākhā and Lalitā’s feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa? By the mercy of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. At 12:37, we hear Uddhava telling Kṛṣṇa with some messages, but really he wanted to try to understand this special love the Vrajavāsīs have for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. After that journey, Uddhava came back and he was telling Kṛṣṇa how much the residents of Vṛndāvana miss Him. I like to read this because I am just hoping someday I can get one drop of that understanding. So here is what Uddhava said to Kṛṣṇa about Lalitā’s feelings of separation:

"Since Your departure, Kṛṣṇa, Lalitā’s cleansing, dressing, and grooming herself have become acts of anguish. She bathes herself with tears, ornaments herself with the pearl necklace of perspiration, anoints herself with the sandalwood paste of an ashen complexion, and dresses herself in the garment of erect bodily hairs. Having decorated herself in this way, Lalitā converses eloquently with stammering words and waits and waits and waits to see You once again."

Now, hearing this, Kṛṣṇa bent His head down and He was silent for a moment. Then He looked up with tears in His eyes and said to Uddhava, "And Rādhā?" He was inquiring about Rādhā; Kṛṣṇa isn’t quite essentially saying, "How does she feel? Is she missing Me too?" Uddhava placed his hand on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulder to prepare Him, and he said, "Friend, do you really want to know how much Rādhā is missing You?" Kṛṣṇa was kind of sitting there, He couldn't answer, He was just stunned. So Uddhava continued:

"O Kṛṣṇa, O Master of the Yadu dynasty, with these very eyes I have seen the appalling state of beautiful Rādhā, Your substance separated from You. The lotus flower of her face is shriveled and wilted, and her heart is muddy with confusion. Because Rādhārāṇī refuses to eat, her body has withered, and she appears parched by the raging fire of misery like the dry bed of a pond cracked by the summer heat. Sometimes Rādhārāṇī trembles like a leaf, sometimes she loudly grinds her teeth, sometimes she stutters with a choked voice. Her tears flood Gokula, her erect bodily hairs shame the kaṇṭakī fruit, and her complexion pales beside the moon." 

This is *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi* 14.139. So in these types of moments, when Rādhārāṇī is experiencing that separation, it is Viśākhā who comes forward and consoles her. In times of separation, this is Viśākhā, and this is her village, Kāmaī. And because of Viśākhā’s expertise, Rādhārāṇī sometimes becomes pacified—the ācāryas say if only for a moment. 

Now, another one of Viśākhā’s services, which I was reading, she very much relishes: to dress Rādhārāṇī for meeting with Kṛṣṇa. Rādhārāṇī shared with Viśākhā her constant longing for the sweet fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental limbs. Because of the intimate relationship between them, she is dressing her, and Rādhārāṇī shares with her, "I have a constant longing to experience the sweet fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body." Immediately in my mind, I was thinking, "What is that scent of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form?" His form is made of what? Eternity, knowledge, and bliss. It is not like a material body which produces foul odors; it is transcendental. Thinking, "What does Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form smell like?" 

Then I went, "Oh yeah, where was that? I read that somewhere." I read about Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental scent in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Antya-līlā. So I started looking in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 19, chapter 91, verse. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, he quotes *Govinda-līlāmṛta* 8.6, and there I found it: 

"The scent of Kṛṣṇa’s divine body surpasses the aroma of musk and attracts the minds of all ladies. The eight lotus petal parts of His body distribute the fragrance of lotuses mixed with that of camphor. Oh my gosh! Lotuses mixed with the flavor of camphor. His body is anointed with aromatic substances like musk, camphor, sandalwood, and aguru. Oh my dear friend, that Lord, also known as the enchanter of Cupid, always increases the desires of my nostrils." 

Now, we heard that Rādhārāṇī is sharing this with Viśākhā; she is getting dressed, and she says, "I just want to smell that fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s body." And then I read that the ācāryas say that to satisfy her constant longing for the sweet fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental limbs—listen to this—Rādhārāṇī sometimes smears her own limbs with musk oil and thinks Kṛṣṇa is just beside me. 

These are all details of the spiritual world meant to attract us, to take our attention away from what we think is wonderful in this world to what is really wonderful in the spiritual world. We are so immersed in material consciousness; these things, these little details, are given to help us break away from that false attachment and become attached to reality, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So when we say, "Oh no, it’s too deep, it’s too deep to hear," no, we are too deeply immersed in material consciousness; that’s the problem. We have to get out of this mundane, which is causing us so much suffering. So the ācāryas, they give a little light, just little bits of light here and there, to attract your attention back to the spiritual world where we belong. 

Such as rose oil on her limbs; she appears to Kṛṣṇa when she comes before Kṛṣṇa with this scent to be a walking bouquet of roses. When the aromatic breeze from the edge of Rādhārāṇī’s garment touches Kṛṣṇa, He whom liberated yogis fail to attain thinks, "Now My life is a success." So, like you know how the mind is, when I was reading all this I was thinking, "Where do they get all these amazing scented oils and perfumes? Did they go to the special places in Vṛndāvana where Vṛndā-devī has her storehouses, where she keeps different things to facilitate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s service? Or did they go to some store? Can I buy it at Lotus Bazaar?" I think some years ago I actually wrote about where they find them. There is a place where you can go and get these oils, not for you to use, but for the service of your deities. So would you like to know where you can find these transcendental oils and perfumes? 

Okay, you go to a place called Gāndharva-kuṇḍa. Some Sādhus, they know it by the name Gandhīśvara. Perfume makers keep flower gardens within this kuṇḍa and make scents, you know, the scents from the seasonal blossoms. Further research revealed that while herding their cows, Kṛṣṇa and His boyfriends, they sometimes come to Gāndharva-kuṇḍa to test the available perfumes. It says that the boys are happy with any of these perfumes—you know, they’re boys, they’re happy with any of them—but Kṛṣṇa secretly is only interested in the ones that will attract Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. In fact, once while visiting this very special place, Gāndharva-kuṇḍa, which by the way is near Govardhana Hill, Kṛṣṇa once took His friend Subala aside and He asked, "Friend, I’m looking for a magic potion, the aroma of which will subdue Rādhārāṇī’s contrary nature and make her surrender to Me. Which of these will do?" Kṛṣṇa tried that perfume, He put it on His body, and then He took it with Him. And it is written that the cowherd boys, always eager to imitate Kṛṣṇa’s ways, they also dabbed themselves with that same perfume, and when they got home, it said to the amusement of their parents, "Like boys, this is girl stuff, what are you doing?" But Kṛṣṇa did it. 

In fact, I read another time that when Kṛṣṇa was there at this place, He took the best perfumes available in Gāndharva-kuṇḍa, and then, in a desperate bid to attain Rādhā’s company, He disguised Himself as a female perfume merchant. He used to show up: "Om, Kīrtī-sundarī!" She opened the door, "Yes?" "I’m a female perfume merchant, and I have the best perfumes in Vraja. I’d like to show them to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." "Please, come in!" They say Kṛṣṇa was not only able to sell Rādhārāṇī some perfumes, He was also able to personally apply them to her wrists. 

There is a nice pastime similar to this in *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, Antya-khaṇḍa 12.2 to 12.9. It describes how Caitanya Mahāprabhu was once wandering through the streets of Navadvīpa, and He too came across a perfume merchant and called out, "Oh sir, please show me your best perfume, only the best!" So that merchant, he showed Lord Caitanya the best perfumes, and the Lord asked, "Okay, what is the price?" This person was looking at Lord Caitanya; it was like, you know, Mahāprabhu was so beautiful, so struck by the beauty of Mahāprabhu, the merchant said, "Sir, is it befitting for me to take money from You?" And he continually said, "Sir, apply the oil and return home; if the fragrance is still with You after Your morning bath, and if the scent is still pleasing to You, then You can pay me whatever amount You deem fit." Beautiful form was enough for the perfume merchant to feel suitably reimbursed, but the Lord was so kind that He paid the merchant with *prema*, pure love for Kṛṣṇa. Wow! 

So, besides Viśākhā’s services of advising Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in their loving affairs, counseling Rādhārāṇī when she is feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, and taking special pleasure in dressing Rādhārāṇī, Viśākhā always brought Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to a special kuñja. Do you remember the other day we were talking about Raṅgadevī and Sudevī? We talked about their different kuñjas—it’s multicolored! It’s over there. You’ll know, you can recognize it with transcendental eyes because it’s like a rainbow. They may not understand, so you have to speak like a connoisseur: "Can you tell me where Viśākhā’s kuñja is?" "Ah, over there!" That’s how you pronounce it. This is all important. 

And then there was something stated—didn't completely understand it, but I'll just say it as it’s written—"It’s able to give Cupid bliss; it’s as famous as Madana-kuñja." I’ll just leave you with that. Now, at the center of her kuñja is a jewel-laden, 16-petaled lotus temple whose structure is difficult for even exalted demigods to comprehend, what to speak of mere human beings. But how will I recognize that? I’ve never been there. How will I recognize this? So write this down: you recognize it because it’s surrounded by four gates made of flowering vines, and guarded by bumblebees, and these bumblebees are intoxicated by the nectar that drips from those flowering vines. Ah, there it is!

It is written that four platforms shaded by a forest of campaka trees surround a main temple, and the combined fragrance of red, green, yellow, and blue campaka blossoms block out all other aromas. There are so many, like there are different colors in the spiritual world, there are aromas we’ve never even smelled, but they’re blocked out by red, green, yellow, and blue campaka blossoms. Oh, okay, that’s all I smell; I’m here, I made it! 

Now, the ācāryas say that Viśākhā-sakhī often resides in this kuñja in great ecstasy, and her follower, Mañjumukhī—who is an expert artist—ensures that the kuñja is always ready to receive Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Because Viśākhā is just in ecstasy in this kuñja, her follower Mañjumukhī is always making sure everything is ready in case Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa show up. "Look who’s here! Ah, okay!" Details necessary to attract us away from this so-called beauty of this material world. 

Because of all these different services we have explained—too many services that this particular sakhī does—because of these intimate services, Viśākhā is described as very, very—three times in Vedic culture it is really stressed—very, very, very dear to the divine couple. Very, very dear! But can you tell me what that means? How dear? How dear is Viśākhā to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? There’s no way I can tell you, but I can tell you how Rūpa Gosvāmī describes how dear she is. It’s a beautiful, very intense eagerness mixed with extreme restlessness; that should be us. Not for things of this world, but those things of the spiritual. We should have very intense eagerness to achieve them, and with the restlessness, "It’s taking too long! It’s taking too long! I’ve been chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa for 50 years, I don’t cry yet!" 

*Vraja-vilāsa-stava*—*stava* means "creeper," so it translates to "divine creeper of intense longings." In that book, in verse 23, Rūpa Gosvāmī describes how dear Viśākhā is:

"O Viśākhā, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have chosen You out of all Their intimate associates as the main object of Their favor. Please help me to attain Your beloved Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s merciful, affectionate glance."

We could speak for hours on that verse. So, Rūpa Gosvāmī says that because Viśākhā is very dear to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, therefore he is asking her help to also become dear to Them. Although we are just ourselves—we are like beginners, the first little baby steps in Kṛṣṇa consciousness—still, as aspiring devotees, we can also try to achieve her favor as well. It’s okay to pray to her. I mean, if we can pray to Rādhārāṇī for Kṛṣṇa’s favor, we can pray to Viśākhā. She is so compassionate that when she looks down into this material world, to this Earth planet, and she sees an aspiring devotee—you know, just joined the temple, but is really sincere—she turns to Kṛṣṇa and says, "Kṛṣṇa, look, this sweet young bhakta or bhaktin down there, please accept them as Your servant." Then Kṛṣṇa accepts that person because of Rādhārāṇī’s grace. Therefore, when we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, we first appeal to Rādhā: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." We pray to Rādhā so we can approach Kṛṣṇa. We can also ask Viśākhā here today, in the village of Kāmaī, "Please help us attain love for the divine couple." 

Those who teach by example: as they pray, we can also pray. Although we are far from the goal, we can pray. They set the example how to pray for mercy. When we pray to the great saints and sages in the days of yore—hundreds or thousands or millions of years ago—do those saints and sages hear us? Do they hear our prayers? I was reading, and I was like, kind of pausing; I said, "What’s the answer when I pray to Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura? Do they hear me, with time and distance separating us?" But time and distance have no effect in our transcendental life. He replied, "Yes, they hear you, and they reciprocate with your prayers depending on the quality of what you’re asking for; they reciprocate with you." 

We can pray like him because he set the example. But you know, better to pray for that than wealth, fame, and glory in this world. If you don’t know what to pray for, if you’re just like a beginner, then memorize the prayers of exalted devotees and pray like that. So here is a prayer that we find in Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s *Manaḥ-śikṣā*. Let me see; this is Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura from his translation and commentary on Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s *Manaḥ-śikṣā*. He wrote a commentary on it, and in verse 9, this is how Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is praying to his mind to appeal to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa:

"My dear mind, always remain absorbed in Lord Kṛṣṇa, the glowing moon of Vṛndāvana, for He is the most beloved of my worshipful mistress, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the Queen of Vraja. Absorb yourself, O my mind, in Śrīmatī Lalitā-devī, for she is a matchless gopī and a bosom friend of my mistress, the Queen of Vraja. Absorb yourself, my dear mind, in Śrīmatī Viśākhā-devī, for she is my instructing spiritual preceptor in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Rādhikā’s favorite pond, and in Śrī Govardhana Hill, for they all increase my loving attraction to the divine couple and Their sublime pastimes."

So we can pray to Viśākhā here today in her village, knowing that because she is very compassionate, she will answer our prayers accordingly and she will reciprocate with us. So are you still with me? This is quite deep; I don’t know if I should go on or not. I see some devotees falling asleep, so I can stop here, or I can go on a little bit longer. That’s up to you. Of course, it would be embarrassing if you said you don’t want me to go on! What we can do is everyone close your eyes; we’ll take a blind vote here. Everyone close your eyes, and those of you who want to continue, raise your hands. Everyone’s eyes are closed. It’s a little late. Raise your hands now. Sit down, sit properly like yogīs in *yogāsana*, straight back. Now, everyone take a deep breath and hold it. Okay, let it out. One more time. No, don’t let it out, one more time. They’re going to be dizzy now. 

Okay, a little bit longer, because this is just nectar; that’s how we came to Vṛndāvana. So how do we know, as aspiring devotees, that we can be recipients of her mercy? Well, we know that she comes from the spiritual world to deliver us fallen, conditioned souls. She comes in various ways. One way she comes, which is quite refreshing, is that she comes as the Yamunā River. The Yamunā River is an expansion of Viśākhā-sakhī. She comes as the Yamunā River, so you know, she’s been here for the last 5,000 years giving her mercy in the form of her sacred waters to whoever bathes there. 

In that way, go to her very respectfully. Consider the Yamunā River even more merciful than Mother Gaṅgā, if I can say that, because Mother Gaṅgā, when you bathe in her, all the sinful reactions in your heart go away, as do material desires. But when you bathe in the Yamunā, you can get *prema*, love of God. Actually, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī again, he writes something very interesting about bathing in the Yamunā. He writes that the Lord immerses Himself daily in the waters of the Yamunā with great pleasure and affection, knowing that the Yamunā is the liquid form of Śrīmatī Viśākhā-devī. I offer prayers to Yamunā-devī, the daughter of the sun-god Sūrya. Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa says that since Śrīmatī Viśākhā is the Yamunā, by glorifying one, the other is automatically glorified. Wow! 

She becomes liquid *prema* in this world. Someone can say, "But she’s a person; how can she become a river?" How does a person become a river? We can accept it because we know another gopī, Vṛndā-devī, comes to the world as a sacred Tulasī plant for the benefit of human beings. So you can go in front of her tonight and see her there on the altar, and then in the next day you can go down to the Yamunā River and put some drops on your head and get her mercy; she is so merciful. 

That’s why in Vṛndāvana, everyone knows Viśākhā; we just know a little bit. People here, they know Viśākhā—how compassionate she is. On her appearance day, there is a huge celebration throughout Vṛndāvana. The Vrajavāsīs, they like to sing Rūpa Gosvāmī’s poem called *Yamunāṣṭakam*, or eight prayers and glorification of the Yamunā, found in his *Stava-mālā*. The first verse is as follows:

"Always purify me! She saves all who touch her from going to the realm of her brother, Yamarāja, and enables even greatly wicked persons who see her to cross the ocean of their sinful deeds. Her attractive water charms the hearts of everyone." 

So you can simultaneously think of the Yamunā and Viśākhā at the same time; they are interchangeable. So that’s one form that she comes in. She comes in another form—we won’t elaborate too much on this, just to inform you—she comes in another form quite recently, actually 500 years ago, as an associate of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. This was found in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya 8.24. The purport: "There was naturally an awakening of love between Viśākhā and Kṛṣṇa in the form of Rāmānanda Rāya and Lord Caitanya. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the combination of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa, and the gopī Viśākhā is the principal group assisting. Thus, the natural love between Rāmānanda Rāya and Mahāprabhu awakened as they embraced."

And how to pray to her? Either by reading *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* and hearing the glories of Rāmānanda Rāya, how to pray to her? There is a beautiful prayer by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in *Lalāpa-kuñja-mañjulī*, text 99, where he is addressing Viśākhā:

"My Queen, Rādhā, will not leave Your company even for a moment because You are both the same age; You are the realm of her playful, joking pastimes. O girl with the beautiful face, O Viśākhā, please show me my Queen and save the life of me, who am on the verge of death because I am separated from her."

And he also wrote: "I pray that Viśākhā-devī, whose voice is sweeter than the queen of cuckoos, may teach me the art of beautiful singing. I pray that by singing during a nocturnal rāsa dance, I will please the youthful divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and I will obtain from Them and Their affectionate associates many necklaces of gold and jewels as my reward." 

And finally, a prayer by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in the mood that we’re in as fallen, conditioned souls and aspiring devotees, stumbling and sometimes making offenses. We can pray like this, as he prayed. This is our stated position; we’re not elevated, but we can still aspire for her mercy by repeating the prayer of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura:

"O benedictions, O cautiously merciful Viśākhā, within the society of the beautiful damsels of Vraja, You are the closest replica of Śrī Rādhā herself. Therefore, please, overlooking my hundreds of offenses, please be kind upon me and accept me as your maidservant."

Here we are again in her village of Kāmaī. We came here not knowing very much about her, but by hearing the words of these great ācāryas, we can leave with a deeper understanding of her. When we come in front of her in our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandira, she is there with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Lalitā, and Viśākhā; we can pray to her according to these different prayers in the same way and beg for her mercy, with a little bit deeper understanding now. 

I hope you’ve listened carefully because you may find yourself in front of the deities and some new devotee comes and says, "Well, that’s Rādhā and that’s Kṛṣṇa, but who’s that person on the left, who’s that person on the right? Can you explain to me?" And you can say, "Yes, there is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and there’s the sakhīs on the left or the right of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." You’ll say, "Lalitā is on the left, and on the right is Viśākhā." And they’ll say, "But I know Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but who’s Viśākhā?" And you can say, "Come with me, sit down for a few minutes, and I’ll explain to you who Viśākhā is." 

All the wonders! Take all the fallen, conditioned souls with us! Ki jaya! The revealer of the Dharma ki jaya! The tiger!""