"*00400*.*
"# A Most Auspicious Beginning - Kartik Parikrama 2023

I would like to welcome all of you to this historic event in our International Society for Krishna Consciousness, this very auspicious event where we are going to be welcoming a very ancient deity—maybe 400 years old—of Ugra-Nṛsiṁha and Sudarśana-cakra. Both of them are our eternal protectors. Generally, you know, when we welcome deities or install deities, we do it on a special day, but every day in Vṛndāvana is special. We are sitting in the lap of the Lord; we are sitting in the playground of God. Even today, His pastimes are taking place for those who have pure spiritual vision. There are two types of pastimes that take place here: *aprakaṭa* and *prakaṭa*. *Prakaṭa* means when the Lord descended here 5,000 years ago and even common people could see Him. But, of course, those pastimes only lasted so long, and Kṛṣṇa went back to the spiritual world of Goloka Vṛndāvana. But according to our ācāryas, Goloka is also an eternal abode of the Lord. When the Lord comes to this material world and performs His pastimes, that place becomes an eternal abode for Him, so His pastimes are still going on even here in Ramaṇa-reti.

This is where Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would play in the soft sands of Ramaṇa-reti. You look out; there's no soft sand, there's only big apartment buildings. But, practically, if one's eyes are made pure by devotional service, one could see Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and the gopīs having their pastimes here right now. They are eternal pastimes. So, therefore, I say every day in Vṛndāvana is special; it is the most special. It couldn't be made more special; it is more special than even the huge realm of Vaikuṇṭha. By definition, the spiritual world is called Vaikuṇṭha. The word *kuṇṭha* means a place of anxiety, and that's Delhi—maybe not Delhi so much—but the material world is a place of anxiety. The *vai* before the *kuṇṭha* means that it is that world where there is no anxiety; there is no birth, there is no disease, there is no old age, there is no death. But even beyond Vaikuṇṭha is Goloka. Śrīla Prabhupāda describes Goloka as "go" can mean cows, so he said Goloka means the planet of cows. That is our definition of the spiritual world; it is full of cows. Lots and lots; Nanda Mahārāja has 900,000 cows. So my point is we are sitting here in the lap of Kṛṣṇa, and this is very auspicious.

Any day is auspicious, but today the Lord is making His appearance before you in a very ferocious form. This is Kṛṣṇa when He gets angry. He has different moods, and those different moods are exhibited in His different incarnations for specific purposes. Vallabhācārya, from the Puṣṭi-mārga, he composed a beautiful poem or a song about the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa. Everything about Kṛṣṇa is sweet; the sweetest of sweets is Kṛṣṇa. But He can also become very angry when His devotees are persecuted. Kṛṣṇa becomes very angry, and He appears as half-man, half-lion. Like we have heard, Kṛṣṇa can be strong like a thunderbolt—boom—or He can be soft as a rose. Here in Ramaṇa-reti, Kṛṣṇa is sweet as a rose. These are also very ancient deities, 200 years old, beautiful ancient śālagrāma-śilā, so sweet as a rose but strong as a thunderbolt. Especially, this is His most ferocious form. Actually, ācāryas say this form should only be worshiped by sannyāsīs because Ugra-Nṛsiṁha takes everything away.

And Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha—He is half-angry, half-pacified—so householders are allowed to worship Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha, because Nṛsiṁhadeva will protect, and Lakṣmī, of course, she is the source of all opulences, and householders need money; just to educate one child costs hundreds of thousands of dollars during their lifetime. And then there is Yoga-Nṛsiṁha; He is sitting with that band around His legs, or Śānta-Nṛsiṁha; He is there with Prahlāda. Everyone can worship that form of the Lord. So I am very happy that Nṛsiṁhadeva came to me, or you know, we are a family, so He came to us. Of course, He made His first appearance in Satya-yuga; we know that He appeared to protect Prahlāda Mahārāja from Hiraṇyakaśipu. But it is not that that history is over, that was the pastime that happens, it's finished—no, Nṛsiṁhadeva is appearing again and again and again to devotees as time goes on. He is a special incarnation. Like Matsya, Kūrma, Varāha—they came, they performed Their līlās, They went back. You discuss the ten avatāras; you know they came and they left. There is that famous saying from England, I think it was one famous king: "I came, I saw, I conquered." It's part of English history; I don't know if he was an English king or a foreign king, but I came, I saw, I conquered. But Kṛṣṇa gets that epitaph, not some other mundane king. So, the Lord comes and He goes. Fortunately, He comes again and again and again and again because we need Him, but in different appearances, different moods, different missions: to protect the devotees, annihilate the miscreants, and reestablish dharma. But you won't see Matsya again till time comes and many kalpas; He will perhaps come again. But Nṛsiṁhadeva, He keeps coming. Even recently He came—recently in cosmic time. Cosmic time means like long time, but recently means 500 years ago, Nṛsiṁhadeva came. Where is Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva? 500 years ago, did He appear in New York or Sydney or Moscow? No. 500 years ago, He appeared to the Chand Kazi in a dream. The Chand Kazi, isn't it? The Chand Kazi was trying to stop the saṅkīrtana movement, so Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared to him in a dream. It was more than a dream, more than a svapna—a dream; it was a vision. He woke up; he saw this half-man, half-lion straddled across his abdomen, scratching his chest, saying, "If you ever, if you try to stop this saṅkīrtana movement of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, I'll tear your heart out like I did to Hiraṇyakaśipu. Leave the saṅkīrtana devotees alone." That wasn't a dream, that was a vision. Therefore, this rascal Chand Kazi, he gave up his enmity; he gave up his anger towards the saṅkīrtana movement, and he wrote a paper—it is still existing in Navadvīpa—"The saṅkīrtana movement may go on forever here in Navadvīpa, my decree." So, that is my point: He is very special. We have special incarnations like Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu; He brought the idea of vraja-bhakti to this world and gave that opportunity to achieve amala-bhakti, pure devotion to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, through the saṅkīrtana movement to even people like Jagāi and Mādhāi. Jagāi and Mādhāi, you and me—at least me, not you, you are all pāpas—and Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared 50 years ago as well. What, Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared 50 years ago? Now, some of you may know that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared to the Chand Kazi—Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared to the Chand Kazi, that is there in śāstra—but where did Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appear 50 years ago? We don't read that in śāstra. We can read it in śāstra, and Prabhupāda—how is that? I don't remember. No, you know, if you read Girirāja Mahārāja's book, *Build Me a Temple*, you will hear the history of the Juhu Beach project in Mumbai. It's a long story; I won't tell it here. I'll just give the end result. There was one Mr. Nair who sold the land to the devotees, but he was trying to trick them and you know, keep the money and keep the land. In so many ways, he tried to stop Prabhupāda from building the temple there. He even sent goondas, he even sent dacoits—bad people—to break the temple and hurt the devotees. And he almost won. He was a very powerful personality amongst the elite in Bombay at that time. So, Prabhupāda had a big fight; it was a big fight, actually. So, it was getting really touch-and-go, maybe we were going to lose the property. So, at that time, Prabhupāda was in Los Angeles, and one evening he got a phone call from India, from Mumbai. Those days they didn't have cell phones, so his servant, the phone was ringing on Prabhupāda's desk, and Prabhupāda generally didn't use the phone like more personal dealings, so Prabhupāda didn't pick up the phone, but his secretary, Nanda-kumāra, picked up the phone and he said, "The phone call is for you." So Prabhupāda took the phone, and there was a conversation going on. Prabhupāda didn't speak very much, but no one could hear. Then finally, Prabhupāda put the phone down, [with a] smile on his face. [They asked], "What? What was the news?" And Prabhupāda said, "Mr. Nair is dead. He died of a heart attack." So devotees said, "How is that possible?" So Prabhupāda, we say in English, under his breath, very softly, he said, "Because I prayed to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to take care of him." So, because of Śrīla Prabhupāda's status as the founder-ācārya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which is historically meant to conquer the whole world during the Kali-yuga, Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared in Prabhupāda's pastimes just as He appeared in Lord Caitanya's pastimes. We should understand this and dwell on this and think how historically that is so important. 

So, Nṛsiṁhadeva continues to appear in Prabhupāda's legacy, Prabhupāda's pastime, Prabhupāda's movement. The International Society for Krishna Consciousness—Prabhupāda said one time, "ISKCON is not different than my body." So that's how dear ISKCON is to all of us because, well, we are Prabhupāda-nugas; that's our real identity. We're followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda in order to get the mercy of the Lord, to get the mercy of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So, how is Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva still present in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness? Has anyone had a vision like the Chand Kazi? Has anyone removed an obstacle by praying to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva and hearing how that person was removed, like Mr. Nair? Thank you, Mahārāja. Girirāja Mahārāja has just arrived back in Vṛndāvana, and although Vṛndāvana is always complete in every way, it is more complete with Girirāja Mahārāja present amongst us. So, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared in Satya-yuga, He appeared to the Chand Kazi 500 years ago, Prabhupāda called upon Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to protect the Juhu Beach project and took care of Mr. Nair, but Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva's pastimes are unlimited. Just like any of the incarnations of the Lord, Their pastimes are unlimited. By Prabhupāda's mercy, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is still protecting this movement. We know that because in 1971, Śrīla Prabhupāda was ill, and although it was just the beginning of the movement, he felt that he had to go back to India to get better—the warm sunshine of Vṛndāvana—and he had one Ayurvedic doctor who he had confidence in. So, Prabhupāda left. It wasn't certain if he would come back because he was very ill, and this was just after... actually, it was around the same time that Prabhupāda had introduced the Nṛsiṁha prayers as a standard prayer within our movement. Some hoodlums had come by and they had thrown a bomb into the Los Angeles Temple that had actually exploded; it destroyed the deity room at the temple. So, that morning, actually, Prabhupāda came down and, in the place of the Bhāgavatam class, he introduced word-for-word the Nṛsiṁha prayers that we chant after every āratī in our movement. That's actually a famous recording that I listen to regular, if not almost every day. But what I particularly wanted to share with you is that at the end of that visit, Prabhupāda was leaving, devotees were greatly distraught and wondering how things would go on, and Prabhupāda said something very important: "In my absence, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva will protect you." 

So, by Prabhupāda's mercy, we have that protection, and we require that protection because there are various enemies or obstacles in the path of pure devotion. There are the enemies within, like lust, anger, and greed; they are very formidable enemies. The Padma Purāṇa describes that in this world there are two classes of men: the divine and the demoniac. And whereas the divine are always concerned about the spiritual welfare of others, the demoniac take great pleasure in persecuting others, especially devotees of the Lord, because generally these asuras are atheists. So both are formidable enemies, inside and outside. And the Nṛsiṁha prayers that Prabhupāda revealed to us actually describe that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, He's within and He's without. If we call upon Him, He can protect us from lust, anger, and greed, and we can practice Krishna consciousness smoothly with focus. And as we've seen on many occasions, He can protect devotees and protect the movement as we try to preach in this material world. So we pray to Him every day; actually, He is one of our main worshipable deities. And Prabhupāda also allowed us to worship Nṛsiṁha not only in the sound incarnation, *śabda-brahma*, through chanting the prayers by which He appears, but he also allowed us to worship the deity, the arcā-mūrti, of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. My godbrother, Guru Kṛpa—at that time he was a Mahārāja, sannyāsī—he had acquired a deity, a small deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha, and he came to Prabhupāda one day and asked if he could worship Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. Previously, we had paintings, so initially, Prabhupāda was a little hesitant. He said, "Well, He's very angry." He's angry for the right purpose, but even if a person is angry for the right purpose, you're a little hesitant to associate with that person. And Prabhupāda explained that, you know, He's very angry, so if you make offense in the deity worship—because we have to be very careful when we worship the Lord in the form of the arcā-vigraha, there's a whole chapter in Nectar of Devotion, offenses to be avoided in deity worship, to be very careful—Prabhupāda said the reaction could be very severe. So then, Prabhupāda said, "Okay, because we all need protection," obviously, he said, "You can worship this beautiful form of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha, but only along with Gaura-Nitāi, because They don't accept offenses; They only accept service, and He is very merciful. So if you make a mistake, it may be forgiven by Caitanya Mahāprabhu." So those of you who have Nṛsiṁhadeva deities, you can... this was an instruction which Prabhupāda gave, and when Prabhupāda gave an instruction to a disciple, generally that was meant for all disciples. The Lord that we are welcoming today is a particularly ferocious form of Nṛsiṁha; He was actually killing Hiraṇyakaśipu on His leg. Therefore, we have brought out our deity of Gaura-Nitāi; this is also a very old deity, 350 years old, deity of Lord Caitanya from Bengal. Now, you might be surprised to see that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is standing on one leg and His other leg is curled like that, and on that other leg He has Hiraṇyakaśipu, of which His claws are in his abdomen, and at this point the deity actually has the intestines of Hiraṇyakaśipu around His neck. In Śilpa-śāstra, which is the śāstra which deals with many things but in particular about the different forms of the Lord, this is considered the original form of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva as He appeared when He killed Hiraṇyakaśipu. Of course, we have our BBT painting of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva sitting on the throne of Hiraṇyakaśipu, which was originally the throne of Indra-deva, but He is sitting there killing him. That is also bonafide, because Nṛsiṁhadeva comes millennium after millennium after millennium, and sometimes the pastimes are a little different. For example, I was reading the Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa the other day, and it describes that sometimes Nṛsiṁhadeva comes, He appears from a flower pot, not a pillar. But this is the Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa; He appears from a flower pot. Another version is, I was reading, sometimes He walks into town, other times He appears as a cat. But He comes to kill Hiraṇyakaśipu and Satya, but the Lord comes again and again. Sometimes there's a little variation in the details of the pastime—variety is the spice of life—but we can support with śāstra. This is the most authoritative understanding: because of the boon, the so-called boon that Hiraṇyakaśipu got from Lord Brahmā trying to become immortal, he asked Lord Brahmā for a boon, "Let me not be killed in the day or the night, by a demigod, a man, an animal, from the lower planets..." so many boons he was trying to make himself immortal. And one of the boons he was asking for is, "Let me not be killed inside or outside," meaning, you know, not outside my dwelling or inside my dwelling. He thought it had all... he had it all covered. But the Bhāgavatam is very clear: he was killed at the threshold of the palace. Threshold means the entrance; you are neither inside the palace or outside the palace, you are in the threshold of the palace, you are in the door coming in. So this is where it's described in the Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa; that is why He is... He is not sitting, He is standing at the threshold of the palace. It was a big fight, so then the fight goes on, He would kill him, so He stood on one leg at the threshold, curved His leg, put him on... Hiraṇyakaśipu. This is authorized. 

So we pray to Him for protection, within and without. But someone asked an interesting question the other day; they said to me, "Mahārāja, you know, the gopīs, they didn't ask Kṛṣṇa for... they didn't ask anything from Kṛṣṇa, they just wanted devotional service. Never hear of them asking for protection. So that's amala-bhakti, that is pure... how is it that we can ask for something like, 'Protect my material body'? Is that pure devotional service? The gopīs never asked anything from Kṛṣṇa; just give me some service, just let me be with You. There's some danger coming; we pray, 'Please protect my body, protect my family, protect my...' Is that pure devotional service?" And just the other day I was reading in the pastimes of Gajendra the elephant, when he was being attacked by the crocodile, Prabhupāda brought this up in a purport. He said, "Yes, it is pure devotional service if you use your... if you want to continue to use your body in the service of Guru and Gaura, because you need a body to serve Them. If you're sick, if you're injured, if you're dead, you can't continue your service. So for the purpose of service, if you ask for protection, Prabhupāda said that's devotional service." But what's the greatest danger in this world? If you go online, if you read, listen to the radio, if you read the newspaper, there's so many dangers. We could spend our whole time just asking for protection, but best is to focus on the most dangerous situation. What's the greatest danger that we can ask for protection from Nṛsiṁhadeva? It's described in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, and I'll quote the verse: "If even for a moment remembrance of Vāsudeva is missed, that is the greatest loss, that is the greatest illusion, and that is the greatest anomaly." That's the greatest illusion, the greatest danger: to forget Kṛṣṇa. For example, if a devotee forgets Kṛṣṇa and he becomes, reverts back to his or her old bad habits, that means again birth, death in this material world. What is the chance when we have the good fortune to come again to some wonderful movement like the International Society for Krishna Consciousness? So to forget Kṛṣṇa is the greatest danger. 

But we will conclude with an even deeper meaning why we worship Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, and I think it's the most important, and many devotees don't focus on this reason why we worship Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in any of His forms—as Ugra, Lakṣmī, Yoga—why are we actually worshiping Nṛsiṁhadeva? And that is revealed by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the great pioneer of our Krishna conscious movement, and I'll paraphrase his words. He says that he is wallowing or he is rolling on the threshold of Nṛsiṁhadeva's palace temple, and he is praying to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to please remove all obstacles on the path of devotional service so that he can worship Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with pure devotion. Because that's the goal of every Gauḍīya. We certainly respect all the different forms that Kṛṣṇa chooses to appear in for various reasons in this world, but we are Gauḍīyas; when actually we are Gauḍīyas, we are worshippers of Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda, who are the most recent incarnations. And Prabhupāda said, "When many instructions are given, the last instructions are the most relevant." So the Lord comes with the most important instructions age after age after age to revive our Krishna consciousness according to time, place, and circumstance, but His most recent incarnation comes as Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is the most merciful of all incarnations because He revealed the highest truth, the love of the residents of Vṛndāvana, to the most fallen people of Kali-yuga. So it's a very miraculous instruction, and we are... we are the results of that miracle, those of us sitting here today. It's only by Lord Caitanya's grace and by Prabhupāda's special mercy that we are here and we can worship such a beautiful, ferocious form for protection, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. So this is why, ultimately, we worship Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva: so that He, because we need as much help as we can, remove those obstacles from the heart, protect us in the mission of serving Śrīla Prabhupāda's movement all over the world, so that we can develop love for the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And that's why we have come to Vṛndāvana, to learn to love Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

So, this talk is kind of a chronological lecture about the history of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva from Satya-yuga down to the present day. So, thank you very much everyone for coming and blessing this ceremony. It kind of happened spontaneously, but that's the mood of this particular place, Vṛndāvana. So thank you.""