"*00504*.*
"My mind longs for the blessed vision of my spiritual master. It cries out like a thirsty chakora bird. My thirst is not quenched, and I can find no peace without the vision of that blessed person. Oh Lord and master, your face is most beautiful and the sound of your words impart deep wisdom. It has been so long since this rain bird has had even a glimpse of water. Blessed is that land where you dwell, my dearest friend and spiritual master. I give myself to you now and forever, oh deliverer of my soul. When I could not be with you for just one moment, the dark age of Kali dawned upon me. Can you keep the children quiet, please?

When will I meet you again, oh beloved Lord and master? I cannot endure the night and sleep does not come to me without your audience. I will surrender everything to have your darśana once again. It was my extreme good fortune to meet you, oh most saintly of all persons, and I will find you again in the eternal home where I am meant to dwell. There I will serve you forever, and I shall never be separated from you even for an instant. I am forever your eternal servant, oh my beloved Lord and master. Dear Kṛṣṇa, in public places I glorify your mercy, which is granted to even the lowest creatures, and which enables me, even though I am lowborn, to live in this forest of Braja, a place where your great devotees who are filled with pure love aspire to take birth even as a blade of grass. Having accepted the renounced order of life, my home is this Vṛndāvana forest. My bed is the soft dust of Vṛndāvana. The sky of Vṛndāvana is my blanket, and the flowering creepers of Vṛndāvana are my only belongings. The moon over Vṛndāvana is the lamp of my hopes, and my chanting beads are counting the days till I meet the divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda kī, Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma kī.

I ask that the children be kept quiet, and if they make noise, they can go out and play. Hare Kṛṣṇa. So, an unexpected day, an unexpected occasion, the departure of a great devotee. Let us begin by saying a great disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and therefore a great devotee. Amongst my godbrothers and godsisters, I see Prabhupāda accepts all their services with great love and appreciation, but sometimes there stands out some devotees, both men and women, who I would like to give that epitaph, that most glorious title, distinction of being a "Prabhupāda man." When I think of what my godbrothers like Śrī Rūpa Prabhu, who have excelled above and beyond the call of duty—as we used to say in the military, "above and beyond the call of duty"—I think there is a Prabhupāda man. And you couldn't give a better definition of such a devotee. So, today in our own way, we're observing his tirobhāva. Tirobhāva in Sanskrit means the disappearance day, the disappearance day of a devotee, tirobhāva.

Śrīmān Cāru Prabhu was known for his exemplary character, perfect gentleman, always dressed as a pakkā Vaiṣṇava. His etiquette was perfect. His compassion was perfect, and he was an innovative preacher. If you study the history of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement beginning in this era with the appearance of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you see that with each generation down to the present day—we're counting about 550 years here—exemplary devotees knew how to innovate, meaning how to present Kṛṣṇa consciousness according to time, place, and circumstance without sacrificing the tradition. This is not easy. It takes an experienced devotee. Times change, people change, situation, history changes. So, you have to innovate a little bit to make the message clear to the people of that present time. Prabhupāda is the perfect example. His deep wisdom of the Vedas, the special message brought by Caitanya Mahāprabhu and revealed to us by the six Gosvāmīs, it's quite deep. But Prabhupāda was so expert at presenting that timeless wisdom to the people of Kali-yuga, to the people of the West in the English-speaking language. We have to remember it's an extremely difficult task, but Prabhupāda did it with such ease. He presented, he innovated. Vedic times, ladies didn't live in the temple. Ladies didn't get Gāyatrī mantra. People didn't go out in the street and distribute books. So many things Prabhupāda innovated without sacrificing the tradition. So, like father, like son. I see that some of my godbrothers and some of my godsisters are able to innovate Kṛṣṇa consciousness in modern times without changing the original tradition. It's a little mystical. And Śrī Rūpa Prabhu was the perfect example of that. He was the first one to start a Hare Kṛṣṇa radio station. Who would have ever thought that the devotees could have their own radio station in LA or in Utah where he eventually settled? Very popular. I mean, radio station means, you know, so many songs, so many interviews, so many seminars. One time I mentioned this the other day, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī wanted to start a daily newspaper in Calcutta. A daily newspaper only about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, one of the local newspapers sent a reporter, a young reporter actually, it was his first day on the job, and he came and said to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, "You're going to start a newspaper every day about Kṛṣṇa consciousness events?" He said, "You're going to run out of information." And Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī said very cleverly, "Well, Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that this material world is only part of his creation." He used the analogy, one quarter of the creation. "But Vaikuṇṭha, Goloka, far beyond, they're three quarters of Kṛṣṇa's creation. So, you're going to run out of information, or you're going to chew the chewed?" We go on with fresh knowledge of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, that was in the 1930s or so. So, Cāru Prabhu did the same thing. He imbibed the same spirit. He innovated. Instead of a newspaper, he started a radio station, and it became very popular. And he set the example, and soon there were radio stations all over the world, Hare Kṛṣṇa radio stations. I remember the one in Italy. It was listened to by a good number of the population. So, he innovated. And he went to one of the most challenging parts of America, Utah, where our Mormon brothers and sisters—you could say, our Mormon brothers and sisters, Mormon church—they're well-established there. And he built a temple along with his good wife, my Vībhavī. A beautiful, big, huge temple, like right out of India, same architecture. And he figured, you know, how will we get people here? So, he went and he met the mayor and the vice mayor and then he met the head of the Mormon church and this and that and then he thought, "I'll get people here because I'll have llamas." You know what a llama is? It's kind of a cross between a goat and a horse or something.

So, he had a herd of llamas. And llamas are pretty, you know, mellow creatures. So, people would come to see the llamas. You don't see llamas in Utah. They're from Peru. So, people would come to see the Peruvian animals and they would pet them and they'd get hungry and they'd go to the restaurant and have prasādam. And then Cāru Prabhu in the temple room, he would give lectures. For me, he's one of the top five preachers in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You should go and lie down and listen to his lectures. He just had this ability to hypnotize people by his speaking. He was such a good, so captivating, so energetic, so intelligent. He would say things I couldn't—so Kṛṣṇa conscious—but I could never come up with that analogy. People loved it when he talked. He was talking and talking and talking all the time. He didn't have a big group of devotees with him. Not many devotees wanted to go to the desert in Utah, Provo, Utah to live. So, he had a small group. So, he and his wife practically did everything. She designed the temple, he ran the temple, few devotees joined. I went there a few times. And I had the good experience one time, you know, every year we have this Sādhu-saṅga retreat in North America. We get all the best kīrtanīyas in the world and we rent some facility somewhere in America, Orlando, New York, Dallas, Atlanta. We get about three or 4,000 devotees every year. It's over Memorial Day weekend. Many people come. It's kind of like the TPs come, the GBCs come. It's like a huge family affair. Huge family affair, Kṛṣṇa conscious family, ISKCON family. So, one year we were having difficulty finding a place, then I kind of mentioned it to somebody. I said, "Why don't you go to Provo, you know, Utah, Salt Lake City and have the program at Cāru and Vībhavī's community?" And we did it. It was fantastic. Of course, a big storm came and knocked the tent down. But then we found a high school gymnasium and then we had the program there. And it was so nice associating with Cāru. He was unique in that he was able to interest and speak to the higher echelon of society. Not many devotees can actually do that, but he did it very nicely. And he did it all with his dear wife, Vībhavī, whom we offer our deepest and heartfelt condolences today. They were really like one body.

Very often the Vedas describe husband and wife are like one body. But then there's the quip that the lady is the better half of the body. That's a whole lecture. We'll get into that now. But certainly, it was true. Vībhavī Mātājī, my heart goes out to you. I cannot even imagine the suffering, separation you're going through now from your lifelong partner. It's just inconceivable. It's inconceivable. We all here today, we make an offering at your lotus feet. Our condolences are there and if there's anything we can do from far away, please request us. If I might say so early in this period of mourning and grieving—because grieving is there. We also grieve. As transcendentalists, we grieve when we lose an important member of our society. We may not know him. He may be serving some distance, but we're all intimately connected by working together in the saṅkīrtana movement. Saṅkīrtana means "sam" means complete. Saṅkīrtana is the complete glorification of the Lord through basically spreading the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. So, all Vaiṣṇavas, directly or indirectly, everyone's significant, everyone's important. We're all involved in the same work. And when part of the puzzle leaves, we feel the loss. We feel the loss. So, we're mourning. Śrīla Prabhupāda, in his one of his offerings to his spiritual master, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, it's a long offering and in the offering there's one or two lines he said, "Upon the departure of my spiritual master, I made a cry of grief." I just remember that. "With the departure of my spiritual master," he said, "I made a cry of grief." So, mourning is there. Grieving is there. We have to give people time to grieve the loss of loved ones, especially loved ones who are connected to us as family or community or even an international society for Kṛṣṇa. The whole society is grieving now. This is a time of grieving. But at the same time, this is a day of mixed feelings, actually. We prepare for this moment. It doesn't come unexpectedly. Of course, it's never expected when death comes, you know, you don't know it's coming. But in one sense, we are prepared. Our whole life is preparing for that most significant moment. *Yam yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvam*—Kṛṣṇa says, "Whatever one remembers at the moment of death, that state he will attain." So, we're practicing to let go of this material world and become attached to the spiritual world, to Kṛṣṇa, his devotees, their pastimes, that beautiful world. So, that's a very significant moment.

So, we're grieving, but at the same time, we're also a little happy because he worked so hard to achieve that moment. And no doubt at that moment, Śrīla Prabhupāda arranged that Cāru would be in the lap of Kṛṣṇa. And we should think of him more for his service than that. Death is always an indignant moment. It's nothing pretty. It's never pretty. So, therefore the samurai warriors, the samurais, those great Japanese warriors, they say, "Don't tell me how he left this world. Tell me how he lived in this world." "Don't tell me how he died. Tell me how he lived." We don't think of that departure. We think of how that devotee spent every second of his devotional career: *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇu-smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam, arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam*. So, it's sad, but it's also happy because everyone has to die. And his whole life, most of his life was dedicated enthusiastically, very determined, working very hard under the guidance of his spiritual master, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta, to preach. So, who can imagine his glorious destination? So, that's happy.

It's sad for all of us sitting here. You only got his association at one holy festival. It's sad for the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness because he was our respected leader. And it's sad for the world. They may know or they may not know because such a wonderful, wonderful devotee has left us. When Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu was asking Rāmānanda Rāya—it's a very famous part of the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, very significant—when Mahāprabhu asked Rāmānanda Rāya, "duḥkha-madhye kona duḥkha haya," he said to Rāmānanda, "Of all kinds of distress, what's the most painful?" And Rāmānanda Rāya replied, "kṛṣṇa-bhakta-viraha vinā duḥkha nāhi dekhi," a famous quote. "Apart from separation from the devotee of Kṛṣṇa, I can think of no other unbearable unhappiness." Apart from the separation of a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, I can think of no other unbearable unhappiness. And whereas for the devotee, the greatest joy is to be with a devotee, another devotee, because Kṛṣṇa says, "One who says he's my devotee is not my devotee, but one who says he's a devotee of my devotee is my devotee." So, we desperately depend upon devotees to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. And when such a leader of that goes away, it's very painful.

So, it's a sad day. And unfortunately, in these most recent weeks, these most recent months that you've kind of been through, we're seeing so many great devotees are leaving us. It's that point in history. It's the decade of crying. My godbrother Bhūrijana Prabhu, knowing that different godbrothers and godsisters are passing at this moment in history, he said, "This is the decade of tears and crying in the International Society." I like to think of these devotees like bright lights in the dark age of Kali. And as such, when they leave, the world becomes just a little darker for me. They're like bright lights. Each and every one of them, all my godbrothers, my godsisters, the second generation, the third generation, many of you are the fourth generation. By your very life as Vaiṣṇavas, you're setting a wonderful example, and you're sharing that example with the whole world. That's the real light. And when a light goes out, the room becomes a little dark, just like we have these lights here. One, two, three go out, a little darker. So, with the departure of these disciples of Śrīla Prabhupāda or their followers or their disciples, Kali-yuga becomes a little bit darker. It's kind of sad. But there's also joy in a devotee's departure. Just like in the case of the famous case of my godbrother Jayānanda Prabhu, they return back home, back to Godhead. Just as Lord Caitanya is the most merciful incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, I would say Śrīla Prabhupāda is even more merciful than Lord Caitanya. One time he was giving a lecture in Atlanta, and he was describing how strict one has to be in following the principles, getting free of material desire, chanting "Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa..." to go back to Godhead. And all the young devotees in the audience—we were all young in those days—like, "Oh my God, am I going to make it? It's such a high standard." So, then Prabhupāda, he finished, and he got up, and he threw his chādar, he said, "All right, you don't have to be 100% freed from material contamination, but at least 80%." Everybody went, "Woah, that's a high standard." So, then he said, "All right, 75%." Woah, then Prabhupāda said, "71%, nothing less." Prabhupāda is very merciful. In fact, when Jayānanda Prabhu left this world, he was alone in his room at the Los Angeles temple. He had leukemia, everyone knew the moment was coming. But you never know when, so for Maṅgala-ārati, everyone in his room went to Maṅgala-ārati, and they left a tape playing of Śrīla Prabhupāda chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Just continuous. Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Rāma, Hare Kṛṣṇa, those famous names. And he left during that. So, Prabhupāda heard that. Devotees told him that. So, he wrote a posthumous letter to Jayānanda. Oh, posthumous means after the person's departed, you write a letter or you send a message or whatever. So, Prabhupāda wrote a letter to Jayānanda. He wanted it published in the Back to Godhead magazine. "My dear Jayānanda, please accept my blessings. I want to thank you for all the wonderful service you did for me during your lifetime. You're the first person to give me $25,000 to print Nectar of Devotion. What's more, you inaugurated the Ratha-yātrā festival in the Western world. I'm so indebted to you." Then he wrote, "If you had any amount of material desires, you've gone to Svargaloka. And there you can fulfill those desires while continuing the practice of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and elevate yourself to Vaikuṇṭha." But then he said he wrote, "But because you were hearing the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra when you died, I say you've gone to Kṛṣṇa-loka."

[Applause]

I say you've gone to Kṛṣṇa-loka. How merciful is Śrīla Prabhupāda? So, I would take an educated guess, 'cause I knew Śrīla Prabhu very well. I'm confident that Cāru Prabhu falls into the same category. Because he just gave his life, he gave his youth, he gave his middle age, and he gave his old age in service to his spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, I'm sure—I mean, I'm not a mystic, but we've all experienced the greatness of Śrīla Prabhupāda's mercy. So, a devotee leaves, he's not before our vision anymore. So, therefore, there's another term for this day besides tirobhāva. Tirobhāva means the disappearance day. There's another name for this day, *antardhyāna-līlā*. Antardhyāna-līlā means the disguise of becoming invisible. In other words, the body of a great devotee becomes invisible, but it's just a disguise because in essence, they're always with us. They're always with us in their teachings and the examples they set. Just like Prabhupāda wrote to me one time, he'd visited our temple—I shared this, I think, the other day. He visited our temple in Detroit. I was not yet initiated, Prabhupāda was leaving, I wrote him a letter. I'm sorry, I'm sad that I didn't get initiated, but I'll keep on trying. And Prabhupāda wrote me back and mailed it back with his own hands: "My dear Bhakta Brian, please accept my blessings. Thank you so much for your letter including your life savings of $10 for my book fund. I have information from the temple authorities you're doing very nicely in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Continue following the four regulative principles, chant your 16 rounds a day, and surely in due course of time, I will accept you as my duly initiated disciple." For me, that was already the connection there. "Your ever well-wisher, Śrīla A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda." Then postscript, P.S., because in my letter I wrote to him, "I'm missing you so much." He said, "I can understand." He wrote to me, "I can understand your feelings of separation because I'm also missing my Guru Mahārāja, but I always feel that he's watching over and protecting me." I always feel that he's watching over and protecting me. So, in so many ways, we can understand that, but of course, the spiritual master, the senior devotees, dear friends and godbrothers, they're with us always because of their instructions and because of the example they set. So, we have a lot to learn from Cāru Prabhu.

But let us remember that a devotee is always in an upward journey. Yes, it's a time of grieving, but he achieved something very great. He was serving Kṛṣṇa, and he died at that moment he was serving Kṛṣṇa. And devotees are always in an upward journey. By dint of their devotional service, they're going up. And by dint of materialistic life and sinful life, you're going down, down, down. You take the low road, I'll take the high road. You'll go to hell, and I'll go to heaven. It's a Christian thing. We're gradually—everyone has their own awakening, their own growth in spiritual life. Confucius said, "The longest journey begins with the first step." So, be satisfied if you're chanting, you're offering your food, you're reading, you know, you may not be out there on the streets or traveling, giving lectures, worshiping the deity, but if every day you're doing something, it adds to your spiritual bank account. We're going upward. No matter what happens, we're going upward. Even death means upward. *Om tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ, divīva cakṣur ātatam.* Just as the sun rays in the sky are extended to the mundane vision, so in the same way, the wise and learned devotees always see the supreme abode of Lord Viṣṇu. Such a devotee was Cāru Prabhu. Another word for this tirobhāva is *Lāl-gāṭā*. Lāl-gāṭā literally means the "red day." This is Braj Bhāṣā language. We have our Hindi, but we have our Braj Bhāṣā. That's our language. What language do you speak? Braj Bhāṣā. Can you speak it? No, but I want to. So, this day is called Lāl-gāṭā in Vṛndāvana. It means the red day. I asked one Gosvāmī, Padmanābha Gosvāmī, "What does this mean, Lāl-gāṭā?" The red day. He said, "In Vṛndāvana culture, red represents the meeting of one's beloved. The meeting of one's beloved. So, when a great devotee departs, it's understood they're joining their beloved Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in their eternal pastimes. Therefore, love that day." Another interesting name for this day, tirobhāva, used again in the Vṛndāvana culture, our culture, when a devotee leaves this world is *Kuñja-vāsa*. "What is the day? Oh, it's his Kuñja-vāsa. His tirobhāva, Lāl-gāṭā. This is his Kuñja-vāsa." What? Why? He just died. Why you saying Kuñja-vāsa? Because Kuñja-vāsa refers to eternal residence in the groves of Vṛndāvana. In other words, it refers to that day that devotee attains eternal residence in the Kuñjas of Vṛndāvana. Who knows? We asked Śrīla Prabhupāda one time, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, who are you?" He said, if I told you, I—we said, "Who are you in the spiritual world?" He said, "If I told you, you'd faint."

So, these things never—to think the glories of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, the glories of devotional service, the glories of being a follower of the founder-ācārya Śrīla A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, to think these things are exaggeration, it's an offense. Yet another name which refers to the disappearance of the devotee is *Ānanda-viśrānti-tithi*. Ānanda-viśrānti-tithi means the day of resting in bliss. You've been working so hard, take a break. The day of resting in bliss. And the last name I found in my studies was used in the olden days of Vṛndāvana, like around the time of the six Gosvāmīs. At that time, the kings of Jaipur, or Jai Singh the second, actually, he built the city of Jaipur to give Govindajī protection. So, when one of those Rājarṣis, who, you know, were servants of Govindajī, when they passed away, it was called *Vijayā-tithi*, meaning the day of victory. And it was used when Rājput kings, who devoted their whole lives to devotion, left this world. Now, a very interesting fact is that tirobhāva, the celebration—of course, you know, Cāru passed away a couple of days ago, but in principle, we're observing that festival, tirobhāva. The disappearance day of a devotee is often celebrated with more joy in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition in Vṛndāvana and Bengal than the appearance day of that devotee. Why is that? I've seen it, actually. I've seen it in Māyāpur in the Gauḍīya Maṭha, maybe not so much in our ISKCON institution yet. But technically, in our tradition, the disappearance day of a great or wonderful devotee, it's a big, big celebration, more than the Vyāsa-pūjā. Like, what? So, I could see it. They're celebrating. Is this the Vyāsa-pūjā? No, this is the disappearance. So, I should all be crying. So, I found out that's because when a devotee is born, his glories are yet unknown. But by the time he leaves this world, his character and his deeds are enshrined in history and can be celebrated in a great and wonderful way. The analogy given to me was like the lotus flower, whose beauty is hidden at night. You go to the pond at night because lotus flowers, they open up with the dawn and the light of the sun. By 12:00 noon, they're fully open. But in the darkness, they're closed. But at noon time, they're fully open. So, when a devotee is born, we're in ignorance. We don't know who he is. We don't know what he can do. To be the servant of a glorious master is the greatest achievement that we can have. And by his mercy, we may accomplish some things. And together, we're going to accomplish wonderful things in spreading this Kṛṣṇa conscious movement. So, therefore, just like Śrīla Prabhupāda, when he was born, no one really knew for the few days who this Abhay was. And then they called an astrologer. And the astrologer said, "Hmm, this devotee, this little boy, one day he'll be the richest man in India." And then he said, "But he'll give that up and he'll travel the world and open 108 temples for Kṛṣṇa." You got a little peek about who Śrīla Prabhupāda was. So, there was a celebration. But the tirobhāva, when the devotee leaves, by that time, there's a record. And whose record is greater than Śrīla Prabhupāda? For us, he's the greatest devotee ever known. And his followers, like father, like son. Generation after generation, not just my first generation, our second generation, much of the responsibilities now falling into the hands of the second or third generation. Because the current of mercy is as powerful as it was 500 years ago or during the time of Śrīla Prabhupāda. Everyone has that facility of being blessed by Śrīla Prabhupāda through the Guru-paramparā. So, there's a devotee who took full advantage of that. The son of the father. So, today and the days that follow, you'll see many devotees recounting the victories of Śrīla Prabhupāda. It's all over Daṇḍavats, it's all over the internet. All the wonderful things he did. And this churning the glories of the departed devotee gives us great solace. *Hari-guru-vaiṣṇava*. That formula, each of those personalities—Hari means Kṛṣṇa, Guru means spiritual master, and Vaiṣṇava—each of those personalities is essential to our progress. One is not more important than the other. They're all dependent upon each other. So, as one might lament when the Lord left, we hear in the prayers of the Vaiṣṇavas, "*yāyī yāyī nīlo premā-nidhāna*." Or when the spiritual preceptor leaves, or when the Vaiṣṇava leaves, the intensity is the same because without the Vaiṣṇavas, living in the association of Vaiṣṇavas, we begin to appreciate our spiritual masters. And by appreciating and serving our spiritual masters, we learn to understand who is Kṛṣṇa. It's a transcendental science. So, it's a day of lamentation, it's a day of joy. Just remember, our loss is another group of devotees' gain. Because devotees, if they come back to serve Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that's the desire of the spiritual master, the desire of Prabhupāda, Caitanya Mahāprabhu; they're born again into an association of devotees. So, that's glorious. The final words of Gaur Mohan De—who's Gaur Mohan De? He was Prabhupāda's father. He was on his deathbed. The last words he said, "May I be born into a family of devotees. May I eternally have the association of Vaiṣṇavas." So, our loss... Cāru has come. He was a divine... We're lamenting and then it goes on and on like this. *Sambhoga* means association. *Vipralambha* means separation. These two are intimately connected. But by missing him, our affection for Vaiṣṇavas will grow stronger and stronger and stronger. So, you'll hear many glorious things about him. And rightfully so, this is our solace. We talk about these devotees, especially soon after they leave. We should actually appreciate the Vaiṣṇavas now before they leave. You know, when we think, "Why didn't I associate enough?" I feel this, but we should associate with each other as if we'll be separated tomorrow. And this is the advice of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his Gītāvalī. He writes, "We should all remember Śrīla Kavirāja Karṇapūra, Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra, and his family members, who are all sincere servants of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. You should also remember the father of Kavi Karṇapūra, Śivānanda Sena. Always remember that all these Vaiṣṇavas, who strictly follow the path of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and remember they are always absorbed in bhajana. If you actually want residence in the land of Braj, then you must remember all the Vaiṣṇavas who are and will always be followers of Rūpa Gosvāmī." He's encouraging us.

So, I feel that Cāru Prabhu is like... he's where Prabhupāda wants him. One time Prabhupāda, one of my godbrothers, "Hey Swamījī, where are you going to go when you die?" Prabhupāda said, "I plan to go to Pātāla-loka and continue with the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." So, that's surrender. And of course, whatever our destination is, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he enlightened us. For he inscribed in the samādhi of Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, he reasons thus, "Let this Vaiṣṇava die, thou art living still and sound. A Vaiṣṇava dies to live, and while living tries to spread the holy life around." All glorious to Cāru Prabhu, his glorious service in this life and his service to Śrīla Prabhupāda forever and forever more. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Jai!""