Krishna, here we are at Krishna's village of peace at the 23rd Woodstock Festival in northern Poland, just on the border of Germany.

If I could say, we're standing on sacred ground. How is the sacred ground?

Well, for the last 13 years, the festival has been held here, and we've had our village of peace here. Our devotees have been performing the maha-yagya, chanting the holy names, distributing prasadam, answering people's questions, doing Ratha-yatra, all their various activities of our festival, just like the battlefield of Kurukshetra.

That place is probably most known for the battlefield, but actually, Prabhupada remarks in Bhagavad-gita that it was a sacred place from time immemorial because that was a place where the sadhus, the sages, used to come and perform yoga. And that's why I believe the Pandavas chose that place to fight because they had the advantage over the Kurus.

So, it's a sacred place, Kurukshetra. So this is also sacred in a sense. This is a very integral part of the sankirtan movement. We come here every year, and we perform the maha-yagya. Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

Over a million people are expected at the Woodstock Festival, and because of our location, we have a prime location. We're just off the main entrance as you come into the event, and the first thing people see when they come to Woodstock is Krishna's Village of Peace, our big tent, which is about almost 50 yards long.

And they see our massive Food for Life distribution tent. They see our various tents around here, almost one acre of land we have here, and of course, they see the devotees busy as bees performing their various services. So, it took 10 days.

It takes 10 days to build this village. You can see our boys on this video. They're working very hard in the driving rain and also the hot sun. So, we give a lot of credit to them. Our mothers, our ladies are working in the tents, decorating them very nicely to attract people inside.

We have, of course, the big tent. We have Food for Life. We have a questions and answers tent, which is always full with at least 100 or 200 kids. We have two seminars going on during the four-day event. One seminar is the Art of Happiness in one tent, and His Holiness Shivaram Swami is coming up from Hungary.

He's going to do another seminar called Simple Living and High Thinking. We have our gopi dots, we have our henna, we have our yoga tent, two or three instructors at one time because there are big crowds here. We have our book tent, which actually is one of the most popular, actually becomes more popular as the years go on because what's the result of coming to some maha-yagya like this?

Darpa-mārdinam, the heart becomes purified, and as the heart becomes purified and one's interest in Krishna consciousness or God consciousness begins to awaken, then one naturally begins to inquire.

Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

We have, um, one of the main features here, as always, is our mantra-yoga tent. That's our kirtan tent. And the kirtan starts around 4 or 5:00 in the afternoon. It goes to 3:00 in the morning. That's 11 hours of kirtan, and real kirtan.

We have Mahatma Prabhu here, we have Madhav, we have BB Govindaraj, the Aut Gopi, Barahari, myself, and other kirtaneers, some of the best kirtan leaders in ISKCON, and they're just chanting their hearts out. As Madhav always says, chant from the heart.

But the real feature of that tent is not so much us, but the people. How the people enjoy Krishna consciousness.

Why not?

Krishna is all-attractive, and He is present in the sound of His name.

So when the kids come into the tent, they're sweet kirtan, devotees are dancing, they're caught up into the mood, and they chant and they chant and they stay for hours. In fact, when we try to finish at 2 or 3:00 in the morning, they won't let us go.

They put the barricades up, so the crowd just can't get out. And when we finally get out, they keep the kirtan going till sunrise. We have 700 devotees joining us from all parts of the world. 200 of them will be engaged in constant cooking.

We've rented six schools around this region, in this area, six schools, because these schools all have kitchens. These are old schools from previous times, so they have big kitchens. We rent the kitchens. We cook hal in one place, we cook papadums, cook rice in another place, we cook sabjis in another place, like that.

And, um, yeah, we're going to prepare 25 tons of foodstuff. This is a maha-yagya. Six tons of rice, five tons of beans, two tons of semolina, two tons of bananas, two tons of sugar, two tons of papadums, two tons of oil, and four tons of vegetables. 25-26,000 tons.

That requires a lot of cooks working around the clock. And Ratha-yatra every day, up and down the main avenue. There's one main avenue here which divides the whole Woodstock, up and down the main avenue, four hours every day throwing sweets from the cart, getting the kids to chant and to dance with us again, like our smaller festivals up on the coast.

We exist simply to introduce people to Krishna consciousness.

This is our life, engaging others, and it's not hard if we follow the process which Prabhupada has given us, which Lord Chaitanya has given us: chanting, dancing, and feasting. Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

Srila Prabhupada described, he said, this sankirtan is complete glorification of the Lord, so it's made complete. We have so many. To make this yagya successful, we need so many various services, and everyone's service is important. So, this is real sankirtan, means the complete glorification of the Lord.

So all devotees from different countries coming together at this particular time in history, here at the Woodstock Festival, this is really history. You could say, I say this all humility, as a humble servant of Srila Prabhupada, this is the modern-day pastimes of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, and we see ISKCON is doing this all over the world, in India and America, in Canada, Brazil, Australia.

The movement is growing, growing, growing, surely giving pleasure to Srila Prabhupada, the Acharyas, and Sri Sri Gaura-Nitai. So we are, we're very happy to be here on this, this battlefield, of, of modern-day battlefield of Kurukshetra, and we look forward to introducing the people in a very big way to the wonderful world of Krishna consciousness, all due to the mercy of Srila Prabhupada.

Srila Prabhupada, thank you for this wonderful opportunity to please you in such a ginormous way. Krishna.

Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.