Welcome, welcome, welcome to the Kartik curriculum 2022 with Indradyumna Swami. We are so, so happy to be here again after such a long time of separation. So many devotees have had to refrain from coming to this most holy of domains during Kartik, but now this year, we're all back again and very excited.

We start today here at this most holy place that you see right over my shoulder, Śrī Rādhākuṇḍa. Rādhākuṇḍa is not just a holy place. Rādhākuṇḍa is *the* holy place. Rādhākuṇḍa is the most holy place in the entire creation. All of the devotees very eagerly come to Rādhākuṇḍa, very respectfully taking the water upon their head, bathing in Rādhākuṇḍa, and purifying themselves of all material desires and deepening their love for Krishna.

This very place, 500 years ago, was not as we see it now. It was not developed like it is now. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself came here looking for where is Rādhākuṇḍa. He found this place after asking so many villagers for directions.

They were not able to locate it. So He sat down under a nearby tree and began to chant with tears in His eyes, and in that moment of chanting, He realized that this was the location of Rādhākuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa.

So today, we see even more of an expansion that facilitates everyone coming and taking the opportunity to bathe in this holy of places. In the early days, sometimes the disciples of Śrīla Prabhupāda became a little over-enthusiastic, diving and playing in Rādhākuṇḍa as if it were a swimming pool.

Prabhupāda did not appreciate this and corrected it.

We know that you come to the edge of the water, offering prayers respectfully, taking the water upon your head, and then reverentially entering into the water. Why entering into such water in this manner?

One becomes completely purified, cleansed, and enlivened in the process of Krishna Consciousness.

This was the movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrīla Prabhupāda also encouraged that every year the disciples, the grand-disciples, and now even the grand-grand-disciples should come to Vṛndāvana, to the holy domain, rejuvenate themselves, revitalize themselves, and refurbish their enthusiasm in Krishna Consciousness, and thus return to the countries that they have come from—North America, South America, Europe, Far East, everywhere—and spread Krishna Consciousness with new vigor and enthusiasm.

This is the importance of coming to the domain, to become refocused again and appreciating these holy pastimes. As we are standing here, there are 250 devotees just a short distance from here, speaking the beautiful pastimes that brought on Krishna as they took place here in Rādhākuṇḍa, enlivening themselves in this way.

Now we encourage you, follow us, not just today, for the entire month. Every day, we will be going to different holy places. Every day, there will be an opportunity for you to follow the videos, the photography, the pictures, everything that is posted from this glorious curriculum, and you too, even though you may not be here, can become enlivened.

For us, we're very grateful to be here again this year to take part in the association of so many wonderful devotees, under the leadership of Indradyumna Swami, listening to the kirtans of Hari-hari, Mādhava, Śiṣṭācāra, so many wonderful personalities, and speaking about all the different kirtans.

Therefore, we are encouraging that everyone should please take part in this activity. Thank you very much. Kartik curriculum 2022 ki Japa.