"*00213*.*
"Yoga and the peak standard of a lover of yoga, for example, can become lighter than air, can fly, or can become so heavy that it is impossible to move them. They can fly through the sky as it has been described, they can dive in one place in a river in India, and appear in a few seconds in another place. And I am reminded of a story when, at one point, my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, visited Kumbha Mela in the 50s with his students, and they took ablutions at the confluence of three rivers. It is said that anyone who takes ablution there reaches the planet of their desired destination. It was early morning, the sun had just risen, and this beautiful, large, blue-colored river was very quiet and beautiful. There was practically no one except for the pilgrims on the bank, and when they started to enter the river, repeating a mantra clearly, suddenly children of six or seven years old began to emerge, and it seemed that they were playing there in the water alone. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda said that it was strange that they would disappear. He said he didn’t see where they could have gone. They went around where they shouldn't have, and then they disappeared. He said it as if by chance. In fact, they were not small children; they were yogis who had been practicing yoga for hundreds of years. These yogis meditate and are constantly located high in the Himalayan mountains or in some holy places. They live in places like Vṛndāvana, or in the Himalayas, where they dive into the river and emerge many thousands of miles away where the Kumbha Mela takes place, and they reincarnate as small children. For a mystic yogi, you can have any mystic power. 

One should express respect because they are such ancient yogis in the form of small children, but nevertheless, they were just having fun. Mystics of yoga do not actually overcome the influence of material energy; they are just having fun, and it is like a magician who shows miracles while still attached. Therefore, these are powerful people, and of course, we offer them our respect because these are not simple people who sit in a tavern or chase after women or men. A self-realized person at a high level of spiritual consciousness is beyond that, but nevertheless, as for us, we strive to communicate with those who are at the highest level, truly devoted to the Supreme. We serve Kṛṣṇa; that is, we want to have a gold medal at the spiritual Olympic Games, not silver or especially bronze.""