"*00476*.*
"In this auspicious place, Badrināth (Badrikāśrama), we would like to welcome you all. This is the second time I have come to this Badri Āśrama; the first time I visited was in 1974. Unlike other places in Vṛndāvana, this place has retained its identity; it has not changed. This is very good, and of course, we are very grateful to all the new people who come here for all the construction that is happening. In fact, it was what Śrīla Prabhupāda wanted—everyone to visit the āśrama.

But the price we pay for this is that Vṛndāvana is slowly turning into a small Hong Kong, with a large number of newly built shops and buildings. This causes a little concern for those who are used to seeing Vṛndāvana as it was before: a small, little village in which Kṛṣṇa is present, where there is Mother Yaśodā, where Kṛṣṇa pats His cows. You know the village, so the cows are growing and there are farmers out there now taking care of them, and the ladies are there—there are Vrajavāsīs and our journey here took about two hours. While we were driving through these endless fields, we saw a wonderful view, and I turned to Rādhā-Prabhu and said that most likely they will need centuries to build something new here, so this is part of Vraja. And of course, we will not want to leave Vṛndāvana itself, the city of Vṛndāvana, because there are the Deities worshipped by the Gosvāmīs, and this place, Vṛndāvana, is very dear to us. Remember how much happiness we experienced in the temple of Rādhā-Ramaṇa yesterday. We know that in Vṛndāvana there are 5,000 temples; according to some sources, it is even 7,000 temples. Vṛndāvana is very important, but it is also wonderful to see Vṛndāvana originally as it was when Kṛṣṇa came here 5,000 years ago. But somehow, this place, Adi Badri, remains truly pure. Just listen to the birds singing; do not listen to the crows croaking. In the *Source of Eternal Pleasure*, it is mentioned that in Vṛndāvana, parrots sing five main melodies, and thanks to these birds, the atmosphere of Vṛndāvana is created. It is said that in Vraja there are also owls and cuckoos.

In fact, it is not just a bird, for example, a parrot, which is present—the exalted parrots, Śuka and Śārī, returned to Vṛndāvana in order to decorate the kuñjas of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They don’t just chirp; in fact, they glorify the qualities of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And it is very, very nice to know that in the spiritual world there are no iPhones or Samsung Galaxys; instead of a phone in the spiritual world, they use parrots—Śuka and Śārī—as messengers. They fly between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and carry certain messages; for example, Kṛṣṇa says, "Please fly to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, say that I cannot get out today and meet her," and then the parrot flies and tells everything.

One sociologist was amazed by what Śrīla Prabhupāda once said, that Śrīla Prabhupāda created a house in which the whole world can live. All living beings can live in the Vṛndāvana-dhāma, not only this planet or the solar system, but the entire universe. Because in the spiritual world, they are all in different relationships with Kṛṣṇa; they are all dear to Him, but all of them together increase the *mādhurya-rasa*, they help the *līlāmṛta*. Therefore, Śrīla Prabhupāda has invited us, as many times in our life, to come here. Because here it is very hard to remember in the West—very hard to remember—and you can be in Moscow, Odesa, or New York, and perhaps in these cities it is very difficult to immerse yourself in this mood. Therefore, Śrīla Prabhupāda invites us to come as often as possible. Vraja is the place where it is impossible not to remember Kṛṣṇa, because everything here reminds you of Him. In order not to remember Kṛṣṇa in Vraja, you must be in a very, very deep state.

In order to more deeply immerse yourself in the mood of Vraja, to feel the painting of the Vrajavāsīs, we came here to really see how the locals live, how they cultivate their fields, how they serve Kṛṣṇa. And we guessed that there would be such a reaction: "Oh God, 5:30 in the morning, so early, where to go?" Many devotees traveled here for a very long time; there was not enough space, they sat on the floor of the bus, but these are all austerities performed on the way, and they seem to be associated with the fact that we came here. And you can say, "Wait, Badri, this is in the Himalayas, high in the mountains. It is approximately at an altitude of more than 3,000 meters, maybe you know this place."

We try to see everything that is happening around, not with our eyes but with our ears, as it says that holy people act this way. Therefore, as Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, Vṛndāvana is the place of the *līlās* of Kṛṣṇa and also the refuge of all other holy places. Amazing India! There is an expression, "Amazing, amazing India." When you see advertising posters there, everything is very neat and clean, attractive, but when you come here, you immediately have this question: "Where is this amazing, wonderful India?" It's still here, but it's just covered in "crap." This is the beauty of India: when you travel from north to south, you visit and pass through hundreds of thousands of holy places. In ancient times, it was a respected profession or activity, where you travel from a young age to old age to all the holy places, yourself awakening your love for God. Thus, at the age of 5, you leave home and say goodbye to all your relatives. Then you follow the *sādhu* and say, "Where are we going now?" For example, to Rameśvaram. And thus, you travel until old age, leaving your body somewhere on the banks of the holy river Ganges.

Pay attention. There is a Vaiṣṇava named Virocana. In fact, he has a prestigious job and also an education that he received in England. But if you look at him now, all he does all year round is travel, visiting Vaiṣṇava places. Look at how he looks; he doesn't wear a good suit, he does not have some decent European hairstyle. He is completely immersed in the life of a bābājī; it is a very difficult ascetic life and requires a lot of effort. They say that fabric ages if you hang it in the sun, and the horse will age if he does not work, and your wife will soon grow old if you do not pay attention to her. A man ages because of long travels; in fact, it takes a lot of physical effort to travel to the holy places of India. But there is such an "open secret"—at least all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas know it, and all the saints know that there is no need to travel along and across Bhāratavarṣa because all the holy places are the original holy places; they are present in Vṛndāvana. All the holy places that are beyond the territory of Vraja are only a continuation of those places that are present in Vraja.

Therefore, Badri, or Badrikāśrama, where we are now present—and it is called *Ādi*—means the "original" or the "main one." It is originally the spot where the Lord is the source of everything. If you come here today, someone from the locals can ask you, "Where have you been?" You can say, "I was in Badri." He will say, "And this Badrināth is the original Badrikāśrama in which we are now present." It is different from the Badrināth which is present in the Himalayas; for starters, it is a little smaller than the one which is in the Himalayas. Virocana or some other devotee can tell you that it is a duplicate, or that Badrināth which is located beyond the territory of Vraja is large in size, it is simply huge, there are magnificent views. And also, there is one more difference between the original Badrikāśrama in which we are and the duplicate. Listen very carefully: what is the difference, and the benefit that you get from visiting the original Badri Āśrama is much more, all times more, than visiting the secondary dhāma.

If you visit this place during Kārttika, then this increases the benefit from the visit by 10,000 times. If you went to the secondary Badrināth... there is a wonderful story how Kṛṣṇa once brought the Vrajavāsīs here. Kṛṣṇa came here, exactly where we are sitting now, and they wanted to go to the Himalayas. He said, "No, no, we will go here." How did this happen? One day, a holy man came to Vṛndāvana, and he was giving lectures at about 4 p.m. in the evening—and you should definitely attend these lectures because that is exactly what they did in Vṛndāvana; they would gather and tell transcendental stories, because at that time there was no radio or other forms of communication. This saint had just come down from the Himalayas, and after spending a few days in Vṛndāvana, he glorified the glories of Badrināth, and also talked about Ṛṣīkeśa, Haridvāra, Gaṅgotrī, Yamunotrī, and all these different places. Vrajavāsīs, by nature, are very simple, sweet people; they are just very attached to Kṛṣṇa and love Him. So, hearing all this talk, they said, "Wow, wow, you came from so far away and told us a great story about the Himalayas!" After this sādhu told the story, everyone stood up and started applauding him. Then Nanda Bābā, he was very inspired, and said that tomorrow all the residents should early in the morning pack their carts, harness the bulls, and we are going to visit all the holy places and purify ourselves.

When I read this passage, I just laughed. I thought that, wow, the residents of Vṛndāvana, they need purification? They are all organized by Yogamāyā herself, and she thus arranges these things for the local residents so that ultimately, at the end of this līlā, their love for Kṛṣṇa will increase even more. We all know that love for Kṛṣṇa is infinite; it increases, increases, and increases. They all returned home, they were very inspired: "Finally, tomorrow we will leave for Badrināth!" And you can imagine how long it would take. They travel on carts with bulls. Imagine, they were going to leave Vraja, everyone was excited, they prepared their carts, harnessed the bulls, took the children, and everyone was looking forward to the trip to the Himalayas. But Nanda Bābā and Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa, He ate His breakfast, but He did not speak at all. He was actually silent by nature. Kṛṣṇa loves to chat. Have you ever met a little boy or girl who just won't shut up for a second? My sister was like that. As a child, she had a nickname, *Banana*, which means *Ananya*. She was very offended when we called her that. She constantly spoke in order to attract the attention of her parents. Usually, Kṛṣṇa is very talkative while He eats, but that day, He ate very silently. Then, Nanda Bābā turned to Kṛṣṇa: "Lālā, something happened? You're not talking at all today." Kṛṣṇa said, "Yes... Dad, don't you know that Vṛndāvana is the most unusual place? All holy places that are present all over the world and also in the Himalayas, they are present here in Vṛndāvana. You want to send all the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana on a trip to the Himalayas to see Badri. But don't you know that Badri, the original Badrināth, is present here with us as the leader of all? You must tell them that. In fact, there is originally Ādi Badri here; this is the place by visiting which they will receive a thousand times more benefit than by going to some Badrināth, traveling in their carts for two months."

In fact, you know that Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā do not know that Kṛṣṇa is God. Please, understand—they do not perceive Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If they worshipped Him and perceived Him as the Lord, then their worship and communication with Him would be such: "O great Lord, wake up, how can I serve You?" In order to support the parental rasa, therefore, for them, He is their little boy, the most beloved in the world. And when she heard what little Kṛṣṇa said to him, Mahārāja laughed and said, "Yes, it's just a baby chattering." And he said to mother, "Well, we can't listen to a six-year-old boy. What does he know about these saints? What does he know about the Badrināths?" And in general... and then Kṛṣṇa, He kept insisting, insisting, insisting. Then Yogamāyā arranged it in such a way that finally Nanda Bābā said, "Well, okay, Kṛṣṇa. But what should we do then?" And then Kṛṣṇa said, "Well, then we must take all our carts with bulls and go to the original Badrināth, Ādi Badri, and go there. It will take about 2 hours. And if you go to the secondary Badrināth, that is a duplicate of the original Badrināth, it will take those 2 weeks. Why go there, Dad? Let's go, and in 2 hours we will already be in the original." Nanda Mahārāja said, "Let me talk to your mother a little." Then he went with his mother to a separate room; they had such a meeting. "Well, what are we going to do? Will we listen to what Kṛṣṇa says, that we will directly cancel the trip to the Himalayas?"

While they were discussing this, Kṛṣṇa bent down and whispered something in the ear of Balarāma: "Balarāma, you know that my Gopīs, they recently went to the original Badrināth. You know all my Gopīs went there weeks ago to this original Badrināth." Balarāma said, "Is that true? Your Gopīs went to Badri?" His eyes widened so much. He asked how it happened, and Kṛṣṇa says that two weeks ago, "I was teasing my Gopīs a little and saying that in Vṛndāvana there is a great sage, Nara." The Gopīs, like girls, were always very interested in hearing something about holy people, and they said, "O, our Kṛṣṇa, where is he? You all know about Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi. He is one of the incarnations of Kṛṣṇa." In fact, Nara-Nārāyaṇa is a very interesting incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, which consists of two personalities. The first personality is the living being Nara, and Nārāyaṇa is Kṛṣṇa. If you look at the illustration, He is presented as Nārāyaṇa, and Nara is presented as Arjuna next to Him. As a rule, each incarnation of Kṛṣṇa is represented by His wealth; Kapila represents the intelligence of Kṛṣṇa, and Balarāma represents the beauty of Kṛṣṇa. Even certain incarnations of the Lord in this world come here to show His quality, and Nara-Nārāyaṇa is the personification of asceticism. He usually comes here, this image of Kṛṣṇa, and He performs complete meditation, asceticism, being in the Himalayas for the benefit of all living beings. In fact, many people do not know that to this day this incarnation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is present in the Himalayas and performs austerities, meditations, and prays for the welfare of all living beings.

They gather together, for example, to sing some cheerful song for the benefit of the whole world. For example, in my youth when I was hippie, we gathered in some park and, holding hands, sang, for example, saying, "Love, love, love." In this way, we tried to change the world. Thus, He is present in the Himalayas in some cave and prays for the spiritual benefit of all living beings. Thus, Kṛṣṇa said that when they come, they want to go there, and they all said, "Yes, let's go." They went there; the Gopis wandered through the forests and mountains. If you can say so, there is such a huge hill here; this is what the mountain becomes in Vraja—that is, not higher than this. In fact, we must have spiritual vision, we must look at this mountain and see its snowy peaks. These Gopis, they walked around these mountains and said, "Well, where is this Nara-Ṛṣi? We want darśana." Then Kṛṣṇa saw them and said, "And have you seen Nara yet? No, you haven't seen? Probably that's all a joke." Then Kṛṣṇa said, "In fact, I am Nara." He says that, "In fact, I am here, Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi, present here in Badrināth, performing penance and austerities for the spiritual benefit of all of you. Therefore, O dear Gopis, in order to thank me, they could give me some dairy products and also a kiss or a few, especially here, you, Rādhārāṇī, kiss me." Then Kṛṣṇa raised His hands up, showed His four-armed form, and said, "Yamurāja is here, please give me dairy products, kiss."

You went to her in her village in Ujjan a few days ago, and she immediately recognizes all of Kṛṣṇa's jokes. Then she put her hands on her hips and came up to Him and says, "Kṛṣṇa, what you say, that you are Nara-Nārāyaṇa, it is as unreal as what you say, that you are a brahmacārī." After this, Rādhā-devī, she threatened Him with her finger: "And if we consider that you cannot endure even half a muhūrta without eating sweets and touching some Gopi, then what you are is... renounced?" And said "Om." After that, touching His thigh, to the surprise of everyone, He took the four-armed form of Nara-Ṛṣi. Then, before Mom and Dad went out of their little meeting, He said that, "And then I appeared in front of my friends; amazingly, they resembled lotus petals, and my clothes were made of black deer skin, and then I had a small pot of water in my hands and also a bamboo cane. Thus, I was the personification." And Balarāma asked, "What, and how did they react?" "Well, what did they do? They just bowed down and gave me all their dairy products. After that, I took back my original form of Kṛṣṇa and they told me, 'Oh son, we don't know how you perform this magic.'" Thus, listening to this story given to him by Balarāma, he was very surprised by this. Thus Kṛṣṇa told that... and He is still present here. There are several personalities who are constantly present... Uddhava. Perhaps they hear us now and perhaps they were very pleased with the kīrtana that we had, but at least you can definitely bow down and pray to these personalities who are present in Ādi Badri.

After we joined breakfast again, he said under the influence of Māyā, Nanda Bābā said, "Kṛṣṇa, what's good, we will pay attention to your wise words and instead of going to Himalaya-Badrināth, we will turn here in Vṛndāvana, we will visit Ādi Badri." At that time the bulls were already harnessed, people tied up their things, and everyone was impatient: "When will we set off on our way?" Rādhā says that at 5:30 the agreement was to leave, and already it's almost 6:00. What's going on? Let's go back to the original story. He came out in front of everyone and said that on the advice of our little Kṛṣṇa, we decided not to go to the Himalayas. We will go to the original Āśrama which is present in Vṛndāvana, because all the holy places are already in Vraja. Everyone shouted, "Hurray!" And the same way we came here, you can imagine that thousands and hundreds harnessed in, and all the dust, and they walked the same path. We walked the same path. Thank God that all this has been preserved in its original form and also as described in the śāstra. Just as we drove through endless fields today, were you sleeping or could you notice what fields... there were very artistic views from the window of the buses or cars because farmers are plowing the land, and the freshly plowed land looks very artistic. In the śāstras, it is written that after several hours they finally saw a ring of mountains. You noticed that when we drove up, we entered this space, and this confirms the inscription, who is always right.

Then, already approaching very close, Kṛṣṇa, He was from the first cart harnessed by the sides, He jumped out of there, turned to everyone, and shouted, "Soon, very soon, you will see for yourself, Ādi Badri!" This is another of the names of Nārāyaṇa; this is the Lord Badrināth. Then these carts stopped exactly where we stopped. Little Kṛṣṇa, jumping out of it, grabbed His dad by the hand and said, "Okay, Dad, now I'll give you a scolding," and then He went along the road we were walking and brought him to the temple which is located here. They then went up a little higher, and when they were walking, they were very delighted with each other. Now we will see, and Kṛṣṇa showed everyone, paying attention to the magnificent trees of this forest, and there they came to that place. This is a forest in which the trees are very densely planted, where He pointed somewhere deep into this forest and said that, "There, my dears, is Badri-kunda; it is more purifying than the one that is in the Himalayas." He said, "Look at the top of the chamber, Ṛṣis... this is..." and everyone began to glorify Him, brought their bows, and this is a very attractive form of a Deity made of black stone. Only look, Badrināth, He appeared here in Vṛndāvana and by the power of His austerities, He protects all the inhabitants of Vraja as well as our cows. If you are very immersed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness now, if your hearts are very pure, if your eyes are sad a little with love for God, then perhaps having risen a little higher you will see on the stone slab which is... performed austerities and pray for the protection of all the inhabitants of Vraja as well as their cows. Then Kṛṣṇa said, "Okay, we have received darśana, now let's go, we have been walking here for a long time and now we should leave." "Right away? No, we want to worship our Lord!" Having received His darśana, then they immediately began to weave garlands to offer Him some clothes, the gopīs took off their jewelry. Then Nanda Bābā turned to Kṛṣṇa and said, "What is this actually?" Then only for... they went up the mountains to visit... in this way, just after lunch, for half a day, they visited all the Himalayas, which Virocana and Tura had visited before. They also visited all the holy places and did it with joy. In fact, Kṛṣṇa, He does not want us to do as He tells, but the process of worshipping Him, He is very joyful. By the evening they had already returned back to their homes in Vṛndāvana-dhāma. If it was amazing, even Kṛṣṇa wanted to come here and bring all the inhabitants of the dhāma, then we should have taken advantage of this situation, this moment, and come here to listen about the glory of Badri Āśrama in Vṛndāvana, Ādi Badri.

Now I also... it will take a few minutes, I want to tell you the story of how this place, Badrināth, and also a duplicate that exists in the Himalayas, why it was so named. Sometimes Badrināth refers to the name of the place, sometimes Badrināth is the name of the Deity. Sometimes there is also the expression Badrikāśrama. Once Nārada went to Vaikuṇṭha to meet the Lord, and you know that we have a certain blessing that he can travel around the universe. You know that most of the time he devotes to traveling through the material worlds in order to inspire and help realize the truth to conditioned living beings, but sometimes he also goes to Vaikuṇṭha to receive the darśana of Lord Nārāyaṇa. One day he went to Vaikuṇṭha to submit his report to the Lord on the... and when he entered the palace of Lord Nārāyaṇa, He saw that the Lord was resting on a soft bed with His wife, Lakṣmī, who was massaging. Here Yogamāyā joins in; she forced to organize all these līlās, so she participates in them. It so happened by the will of Yogamāyā that when Nārada Muni saw this scene from the life of the Lord, he became angry. Then he turned to the Lord and His wife Lakṣmī and said, "Lord, what are you doing here? You sleep very freely on a soft bed, and your wife massages your feet. What will people do? Seeing such behavior, they will simply become lazy and imitate your activities. Seeing this, people will no longer have the desire to engage in asceticism and repentance. They all have a taste for material pleasures. And what will happen if you do not inspire them? No one will perform asceticism." Prabhupāda has said many times that asceticism is dignity. Thus, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we do not hurt asceticism. In fact, with age, we increasingly accept it because it is asceticism that helps us to be more resistant to material pleasures and develop true joy that we can receive from spiritual practice.

Of course, Lord Kṛṣṇa is not forced to perform any austerities because He initially enjoys, but His enjoyment does not have any tint of material enjoyment, it is completely transcendental. Leaving the Lord for a better example to everyone, Lord Nārāyaṇa did not answer anything, but at the same time he thought, "Yes, perhaps He should set a proper example for others, so perhaps I should accept sannyāsa, renounce everything, and begin to perform austerities in the Himalayas." But how? Then I will need to leave the kitchen and not only leave with... now there will also be... and then, with the help of Yogamāyā, the following happened. Līlā, Lord Nārāyaṇa said to His Lakṣmī, "Lakṣmī, you have been here on Vaikuṇṭha for so long." Then he told her that you are probably already bored here. She said, "No, I really like this. This is my eternal līlā. I love the Lord very much. Everything is very wonderful." He said, "No, you don't understand. You are already bored. Maybe it's time for you to go to some other planets." She said, "He says, 'Go to Na-loka and there are magnificent goddesses and you can go and have a wonderful time with them there and then come back.'" You all know such a concept, as usually women really love such trips, and so Lakṣmī told me, "Oh yes, a very wonderful idea! Great, I will gladly go, I will go there to the planets, we will talk and then I will come back." She went, and soon after that Lord Nārāyaṇa went... and He went to earth in order to perform His austerities and penances. He came to the place that later became known as Badrināth or Badrikāśrama. He went there, looked around; it was very cold around, there was snow, few people, and He thought that, "Yes, this is exactly the place where it will be very favorable to perform my prayers of asceticism."

There was one problem. While He was looking for the place where He should sit to perform asceticism, He saw that another person was present there along with His wife. It was Lord Śiva with His wife, and He was sitting exactly in the place where He intended to sit for His asceticism. And the Lord Nārāyaṇa said, "Śiva, he is my devotee, he is the greatest of my devotees, but perhaps he will not want to leave this place because he also performs austerities and penance in it, and this place is just perfect for this. So I need some kind of plan to... Śiva, Pārvatī, and send me from this place so that I can be here." In fact, Nārāyaṇa does not need a very long time for the Lord to create an ideal plan because He is the creator of all ideal plans. The next morning, the Lord accepts everyone in the morning... all the residents come there to bathe because the temperature around is very cold, and the springs of... so every day Śiva and Pārvatī bathe in the warm waters of this kunda. At the moment when they were leaving the warm kunda, Pārvatī noticed an attractive young man shaking from the cold. Then Pārvatī, driven by maternal instinct, she said, "Oh, what a wonderful, sweet boy, but he is so frozen!" She said to the Lord, "Let's accept him as his son and we will take care of him." Then Lord Śiva said that "Somehow it is suspicious, it is not clear what the story is, how did a little boy end up here in the Himalayas?" Then Pārvatī said to him, "How can you say that? Look at him, he is such an innocent little boy, let's take him with us." Śiva said, "No, let's leave, we will not take him here, something is wrong here." Pārvatī, she gently hugged him and said, "No, listen, what an innocent boy and you are a cruel-hearted person!" Then she said, "Let the boy tell his own story," and she turned to this boy: "Say something to my husband, what are you doing here?" Then he started crying and said, "I came here with my mother, she left me, where did you go? I don't know where she went." A strange story, maybe we just take him home and not that... there was some huge house, it was like their refuge where they lived; they took him there. As soon as they brought him there, the boy said, "I'm hungry." "Doesn't speak well, it has already begun, now he's hungry, then something else, when should I meditate?" He says, "I'm hungry and I'm tired and I want a warm, soft bed." Then the Lord said, "This boy interrupted our līlā in... just leave him here and let's go back." They left this boy sleeping in their house and they sent... in fact, the kunda is located here, a little higher, they finished their... after that they came into the house, but it was closed, so that everything was locked here. Through the window, He saw the smiling face of a boy who joyfully waved to him: "Open the door, our house," and the boy said, "This was your house, but it became mine." Then Śiva became very angry. And then this boy, who was Lord Nārāyaṇa Himself...

Lord Śiva said, "Pārvatī, well, look what you've just done." The boy said, "I don't know anything, this is my līlā, this is where I will conduct my asceticism, so I don't know anything, go to another place." Then they went... to another place, where they performed their... Lord... that while devotees of Lord Viṣṇu come to Badrināth to receive the gift of Nārāyaṇa, followers of Lord Śiva come to Kedāra to receive the gift of Nārāyaṇa. Thus, Lord Badrināth took the form of Nārāyaṇa, performed His austerities and penances, but the līlā was not over yet. Now it’s almost lunchtime, we haven’t even had breakfast yet. This will remind you of Rādhānātha Swami’s lecture, and we haven’t finished the story. Note, because you remember that Goddess Lakṣmī went to... to her... to spend time with them, but when she returned to Vaikuṇṭha, she did not find her husband Nārāyaṇa there, and you cannot even admit the thought that Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa can be separated for a long time. Thus, Lakṣmī searched for her husband everywhere on the territory of Vaikuṇṭha, then she descended into the material world for him, and she searched for him everywhere, and finally she reached the Himalayas. She came here to the original Badri Āśrama, and she saw the form of Badrinātha-Nārāyaṇa who sat in the snow and ice, performing austerities and penance, praying for the spiritual benefit of all living beings, thus setting an example.

She said, "What should I do now? My husband became the father of the... how can I communicate with him?" Then she incarnated in the berry tree, and in Sanskrit, berry means *badari*. Thus her beloved husband, Lord Nārāyaṇa, He sat in the shade of this tree, and thus the Lord became known as Badri-Nārāyaṇa or Badri-Nātha. This is the Lord of this place, and thus Badrināth... *Nātha* means Lord, *Badri* means berry. Thus Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa became Badrināth to us, and thus this name Badrināth came about. Also, in Badrināth we can meet Vyāsadeva. We know from *Bhāgavata* that he lived on the banks of the Sarasvatī River, but you also remember that he was at the head of writing all the Vedic works; he decided that it would be better for him to do this activity in Vṛndāvana. Thus, they say about Vraja-vāsīs that he came here in Badrikāśrama originally in order to write the Vedic scriptures. We also want to note that Uddhava, the great devotee Uddhava, is present here, and before leaving, Lord Kṛṣṇa thought to whom from the personality I can impart my transcendental knowledge so that after my departure its dissemination will continue. Thinking about all those who were present, he chose Uddhava for this.

Thus he said that, "O Uddhava, I have spread transcendental knowledge where I could and where I had time, but I did not have time to go to Badrināth and satisfy the thirst for transcendental knowledge from all the holy Ṛṣis who are present here. Therefore, go to them and tell them the transcendental knowledge." Thus, Uddhava came here to Ādi Badri and then Uddhava shared the knowledge that these sages could not receive before because they were high in the mountains. He enlightened the transcendental knowledge of these sages of Badrināth. Lord Kṛṣṇa answered the secret desire of the heart of... to always be in a... in the form of... this is an amazing place which is filled with transcendental knowledge.

We are grateful to all those personalities who are still present in this place and also to all those holy people who still reside in this for the benefit of all conditioned souls. A little later we will go a little higher and perhaps, if you have the mercy, you will receive the blessing of these transcendental personalities. This is a transcendental place. We also heard a transcendental narration about the... that happened here, and now we will begin our breakfast in order to prepare our stomachs for the tasting which will also happen in an hour. I apologize if it was long, but where else can we tell... if not here? I was studying this text yesterday throughout the evening, and therefore in this place they are like nectar. It is also very important that in this place there are such great personalities whom we have listed, as a rule, before reading; these personalities are also mentioned in a certain verse that we read. Enumeration, and usually this verse, this prayer, is read before the beginning of the lecture. Now we will finish our lecture with this prayer, but in any case, it is favorable and if you know, then you can repeat with me.

We offer our humble obeisances to Śrīla Vyāsadeva who is the author of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and also a bow to Nārāyaṇa-Ṛṣi who is the best among living beings.""