
"Once, I accompanied Śrīla Prabhupāda on his trip to Switzerland, and in the sky, he conducted darśana. They were looking for rockets. Grosso, Secu, Orenburg, Śaśka, Loparev, and Funk, James—a set of fellows, and one girl—the questioner's outfit disappears. Is it possible to predict the future in 24 minutes using dreams? People study dreams and try to predict the future using them, although in fact, this is not a reality. But in modern times, those who are trying to study this themselves conduct personal interviews.

A girl tried to explain how one can predict the future in dreams. He listened and listened, and then said, "All this is nonsense; all your dreams are sheer nonsense. It is all just a figment of the mind. How can they reveal the future?" She didn't know what to say, but he smiled and said, "But if you see a spiritual teacher or Kṛṣṇa in a dream, then this is very good."

We recently saw a dream in which a group lived. I sat surrounded by many of my spiritual brothers somewhere on the lawn. I was surrounded by a semicircle of them. For me, this was Rādhānātha Mahārāja, Bhaktinātha, and others. I danced with all my strength. This process is very balanced and thoughtful; he has all the arguments against scientists ready. He smashes them to pieces. I say, "Why will no one challenge this scoundrel?" A simple brahmacārī and humble, but all scientists feel bad because of him.

I sat in this dream somewhere 30 meters away and from a distance watched what was happening. Śrīla Prabhupāda said to all these devotees, "For all your service, you will return back home, back to Godhead." I, of course, was very happy for them, but I thought about myself, "What about me? I also want to go back." Then Śrīla Prabhupāda looked back and saw me. He touched my knee, pointed at me, and said, "How about him?" He looked at me in a dream and asked, "Girirāja, this one?" He said, "Yes, he will also return home." 

At 2:30 a.m., I woke up, jumped up, and started dancing. There was a dream about a return, and sometimes they come true. He said that ordinary dreams are stupidity, but if you dream of a spiritual teacher or Kṛṣṇa, it is wonderful. He jumped up and started dancing and singing. This is wonderful! This is wonderful! You're right. 

And you need it in life. Śrīla Prabhupāda, in the comments we read today, very specifically talks about material life, saying that it's not just a dream, it's a nightmare.""