Hello, everyone. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana, Viṣṇupada, Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Swami Mahārāja ki jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda, namaste.
Sarasvatī devyai so today, 
I would like to share several pastimes we find in a śāstra called Aṣṭa Kala Līlā Padāvalī. It is by a well-known, highly respected Vaiṣṇava poet, his name was Kavirāja Śekhara. My godbrother, Śivarāma Swami, quotes this author in his works a number of times, actually.

Kavirāja Śekhara was born in Bengal and was a disciple of Śrī Raganandana Gosvāmī. We'll also refer today to a scripture which we've been using many times during the last months, that's *Prapanna-Jīvana-Amṛta*. So, from these ācāryas and others, we learn of a principle that, um, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can never get enough of each other's company.

For example, we've discussed before how Kṛṣṇa often leaves His cows and His cowherd friends to meet Śrī Rādhā at noon time at Rādhākuṇḍa. But after spending some time together there, the thankless task of reminding Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that they must part ways falls to, what one ācārya says, the weakening rays of the sun.

The weakening rays of the sun, as well as an apologetic gopī who says to them, "Uh, dear Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the day is ending. The day is ending." So, the ācāryas say that such words appear like a curse to, to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, which causes them to stop smiling, makes their speech falter, and unleashes a flood of tears from both of their eyes.

And to soften, um, the, the harsh advice, you could say, the harsh advice of that gopī, another gopī says, "Oh, Rādhā!

Oh, Śyāma!

Don't delay now. If you are late, your parents might become suspicious and prevent you from ever meeting again. So please hurry." So, these ācāryas say that these words strike fear into the hearts of the Divine Couple. So, they finally somehow part ways and reluctantly leave Rādhākuṇḍa, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī returns to Yāva, and Kṛṣṇa to His friends who are anxiously waiting for Him along with His cows in the forest.

And the child is right that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's noon-day pastimes at Rādhākuṇḍa actually last five hours, five hours. But the cowherd boys, they think they have been separated from Kṛṣṇa no longer than 10 minutes. So, how is that possible?

Well, it's explained in scriptures that just as the Lord's, uh, pastime potency extends the night of a rāsa dance with the Gopis to last as long as the night of Brahmā, it also contracts Kṛṣṇa's midday absence from His cowherd friends to, to no more than a few minutes.

Just as the Lord's pastime potency extends the night of a rāsa dance with Kṛṣṇa and the Gopis to be as long as a night of Brahmā, so that same pastime potency contracts Kṛṣṇa's midday absence from His cowherd boyfriends to appear to be no more than a few minutes.

So, in this way, the cowherd boys think, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa's only been gone for a few minutes," when in fact, He was gone for five hours. And there's a reason for this, because if the cowherd boys felt that Kṛṣṇa was away any longer than a few minutes, they would certainly search for Him, fearing that, you know, He may have been captured by a demon or gotten lost in the depths of the forest.

And if they found Him at Rādhākuṇḍa, they would interrupt His pastimes with Śrī Rādhā. So, the pleasure pastime potency facilitates all these līlās in a very wonderful way. Now, the ācāryas have gone to note that, uh, the time Kṛṣṇa spends traveling back to His cowherd friends from Rādhākuṇḍa, it's extremely difficult for Him.

He feels alone, and He feels the, the pain of separation from Śrī Rādhā. In fact, on the way, He, uh, it's mentioned He muddies the ground with His tears. However, as soon as He arrives where His friends are, the cowherd boys, they happily greet Him with loving embraces, and they beg Him to, to play with them.

And while playing, He forgets His sorrows and, rather, He's drowned in the happiness of fraternal love, friendship, friendship. It's described that in, in an ensuing ballgame, there's often a shoving match between Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rāma, but in the end, the two boys, they make up and embrace.

And as Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys continue to wander here and there through the various forests, Kṛṣṇa visits different groups of cowherd boys and engages in friendly exchanges with each group, according to their particular loving mood and service. As we've discussed a number of times, there are different groups of cowherd boys.

So, while they're wandering in the forest, Kṛṣṇa takes the time to visit each group according to their mood and to their service. It's very sweet. So, when this large, uh, contingent of cows and cowherds reaches Govardhana Hill, the boys usually engage in a, a game of tag.

They like to play tag at Govardhana Hill until that time that Balarāma blows His buffalo horn, which announces that it's time to return home. Now, it is said that the sound of the buffalo horn reminds each boy of his own cows, because, you know, each boy is in charge of a particular group, group of cows.

So, they all stop their play and they run around calling their cows and searching for the stray ones that may have gone into a cave or some nearby grove like that. So, when Kṛṣṇa sees that His friends are getting tired trying to gather the cows, He calls out, "Oh, friends!

Don't be upset. Listen as I call the cows with my flute." So, after climbing up on Govardhana Hill, Kṛṣṇa plays His flute in such a way that it sounds like the names of all the various cows, and they all come to Him at once.

And as they come running, it's described, the sound of their hooves keeps perfect time with Kṛṣṇa's flute. I really like that one. As they come running, just imagine all the cows are coming to surround Kṛṣṇa, the sounds of their hooves keep perfect time with Kṛṣṇa's flute music.

And when they arrived, they jostled just to get close enough to Him to, to lick Kṛṣṇa, to smell Kṛṣṇa, or brush Kṛṣṇa with the soft switch of their tails, all the while showering Him with, uh, loving glances. So much bhāva, so much love.

At that point, it's described Śrīdāma says to Subala, "Oh, friend, who amongst us can bring our cows together just by playing a flute?

Only Kṛṣṇa is capable of such a feat, just as He, just as only He can kill ferocious demons." Then, uh, Subala, he has a stick, he twirls the stick in the air and he calls out, "Okay, everyone, let's go!" And at that point, the boys cheer, they, they blow their horns and call the names of the leading cows, Kali, Diwali, Urangi, and Hamsi.

So, the cows themselves, you know, eager to return home, need little, if any, prodding to move on. But the boys, you know, they play their roles as cowherd boys do by, uh, beating drums, blowing on instruments, clapping their hands, and, oh yes, shouting, "He, he, he, he!" Now, it is mentioned that the demigods and I'll quote here.

Quote: "Try to observe these sublime līlās from their flower airplanes hovering above. They can only trace these celestial sounds to a vast golden cloud of dust." You know, the boys making all these sounds, they can only trace these celestial sounds to a vast golden cloud of dust.

And despite the strength of their mystic powers and sublime vision, they see nothing more than that. They don't actually see the boys. They don't see Kṛṣṇa. They see this golden cloud of dust. So, the ācāryas, they say, and I'll quote them again here.

It's, it's very important. "Without the essential, uh, prerequisite devotion, how can an ordinary conditioned soul, however powerful he may be, penetrate through the billows of chintamani dust to see Kṛṣṇa and His pastimes?" But when the sounds of the demigods' prayers catch Kṛṣṇa's attention, only then, by His empowerment, can they behold His pastime of herding the cows home in the afternoon.

That same empowerment, and even more, comes to our own eyes by the strength of nāma-saṅkīrtana, in which Hare addresses dust-covered Kṛṣṇa, and Rāma addresses Balarāma by His side.

Wow. So, that's the description of Kṛṣṇa leaving His meeting with Śrī Rādhā after their noon-day pastimes at Rādhākuṇḍa. But hearing of Rādhā's departure back to Yāva is enough to melt one's heart. Actually, it's described that at the fork in the road where Kṛṣṇa took the path leading back to His friends, Śrī Rādhā went there and left a depression in the ground by nervously digging there with her toes as she watched Him depart.

And after leaving, after leaving Kṛṣṇa's heart urged Him to, to turn back, to wave, and look at Rādhārāṇī. But knowing that such gestures would prolong her agony, He walked quietly to a bend in the road and then out of sight.

So, so Rādhārāṇī remained stunned at that spot where she stood, and her eyes filled with tears, and the heat of her burning heart made the nearby plants wither, such as her intensity of her devotion and separation. At that point, at that point, her radiant body became so pale, and her limbs so thin, that her, uh, her bracelets and her anklets all slipped to the ground.

And seeing her in this state, you know, feeling the separation from Kṛṣṇa, one of her Gopis said, "Behaving this way out in the open, you will disclose your own secret and open a storehouse of gossip for your enemies to share.

Please now, be grave." So, at this, Rādhārāṇī took a deep breath and tried to compose Herself, as her friends quickly replaced the ornaments that had slipped off. Then, one of her Gopis said, "Śrī Rādhā, try to understand. Kṛṣṇa resides within your heart.

Look within and be with Him at any time, day or night." Now, the śāstra says these, these words of this Gopi brought hope to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And so she said, "Yes, I will see Him again. I will see Him again.

I will." Arriving back at Yāva, Rādhā and Rāṇī entered the kitchen and quickly began preparing *lāḍḍus* and fancy rice for Kṛṣṇa, placing them on golden trays along with *pāna*, sandalwood paste, and a flower garland. And knowing that Kṛṣṇa would soon be passing by Yāva on his way to Nandagrāma, Rādhā took the help of a maidservant to bathe, dress, and ornament herself in a way that would please Kṛṣṇa and capture his heart when he saw her in the window, gazing at him as he passed by.

So, then she entered her, her sitting room and she sat before a picture of Kṛṣṇa painted by Viśākhā, and she softly chanted His names. And she waited for the sounds, you know, of the cows coming, you know, their hooves and their mooing, and the, the bugles and the flutes of the cowherd boys, uh, and to, to announce that, you know, that they were coming, uh, on the road outside of Yāva.

But after an agonizing wait, no sounds came. There was only silence. So, hoping against hope, Rādhā peered out the window for a sign of at least a dust cloud, but again, nothing. So, it's described that she paced back and forth, back and forth, repeatedly looking out the window, but each time she passed by the window, she didn't see anything.

Her anxiety increased. There was no sign of Kṛṣṇa. So, finally, in desperation, she sat down and she shivered, it's described, as if from a severe fever, and she choked, as if forcibly held underwater, gasping for air. And as tears blinded her eyes, the ācāryas say she withdrew from the external plane and was unable to hear Kṛṣṇa's flute or see the dust cloud that finally was approaching as Kṛṣṇa came up to Yāva.

And only when a, a maidservant very quickly, uh, pulled her to the window and spoke into her ear that Kṛṣṇa is near, did Rādhārāṇī come back to consciousness. And when she did, she called out, "Kṛṣṇa is coming!

Kṛṣṇa is coming!

Kṛṣṇa is coming!" However, just to increase the intensity, before approaching Yāva, Kṛṣṇa stopped at a banana orchard, and along with Madhu Maṅgala and Subala, they picked as much fruit as they could and passed it out to the other boys.

And finally, to announce their arrival to the residents of Yāva, and you could say even the residents from a far distant, uh, village, all the boys, Kṛṣṇa included, played very loudly on their horns and their flutes in unison on the same note.

They were announcing elsewhere, passing by Yāva, would be home soon in Nandagrāma. They played their horns, they played their flutes in unison on the same note. So, while all this was going on, Śrī Rādhā hurried to the top of the moon tower on top of the palace at Yāva, where she could see Kṛṣṇa coming closely, who was looking at at her as he passed by.

And when the Divine Couple's eyes met, they were unable to, uh, to, to even blink, and they both of them remained rooted to where they were standing, just like statues. But as the intensity of their glancing at each other increased, they started tottering back and forth, it's described, until they both collapsed into the waiting arms of their friends, she in the moon tower, and Kṛṣṇa on the path going by Yāva.

But, uh, Rādhārāṇī gradually came back to consciousness, but Kṛṣṇa remained collapsed in His friend's arms. So, Subala told the other boys to carry Kṛṣṇa to a nearby grove, where they brought Him back to consciousness by chanting mantras, putting a damp cloth on His forehead, and reminding Him that He would very soon again see Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

So, once Kṛṣṇa came to, He and all the cowherd boys resumed their march towards to Nandagrāma. And the ācāryas say that although Śrī Rādhā couldn't see Him, she could hear His flute, so she felt reassured that He was all right and He was on His way home.

Then, a couple of hours later, she suddenly remembered the trays of food that she had prepared earlier for Kṛṣṇa. So, she ran down from the moon tower to her quarters, calling out to Ratimanjari, "Rati, quick!

Follow me!" And in the privacy of her bedroom, she gave instructions to Rati by whispering into her ear, you know, that she should, um, essentially take this, this food to Kṛṣṇa in Nandagrāma.

So, she sent Rati and her friends often to Nandagrāma with trays of sweets. There was rice, there was *pāna*, and there was a garland. And Rati and her helpers, they quickly crossed, it's described, the divine lotus of Vṛndāvana, which we many times mentioned, that to facilitate pastimes, it opens up and then it closes, and it opens up and it closes like this, it expands and it contracts according to different pastimes.

So, they made their way to Nandagrāma, where they handed these offerings to Dviṣṭa and others, who also received from these special Gopis a special handwritten message from Rādhārāṇī to Kṛṣṇa. So, such as the sweet pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. Nice pastimes.

And we'll conclude today, um, with Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura from his, uh, *Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta*.

As we often do, two very beautiful verses about Bṛj. He writes, "Happily cross over the ocean of material existence to the land of Vṛndāvana, which is endowed with villages made of huge cintāmaṇi gems, which is endowed with flower pollen and camphor dust, a place by which touching just once uproots the six waves of material existence.

I remember the land of Vṛndāvana, full of unlimited astonishing qualities, the form of great light, variegated with the effulgence of pure gems, bestowing eternal happiness, sweet with the footprints of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa everywhere." And so, we conclude today.

Thank you again, uh, Prabhu. We'll go back to our research and we'll share with you in a couple of days some more nectar from the twelve forests of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Vṛndāvana is.

Kṛṣṇa!