Hare Krishna  and welcome to our endowment para-rama 2019.

It's never overstated how much Śrīla Prabhupāda encouraged that his disciples should come to the holy dhāma, should visit these places of the pastimes of the Lord, and should relish talking about these pastimes while there. Śrīla Prabhupāda himself personally took the devotees around Vṛndāvana to the different temples and the different places where Kṛṣṇa engaged in His pastimes when He was appearing here 5,000 years ago.

So, therefore, following in the footsteps of Śrīla Prabhupāda, each year we try to assemble a group of enthusiastic and interested devotees to come and go to all the holy places that we are able to hear in this most holy land of Braja-dhāma.

Today, we have come for the first time to this beautiful place of Akrura-ghāṭ. We all know how Akrura was a great devotee of the Lord, but somehow was engaged in the service of Kaṁsa as one of his ministers. And due to that service, when Kaṁsa wanted to bring difficulty, he sent Akrura to secure Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and take them away from Vṛndāvana, where he had no success with his efforts, and bring them to Mathurā, where he hoped to vanquish them.

How foolish Kaṁsa is, wouldn't you say?

At any rate, Akrura came and after much difficulty, convinced Nanda and Yaśodā to place Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in his care. And Kṛṣṇa invited all the cowherd boys, "Come with me, we are going for wrestling. This would be great fun," and everyone came along.

About halfway between Vṛndāvana and Mathurā is this place.

And previously, in ancient times, the Yamunā River ran through here. And Akrura stopped to take a light bath and refreshment, rejuvenate himself for the journey ahead. As he went into the Yamunā River, he bathed and then began to say his Gāyatrī.

And looked in there in the water at this very place, he saw Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. But wait, he thought, "I've just left Him in the chariot." So he got out of the water, went back to the chariot, and saw that they were still there. "Oh, it must be the hot sun," he thought.

Then he went back to the Yamunā River and there again he saw Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. Only this time, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma manifested themselves into different forms. Balarāma became the śeṣa, the eternal serpent, and Kṛṣṇa became the form of Viṣṇu lying on him.

And in this way, he understood there is no difference in the different forms of the Lord. This was also Kṛṣṇa's trick to be able to leave Himself here in Vṛndāvana and send another form outside.

As we all know, Kṛṣṇa never leaves Vṛndāvana. 500 years ago, when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to this holy land of Vṛndāvana, in its very undeveloped state, He would stay here at Akrura-ghāṭ under a famous banyan tree and sleep there at night.

Then during the day, He would go into Vṛndāvana itself to the Imalī tree and sit there and do His bhajana and His japa.

And then visiting the different forests around Vṛndāvana, He would return here to Akrura-ghāṭ to spend His evenings.

So, in both Kṛṣṇa-līlā and Gaura-līlā, we find this is a very important place of pilgrimage. If one goes to this ancient banyan tree, which is actually a Kapittha tree, and prays for enthusiasm and inspiration in the process of devotional service, all such desires are easily granted here, just as Akrura was able to get that vision of the Lord at this exact place.

Of course, Śrīla Prabhupāda's encouragement for us to come to the dhāma was not to come as a tourist.

Sometimes you see devotees, they come and they spend most of their time in Loi Bazar, going this place and that place with the wrong attitude. Actually, the real mood of the devotee when they come to different āśramas is as a beggar, begging for the mercy of the Lord, begging for service to the Vaiṣṇava, and begging for service to the very dhāma itself.

This is the secret of actually relishing the benefits of coming to the dhāma. During the month of Kartik, so many activities are glorified, and one of the most glorified activities is to visit the dhāma. Śrīla Prabhupāda, of course, was aware of all of these things, and this is why he encouraged us.

Because by doing these activities, we become enlivened, we become rejuvenated, and then we're able to go back to our service in the western part of the world, whether it's in Europe or Russia or South America or America itself, all of these different places, and continue on with that inspiration we get from visiting the holy dhāma.

This was Śrīla Prabhupāda's plan when we would come to have parikrama.

So, in this way, we're trying very seriously to take up this mood that Prabhupāda encouraged us, under the direction of Indra-dyumna Swami and Bada Hari Prabhu, we go to all of these different holy places and try to embrace the mood of that place, listen to some pastimes that took place there, and then take those pastimes in our heart, both as something we can share with others when we return to our preaching place and as something that will inspire us for the coming year until we can return back here again.

So, this is a place not many ISKCON devotees know about or come to, but it is a wonderfully quiet place. The surrounding village is very undeveloped, much like the old times that many of us remember Vṛndāvana being.

So we've been very happy to come here. And we ask that you join us at each of the places we go to over this next month as we do our Braja Maṇḍala Vṛndāvana para-rama 2019.

Jai Śrīla Prabhupāda and Kṛṣṇa.