During the Second World War, in the armies of the Allies, just as in the armies of the enemies—that is, Germany, Austria-Hungary, and other countries that fought on the side of Hitler's troops—both sides sent spies into each other's armies. Especially, spies were present in the highest echelons of officer ranks.

For example, German spies could speak such perfect English that it was impossible to suspect that they were not English. They knew English culture very well and had all the habits of the English. They even knew all the English football teams, their English pedigree, and everything else.

British spies could speak German without an accent. They showed great devotion. It was impossible for the Führer to suspect them of being British. This created a specific situation. For example, these British spies were called "G.I." by the German troops.

They had false documents stating that they were born somewhere in Düsseldorf, for example. They gradually achieved high positions, some high ranks in the army. This took them several years, but it was necessary for the cause. In the same way, German spies crossed Europe, went to England with forged documents, and joined the British army.

No one could suspect that they were Germans. Here we will report that those who know military science understand that the main instrument of war is deception. They could have, for example, smoke screens. And in 1944, there was an incident when British officers, former staff, drew up plans on how to defeat the Nazis, where what forces, tanks, and everything else should be located.

And each time, all their plans failed. The enemies knew exactly what they were doing. They began to suspect that they had some kind of spy present in their ranks because otherwise, how would the enemies know all their plans?

They decided that among the thirty-two senior officers, there was a traitor, and Churchill himself personally questioned all thirty-two. They asked all these officers a variety of questions: where were they born, where did they study, where did they get married, what kind of world championships were held in what year, who won with what score.

And each officer answered all the questions without hesitation. They sang the British anthem, "God Save the Queen," and all thirty-two officers cried while singing the national anthem. And therefore, they decided that there couldn't be a spy; they were all pure Britons.

They are all loyal British guys, ready to die for God and the Queen. They continued to lose the battle, for somehow information penetrated the enemy's environment. They couldn't understand. A week later, Churchill walked into this office, and Churchill was a very astute politician.

He suspected one of the officers. He invited all the officers to dinner. He invited all these officers to a dinner party, and when he was talking to this officer whom he suspected, his fingers were in the doorway. And during the conversation, Churchill pinched his fingers in the door.

When the door pinched his finger, he began to swear in German. And they all caught someone else and shot him. This really happened. After that, the British no longer played the beat. So next time you put your head down, look at what you say, and you'll understand.

If we constantly concentrate on Kṛṣṇa by chanting His holy name, then at the most difficult moment of our life, the moment of death, we will also be able to remember Kṛṣṇa and return to the spiritual world.