Hare Krishna, and welcome to our Vrindavan Kartik Karuma 2017.

It's been a tradition for us for the last almost 10 years now to come to Vrindavan with a group of devotees from different parts of the world on the invitation, actually, of Śrīla Prabhupāda, to go to the holy places, have kirtan, discuss the lilas that took place there, to nurture our bhakti-lata-bija, seed of devotion.

In the Shastras, it's said that there are five things that are particularly helpful for making spiritual advancement: chanting Hari Krishna, hearing the Srimad-Bhagavatam, associating with devotees, worshiping the deity, and living in or visiting holy places.

Jiva Goswami actually states in Mathura Mahatmya that by performing any one of these activities, even a neophyte devotee can experience ecstasy. Dear IVC. The Karma hoodie. So, on again, on proper cementation, we have, we have come. It's a tradition, especially during the month of Kartik, because this is a special month of the year where, well, one makes great spiritual advancement, not only here in India but anywhere in the world.

But in Vrindavan, we understand that any devotional service that is done, one of the nine types of devotional service, the result of that service is magnified a thousand times. So, all devotees are eager for spiritual advancement. So, we assemble here to do our parikrama.

Of course, not everyone can come. All the devotees around the world, they have their various responsibilities: school, work, family, society, etc. We'll be filming our program as we go out onto these various holy places and having kirtans, etc. We'll be filming that for all of you, so you can, you can join us.

It's a saying that a picture's worth a thousand words, so I can imagine that a video is worth ten thousand words. So please join us as we do our parikrama this auspicious month of Kartik. Again, it's only by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda that we find ourselves here.

I remember in the early 1970s, in Mayapur, Śrīla Prabhupāda had said from the diorama that he wanted all of his disciples to come every Gaura Purnima to Mayapur for that festival.

We were stunned when we heard that, and actually, that evening, I heard that some of the senior men, some of the GBC, they actually asked for a budget. Everyone should come every year because they were thinking it would create a financial crisis back home in the various temples.

Prabhupada was at him, and he said, "Yes, if possible, try to come to India, try to come to Vrindavan, and try to come to Mayapur, because when we come here, we become so inspired, and we can go back and perform our services with more spiritual strength and inspiration." Another time, I heard Śrīla Prabhupāda say in his room in Vrindavan that Vrindavan is for inspiration.

We come here to, to use a common saying, "get our batteries recharged." Maharaj. Love comment. I need your, yeah, our son. Pramod wanted that we spread the sankirtana movement all over the world. That's our main business, preaching. This is a missionary movement.

But Śrīla Prabhupāda also wanted that we become pure devotees of the Lord.

So, what better place to come than Vrindavan?

Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu states that of all the holy places in the world, in the universe, in the material creation, Vrindavan is the most holy because this is the place that the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, Krishna, comes to perform His lila to attract us back to the spiritual world.

And of all the residents of Vrindavan, those who have the surest, deepest love for Krishna are the Gopis.

We feel fortunate that we're here performing sharanam sharanam, etc., and we'll be very happy to share our experiences with you, our humble, meager realization, so you can be inspired from afar from this great Dham of Sri Vrindavan. So, please stick with us for the next four weeks.

Hari Krishna.

Jai Sri Sri Radhe Shyam. They could see sure. But uh, door.