Hare Krishna, very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vrndavan.

In this very beautiful month of Kartik, Viṣṇupāda, Kṛṣṇa, Puṣya, so, the other day I was, uh, studying a śāstra which I've quoted many times, Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛta, I was reading chapter nine, and I found a very, uh, beautiful pastime. I thought I would share with all of you today.

It will most certainly enrich our appreciation and love for Vrndavan, especially during this month of Kartik. Now, it's a long pastime, so I'll summarize it as best I can while sharing some nectarian details. I'll also take help from my godbrother Śivarama Swami's description of the same pastime in one of his books called Nava Braja Mahimā.

This pastime describes what is said to be a typical evening wherein Kṛṣṇa and his associates enjoy what appears to be an opulent festival that we might imagine takes place in Vaikuntha, in that abode of reverence. But in reality, it's really all part of the sweetness of Braj, in which Kṛṣṇa and his devotees play in different moods and different humors.

So, once upon a time, the cowherd boys rose from their, it's described, after-dinner nap. Apparently, they have after-dinner naps. And, uh, they very quickly woke Kṛṣṇa, saying, "Quote, Hare, just listen to the commotion below.

The performers are waiting for your arrival. Let's go downstairs quickly." So, it looks like something's happening downstairs, underground. So, Mother Yaśodā had servants dress her son in royal attire before having him join his friends in the audience waiting downstairs, because, um, Kṛṣṇa would be sitting at the center, it's described, of a royal assembly, a royal assembly.

So, Mother Yaśodā's servants dress Kṛṣṇa in elegant royal robes and then tucked a jeweled dagger in the sash around his waist, and smeared sandalwood paste on his limbs, and placed, it's written, a prince regent's scepter in his hand, a prince regent's scepter in his hand.

And then they tied Kṛṣṇa's hair in a topknot and bound it with a red and golden string, and crowned it with a peacock feather. And then finally, they placed a wreath woven out of very tiny flowers on his head.

Then a special class of servant boys adorned Kṛṣṇa with flashing earrings, a precious pearl nose ring, a diamond choker, a jeweled locket, and assorted rings of giant pearls, all from the royal treasure chest. So, by this time, Kṛṣṇa was very restless to meet his friends and join the fun below.

So, Mother Yaśodā opened the door of his room, and, and then she invited all the cowherd boys to escort Kṛṣṇa to this festival downstairs. Actually, it's described in a courtyard of the palace, and flanked by friends and servants, Kṛṣṇa held Balarama's hand as he entered the assembly.

It's described looking like the moon rising in the sky alongside influential planets, that's what he looked like coming in with his friends to the courtyard, looking like the moon rising in the sky alongside influential planets. So, there he met his father, Nanda Mahārāja, who on this occasion in Vrndavan was also dressed in royal clothes and seated on a very large throne.

So, both Kṛṣṇa and Balarama joined him, and they sat on either side of him, Kṛṣṇa on one side, and Balarama on the other side. And then Kṛṣṇa and Balarama, it's described, they joined their palms and they humbly offered respects to all of their elders.

Now, this throne was surrounded by silk carpets upon which Kṛṣṇa's friends took their seats in, in two groups. So, Sumukha, Arjuna, and their friends, they sat on the left, and Śridama, Sudama, and their friends, they sat on the right.

And it's described that very stout, very strong servants held big lamps aloft while brāhmaṇas recited auspicious invocations to inaugurate the evening's entertainment. So, roll upon roll of expert musicians played instruments and beat drums, and it's said that townspeople quickly filled this royal court.

But no matter how many guests arrived, there was space to accommodate everybody. And it's written that every guest, from his or her particular vantage point, could see Kṛṣṇa. And also that with so many, uh, Braja-vāsīs gathered together in such a close space, with all of them, uh, lovingly chanting Kṛṣṇa's names, so much bliss was generated that people wondered if entertainment was even necessary to enjoy the evening.

They were just so happy in each other's association. Nevertheless, the performance began, as poets sang their their compositions describing Kṛṣṇa's exploits, uh, with musical instruments. And while they were, they were reciting, they're also dancing at the same time, reciting, playing musical instruments, and dancing.

It's interesting. And the audience, all the Braja-vāsīs, they were quite pleased with the performers. So, Nanda Mahārāja rewarded those performers with gold coins, gold coins, and requested them to come again and again every night that they had this royal performance.

So, then it's described, talented dancing girls charmed the audience by depicting Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, killing asuras like Ariṣṭa and Vyomasura, as well as chastising the Kāliya serpent. And then it's written, a pot-bellied comedian. It actually says that a pot-bellied comedian made everyone laugh by singing and playing instruments as he impersonated demons like Kaṁsa and Jarāsandha.

And in the middle of his act, another clown appeared at the far end of the stage, which led the two clowns to pretend to argue and engage in like a mock fight between them. And while rolling on the ground and laughing, the cowherd boys, they threw coins on the stage, just you can just see this in your mind.

And, uh, the clown, the clowns fought over the money, and they, while they were fighting, they sometimes pulled each other's noses and slapped each other's cheeks. Then at the peak of this, uh, fun, when the audience was roaring with laughter, who appeared on the stage?

Maru Mangal. And he pushed the two clowns aside, and he walked to the center of the stage. And from the audience, the rowdy cowherd boys made fun of Maru and pelted him with what?

With flowers. But Mottu remained unruffled and started his own routine with jokes that immediately had everyone laughing. Then suddenly he disappeared from the stage, only to return in one disguise after another, to come on with one disguise and he'd leave and come on with another disguise like that.

And first he came out dressed as an outcaste and ridiculed the foolish ways that rich people treat those of lower birth. Then he disappeared and came back, appearing as a thief and threatening the audience, which, uh, scared little children into their parents' arms.

And finally, he discarded his costume and again appeared as the very lovable Maru Mangal. And for his last act, he sang the glories of the six kinds of foods, especially the sweets, and he made, funny, very funny, various postures and made very wild faces.

And finally, he left the stage to an overwhelming round of applause, especially from his friends, the cowherd boys. Actually, it's described that Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys were all holding their stomachs and laughing. When suddenly the cowherd boy Raktaka, Raktaka, went and whispered to Nanda Mahārāja, "Mother says you must stop the show now.

Kṛṣṇa and Balarama must come and sleep." Unquote. So, Nanda Mahārāja brought this very interesting evening to a close, and after rewarding all the performers, he took Kṛṣṇa and Balarama by the hand back upstairs. And once the two boys were upstairs, their servants removed their royal jewels, unbound their hair, dressed them in a light sleeping clothes, washed and dried their feet, and offered both of them slippers.

And overwhelmed by exhaustion, then Balarama offered respects to Nanda Mahārāja, embraced Kṛṣṇa, and retired to his room, where he quickly fell asleep as his servants massaged his transcendentally weary body. And Kṛṣṇa, he also said good night to his father, Nanda Mahārāja, and laid down to sleep in his own room, which, it's described, had been freshly washed, dried, and scented with a guru incense.

And the śāstra that we're referring to, it says that incense of guru is Kṛṣṇa's favorite incense. So, if you're a pūjārī, you can take note of that. And as Kṛṣṇa fell asleep, moonlight streamed through the open window, and it illuminated Kṛṣṇa's jewel-studded bed, whose moonstone posts, golden canopy, white sheets, and soft pillows illuminated Kṛṣṇa's resting place.

So many nice details. Again, and I was reading that perched in a corner, a pair of green parrots spread their wings to greet Kṛṣṇa and then huddled together to sleep, as they expected him to do so as well. That's cute.

However, Kṛṣṇa immediately woke up. He immediately woke up and he walked out onto the balcony to appreciate the sweetness of Vrndavan's night, concluding that it was the most fitting atmosphere for his pastimes. Finally, he returned to his room, and leaning back against a pillow on his bed, fixed his mind on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's smiling face, and gradually drifted off to sleep as some intimate servants massaged his feet and others fanned him.

Now, it's written that within minutes, the goddess of sleep overcame the servant boys, who then laid down right there in Kṛṣṇa's room, and all of them quickly fell into a very deep, sound sleep. Just as Kṛṣṇa woke up to pursue his nighttime pastimes.

We were describing his evening pastimes. I actually, I never knew about those evening pastimes. So, seek and ye shall find in the śāstras. Buddhist sadhu. So now he woke up to pursue his nighttime pastimes, and rising from bed without disturbing the boys, who were like scattered all around the room like tossed flower petals, it said, Kṛṣṇa went back out on the balcony.

And then what did he do?

He played his flute in a way that only young Gopis could hear. Kṛṣṇa's master of the flute. So, he played the flute, his flute, in such a way that only young Gopis could hear. And the chariots say that, quote, "The flute's message was an affectionate plea to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her friends." Unquote.

And what did the, what was the message that the flute was giving?

I'll also quote that. "Dear girls," Kṛṣṇa is saying through his flute, "Leave your houses now and set out on the path to our meeting place. I am on my way there. Soon we will be together." That was the message the flute gave.

So, then, uh, uh, tucking the flute into his belt, Kṛṣṇa leaped off the balcony onto an adjacent, adjacent tree, and with the help of a bending branch, he slid to the ground and made his way down the rear part of the hill, the the back part of, uh, uh, Nandagram, where he, uh, quickly, he freely and and quickly moved on a familiar path, it's described, to the banks of the Yamunā, where he often meets, um, the Gopis.

And there he met his beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and other Gopis and enjoyed many hours of rāsa dance with all of them. And as the night came to an end, he quickly returned to Nandagram along the same path that he had followed, crawled up the same tree he had descended earlier, and climbed up to the balcony attached to his room.

Then he very quietly and stealthily returned to his bed to sleep for only an hour before Mother Yaśodā woke him up, saying, "Quote, my dear son Kṛṣṇa, wake up. I know that you're very tired because all day long you heard cows and played with your friends, so you must be very tired.

But why is my child?

To see, the sun is rising." We quoted that in an earlier class as well, that she wakes them up. Little did she know. Hare Kṛṣṇa, what a wonderful pastime described in our, our śāstra.

So, we'll, um, close today again. It's a rather short class, but this is Kartik here in Vrndavan. There's lots of things to do. So, we'll close today with two verses from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Saraswatī's illustrious Vrndavan Mahimāmṛta. Quote, "I worship fortunate Vrndavan, where Kṛṣṇa, with the graceful, intoxicated peacock feather on his head, with a delicate, uh, dark complexion of a blue lotus, with flower garlands, with attractive mineral mineral designs on his body, and with the charming gunje berry necklace, manifests his beauty.

If one travels to Vrndavan, what is the use of going to millions of tirthas?

If one hears the birds singing there, what is the use of hearing the Vedas?

If one has a taste for reciting the names of the trees there, what is the use of stotras and mantras?

If one sees Vrndavan, what is the use of thousands of meditations?" Śrīla Bhaktivinoda.

Yes, lots of wonderful līlās in Śrī Vrndavan dhām. So, we'll be back in a couple of days to share, um, some more with you in this wonderful, very auspicious mantra from Kartik. For glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dhām. Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu ki! Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarāma ki! Śrī Rādhā Sundara ki!

Kṛṣṇa. You.