"*00458*.*
"We want to welcome you all to Javat. This is a settlement that is located on a small hill nearby, and there is a so-called palace; this is the very place where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī lived after she got married. We talked before about Rādhārāṇī appearing in the small village of Rāval; those were her parents. When Kṛṣṇa and His family moved to Nandagrām, Rādhārāṇī's family did the same; they moved to Jāvaṭ. This is the place where Rādhārāṇī spent her youth. It is the Vedic tradition that when a girl reaches a certain age, she gets married, and Rādhārāṇī married Abhimanyu. He is described as a clumsy cowherd boy who spends all his time with the cows; he cleans up after them, and he is with them all the time. Many devotees are surprised and say, "How so? Why did Rādhārāṇī marry him?" But in fact, this is all part of the līlā in order to make the feelings between them even stronger. It is also said that Abhimanyu is none other than the shadow of Kṛṣṇa. The relationship between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is very intimate, but until the moment before the wedding, they are not married. Everything thickens even more after Rādhā marries another. They meet secretly; when Rādhārāṇī was not married to Kṛṣṇa, she could run away from Varṣāṇā, and they met—these were very sweet games. But now everything has become much more complicated because she is married to Abhimanyu and lives in Jāvaṭ. Now she needs to manage to slip out of the house, and meeting with their relationship is even sweeter. This is called *parakīyā*—a relationship outside of marriage. When Rādhā stayed at home and Śyāma lived with them, every morning she came here to Jāvaṭ. When we came to Jāvaṭ a long time ago, there were wild thickets of bushes, and it was impossible to approach the kuṇḍa.

One day, I came here and saw that everything was restored: a new temple was built. This was done by one of the Gauḍīya Maṭha Mahārājas and his followers; they laid marble here and made a platform for you to sit here.

The Ācāryas describe that there are 15 main kuṇḍas in Vṛndāvana. Of course, we all know the Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and there are many, but this kuṇḍa is one of the main ones. In the sacred scriptures, there is a description that there are a large number of flowering plants here, and a large number of pilgrims and demigods also come here to take ablutions. There are a large number of singing, beautiful birds. The magpie knows very well what he is doing. When Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa manage to meet at the moment when she is married, it is very difficult, but they meet here. This place, just like in Kāmya-vana, fulfills all spiritual desires. We did not go there this year, but we came here, and there is a description that when you bathe in this lake, all your desires are fulfilled. As we already said, a large number of wonderful games take place here, but I chose the one I want to share with you today.

One day, Kaṁsa, who was living at that time in Mathurā, began to hear about the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and began to think a lot about her. He did not treat this person with any affection, and therefore he sent his spies so they could find out everything thoroughly about them here, because it was not far from their place of residence. You can imagine what these spies looked like; they communicated with Kaṁsa and were his servants, so they looked like real hooligans. When they returned to Kaṁsa, they talked about Śrīmatī Rādhā. He invited them to his royal chambers and said, "Tell me about this girl." After that, they began to list all her wonderful qualities. You know how it is in our saṅga; it is customary for one of the Vaiṣṇavas to list the 25 transcendental qualities of Rādhā. Imagine all these rude, uncouth liars—in the end, they fell unconscious, and Kaṁsa was then inspired and said, "I definitely need such a girl."

It is difficult to imagine how such an Asura wanted to have Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with him, but this story is repeated because we remember the game when Rāvaṇa wanted Sītā—who was the goddess of prosperity and an expansion of Rādhārāṇī—to be with him. He came up with a reason to go, and he said, "Well, since this whole area of Mathurā-Vṛndāvana belongs to my maṇḍala, this is my everything, so I will take my soldiers and go on reconnaissance. I will look, I will check my estates." He was simply conducting an inspection in his kingdom. So he, with all his followers and a chariot of soldiers in large numbers, came here to Vṛndāvana because he knew very well that Rādhārāṇī lived in Jāvaṭ. He noticed this kuṇḍa from afar and thought that maybe it would be very wise if he left everyone behind and went to this kuṇḍa alone. When we talk about Kaṁsa, we say he is a demon. Yes, but at the same time, remember that he was very intelligent; he had intelligence. He could calculate everything correctly, just like Rāvaṇa, who had so much intelligence that he could conquer 14 planetary systems in his time. There is a description that Kaṁsa had the strength of 10,000 elephants, and he was always armed with earthly and divine weapons. He was tall and shone like gold. At the moment when he approached this kuṇḍa, he was adorned with priceless precious stones and necklaces. You might think that outwardly he looked quite like a demigod, but the Ācāryas say that this radiance of splendor could not eclipse the fact that his nature was Asura. At that moment, being an Asura, he approached this lake, and the lake, in fear of the approaching Asura, became smaller; it shrank. The fragrant wind suddenly stopped blowing, birds stopped singing, and the lotus flowers closed. When a holy person comes to some area, the birds immediately begin to sing, the flowers bloom, and the whole atmosphere becomes divine. At the same time, when a demonic personality comes, the lake begins to shrink, the birds stop singing, and even the fragrant wind stops blowing.

He walked and thought, "Where is this Rādhā? Where will I find her? When will we meet?" Before finding her, he felt that he was experiencing great thirst. He approached this lake and decided to drink a little.

Yesterday, we talked about how this happens—how Kṛṣṇa created the lake, the cowherd boys sang in the streets, and this water was either from the palms or in the way He showed as a līlā. It was His cup from which He drank in front of everyone like a cow. Imagine such a picture: he is so courageous, such a huge Hercules with a weapon, he lowers the weapon to the ground, sits down on one knee, takes water with his palm, and sips a little. There he is, with a mustache, courageous, with black hair, and suddenly, as soon as his lips touch this water, he looks at his reflection in the lake, and who does he see there? An attractive girl. He brushed away the water and was surprised, "Where is my mustache? I see only kajal, eyes decorated like this, eyelashes decorated with mascara." Suddenly, he got up and looked down, and to his horror, he discovered that he was no longer dressed in his pants, belted weapons, and knives, but in fact, he was dressed in women's clothing.

Instead of finding powerful bracelets on his hands, he looked at his hands and saw there delicate bracelets with bells and rings. In Mathurā, he was always walking—he was so courageous, everyone knew that their king was coming—and here he looked and suddenly realized that his movements were very light, gentle, and elegant. One Ācārya describes that his cheekbones became very delicate and small, and his clothes—or rather, her clothes—were very lush. When he looked again at his reflection in the lake, he saw that there was already mascara on his eyelashes, his lips were painted with red lipstick, and on his chin, there was musk. He screamed in horror, "I became a woman! What happened? Save me!" He looked around, and here, not far away on the steps, sat two girls, and they smiled looking at him. In fact, they were none other than Lalitā and Viśākhā. They were well aware that he would come to steal their precious Śrī Rādhā, so they had a plan. He did not see anyone else, so he turned to them and said, "Girls, please help me! This much you can help me—return me to my normal form. What kind of mystical place is this?" Then there is such a description that Kaṁsa began to talk, "In general, the water of this lake fulfills all desires. And what kind of desire did you have in your heart since you have the body of a gopī? Or maybe you wanted to steal this young gopī? You so wanted to have a gopī; well, now you yourself are a gopī, and now you will forever remain like this. You deserved it. You got what you deserved, and we leave." Kaṁsa, in horror, realizes that he cannot return to Mathurā like that; the emperor cannot sit on the throne. "Everyone will be like this, everyone will laugh at me, and they won't believe at all that I am Kaṁsa." He said, "I will remain like this for the rest of my life." Lalitā and Viśākhā went in that direction, so he ran after them, fell on his knees, folded his hands, and began to pray to them. Then he decided to lie, "Oh, dear sakhīs, what you are saying is true. I came to this place to see the glory and beauty of Vraja, but I didn't plan to steal anyone at all." But Lalitā knew perfectly well that he was lying, and she was already ready to pounce on him. At that very moment, Rādhārāṇī appeared in Lalitā's mind and told her, "Dear Lalitā, please bring this scoundrel here. He is now humiliated to such an extent that he is perhaps ready to perform some service for Kṛṣṇa. Before that, he was such a proud Mathurā man who protested against Kṛṣṇa every day and sent demons here to kill Him. Now we have a beautiful young fourteen-year-old gopī who is very much waiting for some advice. Bring him to me." Lalitā, who is known for having a fiery nature—she always wants to protect Śrī Rādhā—in this case said, "Kaṁsa, I cannot help you, but we have Princess Rādhārāṇī who can certainly help you if you approach her correctly. If you attract her mercy, then everything is possible." This is true, isn't it?

What does it mean that everything is possible by the mercy of Rādhā? For us, this means that we can gain Kṛṣṇa consciousness and thus chant in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For this, we need the mercy of Rādhā. Imagine how much Rādhārāṇī is merciful, because even Kaṁsa, being a demon, suddenly wanted to see her like this. You and I, being in demonic consciousness at the moment, already know about her and are thinking, "How to find a meeting with her?" Lalitā recommended, "When you meet such a person, it would be great if you give something as a gift." Kaṁsa thought; he looked at himself. Previously he had ornaments, weapons, and a lot of valuables, and now on his hands were only a few bracelets. So he decided that he would bring this divine nectar water to Rādhārāṇī. Lalitā joked with him and said, "Oh, what a good gopī we have now."

In order to make sure that everything would go well, Kaṁsa began to offer his obeisances to everyone passing by in Jāvaṭ on the way to meet Rādhārāṇī. Then Lalitā took Kaṁsa by the arms, who was in the form of a gopī, and brought him to the meeting. It’s difficult to say whether he or she is meeting Rādhārāṇī. "Please sit here in the reception area, and when Rādhārāṇī is ready, she will come to you." This humble gopī was sitting very humbly and calmly in this room with a bucket of water. Unfortunately, at that moment, he was meditating on his form as Kaṁsa. Imagine, we all meditate on gaining the form of a gopī, but he was so unlucky—a demonic form. Lalitā came to Śrī Rādhā and she said to Rādhārāṇī, "A very unusual gopī is waiting for you in the reception room." Rādhārāṇī asked to clarify what is so unusual about this girl, and Lalitā just laughed. Lalitā says, "Oh, this gopī says that he is Kaṁsa and he came to patrol your domain. When he drank water from Kiśora-kuṇḍa, his male body turned into a female one, and the clothes changed format." As they say in the scriptures, it is very difficult to find your spiritual identity; this happens through many births. But it seems that if one of you gentlemen approaches Kiśora-kuṇḍa after the lecture and sprinkles himself with water, then it is very possible that you will acquire a female form. This is Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā—sometimes it happens. But I hope that now this will not happen to you right away! She began to explain that Kaṁsa is waiting for her to turn him back into his male form because of some mystical ritual. Imagine Kaṁsa; he has already succeeded in everything—he took the form of a gopī—but no, he wanted to go back.

There is a description that Rādhārāṇī thought for a moment, then raised her head high and gracefully entered the room where this new gopī was waiting. There are many beautiful details that are present to describe this game. There is a description of what happened when he saw her; the hall was decorated with all the best that is in all the seasons. Kaṁsa had never seen such incomparable beauty. Then Rādhārāṇī, turning to Kaṁsa—because it was the form of a little girl—said, "Gopīs tell me a very strange story connected with you. Tell me yourself with your own lips what brought you here in Jāvaṭ." Kaṁsa exhaled and said, "O Rādhā, I heard that you have perfection; I came here to take shelter of yours. I am Kaṁsa; I am the king; I am the one who takes care of these lands. But after drinking water from your lake, Kiśora-kuṇḍa, I received some magical curse and my body turned into the body of a gopī." He showed diplomacy; he was completely conditioned, not ready to be in this form. He said, "For the benefit of all the inhabitants of Mathurā, please save me from this humiliation." Imagine, he called it humiliation. "Please save me from this curse so that I would become a king again." Rādhārāṇī said, "If you really are in that position which is a consequence of your own sins—and listen correctly, Rādhārāṇī—my kuṇḍa, Kiśora-kuṇḍa, fulfills the desires of everyone. I think that you became a gopī because you were immersed in thoughts of gopīs. And how can I help you?" Kaṁsa already understood that perhaps he would have to stay like this. At that moment, he folded his hands and began to pray; he began to ask her. If you were Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, what would you ask for? You would say, "I want to be yours, give me service," and you would pray, "I want to become yours, dear Kṛṣṇa, and please take me away from this terrible material world." But he prayed, "O Goddess, please, I want to be a powerful king, I don't want to be a gopī. I conquered others!"

Kaṁsa was a fool. He began to shout, "I have conquered so many, I imprisoned my father himself, I violated all religious principles in order to become an emperor, I really want my own form back, I want to be king!" At this moment, a sound came from the sky, "Yes, Kaṁsa, you are a fool." This has already happened when they announced to him, "You don’t know that the eighth child has already been born, He will kill you." This situation once again confirms that Kaṁsa is a fool. He prayed to Rādhārāṇī, "I need the body of a kṣatriya to rule my kingdom, I cannot rule this kingdom in the body of a twenty-year-old girl." Then Rādhārāṇī, she winked at Lalitā, and she said to Kaṁsa in a very sweet voice, "Your body will repay me, Kaṁsa, but how will you repay me? What will I get for this in return?" Kaṁsa was so inspired: "Hooray, I have a chance, and I will again be a conditioned soul." Imagine, there are those people who want to be conditioned; they are satisfied with everything and they do not want to leave this material world. We, unlike them, pray by reading the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra to quickly leave this material world and finally become devotees. Therefore, we pray to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī: "O energy of Rādhā, please take me out of this ocean of material existence and place me like an atom at your lotus feet." With the same desire with which we want to enjoy in this world, we should want to be freed from this world. It's like a magnet: it has the power of attraction and it also has the ability to repel an object. As much as we are attracted to this material world, this attraction should be redirected to Kṛṣṇa. Rūpa Gosvāmī in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* talks about this; he says how young men are attracted to girls and girls are attracted to guys, with the same force but with a different purity. "Please, Lord, allow me to attract You." Kaṁsa was ready for the Supreme Personality of Godhead because he already felt that soon this moment would come. Kaṁsa said, "You agree to everything," and she says, "Yes, ask." "I agree to anything, I just want to get out of this woman's dress!" She raised her right hand, because she is the Queen of Vṛndāvana, and she was very angry, "Kaṁsa, from the moment my Kṛṣṇa was born, you always tried to kill Him. Everyone knows that you constantly send them all; by your destiny they were all killed. But despite the fact that they were all killed, they interfered with my beautiful Kṛṣṇa's play. If you want to be a king again, Kaṁsa, then promise that you will not send any demons to Vṛndāvana anymore." As soon as she finished this phrase, "no demons in Vṛndāvana," Kaṁsa immediately agreed, "I promise!" She says, "What do you promise?" and he said, "I promise, I promise, I promise never, never, never to send demons to Vraja! I promise!" Rādhārāṇī says, "Do you know what will happen if you break your promise? You will turn into a gopī again, and next time it will be forever and absolutely forever." Of course, he fell at her feet and began to shout, "I promise, I promise, I promise!"

Then Rādhārāṇī, she calmed down a little and more seriously said, "Now go to the southern side of this lake and in the presence of Lalitā and your vows, looking at the sun, drink water again, and after that, you will no longer be this. As you want, you will become the emperor." At that moment, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī comments and reveals to us what Śrīmatī Rādhā was thinking at that moment. She thought, "In Kali-yuga, many will dress in clothes, go change clothes, in order to find something here—imitation. It will not work. Only by the mercy of the Guru who will manifest in this way." Kaṁsa's dreams never came true; he never stole Rādhā. But we, being followers of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness under the guidance of Rūpa, our dreams can come true by the mercy of the Guru. But our dreams are not ours; they are our nightmares. It is our spiritual dreams that can come true because we will repeat the holy names daily. The holy name is the purest form of knowledge, the best of all gates and vows, the auspicious fruit of the highest meditation, the highest stage of renunciation, incomparable spiritual activity, the most pious activity of all, the highest path of self-realization; it grants complete liberation. The goal is the best place that can be found—the best devotional service, the best of all that purifies. It grants love to God and is the basis of remembrance of God, the cause of all causes, and the Supreme Absolute Truth is the very object that is worth worshiping, for it manifests as the supreme preceptor and spiritual master.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.""