Hare Krishna, 
before our food distribution tent here at the Polish Woodstock, the Poland Rock Festival at Krishna's Village of Peace.

You can see there are like five, six lines, each of them's like at least 50 yards long. People are really eager to take this mission for Prasadam because we've been at this event with Krishna's Village of Peace for 25 years.

So all the young people know about our Prasadam. It's actually one of the most attractive features of the entire Woodstock or Poland Rock Festival itself because, you see, when the youth come here, they get hungry. It's a lot of activities going on, a lot of music, a lot of dancing, a lot of different types of entertainment.

So you get hungry, and one of the best places to eat is here at Krishna's Village of Peace.

They say nothing speaks louder than success. We have, we've been cooking about 49 or 50 tons of foodstuffs. We have seven kitchens, we have about 150 to 200 devotees working in shifts around the clock. For the actual Woodstock Festival, Poland Rock Festival, it's a three-day event, but for us, it's a five-day event because we come a little bit early.

And since day one, it's been like this. The other day I said, Krishna is all attractive.

He's attractive in many ways, in the form of His name, in the form of His pastimes, His devotees, and Prasadam. Both, one said that Prasadam is Lord Chaitanya's secret weapon, meaning that if a person's not inclined to hear philosophy, or the person's not inclined to chant, I don't know how, because the chanting, as soon as whatever the case, everyone likes to eat, and our Krishna Prasadam, our foodstuffs, are in this movement very tasty.

Cool, Yamuna Devi made sure of that when she learned from Śrīla Prabhupāda how to cook Prasadam, and she made that all-famous wonderful cookbook, which will be the standard, I think, for the next 10,000 years.

Prasadam, it's so tasty, it's so nourishing, nourishing, so fulfilling. And the most important thing about Prasadam is that it's blessed. It's vegetarian foodstuff offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who takes it, who relishes that, that by His grace, He leaves so much for us to enjoy and to become purified and to awaken our love of God.

So even when you take it, you don't know the effect that's there. You just relish the taste and the good association of devotees. It's like medicine. You take the medicine, you don't know how it's working, but you have faith in the doctor that he knows the proper prescription.

So in the same way, you take a plate of Prasadam like this. You can see how nice this Prasadam is at our Krishna's Village of Peace.

There's rice, there's sabji, there's papadums, there's halava, cooked very nicely. We have a big pot there, we cook the sabji there. Someone takes this, tasting good. But Kṛṣṇa consciousness and devotional service, like anything in Krishna consciousness, does the cleansing process is going on.

So you feel good, like after you take a bath, you feel refreshed. After you take Prasadam, you feel refreshed. You feel refreshed after chanting Hare Krishna.

You feel refreshed after hearing the Bhagavad-gītā class. You hear, you feel refreshed. So here, we're refreshing approximately 160,000 people. Of course, some people come back for seconds, thirds. I don't have the proper calculation, but we are, by the end of this event, in two days, we will have distributed for a nominal fee, 160,000 plates of Prasadam.

Our goal is to please Śrīla Prabhupāda because he wanted to see this movement spread all over the world.

And he was always talking about, you know, doing big, big book distribution, big Prasadam distribution, many temples open, many people joining. So here at Woodstock, it's a huge event, again, 2.2 million people. This is about as much as we can do with the 700 devotees we have, round-the-clock Prasadam.

And it's so satisfying to the heart to see how the people love it, people coming back again and again year after year after year. And this is the main place people eat. There are other things, but, you know, vegetarianism, this is vegan, vegan is very popular these days.

So people, they feel comfortable here, they like to come and eat here. And it's transcendental. Not so secret anymore, again, Prabhupāda's secret weapon, that's a secret anymore.

At least here, Krishna's Village of Peace is an open secret.

Come to Krishna's Village of Peace, hang out with the devotees, go to the mantra yoga, kirtan, face painting, questions and answers, yoga shops, exhibits.

Come here and just relish the process of Krishna consciousness.

As much attention, much attention introduced. And know for sure, this Prasadam is purifying. One little story I'll end with that I always liked about Rāmānujācārya. From Sri Lanka, one time he was taking Prasadam next to the Kāverī River, and some atheists came by and they were making a joke.

They were saying that, "Oh, Rāmānujācārya, he says that those vegetables have a transcendental nature to them because they're offered to God." They were joking like that. So Rāmānujācārya, he took a little bit of that Prasadam and he threw it into the Kāverī River.

Everyone saw, and some fish came, six or seven fish, and they nibbled on that Prasadam from the plate of Rāmānujācārya. Immediately, those fish assumed their four-armed eternal forms and they were no longer fish. They rose from the water and they ascended.

So, let's push on. We may not see that here at Woodstock, or have a mini-Rāmānujācārya, but the Prasadam is Prasadam, and it will have its effect in due course of time. That's up to the Lord when, where, and how.

But it's transcendental. So we are very satisfied to provide for the youth here, 160,000 people, delicious Prasadam, cooked by our devotees, offered to our Deities, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Gopīnātha, Śrī Śrī Gaura Nitai, Śrī Śrī Jagannātha, Baladeva, Subhadra, and we see lokas diminishing, yet offered very conscientiously with Gāyatrī mantra.

So we're very satisfied that these, these young people here are relishing something that is very dear to our Gaudiya Vaishnavas, something that is Prasadam. So we'll go back and continue now. Jai Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityānanda, Śrī Advaita Gadādhara Śrīvāsa, Gaura bhakta vrinda ki, Jai Śrīla Prabhupāda ki, Jai.

Krishna's Village of Peace, Woodstock, Poland Rock 2019, Radha Krishna.