"*00514*.*
"Good evening, everyone, and welcome back to our short series on Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s journey from Jagannāth Purī to Vṛndāvana. I believe this is part four. In my research, I found that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura actually goes into great depth discussing this particular pastime of Lord Caitanya’s travels to Vṛndāvana. He writes about it in his books; he writes that—actually, we didn't know this before, but I discovered it by reading—just after an ecstatic Ratha-yātrā in Jagannāth Purī, this desire of Caitanya Mahāprabhu manifested in His heart to go to Vṛndāvana. In our first or second class, we discussed different reasons why Mahāprabhu wanted to go to Braj. He summarizes everything in a very nice way, and I’ll just quote him: "It was only natural that Lord Caitanya would want to visit Vṛndāvana because that was His transcendental playground as a young boy 5,000 years ago." 

Recently, when we were in Kārtika in Vṛndāvana going out to different places, I would often use this word "playground." I think I got it from Bhakti Caitanya Swami; I think I heard him give a lecture on *Vana-līlā* stories, and it just appealed to me. He described Vṛndāvana as a playground because Kṛṣṇa is a young boy there; He never ages beyond 16, so it's kind of like a playground for His transcendental *līlā*.

The general spiritual abode and Goloka—the topmost planet within that abode—but the general abode is kind of the official kingdom of God. We say "master-servant," a very nice relationship, but that predominates in Vaikuṇṭha. As we used to say when we were in the military, we had to address our officers, "Sir, yes, sir." In Vaikuṇṭha, that's the mood; it’s a very beautiful mood to be the servant of a glorious master, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. But Vṛndāvana is a little different; it's more intimate, it's more like family. You can be a servant of God, He can be your friend, He can be your child, or He can be your lover—all on the transcendental platform. It's very appealing, and all those relationships fit into the concept of a playground.

Just like this Gangā River: sitting during the day, it's a playground. Children are playing, the parents are chasing after the children, the parents are walking with the children behind, exchanging sweet words—it's a playground. This is the mood of holy Vṛndāvana. It's not so official. "Official" is... and we're very grateful to Śrīla Prabhupāda for introducing us to that playground. But I was always using the word, yet I didn't know if there was a reference for it other than my exalted god-brother, Bhakti Caitanya Swami. So I was very happy to read in Bhaktisiddhānta's words that this is the transcendental playground: "It was only natural that Lord Caitanya would want to visit Vṛndāvana because that was His transcendental playground as a young boy 5,000 years ago." I found that authorized quote from śāstra.

A few days ago, we finished part three of this series, where Lord Caitanya and His servant Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya were actually leaving Oḍiśā, crossing the frontier of Oḍiśā, and entering into another state in India. There are different states or regions, so they left Oḍiśā and came to Jharkhand. It’s pronounced "Jharkhand." Okay, West Bengal, Oḍiśā—so this is a state called Jharkhand. We're somewhat familiar with that because we know of the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. That's one of our favorite pastimes: that Lord Caitanya made the animals chant and dance. It’s a special forest; it means a multitude of *jhārī*, or bushes, that comprise a very dense forest along with different types of beautiful creepers and sweet-smelling wild kadamba trees. When you talk about a forest, there’s a variety: there’s redwood forest, there’s pine forest. So one might think, "What kind of forest was it? Was it like the Amazon jungle?" No. I actually visited the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, and I was thinking it would be like the Amazon, but it was just a forest of bushes. *Jhārī* means a dense forest of bushes scattered here and there—well, more than just here and there, quite closely—of kadamba trees. This is actually what it looks like if you go through it now. We know there are different parts of Vṛndāvana: there are 12 main forests, and there are sub-forests, and sub-sub-forests. So the Jharikhaṇḍa forest contains... it’s a vast tract of land which includes different territories as well.

We're just preparing you here for Lord Caitanya’s entrance into the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, so you get an idea of where He was going, what He was getting into with Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya. Prabhupāda himself gives us a very detailed description of the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, all the different tracts of land in the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. Prabhupāda took the time in one of his purports to give us a detailed understanding of the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. Those of you who are connoisseurs of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, you probably already know this. *Madhya-līlā*, Chapter 17, verse 46, Prabhupāda gives a lot of detail about this forest. I'm going to have trouble pronouncing the regions, but bear with me; this is Prabhupāda writing: "The great forest of Jharikhaṇḍa is a great tract of land including Aṅgula, Lāhārā, Bāmara, Boṇāi, Gaṅgāpura, Choṭa Nāgapura, Yaśapura, and Śeragūḍha. All these places, which are covered with mountains and jungles, are known as Jharikhaṇḍa." There you go. Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! 

It kind of sounds scary, of course. Although it's very wild, it became a transcendental place because it was touched by the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But I was reading that historically, at the time that Mahāprabhu crossed from Oḍiśā into Jharkhand and thus into the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, I was reading that this Jharikhaṇḍa forest had never been explored. No human beings had ever gone there; literally, that means no one traversed through there because there were some aborigine people who were living there, but basically nobody went there. It was just too wild, it was too dangerous. Just to give you an idea: one historian writes that the animals there had never smelled humans. Wow, the animals had never smelled humans! Actually, tigers—their favorite flesh is human flesh. They don't get it very often; it must be a special treat. But once a tiger has tasted human blood, that tiger will not eat anything else. That’s why they have to hunt the tiger down if a tiger comes into a village and attacks somebody; they have to find it and kill it because it will only eat human beings. This is not something transcendental, but it’s just sort of interesting.

Traveling in India in those days, because there were jungles everywhere, was fraught with danger. Jungle terrains were very difficult to get through; wild animals and thieves and robbers would sometimes hide out in jungles because there was no police, and they could rob pilgrims. This is what—just to get you an idea, to prepare you—this is what Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya are getting into. It was pretty much the case everywhere in India at that time. Even between Vṛndāvana and Jaipur, that was a very dangerous route. One of my first disciples from Australia did his PhD thesis on Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Imagine doing a PhD thesis—you get to do a lot of nectarean study. So one day, he shared a very interesting piece of information with me that he got during his research. In the Jaipur museum archives, he actually found a handwritten letter by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Ṭhākura was complaining to the King of Jaipur that there were many thieves and many dacoits on the way from Jaipur to Vṛndāvana who were bothering the pilgrims coming back and forth. They would rob them and beat them and kill them. So in this letter, he was complaining, "You're the king, why don't you do something about it?" He said, "Do something about it! Station your military along the road so that we can travel peacefully from one holy place to another."

I found it interesting because we think of these illustrious personalities writing their books on the science of bhakti, but they also had to live in this world; they had to have their practical affairs. So Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was going back and forth from Vṛndāvana to Jaipur and Jaipur to Vṛndāvana to see the deities, and he's complaining, "There's all these robbers beating everybody up and killing; you're the king, do something!" Just like Prabhupāda was very practical as well, writing the lofty *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* purports but also managing a society which is growing all around the world. Our ācāryas are like that. 

There were many wild animals—that doesn't ring a bell for us because, well, nowadays we have highways and trains and planes. We only see wild animals in the zoo, and if you go "boo," they go "wow" and you get scared and run away. But what if you're in the jungle and you go "oh," and they come and eat you? It happened all the time. Yes, what is that movie, the drama *The Wizard of Oz*? "Lions and tigers and bears, oh my!" But really: lion, tiger, bear—whoa! You have to have bear spray. Now you can spray the bear and he goes away sometimes. 

Many times I’ve told the story that Bhūgaji Prabhu—his nickname was "Bhūgi," but his name was Viśvambhar Dāsa—was a close friend of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and we used to go see him in the 1970s. He came to Vṛndāvana in 1929 or 1930 something like that; there was nothing there. It was just jungle, really. Even before Prabhupāda established the temple, it was so far from Vṛndāvana, we thought nobody was going to come there because it was a jungly area. He came as a *sādhu* and they built little mud huts and grass huts—that’s how they lived in Vṛndāvana. And he told us in those days there were lots of tigers in Vṛndāvana, lots of tigers. And sometimes the tigers would come and they'd enter into the grass hut or into the mud hut, and they would eat the *sādhus*. Now, the problem nowadays is you don't want to get hit by a rickshaw or a car or something, but in those days, you don't want to be food for a tiger. 

"How did you survive?" He said, "We learned the trick. We would take a big pot of milk, we'd boil a big pot of milk and put guḍ or natural sugar in it, and we'd put it outside the hut, and it would be steaming like that and sweet. So when the tigers would come, they would smell that, and before coming in the hut to eat the people, they would drink this milk, and it was very satisfying; they'd turn around and go away." So, he said, in front of every hut there was a big pot of milk. And many times in the morning, they'd wake up, there'd be no milk in the pot, and they'd go, "Haribol, Kṛṣṇa!" 

So, when they started entering into this jungly region, the first thing they saw was wild animals. It wasn't that once in a while, like these days; they were everywhere. Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya was so afraid. Mahāprabhu wasn't afraid. *Kṛṣṇa rakhe yāre, ke tāre māre?* If Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you, and if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you. But Bhaṭṭācārya, he was shaking, seeing these wild tigers and different foxes and snakes and spiders—big spiders. But he had nothing to fear because he was with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is in the heart of every living entity. You remember, at one point he was living in a cave and his companion was a poisonous snake, but he had no fear because he had full faith in Kṛṣṇa. But the local people were afraid. And it’s described that the Lord in the heart of the snake told the snake to leave; well, the snake left one day because Kṛṣṇa is in the heart of every living being. Mahāprabhu is specifically directing the wanderings of all living entities. So it’s described, when they entered this forest, all the animals were there. By the influence of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, all the animals stood to the side. "Here's some nice human meat," but when Mahāprabhu came, by the influence of Mahāprabhu, they all came to the side. They were just walking through these rows of wild animals and nothing was happening. 

And that's confirmed: "Bhaṭṭācārya was very much afraid to see them, the wild animals, but by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s influence, all the animals stood to one side. Hare Kṛṣṇa." One very famous Vaiṣṇava poet, who is very much appreciated in our *sampradāya*, he wrote in his poems more detail about what transpired. Expert servant... he addressed Balabhadra; he said, "Bala, don't forget about the pastimes of the cowherd boys. Whenever the demons were coming to attack Kṛṣṇa, they would first attack His cowherd boyfriends. And even though they were very small, they didn't cry; they just called out Kṛṣṇa’s name with faith and with confidence." 

And Mahāprabhu continued, "Do not fear, the protective Kṛṣṇa is always with you, and remember that there's nothing more fearful than getting separated from our eternal lover, Kṛṣṇa. That is real fear." 

Having said this, just like Bhaṭṭācārya just walked into the jungle, even though he was still afraid—yes, it’s described in even more detail in *Madhya-līlā*, Chapter 17, verses 18, 19, and 20. We're all hankering for details like Prabhupāda said—Deity worship: "detail, attention to details, a sign of love." In the material world, people are bored with the details, but one who relishes details about the Lord and His pastimes... "When the Lord passed through the solitary forest chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, the tigers and elephants seeing Him gave way. When the Lord passed through the jungle in great ecstasy, packs of tigers, elephants, rhinoceroses—I didn't know there were rhinoceroses—and boars came, and the Lord passed right through them." 

A tiger was lying on the path, and Mahāprabhu, walking along the path in ecstatic love, touched the tiger with His feet. The Lord said, "Chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa." The tiger immediately got up and began to dance and to chant, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." Another day, while Caitanya Mahāprabhu was bathing in a river, a herd of maddened elephants came there to drink water. The elephants came before Him. The Lord immediately splashed some water on the elephants and asked them to chant the name of Kṛṣṇa. 

Prabhupāda mentions in the purport to that chapter of *Madhya-līlā* that when Mahāprabhu was facing these dangers, He set an example. He had no fear because, well, His holy name is fear personified—fear is afraid of Kṛṣṇa’s holy name, which is not different than Kṛṣṇa. So we can understand that Mahāprabhu had no fear, but to set an example for us conditioned souls how to take shelter of Kṛṣṇa in difficult times, the Lord did as follows: very dangerous situation, they needed protection, so what example did Mahāprabhu give? He started chanting mantras for protection; specifically, He started *kīrtana* because *kīrtana* is made of mantras. So He started *kīrtana* as a means of protection. 

And there were three specific mantras that Mahāprabhu chanted in the Jharikhaṇḍa forest that became, and are, very popular in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, and this is their origin. You know them, you've heard them; this is the origin, when He was going through the forest for protection. He called out these mantras:

*kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa pāhi mām*
*kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa rakṣa mām*
*kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa pāhi mām*
*kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa rakṣa mām*

"O Lord Kṛṣṇa, please protect me and maintain me. O Lord Rāma, the descendant of King Raghu, please protect me. O Kṛṣṇa, O Keśava, the killer of the Keśī demon, please maintain me."

Nowadays, singers sing these mantras, but they're so important, so relevant to our situation right now because we may not be living in a jungle or even passing through a jungle, but we live in asphalt jungles—the cities of Kali-yuga, full of fearful things and fearful people. I don't have to go into detail about the dangers of living in the cities of Kali-yuga. So you could say we live in an asphalt jungle—so much asphalt you don't even see a tree anymore, even a *jhārī*—a bush or a flower—you just see concrete everywhere, full of the population of people. It’s been stated that in the age of Kali, most people are śūdra-like in nature. These three mantras that became famous came from His heart. As He is going into the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, we can make them more prominent in ISKCON because the Lord set this example. And then, of course, the Lord was chanting the *mahā-mantra*, the *yuga-dharma*, the process for this age, where the power and the potencies of all other mantras are included in one mantra: the *mahā-mantra*. 

What happened? All the animals started chanting and dancing. It’s described in prayer: in love, they were elevated to the stage of *prema*. Which we know, *vāsudeva-sarvam-iti*—it may take many lifetimes to come to the point of being fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, but hearing the chanting from the lips of the Lord, they attained the stage of *prema* almost instantaneously. This is standard practice; we're all *sādhakas*, we're very happy being *sādhakas* step-by-step. There's also *guru-kṛpā*—sometimes a disciple may get special mercy—and there's *kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*—sometimes the Lord gives special mercy as well. Just like Śrīla Prabhupāda mentioned in Jagannāth Purī, there's a deity discovered by Caitanya famously called Toṭā Gopīnātha. We often go to that temple and have these wild *kīrtanas* because it's said that deity can give *prema* to us; he can bestow *prema*. *Sādhana* means that an aspiring devotee, one who is following rules and regulations and is not yet spontaneous—there's no *rāgānuga-bhakti*, etc., what to speak of *prema*—He can give you *prema* in an instant. This *kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*, *guru-kṛpā*, and the gradual process of *sādhana-bhakti*. 

We should focus on the *sādhana-bhakti* because it's very rare that that type of *guru-kṛpā* or *kṛṣṇa-kṛpā* comes. Just like sometimes a university, a prestigious university, they bestow a particular degree that you usually get from graduation upon someone who's not even gone to the school because they've become very expert and very proficient in that subject and added to its glory around the world. So they get a degree from the university, a PhD, they didn't even study, but they get it from the school. So sometimes devotees get special mercy, but we should follow the general path of going through four years of education to get our graduation at a university. We should go through the gradual process of chanting, dancing, feasting, following rules and regulations in this lifetime to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That’s the general way, *sādhana-siddha*. 

So when Mahāprabhu chanted, the butterflies, the squirrels, the bees, the elephants, the tigers, the rhinoceroses—immediately *prema*, and they started chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Like Prabhupāda writes in his purports, that the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa when heard from the lips of a pure devotee like Śrīla Prabhupāda, it has special effects; it doesn't lose its potency because it's on a tape. The vibration is there. Therefore, we should hear Śrīla Prabhupāda’s lectures, we should hear his *bhajanas* as often as possible because special potency is there. By the moment... much too early, the beginning of the movement, he passed away during Maṅgala-ārati when all the devotees were at the temple, but there was a tape of Prabhupāda chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa when he left. So when he left, that's all the sound that was in the room: chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa on a tape. And after he died, Prabhupāda wrote him a letter, has to be published in the *Back to Godhead* magazines. In English, we call that posthumous; *posthumous* means after the person's departed. So he said many things in appreciation of Jayananda Prabhu's service in that letter, and then he said, "My dear Jayananda, if you had any amount of material desires, unfulfilled material desires, you've gone to svargaloka and from there you can continue your devotional service and be transferred to Vaikuṇṭha." Then he said, "But because you were hearing the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa at the moment of your death, I say you have gone to Kṛṣṇaloka." This is, you know, it never deteriorates, it never loses its potency, irregardless of how one hears it. It's supremely—supreme blessings, apparently beneficial. Especially when it's chanted in a congregation; there's a special potency there. Just like this morning, a small group of devotees came for chanting *japa* at six o'clock, but you know, everyone who was there was very sincere in the chanting of their *japa*, so therefore we stayed together for three hours non-stop. By 10 to 25 rounds, we just—nobody could leave because being all together like that, there was some special potency in chanting *japa*. 

We welcome you tomorrow morning. Actually, it was so nice that when we finished, nobody wanted to leave. We all finished our rounds, but like sometimes you know you go to a *nāma-haṭṭa*, alright, *kīrtanas*—after it's over, there's this silence and nobody wants to move, nobody wants to go. It was like that. However you chant the *mahā-mantra*, the same effect is there. Exactly how this phenomenon took place that the animals started to chant, that’s described in detail by Kavirāja Gosvāmī in Chapter 17 of *Madhya-līlā*. Feeling eight ecstatic symptoms of love of God, through the jungle... five or seven—it's really interesting—five or seven tigers came. Joining the deer, the tigers began to follow the Lord. Seeing the tigers and deer following Him, He immediately remembered the land of Vṛndāvana. He then began to recite a verse describing the transcendental qualities of Vṛndāvana. He appeared in the role of the mood of a devotee to teach us the process of devotional service. We hear how a pure devotee, due to his purity and his *bhāva*, his mood, his love for Kṛṣṇa, everything's a stimulus for remembering Kṛṣṇa. 

You know, some dark clouds assembling on the horizon, a non-devotee thinks, "Oh my God, it's going to rain," but the devotee thinks, "Ah, Kṛṣṇa," because that's the color of Kṛṣṇa. These are stimulus. There's a chapter, Chapter 26 of *Nectar of Devotion*, entitled "Stimulus for Love of Kṛṣṇa." There's so many ways a devotee can see Kṛṣṇa, even in His material energy. The greatest love for Kṛṣṇa: when Śrīmatī sees a tamāl tree, which is darkest by nature, she remembers Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa sees a kadamba tree, which has a golden look to it under the sunlight, then He remembers Rādhā. So here’s Lord Caitanya; these wild animals are coming like tigers and wolves, and He's remembering Kṛṣṇa, He's remembering Vṛndāvana. "Like what? There is no hunger, anger, or thirst there, though naturally inimical human beings and fierce animals live together there in transcendental friendship." That's the perfect explanation from the mouth of Mahāprabhu. 

Deer and tigers specifically are following Him, so the Lord turns around and what does He say to them? The tigers and deer began to chant Kṛṣṇa and dance in ecstasy. We're meant to dance in ecstasy when we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, not be wallflowers. All the tigers and those—meaning female deer—danced and jumped. Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya saw them, and he was struck with wonder: "What is this? Who is Mahāprabhu?" Of course, he knows. "What is this mantra that decorates our lips every morning for two or three hours? How blessed we are!" 

And then the poet, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta's—he writes at this point: "All the deer and lions started embracing each other; snakes and mongooses started eating together; swans and fish started swimming together, because the nature of all these living entities had started changing to the opposite, that they were feeling love for Caitanya Mahāprabhu." This is miraculous. What’s the definition of a miracle? A miracle is something that contradicts the stated laws of nature. You can't change the laws of nature—that's just how they are—but a miracle is, because of some spiritual potency, the laws change. And deer and lions, who are afraid of each other, they're embracing each other; snakes and mongooses, who always fight, they're eating together; swans, who eat fish, they're all swimming together at their opposite nature. Their opposite nature came about because of the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. 

And that will happen to us. Our conditioned, materialistic nature is miraculous; it can also change. We can also become *Vaikuṇṭhavāsīs* by chanting. It's an axiomatic fact. Let's hear how the poet, Bhakti-kiśora, describes this phenomenon—I wrote it down by hand originally—"Such was the beauty of personified love who, wandering in the forest of Jharikhaṇḍa, called out the names of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā. Even the demigods' eyes became wet with tears while witnessing this pastime." *Suras* are foreigners, but they still retain some material desires. Nevertheless, witnessing the pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, even the demigods' eyes were flooded with tears. Such is the potency of Gaurāṅga. I don't know if you were present what that *kīrtana* was, and this young boy here with a blue scarf, he was looking at the picture of Pañca-tattva while Viśvambhar was chanting, and tears were streaming down his eyes for the whole *kīrtana*. I took some photos of it. So what to speak of the demigods, and then what to speak of the animals? How potent is this mantra! And hearing these things, our *śraddhā*, our faith in the mantra, should increase a thousandfold. Otherwise, what is the use of hearing? Well, just hearing—like snakes have holes in the side of their head that look like ears, they don't function like ears. So when we hear these things, it has to go to the heart and melt the heart, and then we have to wake up tomorrow morning, I'm gonna go at six o'clock in the morning to this field and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa with the Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs. 

Prabhupāda also has his commentary on this pastime. He writes in his purports, specifically, that as a result of chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names, all the animals became non-envious. This envy is like—you could say the cardinal sin in biblical language; it's the reason we fell from grace because we became envious. Prabhupāda said of Kṛṣṇa’s—it’s like the cardinal sin. So we carry that envy into this world and we become envious of God's parts and parcels. It's a great obstacle to our spiritual progress. Rather than becoming envious, we should glorify the qualities of our brothers and sisters, those who are on the same path back to Godhead. We should always be glorifying them. But you can see this envy in a very clear way, like when a cat and a dog meet on the road; you know, they're like—it's like envy personified. And sometimes people are like that, sometimes nations are like that. Envy is something we have to overcome. It's very aptly called the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa: the "peace formula." He sees with equal vision all living entities; he doesn't see their bodies, he sees who they are: the soul. He sees they're part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, they're my brothers and my sisters. 

How powerful is this mantra! It can not only solve our problems, it can solve the problems of the whole world, irregardless of what those problems are, because they all come from a lack of spiritual consciousness. And as soon as you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, your consciousness is elevated. So the solution, really—we say it, it's a strong statement—the solution to all the world's problems is *kīrtana*, and you will be a great center; you'll go all over the world and you'll chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and you bring peace to the whole world, yes, in this planet. You can start when you're 18 years old. So this chanting, it destroys this cardinal sin, this deep impurity we have of envy; it destroys it. Imagine how powerful it is. It destroys envy. 

Now, this state of consciousness, which you could say it exists in the spiritual world—there's no envy—it's also appreciated in the Holy Bible, in Isaiah 11:6. There's a beautiful verse I remember from my youth. Just like we're hearing how the animals all got together, they're non-envious, their opposite nature, but they're embracing each other—same thing is described in the Bible: "The wolf shall live with the lamb, the leopard shall lay down with the goat, the calf, the lion, and the yearling shall be together, and a small child shall lead them." The wolf shall live with the lamb, the leopard shall lay down with the goat, the calf, the lion, and the yearling shall be together, and a small child shall lead them. That's also our prayer; we're not only concerned with our own deliverance, we want the deliverance of all our brothers and sisters, irregardless of whatever species of life they're in. And actually, this is the mood of a Vaiṣṇava: his sadness is to see people bereft of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and his or her happiness is to see people getting the opportunity—the opportunity for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is our heart as Vaiṣṇavas. 

We have the same type of verse in *Bhāgavatam*, Fifth Canto, 18th chapter, text number nine. One of my favorite verses: "May there be good fortune throughout the universe, and may all envious persons be pacified. May all living entities become calm by practicing bhakti-yoga, for by accepting devotional service they will think of each other's welfare. Therefore, let us all engage in the service of the supreme transcendence, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and always remain absorbed in thoughts of Him." And that's already happening as a result of this International Society for Krishna Consciousness. And you could say that, well, this movement was actually predicted by Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, an associate of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in his following words that we find in the *Śloka* book. This is actually describing all of you: "From the moment that the holy name of Hari appeared on the earth, Vaiṣṇavas became manifested everywhere, adorned with spotless tilaka and neck beads and equipped with the mahā-mantra. In the midst of the age of Kali, they purified the atmosphere chanting." So indeed, it came to pass. 

So, as Lord and Balabhadra continued on their long journey to Vṛndāvana, a child describes that some days were, quote, "as good as walking on a bed of roses and others were as bad as walking on burning coal." In a very rustic way, he says, but the beautiful eyes of Vihāriṇī-priyā—Rādhā in separation—meaning Mahāprabhu, were always searching for Kṛṣṇa’s abode in Vṛndāvana. Mahāprabhu appeared as Mahāprabhu to experience Rādhā's love for Him, so He’s in that mood of Rādhā feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. Referring to Lord Caitanya, but the beautiful eyes of Vihāriṇī-priyā—Rādhā in separation, meaning Caitanya Mahāprabhu—were always searching for Kṛṣṇa’s abode of Vṛndāvana. Mahāprabhu is always searching for Kṛṣṇa’s abode. And Balabhadra would fan Him and wash His lotus feet because there were cuts, insect bites, and blisters on His feet; he would wash His lotus feet with his tears. Bhaṭṭācārya—you know, Mahāprabhu's feet were bruised, etc.—so he would wash them and cool them with his tears. He wouldn't take water and wash them off of His feet; he would wash the lotus feet of Mahāprabhu with his tears. 

And while washing those lotus feet, he would say to himself, "Just look at these lotus feet which are worshiped by Indra, washed by Brahmā, decorated by Śiva, kissed by the Yamunā, served by Lakṣmī, fanned by Garuḍa, are the ornaments of Sītā, who are appreciated by the royal ruler of Bhārata. They are the life of Lakṣmaṇa, the heart of Hanumān, and the faith of Vibhīṣaṇa. These are the feet; these feet are the only savior of Prahlāda, the only promise on Bali Mahārāja's forehead, the only shelter of the Vedas, by the mercy of the Matsya avatāra, the only base of Mandara Hill for the churning of the milk ocean, and the only pleasure of Govardhana Hill, the only pleasure of Govardhana Hill." 

The only word that Mahāprabhu would utter besides chanting was, "Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana." And in conclusion for tonight—because we have to get up early tomorrow to do our *japa*—it's also mentioned the following, and I found this very interesting: on the way to Vṛndāvana, sometimes Mahāprabhu would run, sometimes He would walk very slowly, sometimes He would dance, sometimes He would stop, sometimes He would laugh like a madman, sometimes He would cry like He had lost someone, sometimes He would become angry, and sometimes He would become very serious. Prabhupāda said somewhere that what you do during the day, you know, your mind puts it together—like you see gold and you see a mountain, so at the nighttime your mind puts it together and you see a golden mountain—so he said what you see and hear during the day may make an impression, and you dream those things. So my hope is that by hearing all these wonderful pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya and all those fortunate animals, that maybe, just maybe, you'll dream of Lord Caitanya tonight when you go to sleep. Why not? 

Take all our fallen brothers and sisters' souls back to Godhead too. *Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya!* Hare Kṛṣṇa.""