Traditionally, devotees, so we have a monk, a star, Sri Racha bug, who is not saying who is the Inspector General of the ill-tibetan police force, was guarding the border between India and China. The TMV India, even though he lives in Delhi, he travels all over India and he does a terrific amount of work.

It does many charity works and he associates with many sadhus wherever he goes. He is my friend, touched. I wanted to stand up to receive him. I didn't imagine Chester petitions to define English and sudden demise to do the to manage and do that.

When it becomes really what is committed. So last time when she's a girl, he went to meet the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, you'll get it. Another Baba Ramdev, so he was present there. So somehow we got to meet him.

And then because of association, and then he had a request to come to Vrindavan and he expressed his desire to come to Vrindavan. So even though he's very busy, somehow he managed to come for the last day of Kartika to associate with Maharaj and also the service.

In the government service, Recharges graboid, Mr. Putin Pradesh, from Devil, but as human, yet probably shown that of nature to be just over there. When his son Daniel Tosh communications, when you think my vehicle wash over the - typically effects with a fascinating article, she's a senior.

He's been seen many videos of the tour of the polished or on YouTube and Facebook. And he's expressed his happiness on how some people movement is being spread all over the world. And would you like to say some words these financial actions and revise about show me your vision, a series of reports?

I told us consent, you Supersoul, Gerod Holliman, hey Krishna, hey!

It's a metal of immense pleasure for me to be here amongst you all devotees, and especially in the electric company of Maharaj. I have been hearing about him for the last many years. I have seen his YouTube videos, but chance came after the spoon.

Very I was in Iran, in an ashram. The worst and then I met accidentally pick through with money and he got me introduced to quality of this, which producers reduce their path rather than hitoshi osakawa's, which they initially step action.

We don't usually agree upon without them. No abortion could namaste towboat it on Vikramaditya near struggle their algorithm. I have done my masters in philosophy during my college days and my this is spiritual journey. Anybody dismissal, I have started as I'm a taste.

I read that communism, the deliverer, I was communist during my college days. Then I read Osho, the great will not be from India. Then I got to know about Zen, Zen Buddhism. I had respect. Capuchin temple, then Tibetan Buddhism.

For the last four years, I am in this path of devotion. Yamanouchi dog food spray the mist epidermis damaged nerves. She's the Sahaj say about fundamentally stamp out million Zen Panza is a shelter from a miss attacks occur to us all.

Because they, the theorization communism, other the Guayabera, show is to touch that ocean return. Both political Buddhism, evil contrition, a path leading to zero Thalia. Yeah, as a child wash foot and bit rasa, we have very, very old relationships.

Indian aggressor and already happy to know that you all are here. Especially I express my utter thanks to Maharaj, who has done so much work to spread this Krishna consciousness throughout the world.

He gasps to toda la ville de la, asunción. You invite the reaction Shasta. Especially for C mu 0. I don't take your much time. In the last, I would again express my gratitude, my love, my respect to Maharaj and my respect to all of you.

And I invited you there, so please keep on visiting this Vrindavan. This is my country again and again, and let's together make this positive energy to explode and to engulf the whole world in Krishna consciousness.

Jai Radha Krishna.

Here's an analogy about the material and spiritual prosperity that we didn't know about myself. My spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, would often refer to the politicians as having this responsibility to see that the material as well as the spiritual welfare of the citizens is the other by the chapter 21 articles that mention why do people respond during the Mughal stadium under the of Medina, back of the poem.

Would sometimes refer to the politicians of your life, you scare others with larger issues, they were saintly persons sitting on the throne. Society actually happy. Party. Who knows the new British Chancellor materially?

I need to position the Medina, the most important area, coming closer to God every day. Yeah, you just finish those present yelling divisions of almost finished at the site. They went back to the spiritual franchise. I have over, which is all politicians available in certified.

She honestly don't know what she's got a bunch of money to connect. So if we had one person's like you in this great country of India, initially some of India to see. They are so familiar, so in the middle of illusionist on Carolina.

Thank you for your courage and assess the motives of Christians, especially the world in spite sympathetically and ask for forgiveness, a personal muralist ability, where spaciousness. If I put a photo assignment in us and we will always, and without.