"In Śrīla Prabhupāda’s passport—his original passport when he first came from India to the West—there were certain details, certain information, like in every passport that you have to fill out. And when it asked the question, "What is your occupation?" Prabhupāda said, "Servant of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī," since the occupation. And the next line was, "What is your home address?" and he wrote, "Vṛndāvana, UP, India." 

So, we are followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda. He is the Founder-Ācārya of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. He is the Ācārya, one who teaches by his deeds and by his words. He is our eternal spiritual father, so we want to be "like father, like son," and "like daughters," following in Śrīla Prabhupāda’s footsteps. So he came to the West to bring us back to the East. There is that saying in America in the old days, in the pioneer days, "Go West, young man, for your material fortune." We’ve turned our back on that, more or less, and we’ve come East. We’ve come to India, to Bhārata. One of the original names of India was Bhārata, and one translation of Bhārata is "light"—light in the sense of being enlightened by transcendental knowledge coming from our beloved spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

As Prabhupāda went to the West, he came back to India; at one point, he came back to India to revive Vedic culture, more specifically Kṛṣṇa consciousness, in this country. And he considered that Vṛndāvana was like his home, so we also think like that. So we’ve come back from the West also. After three months of preaching, we had our Festival of India in Poland. It was extremely successful; tens of thousands of people were introduced to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We continued on a little bit afterwards, visiting different yātrās in Europe, but we’ve come back home to consider Vṛndāvana our home. All devotees who consider Vṛndāvana their home, we should feel more comfortable here than anywhere else in the world. Of course, it takes time. That’s the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness; we become purified of all unwanted things in the heart, all unwanted attachments, identities—I’m American, I’m Russian, I’m German, I’m French, I’m Australian—those are all material designations. We don’t feel comfortable with those designations, actually. So we have to learn to become Brajavāsīs; we have to practice becoming Brajavāsīs, because when we go back to the spiritual world, we’ll be eternally Brajavāsīs. 

So as quickly as possible, it’s good to come to Vṛndāvana, if possible, from time to time. Everything done here is extremely purifying and uplifting, devotionally uplifting. So I consider it my great fortune as a sannyāsī to be able to travel, and on my travels, of course, I travel in the order of my spiritual master. Prabhupāda said to me, "Preach boldly and have faith in the holy names." But like a magnet, I always come back to Braja, because this is the lap of Kṛṣṇa.

Prabhupāda also described at one time, "Vṛndāvana is the playground of God." So we come here and we get accustomed to being Brajavāsīs. We’re not foreigners; no one is a foreigner to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Like George Harrison said one time, "Everyone’s a devotee of Kṛṣṇa; some know it and some don’t." So by Prabhupāda’s grace, we know that, and we’re trying to gradually become purified and develop that mentality that "I’m a Brajavāsī." And so we’ve come back after many months of preaching, and it’s very comforting. You know, there’s that saying, "Home is where the heart is," so after many, many years, I’m beginning to understand this is where my heart is—Vṛndāvana. I have a Western body, but as a spirit soul, by Prabhupāda’s grace, I’m realizing I’m an eternal resident of Vṛndāvana. 

So today, for the first time we came back and got over the jet lag, and for the first time, we’re going out on Vṛndāvana-parikramā, the parikramā-mārga around Vṛndāvana, keeping everything to our right. And it’s very purifying to do parikramā. We’re doing parikramā of all the temples, the thousands of temples and the seven most prominent temples. We’re doing a parikramā of all the samādhis of great saints; we’re doing parikramā of many ācāryas’ samādhis as well; we’re doing parikramā of cows. Everything is Kṛṣṇa conscious here if we see it through Prabhupāda’s eyes. And we’re doing parikramā in the dust of Vṛndāvana; every particle of dust here is more opulent than all the opulence of Vaikuṇṭha. These things we’re learning; we’re learning, and gradually, gradually, because this process works, we’re beginning to realize these things. And that’s the beauty of old age. No one looks forward to old age, but old age in Kṛṣṇa consciousness means that for many years of service, the jñāna becomes vijñāna; it becomes realized. And that’s sweeter than the sweetest. 

As we walk around Vṛndāvana-dhāma now, we’re continuing to open our eyes through the process of chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa. And that’s what you do here: you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, you hear Kṛṣṇa-kathā, you take th"e mahā-prasāda of the deities, you associate with the sādhus. We do all these things, and in our heart of hearts—that’s an expression, right?—in our heart of hearts, we go before Śrīla Prabhupāda at the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, the temple that he constructed from his heart. And we come before Śrīla Prabhupāda at his samādhi-mandira as members of ISKCON; we consider that the most holy place in creation, the most holy place in creation, because Śrīla Prabhupāda is our ever-well-wisher. And we go there and we often make reports about our preaching in the West. We wouldn’t be here—you know, we’d like to be here a long, long time—but we have our duties in different parts of the world. So, as it’s often said, we come here to get refreshed, but in old age we stay a little bit longer, just to make sure that by the time we leave these bodies, we’ll be chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa will be in our mind, and Prabhupāda will come and take us back to the spiritual world. 

So that’s what we’re doing; we’re on parikramā and we’re enjoying it every step of the way. It’s like, as they say in the spiritual world, Brahma-saṁhitā says, "Every step is a dance, every word is a song," and there’s a festival every day. We’re out here in a very festive mood, celebrating the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So we’ll be doing this for a few weeks. Many devotees will join us soon for the Kārttika-parikramā. We’ll be going out and visiting all the major līlā-sthānas and also the minor ones. This year our theme will be visiting the places that are often visited, and it’ll be wonderful to receive all the devotees, to serve them by introducing them to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We will be their guides in the sense that we’re just repeating what Prabhupāda has told us. And we’ll be looking forward to that sevā. When we come to Vṛndāvana, we come here to do sevā, to do service. So please stay with us. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dhāma! All glories to Vṛndāvana-parikramā! All glories to the upcoming month of Kārttika! Hare Kṛṣṇa.""