"*00449*.*
"All right, everyone—those of you who are left, because I know it is quite late in Australia and many devotees probably have gone to take rest—to all those of you who are still here, those who are dreaming, I want to thank you all very much for your very heartfelt offerings of devotion. I think it is very significant that our dear-most Ācārya, whom we find ourselves quoting more and more these days, wrote a book called *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, which really was one of the first books that Śrīla Prabhupāda translated, or you could say summarized, in the form of his famous *Nectar of Devotion*. It is actually a very deep study of the science of devotional service. It is interesting that Prabhupāda gave it to us in the beginning, when we are again just trying to figure out that we are not the body. It is like the *Kṛṣṇa* book; *Kṛṣṇa* book has so many wonderful stories, pastimes let us say, of Kṛṣṇa, and particularly Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. Prabhupāda said one time it is a summary study of the Tenth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and Prabhupāda says in the introduction to the *Kṛṣṇa* book that this simple book, *Kṛṣṇa* book, will give solace to my disciples when they reach the stage of feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa.

It is a very elevated stage. Prabhupāda said, "I am giving you this book because when you get to that stage of actually feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, by reading this book you will have Kṛṣṇa’s association and you will get some solace." You see, Prabhupāda gave us everything: an introduction to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, a process to make progress, and he also explained the goal to us very clearly. There are no secrets, or you could say it is an open secret for those who want to know. So, *Nectar of Devotion* is a summary study. One of the most important works of Rūpa Gosvāmī, which goes into great detail about devotional service in the mood of the residents of Vṛndāvana. Actually, Prabhupāda described *Nectar of Devotion* as the handbook for the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. I remember we had, in the very beginning, we had these brick-colored *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*s that Prabhupāda brought with him from India. He had several trunks, and when I joined the movement, there were devotees who had copies of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. I think there were three parts to what Prabhupāda wrote; there were three particular books from the *Bhāgavatam*.

And when I asked him for his copy, Prabhupāda gave him that brick-colored *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, printed in India by the League of Devotees. And I asked Viṣṇujana Mahārāja before he left, I said, "Can I have that book?" He said, "No, Prabhupāda gave me this book and this is everything I know about Kṛṣṇa." I said, "Where do I get one?" He said, "You can't get one." So, one night when Mahārāja took rest, I snuck into his room and I opened the book and I wrote down the address of the ones who printed that book. There was a note that it was produced by the League of Devotees, Mathura, Vṛndāvana. The League of... that is all. This was one of Prabhupāda's first movements; one of his first organizations that he created was called the League of Devotees. Like in Jhansi, he had a particular group—forget what it was called—but later on, when he was in Delhi, he created the League of Devotees, a precursor to ISKCON actually. But no one was really interested; Prabhupāda made one disciple in India. So, I put ten dollars in an envelope and I said, "Dear Sir, please send me one of my spiritual master's books called *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* part one, two, or three, I can't remember."

I said that the color of a brick, and I wrote "League of Devotees, Mathura, Vṛndāvana, India"—that is the address, League of Devotees, Mathura, Vṛndāvana, India—and I put it in the mailbox. Six months later, I got a parcel in the post; it was a burlap bag tied up with three books inside. It had come by sea mail. Only Kṛṣṇa knows how that letter was delivered to such a simple address: League of Devotees, Mathura, Vṛndāvana. There is no street, there is no street number, there is no regional postcode or whatever it was. It was just Kṛṣṇa; I just took it. It was Caitanya Mahāprabhu; somehow He wanted to drag me into this movement. It was sent by sea mail; it took six months to come. You can imagine the condition of that burlap bag.

We unwrapped it and there were the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*s, the originals. So, I had those, and I had been given an old blue *Bhagavad-gītā*, simple, the first *Gītā* in ISKCON published by Macmillan Company before Prabhupāda printed *Gītā* in Japan. So, I had those brick-colored books, I had a *Gītā*, and I had *Nectar of Devotion*. I could sort of understand *Bhagavad-gītā*, kind of understand the *Bhāgavatam* because it was Prabhupāda's old English. I couldn't understand a thing about *Nectar of Devotion*—nothing—but I read it three times. I just was so attracted just to the idea of devotion, you know, love towards the Supreme. And I was very interested because I read it was a summary of another book by somebody called Rūpa Gosvāmī, and it was the summary study of the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. And Prabhupāda translated that as *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, the nectar of the ocean of devotion. I am thinking, there is an ocean of devotion because when I was young I was a surfer, so I knew what an ocean was, and the waves on the ocean, and an ocean of saltwater. I was thinking, "An ocean of love?" And then Prabhupāda somewhere in *Bhāgavatam* mentioned there is an ocean of ghee, somewhere in the universe there is an ocean of milk, there is an ocean of honey, there is an ocean of sugar water. I felt this is a fantastic philosophy; I hope it is all true. An ocean... I didn't know what ghee was; someone said it is butter. I said, "An ocean of butter?" But it is all true; it is all there for a purpose. I was mostly infatuated by this idea of devotion because, you know, I came from the hippie generation, 1960s in America, and our whole thing was, "All you need is love," the Beatles would sing. And I felt that was true because I came from a well-to-do family and I had pretty much everything I needed when I was young, but I was frustrated.

I had a car when I was 15; I had a credit card from my grandmother, I could go to the mall, buy whatever I wanted. I had lots of friends; I was a famous athlete, but something was missing. And I believe in that motto, "All you need is love," but I couldn't find that love because love in the material world means, "I love you because you can satisfy my senses." It is the opposite of love in the spiritual world, where you give more than you take, or the mood of the Gopīs—you give everything to Kṛṣṇa, and then Kṛṣṇa gives all His love to you. So, I knew I found it in Hare Kṛṣṇa; I knew that this was the chance. And I thought, "Wow, an ocean of love." And then...

I was writing to the devotees, and they told me that you can churn that ocean of love, *Bhakti-rasāmṛta*. You can churn that ocean of love—that is the process of devotion: churn the ocean of love. And I remember I read that, and what comes out of that ocean is just more love: love for the devotees, love for your guru, love for Kṛṣṇa. And I heard about another ocean that the demons and the devotees churned—you know, the famous pastime, churning the ocean—and Kūrma, the turtle, was there, and the Rod [Mount Mandara] was there, and the demigods and the demons were churning, and all kinds of things were coming out. Lakṣmī-devī came out, Indra's elephant came out, but also poison came out, *halāhala*, and Lord Śiva, He drank that poison. So I thought, "I am not interested in that ocean; I want to churn—to be part of churning—the ocean, the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, the ocean of love." So today I felt like we were churning that ocean. I actually felt that when you churn something—when you churn milk, that becomes yogurt, then you can get butter, and you keep churning, so many wonderful things come from the milk product—so today we were churning this ocean of the *Nectar of Devotion*. I was glorifying all of you for your seriousness and your commitment to following Prabhupāda's teachings, and I love you for that. And you were expressing some love for me as your captain of the ship, and it was just love—unmotivated love. My love for you is unconditional; you are my children. Even sometimes you have your missteps, sometimes you may fall down; we know your heart. You wouldn't be in this movement unless you understood the goal of life is to love Kṛṣṇa. But because of some previous attachments and previous desires, sometimes we become overwhelmed, sometimes the material energy fools us and we make a mistake. But that is not your heart; your hearts are with Prabhupāda, your heart is with Mahāprabhu, your hearts are in Vṛndāvana. Devotees like to wear those T-shirts, "I left my heart in Vṛndāvana." So maybe they are making some mistakes, but my Muslim friend, he was a big cleric in Uzbekistan, he said, "Swami, in your Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, do your devotees sometimes fall down?" I said, "Yes, sometimes." And I said, "In your Islam, do your followers fall down?" He said, "Yes." I said, "What do you tell them when they fall away?"

He said, "Swami, we tell them: if you fall down eight times, you pick yourself up nine times. But never give up." We tell them that they learn by their mistakes. So, I like that attitude. I also think like that. Sometimes devotees fall away and they are criticized. Anyone can fall; even a *mahārāja* can fall down if he hears *māyāvāda* philosophy. So, we have to be always very forgiving. If someone is repentant and they want to try again, we have to be there and help them. Like that. So if sometimes you struggle, don't feel bad. This material world is... Kṛṣṇa says this divine energy of Mine consisting of the three modes of material nature, it is very difficult to overcome. That is God; God is saying this world He created is difficult to overcome. But He always gives the solution; there is an answer for everything in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He said, "One who surrenders unto Me, they can easily overcome it." So this is the duty of the spiritual master: to forgive our past sins. At the moment of initiation, he forgives our past sins; he absorbs the karmic reaction to give us a chance, a clean slate to move forward. And he encourages us. How does he encourage it? He gives us a very simple process to overcome this. You know, what Kṛṣṇa says is very difficult to overcome, but how do we do it? Through penance and austerity and studying the Vedas three times? No. We sing, we dance, we hear the nectar of *raja-bhūmi* Vṛndāvana, Māyāpura-dhāma, and we get a little tired of singing and dancing and hearing, we sit down and we take *Bhagavad-gītā*. That is our process. So don't ever get discouraged if you have some difficulty; pick yourself up and then enthusiastically embrace what is so simple: singing, dancing.

Don't underestimate it. Sometimes it is so simple we might miss it: "Oh, it is too simple. Material problems take so much effort, so much politics, and you finally come to the solution." So to overcome this material energy, it must be such a difficult... no, Mahāprabhu is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa. Though Kṛṣṇa is very merciful, Mahāprabhu is very merciful. And Prabhupāda, I have to say, he is even more merciful than Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is even more merciful! He didn't give Gāyatrī mantra to ladies? [No], he did. He allowed men and women to live in an āśrama; he allowed women the privilege to go out and preach the divine command. Prabhupāda said, "Our ladies, they're like lambs at home, lions on the chase." Prabhupāda loved his female disciples; he loved Malatī, he loved Yamunā. Sometimes he would have Yamunā speak at the *pandal* before he spoke. So Prabhupāda has taken the message even of his own Guru Mahārāja and made it perfectly applicable for the next 10,000 years. We have to think like that. There is no need to change anything anymore. We can innovate according to time, place, and circumstance, but innovation means that we think of novel ways to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but without compromising our core values, our core tradition. This takes a little bit of experience and some wisdom, but Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said progress means to make the necessary changes on the way to the goal without compromising our tradition. Prabhupāda was so expert at that.

So really, Prabhupāda told us one time—remember, we were sitting in New Māyāpura on the lawn, we were having problems getting *darśana*—so he is speaking about how easy the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is, and he said, "Are there any problems? Is there a problem?" And I remember sitting there and I was thinking, "No, there is no problem. If there is a problem, it is not the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There is a problem in our own hearts that we are still holding on to our so-called securities in this material world." But in the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there are no problems. You don't read about problems in the spiritual world.

So in the process of chanting, dancing, feasting, *śāstra*, deity worship, the problem is not with the process, the problem is just... you know, they say old habits die hard. Old habits die hard. So what are our old habits? Fascination with the material energy, some hopes that it will bring me some pleasure, some security, some status. Back to the process: the process is very simple. Knowing we have some attachments, we have to be very serious about chanting. Therefore, more often than not you will see a devotee like this, but often you will see a devotee—you know, we have our serious job, but then we have our moments with our friends, or we are walking, the hand is still in the bead bag because there is more that comes out of this bead bag than the finger.

There is more that comes out of this bead bag than the finger. What comes out of this bead bag is *ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam*—cleansing of those attachments, uprooting the roots of material desires and throwing them to the tenth dimension. And then when all is said and done, what comes out of this bead bag? Prabhupāda said, "You have to learn the art of crying." Is there *Nectar of Devotion*? There is a chapter on the art of learning to cry for Kṛṣṇa. Not like a *sahajiyā*, not something cheap, but a genuine tear that will come from taking your mālā and turning that bead. So simple but pregnant with mercy. You can see these beads, these beads are 250 years old; they were the beads of a great sādhu in Braja. You can see they are made from the roots, the roots of the Tulasī leaf, not just the wood but the roots. You see how shiny they are? These beads, generations of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas have chanted on these beads. And if you offered me—you can try—if you offered me one million dollars, you offered me... if you offered me a million dollars [I wouldn't trade them].

Because what one derives from chanting—all the opulence of this entire creation and even the veneration of Vaikuṇṭha—doesn't compare to the *prema* that one can get for the Divine Couple by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. These beads are my constant companion, and I often remember the words of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura; he says his going back to Godhead will be the result of all his chanting charms. I love that. "His going back to Godhead will be the result of all his chanting charms." I just love that word, "charms." C-H-A-R-M-S, chanting charms. It is a magic word, isn't it? You say to someone, "You just charmed me by your presence," or "I have a special charm." You know, like this, this is my... these are my chanting charms. Every bead is. So therefore, you will always see devotion. When I travel with Prabhupāda, remember on a number of occasions I would always look at Prabhupāda; he would always be chanting. He always had his hand in his bead bag. When I traveled somewhere with him, he would even be talking and I could see the beads.

He would chant; he would go like this, *Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa*. So like this, this is all churning the nectar of the ocean of devotion. What will come from that churning? Love. Love for the Vaiṣṇavas, love for our spiritual preceptors, love for the Divine Couple. And that love is *ad infinitum*. It is not like love in this world. Even if you have the perfect loving relationship—"until death do us part," "until death," that is the Christian... this is hard talk, that is the Christian wedding, "I will love you until death do us part." You don't know what you are saying. Romeo and Juliet, that is the unfortunate nature of this world. But in the spiritual world, it just grows and grows and grows, *ad infinitum*. And that is what we want. "All you need is love," but love in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And because we are all tasting that, even as neophytes—we are all neophytes, I will admit—the drops that we have got,

Are better than anything we ever had in this world. And by giving that drop away, you get more; that is the spiritual mathematics: $1 - 1 = 1,000$. What? Yeah, you will understand if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. If you give away what you have got in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, with more spiritual mathematics, it falls from the heavens like a gentle rain, like a gentle rain. So please, everyone, keep churning this *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, this nectar of churning the ocean of the *Nectar of Devotion*, or as Prabhupāda said, you know, "Read *Nectar of Devotion*." Now, now is the time. Now you can start reading *Nectar of Devotion*, because Prabhupāda expected us all at some point to become interested in where the love is going to take us.

And I will do my very humble service of trying to keep sharing with you the nectar of Vṛndāvana. I from the very beginning considered myself like the least qualified; *dīna-bandhu*, these persons, they have the real... but I just thought, "Well, here are the books, let's..." and my duty is to share with all of you. And I really appreciate that you appreciate... I mean, now I am going to really start trying to preach, hearing how you have appreciated what I have shared, how much that you are hankering for that. Now I have to really get serious; my chanting has to improve, my prayer, depending on Prabhupāda and Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa. I have to really comb through the books, I will pull out every detail. You know, now I promise you I will really do my best to present it *tathā ca*, as we say in French, "as it is." So thank you for a wonderfully, wonderfully satisfying devotional day. And all I can say is we have so much to look forward to. They have that saying, "It doesn't get better than this." It does! They say like that, right? "It doesn't get better than this," they are at a rock concert or at a pizza parlor, I don't know. "It doesn't get better than this." We have it much better than them, but it just gets better and better and better. So stay on this transcendental *Jaladuta* boat that Prabhupāda is the captain of, and he is taking us back all the way to Goloka Vṛndāvana. Don't jump ship. Please don't jump, even if the ocean gets a little... if you get a little seasick on the ocean, somehow don't jump ship. Stick with the process; you will never regret it when you get back home. Because once you get back home, Kṛṣṇa promises in *Bhagavad-gītā*, you will never return to what Prabhupāda described as this nasty world. And I can see you are making quick progress; it won't take long. He said one time—I have said this many times—he said, "I see no reason why all my disciples cannot go back to Godhead in this one lifetime."

And Prabhupāda told Viṣṇujana Mahārāja—he told me—he said, "Prabhupāda told me, 'I have taken birth in every species of life, 8,400,000 species of life. So many times I have been born in the human species of life.'" Prabhupāda said, "You have been everywhere, you have done everything, but the one thing you haven't done is utilize your human form of life for full surrender to Kṛṣṇa. *Ātman*-full surrender. Just try one lifetime." You have been a demigod for the heavenly planets, you have been a snake, you have... just make an experiment: just give everything to Kṛṣṇa. Just take one lifetime, just try it, everything to Kṛṣṇa, see what happens. You will dive into this ocean, right, with this particular ocean where there is an ocean of Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mercy, you will dive into the ocean of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana and you will surface in Goloka Vṛndāvana. That is what we promised you. So we will all meet there. I often tell my disciples, I won't go back until all of my disciples are back. I will be the last man standing. And one day we will be there, because Prabhupāda said we will have our ISKCON in the spiritual world. He told Gargamuni that when we get back to the spiritual world, we will recognize each other. We won't look the same; I definitely don't want to have this body for too long. I am 72, what is it going to be like when I am 80? That is only, what, eight years away? That goes very quickly. So we want to have our spiritual forms, but somehow by the mystic potency, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Mystic, will recognize each other. When will that day be ours? So thank you all, my beloved disciples and inspiring disciples, all my friends, my godbrothers who are so kind to me and encouraging me. And yes, let us also think about the people, our brothers and sisters out there like black sheep, they have lost the way; they are also part of our family. So let us think that we won't go back home until they are all home as well. That is our duty to Prabhupāda. Thank you. It is late here, I can imagine how late it is in Australia. I also look forward to the day that we will meet; I can't imagine what it is going to be like flying into Sydney, flying into Melbourne, flying into Brisbane after—maybe it will be two years now—and coming out of the airport and then, "Oh my God, all of you were there," and we see each other after churning this *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* through lectures and through emails and through sharing videos and hearing of your service and whatever. And what it will be like when I come out of the airport and I see all my beloved... it will be not an ocean of milk, not an ocean of butter, not an ocean of saltwater; it will be an ocean of tears.

Isn't it? When we meet again, it will be an ocean of tears, and we will swim in that ocean together. Thank you everyone. I will let you go now, and I look forward to seeing you soon. We have a lecture coming out tomorrow; tomorrow's Friday, we have a nice lecture coming out tomorrow. Every Tuesday and every Friday, our hearts will be together. Thank you all. Glorious.""