Hare Krishna, everyone.

At the moment, we're driving through a frozen Siberian forest here in the countryside in Russia on our way to our local temple in Barnaul, Siberia. It's well known that for many centuries, criminals and wanted people, those who opposed the government or whatever, they've been banished here.

They've been exiled. The idea being that this is a very remote place and the conditions here are extremely harsh: very, very hot summers and extremely cold winters. Actually, the winters are very long, the summers are very short. So people were sent here for punishment and they just couldn't get away.

But in time, Barnaul, one of the main cities here, became the major center of intellectual and social life for many of the exiles. And much of the city's cultural heritage comes from such persons. And the famous writer Valentin Rasputin lived here and wrote here.

For over a thousand years, Barnaul was one of the main places in trade between China and Europe. And presently, there are about half a million people living in the city. And Barnaul is also famous because it's not far from Baikal, which is the largest freshwater lake in the world.

Actually, it's very, very beautiful. What it means, oh. Our International Society for Krishna Consciousness has been present here since the early 1990s, and presently there are about 300, a little more than 300 active devotees and a large congregation as well.

And 12 years ago, the devotees got together and they built this beautiful temple, a very, very beautiful temple. One devotee is an architect who designed it. One devotee is a builder; he built it. They collected the funds, and it's been the center for activities for many, many years now and is very popular with the local people as well.

And in that compound, they have a Gurukul, a nice Gurukul for our children, and there's a daycare, daycare center for little children. And there are about 20 units on the property for devotees to live in. So it's a, it's a big property, very successful.

Unfortunately, a couple of years ago, the Russian government imposed certain restrictions on what they call new religious movements, and it made our preaching here difficult in the country. In most of our centers, most of our temples, we were not allowed to do Harinam anymore.

And in the cities, we were not allowed to distribute books. And foreign missionaries were not allowed to preach or teach to the public, just come and inspire devotees and local centers. So that's, that's a setback. But at the same time, some of the, some of the temples, in some of the cities, because they had very good relationships or continue to have very good relationships with the local government, they're allowed to do some Harinam and some book distribution, a little, for sadhu distribution.

So one such place is here in Barnaul. The devotees, they go out and do Harinam three times a week during the winter, and that's something. They're real troupers. The winters here are extremely harsh again, well below zero, 30, 40 degrees.

And during the summertime, they go in Harinam every day. So we're very, very impressed with them. And as a result of that nice service, that surrendered service, they've been blessed by Lord Caitanya and they're very blissful devotees. Very nice to come here and get their association.

Generally, as soon as he travels around the world to different places to give association, but when I come to places like this, the remote areas of Russia, Siberia, the devotees are so wonderful, I feel like I'm coming to get association.

Oh, it's not easy to come here. Not easy to travel to this remote part of the world. Again, the harsh conditions, sometimes the facilities we get in our travels. The devotees tried their best, but sometimes the facilities are not so good.

Sometimes there's fleas, there's bedbugs, whatever. There's long lines in the airports, and there's delays in flights, and there's the traffic, and so forth and so on. So the difficulties are there, but we willingly embrace these austerities and these difficulties for the pleasure of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

He set the standard. He came here in the early 1970s to Russia and he planted the seed of Krishna consciousness in Moscow, and that seed has grown into a beautiful tree producing many fruits and flowers of so many wonderful devotees.

So we know it gives pleasure to Prabhupāda to continue the preaching here.

So we willingly embrace, willingly embrace whatever difficulties we encounter in that regard. I keep a letter that I printed out that Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote to my dear God-brother, Prabhupāda Viṣṇudās, in the early 1970s.

At that time, Prabhupāda Viṣṇudās was preaching in England, and he wrote a letter to Prabhupāda, telling Prabhupāda the results of the preaching and sharing with him some of the austerities involved at that time.

And Prabhupāda wrote this wonderful letter, which for me is like a mission statement.

And when I come to places like this or other places around the world that are a little difficult, I take that letter out sometimes and I read how pleased Śrīla Prabhupāda is when we do these austerities for him.

I'd like to read it to you. I have a copy here in front of me. Prabhupāda writes to Prabhupāda Viṣṇudās: "I can understand that it is not an easy matter to travel extensively over long periods of time without proper food, rest, and sometimes it must be very cold there also.

But still, because you are getting so much enjoyment, spiritual enjoyment, from it, it seems like play to you. That is the advanced stage of spiritual life, never attained by even the greatest yogis and so-called jñānīs. Let any man see our devotees working so hard for Krishna, and let them say they are not better than any millions of so-called yogis and transcendentalists.

That is my challenge. Because you are rightly understanding through your personal realization this philosophy of Krishna consciousness, therefore in such a short time you have surpassed all the stages of the yoga process to come to the highest point of surrendering to Krishna.

That I very much appreciate. Thank you very much for helping me in this way." All glories to the Siberian devotees, and all glories to our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Hari Krishna.

My.