Hare Krishna and welcome to Sochi, Russia.

Sochi is on the Black Sea, the northeastern coast of the Black Sea, and is considered by many to be the Mediterranean of Russia. And if you come here, you'll immediately understand why. The weather is just beautiful, the beaches are right there, and then to your back are the snow-capped mountains.

So it's a very nice place here. The city has about six hundred thousand people, and it's very well respected. It was the site of the 2014 Olympic Games, and it's one of the many sites of the 2018 World Cup being sponsored here by Russia.

The devotees have been established here in this city for a very long time. Back in the 1980s, the early pioneers of Krishna consciousness in Russia came to Sochi because it reminded them of India with its warm climate.

Tropical trees, palm trees, banana trees can be found everywhere here. So they began preaching here, and as a result, it's one of the oldest devotional communities in Russia. Hari Krishna, Hari Hari.

Hari Rama, Hari Rama, Rama Rama, Hari Hari. Currently, the devotee community is about 350 to 400 devotees residing here. They own a very nice piece of property just in the hills overlooking the city below. Two large brick buildings with a spacious space for all of their programs and ponds.

Wonderful, wonderful _bhajana_ and _kirtana_ are presided over here, and just behind them on the altar, beautiful Lord Jagannath, Balarama, Subhadra. Very unique features, like you've never seen before. We're very happy to be in Sochi after all of our travels around.

The devotees here are very warm-hearted. We've held several different festivals here. It was two really jam-packed days of initiations, _nitya-seva_ and _kirtana_, and then the following day, we observed a ten-couple wedding ceremony. It was a very wonderful event because it showed how much importance these weddings are in the growth of a _vaishnava_ community, these commitments to each other and the commitment as a couple to the community itself.

We're very well received. The wedding was very, very popular, and everyone was quite satisfied with the results. Hari Krishna, Hari Hari.

Hari Rama, Hari Rama, Rama Rama, Hari Hari. So here we are, standing in the airport in Sochi, waiting for our next flight, which will take us to Krasnodar. From Krasnodar, we'll go to Saint Petersburg, and from Saint Petersburg, we'll wind up our Russia tour in Moscow.

It's been an adventure, and everyone on our team has been excited that each of the different temples that we've gone on to, been enlivened by each of the different types of devotees that we've met, and been very happy to share Krishna consciousness with all the devotees we've come in contact with.

This is the wonderful thing about moving from one temple to another and sharing Krishna consciousness that Śrīla Prabhupāda gave to all of us so many years ago, and seeing how that has grown and blossomed so wonderfully here in Russia, in all parts of Russia, and seeing how Krishna consciousness has blossomed all over Russia, from the east all the way to the west, from the north all the way to the south.

So many enthusiastic and happy devotees. This is the true testament that Krishna consciousness works.

So, Sochi means wonderful programs, nice _Purushottam_, wonderful _kirtans_, and the association of great devotees. We're very happy to be here and we look forward to coming back here again. Thank you and Hari Krishna.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Krishna Krishna Krishna Hari Hari.

Hari Rama, Hari Rama, Rama Rama, Hari Hari. Hari Krishna, Hari Hari.