Hare Krishna and welcome to the beautiful seaside town of Sochi, here in Russia.

Hare Krishna  and myself continue our preaching tour in the springtime.

Sochi is a wonderful city to visit, but it's also a wonderful city for spreading Krishna consciousness, despite the fact that since the early 11th century, up until the middle 20th century, there has always been some type of war or strife or battle going on in this area because it's a very desirable place.

In the mid-1900s, things began to calm down quite a bit, and so Sochi began to come into its own. It's a very popular place for families to come and spend their vacations, as there are many attractions here: aquariums and amusement parks, and all different types of museums and things.

Since the early 1990s, the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust headquarters was founded here in Sochi, and what is currently the existing temple. In 2007, that building was turned over to ISKCON as the local temple, and now it thrives with three buildings, a young [mashaallah?], and beautiful grounds that are decorated with all types of flowering trees.

When you look at everything, you can't believe you're actually in Russia because there are palm trees, banana trees, fig trees blossoming everywhere. The devotees here, they've been able to very successfully establish several Nama-hatta programs. They're a bit limited in some of the outreach programs they can do here in Russia, but they're very successful with their Nama-hatta programs.

The community has an active force of about 150 members, and on festival days that swells up to 300-plus members. Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Hare Rama, Hare Rama.

Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.

It's not Krishna.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama.

Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna. [Debilitating effect?].

I think I painted at the the good in the pod. Typically depicted. Hare Rama, Hare Rama.

Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama.

Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.

With such a large community of devotees, it's a great opportunity for [endodermis swami?].

But a Hari and myself to really appreciate the association of these wonderful Vaisnavas. Whatever obstacles are in their way, they persevere with great enthusiasm, with great devotion, and a real joy to receive older devotees as they come through and share their experiences in Krishna consciousness.

We actually are the ones that benefit from their association more than they can ever know because seeing how Krishna consciousness continues, even after Śrīla Prabhupāda's departure physically, and seeing how much new families and new communities are growing in Krishna consciousness is spreading, is a great joy and satisfaction to us.

We like to return to Sochi time and time and time again, and we hope to be able to do so in the future. Just remember, if you're in Russia, you must come see Sochi. It's the Mediterranean of the Black Sea.

All right, Krishna.