Hare Krishna 
 this is a significant year for me in Krishna consciousness.

The other day we celebrated my 70th birthday here in Saint Petersburg. It also marks 30 years since I've been coming to Russia, 30 years since we've been preaching in Poland with our Festival of India, and 40 years having taken *sannyasa*.

Of course, after a lifetime of devotional service, so many memories are there, and many of those precious memories are here in Russia. I can understand why Śrīla Prabhupāda came to this country in 1971, June 1971.

He had that vision that this would be an amazing place for spreading Krishna consciousness.

It is said that a pure devotee of the Lord, he is *trikālālakṣaṇa*, he can see the past, the present, and the future. So, Prabhupāda saw the potential in this country and he came here in the early days with the Hare Krishna movement, and he planted the seed.

And it's just such a privilege, it's such an honor to, well, to witness what's happened since Prabhupāda planted that seed.

Krishna consciousness has spread like wildfire all over the country, from Saint Petersburg in the west to Vladivostok in the east, and there are tens of thousands of devotees.

The movement continues to grow, and I feel very satisfied that I've been able to play a small part in helping Prabhupāda in his mission here.

Again, I came here 30 years ago, in 1989. It was full-on communism. There are many stories. I remember hiding from the KGB, running from the KGB, and so forth and so on. But now we have much more liberty to share Krishna consciousness here.

So, it hasn't been without its austerities. Even this recent trip, there are austerities, and traveling in a big country like this, it's sometimes too cold, it's sometimes too hot, and there are so many inconveniences that one experiences when they travel.

Late-night festivals, up early in the morning for the morning program, you don't get enough sleep. But Prabhupāda said one time, it's like drinking hot sugar juice that it's burning your lips, but it's so sweet you can't stop.

Hi Krishna, Krishna, hi.

I don't remember the austerities, I just remember the joy of serving Prabhupāda's mission here in this, in this great country, and just again, watching how people take to Krishna consciousness is very satisfying.

And our last two days on this recent tour of Russia, a three-week tour, was in was in Moscow, the capital, and in Saint Petersburg, you could say the cultural capital of this country. And as I close my eyes, I just see thousands of devotees.

We give classes, there are at least a thousand devotees, if not more. And my great respect to the GBCs in this country and the managers and the temple presidents, they are the ones doing the real work. We, as traveling preachers, we just come and we just put a little touch on the painting.

There's a big painting, and we come through as traveling preachers and we put a little touch on that painting. But it's satisfying to be part of that great mission. So, I thank my spiritual master, Prabhupāda, for giving me this opportunity to serve the people of this nation and to introduce Krishna consciousness here.

It's not difficult in that sense because there are many pious people in this country, and that's evident by the fact there are so many beautiful churches. The Russian Orthodox Church has the most beautiful churches, and they're everywhere, on every street corner.

So, it's indicative of the inner mood of the people. And, you know, everyone wants ultimately a devotee of Krishna.

So, when we introduce our process, these universal truths, actually Krishna consciousness, in the very attractive way that Lord Caitanya introduced, through singing the Hare Krishna mantra, through dancing in ecstasy, some philosophy, authoritative philosophy from the Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, *cintāmaṇi* and made people listen carefully, and nice delicious *prasādam*.

The formula works. And I've seen in the last few years how mature the devotees have become. Actually, when I first came to this country, it was pretty wild, pretty wild. But through good training and vision and encouragement, many devotees have become very mature.

I'm very touched by that. So, if the Lord grants me some more time, I'm very happy to be coming, come back here for the next, for the years to come, and continue helping Prabhupāda with this, this gentle vision that Krishna consciousness would and is successful in this country of Russia.

Hare Krishna.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Hey hi. You.