I did my Hare Krishna  and welcome to Vladikavkaz, which is a beautiful city here in the southern part of Russia, in the Republic of North Ossetia.

Vladikavkaz is situated in the foothills of the Caucasus Mountains, near a very beautiful river called the Terek River. There are about three hundred thousand people who live in this town, and the city was founded in 1784 as a fortress during the Russian conquest of the Caucasus.

For many years, it was the main military base in this particular region. Our center here has about 100 devotees. Preaching started here around 1990, in the early 1990s. It's a small temple, a small group, much different than, you know, when we were traveling in the cold tundra of Siberia and the chilly weather of the Urals.

They have big centers there. It's a small center here, but it's small and beautiful, and the devotees are all very nice. They do Harinam once a week and they distribute books. So, we're having two big programs here. We had a public program last night, which was attended by about two or three hundred people.

We gave an introductory class on Bhagavad Gita. We had a nice kirtan, distributed prasadam. It's the same formula that we use all over the world for introducing people to Krishna consciousness.

English it's not hi. Krishna, Krishna, I did my.

And today is a day off for us. We have a break. We've been on the road now for over a month. This is our first break day, and we've come to the foothills here of the Caucasus Mountains, a very beautiful, towering mountain, still full of snow, although spring has come to this region.

A break for us as well from the cold weather of Siberia. And we're visiting a monastery here, a very historic monastery. It's a sacred place and it's very historic as well. A few weeks after Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, his apostle Andrew came to this particular area of Russia and began preaching Christianity.

The scholars and historians, they say that this is the first place that this is where Christianity actually arrived in Russia, and he preached amongst the villages here. And the head priest here, who was a very kind and gentle soul, he spent at least two hours sharing with us the history of this region and the development of the church.

He said before the Apostle Andrew came, this area was known as the place of the Aryans, which I thought was very interesting. He said, this is the place of the Aryans, a very sophisticated civilization, also believed in God. When the Apostle Andrew came here and he began preaching Christianity, I asked the priest here, was there some conflict with the Aryans?

He said, no, both are worshipping God. And to this very day, actually, the people of this region live in a very harmonious way. There are different groups that have moved into this area now, and there are different, a few other churches, but everyone works together very harmoniously.

I thought that was a very interesting fact, and probably one reason the priest was so friendly and so gracious with us. So, one more program tonight, and then tomorrow we're off to Sochi, and then the bigger cities in Russia.

We go to St. Petersburg, and we finish our trip in about three and a half weeks in the capital, Moscow. Hi Krishna from the foothills of the Caucasus Mountains here in southern Russia.

Hi Krishna.

How did my. Oh, great. How did my. I'm ready. How did my.