Hare Krishna  
we're standing before our temple in Krasnoyarsk, Siberia, Russia. Krasnoyarsk is the third largest city in Siberia, and they also say it's the most beautiful city. I can't really appreciate that so much now because we're just finishing the winter here, and there are no leaves on the trees, and it's actually sub-zero weather right now.

But it is a beautiful city, and it was founded in 1628. Historically, it was a fort which guarded the eastern frontier of Russia, but it's developed into a very, very beautiful city of 1 million people. It has a beautiful river; it's called the Yenisei River.

And as you'll see in the video, there's a beautiful monastery on top of the hill overlooking the river. In a darker period, Krasnoyarsk was infamous as the place where they have their largest gulag, as they call it here, or a forced labor camp.

Our International Society for Krishna Consciousness has been present in this city since 1991.

Currently, you can see the temple behind me; that was built eight years ago. And we have about 400 devotees here. About 80 of them are initiated. Regularly, we have about 10 devotees going out and book distribution again during the winter and in summer.

And they also have here a Food for Life program for the homeless people. One interesting feature that we have here in Krasnoyarsk is the Gypsy community just outside the city. We've been preaching there for a number of years. Actually, when I first came here, I think I first came in 1992.

Here we had a temple outside the city, just next to the Gypsy community, a large Gypsy community. And we still go and preach to that Gypsy community, and that was a lot of fun, actually. Because in the Gypsies, they have a tradition also; they like to sing, they like to dance, etc.

It's actually said that the Gypsies originally came from India many, many centuries ago and settled in the West. So there's a lot of similarities between the Gypsy community and our Krishna conscious tradition.

So we kind of bonded in those days. On those preaching programs, we'd even go inside people's houses and chant and dance, and they'd come out and dance with us. And, you know, the Gypsy community has a reputation; some of their activities are questionable.

But like everywhere, by the power of the maha-mantra, they can purify everyone's heart. So eventually, one of the main leaders in the Gypsy community began practicing Krishna consciousness very seriously, and eventually, he became my disciple, Brajesh Sinha.

And his wife, Shobha Devi, they are really, really good devotees. So all through these years now, they have continued to preach Krishna consciousness in the Gypsy community.

I wouldn't say that anyone else has joined, but we're popular for our singing and our dancing. And just the other day, we had a program at Brajesh's house, and many of the leaders of the Gypsy community came. And I was very touched by the depth of their questions, very nice questions, and very nice response.

They said they would dedicate themselves to chanting Hare Krishna, they would learn cooking and come to the nama-hatta program that Brajesh was going to start at his house.

So this is very satisfying. Again, as I travel around the world, I see that this is a universal process. It was never meant just for a particular people in a particular continent. Krishna says in Bhagavad-gītā that He is the seed-giving father of all living entities.

And this is the process, the universal process, the eternal Dharma, chanting Hare Krishna, to bring forth our dormant Krishna consciousness.

And to see so much for me to see, especially the Gypsies taken to Krishna consciousness, it just creates in my heart a deeper faith in the chanting of the holy names and this wonderful process that is so unique.

So here in Krasnoyarsk, we're also preaching in our temple here. We have lots of devotees coming to our programs. There's lots of kirtan and lots of classes, and it's just wonderful at the end of winter here, being in Siberia, sharing our good fortune with others.