Janardhan Prabhu, Nityananda, see Advaita, Gadadhara, Shrivasa, Godavari. Gada, goddess. Rebus, ID, go my Kṛṣṇa. Here we are in Vladivostok, the eastern, far-eastern part of Russia. Actually, and you can see it's snowing. And as I was chanting this morning, many thoughts are coming to my mind.

One time, Prabhupāda said, "A preacher sometimes sleeps under a tree, or sometimes a preacher, a traveling sannyāsī, sleeps in a palace." So I was thinking in a similar way.

A few days ago, we had our sacred sounds kirtan retreat in our New Govardhan community in Australia. It was like a celestial paradise there, kind of towards the end of the summer, and really, really beautiful. And we had our kirtan party, and we were in short sleeves, chanting and dancing in the heat.

And then we got on the plane and we flew to Tokyo, Japan. And in Tokyo, Japan, it was spring, spring was just breaking, and the sign of spring in Japan is that all these cherry trees, they blossom with those beautiful flowers.

And then we got on the plane because we're traveling preachers, me and my retinue, my party, about Haribol, Tribhuvan, Boo Boo, and Anton, and a few others. And we flew northwards some hours to Russia, to Vladivostok. And here we're beginning our tour all the way across the country to St.

Petersburg. So, like that, we witness that we're in a celestial paradise, or we're in spring, or we're in midwinter. But actually, a devotee is not in the mood that if the weather is nice, he's happening. If the weather is not nice, he's not happy.

We're just looking for the opportunity to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we can go anywhere and everywhere, just like Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Earlier today, I was quoting Prabhupāda, speaking with one devotee about his upcoming trip to Moscow, Russia in the early 70s.

And that devotee was saying, "Prabhupāda was in Hawaii, and that devotee was saying, 'Prabhupāda, don't go to Russia now.

It's snowing in Moscow. You should stay here and rest in Hawaii and enjoy the mangoes.'" Prabhupāda famously said, "Preaching in the snows of Moscow is sweeter than the sweetest mango." So that's why we're coming.

I've actually been coming to Russia now for almost, well, thirty years, actually. And this is our pleasure to continue the mission of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Early 1970s, and everyone knows the story. Prabhupāda came, and it didn't appear that there was any real opportunity for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness other than meeting a university professor.

But Kṛṣṇa arranged for Prabhupāda and a couple of nice boys, and inspired them in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and they went on to spread the movement all over this country for some time.

So he had the vision. And interestingly enough, one time I told my godsister, Govinda Dasi, that in previous times in the Vedic culture, this part of the world was called Rishivara. Rishivara means the place with the Rishis. So Prabhupāda said that, and he actually stated this, that the yogis who like to perform penance and austerities in cold places like the Himalayas, they would come to Russia.

They would come to this far-eastern part of Russia, middle of Russia, where there were these cold winters, and it's snowing like now, and they performed their penance and austerities. So though we come to far distant places like this, and there is some risk involved, and there is a little bit of opposition building up again, we have faith that just as Śrīla Prabhupāda was successful in his preaching by the mercy of the Lord, we, as just his sincere followers, we can also be successful in our attempts.

And all glory really goes to the Russian devotees, the leaders of this yatra, which is very expansive, all the way from St. Petersburg here to Vladivostok. The devotees have just, you know, they've really taken the bull by the horns, so to speak, and they've made a very well-organized yatra.

There's lots of preaching going on, lots of temples are coming up. They've even installed Radha-Kṛṣṇa deities in homes here in Vladivostok. They built a beautiful temple right on the shore of the bay here, the ocean, and beautiful deity worship, and they have a lot of prasādam distribution.

And here, although there are restrictions now in Russia for the movement, as I mentioned, they do kirtan 365 days a year. Very enthusiastic devotees. It's, it's like Prabhupāda told us one time in India, said, "India is such that if you just scratch the skin of some Indian person," he said, "you'll find Kṛṣṇa consciousness underneath." It's natural for them.

So Russian people are actually very pious people. You can see because there are so many churches. In discussion, the Russian Orthodox Church, this is their religion here. Their people go to church. It's unlike some parts of the West in Europe where the churches are no longer popular.

Here, people, they go and attend church on Sundays and follow all the religious holidays. So pious by nature, and therefore also interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because Kṛṣṇa consciousness is also an ancient spiritual tradition. It has so much to offer.

And Russian people love our kirtans, they love our festivals, they love our prasādam. It's... My experience as a traveling preacher is no matter where I go in the world, whether I go to South America, I go to Australia, I go to Canada, I go to Europe, I come here to Russia, the same formula works.

All right, now I'm sankirtan, cultivating people in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, distributing prasādam, having festivals. This is the mood. We have to keep the engine churning by preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by sharing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And if we go out of our comfort zones, so to speak, and this is really going out of your comfort zone here in the snows of eastern Russia in Vladivostok, if we go out, we'll see that Kṛṣṇa will make the arrangement that people who have that spark in their hearts to understand what is God and what is, who is Kṛṣṇa ultimately, they'll come forward.

So this is what we're doing here. We left the tropical paradise of New Govardhan, to the springtime of Japan, to the freezing cold snows here in Russia. And we're enjoying assisting the Russian devotees and their leadership, under the GBC, you know, in humble ways to to keep Kṛṣṇa consciousness going here on a big scale.

And in Vladivostok, we see that's happening. We're very proud of the devotees here, that their, their relationship with the government is very nice, and their sankirtan, their chanting, the book distribution is going on. So we're playing our humble role as the foreign missionaries to come here and assist them, and to help Prabhupāda, to keep the mission here in Russia, in Russia going full steam.

Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda, for giving us this opportunity to follow in your footsteps and continue preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And all glories to the Russian devotees. Hari Kṛṣṇa.