Vardhan is so old, it's mentioned in the Skanda Purana. We know that Purana means the ancient history of India, of Bharat as it's known originally, India going back millions and millions of years. So, this holy place, people have visited this place, saints have visited, Rishis, and aspiring spiritual seekers.

They visit this place since time immemorial. As a holy list, we have here great personalities. Well, of course, Buddha, we hear in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, in the eleventh canto, Krishna sent food over here to bathe in the holy waters which emanate, emanate from Krishna's lotus feet.

We know the compiler of the Vedas, Shrila Vyasadeva, is living very near here. He's still present here. He compiled the Vedic literatures at the beginning of Kali Yuga. Guru Maricha visited here, Kapila Deva, Kasyapa Muni, Sankaracarya, Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya. Even it's said that Lord Nityananda visited here during his pilgrimages.

And yes, people have been coming since time immemorial. They come to take darshan of the deity who is known as Hari Narayan, or some people call him Bhadra Vishal. This deity is said to be a self-manifested Salagram Sila that is two feet tall, and has been worshipped here since time immemorial.

Many pilgrims come. You may not know, but Buddhism was spread throughout India at a particular time in history. And during the period when Buddhism was very prominent, unfortunately, this deity was neglected, and it was thrown into the river here.

But a thousand years ago, Adi Shankara, Sankaracarya, who's an incarnation of Lord Shiva, he came here and he found that deity in the river, and he installed the deity here and had the temple built. The temple is about a thousand years old.

A lot of history here. So, during the wintertime, it becomes very, very cold here. So cold that the priests have to leave. And what they do is they light a ghee lamp in front of the deity, and then Narada Muni and great demigods, they come here and they worship the deity for six months.

And when springtime comes, the priests, they come back, they open the door, and the ghee lamp is still burning. So it takes great austerity to come. Of course, we've come here, we've taken the convenience of the helicopters. But even that, staying in this cold area and walking in these high altitudes and getting a little bit of altitude sickness and a little upset tummy from what we're eating here, it's of no consequence to us because we have the darshan of this beautiful deity.

We get to see so many genuine sadhus. Actually, here sadhus come. We've seen sadhus from all the way down in the tip of India, from Bengal, from U.P., from Kashmir. This again is one of the Char Dhams of Greater India.

People come because of its history and because of the spiritual potency. You can actually feel it. Just like Shrila Prabhupada writes in the Nectar of Devotion, that if one comes to Vrindavan, to Mathura, and spends a fortnight there, he mentions even a new person, someone new to spiritual life, he can feel the purity of that place, that he can feel a change of heart.

So we've come here to take shelter of Hari Narayan, the beautiful deity. It is the deity of, if there is a deity of Hari Narayan, who recently there's a deity of Garuda, a beautiful temple. And we found that we've been, the people of Badrinath, the priests of Badrinath, they are very accommodating.

Everywhere we go, they say, "Hari Krishna." Well, we just say, "Om Namo Narayanaya." You know, a lot of impersonalists come here as well, so they'll greet you, "Om Namo Narayanaya." I offer my obeisances to you, Narayan.

Of course, our philosophy is exactly the opposite. But their sadhus, they renounce their goals as an impersonal, the effulgence of the Lord. But everyone, the shopkeepers, the priests, different types of kanis and yogis, when they see us, they fare all. "How do you know?" Many of them say, "We have been to Vrindavan.

We have been to your Krishna Mathura temple." So that just shows what an influence Shrila Prabhupada has had in spreading Krishna consciousness around the world.

These sadhus, Rishis, these priests, these just two people here, they are very appreciative that we're sharing their culture with the world. Actually, as we've stated many times in our videos, this is the culture of the spiritual world. Krishna says in the Bhagavad-gita, *aham bija-pradaḥ pitā* (BG 14.4), that He is the seed-giving father of all living entities.

And George Harrison said, "Everyone's Krishna conscious, some know it and some don't." So a saintly person, he sees all living entities equally.

And in that sense, he sees their spiritual nature, which is servants of Krishna.

So this, we're spreading this philosophy around the world, and the people of India, they appreciate it. When you come to an area where there are many sadhus, and there are pujas going on, chanting of different mantras, bathing in sacred rivers, it's a very, very auspicious atmosphere.

We come here and we chant Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

And my humble self, when I come before all these deities, we've seen at Yamunotri, and Gangotri, and Kedarnath, and here at Badrinath, my humble prayer is that I can become a good disciple of my spiritual master, Shrila Prabhupada, to help him in his mission of spreading Krishna consciousness around the world.

I pray that whatever desires, material desires that are there in my heart will be burst asunder and sent to a distant place. I pray that I can become a medium by which the message of Shri Vyasadeva, in the four Vedas, compiled in the form of our Six Goswamis, a message to Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, brought to the Western countries, that I can speak in such a way that people's hearts will be touched.

Because this is Kali Yuga. *Kaler doṣa nidhe rājan* (SB 1.1.10). Sukadeva Goswami tells Maharaja Parikshit, this is an age of Kali, is an ocean of inauspiciousness. The only way we can break through the terrible influence of Kali Yuga is *kīrtana eva kṛṣṇa-nāma-nāma-sankīrtana* (CC Adi 7.33).

By chanting Hari Krishna and explaining the glories of the Holy Name.

So I pray to all these deities, to these holy rivers, to the Himalayan mountains, who are non-different than the Lord Himself, that I can be an instrument in speaking so that people will get the message and start practicing Krishna consciousness, and maybe be just as fortunate as we were to one day come to these holy places.

Why not?

These holy places are opening their arms to all of society to come here and become purified. I also pray for *sva-nāma-ruci*, some taste for the Holy Name, which is the *yoga dharma*. And I'm also praying that the whole world can become flooded with Krishna consciousness.

So this we've learned from our spiritual master. So we conclude our program here in the Char Dhams of the Himalayas. And in this mood, that we can take our good fortune, whatever we've gained here, whatever sins have been washed away, whatever material desire has been thrown to a distant place, whatever taste for the Holy Name, whatever blessings we've gotten from the sadhus, and the holy rivers, and the deities, and the trees.

This stick was given to me by a very nice sadhu. The stick actually comes from this area, Badrinath only place in the world you can find this tree from where the stick comes from is a little bit higher than Badrinath.

You have to go through the snow, and these trees grow, and then you have to pray to the tree. The sadhus say you come back for days, you cut the tree like that. And then this stick is said to be very auspicious.

It keeps all evil away. It especially keeps snakes away. The sadhus, you always see them sleeping with it, but it keeps all evil influences away. Of course, we have that in the form of the Holy Name. But the more mere here, whether blessings we can get to continue a long life of preaching Krishna consciousness, we'll take that.

So once a sadhu gave me this gift of his stick. He had it many years. He said, "So that you can go on preaching the message of Krishna consciousness around the world." And Prabhupada told me personally, Prabhupada gave me his dhoti in 1971.

I was on my way to France. I was a little nervous. Prabhupada ordered us to go to France and preach. I was just 20 years old. And he gave me his dhoti and he said, "This is not ordinary. This is a gift from the Vaisnavas, a very special thing." So this was a yogi, a transcendentalist.

He gave me this. "I don't take this as an ordinary stick, take it as a blessing. I'll carry this back to the West and I will continue preaching Krishna consciousness by the blessings of Shrila Prabhupada." So that's why we come to this holy dham.

We've had a wonderful, mystical, I have to say, a mystical experience. If you can, in your lifetime, I'm 70. I made it. We had some extra help, but come to these holy Dhams, become purified, and we pray to achieve the highest globe, Goloka Vrindavan, one day.

Oh, glorious Shrila Prabhupada. Char Dham Ki Jai!

Om Namo Narayanaya!