"*00574*.*
"### Balarāma’s Appearance Day: Vṛndāvana Tour 2022

Today we are observing the appearance day of Lord Balarāma. As many of you know, Balarāma is a very prominent personality in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. The central deities, as you know—the central deities are Kṛṣṇa on the left, and in the middle, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Balarāma.

Vṛndāvana is a place where there is lots of sand, but that means we should have Kṛṣṇa on the center altar because this is the place where They have Their pastimes. Of course, there are other places in Vṛndāvana where there is Kṛṣṇa; in my experience, there are many temples of just Balarāma alone. It is interesting—there are many temples of just Balarāma, and if you are looking for those temples, you cannot say "Where is the Balarāma temple?" You have to say, "Where is Dāujī?" And you can always see that in Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma deities because Balarāma is always a little bit taller than Kṛṣṇa, and He is resting His hand on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulder, protecting Him.

It is very interesting, and in the first canto of the *Bhāgavatam*, usually we think of Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but in the *Bhāgavatam*, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma together are referred to as the Supreme Personality of God. There is a famous verse in the First Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* describing the various incarnations of Kṛṣṇa. Listen to this verse: in the 19th and 20th incarnations, the Lord advented Himself as Lord Balarāma and Lord Kṛṣṇa in the family of Vṛṣṇi, the Yadu dynasty.

But He doesn't usually manifest these in Vṛndāvana. Owningly, somebody pulls Itself properly; it’s a place with very sweet pastimes, so He brings Them out sometimes. But He doesn't usually have His plow on. His plow is not there because the older brother shouldn't see the younger brother’s romantic pastimes; you know, that’s Vedic etiquette. It is not the proper etiquette for the older brother to watch the romantic pastimes of the younger brothers; it is just not Vedic. So, they have their *rāsa-līlās*. Balarāma has His *rāsa-līlā* with His gopīs over here, and Kṛṣṇa has His *rāsa-līlā* with His gopīs over there.

The older brother is the main child in the family, so He is supposed to look out for the younger brother, and He is supposed to protect the girls, His sisters, even up to death. He is meant to protect His sisters; it is very interesting. He also thinks of Himself as Kṛṣṇa’s servant. He is a servant. It’s interesting, isn't it? He is the older brother, but at the same time, He thinks, "I am Kṛṣṇa’s servant." Because in our philosophy—it is hard to understand on a hot day—but in our philosophy, Balarāma is the first expansion of Kṛṣṇa. His purpose is Kṛṣṇa expanding into various incarnations like Vāmanadeva and Śeṣa. He is the first expansion of Kṛṣṇa, so He considers Himself subservient to Kṛṣṇa. So many interesting ways that Balarāma serves.

He considers Himself Kṛṣṇa’s fan. We have the peacock fan in the spiritual world; when they find Kṛṣṇa, He expands. Sometimes He gets a little tired, so Balarāma expands as the *āsana*, as Kṛṣṇa’s sitting place. It is just like in one of our plays—you know, there is a pretend couch, and all the devotees are there, right? And then one of the actors sits on top of the devotees. You know, in that play, he sits on top of the devotees. He’s a big man; I don't know who he sits on. Oh my god! So, being transcendental brothers, they are almost always together. They spent most of their youth together, actually. The boys, they get most of the association with Kṛṣṇa—the association that is a problem that the gopīs are always thinking: "When do I get to associate with that beautiful boy?"

With all the cows to the pasture grounds, the girls are looking out the window, "Oh, He’s so beautiful! When can I associate? When can He be my husband?" And all the residents of Vṛndāvana, they came under that umbrella there, and they were all very close to Kṛṣṇa, and the gopīs were very happy. They were together with the cows and the boys the whole day, and actually, they even left Vṛndāvana together.

One of the most difficult moments for Vaiṣṇavas is hearing how Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, and all those residents were crying rivers of tears—more than anyone has ever been loved before. For them to be separated from Kṛṣṇa, because of their love, it feels like a thousand years have passed. It is only one second, but it feels like I’ve been absent from Kṛṣṇa for a thousand years. It’s only been to the wrestling arena; they went to the ocean, and Kṛṣṇa had that Viśvakarmā build that big city of Dvārakā, and Kṛṣṇa became a king. Isn't that interesting? We know exactly how long Kṛṣṇa lived in Dvārakā: 96 years and 8 months. Poor gopīs, to be 125 years old. That’s a big discussion; we will have that another day. Did Kṛṣṇa go back? Another four-hour lecture. I mean, it may sound very cruel, you know—Kṛṣṇa, all these gopīs and the gopas, and none of you, so they love Him so much, He never went back. But there are some reasons why He didn't go back. Would you like to hear the reasons why our Kṛṣṇa didn't go back?

The first reason is that He didn't go back because He saw the need to rid the world of powerful demons like Jarāsandha, who potentially could attack Dvārakā. No one can save you if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, and no one can kill you if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you. So Jarāsandha was a big demon. Kṛṣṇa said, "I have to stay in Dvārakā to protect all My devotees everywhere." Yesterday, He increased His devotees' love for Him by separation. She hasn't seen her daddy in several months; he is coming in a couple of days, so that separation caused her to love her dad more than before. "I am considering a moment to be like 12 years or more. Tears are flowing through my eyes like torrents of rain. I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A man or woman can satisfy the love of a family or a neighborhood, but Kṛṣṇa can satisfy the loving desires of every created being to their full satisfaction. The *Bhāgavatam* describes this love in separation very nicely in the Tenth Canto, 47th chapter, text 35: "When her lover is far away, a woman thinks of him more than when he is present before there was nobody." And indeed, sometimes Kṛṣṇa puts the gopīs into extreme suffering by separating Himself from them; nonetheless, they cannot forget Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā, the gopīs became most dejected and spent the rest of their lives simply crying in separation from Kṛṣṇa.

But Balarāma, He came back to Vṛndāvana. In the Tenth Canto, Chapter 65, and also in a scripture called *Harivaṁśa*, it’s explained that after the departure of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma from Mathurā, the residents of Vṛndāvana were feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. One day, Balarāma revealed His desire to Kṛṣṇa to go back. So one day they were walking together, and Balarāma said, "My dear brother, how is it that You have not returned to Vraja? Our father and mother’s hearts have been burning in separation from You. I don't understand Your intentions; it seems You have forgotten the Vrajavāsīs."

He said, "Alas, alas! Vṛndāvana dwells always within the chambers of My heart. How can I? Vasudeva has instructed Me that I should not disobey our parents, Vasudeva and Devakī, in Dvārakā, who never let Me go from Dvārakā." Kṛṣṇa’s original parents were Vasudeva and Devakī; they are living in Dvārakā. They are not going to let Kṛṣṇa go back to Vṛndāvana; He is bound by their love as well. It’s all about love. "My dear Balarāma, get their permission to leave and go see the residents." So Balarāma actually went to Vasudeva and Devakī, who loved Kṛṣṇa so much, and He said, "Can Me and Kṛṣṇa go back to Vṛndāvana?" "All right, you can go, Balarāma, but out of fear that Kṛṣṇa would not come back to Dvārakā, they said Kṛṣṇa can't go. You go alone." They really love Him, so "You go around, and Kṛṣṇa stays in Dvārakā. I am going now." At this point, the ācārya has raised the question: how Balarāma Himself could leave Kṛṣṇa and go to Vṛndāvana? Because how can anyone leave Kṛṣṇa? The question is raised by the ācāryas: how did Balarāma leave Kṛṣṇa to go to... In the 65th chapter of the Tenth Canto, verse four, I found that Balarāma is referred to as *tādātmyam*—meaning He is the second body of Kṛṣṇa. But the answer is found in the first verse of the 65th chapter of the Tenth Canto: this pastime is being discussed; He had such an intense desire, intense eagerness to return to Vraja that His sobriety, discrimination, and sense control, it all vanished. But also, the ultimate factor is that Kṛṣṇa wanted to go back to Vṛndāvana because He knew how important the residents of Vṛndāvana were to Balarāma.

There is a very famous verse in the *Bhāgavatam* which shows how much Kṛṣṇa... Today we are trying to awaken our love for Balarāma; it is His appearance day, so we are talking about Him, we are bathing Him, we are feeding Him, we are following in the footsteps of the Vrajavāsīs; we are trying to love Balarāma. If this day goes by and your love for Balarāma has not increased, this day was useless for you. Yes, this is the day we try to love Balarāma, so we can understand, we can appreciate, we can develop our love for Balarāma by hearing how much Kṛṣṇa loves Balarāma. Would you like to hear how much Kṛṣṇa loves His brother? Who wants to hear Him? Okay, this is Tenth Canto...

Kṛṣṇa said, "Just open your hearts and listen to this." He says, "This earth has now become most fortunate because You, Balarāma, have touched Your grass and bushes with Your feet, touched their trees and creepers with Your fingernails, and because You have graced our rivers, mountains, birds, and animals with Your merciful glances. But above all, You have embraced the young cowherd women between Your two arms of favor, hankered after by the goddess of fortune herself." This is more important than the food we eat; this is the nourishment for the soul, to hear verses like this glorifying that person who is our real lover.

Kṛṣṇa, one of the girls here, she is taking initiation today. I’ve been waiting for centuries. *Kṛṣṇāmṛta*—it means the nectar of *kathā*, the nectar of hearing about Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, not in Vaikuṇṭha but in... He said, "Although I have consoled the people of Vraja through the mouth of Uddhava, You must also give sweet instructions to them. Now, get on Your chariot alone and go quickly, so that no one will see." Kṛṣṇa sent lots of messages from the cowherd boys, from Nanda, Yaśodā, for the gopīs, for the cows. Kṛṣṇa sent a letter with Uddhava to... It was too hard. Uddhava accompanied Him for some distance with tears in his eyes, and when Balarāma was out of sight, Kṛṣṇa returned to His palace in Dvārakā and cried.

So, quickly on His chariot—so that other travelers on the road didn't see Him—He entered Vṛndāvana. He changed His clothes because He was in like kingly dress, you know, in Dvārakā, and He dressed like a simple cowherd boy. This morning, and now it is so sweet, He is coming into Vṛndāvana on a chariot, dressed like He was before—a cowherd boy. The news spread like wildfire. Followers back in Vṛndāvana...

Of course, everyone was sad that Kṛṣṇa was not with Him; however, knowing how attached Balarāma was to Kṛṣṇa, they were grateful that Balarāma had made... He writes—he repeats a verse from the *Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, 65th chapter, verse number three: "Let us repeatedly glorify Lord Balarāma. Although He is the original personality of eternal bliss, *Nityānanda*, He felt pained by His love for the residents of Vraja unless He went to see them, even at the cost of leaving His beloved Kṛṣṇa behind."

I know it’s hot in here; you haven't taken *prasādam*. This is what we do on these days, you know, the customs in the evening till midnight. It was so hard, but this is what we are supposed to do. You have to fix your mind on these activities. It’s just a few times a year we try to make a big step forward in Kṛṣṇa consciousness by the *kathā*, *prasāda*...

To a very quiet place in the forest, and they bathed Him, they fed Him, and they gave Him... Balarāma... "Had faith that today, tomorrow, the two of You would return. We have passed our time in that way only, somehow maintaining our lives. Holding Your feet, Balarāma, we pray that we will bring Kṛṣṇa back from Dvārakā one day." And... He writes, "Even if a blind man experiences happiness through all of his senses, he is still not completely happy because he cannot see. Similarly, even though Balarāma visited the homes of the Vrajavāsīs, He did not feel happiness within, for Kṛṣṇa was the joy of His life." And the people of Vraja—the gopīs—they said to Balarāma, "Does Kṛṣṇa remember His friends? Does Kṛṣṇa remember His father, mother, Yaśodā?" So then, Balarāma, taking pity on the gopīs, He read a letter to them that Kṛṣṇa had written to them. Get your tissues out! Get your tissues out! The letter said, "My dear gopīs, all the messages that I have sent you after leaving are full of promises that I will return. My words could not be untrue. I am most anxious to return. After quickly killing the remaining seven or eight enemies of the devotees, I promise I will come to Vraja in seven or eight days."

So at that point, all the gopīs, they looked at each other and said, "Hopefully, maybe this time it’s true." That should also give us hope that we can purify our hearts, and when our hearts are pure, we will be attracted to the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Analogy using Balarāma’s plow and Kṛṣṇa’s flute: as we know, Kṛṣṇa—as you mentioned—we know that Balarāma carries a plow and Kṛṣṇa carries the flute. The ācāryas say that with the plow of Balarāma’s mercy, we can... and when our hearts are free of all material desires, we will be attracted to the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, calling us back home to Vṛndāvana. You know, the plow, it closes up the earth and takes up the weeds, so by Balarāma’s, by His plow, we can uproot our material desires. When our hearts are pure, then we will be attracted to the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, saying, "That’s the goal of my life, nothing less than that. I just want to go home to Vṛndāvana." Of course, we may, you know, recognizing our neophyte nature and the desires that we are fighting with, you know, we may think, "I can't make it," but no, we...

Who is the most merciful representative of Lord Nityānanda who has so much compassion for the fallen conditioned souls?

"I have no love for Kṛṣṇa, nor for the causes of developing love of Kṛṣṇa—namely hearing and chanting—and the process of *bhakti-yoga* by which one is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa and fixing His lotus feet in the heart is also lacking in me. As far as philosophical knowledge or pious works are concerned, I don't see any opportunity for me to execute such activities. But above all, I am not even born in a nice family. Therefore, I must simply pray to You, O Gopījana-vallabha Kṛṣṇa, maintainer and beloved of the gopīs. I simply wish and hope that some way or other I may be able to approach Your lotus feet, and this hope is giving me pain because I think myself quite incompetent to approach that transcendental goal of life."

*Āśā-bandha*—one wants to continue to hope against hope that some way or other he will be able to approach the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord.

Thank you very much.

On this auspicious day, we are accepting these candidates as disciples, and in our Brahma-Mādhva-Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, specifically, we are welcoming them into our extended family through the simple activities of chanting and dancing.

So, just like a woman when she gets married to a man that she admires and she loves, she is very happy to be part of that new family. She actually moves out of her home and moves into the home of her husband; she feels very proud to be joining this family of her husband. So we are supposed to be devoid of pride, but everything can be dovetailed. We are proud to be part of Prabhupāda’s movement. Officially today, they are officially part of Prabhupāda’s movement. This was such a wonderful evolution. The most important day in their lives since they fell from grace—since we fell from grace from the spiritual world—because this is the point, the turning point. Turning point, going back home, back to Godhead, at the summit. Oh, happy days! This is the happy... then we come in contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we accept a spiritual master, we take initiation, and we go up. It’s like a big smile, to bring my disciples safely to His lotus feet. So for my disciples, I try to be a good example of what it means to be a follower of Prabhupāda, and share with my disciples the philosophy and instructions that he has given the whole world. And my hope is always that my disciples will, as quickly as possible, become free from all material contamination, and that lotus flower of *prema*, it’s there in the heart, that will blossom, and they will get back home, back to Godhead, as quickly as possible.

I am not allowed to rest until everybody is in Vṛndāvana; then I can go back and see. What quality? You can make my service easier by, you know, maintaining strictly the four regulated principles and chanting from your heart and serving this mission, and you can get home as quickly as possible. Because who wants to stay in this nasty world? I’d like all the devotees to raise their hands to give blessings to these candidates for initiation. We will chant Hare Kṛṣṇa three times for blessings. Devotees...

Those blessings are also going for all the candidates for initiation that are on, so let’s also give our blessings to them three times.""