My name is Crane. Oh Marva, I'm from Stellenbosch, South Africa, and I've come to take part in this absolutely magical endeavor of the Vivo Cultura Foundation in Poland. We're traveling all along the Baltic coast and we're sharing the essence of spirituality and culture with people through the performing arts.

We have theater, we have traditional Indian dance, we have martial arts, we have acrobatic elix, amazing professional performances from all over the world, and it's, it's really an honor to be a part of it. The theatre department is truly like a family.

We, we have such a strong sense of shared purpose in what we do. It really is such an honor to be part of a team of people that are so selfless and so committed to, to sharing authentic spiritual life.

The main performance that I'm a part of is called Sitaram. Sitaram can be described essentially as the original love story between the most virtuous, benevolent, conscientious king that ever existed, our Lord Ramachandra, a long time ago in the general area where India is today, and then his consort, Sita Devi, is the embodiment of chastity, virtuousness, loyalty, beauty, kindness.

So, the relationship of love between them is incredibly deep and incredibly mature, and on a truly spiritual level. The story, of course, also encapsulates themes of good and bad. So, we have like the original demon, Ravana, who is a very dark character and, and basically embodies the quality of selfishness and greed.

Under the amazingly able guidance of Shri Nivedita Malli Poovu, who has been involved with Vivo Cultura, he practically grew up as being part of this mission. So, he's our director, and he has more than a decade of experience in, in the theater department, and he really just knows how to, how to bring us together and to help us to work as a team.

Then the incredibly interesting, charismatic Sundar Chaitanya is playing the role of Ravana, and he really brings out the dark side in such an, such an accurate way. Shri Hari Naam from Germany is playing the role of Sita Devi, and of course, she's such a graceful, amazing dancer.

In getting ready for the show, she just spent so much hours, so many hours of her time, with so much patience and tolerance, to help me to get all of the dance routines right. And other than that, we have such a wonderful collection of supporting players.

We have the trees played by Vrindavani and Lisa and Marcia and Roger, and they, they, they do such an amazing job too, to support the bluff of the play and to really embody what, what Sita is is doing and what she's experiencing.

And Hanuman, played by the amazing Sachi from Gauraṅga Puri, he's just such a magical person. And whenever he embodies a role on stage, he just does it with so much dedication and authenticity. So, especially, there is a very intimate relationship between Hanuman and and Ram.

So, it is very easy for me to feel so much affection and care for for Hanumanji on stage. A sense of purpose and doing something as meaningful as I possibly can is the most important thing in life. And so I've come to understand that helping people to realize their true spiritual identity is the most meaningful thing that one can possibly do and be a part of.

And so this mission of Vivo Cultura is in the line of the Gaudiya Vaishnava sampradaya of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, who aims to share love of God through the chanting of the holy names and through experiencing joy in, in, in shared spreading of love of God.

So I'm incredibly grateful to be a part of it. You come and you see people step out of their mundane, dreary lives, and they enter into this realm that we've created, and you can see their faces light up in a way that they've probably never experienced before.

And especially being on stage and being able to observe this, and meeting people afterwards and seeing how their hearts have been touched is truly incredible because essentially, what we're trying to do is we're trying to plant seeds of devotion and help people to really take up the path that addresses their true identity.

So deeply, deeply grateful to the Vaisnava devotees of the Lord. I offer my humble obeisances to all of you. Thank you so much for making this great, great, great sacrifice.