"*00146*.*
"### Lecture Transcript: Best to Leave This World in Kurukṣetra

Kṛṣṇa, to begin with, I’d like to officially welcome our ISKCON Temple President, Śākyagola Dāsa, to our function today. He is an empowered representative of Śrīla Gopāla Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja for all the wonderful service he is doing in this very sacred place. I take the dust of your feet on my head.

I would also like to apologize to our group of devotees for any inconvenience you’ve undergone in our switch from the hotel to the local hostels. Perhaps that’s one reason that I included the word "tolerance" in the itinerary: be more tolerant. That’s traveling in India. As the organizers, we’re doing our very best, especially trying to give you the best facilities that we can, but sometimes we live in a palace in Jaipur and sometimes we live under a tree. So, just bear with us as we try our best to serve all of you. Sometimes that’s all we have—the hotels—but you are in Kurukṣetra. I was going to say "for better or worse," but there’s no "worse." It’s just better to be here than in a comfortable apartment in New York, or Moscow.

I’m with you; the same bedbugs are biting me. My hotel is one step up from you, but I’ve got twenty bites on my leg here—bedbugs. So, I’m scratching a lot during the class. I’m taking a little risk to come here with my kidney stones; the doctor said, "Better you go to Delhi and be safe." I said, "I’d rather be with my devotees, unsafe. I’ll just depend on Kṛṣṇa."

My dear devotees, let us remember we’re here by the austerities of Śrīla Prabhupāda. Our austerities are nothing like the many years that Prabhupāda lived in Vṛndāvana in absolute poverty, preparing to come to the West. Prabhupāda was living alone in much more austere conditions than any of us are living in our hotels here. For example, when Prabhupāda would receive a letter from some dignitary or an important person, he didn’t have enough money to buy paper to reply to that person. He would turn the paper over, and whatever space was left on that letter, he would reply in that space. That’s how poor he was. And when he was printing his first publications of the *Back to Godhead* magazine, he would go out alone and distribute the magazine on the streets of Delhi. It would be so hot, Prabhupāda would faint onto the pavement. And when he boarded the *Jaladūta* to go to the West, he was all alone, sleeping in a very austere cabin or little quarters on a cargo ship. There was no mattress there, there was no window, there was no—and talk about austerity! For our benefit, he suffered three heart attacks.

We should bear whatever austerities we’re undergoing here in this sacred land of Kurukṣetra with tolerance and humility. We shouldn’t complain; we shouldn’t write on the app group, "You know, there are so many fleas here, I can’t—there’s too much noise, it’s dirty, the linen—" Tolerate. Be proper grand-disciples of Śrīla Prabhupāda and bear that austerity, because here you’re sitting under this beautiful Banyan tree in the holy land of Kurukṣetra. And I’m with you; I’m with you, I’m enjoying it. But I do understand for some of you it’s a shock. I’ll just be honest: I understand it can be really a shock. So, those of you who can’t tolerate it for whatever reason, we’re sending one bus back to Vṛndāvana this afternoon, and you can board that bus and go back to Vṛndāvana and wait for us. We’ll be back in two days and you can continue to be part of the tour there. I understand.

You have to be a spiritual warrior to stay here in Kurukṣetra, but if you’re not, it’s understandable. So the bus will leave around 5:00 this evening, and don’t be shy, don’t be embarrassed, you can contact the ceremony and that bus will go back. You’ll be back by 10:00 tonight in Vṛndāvana. Leaving at—oh, it’s leaving at 2:00. And there’s no money back; we know you paid a registration fee, but we can’t give your money back. Just go back, we’ll be there in a few days. 

And for those of you who are just still like, "shocked" by the appearance of Kurukṣetra, it’s nothing like it was after the battlefield. After the battle of Kurukṣetra 5,000 years ago, there were dead bodies everywhere and there were, you know, vultures eating everybody and blood everywhere. It’s not that bad, okay? So, no more messages on the app about how dirty it is; I don’t want to hear that. Just want to hear—and please be kind to Rāsāyānī, she’s got a lot on her plate.

So again, today we find ourselves in a most sacred place: Kurukṣetra, where Kṛṣṇa, as Pārtha-sārathi, famously took the role of Arjuna’s chariot driver during the big battle that happened here 5,000 years ago. Just try to imagine in your mind, you know, 5,000 years ago, there’s a huge battle going on. But for the deliverance of humanity for all time, Kṛṣṇa took maybe 45 minutes to speak the wisdom of the *Bhagavad-gītā*. We often quote, "Elegance is truth spoken concisely." So everything and all we ever needed to hear, if nothing else, were those 700 verses in *Bhagavad-gītā* along with purports. *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is* is a panacea for all of humanity. "Panacea" is a big word; it means very complete. It means that which can solve problems. The ultimate panacea, all problems, is solved by reading *Bhagavad-gītā*, because by becoming a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, you go back to Godhead. No problems in Vaikuṇṭha, no problems in Goloka. 

Last year, I remember in India I kind of secretly bought a book: *Hindi in 10 Easy Lessons*. I only got through two pages. I learned *tīna*, which is "three," and *sāmpa* means "snake." But the opportunity was there. So, in the same way, the opportunity for transcending this world and all its problems is *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is*. That knowledge and the culture of that knowledge, the culture of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is the foundation that we need to go deeper into Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So central is the *Gītā* to our lives that we should read it every day. 

"But Guru, I’ve been a devotee for many years, I already know I’m not this body." One of the central themes in *Gītā* is that we’re not the body, we’re the spiritual force within the body, the spark of life, with the *ātman*, with the soul. "I know that, I’ve been a devotee 10 years." My dear Prabhu, if you really realized you’re not this body, why then do you contemplate even for a moment material desires when they come to your mind? You should just say, "Oh, go away, be done with you." But we spend a little time; we haven’t even realized the basics yet. We have to keep on trying. But along with the ABCs of spiritual life, we have the XYZ in the form of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. We’re in the 10th Canto; we’re so blessed we can learn of the wonderful pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Now, for argument's sake, the question may arise: why have we come here to Kurukṣetra, where a big battle took place, during the month of Kārttika, which is specifically reserved for the worship of Kṛṣṇa in His form as a baby, as Dāmodara, as well as a time for focusing on—as we learn in the *Brahma-saṃhitā* with the great Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s quotes—Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in the opening verse of his mind: "The most worshipful form of the Lord is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, and Vṛndāvana is the topmost worshipable of abodes." So, what are we doing here? See, based on that statement, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas have preferred to focus primarily on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vraja, or in Māyāpur where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa appeared in the combined form of Mahāprabhu Kṛṣṇa, not so much in other places like Mathurā or Dvārakā or Kurukṣetra, where Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself to go to Mathurā, expanded Himself to go to Dvārakā, expanded Himself to come to Kurukṣetra.

Vrajavāsīs don’t like to take Kṛṣṇa out of Vṛndāvana. When Rūpa—when instructing Rūpa Gosvāmī to write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Lord Caitanya said, "*Kṛṣṇa kabe nā yāya*—don’t take Kṛṣṇa out from Vraja, because He never leaves Vṛndāvana." And I found in the purport of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.92.1, Prabhupāda quotes the phrase: "Kṛṣṇa never even takes a step out of Vṛndāvana." So what are we doing in Kurukṣetra? But at the same time, devotees are not adverse to hearing or studying Kṛṣṇa’s other *līlās*. We like to hear how Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā and killed Kaṃsa. We relish hearing about—Prabhupāda said, "Our Kṛṣṇa, our Kṛṣṇa, He reigned as a King in Dvārakā." Y’all want to hear that? He’s my hero. Whatever He does, I want to hear it. I also want to hear about Kṛṣṇa coming to Kurukṣetra and speaking the *Gītā*. Why? Because all His pastimes are transcendental. All of His pastimes are extraordinary—not ordinary, but extraordinary. He says, "My appearance and activities are not material, they are transcendental. One who understands this in truth, after quitting his body, comes home to Goloka, comes home to Me." 

And Prabhupāda said in a *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* class in Vṛndāvana, September 11th, 1976, shortly before he left this world: "Those who are advanced, they know that Kṛṣṇa is dancing with the gopīs, that *līlā*, and Kṛṣṇa is playing as the leader on the battlefield of Kurukṣetra, it’s the same. It’s all transcendental. One should not make any distinction between the two."

I was trying to think of an analogy because analogies make philosophical concepts more clear. So then I thought of myself when I was a young boy in my relationship with my father. I worshiped my father like a hero. He was a cool guy, tall, very athletic, he had blonde hair; he was like, you know, a superstar. He could speak nice, so he was my hero. So when he came home from the office, "Hey Dad, what was it like at the office today?" My mom said, "That’s not your business." "Yeah, but what did Dad do?" And he’d sit down and tell me. Yeah, my dad. I was interested; wasn’t my business, but I was interested. But I wanted to go to the ball game—we played baseball in America. I said, "Dad, when are we going to go to the ballpark?" "I’ll take you on Saturday." "Oh Dad, thanks very much!" Everything my father did I was interested, although I liked the ballpark the best. So yes, but that same Kṛṣṇa came here and for our progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, our beginning progress, He spoke the *Gītā*. I want to follow Him here. What did He do when He was here? Kṛṣṇa, our Kṛṣṇa, to like that.

So let’s go deep into Kurukṣetra. And rightfully so. Generally, when we think of Kurukṣetra, of course we think of this enormous battlefield, you know, where again Kṛṣṇa spoke. We think Kurukṣetra is important because, well, the battle took place here and the *Gītā* was spoken here. But actually, Kurukṣetra has been a holy place from time immemorial. For example, in his *Prārthanā*, 47 quotes the *Mahā-Tantra*, where it said—this is why we included His names in the prayers before the class—He quotes, "Kurukṣetra was the main holy place in Satya-yuga." Is that interesting? According to the *Mahā-Tantra*, this was the main holy place in Satya-yuga. Puṣkara was the main holy place in Tretā-yuga. Naimiṣāraṇya was the main holy place in Dvāpara-yuga. And then it also mentions Kali-yuga. What’s the main holy place in Kali-yuga? Because Kṛṣṇa came as Mahāprabhu in Navadvīpa, Māyāpur, to inaugurate the *saṅkīrtana* movement for the age. 

Also, tradition has it that as Lord Brahmā created the Earth, he sat in the center of Brahma-sarovara, this lake where we are right now, that he sat here and created the universe. It was also in Kārttika that Bali Mahārāja gave the entire universe to Vāmana, a day when the Lord begged the king to give Him one step of land. That pastime happened here. A lot of things happened here, not just the Battle of Kurukṣetra. I also found it mentioned in the *Tīrtha-anukramaṇikā*—imagine how you find that—that after Paraśurāma killed 21 generations of Kṣatriyas, he collected their blood and made the five lakes of this area, Samanta-pañcaka. This is also the place that he performed penance to atone for killing all those Kṣatriyas. 

It’s also mentioned how this place got its name, "Kurukṣetra." It was named after Kuru, who was a forefather of the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas, when he came here and settled on the bank of the Sarasvatī River. The Sarasvatī River, well, it’s underground now; it’s not far from here. Now, when that Mahārāja Kuru came here, he was, you know, tilling the land with a golden plow to get things going. Now, usually when you plow something with a plow, what comes up? Like clods of earth, maybe little insects, things like that. But this has been a transcendental place since time immemorial. So when he was plowing the Earth, many mystical things came up from his plowing. Śāstras say that the ground yielded eight religious virtues. Did you ever see someone plow the ground and out came eight religious virtues? "Hey Mom, I was plowing the field today to put the potatoes in and eight religious virtues came out!" "Really, son? Where’d you plow?" "Kurukṣetra!" "Wow!" 

Truth, Yoga, kindness, purity, charity, forgiveness, austerity, and celibacy. So it’s described in the *Vāmana Purāṇa* 12.16; it’s written that Kṛṣṇa appreciated this so much that He gave the King two blessings, because Kṛṣṇa likes it when these good qualities come forward. He wants us to live a moral life, spiritual life, a transcendental life. So He was so happy with the King, He blessed him: "My dear King, thank you for bringing forth truth, yoga, kindness, purity, charity, forgiveness, austerity, and celibacy. Thank you very much." From this dirt came those virtues, and the King brought them forth. 

So Kṛṣṇa said, "I’m going to give you two blessings: that from this point on, this land will always be known after you as Kurukṣetra—*kṣetra* means a place, Kurukṣetra, this is your place, you’re the king—and my second blessing, my dear King, is that anyone who dies here will get *mokṣa*, liberation." We all want *mokṣa*—culminating in *bhakti*, which is the ticket back to Godhead. But please don’t die today! Tolerate the bedbugs. And in my research, I found out in *Mahābhārata* it’s stated that Prabhupāda once said, "Go to Kurukṣetra, that fulfills all desires. By seeing that place, all living entities are liberated from their sins. You don’t even have to come here; you can fly over it and look down and see it. By seeing this place, all living entities—not only humans, but even mosquitoes, bedbugs—they’re liberated from their sins. Whoever merely says, 'I will go to Kurukṣetra,' is free from sins." And if the dust of Kurukṣetra is raised by the wind and just touches a great sinner, he’s free from his sins immediately and attains the highest abode.

And on the side, I was reading that in Dvāpara-yuga, the yuga before Kali-yuga, Kurukṣetra was not only spiritually potent but also very beautiful with green groves, lotus-filled lakes, and fertile pastures. People would say, "One who lives in Kurukṣetra lives in heaven." Okay? "One who lives in Kurukṣetra, he lives in heaven." Bedbugs? That’s all illusion. So if you’re going back in that bus at 2:00, you may want to think twice. Come on, bedbugs, I’m all yours! Never leave in this place. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Now, let’s go a little deeper. Often I quote that poet from the 70s—we know who we are—and by Prabhupāda’s grace, we know where we’re going: higher and higher and higher and higher. So another very, very important reason that Kurukṣetra is so famous is that 5,000 years ago, on the occasion of a solar eclipse, Kṛṣṇa came here with the residents of Dvārakā. Kṛṣṇa spent just a little time in Vṛndāvana, broke those young girls’ hearts by leaving so that their love for Him would increase—it’s a mystery—then killed Kaṃsa, then to protect the Yadu dynasty and keep all the demons away from Dvārakā, He went to Dvārakā and He stayed almost 100 years there. 

But then there was this occasion of a major, major solar eclipse. And eclipses are considered very inauspicious because Rāhu is eating the Sun or the Moon as it may be. Very inauspicious. Nowadays people, because everyone’s in ignorance, when there’s an eclipse, "Well, let’s go look at that, it’s really nice!" Yeah, okay, right. It’s like drinking poison. So to counteract an eclipse, devotees of the Lord, they’ll go to a sacred place where it can’t have that much effect, they’ll bathe in a sacred river while the eclipse is happening, or they’ll just stay at home and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, to bathe in the nectar of the Holy Names. 

So, because it’s such a sacred place for the many reasons I gave and more, Kṛṣṇa came from Dvārakā with the Dvārakāvāsīs. But it gets better: on that occasion, the residents of Vṛndāvana, which is not that far away—it’s about a three-hour bus ride, by the way, it’s not five hours from, like, from Jaipur—they also came for the same reason. All the, "Yeah, we’ll come here because there’s a solar eclipse," yeah, right. In truth, they came here to meet Kṛṣṇa who had left Vṛndāvana long, long, long, long ago. Because again, Kurukṣetra is not far from Vṛndāvana; Dvārakā is much farther. If we take a bus ride to Dvārakā, whew, you’d be like, "Rādhā, please!" So because Kṛṣṇa was pretty close, they actually came to ask Him to come back to Vraja.

I haven’t found the calculation how many years that was since Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, but I can spiritually make an educated guess: it was like millions of years. Because, "Oh Govinda, feeling your separation, I’m considering a moment to be like 12 years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain. I’m feeling all vacant in the world. You’re absent, so even a second is like a thousand years." So Kṛṣṇa was gone a long time, and they missed Him more than anyone’s ever been missed before because they loved Him more than anyone’s ever been loved before. 

By the mercy of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who’s a mañjarī in the spiritual world, we get to look into the heart of Kṛṣṇa’s favorite gopī and see how much she was missing Kṛṣṇa. In the *Lalita-mādhava* written by Rūpa Gosvāmī, 3.25, we hear how while Kṛṣṇa was absent from Vṛndāvana, Rādhārāṇī—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, just to say her name we have to say it very humbly—she would often lament as follows. The following is one of my favorite passages from all our Gauḍīya literature written by the Six. I’m not even a proper representative to say her words, but out of duty I will say them. While Kṛṣṇa was away from Vṛndāvana, she was thinking as follows:

"Oh, where is Nanda-candra, the moon of the Nanda dynasty? Oh, where is Śikhi-candrakalita—that Kṛṣṇa on whose crest is a peacock feather? Oh, where is Maṇimān-muralī-rava—that Kṛṣṇa who plays the flute so sweetly? Oh, where is Surendra-nīla-dyuti—that Kṛṣṇa whose bodily luster is like the luster of a blue nīla jewel? Oh, where is Rāsa-rasī—that Kṛṣṇa who dances so beautifully in the Rāsa? Oh, where is Kaṇṭhakān-mama—that Kṛṣṇa who is the soothing balm for my afflicted heart?" 

Then she finishes. I could read that passage for the rest of the class to keep it with us—not as a tattoo, but inscribe it on our hearts and think of her like that and want to be her dāsī, her servant. 

So in *Gopāla-campū* by Jīva Gosvāmī, it’s described that when the residents of Vṛndāvana heard that Kṛṣṇa was going to Kurukṣetra during that solar eclipse, they immediately left. There was no discussion: "Should we go?" Immediately! "Here’s a chance to meet Kṛṣṇa again, let’s go!" It packed up, boom, they’re off. They packed their bullock carts with whatever was required. They were so much in a hurry they left things behind. It doesn’t matter. And they headed north to Kurukṣetra. Jīva Gosvāmī describes that although they were generally always singing about Kṛṣṇa—it’s some solace they get, because much of the time He’s not there, so they’re singing—and by singing, because that sound is non-different than Him, it’s some solace. They feel His association, the same as when we chant, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." Even though we’re not so advanced, we can also feel the presence of Kṛṣṇa. Yeah, like a baby doesn’t know the mother, but when it gets the breast, the nipple with the breast of its mother, it doesn’t know who the mother is, but it feels content. So we’re not so advanced; when we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, we get the experience of Kṛṣṇa consciousness which keeps us going. *Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate*.

How many times have I quoted what Prabhupāda said? A *sādhu* sees, could see, experiences through his ears, not through his eyes. Because if your ears are hearing guru, śāstra, and sādhu—the authorized process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness—you’re actually seeing things as they are, you’re seeing Kṛṣṇa. "No, Guru, I’m not seeing Kṛṣṇa, I’m chanting, but I’m not—I’m not seeing Kṛṣṇa." Yes, you are! If you concentrate on that vibration. It’s like a baby; when a baby’s first born, mothers will tell you, the eyes are working, but babies, they can only see colors for the first, I think, four or five days or something. They can’t see form; they see the color of Mama, but they can’t see the form of Mama. And as their eyes mature to the light outside the womb, gradually they begin to see Mother. 

So, we’re chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. "I can’t see." Yes, but you’re like the baby; you’re just getting a little, some color there. But then the form will come. So if you keep chanting, one day you’ll see Kṛṣṇa. When we were installing the small Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities, brass deities, in Los Angeles in the early 70s, Prabhupāda said, "If you think these deities are just brass, they’ll remain brass forever. But if you worship them according to the authorized process of deity worship as I’m teaching you, one day Kṛṣṇa will speak to you." "My dear Prabhu, could you move that lamp a little over to the left?" "What? Your spiritual master told you, one day if you worship Me according to the proper rules and regulations of *pūjā*, I’ll speak to you." So I’m speaking, why are you surprised? You think your spiritual master was cheating you? No. 

1968, one of my god-sisters said to Prabhupāda, "Prabhupāda, is it true that God Almighty is blue, that He’s 7 years old, He lifted a mountain, killed a witch called Pūtanā, and He plays frivolously with His friends in the sand of Vṛndāvana? Is that true? How could He be God Almighty?" Prabhupāda lowered his head like this, and he opened his eyes—so his eyes were always flooded with tears, but particularly then—we could say he said, "My dear spiritual daughter, do you think I would cheat you?" And she just blushed and she said, "No, Śrīla Prabhupāda, you wouldn’t. I believe it. It’s true because you said so."

I checked carefully the verses of *Gopāla-campū* last night, and although the Vrajavāsīs generally were joyful, always singing about Kṛṣṇa, during that trip to Kurukṣetra, they were unable to do so, because they were so overwhelmed with the possibility of seeing Him, seeing Him again after so many years. In fact, it’s described that their anticipation of meeting Kṛṣṇa again was so intense that their teeth clattered and their voices choked. That’s *bhakti*. The science of this, what we’re hoping to achieve, hoping against hope. It’s what everyone’s looking for. So Jīva Gosvāmī says as a result, any words—when were they able to say some words? They came out garbled, and their minds were confused. And on the way from Vṛndāvana to Kurukṣetra, they forgot to eat or sleep. Can you imagine? We’re getting three meals today. I know one person on our party who’s not eating or sleeping, and that’s Rāsāyānī.

Now, when these—this group of Vrajavāsīs—this would be the ultimate movie production, and you could watch it a million times and never be satiated, never be satisfied. When they finally got close to Kurukṣetra, they could smell the aroma of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body from a great distance, and they went mad! They arrived in Kurukṣetra like mad women, mad men, just by, from a great distance, smelling Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body. 

So, to make a long story short—actually, I could—we could sit here for months without eating and sleeping and just hearing this *līlā*. So first, when the Vrajavāsīs got here, Kṛṣṇa met first with Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja, much like He did when Uddhava came—would have met with Mother Yaśodā. Then the cowherd boys and the gopīs, and when Balarāma came back to Vṛndāvana, He met successively with different Vrajavāsīs. So first, Kṛṣṇa met with Nanda-Yaśodā, and they were overjoyed. I mean, words, you know, fail to understand how satisfied. Because if you’re really missing someone, when you meet them, what’s it like? Those, you know, famous army pictures—the soldiers come back from the war and the girlfriend’s there, and they jump into each other’s arms. It’s a perverted reflection; if the *bhāva* is very strong, the *saṃbhoga*, the meeting, is also very intense. And that’s Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Vaikuṇṭha, and it’s just increasing the love of the residents of Vṛndāvana for Kṛṣṇa *ad infinitum*. It never stops, it just goes on and on and on. This is what we’re looking for, and this is what Prabhupāda introduced us to.

So it’s stated that although Kṛṣṇa was older now—you know, He’d been away, I don’t know, 50 years, or you know, 90 years—of course, He’s still looking like a fresh youth, 16 years old. Although He was in His, you know, elder teens, they still treated Him like a little boy. Yaśodā took big Kṛṣṇa on her lap and treated Him like a, "My little baby, my little baby." That’s what Yaśodā is; that’s her mood. That’s how she sees. She doesn’t see externally; she sees, "This is my Lālā." She put Him on her lap. Try to understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness; Vraja-bhakti is a mood, it’s not just a place. It’s a mood. If you’re in Vṛndāvana and you don’t have the mood, you’re not really there. And if you’re far away from Vṛndāvana and you have this understanding and you’re trying your best, any place can become Vṛndāvana. Prabhupāda made it one time; Prabhupāda woke up and he said, "Look, my household has become like Vaikuṇṭha." It’s a question of consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And then finally, Kṛṣṇa asked to see the gopīs. They were in some secluded place, and when He approached them, first they didn’t recognize Him because He’s Dvārakādhīśa—He’s like a king—and that’s a Kṛṣṇa. "Where’s His simple dhoti and His sash? And what—what’s that crown? Where’s the peacock? He didn’t look like Vṛndāvana-gopī-vallabha. He was like a king." And they were a little bit like confused, they were a little bit confused, and they felt a little uncomfortable seeing Him like that. They wanted to see Him as they knew Him in Vṛndāvana, you know, in the Vṛndāvana forest, down by the river Yamunā, playing His *veṇu*, playing His flute, ready to dance with them. That’s how they wanted to see Him.

And Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she was particularly overwhelmed because she’s the *hlādinī-śakti*, she’s the one who has the greatest love for Kṛṣṇa. So she turned to Lalitā, and she said, famously, this will break your heart: "My dear friend, now I have met my very old and dear friend Kṛṣṇa on this field of Kurukṣetra. I am the same Rādhārāṇī, and now we are meeting together. It is very pleasant, but I would still like to go to the bank of the Yamunā beneath the trees of the forest. There, I wish to hear the vibration of a sweet flute playing the fifth note within that forest of Vṛndāvana." 

Famous verse, the heartbeat of every Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, service to—what is the use of a bowman’s arrow unless it pierces the heart of the enemy? What is the use of the poetry in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the word, the philosophy, unless it pierces the heart of the listener? It brings forth some spiritual emotion. One time, Prabhupāda was walking on the beach, a beach in California, Stinson Beach—I know this beach very well, um, anyway—and he was walking and the waves were crashing, and he turned to his disciples, he said, "What is that sound?" The devotees said, "Oh, Prabhupāda, that’s the sound of the waves breaking on the sand." And Prabhupāda, who could see Kṛṣṇa everywhere, he said, "No, that’s the sound of the gopī’s heartbeats when they’re missing Kṛṣṇa. Boom, boom." Therefore, he says, "Surfers are sufferers." Anyway, that’s all right, they don’t understand what’s really—no, that’s the sound of the gopī’s heartbeats when they’re missing Kṛṣṇa.

Now, in relationship to Rādhārāṇī’s words to Śrī Lalitā, I’d like to bring forth a historical event that happened, uh, just 500 years ago, 4,000—500 years after Rādhārāṇī spoke those words. Once while dancing in front of the Ratha-yātrā cart in Jagannātha Purī, Lord Caitanya sang, or rather He repeated a mundane love song that comes from the Sanskrit book called *Sāhitya-darpaṇa*, that was very similar to those words that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī spoke to Lalitā—authorized mundane, don’t read it—to kind of keep His emotions hidden. Because Vrajavāsīs, they’re gopīs; they like to keep their love for Kṛṣṇa secret. They don’t want to become famous and advertise it, that "we keep the love affair." It’s secret. "Gopī" comes from the word *gopya*, which means "to hide." The gopīs hide their love for Kṛṣṇa. 

And so Mahāprabhu’s come to this Earth—one reason Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa came to this earth as Caitanya Mahāprabhu was to introduce the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, but also Kṛṣṇa wanted to try to understand Rādhārāṇī’s love for Him, because He’s the object, He’s not the lover. "So I want to understand how Rādhā loves Me." So He came in the mood of a devotee, as Rādhā, but He’s hiding that He’s seeing Kṛṣṇa on the chariot. So in the mood of Rādhā, He’s trying to, you know, love Kṛṣṇa, but He’s keeping it hidden. So He didn’t repeat that song; He paraphrased it through this mundane love story, *verśa*. Thank you, so it’s kind of—He’s expressing His love to Kṛṣṇa Jagannātha, but He’s kind of keeping it hidden. So He quoted this mundane love song: "Māhāprabhu is singing, 'That very personality who stole my heart during my youth is now again my master. These are the same moonlit nights of the month of Caitra, the same fragrance of Mālatī flowers is there, and the same sweet breezes are blowing from the Kadamba forest. In our intimate relationship, I am also the same lover, yet still, my mind is not happy here. I’m eager to go back to that place on the bank of the Revā, under the Vetaṣī tree. That is my desire.'" 

It’s different than what Rādhārāṇī said; it’s kind of like just some mundane, you know, person thinking about his mundane love. So all the devotees around Lord, you know, the sādhus, they’re like, "Whoa, what’s He singing, this mundane love song?" No one could understand the hidden meaning. But there was one devotee present who understood immediately, and that was Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Because in the spiritual world, Rūpa Gosvāmī is Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī, the personal assistant of Lalitā, who serves Rādhārāṇī as her girlfriend. So these things, he immediately understood. So he recomposed the song, but exactly as Rādhārāṇī had originally said it. It’s all very deep, I know. Maybe it’s above most of our heads, but it has to be spoken here in Kurukṣetra. He knew that Lalitā was experiencing Rādhārāṇī’s love for Kṛṣṇa—that was one of the reasons He came to this world—so it has to be explained. 

So he took a pen—you could say a pen—and he wrote, he recomposed it as Rādhārāṇī had said it, he wrote it down on a parchment, and he rolled it up and he placed it somewhere, thinking no one would find it. And Lord Caitanya came, and by the arrangement, His arrangement, He found that paper and He read it. And what did it say? "My dear friend, now I have met my very old and dear friend Kṛṣṇa on this field of Kurukṣetra. I am the same Rādhārāṇī, and now we are meeting together. It is very pleasant, but I would still like to go back to the bank of the Yamunā beneath the trees of the forest. There, I wish to hear the vibration of a sweet flute playing the fifth note within the forest of Vraja." Read that—Rūpa Gosvāmī understands my mind.

And later, in the association of some of His most intimate followers, Mahāprabhu glorified therefore one of the most dearest stanzas for all of us Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, who are Rūpa’s followers, in the footsteps of Rūpa Gosvāmī, as follows: "When, who is Lord Śrī Śacīnandana within this world, the mission to fulfill the desire of Lalitā—give me shelter at His lotus feet. When, oh when will that day be mine?" And a private prayer that may not be so well known: "Sudha—for purification of my physical body, I bathe regularly using water. However, for the complete purification of myself and my existence, I bathe in the nectar of the words of Rūpa Gosvāmī." 

Now, this is also very subtle, but in that famous verse composed by Rādhārāṇī, she says, "I am the same Rādhārāṇī." Now listen to this: Jīva Gosvāmī states in *Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha* that Rādhārāṇī is saying this because she and all the Vrajavāsīs who met Kṛṣṇa in Kurukṣetra were actually replicas, not expansions—which is something less—but exact replicas. They never left Vṛndāvana. Why replica? He said because the Vrajavāsīs, including Rādhārāṇī, would never leave Vṛndāvana, what to speak of go to a place that did not display the charming, pastoral atmosphere of Vraja. The atmosphere in which one lives very much dictates one’s consciousness. That’s why we would rather be under this Banyan tree in the Kārttika instead of the flea-bitten hotel. 

Rādhārāṇī, she said to Kṛṣṇa, "I only come to this world with you if you bring the Yamunā River, the forest of Vṛndāvana, and Govardhana Hill with us." Yeah. For so these are replicas. And the *Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha* even quotes them as saying, "We desire to stay in Vṛndāvana even more than we desired Him." Because what’s Kṛṣṇa without Vraja, and what’s Vraja without Kṛṣṇa? Where this all happened, you can become very Vraja-conscious here. In So, it’s heartbreaking, just heartbreaking. At that moment, all the gopīs said, "Kṛṣṇa, come back to Vraja!" Can you imagine that point in a film? The whole audience would be crying: "Kṛṣṇa, come back! Oh Kṛṣṇa, go—please go!" 

And Kṛṣṇa actually wanted to go back to Vṛndāvana, but He asked the gopīs to give Him some time to think, to think about it. And in the meantime, in the weeks that followed here in Kurukṣetra, He would secretly have *rāsa-dānce* with them in the evenings. *Rāsa-līlā* took place here. But after three months had passed, some were like, "I got to get home, I’ve got to get back to Vṛndāvana." So many had returned to their homes. No, the gopīs, they stayed and they kept asking Kṛṣṇa every day, "So, have you made up your mind? Or you going to—you going to come back to Vraja?" 

So finally, finally, in consultation with Vāsudeva and Devakī, Kṛṣṇa decided He would return to Vṛndāvana—I’m leaving this sentence in the air—He would return to Vṛndāvana with one condition only: after killing one or two more demons. And this is one of the reasons that we discussed this in the other day, that Kṛṣṇa didn’t return. He loved the Vrajavāsīs so much that He stayed out of Vṛndāvana, killing the *asuras*. So many *asuras*, Jarāsandha who wanted to attack Kṛṣṇa’s devotees like Vṛndāvana and Mathurā and Dvārakā. Kṛṣṇa was protecting the Vrajavāsīs, number one. And the deeper reason He didn’t go back was to increase their mood of love, love for Him in separation. Because separation makes the heart grow fonder. This is the deeper understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, crying, crying, crying. 

The Beatles famously sang, "All you need is love." Yes, there—if you want to understand love, you have to come to Vraja. You have to shave your head, have a *śikhā*, wear *dhotī*, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, then yes, you’ll understand, "I need the love of Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, Rādhā, and Kṛṣṇa, Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy." So these are young, you know, cowherd girls, innocent, you know, girls with very deep—but just Prabhupāda would say like that sometimes—so they trusted what Kṛṣṇa said: "Oh, He’s going to come, let’s go back and prepare for His visit." Kṛṣṇa, when you left Vṛndāvana with Akrūra, You told us You’d be back in 72 hours, in 3 days. We waited, lots of Vrajavāsīs still waiting on the perimeter for now, and it’s been, you know, 96 years. You stay, then come, no, one or two demons, I’ll come back. Okay, sorry girls, sorry gopīs. 

Fortunate gopīs. So it’s—Kṛṣṇa left to go to Dvārakā for His business; they also left. But described, they sensed it would probably be, it would probably be sometime till He came back to Vraja. So it’s described, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sat in a horse cart like a statue, staring back into the clouds of dust behind her, knowing that Kṛṣṇa was traveling in the opposite direction to Dvārakā, and His tears rolled down her cheeks. Lalitā stood up and said the following, another heartbreaker: "Oh Rādhārāṇī, oh my most beautiful friend, do not lament. It is well known that sacred Kurukṣetra fulfills all desires. The great King Kuru tilled this land and made it fertile by his piety. Now Kṛṣṇa has planted the seed of His promise here—a seed that will sprout and bear fruit by the time we arrive in Vraja. Rest assured that He for whom we came to Kurukṣetra, giving up our home and lands, will soon be tapping on your window, begging you to join Him in a grove with the shore of the River Yamunā. Hare Kṛṣṇa." 

So the *gopīs* say that because of these particular pastimes, there are two transcendental moods that permeate this sacred abode that outshine all other influences here. Two moods outshine all their influence. One mood is the pain of being separated from Kṛṣṇa—two times, the pain. One time, okay, He left Vraja, but there’s two instances here; the Vrajavāsīs, they missed Him when He left for Mathurā and they would miss Him again after leaving Kurukṣetra. That’s one mood that predominates this area. And the second of two moods is the mood of great hope that Kṛṣṇa will come back to Vṛndāvana one day. 

So although, let’s be honest, we’re aspiring devotees, we’re *sādhakas*, we’re practitioners—we’re not, I mean, at least me, maybe some of you are on that higher level—but while we’re here, let us meditate on these two particular moods. And as *sādhakas*, we can, um, *pilgrims*—pilgrims, we can meditate on this sacred land. While we’re in the sacred land of Kurukṣetra, we can relish that our beloved Kṛṣṇa spoke about here. There’s a beautiful statue of, you know, the *diorama* that say, you know, Pārtha-sārathi Kṛṣṇa, the chariot driver of Arjuna, the chariot with the horses, and, you know, the battle’s about to begin, Kṛṣṇa speaking. To that diorama, we pay *praṇāmas* because—work now, see later. 

Prabhupāda, and what he says, that by service to the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, which is essentially to spread the *saṅkīrtana* movement, that is the way that one gets Rādhārāṇī’s mercy. Not by going to Vṛndāvana and being a *bābājī*, serving Śrīla Prabhupāda through book distribution, opening temples, *nāma-saṅkīrtana*, this becomes our qualification to get Prabhupāda’s mercy to go back to Goloka. But because Prabhupāda has invited us to come here to Kurukṣetra, we can also think, we can also remember it as a deep place of *rasa* as well. 

I will finish with this quote from the *Harmonist*, which was a publication that, um, was published by the Gauḍīya Maṭha—weekly or monthly, I can’t remember—in that Gauḍīya Maṭha mission. Quoting, once surprised his audience by saying that shallow thinkers appreciate Vṛndāvana, but a man of real *bhajana*, real divine aspiration, will aspire to live in Kurukṣetra. He noted that Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, after visiting many different places of pilgrimage, remarked, "I would like to spend the last days of my life here." All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn. Thank you very much.""