"*00500*.*
"### Beyond the Magic Curtain — ISKCON Attapur

$Om\ nama\ bhagavate\ vāsudevāya$. Chapter 29, Verse 83. It is just what I opened up to this evening—such an interesting verse: "My dear Vṛtrāsura, one who hears this narration concerning the understanding of the living entity’s spiritual existence, as described by the great sage Nārada, or who relates it to others, will be liberated from the bodily concept of life."
 **Purport by Śrīla Prabhupāda:** This material world is created by the dreaming of Mahā-Viṣṇu. The real, factual platform is the spiritual world, but when the spirit soul wants to imitate the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is put into the dreamland—the dreamland of material creation. After being in contact with the material modes of nature, the living entity develops the subtle and gross bodies. However, when the living entity is fortunate enough to associate with a devotee like Śrī Nārada Muni or his servants, he is liberated from this dreamland of material creation and the bodily concept of life.

My dear devotees, in his purport, Śrīla Prabhupāda takes a cue from the verse itself. He compares material life to a dream. We all have dreams, and we know they are nonsense. Saying something is a dream, by definition, means it is only an illusion. Of course, elsewhere I read that Prabhupāda said when you have a dream of the spiritual master, that is very nice. Recently, I was in Māyāpura and I had a dream. I wanted to share it with my servants and my helpers, but I was a little shy. But I will share it with all of you; it is a bigger crowd.

I dreamt that I was with a number of my Godbrothers sitting with Śrīla Rādhānātha Swami, Śivarāma Swami, and Guru Prasāda Swami. Śrīla Prabhupāda was saying to all these Godbrothers, "For your services, you are all going back home, back to Godhead." But I was off to the side in the dream, and I was feeling unhappy that I wasn't included in Prabhupāda’s statement. So, in the dream, Śivarāma Mahārāja saw me. He turned to Prabhupāda, pointing to me, and said with some compassion, "What about him?"—meaning me. So, Prabhupāda said, "Is he a good boy?" (I am 75, "Is he a good boy?") And Śivarāma Mahārāja replied, "In general, yes." So, Prabhupāda looked at me, then he looked at Śivarāma Mahārāja, and smiling, he said, "All right, Indradyumna Swami can also come."

Along my dream—then I woke up. So again, Prabhupāda said that dreams are nonsense, but dreams of the spiritual master, dreams of Kṛṣṇa—he said something special. When Prabhupāda was a householder, later on in his household life after he had received instructions from Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the English-speaking language, he had his responsibilities as a householder, so he didn't take that up immediately. But later on, when he was getting towards his 50s, he would have dreams of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, and Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī would say, "Come, take sannyāsa! Come, take sannyāsa! Come, take sannyāsa!" And Prabhupāda said, "I was horrified." It is a powerful time. And eventually, Prabhupāda did take sannyāsa. So, dreams of a spiritual nature can be encouraging, but generally, dreams are illusion. 

Prabhupāda compares material life to a dream, but factually, the dream or the illusion of material life is more like a nightmare, isn't it? Because in material life, we have so many plans, we have so many projects, we have so many hopes for happiness, but either they are dashed by the material nature, or they never materialize. Or if they do materialize, it’s just *thoṛā, thoṛā*—it's the only Hindi I know—little, little happiness is there. So material life can be very frustrating. In my country, in America, they did a recent survey, and in that survey, only 5% of the people said they were happy in life. 5%. 5% said they were miserable, and 90% of the American population said they’re bored. You know, America, the land of dreams—many people from this country are going to America—but only 5% of the people were happy, 5% were miserable, but most everyone is bored.

So, the happiness we are searching for is like a dream. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura puts it very aptly in his song *Prārthanā*, song four, text 21. He writes: "The treasure of love of God has descended from the spiritual world of Goloka Vṛndāvana, appearing in this world as the *saṅkīrtana* movement of chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa. Why am I not attracted to it? Day and night I burn from the poison of material existence, but still I refuse to take the antidote." What is the antidote? We just did it: the antidote is chanting, dancing, and later we will feast. This is the antidote. What is the poison of material existence that Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura is referring to? Well, it is the temporary and miserable nature of this world, characterized by four very high walls—like you are in a prison—there are four very high walls you cannot escape: birth, disease, old age, and death. Maximum security. When there is a really bad criminal, they will put him in maximum security—no way out. Sometimes they get out, but I know a few prisons you will never get out of, and one of them is the material world. You can’t escape birth, you can't escape disease—everyone got COVID—you can’t escape old age, and who can escape death? But despite these very stark realities, people imagine they are happy with a little bit of material enjoyment that we get.

The soul’s *ānanda*—soul means that the soul is created, the intrinsic nature of the soul is to always be happy, always, no interruption. Just like the intrinsic nature of water is that it’s wet; the intrinsic nature of the sun is that it is sunshine. So, what is the intrinsic nature of the *ātmā*, the soul within the body? To be *ānanda*, to always be happy. And what is the highest happiness? Love. Love is the highest happiness. If you have everything in this world but you don’t have someone to share it with, you can’t be happy. But if you have nothing but the shirt on your back and you live in a grass hut, but you have a beautiful wife who loves you, husband, children, neighbors, countrymen—without anything, you can be happy because love is the highest happiness. But in this world, love comes and goes, and at death, it is finished. So, what we are really searching for is an eternal loving relationship with the Supreme Lover, Kṛṣṇa. He is so great that He can satisfy the loving desires of every created being. You can love five or ten people deeply; Kṛṣṇa, He can love every created being to their full satisfaction. But not here in this material world—in the spiritual world.

So, an intelligent person, he sees this as the alternative: back home, back to Godhead. And he knows that in this world of birth and death, a little bit of sense gratification—that’s not happiness. The Mahābhārata puts it into clear perspective. You may have seen that painting: once, a man was chased by an elephant in a forest, and as the elephant was catching up to him, he climbed a tree to get away from the elephant. But as he climbed up, he started slipping, and as he was falling, he grabbed onto a branch, and he is hanging from the branch, swinging like this midair. And when he looked around, he was shocked to see the elephant with his trunk around the tree, trying to pull the tree down. And he looked down; he saw a nest of snakes, cobras, at the bottom, waiting to bite him when he lost his grip and fell down. And in the distance, he saw a tiger racing to the scene, hopeful to get an easy meal. He slipped and fell to the ground. Then, to his horror, he looked to the side, and where the branch was attached to the tree, there were two rats—one was white and one was black—and they were gnawing at the junction of the branch and the tree, which means into the nest of snakes, and dinner for the tiger, and the elephant would stomp on him. And just at that moment, a swarm of bees came and started biting him because the whole episode was shaking the tree and the beehive was shaking, and the bees came out; they were stinging him. Can you imagine? It’s a true story. And suddenly, one drop of honey, one drop of honey fell from the beehive right here, and he licked it, and he thought, "Oh, how wonderful is this drop of honey! How much I am enjoying here!" True story. "How much I am enjoying here." 

Here he is, swinging, and just about to fall down, and the elephant is on the tree, he sees the tiger coming out of the jungle, he sees the cobras down below ready to bite him, and the rats are biting the tree branch, and he is, "Oh my God, what is going to happen?" And then the drop of honey—drop of honey, some joy. So, death is represented by the elephant chasing us relentlessly birth after birth. The two black and white rats represent day and night, respectively, slowly reducing our duration of life. The hissing snakes represent the many obstacles that we face in life, and the tiger approaching represents the dangers that are awaiting us as we move forward in life. And the honeybees, according to Mahābhārata, they represent the daily problems we face. How many problems did you have today? If we put them all together in a basket in the middle of the room, it would probably go to the ceiling. And the drops of sweet honey, they represent the little pleasure that we draw from this material existence. Actually, I heard Prabhupāda say one time in London, he said, "What is pleasure of this world?" He said, "It’s the relief from pain." Just like someone is pounding you on the head, "Boom, boom, boom," he stops—"Ah, now I am enjoying that." Prabhupāda was a *sādhu*; *sādhu* means he speaks the truth. *Sādhu* means when he speaks, he cuts our material attachments. It’s not always pleasant to hear; from the brāhmaṇas, "Tell us something sweet." "You first, I’ll tell you something sour. You give up your attachment to this world, then the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa." So, Prabhupāda said, "Material pleasure, what is material pleasure in this world? It’s when someone stops bombarding, hitting you on the head. You think, 'Oh, now I am okay.'"

But even after hearing this wisdom, we are slow to catch on, isn't it? Because Māyā, the illusory energy of the Lord, is very expert in making it look very nice. That’s her job. Māyā—one form of Māyā is Durgā. I just came from Bengal; the worship of Durgā is more popular than the worship of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But Durgā is the warden in the prison house—I was speaking of a prison, there is a warden—so Durgā is the warden, and the business of the warden is to make sure you don't escape. So, we have big high walls and bars on the windows, but how does Durgā keep us here? Until we desire to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, she takes away the illusion of material enjoyment; she makes it look all very attractive. Even demigods are attracted by her ingenious schemes. There is that verse: *daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā*. By him and her, even great sages and demigods are sometimes placed into illusion, as one is bewildered by the illusory representations of water seen in fire, or land seen on water. I remember sailing with my father; sometimes we would be out at sea and the reflection of the sky on the water made it look like there was land, but there was no land there. It was all an illusion. So, we are just tiny little *jīvas*, so we can be easily fooled. But if we see things through *tat-tva*—*tat-tva* means the truth—if we see the truth from the *dhīras* who have seen the truth, we get a clear picture and we can avoid Māyā’s traps, Māyā’s schemes.

You try to learn these truths of the material world and the spiritual world by approaching one of Kṛṣṇa’s representatives. You inquire from them, you serve them, and they can reveal the truth to you because they are *taṭa-dhīras*—they have seen. How have they seen? They have seen through guru, śāstra; they have seen through hearing the words of their spiritual master, and they have seen through studying the Vedic scriptures. It becomes very clear; without that, we will always be bewildered. Even demigods are bewildered, even demigods make mistakes, fall down. So, once Śrīla Prabhupāda described the power of illusion; he told the story of Duryodhana. You all know Duryodhana. So, one time Duryodhana, he went to the Imperial Palace of the Pāṇḍavas in Hastināpura. Now, that palace had been constructed by Maya Dānava in such a way that it was very difficult to attack and conquer that palace. Maya Dānava had created so many illusory things there that it was very hard. So, Duryodhana, as you know, he was a kṣatriya, very powerful, handsome, famous personality, but when he entered that palace created by Maya Dānava, as he was walking towards the chamber of the room of Yudhiṣṭhira, he saw a little pond right in the middle of the compound, and there was no way to go around it; he had to walk through it. And because it appeared quite deep, he quickly—you know how the kṣatriyas, he had one of those long coats—he lifted it very high, so high that his underwear showed a little bit, *oops*, and he walked forward. But actually, there was no water. It was an illusion created by Maya Dānava to protect the palace; it was a crystal platform, it was a blue crystal, and the sun was shining on it, so they made it look like it was water. So, as he was walking, what he thought was through the water, he actually just stayed on the crystal and he walked with his coat up and his underwear showing, and all the ladies in the palace, they started laughing at this great, powerful kṣatriya. They made fun of him; he was so embarrassed.

Then he walked a little further and there was another pond. So, he thought, "I’m not going to be fooled again. That was just crystal Maya Dānava had created to make it look like water; I’m not going to do that." So this time, to cross the pond with the crystal, he just kept his clothes on and he started walking. But this time, it was water! Maya Dānava had made it look like crystal, but it was actually water; he fell over. Then as he approached the palace, seeing the main door open, he tried to walk in, but it was another trick of Māyā; it was actually crystal, making it look like you could see through it. So, he thought there was just a door, walked right in, but *boom*, he banged his head, fell down on the ground, and again the ladies giggled, giggled, giggled. It’s a thing for a kṣatriya, to be dishonored is worse than death; for one who has been honored, dishonor is worse than death. So, they take these things very seriously. So, three times, so embarrassed, he walked to the next door and he thought, "This time, I’m not going to be fooled. I’m not going to bump into another door like that. I’m just going to open up and go through." So, he tried to open it, but there was nothing there, just—and he fell down, and the ladies giggled it again. So, Prabhupāda told the story to show how even great personalities can be fooled by Maya Dānava. But we may think, "I’m pretty smart. I won’t be tricked by Māyā’s illusions: handsome men, beautiful girls, fast cars, lots of money, name, fame. I won’t be fooled by Māyā." One time we were in London, and Prabhupāda turned to one of my Godbrothers who was kind of, you know, flirting with Māyā—wasn't chanting his rounds, he was going to movies and things like this. So, Prabhupāda turned to him and said, "Kuleśekhara, the problem with you is you’re not afraid of Māyā." We have to be a little fearful to avoid her.

Isn't it? If you listen to the words of guru and *sādhu*. I’ll share with you one more story to convince you of the power of illusion and how we have to always be on guard. How can we be on guard? We have a mantra: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Prabhupāda said, "Mantras and jewels, they don’t lose their potency in Kali-yuga." In Kali-yuga, everything deteriorates; in Kali-yuga, even the great mountains, the oceans, the seas, by the influence of time, everything deteriorates. But mantras and jewels never lose their potency in Kali-yuga. Maybe your astrologer has recommended a jewel for you, okay, but the real protection is in the mahā-mantra, sound vibration. We know when Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa and Sītā were in the forest, Mārīca—Rāvaṇa sent Mārīca, the deer, to take Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa away from Sītā so he could capture her. So, Mārīca went, and he went into the forest and he was looking around, and Sītā saw the deer—Mārīca disguised himself as a deer—and being of a feminine nature, she said to Rāma, "I like that deer; he’s so cute! Please go capture that deer for me." So, Rāma said, "This is a forest, there’s rākṣasas here who have mystic powers, I don’t know if it’s—" "No, Rāma, you go get me that deer." So, Rāma ran off into the forest to catch Mārīca in the form of the deer. And while he was there looking for the deer, Mārīca, in the form of the deer, took on Rāma’s voice and said, "Lakṣmaṇa, help! Lakṣmaṇa, help!" So, Sītā heard that. Lakṣmaṇa’s there protecting Sītā; he didn’t go. So, Lakṣmaṇa said, "No, that must be the voice of a rākṣasa; he’s tricking us." Sītā said, "No, that’s the voice of your brother Rāma. You go now!" Lakṣmaṇa said, "No." So Sītā said, "Just—you want to enjoy me?" And Lakṣmaṇa said, "My dear lady, I’ve never looked above your ankles in Vedic culture, so chaste, everyone is so chaste. See, I’ve never looked above your ankles." He never looked at her in the thing, I never looked at him. She said, "Go!" So, before he went, he took his sword and he made a circle around Sītā, and while doing so, in the dirt he made a circle; he chanted one protective mantra. He left.

So, that was Rāvaṇa’s chance. So, Rāvaṇa came. Rāvaṇa means—his name literally in Sanskrit means—"He who makes the universe scream," "He who makes the universe scream." And he’d conquered, like Hiraṇyakaśipu, he conquered the 14 worlds, the demigods were all his servants, Nārada Muni was his foot servant. So, Rāvaṇa comes, here’s this fair, young princess, delicate, no calluses on her feet, you know, in a silk dress in the forest, and Rāvaṇa came disguised as a beggar with an empty bowl. "Beggar, dear lady, please give me some fruit; I’m a hungry beggar." She: "Don't know." He said, "You don’t have to be afraid of me; I’m just a beggar." And as he tried to touch her, he would touch that invisible barrier created by the mantra. Mantras have a protective nature. His skin was burning; he couldn’t get close to her. Every, all angles he tried, the greatest most powerful asura the world’s ever known, he couldn’t get close. Only when she became a little weak and said, "All right, just wait," and she stepped forward out of the mantra, *boom*, he got her, flew off in his donkey chariot to Laṅkā, captured her. So, that’s not just mythology, some poet’s dream, Vālmīki is making it up, "No, this is the history of the universe." Purāṇa—purāṇa means the ancient history of the universe. Bhāgavata Purāṇa, Śiva Purāṇa, these are the history. Śrīla Vyāsadeva is no fool writing children’s fables, excuse me. This is the history of the universe, showing in this particular instance many things, but the power of mantra.

We have a very powerful mantra. We have the mahā-mantra—*mahā* means the great—chant for deliverance, and all the benefits you get from other mantras are there in the mahā-mantra. So, *Rādhā Kṛṣṇa, Hare Rāma, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā...* If you’re chanting the mantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you. And if Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you. Which side are you on? There’s a line, "Which side are you on?" Are you going to follow Hiraṇyakaśipu, or are you going to follow Prahlāda Mahārāja? So, we don’t want to step over the line because Māyā, well, Māyā may attract us. She may make it so attractive that we may sometimes break regulative principles. There was a song in my country in the 1950s: "Don’t make promises you can’t keep," a girl talking to her boyfriend, but in the general sense, we have made promises, we can’t break them because we’ll lose the protection and we’ll lose the ultimate benefit of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, which is *prema*, or love for God.

But just to show you how powerful Māyā can be and, as such, how sincere we have to be taking shelter in Kṛṣṇa in His holy name, this is a true story. I read it in a library in Jaipur, the King’s library, actually—the true story written down by scribes—that once a king in Bengal asked his wife, the queen, what she would like for her birthday. You know what she said? "I want to see a magic show." "Okay, okay honey." So, there was a very famous and popular magician in the countryside; people called him the "best of the best." So, the king invited the magician and asked him to come on his wife’s birthday and do a magic show. And actually, the whole extended family came, you know the kings, they have nephews and nieces and aunts and uncles, and the whole royal family came and the ministers came and many of the VIP people. I think there was a thousand—this true story—a thousand people in the audience.

So, the day of the magic show, the magician arrived with his family members. And as the show progressed, they were, you know, taking rabbits out of hats, I don’t know, making cards, putting coins in the ear, pulling the coin out the other side—I don’t know how they do that, but there’s way, I think there’s videos that show you how the magicians do their tricks, but I never watched them because then it’s no fun. But these magician—this magician and his wife and his son and daughter, there, they’re doing all these tricks. And at one point, the wife of the magician, she’s wearing a beautiful necklace, so her husband the magician said, "Give me the necklace." His wife gave him the necklace, and he took the necklace up into the assembly and he gave it to the queen. You know, so the wife’s going, "Wait a minute, you gave my necklace away to the queen!" And she slapped her husband on the face in front of the royal assembly—I mean, in the middle of a magic show, "Took my..."—she slapped her husband like that. So, the magician slapped his wife back. And the elder son, who was very close to his mother, became very angry with his father, and he came and hit him in the face, and the—and all the people like, "What happened to the magic show?" And he hit him again, and he knocked the teeth out of his father for hitting his mother. So, like you know, anger and anger—people do crazy things in a fit of rage. The father took his sword out and cut off the head of his son. And when he cut off it, all the blood, the artery sprayed blood everywhere. So then his wife, you know, seeing that her husband had killed their son, she charged her husband with a dagger and she stabbed him in the heart and killed him, tore his heart out, threw that—blood everywhere! So then her daughter took the sword that was on the ground, killed the mother, and then the daughter took the dagger and killed herself. So, this is a horror story. What am I telling a horror story here? But it’s a true story, and there was just blood flowing like a river everywhere.

So, the king and the queen, they stood up, and they apologized, "We’re really sorry, we wanted a magic show, but look what happened! We’re really sorry." And he said, "Everyone leave." And the servants came, and they’re sweeping up the blood, and you know, bodies were dragged out. Six months later, a courier came with a letter—in the old days, they’d roll it up and tie it with the ribbon—a courier came with a letter for the king, and it said, "To the king, the queen, and the royal assembly: Please read, very important." It had a stamp on it with gold, and "Okay, this is a very important message from someone." I’ll read it to my, to the family. And this is what the letter said: "My dear King, all glories to you. I hope you liked our magic show. As you know, I’m the best magician in the country. I offered you the highest price and you paid for it. So, how did you like the show? Me, my wife, my daughter, and son, we’re all fine. We’re enjoying the great gift that you gave us and at—that you paid us before the show. We just wanted to say thank you. Hope the show was not too much for all of you. It was all magic. But now you know it, the screaming, the killing, the blood, it was all an illusion. Don’t ask me how we do it, but we can come back again if you want." It’s a true story, this is written and described in the official document. So, if an ordinary magician can create an illusion like that, what about Māyā Devī? What about Māyā Devī? She’s so powerful. So, what’s our hope?

"This divine energy of Mine, Kṛṣṇa says, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily overcome it." We’re very small in this material world; the illusion is very great. But although we’re very small, we take shelter of Kṛṣṇa, we’re protected. One time, Prabhupāda was walking on the beach in Mumbai with his scientist devotees, and they’re walking on the beach; there’s a little colony of crabs 30 or 50 meters down the beach. And as they’re getting closer to the crabs, all the crabs—you know, crabs move sideways, funny thing—they all went into the ocean. So, Prabhupāda said, "Why did those crabs go into the ocean?" So the scientist, Bhakti-cāru Mahārāja, said, "They say because the pressure of our feet are creating energy, electric energy going into the bodies of the crabs, and the sea fibers in the brains of the crabs say, 'Go left.'" Prabhupāda said, "No, that’s not why they’re going to the ocean. They’re very small, and they sense danger. So, they’ve taken shelter of the great. By taking shelter of the great, they’re protected." So, we’re very small, and in a dangerous world, but we can take shelter of the greatest. Who’s the greatest of the great? Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa. But He’s very far away in Vaikuṇṭha. No, *Kṛṣṇa-nāma*—in this age, He’s descended in the form of His name. So, if we chant, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa..." Did you hear them? What did you say? Very good.

One time, Prabhupāda had to go to court in Kolkata, but there was some dispute with the land. He came with his disciples; you can imagine, he there was a court case. So, Prabhupāda walked into the courthouse with all the lawyers, you know, present, and he said to his disciples, "This whole atmosphere is polluted with the lies of the lawyers. I hope none of you are lawyers." Prabhupāda said, "Lawyer means liar, you’re all it." So, Prabhupāda said, "Kīrtana!" And we’re in a courtroom, the judge is there at the court case, Prabhupāda said, "Kīrtana!" So, how, they’re dancing around and the judges—*whoa*. The lawyers, Prabhupāda said, "Stop! The whole atmosphere has been purified with the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa." So, we’re in a sleeping condition; we don’t realize all these things. So, we have to wake up by hearing from guru and *sādhu*. Just like Mahāprabhu said, "How long will the people stay sleeping in the lap of illusion?" And when you’re sleeping, dreaming, your material happiness is something wonderful. The only way you can wake up a deep-sleeping person—how do you wake up a deep—let’s say you’re sleeping in your apartment and a thief comes to steal; you can’t see him, you can’t touch him, you can’t taste him, none of your senses will alert you to the danger. But if he makes a mistake, bangs into the door, you can hear him. So, Prabhupāda said, "In the same way, we’re sleeping in illusion. The only way you can wake up to this challenge of Māyā, taking shelter, is by hearing." By sound, we become liberated. And this sound is so powerful, it can even deliver creatures who are in deep ignorance. Like when Mahāprabhu went to the Jhārikhaṇḍa Forest, what happened? The deer and the tigers heard the chanting from the lips of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and all their illusion was gone. They became pure devotees and they embraced each other and started singing Hare Kṛṣṇa. That’s not a children’s story; that’s fact.

I went there, I went to the Jhārikhaṇḍa Forest to the place where Mahāprabhu had that kīrtana. It’s deep in the jungle, takes a long time to get there. There’s a couple sādhus, and when that kīrtana was going on, it was so ecstatic, the rock melted in ecstasy. The rock melted! I went there, it looked like a volcano had been there, there was all melted, but the footprints of the elephants were there, the footprints of the tigers were there, the footprints of the deer that were there, right close together, the snake, the birds, everything was all there. It was all real, and the footprints of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu were also there. He was 7 feet tall, so his feet, and there there was one embedded in the rock. So, I bowed down and put my head inside that footprint, and one of the pieces of rock embedded in my skin, and it was bleeding. I said, "No problem." I took that rock and put it in this cover here—footprint of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is inside this. So, He’s given us a mantra that can wake up even the most ignorant persons, what to speak of you and me.

And when we wake up from this dream of material existence, what will you see? When you wake up in the morning, right, you see what you see: your wife, you see your husband, you see the toothpaste, you see the mirror, "Oh God, that look, horrible!" But when you wake up from the illusion of Māyā, what do you see? That’s described: "Having obtained real knowledge from a self-realized soul, you will never fall again into such illusion, for by this knowledge you will see that all living beings are but part of the Supreme—in other words, that they are Mine." Once you wake up, you’ll see who you are beyond the body, you’ll see Kṛṣṇa, and you’ll see the devotional service that you can offer the Lord. This is what it means to wake up.

So, we’re in a deep sleep. There’s a "nap." Prabhupāda used—I remember in Paris one time, Prabhupāda said, "I’m going to take a snap," and we said, "Excuse me?" "I’m going to take a snap." He meant nap, but Prabhupāda’s English wasn’t so perfected that time. "I’m going to take a snap." I said, "Oh, a nap." One devotee said, "A nap?" Prabhupāda said, "Yes, nap!" So, we take naps, right, maybe in the afternoon or something, then we go to sleep. But then there’s a deeper state called coma, maybe someone’s sick and they go into a coma. But deeper than that than a coma is the ignorance of material existence; that’s like a sleeping condition, total ignorance of who we are, who is God, what is my relationship with Him. But in that deep ignorance, we can wake up if we hear Hare Kṛṣṇa.

But "I’ve been chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa for two years, 5 years, 10 years, 20 years, 30 years—I’m still tricked by Māyā sometimes. While I’m chanting, some materialistic thought comes to mind, and I follow it for two rounds and then come back. Why, why, why haven’t I seen myself, seen Kṛṣṇa, and our eternal relationship?" Well, because we were asleep for a long time. And if you sleep a long time, when you wake up, it takes a long time to get up. But it will happen, just like a businessman: he goes to sleep, and after a few minutes, he remembers, "Oh yes, I’m a businessman, I have to get to work." It depends how long. We may have been here for millions of years, so to become self-realized, it may take a little time. One time when one of my God-sisters came before Prabhupāda for initiation vows, Prabhupāda said, "What are the four regulative principles?" She said, "Prabhupāda... no meat-eating, no intoxication, no illicit sex, and no gambling. And I promise to chant a minimum of 16 rounds every day." So, Prabhupāda leaned over and he said, "Why a minimum? Why not more? The more you chant, the more the fog of material existence is dissipated." And at that point—and it will come—when you become a pure devotee, what will happen when you reach that stage of *prema*? Kṛṣṇa sees you. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written at that moment, when you become a pure devotee and Kṛṣṇa is standing before you, he writes what happens. It’s quite deep. He says the moment you reach the stage of *prema*, the Lord reciprocates with such a devotee in amazing ways. First of all, He enlivens that devotee with the sense of sight, revealing His *tribhaṅga-sundara* form to the devotee. Then He manifests His ambrosial fragrance, so upon smelling that fragrance of the Lord, the devotee faints. Then the Lord desires to rescue His devotee from that fainting condition, and He engages that devotee in the sense of hearing. He calls out to that devotee, "My dear devotee, I am now captivated by your love, I am fully under your control. Do not be overwhelmed, just look at Me again and fulfill the desire of your heart." And from that slumber of smelling the fragrance of the Lord, the devotee wakes up.

And nextly, the Lord reciprocates with that devotee’s mood. Whatever your *rasa* is with the Lord, if it’s *servant-dāsya*, the Lord—Viśvanātha said—He puts His feet on your head. Everyone has an eternal relationship; it’s in the heart, it can’t be changed. If you’re a servant, you’re very happy. So, when you become self-realized and your *dāsya*, the Lord puts His feet on your head. And if your relationship with the Lord is *sakhya-rasa*, meaning friendship, the Lord takes your hand and He puts His fingers like this in your hand, like we do at our friends sometimes. And if your relationship is *vātsalya-rasa*, like seeing Kṛṣṇa as your child, you’ll start crying and the Lord will wipe the tears away from your eyes. And if your relationship is *mādhurya-rasa*, Kṛṣṇa will bring you to His chest and put His arms around you and embrace you. Then the Lord fully awakens the devotee’s sense of spiritual taste by taking the chewed remnants of what He’s been eating and He puts it in the mouth of His devotee. Very deep. We don’t usually finish our lectures with such, but just to give you, you know, a preview. I think when you go to the movies these days, they show a preview of the next movie. This is the preview of what we’re waiting for when we stop getting tricked by the witch of Māyā and we chant sincerely, taking shelter of Kṛṣṇa. And that chanting brings us to the stage of *prema*. This is what we are—so we have so much to look forward to. Don’t ever get disappointed. Prabhupāda said to one of my Godbrothers, "When you get back home, back to Godhead, your spiritual master is waiting for you, and he takes your hand, he leads you into the forest, and he puts your hand in Kṛṣṇa’s hand and leaves the two of you together for a while." That’s the goal. So, therefore, we can struggle with Māyā, overcome Māyā, our doubts and illusions; we can believe it’s true and take shelter in the great mahā-mantra: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""