"*00426*.*
"# Bhagavad-gītā 4.8: Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī Class

*Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.*

As we read the fourth chapter of the text on this holy day: "To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I Myself appear, millennium after millennium."

According to the *Bhagavad-gītā*, a person with Kṛṣṇa consciousness who fully possesses Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be considered a *sādhu*. Even if he does not seem very pious, the word *duṣkṛtinaḥ* refers to those who neglect Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Even if such wicked people are very educated, they still remain deep and lowly among people, while a person absorbed in activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a *sādhu*, even though he may not be blessed with the juice of education and culture.

Sometimes the Lord has many assistants who are quite capable of coping with this task, but the Lord brings material peace, first of all, to help His pure devotees who are disturbed by demons; demons pursue devotees. In order to free them and to kill Kaṁsa—although He did both at the same time—the Lord appears. That is why in this verse it is said that the Lord will come to the material world in the form of various incarnations to liberate the pious and destroy the evil-doers.

There are many scriptures in human society, and all of them are intended to help us get out of the temporary material world and get into the spiritual world. Therefore, true devotees of the Lord have respect for all authoritative scriptures and for all sincere followers of these various traditions. At the same time, we can understand that the *Bhagavad-gītā* is unique because, although there are many scriptures that talk about God, this is a work that was spoken by the Supreme Lord Himself. Any follower of any spiritual tradition understands that the goal is to restore their relationship with God. The *Gītā* is therefore unique because no one can know more about God than the Lord Himself. The Lord is the narrator. It is a very special work; for example, who knows about you better than you? Your wife or husband may know something about you, and your best friends may know something, but you probably have secrets that you do not tell anyone. That is why you know yourself better than everyone else.

Here Kṛṣṇa explains a very unique phenomenon: He talks about His own arrival in the material world. The Lord does not live anywhere within the limits of the material creation; He is in the spiritual world. The Lord says in the *Gītā* that outside this world exists His eternal abode, which, unlike what happens here, is never created and is never destroyed. The spiritual world is distinguished by three qualities: it is full of bliss, knowledge, and eternity, while the world in which we live is a world of suffering, ignorance, and everything transient.

Just as some rich and high-ranking person does not live just anywhere—he lives in the best place in the city—the Supreme God chooses for His place the best place to stay. It really surprises people how God, the Father Himself, can appear in this world. But from this verse, we can understand that God does come here. Does it mean that one beautiful morning He wakes up and decides, "I will go to the material world," just as we might wake up on a Saturday morning and decide to go to a lake or a beach? The Lord does not act so spontaneously. He comes with a specific purpose. 

What happens when people forget *dharma*? They begin to practice *adharma*—a godless, sinful life. All this happens periodically because the nature of this world is that everything is destroyed, including the true religion which falls into decline. The Supreme Lord Himself is forced to come in order to restore people. It is not at all necessary that He always comes Himself; He sends some of His representatives also to inspire people and to help them get back on the path of true *dharma*. He sent His representative Muhammad; he preached *dharma*. He certainly did not call it that, but he spoke about what helps to develop the love of God. And when people degrade, He sends His only son, Jesus Christ, so that he can lead people to the path of truth and the path of *dharma*. Although he does not use this exact expression, he talks about the same thing: that you must love God with all your heart.

If someone is forced to come himself, you can ask those who are parents. For example, if I ask one of my responsible students to come down and calm down the noisy ones, and if he does not succeed, I may ask another student or secretary to solve the problem. If he returns and says, "I did not succeed," no one can do anything, so the Lord comes by Himself. Of course, someone might object. For example, people sometimes argued with my spiritual teacher and said that it is impossible for the Lord Himself to come. My spiritual teacher objected by saying, "And what can someone forbid God?"

If you saw some high-ranking person in a place like a tavern or a brothel, it would seem very strange. The Supreme Lord is the best of people, and He comes into this world. And He also talks about why He comes. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita wrote the *Nīti-śāstra*, a work of logic and common sense. He talks about how to exist in an ideal way in this world so that there are no problems and worries: do not visit places where there is no pious king, do not visit places where there are no good doctors, and do not visit places where you are not expected. 

Yesterday we discussed where to go, and we decided that instead of going to a place where we are not particularly needed and where we are not expected, it is better to go to a place where we are expected most, where our presence will be appreciated. At the same time, we remembered how last year we were very inspired by the sincerity of devotees and their reactions to our kirtan and lectures. My secretary, as I mentioned yesterday, is an American woman. She asked, "What kind of place is Ufa? Is it North Korea?" And I said, "No, it is a city, the capital of Bashkiria, located in Russia."

Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says don't visit places where there is no godliness, because they can put you behind bars and throw away the keys to the cell. Don't visit places where there are no good doctors, because the doctor can treat you to the last penny and still won't cure you. Don't visit places where people don't like you. How is this connected with Kṛṣṇa? The material world is a place where, to a greater or lesser degree, people do not want to hear about God and try to act independently of Him. This is the material world. Of course, this applies very strongly to the heavenly planets; the demigods are servants of the Lord, but even they show independence. They still act for the sake of their own sensual pleasures. From time to time, even Indra creates problems because he acts trying to fulfill his selfish desires—this is the King of Heaven. This is shown very clearly in the episode when Kṛṣṇa advised the people of Vṛndāvana not to perform a *yajña* to satisfy Indra, but instead worship the hill of Govardhana. Indra was so angry that he sent a cloud to destroy everything. We can see how even the demigods sometimes forget about God. Although they are pious, they are still in the material world. 

What does that say about the lower planets? There, everything is completely oblivious to God. And on Earth, it is 50-50. Half of the people are pious, half are not. Every person in the material world is such a rebel, just as in prison there are prisoners of the highest level and the lowest level, but they are all prisoners. And the spiritual world is a place where everyone loves Kṛṣṇa, because no one loves Him more than the residents of the spiritual world. No one has even the slightest desire to do something that is not directed towards Kṛṣṇa; everyone thinks about the enjoyment of Kṛṣṇa, about serving Kṛṣṇa, and they are ready to go through any difficulties for the sake of serving Kṛṣṇa. Thanks to their devotion, Kṛṣṇa reciprocates more than anyone else. But one way or another, anyone who crosses the border and enters the material world is jealous of Kṛṣṇa to a greater or lesser degree. But the position of our soul is certainly that it can be corrected thanks to devotional service.

Kṛṣṇa says that in this world, out of many thousands of people, there are hardly a few who strive for perfection. This is explained in a very interesting story connected with the Mughal emperor Akbar and his chief minister, Birbal. Śrīla Prabhupāda regularly cited the example of Akbar’s life story to illustrate philosophical points. Despite the fact that Akbar was a good ruler, he was broad-minded and tolerant of other people's practices. Here in Bashkiria, for example, 85% of people belong to the category of Muslims, but they are very tolerant of the practice of other religions. I saw churches here, and in principle, the government does not object to the presence of our temple. In some places where there were a lot of people, we were treated very well; for example, some couples often approached in a friendly manner, and wedding groups wanted to take photos with us.

Akbar was also very tolerant towards other religions. It is said that he even gave a donation to the construction of a famous temple. Some scholars describe how Akbar came to visit Birbal to get advice. Akbar, in his royal robes, had a sword, a crown, and he was decorated with various jewels. Birbal, who belonged to the community of Hindus, was of course a Vaiṣṇava; he dressed very simply and walked generally. Akbar asked Birbal: "How do you Hindus call Allah, the Supreme Lord?" 

Birbal said: "We have a wonderful name of God—Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa means the most beautiful person." 

Akbar said: "Well, because Allah is above all, He is the most powerful, He must be the most beautiful also. But this name of Kṛṣṇa... is there something special associated with your Kṛṣṇa?" 

Birbal said: "Sometimes He comes to the material world to save His loved ones." 

As is known in Islam, any discussion of the form of God is often rejected so that people do not indulge in some idle conjecture about who God is or what He looks like; they are even forbidden to talk about it or think about it. Akbar said that he could not believe that the Supreme Lord, Allah or Kṛṣṇa, came here. 

Birbal said: "No, actually Kṛṣṇa comes here—not once, but many times. He comes here regularly in order to save His devotees." Birbal quoted this verse from the *Gītā*—*yuge yuge*—meaning from age to age, He comes periodically again and again. 

Akbar said: "Stop this! It is insulting to God. These are heretical things! Allah cannot come here; He cannot come to this terrible world because it is too great." 

Birbal said: "He comes because He loves His devotees as members of His family." 

Akbar said: "God is too kind to come here. Instead, He sends me; this is enough." 

Just then, they were walking near a deep pond, and Birbal's grandson, who was very small and could not swim, fell into the water and began to sink. When Akbar saw this historical event, he put aside his heavy crown. He was a very tall man, taller than me, with such shoulders, and he was so powerful that he could cut a rider and his horse in half with a sword. Because he was a powerful king, to show his position he carried many jewels. He quickly took off all his heavy jewelry and everything else—to dress the king, it was usually necessary to spend several hours, but in a few moments, Akbar threw off his sword, threw away his shoes, and in an instant, he was left in his underwear and jumped into the water to save the boy. Then, when he saw the boy was alive, he walked back to where his pile of clothes was, and all his attendants had little chairs and were drying him off, draining his hair, and putting all his clothes back on. It took an hour and a half to put back his sword, his jewels, and everything else.

Birbal asked: "Your Majesty, you are a great emperor surrounded by advisers, ministers, generals, and an entire army; you could have sent anyone to save the boy. But you yourself set out to do it. Why?"

Akbar replied: "Because I love my grandson. Out of love for him, because he is part of my family, out of attachment for him, I had to do it myself." 

"So Kṛṣṇa is the same way for all His sons and daughters," Birbal said. "Sometimes, out of loving affection, He feels it is necessary that He comes to this material world personally to deliver us."

Both manifestations of the Lord's compassion are that He saves the devotee, destroys the demons, and restores the principles of religion. But sometimes, when the Lord tries to save us, it is difficult; on the contrary, we have to help Him. I had my own experience because, at one time, I was trained and worked as a lifeguard on the beaches in California. Part of our training was that when you try to rescue somebody, they panic because they think they are going to die. They grab onto you and try to push you down so they can stand on you and breathe. So you have to be very careful with them, and the main thing they taught us is that drowning people panic—that's why they grab and push the savior. And it is natural that if a person panics, he drowns the rescuer and drowns himself instead of simply relaxing. The rescuer tries to help, but the drowning person resists. Just as well, Kṛṣṇa wants to save His devotees, but they may cling to material attachments, and because of this, it may not be easy for the Lord to fulfill His task.

We don't have serious faith in this, and that is why we continue to hold on to our attachments and complicate the task of Kṛṣṇa to save us. The Lord has to drag us, but because of a lack of faith, we are holding on to the dirt. The Lord is holding on to us, and we are holding on to the material attachments and desires. Even though we are instructed on the subject of the consciousness of Kṛṣṇa, we become attached to the fruits of our activities. 

There are deliverers: Kṛṣṇa delivers us, Guru delivers us, and the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas delivers us. Finally, the process of getting rid of material attachments is not artificial. If we had no attachment to the material world, we would cry tears of ecstasy achieving Hare Kṛṣṇa, but the fact that this does not happen to us is precisely the confirmation that we are still conditioned. 

Once, a Guru gave the instruction to a disciple to let go of material attachment, and the disciple was somewhat arrogant. He didn't even answer. The Guru said, "Come where you are, at 6 o'clock." When the student came to this place, he saw the Guru was holding on to a big tree and shouting, "Let me go, tree! Let me go!" The student said, "Guru, the tree does not hold you; this is you holding on to it! Just let go!" And then the Guru let go of the tree and said, "It is not the world that holds you; you hold it. That is why I say, let me go." 

The student said, "Now I understand. The Lord is ready to free us, but we must make His task easier."

The six Gosvāmīs were instructed to find the places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, to open temples to worship the deities of Kṛṣṇa, and to choose from all the sacred writings the most important verses which explain that Kṛṣṇa is the eternal God. Therefore, the Gosvāmīs read a lot more than anyone else. For example, Śrīla Prabhupāda read more than all the other devotees whom I know. Every free second, he held his e-book in his hands; sometimes he fell asleep directly with it in the evening. Rūpa Gosvāmī collected the verses that he liked the most, and I have this book; it is one of my favorite books.

The Lord is so merciful that He shows His mercy through the principle of *sādhu-saṅga*. If we receive the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas, we can get rid of our material problems. But it is not easy because we have carried this sadness with us for many lifetimes, and we know how hard it is to change our qualities and character. What should we do? Once again, turn to the wisdom of Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. He says that we can refuse the worst only if we receive something better. If, for example, you have 10 rubles and I have 1,000, and I offer to change, you will be very inspired because you will get 1,000 rubles. So, we can get rid of material attachments if we get something better, something higher—something that will make us more joyful and happy.

The sublime truth is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is His present, sounded Name, and He is one and the same. One of the most important truths of philosophy is that the Supreme God is not different from His Holy Name. He is the reservoir of all devotion, and to the extent to which we can increase the amount of chanting of the Holy Name and strengthen the quality of chanting, our taste for spiritual practice will be awakened, and to the same degree, we will lose our taste for material sensual pleasures. 

This is a gradual process and it brings results with time. We know the formula, and therefore we must apply it, and we will see serious changes thanks to the influence of the Holy Name. Prabhupāda emphasized that of all the instructions of the spiritual teacher, the most important is the daily chanting of at least 16 rounds. Chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa is the solution to all our problems and the source of all blessings. 

As Indradyumna Swami speaks, the road is reddened by an ocean of trials, and as a tsunami destroys everything, a tsunami of problems destroys everything. And yet there is only one good left in this ocean of problems, and this is the Holy Name. It will lead us to the liberation of the highest perfection, and this is a very easy process. We can sing and chant on our own, in the breaks. Of course, many people like Beethoven, Tchaikovsky, rock and roll, etc. But devotees who are solid in their chanting—not just quantity, but quality—don't have many problems. If they do, the Holy Name gives them the intelligence and the spirit. Those who seriously sing the Holy Name, even if they have problems, Kṛṣṇa gives them the mind to solve them. They have the best opportunity to return to the spiritual world already in this life. That means work, family, it all has an ending, so the purpose of the devotee is to help in spreading the movement through their business, work, or study.

Lord Kṛṣṇa came more than 5,000 years ago; Lord Caitanya, not more than 500 years ago. But Kṛṣṇa says to you that there is one more incarnation of the Lord: this is the Holy Name. And therefore, until we sing the Holy Name, the Lord is here with us. You can take this mercy to increase consciousness in various ways, in particular by the quality of chanting: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.*

With us, we have a holiday every day. Such a day as today, Janmāṣṭamī, some devotees consider the Vaiṣṇava New Year. One way or another, these days are very powerful and very auspicious in order to take special vows to strengthen and improve your spiritual practice. You must use this opportunity to chant the Holy Name to the maximum. 

Therefore, thanks to spiritual concentration these days, we must change and develop more and more determination; develop pure, divine love for Kṛṣṇa. We must wake up tomorrow morning already with a very strong attachment to Kṛṣṇa by the grace of our spiritual vows.

*Kī jaya! Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahāmantra kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Gaurabhakta-vṛnda kī jaya!*""