"*00468*.*
"### Bhadra Purnima Marathon

All right, everyone. Thank you so much for this opportunity to address the assembled devotees on this auspicious occasion of your marathon for Bhadra Purnimā. I’d like to begin by offering my obeisances to Śrīla Prabhupāda: *śrī-guru karuṇā-sindhu, bandhu-gaṇa-tāra-kārayā, prema-kūpātura-trātā*. I bow down to the lotus feet of my spiritual master, who is a wish-fulfilling tree of divine love for Kṛṣṇa, the most magnificent benefactor who initiated me into the valuable jewels of both the Gāyatrī and Mahā-mantras. How can I sufficiently praise his glories? And then to all of you Vaiṣṇavas: *sakala vaiṣṇava para-maura namaskāra, iti kichu aparādha nahuka āmāra*. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of all Vaiṣṇavas, praying I will not commit offenses in my attempts to please them. To all Vaiṣṇavas who have ever been and to all Vaiṣṇavas who ever will be, I offer my obeisances to their lotus feet. That is a prayer by the devotee-poet Devakī-nandana Dāsa some hundreds of years ago.

I also feel it’s my duty and my pleasure to pay my respects to my dear godbrother, mentor, and friend, Śrīmān Vaiśeṣika Prabhu, because he stands tall above me in both character and accomplishments. Therefore, I invoke the following for everyone’s consideration; it’s from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.32.42, from Prabhupāda’s purport there, and I quote: "If a godbrother is more enlightened and more advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one should accept him as almost equal to the spiritual master, and one should be happy to see such godbrothers advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So, with that statement, I am authorized to say the following prayer:

Nama obeisances to him, Prabhupāda’s enthusiastic follower, whose heart is free of the propensity to criticize others, who fans the spark of pure devotional service in everyone he meets, and who inspires them to distribute the *bhakti* scriptures. *Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya!*

So, for the next few days, devotees around the world will be striving to reach a goal of distributing 10,000 sets of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* or more before or on the auspicious full moon day of the month of Bhādra. What is the significance of Bhādra Pūrṇimā? In the *Bhāgavata Māhātmya* section of the *Padma Purāṇa*, Uttara-khaṇḍa, it is stated that on Bhādra Pūrṇimā, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī completed his narration of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. That is from *śāstra*, and all the book distributors are very excited now because they are aware how in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 12.13.13—you all know this verse—it is stated that by giving *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* on Bhādra Pūrṇimā, *yāti paramāṁ gatim*: that one will attain the supreme transcendental destination.

And to whom are we giving or selling these sets? Well, actually, *Bhagavad-gītā* recommends that we use some discrimination in whom we give charity to. There’s that famous verse from *Bhagavad-gītā* (17.20): *dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ dīyate ’nupakāriṇe*. Charity given out of duty without expectation of return, at the proper time and place, and to a worthy person, is considered to be in the mode of goodness. We are supposed to give charity to people worthy of that charity. A great Vaiṣṇava saint who lived some hundreds of years ago, his name was Śrī Vaṁśīdhara Śarman, he wrote: *suvṛttāya dadyāt kṛṣṇa-bhaktāya santataṁ sarva-śāstra-vide veda*. 

Very interesting verse: this *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* should only be gifted to a well-behaved gṛhastha who is a constant devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Such a gṛhastha should know all the *śāstras* and should be engaged in teaching the Vedas. It’s a strong injunction: the Bhāgavatam should only be gifted to a well-behaved gṛhastha who’s a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, who knows all the *śāstras*, and who is a teacher of the Vedas. So what’s going on here, this Bhādra Pūrṇimā marathon? Well, we are all Gauḍīya Bhaktas; we’re devotees of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He’s the Yuga-avatāra. Prabhupāda said when many instructions are given, the last instruction is the most relevant. So many avatāras have come, giving their instructions according to time, place, and circumstance, as the great ācāryas. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu is a special avatāra, and he introduced a different conception about giving charity. He’s the most merciful incarnation; he broke open the storehouse of mercy for everyone. 

He said—or it is said—in distributing love of Godhead, Caitanya Mahāprabhu and his associates did not consider who was a fit candidate and who was not, nor where such distribution should or should not take place. They made no conditions. Wherever they got the opportunity, the members of the Pañca-tattva distributed love of Godhead (*Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*). So, this is how we see the distribution of charity. So, this Bhādra Pūrṇimā marathon, it perfectly conforms to the Yuga-avatāra Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s instructions, as they have come down to us through this succession, especially from Śrīla Prabhupāda, who very much encouraged us in book distribution. 

The importance of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, which is the book we’re distributing this month in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, cannot be underestimated, nor can it be sufficiently glorified. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.3.40 says: *idaṁ bhāgavataṁ nāma purāṇaṁ brahma-sammitam*. This scripture named *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* is the literary incarnation of God. There are many kinds of incarnations, but this is the literary incarnation of God. Bhāgavatam is an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. And what are the activities of an incarnation? We know from *Bhagavad-gītā*, what are the activities of an incarnation? *Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ* (4.8): in order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, Kṛṣṇa says, "I advent myself millennium after millennium." So, there’s the designation of an incarnation: to be respected or honored/worshipped as an incarnation, therefore one must deliver the pious, he must kill miscreants, and he must establish *dharma*. So the Bhāgavatam identifies itself as an incarnation. So does the Bhāgavatam meet those criteria?

Yes, it does. Let’s first consider *paritrāṇāya*. Does the Bhāgavatam deliver people? Yes, it does, by sound vibration. *Vedānta-sūtra* says, "By sound one is liberated." By sound one is conditioned, and by sound one is liberated. So people are getting delivered by this incarnation. By *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇu-smaraṇam*, hearing/chanting the Bhāgavatam brings Kṛṣṇa-smaraṇa. And we all know how the Bhāgavatam has delivered us; it’s our savior. Sanātana Gosvāmī writes—you probably all know this verse because it’s so relevant to Bhāgavatam, and we’re all distributing the Bhāgavatam during this month—he writes: "My only friend, my constant companion, my spiritual master, my great wealth, my savior (nistāraka), my good fortune, my source of ecstasy, I bow down to you, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." I know, at least myself, this is true. 

I was thinking, when Vaiśeṣika Prabhu asked me to speak on the subject matter, I was remembering the first day I met devotees, way back 51 years ago, on the campus lawn at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. I met four sannyāsīs: Viṣṇujana Mahārāja, Brahmānanda, Nāgamuni, and Subhāga Mahārāja. That’s what it took to make me a devotee. But I noticed, when I first walked up, this big, tall, effulgent personality, Viṣṇujana, he was speaking to the students and he was holding this old brick-colored book in his hand. And later when I asked him about that book, I said, "What is it?" and he said, "This is the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, the king of all scriptures." I never heard of a king in relationship to scriptures; you know, I’ve heard of kings, emperors who fought wars, I never heard "king of the scriptures." But he said those words with so much love, it just resonated in my heart. So those sannyāsīs stayed with me for three days, and the day after I met them, that book was sitting on a table and I asked Viṣṇujana Mahārāja if I could look at it. So I looked inside, and I said, "I want this book." I said, "Where can I buy it?" He said, "It’s not available." But inside I found a small message, in the second page; it said, "Interested readers may inquire from: The League of Devotees, Vṛndāvan, U.P., India." 

So I took that address down. There was no street address, no box number, no zip code, nothing. I thought, "Why not try?" So I put $20 in an envelope with my address, a little note asking for the book, and I wrote on the envelope, "League of Devotees, Vṛndāvan, U.P., India," and sent it airmail. Three months later, I received a burlap-wrapped parcel that had been sent by sea mail, by ship, from India. And when I opened it up, there it was: the same First Canto *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, the original Bhāgavatams that Viṣṇujana Mahārāja carried. I read it cover to cover so many times, and that’s what convinced me to become a devotee. So, yes, the Bhāgavatam is *paritrāṇāya sādhūnām*, delivering us. To be an incarnation, the Bhāgavatam has to kill demons. So surely the sound vibration of the Bhāgavatam is purifying the demoniac propensities in our heart. *Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ...* Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramātmā, the Supersoul in everyone's heart, and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses the desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who has developed the urge to hear His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted. Number three: Does this incarnation establish *dharma*? Sure does, because the Bhāgavatam propounds the highest *dharma*. "The supreme occupation (*dharma*) for all humanity is that by which men can attain to the loving service of the transcendent Lord. Such devotional service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted to completely satisfy the self." 

So, by fulfilling all these requirements, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* has become the *grantharāja*, the king of all scriptures. Again, it identifies itself; it has the right to do that. Just as the Gaṅgā is the greatest of all rivers, Lord Acyuta the supreme amongst deities, and Lord Śambhu (Śiva) the greatest of Vaiṣṇavas, so *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* is the greatest of all Purāṇas. So we’re all aware of that special line in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. What is the verse? 1.5.11: *tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo*. That this Bhāgavatam is meant to bring about a revolution in the impious lives of the world’s misdirected civilization. There’s that word: revolution. It really stirs up the *saṅkīrtana* devotees—the revolution! 

So one could say that this spiritual revolution to purify the world and awaken *prema*, or love of God, as given by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, began in earnest with the appearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who envisioned the worldwide society of devotees who would take Kṛṣṇa consciousness to every town and village of the world. And part of his scheme was to have the six Gosvāmīs write books, books, books, books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Prabhupāda said his followers have continued down to the present day. Books are an integral part of Vedic culture, and so much so in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, books were very much part of the six Gosvāmīs' lives, the first disciples of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And that was especially true in one sense of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, for his worshipable deity was *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. He spent a total of eight months in the service of Lord Caitanya in Jagannātha Purī, after which Caitanya Mahāprabhu sent him to Vṛndāvan to study the Bhāgavatam under the guidance of Sanātana Gosvāmī. And after some time, he became so expert in reciting Bhāgavatam, it’s said that he could recite each and every verse—18,000 verses—in three melodious tunes. So again, his worshipable deity was the Bhāgavatam, whereas the other five Gosvāmīs, they each had their worshipable deities in the forms of Govindajī, Dāmodara, etc. Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa had *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* as his *iṣṭa-deva*. He saw the Bhāgavatam as Kṛṣṇa himself, and that’s possible. Again, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī writes: *paramānanda-pāṭhāya śrīmad-bhāgavata...* "I bow down to you, the Bhāgavatam, who are supremely blissful to read. Your every syllable pours down a flood of *prema*. You can always be served by everyone. You are Kṛṣṇa; *bhāgavata... kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa-pratyakṣa-kṛṣṇa...* You are Kṛṣṇa himself." Bhāgavatam is still being worshipped here in Vṛndāvan at a place called Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Pīṭha in Vṛndāvan. He was a disciple of Gadādhara. So again, just by reading or hearing the Bhāgavatam, one can achieve perfection. And Kṛṣṇa wants us to hear the Bhāgavatam; he strongly wants us to spend time hearing the Bhāgavatam so we become inspired to give the Bhāgavatam to others.

Hear the Bhāgavatam. Once in Vṛndāvan, there was a blind old woman who made her living by selling wheat flour. She would grind grains day and night in an area called the Jāru Maṇḍala, here in Vṛndāvan. It’s not far from where I live here, which was also a place that devotees would gather to regularly discuss, hear, and chant about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unfortunately, her grinding became a significant distraction for the devotees who could hear the noise from her mill more easily than they could hear the narrations of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. So repeated attempts were made to convince this woman to stop her grinding when devotees were in the area hearing Bhāgavatam, etc., or maybe to ask her to move to another location, but she was too old to go anywhere else, she said. So finally, the local *paṇḍas* and the resident devotees became so upset that they decided to choose another site to congregate, somewhere where they could hear and be heard without disturbance. 

However, the Vaiṣṇava lore—the *bhāgavata-kathā* says—Kṛṣṇa didn’t want his devotees to abandon that particular place because it was a pastime place. So he decided to intervene on their behalf, and he appeared before that blind woman and empowered her to see him. To stop the racket she was causing, the Lord placed his foot on the grinding stone—her grinding stone—and said, "Don’t you know that you’re disturbing my devotees by creating this noise? You must stop this at once." So of course, the old lady was in ecstasy seeing Kṛṣṇa, and she bowed repeatedly to him, and then finally replied, "Oh Lord, whatever is your order I will certainly follow, but I must ask you, how will I live if I leave and try to set up somewhere else? My tiny income comes from selling wheat flour. If I stop grinding, my income will stop, then I won’t be able to afford to eat, not to mention buying the flowers and fruit that I offer you in my meager service." So it’s said that taking compassion on his devotee, Kṛṣṇa pressed his foot firmly into the grinding stone, leaving a clear impression of his footprints, and the old woman gazed at that footprint in amazement. Pointing to his footprint, Kṛṣṇa then said, "News that my footprint is impressed on your grinding stone will spread throughout Vraja. Locals and pilgrims alike will come to visit it and offer their respects. Worship this footprint with Tulasī flowers/leaves and flowers. As its custodian, you can live from the coins that people place on it. Have faith; I will ensure that your income is sufficient for your maintenance." So then Kṛṣṇa disappeared. The old woman, it’s said, she stopped grinding grains and served the Lord’s footprint instead. And just as Kṛṣṇa promised, she was able to subsist comfortably on the donations that pilgrims would leave. And from that time on, the pilgrims were not only free to hear Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes at Jāru Maṇḍala without disturbance, but also to meditate upon Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet as they listened. And ācāryas have given us this story because they say it’s evidence of Kṛṣṇa’s deep concern that devotees always have the opportunity to hear about him. He is willing to intervene personally when there is some interruption to this activity of *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ*—hearing and chanting—which brings remembrance of him, Kṛṣṇa-smaraṇa, hearing the *śāstras*. So I thought that’s a nice story to show how Kṛṣṇa wants us to hear, and he intervened in this particular pastime so the devotees could be peaceful and not hear the grinding mill and just hear *grantharāja*. So it’s so beneficial to hear. 

So we don’t want to be misers. We want to keep it for ourselves? No, we want to give it to others. Just like in the Christmas marathon, I often tell the devotees, as Jesus said, "It’s better to give than it is to receive," and really this is the real pleasure that we experience in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, not just the pleasure of becoming relieved from sinful activities or sinful reactions, or even just chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa ourselves. But when you give the Holy Name to someone else, the Holy Name blesses the giver to experience the highest taste of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Giving like God does. If it’s good enough for God, it’s good enough for us. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to give the *saṅkīrtana* movement; he enjoyed it, and the ācāryas enjoyed it. So that’s where our future lies, our happiness lies: in giving Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So what will be the result of giving a Bhāgavatam? Again, *yāti*... if you give a Bhāgavatam on the full moon in this month of Bhādra, you’ll attain the supreme transcendental destination. Wow. One Bhāgavatam to one person. But how does that work? Is that by one simple act of distributing one single Bhāgavatam to one single person we qualify ourselves to go back home, back to Godhead? Well, yes and no. It really is part of a greater theme: that by dedicating our entire lives to serving Śrīla Prabhupāda’s desire to enlighten the world by book distribution, we’re entitled to receive such mercy. 

One of my favorite verses: The Vedas say that to a loyal disciple, one may speak the confidential secret. Therefore, O most fortunate one, now please hear the glories of Goloka. Remaining loyal to our spiritual master, serving his mission selflessly without desiring anything in return, the spiritual master gives the most valuable thing. He gives the confidential secret. He gives a deeper understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That’s from *Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta*, Part 2, Chapter 1, text 6. So while it’s true that Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is such that by one deed done in devotional service one can achieve perfection, the general rule is that by a lifetime of *sevā* one achieves perfection. It’s difficult, actually (*Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.1.35). Devotional perfection is very difficult to attain for two reasons: first, unless one is attached to Kṛṣṇa, he cannot attain devotional perfection even if he renders devotional service for a long time. Secondly, Kṛṣṇa does not easily deliver perfection in devotional service. So sometimes devotees do get special mercy, just like to be awarded a university degree, one patiently and diligently takes courses for four years, but sometimes the university awards a person proficient in some knowledge who did not attend the school an honorary degree. So yes, one book, one person, one time—Goloka. But generally, we go through the whole process of *sādhana-bhakti, rāgānuga-bhakti, prema-bhakti*. It’s okay; maybe it’s even more reliable to stay behind and keep distributing Prabhupāda’s books until all the 14 worlds are delivered.

Sanātana writes that the pastimes of Lord Caitanya are especially relishable in the material world because of the dark background. The dark background of material existence, which doesn’t exist in the spiritual world... he gives the example: like you take a diamond and you put it on a black piece of velvet, then you can really appreciate it. So the transcendentally effulgent pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and his devotees in distributing the *saṅkīrtana* movement, they’re more appreciable in the material world because of the background of the darkness of ignorance, even more appreciable, he says, than in the spiritual world. So thus, one could think that a lifetime of distributing or organizing book distribution is an ideal life. Just like our Vaiśeṣika Prabhu—he’s distributed books his whole life, he organizes book distribution on a mass level, and perhaps most importantly, most significantly, he ensures—he has insured in the service of his spiritual master the perpetual distribution of books through the ages by his *magnum opus*. Those of you who are university students, you know *magnum opus*—that’s the best achievement one makes in one’s life. By his *magnum opus*, which is *Our Family Business*—that book, *Our Family Business*—he’s ensured that devotees can remain inspired in book distribution for the full gamut of 10,000 years of Lord Caitanya’s *saṅkīrtana* movement. I’ve read that book three times. Every book distributor should know that book like the back of his hand, as we say in English. Śrīla Prabhupāda said of his books that we should know them like a lawyer knows the law books. And therefore, we should never forget that ISKCON is first and foremost a missionary movement, and book distribution is a principal anger, or arm, of that missionary spirit. It should never go out of style. That was something we did in the 70s and the 80s? No, there are certain things that will never go out of style, like *prasādam*—I’m sure that’s guaranteed—Bhāgavatam reading, visiting the deities in the temple. But this process of giving Kṛṣṇa consciousness, especially through book distribution, it should never go out of style; rather, it should continue and grow on and on and on and on. 

In the beginning of our movement, and through the formative years of our movement, the late 60s, 70s, and 80s, book distribution was the service that united our ever-growing and expanding movement. It was the glue that held everything together, and it kept devotees enthusiastic, which is a key element in devotional service. But of course, in course of time and naturally so, our movement has become diversified, and that’s also required: temples, schools, farms, restaurants. And so the motto now is "More Unity in Diversity," thus fulfilling Prabhupāda’s desire for a worldwide movement encompassing all aspects of society and all types of people. However, "Unity in Singularity" is also a valid motto, and that motto is, without a doubt, the motto of ISKCON Silicon Valley, where book distribution is the singular or principal activity of devotees who live diverse ways of life. And therefore, you find an enduring enthusiasm in the temple and the congregation of ISV. Enthusiasm—you see that wherever you go in the world where books are being distributed and *saṅkīrtana* is going on. There’s this mystical enthusiasm. As Yamunā Devī, my god-sister, said, "So many magic moments." 

Enthusiasm is so important to maintain. In a letter on the 31st of December, 1972, in Bombay, Prabhupāda wrote in a letter, quote: "I am especially glad to know that everyone is feeling so much enthusiasm to work very hard in this preaching mission. That enthusiasm must be maintained under all circumstances. That is our price for entering Kṛṣṇa’s kingdom." And Māyā is always trying to take away our enthusiasm to serve Kṛṣṇa, because without enthusiasm everything else is finished. Any *saṅkīrtana* devotee, part-time or full-time, or even just a couple of times, will know how much enthusiasm is generated from book distribution. Why? Because Kṛṣṇa reciprocates very quickly. If we want mercy, we go out on the street, we get on the phone—now we’re calling people on the phone because of COVID-19—any novel way we can come up with, we’re sharing our good fortune with others. We’re always in line with us, because Kṛṣṇa is pleased. 

So why is book distribution so important, especially as regarding the Bhādra Pūrṇimā marathon? Because what are we giving people? *Rāja-vidyā*, the king of all education, transcendental knowledge. But more specifically, we’re giving them the *grantharāja*, the king of all scriptures, the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Such an important book. In the *Caitanya-mata-mañjūṣā* by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, a very important verse which mentions the *Bhāgavata-rājya*: "I’m just learning that verse so excuse me, it didn’t flow so well. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, is worshipped along with this transcendental abode of Vṛndāvan. The most pleasing form of worship for the Lord is that which was performed by the Gopīs of Vṛndāvan. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* is the spotless authority on everything, and pure love of Godhead is the ultimate goal of life for all men. These statements, for which we have the highest regard, are the opinion of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." 

Viśvanātha! However, the crowning glory of giving people *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, especially in the form of sets, are the purports of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* by the famous Bhaktivedanta purports. It’s really Prabhupāda’s purports that reveal the glories of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* or Kṛṣṇa’s accomplishments to the people. The analogy is given: the analogy given is fruit in a tree. When the parrot nipples the fruit, by contact with the parrot’s saliva, the fruit is said to become sweeter. So that immortal analogy is enshrined in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.1.3: *nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalaṁ...* "And thoughtful men relish *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, the mature fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literatures. It emanated from the lips of Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Therefore, this fruit has become even more tasteful, although its nectarean juice was already relishable for all, including liberated souls." 

So what’s really happening when we give *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* to people is that we’re giving them Śrīla Prabhupāda. 10.48.31 says to Akrūra: "Water alone does not make a sacred place, nor is it earth or clay that encompasses the deity. The waters of the Ganges, visits to holy places, and the worship of Śālagrāma-śilā purify one only after a long time, but *sādhus* like you purify one instantly by their very sight." So that verse is important because when we’re giving people the Bhāgavatam, we’re giving them Prabhupāda’s purports—they’re getting Prabhupāda’s association. So by giving Bhāgavatam, we’re doing the highest welfare work. It’s good for them, and it’s good for us. In his purports to *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, this is what he writes, and I quote: "In the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, there are only two principal instructions: display a taste for chanting the Holy Names and display compassion for the fallen souls." That might make a nice mission statement for ISKCON: "In the teachings of Mahāprabhu, there are only two principal instructions: a taste for chanting the Holy Names and display compassion for fallen souls." 

So how powerful is Śrīla Prabhupāda’s association, either in *vāṇī* or *vapu*? Well, I’d just like to conclude—I think I’ve gone over my time—but just with a short story, one more personal story, because it does seem to enliven the devotees the most, how Prabhupāda’s association can enliven one to read his books. Many, many years ago, in the early 1970s, I was doing *saṅkīrtana* in an island called Corsica in the Mediterranean Sea with my *saṅkīrtana* party. And one Saturday, we did a program in a yoga studio, and to that program came about 15 or 20 people. And there was one gentleman in a uniform; he turned out to be an admiral in the French navy. He was just going home from his work, and he happened to see our *kīrtana*, and something pulled him in. He sat down, he listened to the lecture, he kind of chanted, he took a little *prasādam*. And at the end of that program, before everyone had left, I received a call from the temple in Paris. They told us that Prabhupāda was... he was in Europe, and he was supposed to go to one temple, but the plan changed and he had arrived in Paris, France. And the temple president said, "Get back here as fast as you can. Prabhupāda’s here for four days." 

So I made a little announcement to the people: "I’m going back to Paris to see my spiritual master, who’s written the purports in this *Bhagavad-gītā* which I’d spoken from that evening." So the admiral came up to me before he left; he said, "Young man"—I was, you know, 23, he was in his 60s—"can I come with you to see your spiritual master?" I said, "What?" He said, "I’d like me and my family to come with you to see your spiritual master. I’m so touched by what he said." And I’d taken a week’s leave from the navy. Okay, to make a long story short, we drove... we took a boat across the river/ocean to Marseille, and we drove 12 hours to Paris. And the admiral and his family were in a car behind us. We arrived at the temple, I arranged an accommodation for the admiral and his family, and then I told the temple president, "I have a special guest to see Śrīla Prabhupāda." He said, "Only great authors or politicians, you know..." I said, "I’ve got an admiral in the French navy." He said, "Okay." So then I brought the admiral in. I was very proud; I thought, "I’ve brought you one admiral." 

So they spoke for some time. And again, I’ll shorten it, but at the end, the admiral said to Śrīla Prabhupāda, "I’m so impressed by the way you speak. What chapter of this book, *Bhagavad-gītā*, should I read? It’s the most important, I should read the most. What’s the most important chapter to focus on?" Prabhupāda said, "Immediately... the ninth chapter of *Bhagavad-gītā*." So the admiral said, "I’ll read that chapter regularly." Prabhupāda blessed him, and then he left. I wish I had more time, but years later, maybe five years later, six, seven years later—I can’t remember—I was doing *saṅkīrtana* in... dressed in *dhoti* and *kurta*, *tilaka*, shaved head, big garland—that’s how I used to do it—on the street on the Champs-Élysées, most important street in France, near the Arc de Triomphe. And there was this big celebration, and the military was having a big... the army, the navy, the air force, they’re all there, and all kinds of barricades and police. And I was trying to distribute *Bhagavad-gītā* to the people there, and the police kept pushing me back, screaming at me, yelling at me, fining me. I kept trying to get in, but I was so obvious. 

Lo and behold, I saw from a distance, maybe 30 meters away, there were people sitting on these benches going up like this. I saw the admiral, and I yelled out, "Admiral! Admiral! Admiral!" so loud everybody looked at me. The admiral saw me, and he had his security with him, of course, and he said... he came down from the benches. He came down and he walked over to me. Everyone was looking like, "What’s happening? This man in a uniform, all kinds of decorations." He came up, he connected. He said, "Ah! Indradyumna!" Remember my name, Indradyumna Dāsa. "How are you?" I said, "Admiral, I’m doing fine." I see... he said, "I’m also doing fine." I said, "You remember you had that meeting with my guru?" He said, "How could I forget? It was the most significant moment in my life." I said, "Whoa, that’s so wonderful to hear." He said, "I think of your guru every day." 

And I said, "I remember Prabhupāda told you to read the *Bhagavad-gītā* ninth chapter as often as possible." He said, "I read it every day." He said, "In fact, I’ve memorized most of the verses. I read it every day. It guides me through my life." Wow. And then he got a call from the official: "Oh, come on, where do I have to come back?" So he was about to leave, and I grabbed my... I said, "Wait! Let’s keep in touch." He said, "Yes, let’s keep in touch." So we exchanged information. Then just before he left, he said, "So, how’s your guru doing?" I said, "Oh, I didn’t tell you, but since you met Śrīla Prabhupāda, he departed this world. He was elderly and he was in his 80s. He went back to the spiritual world." When I said that, he got shocked, and tears came from his eyes. The admiral started crying. He said, "He’s gone? He’s gone? But he’s my guide. He’s my guide. He’s my guide." And the announcement came, and he just kind of turned around like this—not saying anything—and he walked very slowly away. 

So Prabhupāda is available; his association in *vapu* form or *vāṇī* form. That admiral kept his association with Śrīla Prabhupāda by reading, not only by memory but by reading *Bhagavad-gītā*, and he considered Prabhupāda his guide. So in the same way, when we’re distributing these Bhāgavatams, the purports... Prabhupāda’s ecstasies. And if we want to know him, we read those purports. So as we’ve been touched by Prabhupāda’s mercy through his books, through his instructions, we should give that mercy out to others. And although most devotees cannot distribute books full-time or even part-time these days, this Bhādra Pūrṇimā marathon gives us the opportunity to do some book distribution, or just give donations for the sets. Others can give them to their friends or their well-wishers or workers. Everyone can participate in this way and give Bhāgavatam and give Prabhupāda to the whole world. 

So I’m way over my time, so sorry, but I’m an old book distributor myself. I distributed books for 11 years, almost every day, even on Janmāṣṭamī, Balarāma Pūrṇimā—the string of days is addictive. And now I have so many other responsibilities, but I always think if the world fell apart and nothing else was there, I’d go back to France, I still got my book bag hanging at one of my disciples' homes, I’d just go back, take that book bag off the shelf there, put some books in it, and just go back into the villages and walk door-to-door selling *Bhagavad-gītās* and *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatams* to people. It’s such a wonderful, nectarean service. So I very much appreciate this opportunity to encourage those of you who are actually out there. All glories to your service! 

And I’ll conclude with a beautiful verse by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, his opening prayer in his *Bhakti-ratnākara*, or the "Jewel-Filled Ocean of Devotional Service." Very quickly, he says to all of us—he’s actually praying to Lord Caitanya: "Oh my Lord Gaura, you are the abode of auspiciousness, beautified by the *kīrtana* of Lord Kṛṣṇa. You are the ocean of elegance, the bestower of a constant flow of devotion, and a mountain of love that is as bright as gold. Your beautiful features give soothing relief to the eyes of every living being, and you are mankind’s salvation from all kinds of misfortune. You are the life of all devotees. Dear Mahāprabhu, please be merciful to me." 

Thank you so much, all the devotees who are organizing this marathon around the world. I take the dust of your feet upon my head. All glories to all the *saṅkīrtana* devotees. *Grantharāja Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam kī jaya!* Here in India, GBC, right now, get out there and distribute those books for both! Hare Kṛṣṇa! We’ve got a few more days left, sorry. Well, thank you.""