"*00157*.*
"### Bitten By The Serpent

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. Good morning, everyone. I am so much enjoying my visit here at the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Madana-mohana in the association of so many wonderful devotees. So, I thought this morning I would speak on the importance of associating with devotees. *Sādhu-saṅga* means association. Birds of a feather flock together; you see the crows and you see the swans. So, this morning, people are congregating for different sporting events and different parties, and so forth and so on, but this is like *paramahaṁsa-saṅga*—this is the best type of association. Swan-like persons who know the essence of life, the purpose of life, to become Kṛṣṇa conscious.

So, we know by Prabhupāda’s grace how to live in this world like the swan. The swan has this peculiar ability that if you pour milk into the water, the swan can drink the milk without getting the water. It is almost mystical, or at least it is amazing how Kṛṣṇa created this world. When I first heard it as a new devotee, I said, "Really? A swan can drink if you pour milk in the lake? The swan can drink the milk and not the water?" I was a new devotee, so I went to a lake in San Francisco and I poured some milk—there are lots of lakes, it is a famous lake there, it is called Swan Lake—so I poured the milk into the water, and the swans came. Lo and behold, they would drink from there, and the water would come out of their nostrils. They were sucking the water, but they were getting the milk; the water was, by nature, coming out of their little... on their beak, they have two little nostrils. I said, "It is true. The Vedic knowledge is true. I am never going to doubt it again." By the mercy of the swan, all of you are swan-like personalities. 

You live in this world and there are so many things that you can achieve: name, fame, glory, money—honey. Money is the honey. "Money is the honey, it's so sweet, you can't be beat." That is their mantra, an unauthorized mantra; you won't find it in *śāstra*. They are thinking like that, but we know we take only what is necessary. We have to maintain the body, we have to maintain our family, we have our society here, we have our world; we want to leave it in a good condition for our grandchildren. So we take what is necessary, but not an iota more. If the whole world lived like this, there would be no poverty, no one would be in need, because the Supreme Lord has created things in such a way that the ant gets his one grain of sugar and the elephant gets his one ton of hay. It is just Nature’s arrangement. But because of greed, human beings—uncontrolled senses—take more than they need. So the motto should be "Simple living, high thinking," or in material society, they say, "Take according to your need, not according to your greed." Then there would be no environmental problems, no warming up of the climate, etc. It is very simple. We have the solutions to all problems in this world if only people would listen. It is not easy; this is the preacher's dilemma. You know, he is on the street distributing books, and one out of twenty-five people take a book. I did book distribution many, many years, and I sat down and made a calculation one day. One out of twenty-five people stopped. What if the whole world stopped and listened to us? Oh happy day, that would be a happy day.

So the association with devotees is so important because by associating with devotees we take on the qualities of the devotees. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura wrote that devotional service is something that you imbibe. It is something you imbibe from other devotees—like COVID, that is a bad word—how did we get COVID? By *asat-saṅga*, unwanted association, we got COVID. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a little... it is a little mystical, actually, that we get Kṛṣṇa consciousness by sitting here in a group of devotees. *Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ* brings Kṛṣṇa. Just by sitting together in these higher topics of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we imbibe devotional service. You cannot underestimate the potency of association with devotees; it is almost like transcendentally automatic.

Like when I was young, in America, you could order from South America... it was kind of strange, you could order all these creatures for a few years—like lizards, and bugs, and spiders, and snakes. My mom hated it, but I loved them. I would take money from my father's wallet or my mother's purse, and I would write it, put it in an envelope, and send away, and three weeks later, a snake would arrive in the mail addressed to me. My mother would just, "What? Another snake?" or spiders. "Boys will be boys; frogs and snails and puppy dog tails," they say in English, and "girls are sugar and spice and everything nice." It is a phrase we have in America. So boys, they like these kind of things. So I used to get these lizards; they were called chameleon lizards. And this chameleon lizard, by nature's way, as a form of protection from predators, wherever the lizard is sitting—on a leaf, or a branch, or the ground—his skin turns that color. And I read about it when I was like nine years old, and I said, "No, you know," again I was doubting, but I always had a curious mind. I said, "You have to prove it. Prove it to me." So I ordered one of these lizards. I took him out of the box—he was looking at me like, "What are you going to do with me?"—and I put him on a green leaf. Boom! Within a few moments, his skin turned a green shade. I picked him up, and he looked at me again. I put him on a branch, a brown branch, and his skin turned brown. And I had a red piece of paper—this was the final test—I put him on the red piece of paper. By nature's way, to protect him so he could hide from predators, his skin turned red. And I picked him up, and he smiled at me—see, I am just kidding—but isn't it a little mystic? It is a wonder. 

One time, Prabhupāda said, "The material creation is mystical; how it is working, how it is going on." Still, we don't know so many things. We don't know how blood is transformed into milk from the udder of the cow or the breast of your mother. Scientists don't know how blood turns into milk. They don't know so many things; they are so proud of what they know, and they are the big authorities, but they know very little. But we know that by association with devotees, we become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Therefore, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has listed association with devotees as one of the most important items in making progress. Actually, He lists 64 essential items of devotional service that we should follow, but because life is short and then you die, He stressed five. We want to get out of the slow lane into the fast lane, isn't it? We are going on—I've been a devotee some weeks, some months, some years, some decades—and I'm still not crying, which is the goal, love of Rādhā-Śyāma, *aukinḍa-bhāva*, feeling your separation. "I am considering a moment to be like twelve years or more, and tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain, Kṛṣṇa, I am feeling your separation." When I haven't come to that stage, but we have to come to that stage in order to go back home, back to Godhead. 

So Mahāprabhu lists—or it is listed—64 items of devotional service, but Mahāprabhu, He lists five to get in the fast lane:
* *Sādhu-saṅga*: one should associate with devotees.
* *Nāma-kīrtana*: one should chant the holy names of the Lord.
* *Bhāgavata-śravaṇa*: one should hear the king of all scriptures, the *Bhāgavatam*—*Rāj* means king—because it deals only with *amala*, pure devotion. One should hear *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*.
* *Mathurā-vāsa*: one should reside or visit Mathurā or Vṛndāvana.
* *Śrī-mūrtira-śraddhāya-sevana*: one should worship the deity with faith and veneration.

There you have it; that is the prescription for the disease of material life to get cured. If you go to the doctor and he gives you a prescription, "Two pills a day for three weeks," you don't really know medicine, you are a layman, you don't know how it's working, but you have faith in the doctor because up on the wall it says he graduated from such and such a university with distinction, with honors, so you take it. So we take this medicine because we have faith in *gaṅgā* and *guru*. 

*Guru-gaṅgā*. I asked Tamal Krishna Goswami, my very dear departed godbrother, "What is the most important quality of a devotee, a disciple? What is the most important quality of a disciple?" So he kind of closed his eyes, and then he said, "The most important quality for a disciple is *guru-niṣṭhā*—faith in the spiritual master." The spiritual master is Kṛṣṇa's representative. Kṛṣṇa came and went, but the representatives remain on this earth like ambassadors from the spiritual world. So what they say is absolute truth, and our minds may challenge sometimes and wonder, but no, we have faith that whatever our spiritual teachers are telling us, whatever *śāstra* is telling you, we have faith like that.

So have faith. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, you know him, great devotee of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Jagannātha Purī, he hinted that chanting the holy names and associating with devotees are two essential ingredients of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious in the age of *kali*. Which—I love this verse, I often quote it—"In this age of quarrel, the remedy for those fallen souls who have been bitten by the serpent of *saṁsāra* is the name of the Supreme Lord and menial service to exalted Vaiṣṇavas." In this age of quarrel, the remedy for those fallen souls who have been bitten by the serpent of *saṁsāra*—repetition of birth and death—what is the remedy for that disease? The name of Kṛṣṇa and service to the combination. Just like we have—I don't know if you study it, but chemicals—there is nitrogen and glycerin; they are both potent chemicals, but you put them together, "Nitroglycerin," boom, right? Nitroglycerin, it's known, it's a compound. You put the compound together, you shake it, boom, everything goes up in smoke. So, nitrogen and glycerin: so the chanting of the holy names and service to the Vaiṣṇavas, you get a Hare Kṛṣṇa explosion. And that is not the kind of explosion that destroys everything; it is the explosion that just propels everyone back to the spiritual world.

So according to *śāstra*, just how important is this *sādhu-saṅga*, association with devotees, in becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious? Well, the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya, they said to Sūta Gosvāmī, "The value of a moment's association with the devotee of the Lord cannot even be compared to the attainment of heavenly planets or liberation (*mokṣa*) from matter, what to speak of worldly benedictions in the form of material prosperity, which are for those who are meant for death." Oh, that is a strong, strong verse. Then Sūta replies to them: "Oh twice-born sages, by serving those who are completely free from vice, a great service is done; by such service, one gains an affinity for hearing the messages of Vāsudeva." You come into the association of devotees, and what do they do? It is all "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, hey!" It's all that, and you kind of, you know, you start going, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, hey!" It's catchy. The Mahā-mantra is very catchy: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. "Oh twice-born sages, by serving those who are freed from vice, a great service is done; by such service, one gains an affinity for hearing these subject matters." You are not getting restless, you are not going away. Even this young boy, he is listening; it is so attractive. Why? Because it is non-different than the Lord Himself, and Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive.

So power, this is very powerful. We are sitting here, and what is happening? There is a transformation. This is a cleansing. Perhaps some person who can paint or draw, he could draw in such a way that as we are speaking, he would draw that from your heart is washing out lust, anger, and greed and just going out the temple into the sewer—that is where it belongs. Lust, anger, and greed, that is what is happening. It is not a figurative thing; it is actually happening as you are sitting and listening. According to the quality of your listening, these things are going away. So you are in the right place at the right time doing the right thing. You could be anywhere in Hyderabad; there are so many—you had so many choices, but you came here. And in the association of the devotees, we are creating a river—a river into the sewer—of all our baggage. "Bye-bye, don't come back! See, I am not going to even see you later, go away, stay away, lust, anger, and greed." Otherwise, how do you get rid of them? You can wash the body with soap, but how do you wash your heart? You can't swallow a bar of soap. When I was a young boy, sometimes I was naughty, my father would say, "If you say that again, I'm going to wash your mouth out with soap." I won't say it again, Daddy. So, how do you wash the heart? *Śabda-brahma*, the transcendental sound; it works. Transcendental sound.

I, the other day, mentioned I came with Prabhupāda here to Hyderabad for the opening of the temple—what year was that? '76? Okay, '76. We took a train, ten or fifteen of us, for the installation of Rādhā-Madana-mohana. I have, you know, I am part of your family; I was here from the beginning. And the day before, we went to a village outside somewhere, I think where the farm is, there was some... yeah, and there were some villagers, and the villagers came to see Prabhupāda. I was like, "What? We won this long train ride, it is so hot, I am so tired, I am hungry." Prabhupāda said, "Let's preach, yes?" So we drove out to the farm and there was a tree, and the villagers—there weren't many, maybe 25, 30 villagers—they came, Prabhupāda spoke to them, he was so kind. And I remember one mātājī, elderly lady, you know, she was kind of heavy-set, she said, "Svāmījī, I have a question." Prabhupāda said, "Yes," it was all being translated for me. "Let her speak." And she said, "Svāmījī, why did Rāma come to this earth? What was the purpose of this incarnation?" It is all coming back, I know the feathers, Rāma. "Why did Rāma come to this earth?" Then Prabhupāda said something I'll never forget. He said, "What was the purpose of Rāma's incarnation?" He said, "To teach us the difficulties in accepting a wife." They're laughing harder than you men! He said that—he smiled, you know—I mean from Rāmāyaṇa there are so many answers you could give. He said, "No, Rāma came to this earth to show how difficult it is to have a wife." That is all I remember from the lecture because during the lecture I fell asleep because it was so hot, I was only 19 or 20, and we had been traveling, and I had nothing to eat, it was so hot. Suddenly, I heard, "Humph! Why are you sleeping when I am speaking?" And I woke up and Prabhupāda was looking at me, "Why are you sleeping?" "Uh, uh, um," I don't speak Hindi. He said, "It does not matter, this is *śabda-brahma*, this is transcendental sound, it will act, it will purify your heart. Stay awake, young man." Yes, Prabhupāda. I never slept again in a class the rest, in the last 53 years. *Śabda-brahma*. 

What do we do when we come together? The Gītā says, "When we come together, this is what we do: we speak of Kṛṣṇa." And we have unlimited pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, *tad-rasas*. We have many of... we have the philosophy, we have Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; we can go on and on and on and on without any problem. So Mahāprabhu, He says, the verdict of all revealed scriptures is that even a moment's association with the devotee, one can attain success. And how many moments are we here this morning? We are here for so many moments. So when you leave this hall, you are going to be a different person, you are going to be changed. This is the purpose of religion; it is meant to cleanse the heart and awaken love of God. When you go into a church, when you go into a mosque, you go into a Buddhist temple, or you go to a Jewish synagogue, you go to a temple here in India, you should go into the house of God for purification and awakening of God. You should come out a different person. You don't just go for some social reason—to see your friends, have something to eat, have a—no, this is serious business. We are serious business. Any moment of life can never be gained back for all the gold in the world. So we come here for purification.

And Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Rūpa Gosvāmī, he further says that in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta*, even a small attachment for any one of these five activities can arouse devotional ecstasy in a neophyte—hearing *Bhāgavatam*, worshipping the deity, associating with devotees, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa—any of these five. He says if a neophyte devotee practices just one of those things, you can bring ecstasy, you can experience ecstasy. Wow. So they are all very important, but I sometimes wonder, "What is the most essential?" You know, the inquisitive mind, always questioning. They are all, it is like they are all essential. It is like Jīva Gosvāmī, when describing the different Dhāmas—the places of the Lord like Dvārakā, Mathurā, Vṛndāvana—he describes them as: Dvārakā is perfect, there Kṛṣṇa is the King, and the relationship is *aiśvarya*, master and servant; it is perfect, all the residents of Dvārakā are perfect, *nitya-siddhas*. But then he says, "Mathurā is more perfect, because they, the women of Mathurā, have an amorous attraction for Kṛṣṇa; it is a little more intimate than master-servant." But then he says, "Vṛndāvana is most perfect because of the pure love of the gopīs for Kṛṣṇa; their loving nature for Kṛṣṇa is very deep." So he says perfect, more perfect, and most perfect. I love it, it is a nice description. The different mellows, they are all... Kṛṣṇa's created all these relationships because He likes it that way; variety is the spice of life. But according to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the best of the best is the mood of the Vrajavāsīs, their pure love for Kṛṣṇa. And generally, it is understood that the followers of Lord Caitanya are aspiring for that relationship of a gopī, although some of Mahāprabhu's associates, you know, they were in the mood of *dāsya*, worshipping the Lord as the master; it is all part of Kṛṣṇa's plan.

So the reason I explained that was because we have these five different practices of devotional service. So, yes, of course, *nāma-saṅkīrtana*—we know it is the *yuga-dharma*. Every age has a particular process for self-realization, just like every season you wear a different set of clothes, right? If it is summer, you just wear your—I see the *luṅgīs* or the *dhōtīs* down this part of India—but when it is cold here, you put on a sweater. So according to the season, you change your clothes; so according to the age—Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali—there are different processes of self-realization because people aren't the same in every age, but the purpose of life is the same. So in Tretā, in Dvāpara, you go to the temple, "Oh my Lord," and then *kali-yuga*. But I'd like to point out how important is the association of devotees, because without the association of devotees, it would be very hard to perfect the chanting. What if you had to sit in some forest all alone and chant? It would be difficult. But in the association of devotees, it becomes easy, it becomes joyful. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa comes in this age disguised as a devotee; He introduces congregational chanting of the holy names. We come together and we appeal to the Lord. This is a very powerful process. So you can see that just maybe, maybe association with devotees is the most essential, because even let us say to perfect that chanting, we have to get that chanting through *dīkṣā*, through initiation. To perfect it, *śāstra* says that if an ignorant person just hears the *kīrtana* on the street, there is some benefit; some karmic reactions are destroyed in the heart, the material desires are loosened. That is how beneficial the holy name is. It is so powerful.

When Mahāprabhu inquired from Haridāsa Ṭhākura, "Okay, what about all the immovable living entities like plants and trees and bushes? How will they be delivered?" So Haridāsa Ṭhākura, he pointed out how powerful this holy name is. He said, "Prabhu, those immovable trees and bushes and plants, they can also be delivered by the loud chanting of the holy names." Whatever bugs were in this room, they are delivered. In referring to Islamic language, *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* says that there was a hunter, a Muslim hunter, and he was hunting, and the boar, a wild boar, attacked him. And in the Islamic language, if you say, "Oh how horrible," it is "Harama, harama, harama," how how horrible. But *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* says that even then, unconscious chanting of the holy name—means you don't understand the true value of the holy name, you don't even know it is the holy name—if you say the syllables, still it is purifying. "Harama, harama," hey, you're lucky, buddy! It is so powerful. Like in Europe, there is a department store—I used to distribute books outside that was my favorite place because of the name of the department store—it was called "Kauframa." So there we have the word "Rāma," "Rāma." So people just say, "I am going to the Kauframa." The holy name is so merciful that they've pronounced it, even in ignorance, still there is some benefit. Still, just see how merciful is the holy name. So when I meet people, "People, would you like to take a book?" "No." "Would you like some a little, simply one?" "No." "Okay, what's in the name of the store you are going to? Kauframa. Thank you very much." I get them to say the holy name. We have to understand how fortunate we are, like a little child doesn't understand the priceless ring of her mother, only when she matures and grows up to see such a ring and appreciate it. So we are all infants, actually, in spiritual life. Confucius said, "The longest journey begins with the first step," but let us be real, we have this holy name; we have yet to fathom what really is dancing on the tip of our tongue. So we have to speak about it more and more. 

But if you get that holy name through *dīkṣā*, then it takes on a different quality. You can only get *prema*, you can only get love of God through chanting if you receive the—or you're initiated into the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. That is why we stress initiation, because if you get initiated then you are blessed with the possibility of getting *prema* by that chanting. And how do you get—how do you perfect chanting? By the mercy of a devotee. That is my point. Perhaps most essential in all these five methods is association with devotees, because even for the *yuga-dharma*, you have to get initiated into the chanting to achieve perfection. It is through devotees that people get the mercy of the mahā-mantra. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written, "From the moment that the holy name of Hari appeared on this earth, Vaiṣṇavas became manifest everywhere, adorned with faultless *tilaka* and neck beads, and equipped with the mahā-mantra. In the midst of the age of Kali, they purified the atmosphere chanting *Hari, Hari*." Indeed, it came to pass. Such a verse. Shall I recite it again? Yes, "From the moment that the holy name of Hari appeared on the earth, Vaiṣṇavas became manifest everywhere, adorned with faultless *tilaka* and neck beads, and equipped with the mahā-mantra. In the midst of the age of Kali, they purified the atmosphere chanting *Hari, Hari*." Indeed, it came to pass. Now he wrote that 500 years ago, and he is talking about Vaiṣṇavas appearing everywhere—in New York, Sydney, Moscow, Buenos Aires—he said everywhere, adorned with *tilaka* and neck beads, chanting the mantra. Therefore, the age of Kali became purified by the devotees sharing the holy names with the people. *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. 

So again, association is so essential. As far as *Bhāgavata-śravaṇa*—hearing the *Bhāgavatam*—we know that we have to hear the *Bhāgavatam* from a devotee, not a non-devotee reciter. And it so happens so often, you have these *Bhāgavata-saptāhas*, yeah, that someone speaks *Bhāgavatam* for seven days. But at the Kumbh Mela, there was one Kumbh Mela, there was a Mayāvādī, a big Mayāvādī sannyāsī, and he was speaking every day from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* in his tent. Thousands and thousands of people were sitting there, and he was speaking *Bhāgavatam*. How is a Mayāvādī speaking *Bhāgavatam*? I went one day just to hear, and he is speaking about Kṛṣṇa: "He is so adorable, He is so amazing, He is so wonderful, He plays *veṇu*, He plays flute, He is the darling of Yaśodā, and He is the Supreme Mystic, even when He was a baby He was killing Aghāsura." Wow, this is a Mayāvādī? He is speaking so nicely from the *Bhāgavatam* about Kṛṣṇa! But then at the end he said, "And my dear people, you are all that Kṛṣṇa." And I felt like somebody had injected me with some heroin or some poison or something. So, like that, we have to hear the *Bhāgavatam* from a devotee of the Lord, because only a devotee receives the mercy of the Lord and can share that mercy with others.

So Prabhupāda said one time, "If you want to understand Kṛṣṇa, you must approach a self-realized Vaiṣṇava and hear from him." Then, what is next? You have to live in a holy place. Many people have misconceptions of holy places. There is a saying, "A person living in Kolkata where the Ganges flows thinks he has to go to Haridwar in order to take a bath in the Ganges and get purified." He lives in Kolkata! It is the same river. It never gets contaminated. It may appear to our external vision to have contaminated, but it is *Gaṅgā-mā*. Like the holy name, it never gets contaminated when it comes to this world. Kṛṣṇa, *avatāra*, doesn't get contaminated. So Ganges, you can get the same purification by bathing in the Ganges in Kolkata, but the real benefit of a holy place—we know if we want to go to a holy place—is to hear from the Vaiṣṇavas who live there. You don't go as tourists, just "click, click, click, click, click, click, I went to Vṛndāvana and look, you see." No, we go to a holy place to hear from the holy people who live there. They can reveal. What is the *darśana*? We say spiritual master is the "revealer of the *darśana*." Like one time, he was taking his devotees—10,000, 6,000, Śrīla Prabhupāda used to take 10 or 20, 25, 30,000 Vaiṣṇavas on *parikrama*—maybe one day Lokanath Swami will do that; I am sure he will—but in the evening he would give *darśana*. So just before the *darśana*, one of his sannyāsīs mentioned to the crowd that, "Gurumaharaja is going to give a class now, but I wanted to mention that there is a special deity where we are today. It is the *ādhikāra* deity. That deity will be opened this evening, so you can also go and see the deity." So a few of the *brahmacārīs* stood up to go see the deity, and Bhakti Tirtha Swami started his lecture speaking about Kṛṣṇa, about Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. So they came back halfway through the lecture and Bhakti Tirtha Swami, he stopped the lecture and he said, "So, where have you been?" "Oh, Gurumaharaja, we went to see Kṛṣṇa." He said, "No, you didn't see Kṛṣṇa. You only saw stone. If you want to see Kṛṣṇa, you hear from me. By hearing from me, you will understand who is Kṛṣṇa and have the eyes to see Kṛṣṇa. So sit down and listen to me." This is how we see the *darśana*. It is said that a saintly person, he sees with his ears, not through his eyes. Our eyes are deficient, but if we hear authorized knowledge, bona fide knowledge, through our ear, it is perfect and complete. So again, we see the importance of associating with devotees even if we go to the deity.

And then finally, what is there? *Śrī-mūrtira-sevā*, serving the deity. We also need the mercy of the devotees to serve the deity well. First of all, you need *dīkṣā*. You need *brāhmaṇa* initiation to serve the deity. So, without the mercy of the devotee spiritual master, you can't really worship the deity. Of course, we can—you have in your homes—and you know, even one time Prabhupāda told us in Detroit to make brass deities of Gaura-Nitāi and go door-to-door and sell them. You should clap, because it is amazing! Like what? Because Prabhupāda said, "Gaura-Nitāi are all-merciful; we don't understand the mercy of Lord Nityānanda, how merciful He is." One time, in one temple in America, one devotee was acting inappropriately, and he was kicked out of the temple; he was doing some nonsense. So Prabhupāda arrived the next day at the temple, and that devotee snuck in the temple and snuck up into Prabhupāda's room and was sitting with Prabhupāda. The temple president walked in and said, "What? Prabhupāda, we kicked this devotee out of the temple! He was so nonsense." Prabhupāda said, "No, you have to let him stay." The temple president, "But Prabhupāda..." So Prabhupāda said, "You have to understand, in the age of Kali, Lord Nityānanda is very, very, very kind." But don't take advantage of Their kindness, Their mercy, like that. So serving the deity requires for the *pūjārīs*, the *Gāyatrī-mantra*, so we need the mercy of a devotee in order to be worshiped. That particular part of the formula, five activities, we have to understand. Also, we have to go deep within our hearts and really understand how the deity is a person. Sometimes my students ask me, "You know, what is the most important rule or regulation in deity worship?" And I always say, "The most important rule in deity worship is to remember that the deity is a person. He is the Supreme Person." So if you are sitting in front of a person, you will conduct yourselves accordingly. The *brāhmaṇa* boy who went with the older *brāhmaṇa* to Vṛndāvana and had *darśana* of Sākṣi-gopāla, when the deity—when he came back the second time to ask the deity to stand as his witness, he said to the deity, "My dear Lord, you are not a statue. You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda." So we have to have that conviction. God has His original transcendental form, but according to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* Canto 11, Chapter 27, He also expands into four other forms which are identical with Him. The first is the *vyūha* expansions: Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha. The second form that God expands into is the 24 expansions of Nārāyaṇa which preside over the Vaikuṇṭha planets. The third, He expands as, and this is very near and dear to all of you, He expands as the Paramātmā, the Supersoul in everyone's heart. His fourth expansion is as the *arcā-vigraha*, the deity. These are four non-different than Him. So the deity is a form of God that we can see. Can we see Kṛṣṇa? Not yet, we don't see His original form. Śrīla Prabhupāda commented one time that the color of Kṛṣṇa that we say, "bluish-black like a monsoon cloud," that color doesn't exist in the material world. It exists in a perverted way as we see it—bluish-black like a monsoon cloud—but the real tint of Kṛṣṇa's form, that color only exists in the spiritual world. So we haven't seen that form of Kṛṣṇa. We need spiritual eyes to see what is spiritual. But the deity, Kṛṣṇa, is so merciful, He appears in the form of so-called matter. It becomes spiritual by the fact that He is present there. When the *ācārya* asks the deity to come into the deity, the form of that deity is not different than Kṛṣṇa. *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.239, Rūpa Gosvāmī describes the power of seeing Kṛṣṇa, and this can also be understood in relationship to the deity because the deity is Kṛṣṇa. So if you go to the temple to see the deity, Rūpa Gosvāmī is giving you a warning: "My dear friend, if you desire to enjoy with your friends and relatives, then do not look upon the form of the Lord called Govinda-mohana, wandering near Keśī-ghāṭa on the bank of the Yamunā River with a slight smile on His lips, with a threefold bending form, eyes roaming restlessly, flute placed to His red, tender-bud lips, and shining gloriously with His peacock feather." Why? "Because if you do, you will fall out of love with this material world." Māyā is very powerful; she is convinced us she is beautiful, so we fall out of love with Kṛṣṇa. But if you go see the beautiful form, any of these forms I have mentioned—they are five, with the original form of Kṛṣṇa—you see any of those forms, you are just going to like, "I am not interested in material life anymore; I just want Kṛṣṇa." So warning is there; if you want to maintain your attachment to name, fame, glory, family, country, "Jaya!" whatever, God Bless America, then don't go to Hyderabad and see Madana-mohana, the tallest deity in ISKCON, God, hey, she is so tall, so nice. Prabhupāda confirmed this in a lecture of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* August 15, 1972: the idea is that if you once see Kṛṣṇa, then you will forget all this nonsense material enjoyment. That is seeing Kṛṣṇa.

The *ācāryas* say that the deity has four transcendental qualities that inspire devotees when they are taking *darśana* of Him. You may not know it, but just like Māyā has many tricks up her sleeves, so does Kṛṣṇa. Like Prabhupāda said one time, "Lord's secret weapon is *prasādam*." You don't want to hear about Kṛṣṇa, you don't want to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa? "Here's a nice *rasagullā*!" "Oh, take that!" So the deity—we are speaking about deity worship here—the deity has four transcendental qualities that inspire His devotees when they are coming and taking *darśana* of Him. Would you like to hear them?
1. *Śrī-rūpa*: means that He is visible to human eyes. We can actually see Him and fix our attention on Him, pray to Him, and take shelter of Him. The vague idea that we should surrender to Kṛṣṇa becomes concrete when we come before the deity. "Kṛṣṇa, I want to surrender to You," you come in front of the deity, you are overwhelmed, "Whoa, I do want to surrender to You, You are so amazing!"
2. *Śrī-līlā*: He gives everyone who approaches Him a feeling of security and assurance. He assures His worshippers that He is accessible to them and they need not feel they cannot serve Him because He is so high and we are so low. He is there to give us shelter. Before the deity, even a fallen sinner can be sure that he or she can worship the Lord. He is there in His magnificence, He allows you to see Him, He allows you to approach Him, He allows you to pray to Him, He doesn't go away.
3. *Adbhuta*: the deity encourages a deep confidence in our heart that He will surely fulfill our desires. You may have noticed that when you pray to the deity and connect with Him, your anxieties and your worries go away, isn't it? This is due to the third of the deity's transcendental qualities.
4. *Valī*: the deity gives constant protection to His worshippers despite their personal faults. He protects us. *Rākṣā, rakṣati*. It doesn't just apply to pure devotees. If Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you; if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you. Kṛṣṇa also reaches out to new devotees: "Just abandon all these other *dharmas* and surrender unto Me, conditioned soul, I will protect you from all sinful reactions, do not fear." Is He preaching to pure devotees? No, He is saying, "You have sinful reactions, if you surrender to Me, I will protect you." My first mercy is, "I'll protect you from your own nonsense." Kṛṣṇa reaches out to new devotees: "Oh my Lord, I am drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence. Oh, You who give shelter to the shelterless, please..." Rūpa Gosvāmī says just just one time, "Kṛṣṇa, won't You extend Your hand to save me?" He is listening. As the new *bhakti-n* is taking up her *japa* beads in her new *sārī* with new *tilaka*, her first day in the temple, she is chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa*, He is listening. Someone calls your name, you listen. Kṛṣṇa is—He is all present, He is everywhere, He is present everywhere by *āviṣa*, what? He is all-knowing because He is present everywhere. He hears your chanting. Just like Prabhupāda said one time, it was very nice, he said when a new devotee comes to the Kṛṣṇa conscious movement, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī takes notice and She says to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, there is this nice *bhakta*, this nice *bhakti-n* down there, please accept their service." She is so compassionate. Confirmed, He is a little embarrassed, but it was Kṛṣṇa. So, like that, but *valī*, the deity gives constant protection to His worshippers despite their personal faults. During *darśana*, devotees can feel the deity's parental protection: "Now that I am with my Lord, everything will be all right because He will protect me."

So the most important aspect of *darśana* is not necessarily that we see the deity, but that He sees us. We think, "I am going to see the deity." Hey, He is a person! He has all senses, He has transcendental senses, He is also looking deep within your heart, purifying you. So therefore, a sincere devotee will spend time with the deity. He won't just come for *darśana*, say, "Oh, I like the flute today, I like the color of the dress, it is all very nice, the garland, like that. Please bless my Grandma, she is sick," and go away. No, he will stand before the deity, "I don't want anything material, just give me some service, because by serving You, I can develop love for You. And my Gurumaharaja has told me that is the goal of life. So please be kind upon this aspiring devotee." Stand there and let Kṛṣṇa's glance purify you. He—all of His senses are interchangeable; He can eat through His ears. You are offering the *prasādam* or the *bhoga*, you are offering it through prayer, He is hearing the prayer; that is how He is enjoying the what you are offering. He says in the Bible, "Let there be light," by speaking, He created light. So He is hearing you, His senses are awakened, they are absolute. So when you are in front of the deity, it is the most important person in your life, it is the most important moment in your life. Pray to Him with all sincerity, be focused, and know that He is listening. And if you ask for protection so that you can live a long life to ensure your family members become Kṛṣṇa conscious, your neighbors become Kṛṣṇa conscious, your country becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, He may very well give you a long life for that. What is the value of a long life life inexperienced in this world? Better one moment of full consciousness, because that begins one on the path of transcendence. That is a verse from the *Bhāgavatam*—that's not the verse we want—Rādhā Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa... so I can serve my spiritual master's mission to my last breath. 

Now, I was reading that during *darśana* there is a special substance called *sudara*. *Sudara* means literally "to purify." This *sudara* comes from the Lord's eyes. What comes from our eyes? What do you want to mention? I had an eye infection the other day, I was like... but *sudara* means literally "to purify." This substance comes from the eyes of the Lord, and it enlivens and purifies those whom He looks upon. The Lord's glance awakens the devotee's desires to serve Him. Just like Lord Śiva, there is that *Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa* prayer—how many of you know that prayer? *Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa*. Śiva was asking for the glance of... what? Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, "Please, just all I want, Śiva, is the glance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, so I can become *rāsī*." So when we come before the deity, this *sudara*—this to purify—this comes from the Lord's eyes. So stay and get blessed! Don't run off to the office, don't run home, don't go and just wander around, stay in the presence of the Lord, talk about *sādhu-saṅga*. That is the highest *sevā*, and we should reciprocate; we should also recite prayers. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he prays as follows—if you don't know what to pray, you can memorize the prayers of great devotees—you can be assured that Kṛṣṇa is pleased with those prayers and they are in your general interest. So here is a nice prayer by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in front of the deity specifically; he says, "My dear Lord, I am so fortunate to be standing before You. Please accept my obeisances. You have a lotus navel, You wear a lotus garland, and You have lotus eyes and lotus feet. I am so fortunate I can see You here because You give happiness to my eyes. When my eyes receive the sight of You, they become pleasantly cool." So therefore, we are being trained to worship the deity by a devotee.

We come to the conclusion now. Each of these five require—or four in particular require—the association of devotees to worship the deity. We need the mercy of the devotee spiritual master. *Nāma-saṅkīrtana, śrī-mūrtira-sevā*—you sing it every day, "The spiritual master is always engaged in the temple worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He also engages his disciples in such worship. They dress the deities in beautiful clothes and ornaments, cleanse Their temple, and perform other similar worship of the Lord." So again, the deity is not different, He is so glorious, but to properly worship Him, we need Śrīla Prabhupāda, because Śrīla Prabhupāda taught us how to approach Kṛṣṇa, what Kṛṣṇa likes, what Kṛṣṇa doesn't like, so we can serve the deity properly. All glorious to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So all together, these five most essential items of devotional service really require the association of devotees. Therefore, we are blessed to be in each other's association today, all by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, whom we are all serving. Therefore, again, I have chosen to finish today with Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He wrote so many wonderful prayers. He writes: "The medicinal herb to purify the minds of fools absorbed in sense pleasure is faithful service to Śrī Guru, and the diet is the remnants of the Vaiṣṇavas." Once again: "The medicinal herb to purify the minds of fools absorbed in sense pleasure is faithful service to Śrī Guru, and one's diet should be the remnants of the Vaiṣṇavas." Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, *kī jaya!* Hare Kṛṣṇa.""