"Dāsa. See, Christian.

Like she loves.

Kuṣa.

Jana-śā. Go. We are definitely very impressed by everything. The way it's organized, how many attractions there are both for adults and for children. It's colorful. There's nice music. So for a summer holiday, it is a very pleasant event. We are grateful that you have organized it so well and that we can participate.

Mat.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. I am delighted. So far, I've enjoyed the face painting and hand decoration. I really like the dresses. I'll take a picture and I will speak to the organizers to invite you to my hometown. I am hoping to try your food. I'm curious what it tastes like. So, I am delighted. It was very colorful and joyful and I really liked it. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

Hare. We come to Reval quite often. It's very nice here and we are glad to meet people like you. We don't often have opportunities to participate in such events, but we decided to visit and try the products and the entertainment to see what is happening here. We enjoyed it very much.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

It's wonderful. Every year we wait for this. We have been coming here for many years and this year we have recently come and we were just saying to each other how empty this place is when you are not here. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. I like this festival very much. It is something wonderful, a wonderful initiative. Everyone is so blissful and I like it very much. It's great. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

This Polish tour, which we affectionately call the Śrīla Prabhupāda traveling festival program, is to introduce Kṛṣṇa consciousness to people in a cultural way. One time Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "We will take the world over with culture." So we have dance and music and theater and wonderful prasādam, and our hope is that the people will take a little bit of the festival home with them in the form of the mahā-mantra, of course, but especially if they can buy one of Prabhupāda's books, because there they can continue their interest in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we have our book tent here and it's very popular; people buy the Bhagavad-gītā, they buy the Teachings of Queen Kuntī, and we especially like to distribute this book, the *Life of Prabhupāda*, especially because this is the 50th anniversary of when Śrīla Prabhupāda incorporated this great movement, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. So we're trying in our humble way to spread the glories of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and through Śrīla Prabhupāda, people can understand the glories of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. We're very happy to say that we've done about 48 festivals this summer along the Baltic Sea coast. This is our 27th year and we average about 5,000 people a festival. And we offer all of this to the lotus feet of our spiritual master...

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare."