"*00195*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa. Today I’m standing in a very historically important place in the history of our International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. This is where, behind me, is the dock where Śrīla Prabhupāda boarded the *Jaladuta* cargo ship to travel to America on the order of his spiritual master to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the English-speaking language.

I’m experiencing a lot of emotion. My eternal spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, was coming to deliver me from nescience—not only me, but anyone who was receptive to his message. Even those who weren't receptive, somehow or other, they were captivated by the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu: singing, dancing, and feasting. It is emotional in the sense that Śrīla Prabhupāda came under very difficult circumstances. It was a cargo ship; it wasn't a cruise ship, and it plied very slowly over the Atlantic Ocean. Although the captain said that it was the first time in his experience—for many years as a captain sailing over the Atlantic—it was the first time he had ever seen the ocean so calm, let us not forget that on that journey, Śrīla Prabhupāda suffered two heart attacks. He was an elderly gentleman—my age, actually, an elderly gentleman—but obviously, Kṛṣṇa intervened and saved him.

But let us not forget, it was a great challenge, and he was successful because of those reasons. It should give us faith that we should approach Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the same consciousness, in a missionary spirit. This movement is a missionary movement; it’s meant to keep expanding. Prabhupāda said Kṛṣṇa consciousness is blissful when it’s expanding. As Prabhupāda pioneered it and it got going, we have to keep it going. We also have to preach—either go out and preach or preach by example. But remember, this is a preaching movement, and when we come across challenges, we shouldn't become deterred, we shouldn't lose faith, we shouldn't get discouraged. We can just think back to that time that Prabhupāda walked up that plank of the *Jaladuta* cargo ship to come to America to preach, *yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa*.

So, when we meet challenges in this generation, in the next generation, and the next generation, there will always be challenges. *Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*—this is a temporary world full of so many miseries. We shouldn't become deterred; with the same faith as Prabhupāda, right there behind me on that dock, alone, we should take any challenge that comes before us. Having faith, again, that along with the instruction of the spiritual master comes the ability to fulfill it. We should be like him, like father, like son: fearless in our spreading the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. There’s no challenge that we cannot overcome if we have that faith, because we’re servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He can empower us. Prabhupāda was empowered; we can also become empowered in our humble ways to serve him not only in this life, but life after life after life. That could be our great privilege, a great fortune.

So, remain fearless in preaching, and preach. Don’t just read about the preaching; be part of the preaching. Be part of the prediction that the *saṅkīrtana* movement will go to every town and village of the world. So, I’m just going to take some time; I’m just going to meditate on how my spiritual master came on the challenge of the *Jaladuta* to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I will spend some time meditating on that, and that other old ship that’s there—the same kind of ship—so that I can be inspired to preach under any and all circumstances for the pleasure of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.""