"*00384*.*
"### Lecture Transcript: Bring My Bow! (Surat, India)
 **Speaker:** Indradyumna Swami

I’d like to thank the temple authorities here for inviting me to give a class this morning in such a wonderful assembly of devotees. I’d like to speak from *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta* this morning, with your permission. It is *Madhya-līlā*, Chapter 20, verse 162:

*nṛ-kṛṣṇa-atra devi bhavati māyāyā*

"You should know Kṛṣṇa to be the original soul of all *ātmās*, living entities. For the benefit of the whole universe, He has, out of His causeless mercy, appeared as an ordinary human being. He has done this by the strength of His own internal potency."

This is a quotation from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.14.55. Parīkṣit Mahārāja asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī why Kṛṣṇa was so beloved by the residents of Vṛndāvana, who loved Him even more than their own offspring or life itself. At that time, Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied that everyone’s *ātmā*, or soul, is very, very dear—especially to all living entities who have accepted material bodies. But that *ātmā*, that spirit soul, is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. For this reason, Kṛṣṇa is very dear to every living entity. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

I was thinking this morning, like all verses in our scriptures, this verse is very—for want of a better word—pregnant with meaning. One could spend many hours, many days, analyzing the various components of this one verse. Actually, one time in Dhaka, which was previously in East Bengal, [the speaker] spoke for one month on the first verse of the *Bhāgavatam*. And Nityānanda-vaṃśī was a Gauḍīya; he spoke for two years on one verse about the glories of the holy name.

It appears this philosophy is like Kṛṣṇa: it’s very attractive. Why is it attractive? Because it’s about Kṛṣṇa, who is all-attractive. There is no knowledge that compares to ours. Kṛṣṇa confirms that in *Bhagavad-gītā*. He says, "In this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental knowledge. Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism, and one who has become accomplished in the practice of devotional service enjoys this knowledge within himself in due course of time." 

I must admit, to a small degree, I am relishing speaking this philosophy, although I am still an aspiring devotee, and all of you are enjoying hearing this philosophy. We are at the right place, at the right time, doing the right thing.

Sometimes Śrīla Prabhupāda would just take one line of a verse and begin his lecture from there. So, what is the line, or what is the essence of the verse that we are speaking from today? It was difficult to decide which particular point the verse was making that I should speak from today. I was just thinking: this or that, or this? I don’t know—if I speak about all of them, I’ll speak for ten hours. But I chose the following line from this verse: "For the benefit of the whole universe, He, Kṛṣṇa, out of His causeless mercy, has appeared as a so-called ordinary human being on this Earth planet."

Why is that line so special? Because it’s about His appearance in this world, and we know that simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa’s appearance in this world, one achieves perfection. If you just discuss with your family members, your *nāma-haṭṭa*, your group about Kṛṣṇa’s appearance—just His appearance—you can achieve perfection in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That’s a very bold statement. Oh, just by hearing about Kṛṣṇa’s *janma* in Mathurā, how He appeared on this planet, you can achieve perfection? That’s a bold statement. But I am not making it, because Kṛṣṇa made it in one of His 700 verses in *Bhagavad-gītā*. 

He says—I can see many of you are, with your lips, repeating the verse—Kṛṣṇa says, "One who understands the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains to My eternal abode, O Arjuna."

Now, here in Gujarat, Kṛṣṇa is very popular. When I came from Hyderabad in Andhra Pradesh, Nṛsiṁhadeva was very popular, and in Chennai, Kṛṣṇa is very popular. But in Gujarat, Lāḍlā Kṛṣṇa, He is very... so you know Kṛṣṇa to some degree. But people who don’t know very much about Kṛṣṇa, very much about God, they might question: why would God come to this Earth planet?

In the *Brahma-sūtra*, Kṛṣṇa—God—is described as *om ānanda-mayāt*. *Ānanda-maya* means comprised or composed of happiness, and *abhyāsāt* means by nature. In other words, by nature, Kṛṣṇa is always cheerful, He is always joyful, our little Lāḍlā Kṛṣṇa. But this material world is just the opposite; it’s miserable and troublesome and full of problems and yuck. Kṛṣṇa also confirms that in *Bhagavad-gītā* 8.16. Everything is in *Bhagavad-gītā*. If you were cast away on an island somewhere in the ocean and all you had was *Bhagavad-gītā*, and you read it and you chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa and you ate only the coconuts that fall from the trees and offered them to Kṛṣṇa, you could go back home, back to Godhead.

*Ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino ’rjuna*. Kṛṣṇa says, "From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places of misery, wherein repeated birth and death take place." But He always offers an alternative: "But one who attains to My abode, O son of Kuntī, never takes birth again."

So, my proposition this morning is: what interest would someone who is always cheerful, always joyful, have in coming to a place which is full of misery? Furthermore, who would go to a place where people are inimical towards you? In this world, people are, to greater or lesser degrees, inimical to God. They left the kingdom of God to become God in the material world. So, if you were nicely situated in life, would you go to a place where people are unfriendly, unwelcoming, cold, ill-disposed, opposed, adverse, and hostile? Would you go there? I give you a free ticket to a place where when you get there, everyone’s unfriendly, no one’s welcoming you, it’s freezing cold, it’s ill-disposed, adverse, and hostile. Would you go? 

So, Kṛṣṇa is a person. We are persons because Kṛṣṇa is a person. He is everything—material and spiritual comes from Kṛṣṇa—so we are persons because He is a person. So why would He come? He hints at the reason in *Bhagavad-gītā*: "Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance."

Compassion. Now, we’ve heard people who are compassionate. You know, wealthy people, they give food to hungry people, they build facilities for poor people, they’ll invest money in trying to find a cure for some disease like cancer. Compassionate. In the history of your country, you have many compassionate philanthropists who are feeding the poor and clothing and building hospitals. But Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His compassion is very interesting. When He comes to this world, it’s a little different; it’s very unique. How does Kṛṣṇa express His compassion for everyone suffering in this world? *Perfect Questions, Perfect Answers*: "To deliver the pious and annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I Myself appear, millennium after millennium."

Now, one can easily appreciate that delivering the pious—which really means the devotees—is compassion, and instructing human society and religious principles, *dharma*, it’s also compassion. But the question may be raised: how is killing demons compassion? You know, some common man may buy a *Bhagavad-gītā* on the street and read how Kṛṣṇa is very compassionate, but then he buys a Kṛṣṇa book and he sees Kṛṣṇa killing Pūtanā, killing Tṛṇāvarta, killing Aghāsura, taking the *sudarśana-cakra*, Śiśupāla’s head bowing... like, what kind of compassion is this? What kind of God is this?

Can we answer that question to the non-devotee? Yes, we can. *Perfect Questions, Perfect Answers*: In Kṛṣṇa’s killing the demons, it’s compassion because while killing them, He purifies them. What, He’s killing them and by killing them He purifies them? Yes, He purifies them to the point that all *anarthas* [are gone] by the touch of His transcendental form; they get purified. And what’s more, they get liberation. They get *mokṣa*. What? Yes, by the touch of the Lord’s hand, purified, they get *mokṣa*. That’s another very bold statement. And like, the worst of the worst, Kṛṣṇa touches, he gets [liberation]. 

When speaking in learned circles, you’re supposed to confirm your statement from scripture. Tell me where it’s said in scripture that the demons get purified by the touch of the Lord and they get *mokṣa*. It’s right there in *Adi-līlā*, Chapter 5, verse 39. Actually, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī is quoting the *Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa*: "Beyond the region of ignorance, the material world, lies the realm of Siddhaloka. The *siddhas* reside there, absorbed in the bliss of Brahman. Demons killed by the Lord also attain that realm."

Really? Yes. It should be noted that yogis aspire for the same liberation by practicing *jñāna-yoga* for a thousand years, yet demons get it simply by being killed by the Lord. We know there’s a famous example of a demon getting *mukti*, liberation, and that is [Hiraṇyakaśipu]. Anyone who reads the Seventh Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* will never doubt that Hiraṇyakaśipu deserved to die. Capital punishment: it’s a big debate in modern society. Capital punishment. If someone murders, some people say he should be put to death, and other people say, "No, one death doesn’t justify another death; he should get life in prison." But *Manu-saṁhitā*, which is the law book for mankind, states that if someone murders someone else, he should get the death penalty. Why? Because by getting the death penalty, he’s freed from the karmic reaction of killing someone else. If he doesn’t get capital punishment, next life, next life, next life, next life he has to experience the same fate.

Hiraṇyakaśipu was no ordinary demon. His son, Prahlāda, addressed him as, "Oh Father, best of the *asuras*." Oh, thank you, Prahlāda. If you address your father when you go home, "Oh Daddy, best of the demons, can I use the car today?" But Hiraṇyakaśipu was true to his ideals. "Yes, thank you Prahlāda, I’m the best of the demons." Actually, the *Bhāgavatam*, 7th Canto, 8th chapter, verse 35 describes him as a meningitis. "A meningitis is a very dangerous fever; fever, meningitis in the head of the fourteen worlds." Is that a nice introduction? "Who are you?" "I’m a meningitis in the head of the fourteen worlds." I’m always embarrassed here in Gujarat when I go to a temple for the first time; they read a little biography: "Indradyumna Swami was born, and he joined the movement, and he got initiated, this, and he took sannyāsa, and he went to the Amazon jungle..." And like, "Oh..." But what if someone introduced you: "This is Indradyumna Swami; he’s the meningitis in the head of the fourteen worlds." Like, "Whoa!"

When I was five years old, I got meningitis. I got meningitis when I was five, and all I can remember is a burning fever for months in the hospital. This was back in the 1940s; medicine wasn’t so advanced. They didn’t have a cure for meningitis; they were experimenting with different drugs. So my mother entered me into this experimental program which involved five boys who had meningitis, and each boy was given a different antibiotic to cure, or combination of antibiotics to cure the meningitis. It was an experiment. Unfortunately, the other four boys died, and I lived, because the combination they gave me cured me of meningitis. Otherwise, I wouldn’t be sitting here today, because the glories of modern medicine. So I know what it’s like. Although as a 5-year-old boy, I can still [remember] burning fever, the pain, and all the shots. I looked like a pincushion when I got home. 

So, this is a description of Hiraṇyakaśipu. Hiraṇyakaśipu had been exactly like a fever of meningitis in the head of the three worlds. *Śāstra* often uses strong language to describe demons, so we get the point. Like, for example, the enemy of Rāma was Rāvaṇa. Jaya Śrī Rām, Jaya Śrī Rām, Jaya Śrī Rām... Rāvaṇa. No, Rāvaṇa means—the literal meaning of Rāvaṇa’s name is "he who makes the universe scream." So Hiraṇyakaśipu was such a big demon, causing so much pain and suffering—not just in one town or village or region or country or even a planet, but the universe. It caused so much, so he had to be eliminated. 

Do you think anyone complained? No one complained when he was killed. Just like if you have a cancer, which is a living virus, if it’s removed from your body, no one’s going, "Oh, you killed the poor virus! You’re so mean, you killed something!" Hey, it’s a virus, but you killed it. So, the whole universe was celebrating the wicked [being killed]. Actually, some *sādhus*, they say when we’re celebrating the appearance of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Māyāpur, we’re also celebrating the death of Hiraṇyakaśipu. I had one Godbrother, he was a little eccentric; he said, "Wow, I can’t wait for an Nṛsiṁha-deva’s appearance day, 'cause we get to celebrate the death of Hiraṇyakaśipu! Woo! I love that day! I can’t wait!" 

So, as much as we appreciate hearing of the appearance of Nṛsiṁhadeva, all the details, we also appreciate the details of how Hiraṇyakaśipu left his body. Now, this pastime happens again and again and again throughout creation. Sometimes Nṛsiṁhadeva is described in the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*. Sometimes Nṛsiṁhadeva appears from a pillar; sometimes He appears from a flower pot. I read in one part of the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*, it describes He walks into town as a cat and comes in the palace and turns into [Nṛsiṁha]. So, a little variety in the pastime. And the scripture called *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 7th Canto, 8th Chapter, verse 15 describes Hiraṇyakaśipu’s last words. We’re going to take a peek in that scripture, verse 15, and we’re going to hear what Hiraṇyakaśipu’s last words were. 

Just like when they use capital punishment in some parts of the world, they always say before the person’s executed, "Do you have any last words?" So I’m quoting *śāstra* here: what were the last words of Hiraṇyakaśipu? Like sometimes, you know, on the Internet or on the television, they say, "Let me warn you: what you’re about to see is not for the weak of heart, so maybe take your children away from the television..." Okay, so I warn you: Hiraṇyakaśipu’s last words. Actually, how many of you would like to hear Hiraṇyakaśipu’s last words, and how many of you are maybe afraid to hear? Oh, okay, you’re all Kṛṣṇa-bhaktas. Okay, so here’s the quote from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*: 

"When Hiraṇyakaśipu saw his servant running towards him in fear, he spoke as follows: 'What is it? What is it?' His servant said, 'Lord, it’s a lion!' Hiraṇyakaśipu said, 'So what?' His servant said, 'Oh Lord, he has a human body! I’ve never seen such a strange creature.' So Hiraṇyakaśipu said, 'If that’s the case, bring him here!'" 

The servant said, "Oh my Lord, he’s coming on his own." Then Hiraṇyakaśipu sees Nṛsiṁhadeva; he says, "Bring my chopper! Bring my bow! Bring my bow quickly! Bring my bow!" And the next line is: "Bring my... ah... oh, his nails!" Those were his last words: "Ah, his nails!" So the *śāstra* concludes, "May that Nṛsiṁhadeva who thus tore the chest of Hiraṇyakaśipu with His sharp nails protect you all." 

The great Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he commented on that particular verse from that scripture. He, interestingly, said that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s nails are a manifestation of the *sudarśana*. The Lord’s Sudarśana-cakra—we all know the Sudarśana-cakra, right?—so the nails of Nṛsiṁhadeva are an expansion of the Sudarśana-cakra. After the death of his father, Prahlāda concluded, "My father went to *Pātāla-loka*." But to the amazement of all humanity, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva informed Prahlāda that not only his father, but ten generations before him and ten generations in the future would all get *mokṣa*. What? All get liberation? 

We originally asked the question: how is killing demons compassion? Well, here we hear: by the nails of Nṛsiṁhadeva, he got liberated. Rāmānanda confirms this: "Oh my Lord, oh transcendental lion, I offer my obeisances to you along with Mother Lakṣmī. Sometimes flying in the sky, sometimes moving on foot, your mane hairs blaze with a golden brilliance, your glance and the touch of your nails are the source of all auspiciousness." So, but he got more than *mokṣa*. Kṛṣṇa is amazing. This meningitis in the head of the fourteen worlds, he got more than *mokṣa*. He achieved *sārūpya*; he achieved the same four-armed form of Lord Viṣṇu, like His form, and went to Vaikuṇṭha. Hiraṇyakaśipu lives on the Lord’s planet in Vaikuṇṭha, and he even got to keep his mustache. But he’s a servant, a loving servant of the Lord in Vaikuṇṭha. It’s all incomprehensible, the Lord’s compassion.

But before I conclude, I’d like to go a little deeper. Or should I finish here? Are you tired? Okay, if you’re tired, you’re not answering ’cause you’re sleeping. No, thank you, we’ll go a little deeper. I want to mention the liberation or the *mokṣa* of another demon. I hate to say her name. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.2.23: Uddhava says to Vidura about how, you know, the killing of Pūtanā— "Alas, how shall I take shelter of one more merciful than He, Kṛṣṇa, who granted the position of mother to a witch, Pūtanā, although she was unfaithful and she prepared deadly poison to be sucked from her breast." 

Please note that this verse says she didn’t just get *mokṣa*; she achieved the position of a mother to Kṛṣṇa. When she was killed by Kṛṣṇa, she went to Goloka Vṛndāvana, and she became one of the *gopīs*—they’re called wet nurses. When the mother of a child is busy or unable to give her breast milk, then her maidservant will give her breast milk to the baby. So, in Goloka, when Mother Yaśodā is busy, Pūtanā, who became a *gopī*, she feeds baby Kṛṣṇa. What? Kṛṣṇa is amazing. 

What could be more amazing than this? And that’s evident by the fact that this one pastime of Pūtanā being delivered to Goloka was what changed Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who was a realized monist, into a Vaiṣṇava devotee of the Lord. Briefly, we all know that Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he stayed in the womb of his mother, what was it, 16 years? You can imagine, ladies, you carry the baby for nine months. His mother, 16 years, like, "When are you going to come out?" Why? He didn’t come out because, well, it’s part of the pastime. Let us say he was playing the part of an impersonalist, so "everything’s one, inside, outside, it’s all the same, just stay here." Now you can imagine his father and mother, Vyāsadeva and his wife, they, "When is our little Radha-Viṣṇu, when’s our little, you know, pure devotee going to take birth?" But he was an impersonalist; that’s just the pastime. And he took birth, and he, being an impersonalist, he just ran into the forest to become Brahman-realized. 

Vyāsadeva was devastated. "My son’s an impersonalist, he went to the forest because all is one! So how am I going to get my son back?" So what he did is he asked a number of sages to go to the forest and recite verses about Kṛṣṇa, who is so attractive that he might change his mind. "I don’t want to be an impersonalist, I want to be a devotee." So these *sādhus*, they went, and so many, they’re chanting the verses, it didn’t work. The idea was that the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa are more attractive than the Brahman. 

So what happened was, he sent one sage to the forest for a second try, and he quoted this particular verse, which changed Śukadeva Gosvāmī from an impersonalist into a Kṛṣṇa-bhakta. And I’m going to redo the verse. It’s the same verse from *Bhāgavatam*: "Alas, how shall I take shelter of one more merciful than He, who granted the position of a mother to a witch, Pūtanā, although she was unfaithful and she prepared deadly poison to be sucked from her breast." When Śukadeva Gosvāmī heard that verse, he said, "I want to be a Kṛṣṇa-bhakta. Kṛṣṇa is so amazing." The fact that Kṛṣṇa, God, could be so merciful to a witch who tried to kill Him—so merciful that He took her life and then He gave her *mokṣa* and He sent her to appear in Goloka Vṛndāvana and become a nurse—he said, "This Kṛṣṇa is too amazing. I can’t be an impersonalist. I have to be a Kṛṣṇa-bhakta." 

So where am I getting this pastime? Am I making it up? No, it’s described by Jīva Gosvāmī in his *Tattva-sandarbha*. He writes: "According to *Bhāgavatam*, the verses chanted by the *sādhus* to Śukadeva told everything about Kṛṣṇa’s elevating the Pūtanā witch to the position of His eternal nurse." 

So why don’t we all become demons? We can get *mokṣa* and we can go back to Goloka like Pūtanā. Well, bear in mind, *prabhus*, you have to be on the level of Pūtanā or Rāvaṇa. One should use one’s intelligence to get the favor of the Lord in a much easier way. Please don’t quote this in the class, that "I’m going to be, in the Surat now, Mahārāja said I can get *mokṣa* [by being a demon]." No, Lord said... he quoted... 

The demigods are waiting in the heavenly planets; there’s a long line going way down the road waiting to take birth. Prabhupāda said, "In this International Society for Krishna Consciousness, because it’s so easy, we have golden opportunity to go back home, back to Godhead." Why take the stairs when you can take the elevator? He said, at one initiation ceremony in the 1970s, "I see no reason why all my followers cannot achieve perfection in one lifetime by this process of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." And that is working for everyone all over the world: for the good guys, the bad guys, and the really bad guys. Mahāprabhu’s movement is delivering people back to the spiritual world. That was predicted by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. 

I’ll close today with this verse. You know, Sārvabhauma, he was a close associate of Mahāprabhu. He wrote the following concluding verse. It’s one of my favorites: 

"From the time that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the sacred form of love for Kṛṣṇa, gave out His gifts of *prema*, the sinner, the ascetic, the drunkard, the dacoit, the rogue, and the thief—all very grateful to Him—completely abandoned all sense enjoyment as if it was a deadly poison, and they intoxicatedly loudly sang the holy names of Kṛṣṇa until they sank, exhausted, into the ocean of Kṛṣṇa-prema." 

Jaya Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu! Jaya! Jaya! Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""