Once there were three sages and they were arguing over what is the best age for self-realization. One of the sages said it's Satya Yuga. Of course, the other sage said, "No, it's Treta Yuga, it's easier." The third sage said, "No, Dwapara Yuga, the Lord comes himself." They were arguing back and forth what is the best age for self-realization, for becoming fully realized, but they couldn't agree.

And the argument got quite hot, so they decided to go to the Himalayan Mountains and ask Śrīla Vyasadeva, the great authority on all Vedic literature, "Ask Vyasadeva, sir, what is the best age for self-realization?" So they trekked high into the Himalayan Mountains to where Vyasadeva was living, today actually, because they were very nice, transcendentalists, they were able to go to the abode where he was.

And when they arrived, he was taking bath underwater, in a deep tank. So they stood above the water for about three hours, taking a long bath. And they said, "Vyasadeva, please come out and tell us what is the best age for self-realization." Suddenly Vyasadeva came out of the water.

He was from another age, he was very big and very tall. And the sages were looking up, "Oh Vyasadeva, what is the best age for self-realization?" Now please note, they never discussed Kali Yuga.

Great saints don't even want to say the name Kali Yuga because it's contaminating. So they were waiting, "Is it Satya?

Is it Treta?

Is it Dwapara?" He said, "No, Kali Yuga, the best age for self-realization." And he plunged back down into the water to finish his bath.

And when the sages heard the word Kali Yuga, they fainted. They woke up, they said, "What did he say?

I don't know what he said. I, I, I, what did he say?" No one wanted to say Kali Yuga.

So they thought maybe they were under some kind of illusion. So once again, "Vyasa, please, please come out from the water and tell us what is the best age for self-realization. What is it?" "I told you, Kali Yuga is the best age for self-realization." Boom, they fainted again.

So of course, three times in our Vedic culture, you know, three times, we. So once again, they gathered themselves. "I must have been hearing wrong. Something's wrong in my ear or something." "Vyasa, please, just confirm. Is it Satya?

Is it Treta?

Is it Dwapara?

Which one of us is right?" He came up the third time.

He said, "Kali Yuga is the best age for self-realization." And he quoted a verse from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 12th Canto, 3rd Chapter, 51st verse. He knew it very well. He wrote it down. He pronounced the verse: "My dear sages, although Kali Yuga is an ocean of falsity, there's still one good quality about this age, only one.

Simply by chanting the Hare Krishna Mahā-mantra, one can become free from material bondage and be promoted to the transcendental Kingdom.

Hare Krishna." So we're very fortunate.

We're very blessed. Somehow or other, we're born in this age. Actually, we're like the burnt remnants of the previous ages. So many souls went back home, back to Godhead, in Satya, Treta, Dwapara. We're the leftovers. No one can be proud in this age.

No one should have an iota of pride, with the burnt remnants of previous ages. But somehow, we get the greatest mercy. This verse came from the heart of Śrīla Rūpa Goswami when he first encountered the Yuga Avatar, Mahāprabhu, because ultimately, he's an intimate associate of the Lord, Yuga Avatar.

He could immediately recognize him. He said, "What is this incarnation?

It's so amazing. Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, you are coming to give the highest understanding, the highest gift, love of God, to the people of Kali Yuga. I cannot imagine what is our good fortune." So we're sitting here today because all of us, somehow or other, we've come in contact with this mantra: Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

By this mantra, all the sinful reactions for many millions of lives will be washed away. Moreover, the root cause of those sinful reactions, material desires, will be uprooted and thrown to a distant dimension. And when the heart is cleansed, that golden seed of bhakti is there in the heart of every living entity.

It will be watered by this mantra, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.

That little seed will sprout, will grow like a stem, going up, up. Prabhupada said, all the way to the spiritual world. It will wrap around the lotus feet of Radha and Krishna, and it will produce the fruits of love of Godhead.

We don't need to go to an astrologer. That's our future. Our destiny was smashed at the moment we came in contact with this movement and took up the chanting seriously. We don't have to worry about anything. There will be some obstacles on the way.

There will be some difficulties, but just keep in mind our goal, our purport, our purushartha is Goloka Vrindavan. And as long as we keep chanting, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.

So in this festival, we should chant very seriously and very joyfully at the same time. And keep in mind our goal of going back home to Godhead. And along with the chanting, there's also dancing. It's not complete. You can't just sit there like a wallflower.

You also have to dance. Even if you're old, old, old, Matangi, Gargacharya, he was also dancing. He was very elderly. If you're elderly, it doesn't matter. Just make your best effort. If you could just go like this, Mahaprabhu will see and He'll bless you.

Okay, let us take a quantum leap today in our spiritual lives by giving our heart to this mantra. And my very dear scholarly, devoted, most lovable godbrother Mundadatta, he sang that song, Hare Hare Namah.

So I thought I would follow in his footsteps. We're always safe. We follow in the footsteps. In one letter, Śrīla Prabhupada sent to me personally, he said, "Please always follow in the footsteps of advanced devotees." So we had the good association in Mundadatta.

So I thought I would try to follow in his footsteps by starting with that. Hare Krishna.

Hare Krishna.

Krishna Krishna.

Hare Hare.

Hare Rama.

Hare Rama.

Rama Rama. Hare Hare.

