"*00215*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, welcome to Vṛndāvana. We are very fortunate today to be able to come to this wonderful place where Vṛndā Devī performs her eternal pastimes. What you see here today is by the grace of one of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Godbrothers, Mādhavadāsa Bābājī, who just rediscovered this lost kuñja, Vṛndā-kuṇḍa, and Her Grace Devī-śakti devī helped in reviving this place so we can come here today and take shelter of Vṛndā Devī. We know Vṛndā Devī has appeared in this world; she is Kṛṣṇa’s śakti. She arranges for all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and organizes everything, and this same personality has appeared in this material world as Tulasī Devī so we can worship her. We can become free from our senses and chanting the holy name, and we can pray to her to make spiritual advancement. We actually pray to her every morning to be engaged as a follower of the sakhīs, and she can do this because that’s what she does in the spiritual world.

*Jaya rādhe śyāma, jaya rādhe śyāma, śyāma śyāma jaya jaya.*

In this place, these eternal pastimes are going on. Early in the morning, Vṛndā Devī is here, Pūrṇimā-devī, along with Nandī-mukhī, and they decide what pastimes will take place during the day—where Kṛṣṇa will go, where the pastimes will take place, what devotees will go there and assist, what trees will be there, what flowers will be there, what bees will be humming, what birds will be singing. Everything, in minute detail, is taking place during the day in these pastimes; it’s decided here in the morning. And Kṛṣṇa has come and He is listening, He is overhearing these things, and He knows what He will be doing during the day. Vṛndā Devī has one disciple who is a parrot, the yellow parrot, and his name is Dakṣa. And Dakṣa has 300,000 disciples who are also parrots, so they listen carefully to all of the things that are happening, and they fly all over Vṛndāvana and they give the devotees the news—what will be happening that day. So this is Vṛndā Devī, and we can take shelter of her. It’s amazing that we can have access to such a person, and it’s amazing that by her mercy we can come to Vṛndāvana.

Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura describes her this way: "You are bathed by streams of splendor that rebuke gold, lightning, and the campaka flower. Your splendid garments are the color of the bandhūka flower. O Vṛndā-devī, I bow to your lotus feet. Your face is splendid with a pearl decorating the tip of your nose and a wonderful, gentle smile on your bimba-fruit lips. You are decorated with wonderful, jeweled ornaments. O Vṛndā-devī, I bow to your lotus feet." *Vṛndāyai namaste namaḥ.*""