"*00570*.*
"In this verse of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, we hear about the demoniac activities of Hiraṇyakaśipu. So, why are we interested in hearing about the activities of a demon? Mahārājas are supposed to come to Punjabi Bagh temple and speak about Kṛṣṇa, so what am I doing speaking about him? Because by hearing about him in the *Bhāgavatam*, at least we can understand that we don't want to be like him. It is actually a school of philosophy which employs the technique of elimination in understanding what God is. *Neti, neti*—the Absolute Truth is not this, not that. By eliminating everything that isn't God, these people hope to understand what is God. So, by hearing about a demon like him, we understand, "I don't want to be like that." You have read the Seventh Canto of the *Bhāgavatam*; did your love for Kṛṣṇa increase? But later in the *Bhāgavatam*, we are going to hear about Prahlāda Mahārāja, the great devotee of Narasiṃhadeva, and by hearing about him, we think, "That’s what I want to be like."

The *Purāṇas* state that there are two classes of men and women in this world: the divine, all of you, and somewhere out there, the demoniac. Two types of people: divine and demoniac. In this material creation, in the Satya-yuga, the divine and the demoniac lived in the same universe; there was plenty of room. The demons lived over there and the devotees lived over here. In Tretā-yuga, the divine and the demoniac had to live on the same planet, some over there and some over here. In Dvāpara-yuga, the divine and the demoniac lived in the same city. But in Kali-yuga, the divine and the demoniac live in the same body. We have within us lust, anger, greed—demoniac qualities. It is not very nice. How do we get these demoniac qualities out of our body? Kṛṣṇa, Mahārāja, they are cleansed by chanting this mantra. 

Now, because both divine and demoniac beings share this world, there is bound to be friction. Friction is caused when two opposing elements rub together very quickly, like two pieces of rock; it makes a spark. So in this world, there is divine and demoniac; sometimes they are rubbing together and friction is caused. *Śāstra* describes how these two—divine and demoniac personalities—are rubbing together. It is very interesting: devotees are going upwards. Learned devotees are always looking towards the lotus feet of the Lord. But where are demons going? Down. Those who are envious, as Kṛṣṇa says, and mischievous, who are the lowest amongst men, I perpetually cast them into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life—down, down. Devotees are going up, up; demons are going down. Friction causes fire. So what is the fire? It makes the Lord appear. *Jvālā* means that his manifestation is on fire when there is friction between the divine and the demoniac. 

Narasiṃhadeva has many different names. *Jvālā* means like fire; he appears like fire. It is explained that fire has two potencies: it destroys and it purifies. Like a fire can destroy a hospital, but a fire can also purify medical instruments, like in the old days. So, when Narasiṃhadeva appears to protect his devotees, he destroys Hiraṇyakaśipu, but he also purifies Hiraṇyakaśipu. Hiraṇyakaśipu, no doubt, was destroyed. When He caught Hiraṇyakaśipu, He put him on His lap and He tore out his heart and threw it to the other side of the assembly hall. That means you are dead. Just to make sure the *asura* was dead, He took his intestines and wrapped them around his neck—that is a pretty sure sign someone is dead. But more importantly, by the touch of the Lord’s nails, the transcendental nails of the Lord, Hiraṇyakaśipu was purified. By touching the body of Hiraṇyakaśipu, all his material desires were purified. 

How do we know that Hiraṇyakaśipu lost all material desires? Because when Lord Narasiṃhadeva asked Prahlāda Mahārāja, He said, "Ask me for a benediction, Prahlāda. You are My devotee, I can give you a benediction. What do you want?" So, like a true Vaiṣṇava, Prahlāda Mahārāja didn't take offense; he said, "Let my daddy be liberated. Come on, please, my daddy, he’s my dad, give him *mokṣa*." The Lord replied, "He is already liberated by the touch of My nails. Not only him, but 10,000 generations before him and 10,000 generations into the future will all be liberated." 

So actually, the pastime is such that Hiraṇyakaśipu, he ascended to Vaikuṇṭha, to the planet of Narasiṃhadeva, and he serves there as a servant of Narasiṃhadeva. He got to keep his mustache. I read in *Purāṇas*—sometimes in Western countries when I’m preaching, people say, "What kind of God is this? He kills people. Jesus saves people; your God kills people." But nothing God does is ordinary; it is extraordinary. So, by the touch of His nails—which it is described are an expansion of Sudarśana-cakra—the person who gets touched by the nails of the Lord gets *mokṣa*, or even better, *prema*. After Kṛṣṇa killed Pūtanā, she went to Goloka and she became a nurse in the home of Nanda Mahārāja. 

When Kṛṣṇa killed Pūtanā, Pūtanā gave her breast milk. Kṛṣṇa sucked her breast milk down. She got more than *mokṣa* (liberation); she went to Goloka and became a nurse in the home of Nanda. That the Lord saved Prahlāda Mahārāja is marvelous, but the fact that He liberated Hiraṇyakaśipu is perhaps even more astounding. That is why on Lord Narasiṃhadeva’s appearance day, many Narasiṃhadeva *bhaktas* they also celebrate it as "The Disappearance Day of Hiraṇyakaśipu." When I was a new devotee, I hadn’t actually joined the temple yet, but I was visiting the temple. I was invited to the festival of Lord Narasiṃhadeva’s appearance. I wasn't exactly sure what it was because I was new, and I remember very clearly when I came in the temple, well, there’s a big celebration. One devotee smiled, he said, "Yeah, this is the disappearance day of Hiraṇyakaśipu." We were celebrating, like, "What one?" He said, "No, no, don't tell him, he’s a new *bhakta*. It’s the appearance day of Narasiṃhadeva," and they had an argument, "No, it isn't, it’s the disappearance day of Hiraṇyakaśipu." 

It is also interesting to note that the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* states that Prahlāda Mahārāja was also purified by the appearance of Lord Narasiṃhadeva. Prahlāda Mahārāja was purified. It is very clear. Seventh Canto, 9th chapter, verse number six says: "By the touch of Lord Narasiṃhadeva’s hand on Prahlāda Mahārāja’s head, Prahlāda was completely free of all material contamination and desires, as if he had been thoroughly cleansed. Therefore, he became at once transcendently situated, and all the symptoms of ecstasy became manifest in his body. His heart filled with love and his eyes filled with tears, and thus he was able to completely capture the lotus feet of the Lord within the core of his heart." 

Now, wait a minute. Prahlāda, a great devotee—we see him as a pure devotee, he is one of the 12 Mahājanas, one of the authorities, ultimate authorities in the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. My question: "How can we say he has material desires?" It is a big question, but Śrīla Prabhupāda answers the question in the purport. "Perfect Questions, Perfect Answers," listen to this. Prabhupāda writes, "Prahlāda Mahārāja was born in a demoniac family, and as a result, demoniac blood virtually flowed throughout his body." 

Of course, again, he is *nitya-siddha*, but this is the *līlā*, this is the pastime to show us the power of the Lord’s mercy. Another way to look at that is that the *ācāryas* say that if there was any contamination in Prahlāda Mahārāja’s heart, it was the sinful reactions of his followers that he accepted, just so we understand. When the spiritual master falls sick, generally we understand it is due to the sinful reactions that he’s absorbed from his disciples, so he gets sick because he has to absorb the karma. Just like Prabhupāda, as he was departing this world on his deathbed, he noted that his illness was the result of accepting his—he said, "too many unqualified disciples." Therefore, Prabhupāda said, "After initiation, the disciples should be very careful not to commit sinful activities so as to burden the spiritual master." He said, "Please don't burden your old spiritual master; act properly in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." 

So, if there was any material contamination in the blood of Prahlāda, it was because he was born in a family of demons—his body is made from the semen and the ovum of the mother and father—but more so because he is very kind, he accepted so many followers, and as a result, there was some contamination. Therefore, Jīva Gosvāmī says in *Tattva-sandarbha* that the Guru should only accept as many disciples as he can handle, that he can deal with their karma and deliver them. I mean, we struggle with our own material desires; how can a spiritual master accept the karmic sinful reactions of a thousand disciples? How does he do it? Because one of the qualifications of a bona fide spiritual master is he has full faith in the chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s holy names, and those holy names can destroy all sinful reactions in just one moment. 

How has His Holiness Jayapatākā Mahārāja accepted 60,000 disciples? Because he has full faith in the chanting of *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. Fear personified is afraid of the holy names. Just like one time, Prabhupāda gave me a personal instruction. He asked me to go to France and open a temple. "Prabhupāda, I don’t speak French. I only know *oui, oui*, no." So Prabhupāda looked at me, he said, "Indradyumna, you preach boldly, and you have faith in the holy names." So the spiritual master gives an instruction to one disciple; it is actually meant for all his disciples. Prabhupāda himself, he said, "I went to America with nothing, but my mission was successful for two reasons: I had faith in the words of my spiritual master, and I had faith in the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa." 

So any contamination that may have been there in Prahlāda was because he was born in a demoniac family and he had many followers whom he accepted their sinful reactions. Of course, Hiraṇyakaśipu, he saw it differently; he considered his son contaminated because he had become a devotee of Viṣṇu. One time he took Prahlāda on his lap and he inquired, "Prahlāda, what is the best thing you’ve learned in school today?" So Prahlāda looked at his father, smiled, "Papa, the best thing I learned in school is *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ*." So apparently, Hiraṇyakaśipu, he wasn't paying close attention because he didn't hear the *viṣṇoḥ*. He wasn't paying attention. So he said, "Yes, Prahlāda, it’s very nice, you’re very eager to chant my glories." He didn't hear the *viṣṇoḥ*. He wasn't paying attention. 

So Prahlāda said, "No, I met Viṣṇu, not you." So Hiraṇyakaśipu, he screamed at the teacher, "Śaṇḍāmārka, where has he learned these things? Who is contaminating my son? The devotees of Viṣṇu!" He had it all backwards. Just like sometimes in the West, when a young boy or girl wants to become a Hare Kṛṣṇa devotee, the parents consider it a great sin. One time I saw a cartoon in the newspaper in the 1970s: a young teenage girl, she is coming home and her parents are watching television. You know, totally absorbed in the television program, and the girl comes in the door and the mother says, "Oh, welcome back from school. What did you learn today, honey?" A young teenage girl said, "Mommy, I learned how to smoke cigarettes today." The mommy is watching the TV, she said, "Oh, that’s okay, that’s good, honey." And the next day she comes home, parents are still watching television, and she comes in, the mother says, "Honey, how was school today?" "Mommy, I learned how to take drugs—heroin." "Oh, that’s okay, honey, just go to your room, I’m watching TV." Next day she comes home, we could go on and on, mother says, "What did you learn in school?" "Mommy, I learned illicit sex." "That’s... it’s okay, honey, don't disturb me, I’m watching TV." 

So the last part of the cartoon is she comes in, home, she’s dressed in a *sārī*, her hair is tied back, she has *tulasī-mālā*, bead bag, she’s chanting. So the mother says, "Welcome back again, honey, from school, what did you learn today?" "Mommy, I became a Hare Kṛṣṇa, mommy." Monday mother goes, "Oh, no! How horrible! My poor daughter! What happened to you? You were polluted at school!" *Hare Kṛṣṇa*—oh, she throws a shoe and breaks the television. 

Sometimes the parents think, "Oh, the poor girl’s been polluted, she became a Hare Kṛṣṇa." You know my God-brother Girirāja Mahārāja? When he joined the movement, his father was very upset. His father was a judge—high, prestigious position. He came from a very wealthy family, and Girirāja Mahārāja at that time, he was going to law school. Mahārāja is very intelligent, he’s got a good memory, you know? So one day he came home from—there was, you know, a vacation in school—he came home instead of in a nice suit with hair combed back, he came in saffron *dhoti*, shaved head with *tilaka*, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. His father: "What happened to you?" So G said, "I met my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. He’s teaching me to love Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." You know, he was in bare feet, you know, like, just his bead bag, no money, nothing, just *brahmacārī*. "I met my Guru, Śrīla Prabhupāda." So his father took out a checkbook, wrote a check, and he wrote a check for $1 million. That, nowadays, that’s like $10 million. He wrote a check for $1 million and then he wrote the date down, and he pushed the check over the table to Girirāja. He said, "If you can leave this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, you’re contaminated now, you’re brainwashed. If you can leave this movement, I’ll sign this check and you can have a million dollars today. Leave your Guru for a million dollars." Mahārāja just pushed the check back. He said, "I’ll stay with my spiritual master forever." 

So, whatever—according to the pastime—whatever contamination was there in Prahlāda Mahārāja’s heart, by the touch of the Lord’s hand, a mudrā, touch of the Lord, it all went away and Prahlāda experienced ecstasy. We’re not pure devotees yet—I mean, maybe some of you are, I’m not—there’s still some residue of material life there. So this just gives us faith that if the Lord shows His hand, if He gives us *abhaya-mudrā*, "Be fearless," be fearless, keep chanting *Hare Hare, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa*... one day all the contamination in your heart will go away. That’s one of the lessons from this pastime. 

So there’s many lessons to be learned from the Seventh Canto. Actually, if you look at the number of lectures Prabhupāda gave, most lectures came from the Seventh Canto. And we have to choose: do we want to follow in the footsteps of Prahlāda Mahārāja or do we want to follow in the footsteps of Hiraṇyakaśipu? He had everything one could desire materially; he conquered the 14 worlds. He was missing the most important thing: he didn't have Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And we can see, although he had everything, he wasn't satisfied. Prahlāda Mahārāja was a 5-year-old boy; he had nothing, but he was completely satisfied because he was a Viṣṇu-bhakta, he was Kṛṣṇa-conscious. Kṛṣṇa by definition is a reservoir of all pleasure, so if you have Kṛṣṇa, you have everything you want. 

Good translator, why is he running Hiraṇyakaśipu in the *Bhāgavatam*? *Bhāgavata-purāṇa*, the spotless *Purāṇa*, dealing only with pure devotional service to Kṛṣṇa—what’s this big demon, you know, a big part of the Seventh Canto doing there? Like, get out of there, Hiraṇyakaśipu, this is a *Bhāgavatam*! It is just for the comparison. Like when the lady goes to the market to buy mangoes, there’s some mangoes there—there’s a yellow mango with some black spots, there’s a green mango, it’s not ripe yet—so she picks the two mangoes up, she compares them: "Yes, this breakfast for the children, aha, yellow mango, green mango." She puts them down; by comparing the two, she can see the superiority of one over the other. So, Prahlāda Mahārāja and Hiraṇyakaśipu—there’s a path of sense gratification and there’s a path of renunciation culminating in devotional service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We’re following the path of Prahlāda Mahārāja, and that’s the recommendation of Śrī Nārada. 

He concludes Seventh Canto, 10th chapter, verse 47. His conclusion is very instructive, and the best way to end the class this evening. Listen to this: "If you follow Prahlāda Mahārāja..." Prahlāda Mahārāja was the best amongst exalted devotees. "Anyone who with great attention hears this narration concerning the activities of Prahlāda Mahārāja, the killing of Hiraṇyakaśipu, and the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narasiṃhadeva, surely reaches the spiritual world where there’s no anxiety." For, as said in music, you always want to end the concert on a high note. A perfect high note: Narasiṃhadeva’s glorification of Prahlāda Mahārāja, whom we’re all following because he’s one of our *mahājanas*. 

I thank all of you for being present this evening and listening to my very humble discourse. It’s not my first time in this temple, or not my first time in Punjabi Bagh. I remember Sūri Mahārāja; he’s the person who started the first preaching center here in the 1970s or 1980s. It was a little house, you know. We’d come on the way to Vṛndāvana, we’d stop at his little house where he had a preaching center. So he said, "One day I want to increase the preaching here in Punjabi Bagh. I’m going to go to Jaipur and get some Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities." Now, in those days the carvers were pretty good, but they weren't so good in carving the deities; they were okay, but not so good. So one day Sūri Mahārāja, he went to Jaipur, he ordered some Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities, and then a few weeks later he came back with, you know, Kṛṣṇa in one hand and Rādhā—they’re pretty big, heavy, but he’s a strong man—brought them all wrapped and put them on the table. Said, "You want to see the deities I got for us?" I said, "Yeah, okay." I remember how the carvings were. "Yeah, okay, your deities, your smaller Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa." 

He put them on the table, he took off the cloth. Literally, I fainted, seeing how gorgeous was Kṛṣṇa, how gorgeous was Śyāmasundara. Oh my, wow, they’re the most beautiful deities in ISKCON. You see how Kṛṣṇa, how His head’s turned like this, and Rādhārāṇī—perfectly carved Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Now they’ve expanded as bigger deities as well, but I’m traveling the world, I’m always thinking, "I have to go back to Punjabi Bagh and see." So when traveling, because they’re renunciates, they don't have any possessions; they sometimes beg from the householders. So I’m begging from all of you, good householders, I’m begging you, please invite me back again so I can have *darśana* and *prasādam*.""