Hare Krishna.
Christmas. Time. So for the last few weeks, actually 20 days, we've been holding our Rishikesh Kirtan Fest on the banks of the river Ganges here in India. But actually, we're a few hundred meters up from the banks of the Ganga.

So I thought today is our last day, I'd come down literally on the banks here and take some Ganga jal with the water on my head for purification. And I was sitting here looking at this beautiful, sacred, flowing river and thinking how her origin is actually the spiritual world.

Several times during our programs every evening, we'd get about four or five hundred Westerners coming, you know, people looking for spiritual knowledge, enlightenment, etc. I'd often tell them that when you meet someone for the first time, you often ask, where are you from?

And they reply, "I'm from France," "I'm from Germany," "America," "New Zealand." You get a little idea of, you know, who they are and what you can expect and how your relationship can can grow. So I said to them, here in Rishikesh, this is a very sacred abode.

Rishis have been meditating here for, for millennia, actually. But it's said with the heartthrob, heartthrob of the sacred places is the river Ganges. And I said to them, "Do you know the origin of the Ganges?" And most of them know.

So I had explained that the origin of the Ganges River is actually the spiritual world. It's a pastime, we don't have time to go into that now, but she trickles down from the spiritual world, through the heavenly planets, through the middle planetary systems where the Earth is situated.

She's so kind, she even goes to the lower planetary systems and she gives her mercy to all. And what is that mercy?

The mercy is because she's purely spiritual, she's not material, she's coming from the spiritual world, she purifies us in our impure condition in this world. She washes. If we bathe in her or just gaze upon her, just gaze upon her, then all the impurities in our heart go away, those obstacles on the path of loving devotion to to Kṛṣṇa, they go away.

And what are those obstacles?

Like lust and anger and greed. Those are the first steps in the science of self-realization, way before we develop love of God. And she's so kind that she just washes those impurities away. We don't have to do so many austerities in this age.

We don't have to read so many books. We can come to a holy place like Rishikesh or Vṛndāvana or Mayapur, and just by being present in that transcendental abode, we become purified.

It mentions in *Nectar of Devotion* that if someone comes to Mathura as just a traveler, not necessarily a spiritual seeker, just comes to Mathura and spends 14 days there, their hearts are greatly purified by that, by that dhāma, that holy dhāma.

And Prabhupāda said they can sense it.

So we've come here and the Ganges is flowing here, purifying everyone. But I was thinking as I was sitting here, meditating on her pure, emerald green waters flowing so wonderfully, and meditating on her, her mercy, that we've come here to Rishikesh to share Kṛṣṇa Consciousness with others.

And the main thing that we're giving them is the Yuga Dharma, the Yuga Dharma, and that Yuga Dharma is the the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So I was thinking, you know, it's also purifying. In fact, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa can give us the highest goal of life, which is pure devotional service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

And as you can see in these, in these videos, and the people, they're just, they're just jumping and twirling and laughing and embracing each other, you know, it's like a flowing river of nectar. So for the past, you know, month here, almost a month, there's been two rivers flowing here at Rishikesh: the the river of Mother Ganges and the river of Grace in the form of the holy names, which had been brought to this world by Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

So we're gonna miss it. We're going to miss Rishikesh, we're going to miss Mother Ganges, her mercy, her beauty, etc. We're going to miss the other river too, which is the flowing Grace of the Mahā Mantra. Of course, we're gonna, we're gonna go other places.

This is what we do, this is our life, sharing the river of Grace, or the Mahā Mantra, with the world. But it's been especially sweet. It's been especially purifying for us as aspiring devotees to, um, to perform this yajña, the saṅkīrtana yajña, in Rishikesh.

We, we just got some special mercy. Of course, devotees always feel they're getting special mercy, but to be here in India, in Bhārat, to be in a place like Rishikesh, where many saintly persons have lived, who have left this world back to the spiritual world, where our own spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, came towards the end of his life.

Prabhupāda accepted the devotee's invitation to come to Rishikesh just to, to rest, you know, he'd been traveling for 12 years around the world and he was getting older and obviously soon after he would depart.

But he came here. Prabhupāda came to Rishikesh.

We actually on Hare Nama, the other day, we passed by the house where Śrīla Prabhupāda stayed while he was here on his last visit here to Rishikesh.

I was thinking ISKCON should purchase that home. But you know, our spiritual masters come here, he spent time. There's a beautiful video of him, you know, floating on a boat down the Ganges. He's, he's smiling, he looks so peaceful, so relaxed.

So we're following in the footsteps of our spiritual master, coming to Rishikesh with the extra blessing that we're sharing this flood of Grace in the form of the Mahā Mantra with all the wonderful people who've come from all four corners of the world.

And they, they've been touched, just like they don't know it, but when they touch the Ganges, there's purification. But when they were chanting with us, they felt the touch of the Mahā Mantra, they felt the ecstasy that comes from Kṛṣṇa, who's present in the sound of His holy name.

And Kṛṣṇa is the reservoir of all pleasure. So this is our last day. Um, it's going to be hard to leave, but we have many adventures ahead of us in the saṅkīrtana movement of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. But I finally made it to the banks.

I was always telling them, we're on the banks, we're a couple hundred meters away. Finally, I've come to the bank after 20 days. You know, many devotees, they were able to come down every day and bathe here, but I was so busy.

Uh, so now I've come down and, and I've, I've taken her blessings, asking her permission to leave with the Ganges and asking her mercy to come back again with the second river, this flood of Grace in the form of the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mantra.

All glories to the revealer of the dogma. Well, Hari Krishna.

Here it says. And now, enough.