"*00381*.*
"I am going to speak from a verse that I have actually spoken on many times. I probably spoke on this first verse at Mahārāja's first dīkṣā initiation in Russia. What is the name of the town? St. Petersburg. That was a good name. Sukharev is also a good name. We are speaking from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, First Chapter, text 22.

*Kṛṣṇa*—my favorite. Actually, it is the first Sanskrit verse I ever heard when I first met the four sannyāsīs in Ann Arbor, Michigan, on the university lawn, the plaza: Viṣṇujana Mahārāja, Brahmānanda Mahārāja, Gargamuni Mahārāja, at the time, and Subala Mahārāja. I approached them with my former wife—you know the story—and they were singing Hare Kṛṣṇa. We just saw an exhibit of peach-white paintings about Kṛṣṇa. I had no understanding at all of who Kṛṣṇa was. So, I asked Viṣṇujana Mahārāja. I said, "Can you tell me something about Kṛṣṇa?" He said, "No. You sit down, and I will tell you about my spiritual master." And he quoted this verse. I remember: "We think that we have met your goodness by the will of providence, just so that we may accept you as captain of the ship for those who desire to cross the difficult ocean of Kali, which deteriorates all the good qualities of a human being." So, please repeat: "We think that we have met your goodness by the will of providence, just so that we may accept you as captain of the ship for those who desire to cross the difficult ocean of Kali, which deteriorates all the good qualities."

In the purport—also one of my favorite purports—it says: "The age of Kali is very dangerous for the human being. Human life is simply meant for self-realization, but due to this dangerous age, men have completely forgotten the aim of life. In this age, the lifespan will gradually decrease. People will gradually lose their memory, finer sentiment, strength, and better qualities." A list of the anomalies—it is a strong word—a list of the anomalies for this age is given in the 12th Canto of this work. And so, this age is very difficult for those who want to utilize this life for self-realization. The people are so busy with sense gratification that they completely forget about self-realization. Out of madness, they frankly say that there is no need for self-realization, because they do not realize that this brief life is but a moment on a great journey towards self-realization. A great journey. The whole system of education is geared to sense gratification. And if a man thinks it over, he sees that the children of this age are being intentionally sent to the slaughterhouses of so-called education. Learned men therefore must be cautious of this age. And if they all want to cross over the dangerous age of Kali, they must follow in the footsteps of the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya and accept Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī or his bona fide representative as captain of the ship. The ship is the message of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the shape of *Bhagavad-gītā*.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Again, today we are accepting all these wonderful candidates for initiation into our Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya-sampradāya, more specifically into the family of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. I often say it is a turning point in our fall down from the spiritual world, fall from grace. How many times have we said we are falling, falling, falling? And then you come in contact with the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. You associate with devotees. You are encouraged to take up the rules and regulations, and then you are encouraged to accept a spiritual master, and then with earnestness you begin the journey home. So, this is like the turning point here. It is the most important moment in your existence since you left the spiritual world. And we always use that—big smile like this—it is nicely described in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde*, that we have been wandering aimlessly—well, we have a name, but the aim is a useful thing—so we are wandering aimlessly from universe to universe. Just think of your history, from universe to universe and species of life to species of life. Oh my God. And from body to body since time immemorial. *Guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde*, either the Lord comes personally—there were fallen souls on this planet when Lord Caitanya came, right as Kali-yuga was beginning, the likes of Jagāi and Mādhāi—so the Lord comes personally and by His presence, as Nityānanda Prabhu, the Pañca-tattva, many fallen souls, the Lord intervened, and they became Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs. But when the Lord is not present, then His representative is present and considered equal in one sense, just like the ambassador to France from France. He comes from Paris to Delhi, and he lives in a nice home in that part of Delhi, and then there is a French embassy. So, the ambassador represents the country. If you please the ambassador, you please the whole French nation. If you displease the ambassador, you displease the whole French nation. That is how powerful he is. He is not the nation, but he is representing the nation. So, the guru, he is not Kṛṣṇa, but he is representing Kṛṣṇa, *sākṣād-dharitvena*. In the eyes of the disciples, it is as good because he can take us to Kṛṣṇa.

So, somehow or other, for whatever reason, we are curious, we are looking for shelter, we are in distress, we are looking for knowledge, we come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and then the Lord arranges that we meet a society like the League of Devotees. What is the League of Devotees movement in India? He broke off from his spiritual master's mission because it is history that they were not following his final instruction to form a governing board of devotees to run the society. There was a fight to be the ācārya. Wait, we will not go into that. For whatever reason, Prabhupāda broke away and he started the League of Devotees. League of Devotees. He printed the *Bhāgavatam*, the original *Bhāgavatam* under the nomenclature League of Devotees. And he went to Jhansi, and he started preaching there as a sannyāsī, and there was a legal battle for the building. The women's club of Jhansi wanted the building, and Prabhupāda wanted the building, but by Kṛṣṇa's arrangement, the ladies got the building. Mahārāja hears from Kṛṣṇa, 11th Canto: "My first mercy upon My devotee, I take everything away so that the devotee has no recourse but to take shelter in My lotus feet." So, it was all Kṛṣṇa's plan, all life finally sailing to the West.

So, somehow the Lord intervenes, or His devotee intervenes into our lives. So meeting our spiritual master is not because of karma or destiny. No, it is an arrangement of the Lord in the heart. He sees, and He directs us to a bona fide spiritual master. He intervenes. "Stop your nonsense." "Yes, sir." "Take up these rules and regulations. Chant the holy names." Hare Kṛṣṇa. From beginning to end, it is all miraculous. Every step we are taking, because it contradicts the laws of nature. So, accepting—you know some basic 101 philosophy here—accepting a bona fide spiritual master is essential. Actually, in any field of knowledge, it is essential to accept a teacher, especially what Prabhupāda describes as the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Science—very scientific. You chant 16 rounds, you follow the regulative principles, you live in the association of devotees, you do service, you will make progress, irregardless. So, it is a science, and we know that high school or university to study science, we had to have a teacher. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa makes it one of His paramount instructions in the 700 verses of *Bhagavad-gītā*: to find a spiritual master. Kṛṣṇa could have said so many things in *Bhagavad-gītā*; He is explaining what is *dharma*. It was our ultimate *dharma* to surrender to Him, and to do that He says—*Bhagavad-gītā* is a summary of all Vedic wisdom, 700 concise verses of knowledge—and one of them is to accept the spiritual master. It is also strongly advocated by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. We find it in Chapter Six of *Nectar of Devotion*. He gives a series of instructions in this regard. Kṛṣṇa says, "Just search out a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively. Render service to him. The self-realized souls can give you knowledge because they have seen the truth." That is one instruction. Rūpa Gosvāmī gives six instructions in this regard in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, which Prabhupāda translated into *Nectar of Devotion*. Not just one, but he emphasizes six times. Six times! You say something three times in Vedic culture, it is very strong, but he doubled it. He said it six times. Rūpa Gosvāmī said: 1. Accept the shelter of the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master. 2. Become initiated by the spiritual master and learn how to discharge devotional service from them. 3. Obey the orders of the spiritual master with faith and devotion. 4. Follow in the footsteps of great ācāryas, teachers, under the direction of the spiritual master. 5. He teaches us to follow his guru's guru's guru's guru. 6. Inquire from the spiritual master how to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Six things.

So it is essential, and if one has the opportunity to accept initiation, one shouldn't hesitate. If by chance or good fortune one gets a guru, it does not matter whether one is in a temple or the forest. If the spiritual master agrees, one should take initiation immediately without waiting for a suitable time or place. Just like this couple—I just said, "You are taking initiation tomorrow," you said "Yes." This young lady also, she wasn't expecting last week to take, Kavita—she is also here on a transcendental impulse, Brahmin initiation—this is all following this: "If by chance or good fortune one gets a guru, it does not matter whether one is in a temple or the forest. If the spiritual master agrees"—that is me—"one should take initiation immediately." Next day come from Delhi, without waiting for a suitable time or place. Come from Australia. She is walking down the street, I send my servant, "Are you ready for initiation?" Okay. I mean, we got permissions, but we sped up the process. Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī said, "If one does not accept a guru to lead one out of material existence and into the spiritual world, then we will end up following other leaders." He called them *gau*. Guru means—it is one way to say cow. If we do not follow a guru out of material existence, we will follow—I do not want to name any names here, any politicians, I will get in trouble—a *gau* into material existence. And Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī told a story, a nice little story in that regard. He said there was once a cowherd boy who had lost his way somewhere way outside of India. He had lost his way. So he was inquiring from different people, you know, "Could you help me get back to my home?" So he came across a cowherd man, an elder gentleman. The cowherd man said, "Well, my cows, actually their goal is Vṛndāvana. So you just hold on to the tail of this cow and I will slap her on the back, and then she will run back and you will get to Vṛndāvana." So the boy held the tail of the cow and that gentleman whacked that cow, scared that cow, and that cow started running over hills, over ditches, on the trail, through the thickets, and through the brush, and past the trees, and through the rocks and the rivers, and the boy was getting scratched and bruises and bumps. Finally, he made it there. So that is the result of a fallen *gau*, a cow-like personality—with all due respect to the cows, they are still dumb creatures, but worship of the cow is very much that instruction—so either we follow a guru out of the material world into the spiritual world, or we follow these useless people who have no understanding of the goal of life. Another analogy is that by following a guru we begin—Prabhupāda says—an amazing journey. It says here "amazing journey home to the spirit world over the ocean of material existence to the ocean of *rasa*." Sometimes the material world is compared to a vast ocean, very difficult, impossible to cross over: the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean. So it is a nice analogy, "ocean," but there is also *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, the ocean of devotional service, so we can cross over. Two things the guru does: The guru gives us knowledge how to get out of this place as quickly as possible. How to enter into the spiritual world. How to go from the world of darkness to the world of light, from the world of ignorance to the world of knowledge, from the material world to the spiritual world. So we offer everything to him. Everything. And the analogy is given that this human form of life is like a boat to cross over the ocean of material existence, and the favorable winds—we are talking about a sailboat—the favorable winds are the Vedas, they blow that boat, and the captain is a spiritual master. So now you have that, you have the boat (human form of life), you have the winds (Prabhupāda's books and teachings of the Gosvāmīs), and you have the captain. But this captain is the tiny captain; he is going to introduce you to the big captain, who will introduce you to the big-big captain, who will introduce you to Prabhupāda. One day we will say, "Prabhupāda, this is such-and-such," and he will introduce us to Kṛṣṇa, who is the *ādi-guru*. No one can deny Kṛṣṇa is the *ādi-guru*. He spoke to Lord Brahmā.

But in this subject matter, it is important to clarify: Kṛṣṇa says accept the spiritual master, but not just "quote-unquote" any spiritual master. Perhaps it is more poignant to say that even recognized spiritual masters—by that I mean gurus in the succession of Haṭha-yogīs and Rāja-yoga and Jñāna-yoga—there is also a spiritual master for Haṭha-yoga. It is an authorized process; otherwise, why did Kṛṣṇa speak about it in the *Gītā*? He gave instructions: go to the Himalayas, be celibate, eat very little, sleep little, stay, stare at the tip of your nose with your mantra. That is bona fide. So you will find spiritual masters in all these different processes. Even if your desire is to merge into the Brahman, which is a feature of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead—the Absolute Truth means the Personality of Godhead, His effulgence, and He is also the Supersoul in the heart of everyone. So the yogīs, they desire—Prabhupāda said—to see the Supersoul in the heart. That is their goal. In Detroit, he gave that lecture, I remember, and he said, "But beware," he is warning us, "because sometimes the yogi, when he sees the Supersoul in the heart, he thinks, 'Oh, there I am.'" Prabhupāda said that, and I was like, "Wow, that is so cool, I do not want to do that." I was just 19 years old. He said, "They will see the Supersoul; they will think, 'There I am.'" No. So we—and to merge into the Brahman, that is bona fide if that is what you want—so you will get a guru who can teach you that aspect of Kṛṣṇa. You can get a guru to help you see the Lord in the heart. They are all bona fide. But no, we do not. We want a Vaiṣṇava guru. A Vaiṣṇava guru. And even a finer point, we want a Vaiṣṇava guru who is a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, a follower of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. With all due respect to the Śrī-sampradāya and the Madhva-sampradāya, they are Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas, and we have all due respect to them, but we differ a little bit because the message of Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches us that in the spiritual world, Goloka Vṛndāvana, is the playground of God. Not just that; He can be your son, He can be your best friend, He can be your lover. This is the unique feature that Caitanya Mahāprabhu introduced. So we want a Vaiṣṇava guru in the Gauḍīya-sampradāya coming down from that. Just see how special you are. Out of millions and billions of living entities, very few are human beings. Out of human beings, very, very few are civilized. And those who are civilized, many are not religious. And those who are religious, okay, well and fine. But you know, India, Bhārata, there are so many deeper spiritual choices. Out of all of them, you get a Vaiṣṇava guru. Oh my God!

But then again, having a guru does not just mean automatic deliverance from material existence. Actually, the guru's business—it is not a business, but his business—is to give us the tools for freeing ourselves from the shackles of material existence. Just like when I was in the Amazon jungle, remember, some parts of the jungle were so thick, they gave us machetes and we were chopping away at the jungle, and after a kilometer I am thinking, "What am I doing here? This hot, with the sand flies that bite you and the mosquitoes that bite you and the snakes here." But we made it to the villages. So the spiritual master, he gives us the machete. He gives us the tools to get out. He gives us the knowledge. The main connection between guru and disciple is the guru gives us knowledge. Therefore, we glorify science and technology. We will give them some credit here that we have Zoom, Zoom, Zoom. We have WhatsApp, and we can have, you know, video with our guru, and our guru can give lectures that can be posted every Friday on stimulation for ecstatic love, and we can hear. By sound, one becomes conditioned, and by sound, one becomes liberated. Just like Prabhupāda is as accessible as he was 50 years ago through his purports in his books. So, "If you want to know me," he said, "read my books." So it is a deeply transcendental relationship. It is not based on time or distance. It is something very mystical.

So it is the knowledge. And therefore, personally, my humble self, I spent so much time researching and studying, but that is my responsibility: to deliver you to Prabhupāda's lotus feet, because Prabhupāda is that master whose feet all masters sit. I am just repeating what Prabhupāda has said or encouraged us to say by studying the teachings of great ācāryas and great poets. So the tool for getting out is the knowledge. Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna, fourth chapter, text 42 in the *Gītā*: "Therefore, the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, stand and fight." So, you know, the guru is giving you the tools to do your job. You have to utilize the tools. He shines the light on the path; you have to walk that path according to the light. It does not mean, "I am initiated, I am delivered." It is just the beginning. It is like grade school. But Confucius said the longest journey begins with the first step. And you see when the children on the first day of school, "I am going to school," with their little backpack. It is a big thing. But if you have to get through grade school, go to secondary school, university, masters... everyone should get a PhD in the science of bhakti. Why not? The Six Gosvāmīs have given us the PhD in the science of devotional service. They elaborated on the essential teachings. Cakravartī Ṭhākura in the 1700s—these, we are meant to study these things because they are stimulus for ecstatic love—they should be diligently applied with focused attention.

But the most important of all the instructions: you chant. And there are three ways to chant. There is japa, there is congregational chanting with the devotees, and there is taking the chanting to the people. These are three valid, essential ways. Everybody should be engaged, whether guru-bhakta, whether one is a sannyāsī renunciate, or one is a gṛhastha. If that person has the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in their heart, Narottama says, "I take the dust of their feet." Look at Vaikunthanātha Prabhu, my godbrother, he is a householder. Look at Bhadra—he is—he always says, "I have been married to the same woman for 42 years." I have been married for 42 years to the same woman. So, whatever we have, we have to chant japa, we have to participate in festivals like the Ratha-yātrā, and we have to take it to the people. So today you are getting your beads, your japa beads, and that is—we will just speak about that for a minute because that is important. I often quote that my god-sister, she came before Prabhupāda for initiation. "What are the rules and regulations?" she said. Prabhupāda—she named the four: no meat eating, no intoxication, no illicit sex, no gambling. And Prabhupāda: "I promise to chant a minimum of 16 rounds every day." So Prabhupāda leaned over, he said, "Why minimum?" She turned white. I forget her name. But you know, I think she did 18 rounds every day, if not more. So it is just a minimum. And Lord Caitanya himself set the example of chanting japa. We do not often think of him like that. We think of him, you know, on *harināma-saṅkīrtana* with Nitāi, that, you know, they had their long black hair and they had their robes and their jewelry. They were wearing jewelry. I have two of the jewels that Nityānanda wore when he was doing *saṅkīrtana*. He used to wear the armlets, you know. So I have two of those jewels, and they looked very beautiful, swinging garlands, dancing. This was unheard of 500 years ago, spiritual personalities. So they went on *harināma-saṅkīrtana*, and we see that the chanting with an assembly of devotees, Mahāprabhu did that in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana with his associates. But he also did japa. We do not see many paintings of Lord Caitanya doing japa, but he did japa. He would never ask us to do something that he did not do. Same thing with Prabhupāda. That is why the rules are adjusted sometimes as centuries go on and Kali-yuga gets worse. In the *Gauḍīya-granthas*, they chanted 64 rounds every day, and they gave a good 75% of their earnings to the *matha*. That would be very difficult these days. So things are adjusted according, but don't take advantage of the adjustment—16 rounds for the principles. Mahāprabhu chanting japa—how do we know? I was reading Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Prathama-caitanyāṣṭaka*—verse five: "The loud sounds of Hare Kṛṣṇa appeared on Mahāprabhu's tongue, counting the names on a splendid string with a series of auspicious knots from a cloth around his waist." There it is! Mahāprabhu had a cloth around his waist which he knotted 108 times, and that is how he chanted japa. And I mentioned the other day in a lecture in South India that one of my disciples went to a Godāvarī cave, found a bābā chanting there on the knotted string. He gave him the knotted string. I have it in my room here. Sometimes I chant on the knotted string. Yes, but you... because that is what Mahāprabhu did. So I am going to do it. "The loud sounds of Hare Kṛṣṇa appearing on his tongue, counting the names on a splendid string with a series of auspicious knots from a cloth around his waist. His two eyes so large they seem to reach his ears." Like, he is chanting, not like this, but like this: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa," just feeling the ecstasy of the chanting. "His two eyes so large they seem to reach his ears. His arms extending down to his knees. When will this Caitanya again be visible to me?" He saw him. He had the association. And that is what Kṛṣṇa does. He leaves to increase our feelings of love for Him. He often does that, and *sambhoga* and *vipralambha* are two themes, you know, running through Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism. We are working so hard this whole life, we are giving to meet Kṛṣṇa, and then He will disappear—that is all right. Similarly, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja writes in his *Caitanya-candrāmṛta*—another one of my favorite books—"tying knots in the waistband of his loin cloth to count the number of names chanted. Lord Caitanya's hands trembled and his heart overflowed with *prema*. When, or when will that day be ours?" He said like that: "When, or when will that day be mine?" We do not have it yet, but we see it in the lives of great ācāryas and we have faith. We have faith in our spiritual master and the saints and the scriptures. One who has that faith, everything will be revealed. So we are always thinking, "When, oh when will that Govinda... feeling of separation," we are thinking like that, waiting for that moment. We have to work for it. So "tying knots in the waistband of his loin cloth to count the number of names chanted. Lord Caitanya's hands trembled, his heart overflowed with *prema*. When will that day be ours?" But every... that is our goal. A lofty goal. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. And Brahmānanda Swami, in conclusion, he writes in his *Stavāvalī*: "When will that son of mother Śacī, who taking the residents of Bengal as his own—and now we are part of that greater family—taking the residents of Bengal as his own, inspired them to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra a prescribed number of times daily and who, like a father, gave them many cherished instructions, again become visible to me?" It is the same as Rūpa. "When will that son of mother Śacī, who taking the residents of Bengal as his own, inspired them to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra a prescribed number of times daily and who, like a father, gave them many cherished instructions, again become visible to me?" So we can think like that, because originally we were so... That should be our intention. Today you are going to take these beads, you are going to think, "When, or when will that day," in your mind. So Mahāprabhu does japa, Prabhupāda did japa. We will do japa, and one day we will join them in the spiritual world where *saṅkīrtana* is a daily, spontaneous affair. In the spiritual world, chanting, according to Jīva Gosvāmī—Kṛṣṇa is the original name of God—it says that the original name of God... so we will go after practicing it. Practice makes perfect. We will join them in the spiritual world for an eternal *saṅkīrtana*. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hari bol.""