
"So today we have come to the sacred village of Cārulā, which is the home of Campakalatā, one of the eight aṣṭa-sakhīs or personal girlfriends of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The eight sakhīs are Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā, Campakalatā, Tuṅgavidyā, Indulekhā, Raṅgadevī, and Sudevī. Each of these sakhīs has their village around the hill of Govardhana, where their queen, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, lives. These eight sakhīs are always busy serving Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and have eight assistants called gopīs who assist them in their service to Śrī Rādhā. The eight assistants or girlfriends of Campakalatā are Padma-nayanā, Sunetrā, Kṛpā, Navanīta-priyā, Pradīpikā, Sukarī, Raṅga-yuktā, Viñcā, and Śukī.

So our ācāryas have given us many wonderful details about Campakalatā. They say she is two days younger than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Her complexion is like a cluster of yellow golden campaka flowers. She dresses in clothes the color of a cātaka bird. She is a master in cooking in all six flavors of food, and she is most expert in making sweet candy for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Because of that special talent, her girlfriends have a transcendental nickname for her; they call her "Niṣṭhā-hasā," which literally means "sweet hands." She also serves the Divine Couple by making necklaces for them and by fanning them with a cāmara. 

These may appear to be very simple services. One might think, "When I get back to the spiritual world, will I just be fanning? I'll get bored." But as we've heard many times in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it's not so much what you do, but the consciousness in which you do it. The most important element in service to Kṛṣṇa is bhakti or love. If you offer even the most simple service with love, Kṛṣṇa will be pleased with that service, and you will become completely satisfied in heart and remember Kṛṣṇa at every moment. That mood, that love of always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, was nicely expressed by the English poet Alfred Lord Tennyson: "If I had a flower for every time I thought of you, I could walk in my garden forever." 

Now, Campakalatā is also the leader for the gopīs who care for the trees, creepers, flowers, and bushes in Vṛndāvana. She actually knows where every kind of fruit, flower, and fragrant bush is in Vṛndāvana.

So now we find ourselves on a walk to the samādhi of Vajranābha. Vajranābha played an important part in the history of Vṛndāvana. He was the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa. After Kṛṣṇa finished His pastimes here on Earth, devotees were feeling such separation from Him, so Vajranābha mitigated their suffering by establishing deities of Kṛṣṇa, who are not different from Kṛṣṇa, everywhere around Vṛndāvana. The Garga-saṁhitā says then Vajranābha installed Dvārakādhīśa, Vishnu, and Keśava in Mathurā; Govindadeva in Vṛndāvana; Harideva on Girirāja-Govardhana; and Baladeva one yojana away from Gokula. In this way, Vajranābha installed six deities of Lord Hari. 

He also established different śivaliṅgas or deities of Mahādeva Shiva in various places for the protection of Vṛndāvana. For example, he established Gopīśvara Mahādeva in Vṛndāvana, Bhūteśvara Mahādeva in Mathurā, Nandīśvara Mahādeva in Nandagrāma, Kāmeśvara Mahādeva in Kāmavan, and Cakreśvara at Govardhana. But our ācāryas say that he also established the worship of Nṛsiṁhadeva in the forest of Vṛndāvana, but due to invasions, only a few remain. One of these Nṛsiṁha deities actually established by Vajranābha is in Kāmavan. There, they call Him Tri-kāla Nṛsiṁha; it means "He who can see past, present, and future." It is for that reason that Tri-kāla Nṛsiṁha has three eyes, the third one being on His forehead. 

There's another version that says Nṛsiṁha's third eye represents destruction, and His two other eyes represent mercy and patience. It's explained that if and when there's ever a major and sustained attack on Kṛṣṇa's earthly devotees, this third eye of Tri-kāla Nṛsiṁha will open, and destruction of the asuras in the world will begin. Śrīla Prabhupāda did say that one day, scholars will note how the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement saved the world in its darkest hour. 

So here in Vṛndāvana, let us conclude today with Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's opening verse to his illustrious Śrī Vidagdha-mādhava: "May the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa reduce the miseries existing in the material world and nullify all unwanted desires. The pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are like śikhariṇī, a blend of yogurt and sugar candy. They overpower the pride of even the nectar produced on the moon, for they distribute the sweet fragrance of the concentrated loving affairs of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs."

Hare Kṛṣṇa. 
To Murāri.""