"*00234*.*
"Taldykorgan. The plan was this: all the passengers boarded the plane, the plane took off. "Computers, yes, it's time to show the movie." Windows—the stewardess closed the window shades, turned on the video on the screen. One time, on a flight from New York, I sat next to versions of my men, and I asked, "Why are you looking at the screen? In New York, at a lecture, I said that you would never see my students in movie theaters. Kindly chant Hare Kṛṣṇa; they are too busy; they sing." One of the experiences—perhaps the stewardess or the flight attendant—decided to demonstrate that I am not interested in movies at all. I took my Bhagavad-gītā, covered the screen for myself, and began to read very loudly out loud, and watched to see how he reacted to my seriousness. I read, read, and suddenly, after a few moments, I heard the man under the scale laughing. I thought, "Why is he laughing? It's a movie." I looked at him and saw that he was watching a movie—he was watching Charlie Chaplin. I closed the book, closed my beads, and also started watching the movie. It was a very interesting movie. Silent movies. Charlie Chaplin.

We were told a tale. Such an exalted leader, Śrīla Prabhupāda, told me that as a child, his mother took him to see Charlie Chaplin films at the cinema. But I thought it was strange. I thought, "We shouldn't watch movies." I couldn't ask. He left and disappeared. He went and approached me and said, "Maybe you should ask him why he watched the movie? Why did we watch the movie if we shouldn't do this? We'll get in trouble." He said, "It will be better if you ask yourself." We decided to flip a coin to see who would ask, and it fell to him to ask. He went to bed and asked about the humor of Charlie Chaplin. Śrīla Prabhupāda—and when he asked why he was watching it, he replied that the thing is that Charlie Chaplin's humor is the original humor that comes from Kṛṣṇa. That is why I saw Kṛṣṇa's humor in Charlie Chaplin. "What did you guys see in this movie?"

His ideal answer is good. He sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere.""