"*00443*.*
"I would like to begin by thanking one of my most favorite devotees—I consider him a bosom buddy, to use an old 18th-century term—for his very erudite, as always, introductory speech today. Actually, he is a very gifted speaker. That is just something Kṛṣṇa has given him, but it is accented by his realizations, which are there by the mercy of his spiritual master, His Holiness Tamal Krishna Goswami. One can have a propensity for something, and it may be working, but by the mercy of Guru and Gaurāṅga, that activity has become something quite extraordinary. So, Vada-truman has done extraordinary service in the Chinese yātrā, following in the footsteps of his spiritual master—like father, like son. So I always miss him, and I always look forward to having his association. One of the best times in my life in the last few years was in my apartment in Russia; we had a lot of fun together and reminisced about our times in the France yātrā. So, thank you.

I feel very honored, actually, to be a very small and insignificant part of the Chinese yātrā. There are many of my godbrothers, and there are many devotees who play much, much more significant parts, but I kind of slipped in the back door somehow. You know, I am tasting the fruits of their efforts over many years. But one reason I am honored to be part of the Chinese yātrā is I know how important that yātrā is to Śrīla Prabhupāda. You know, we often hear about Prabhupāda's exploits in America; we all know, we have discussed so many times, Prabhupāda's arrival in Boston, then New York, and then so forth and so on. We often hear about Prabhupāda's interest in Russia, so much so that Prabhupāda himself went there during the Russian Communist era—Prabhupāda went to Moscow. We hear so much about how he was interested in Russia, but I believe that Prabhupāda's interest was equal regarding China. Perhaps he didn't have time in his lifetime to go there personally, but we know he went to Hong Kong, which is a little different, but I believe the China mission was very much part of Prabhupāda's plan on this planet. There are three countries that I see as the most powerful, or that will become the most powerful countries in the world: America, Russia—because it is so big and has such ambitious plans—and China. You can see China is becoming, economically, a very powerful force in the world, and they are also expanding. So I think Prabhupāda saw that America, Russia, and China—because Prabhupāda was *tri-kālajña*, which means that a pure devotee can see the past, the present, and the future. When we were young, we were wondering, "Why is Prabhupāda going to Russia, the 'evil empire'? What can we do there?" But he had that vision for the future, and I believe that he had that vision for China as well, and we will see that in the future. History knows that China once had a very unique culture. Now the whole world is like Westernized; everyone is wearing the same clothes, eating the same fast foods, watching the same news. It is like one world, Kali-yuga culture. But at different times, different countries of the world had unique cultures, and of course, China did for thousands of years—a very unique culture. And I think that as a result, China will one day be able to embrace this culture, because it is a cultural nation in essence. One day, China will embrace this culture of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

You know, it is something unique to say that a country has a culture. What culture does America have? America is a brand-new country; the only culture is the cowboys and Indians—that is not very much culture. But China has a great history, and I think it is in the genes, in the DNA, and I think that one day—maybe not within our lifetimes, of course—someday, China will be one of those countries I believe will embrace Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And therefore, he saw the potential. And how do I know that he saw that potential and he believed that China could be a great nation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Because he sent his best man to go there to inaugurate the preaching. Just like he felt it was necessary that he personally go to America to ignite the Hare Kṛṣṇa explosion; he felt he had to personally go to Russia to plant the seed. Prabhupāda was getting elderly and he had so much responsibility, but I think China was still on his mind, so he sent his best man.

His Holiness Tamal Krishna Goswami—I knew TKG, as we called him, very well. We were friends; he was my senior, but he called me his friend, and he often asked me to come to where he was and be with him for days or weeks at a time—India, Oxford, so many places like that. So I knew him, and he was my saṅkīrtana hero, he was a visionary, and he had a very deep love for Śrīla Prabhupāda. He was one of the first, you could say, with his series of lectures on Vṛndāvana way back in the 80s. So he was beyond his time, you could say; he was beyond his time. And Prabhupāda had so much faith in him. He was always sending him to the new places, the difficult places, to begin Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So this was actually Tamal Krishna Goswami's greatest challenge, and he took it up. Prabhupāda sent his best man; you don't send your best man to some engagement that doesn't have any real significance, just like Kṛṣṇa sent Prabhupāda to the material world. So, just as Kṛṣṇa sent Prabhupāda, knowing the potential of that country, therefore I know that it is a very, very important mission, the Chinese mission. A difficult mission, but that is good, because when you are successful, the victory tastes even sweeter. We say, "Kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtana." You know, nowadays you can go on a street in America; no one is going to throw tomatoes at you or call you bad names and say, "Oh, it's the Hare Kṛṣṇas." So it is kind of easy, and that can create an atmosphere of almost complacency or procrastination. But not in China. There is a lot of—we don't have to go into details, we know that the difficulties are there—so that will make the victories in the future very, very sweet. And who will be tasting that sweetness? Śrīla Prabhupāda, because that is his desire, that China embraces Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It almost seems impossible now in some ways, but history is like that. You can't judge something by the immediate.

I'd like to see, of course, the same progress that we have seen in Russia. Now, at one time, Prabhupāda said, "In America, 'Hare Kṛṣṇa' is a household word." I don't know how you translate that in Russian or in Chinese, but "Hare Kṛṣṇa" is a household word, and in Russia, it is true also; everyone in Russia knows Hare Kṛṣṇa now, for better or worse. So we would like to see that in China, but that hasn't necessarily happened yet. It is a big country and there are various obstacles, but we should understand that very often, valuable things take time to mature. It takes time to mature—like certain nuts, like peanuts; you plant them and a few months later you have got peanuts. But macadamias or some other types of nuts, they take years to mature, and they are the king of nuts. So in the same way, it is going to take time for Kṛṣṇa consciousness to mature in that country, but that is understandable, and we accept that because very often there is that saying, "The best things come last." So that is my understanding, my limited understanding, of the Chinese yātrā. It is a very, very special yātrā; all the yātrās are important, but Prabhupāda focused on the big ones: America, Russia, and China. No one can say Prabhupāda did not focus on China; he sent his best man there.

So I am looking forward to coming back as soon as possible, as soon as the pandemic finishes—it seems to be easing even in your country—then I think the first place I would go would be Beijing. I would fly to Beijing and I would stay with Rādha-caraṇa in his apartment, and we would speak like expensive French, and we would talk about old times, but we would talk more about the future and the greatness of China. You are all blessed to be born there. Someone can say, "I'd rather be born in Germany or Italy." Well, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is going on there, it is happening, but still, China is a pioneer place; it is still a pioneer area for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And preachers, that is what they love to do—they like to go to where the biggest challenge is, so they can one day go to their spiritual master and say, "Mission accomplished. What's my next mission?" Like that, you can be recognized if you can do something big there. Of course, don't try too big right now, but if you can do something there to add to the Kṛṣṇa conscious history, that will be recognized. So feel blessed that you are there in that country and that you have the opportunity to, slowly, slowly, very carefully, according to the directions of your seniors and your authorities—things have to be done very conscientiously there—follow your authorities, work closely with your authorities, and know that ISKCON is the best medium for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness in that country. This great organization, working under Prabhupāda's blessings and the directions of your authorities, do whatever is necessary to slowly, slowly, but surely awaken the Chinese people to who they really are: they are all eternal servants of Kṛṣṇa. And you will be blessed, and who knows? You may even make it back to Godhead quicker for the wonderful service you have done there in awakening people to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So I will be back; I will be back by Kṛṣṇa's grace. I have so many memories of my time there. This is the watch that several of the Chinese devotees purchased for me. I wear it, I see it, I remember all of you, and I look forward to coming back and I look forward to hearing your offerings today. As "I love you, you love me," that is reciprocal, because we all love Śrīla Prabhupāda, for he is the master at whose feet all the masters sit. So we are part of the same greater family of God, spiritual family. So I think Prabhupāda would like to hear me speak, but I love to hear you speak as well, your appreciation for my humble service to my spiritual master to act as your spiritual guide, one day to his lotus feet. So I will let you speak now. I can sit here six, seven, eight hours, whatever time it takes, and we will just turn the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, this nectarean ocean of devotional service, to Śrīla Prabhupāda and to our previous ācāryas, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. It is that in previous Vyāsa-pūjās, this is basically all I do now—speak about it. So please allow me to explain to the devotees that right now they need to select the Chinese channel to hear the translation.

Guru Mahārāja, well, thank everyone very much for your very beautiful and heartfelt Vyāsa offerings. I can understand that you all worked on them for some time and put your whole hearts into them as an expression of your gratitude for my guidance in your spiritual lives. I very much enjoy this service because I consider being a spiritual master for me as a service to my Guru, to continue the wonderful teachings that he brought to the West and, as best I can, to set an example for all of you to follow. So just like you know, you are doing *ārati*, or you are cleaning the house, or you are translating, or something—you have some *sevā*—so for me, this is my service to my spiritual master: to bring you to his lotus feet. And I have said previously, and I will say again, that I have many services in this movement, some of them very big like the Polish festival tour, the summer festival tour, the Woodstock festival you have heard about in Poland, in Europe, and other big events that I put on. But I know, because I have been nourished by my spiritual master and therefore I am able to go on with confidence, back home, back to the spiritual world, I know that I am obliged to build that same confidence in you: that you can get out of this tabernacle, this entanglement of material life, and go back home where we belong, in the spiritual world. So really, this is my most important service, all of you—that is my most important service.

Because out of the seven billion people in this world, you know, you are some of the few that have come forward expressing a desire to revive your original loving relationship with Kṛṣṇa. You know, we know that, and we are enjoying that, and we have our association, but it is rare. It is actually very rare that someone can understand the futility of material existence and want to take up spiritual life—and take up spiritual life in the way that we do it. We are not impersonalists; we don't want to merge with the Supreme. We are not fruitive; you know, we are not asking anything from Kṛṣṇa, we just want to serve His lotus feet or learn to serve selflessly. This is very rare. It is very, very rare for a human being to understand the ultimate purpose of life. It is very rare for a person to become pious; it is very rare for the pious person to take up spiritual life in earnest; it is very rare for such a person taking up spiritual life to come to yoga and want to serve selflessly for the Lord. So you are all very rare; you are a precious commodity in the material world. So we have to take good care of you; we have to take very good care of you. Prabhupāda would often say that is our most important service: to take care of the devotees. He said the preaching will go on, but those who come are special souls, and we have to take care of them. So I really enjoy this service. I enjoy preparing my lectures, I enjoy speaking my lectures, I enjoy trying to set a good example, I enjoy my infrequent contacts with all of you. I would like to be with all of you all the time, that would be very nice; I would like to be with all of you all the time—and you are thinking, "Yes, Gurudeva, that would be so nice." But that is the point: that by cultivating our Kṛṣṇa consciousness and inspiring each other and helping each other, teaching each other, we will be together all the time—but not here. Who wants to stay here in the material world? One time, Prabhupāda said, "Don't be surprised when things go wrong; be surprised when things go right." That is material life—don't be surprised when things go wrong. "Oh, why is everything going wrong?" That is the material world; be surprised when things go right. So we can't all be together all the time here, but we can in the spiritual world, and we are developing that desire. We just want to be with Vaiṣṇavas, we just want to be with our Guru Mahārāja, we just want to be with Kṛṣṇa, with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And if you keep on hankering like that and practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness sincerely, then in due course of time, you wake up one day and you will be in the spiritual world, which is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. It can happen, it can really happen. Every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there is a Hare Kṛṣṇa festival every day, and no one can stop it because that is all there is to do up there. So we will be together eternally. Prabhupāda did say we would have our ISKCON in the spiritual world, but we have to earn that right. So we have to chant our rounds, follow the principles, study Prabhupāda's books, associate with devotees, try to bring other people into the fold—that is our duty as Vaiṣṇavas. We are not satisfied to be liberated alone. So, as we can, in time and circumstance, we should welcome other people. Today, I was so happy to see new faces.

A few devotees asked if they could become disciples, and I wholeheartedly agreed—aspiring disciples. So we can see that in China, people are coming forward to embrace Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So it looks like we won't be a big group—in the spiritual world, we are going to be a really big group! And that will make Śrīla Prabhupāda happy. So please, everyone, continue as you are. See, we are not withholding any secrets on how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious; Prabhupāda has given us everything to become pure devotees. It does take some time, so you have to be a little patient. You have to be tolerant of, you know, the difficulties that material life throws at you. Don't be surprised when things go wrong; just tolerate. But know that there is light at the end of the tunnel. And what is that light? It is the Brahman. But what is the Brahman? The Brahman is coming from Kṛṣṇa; the Brahman is Kṛṣṇa's effulgence. So there is just a saying we have in English: "There's light at the end of the dark tunnel." And for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that light is the effulgence coming from the transcendental form of Kṛṣṇa. Beyond that light is a beautiful, threefold-bending form of Śyāmasundara, with His lotus eyes going all the way to His ears, with His sesame-shaped nose, with His *bimba*-red lips, with His threefold-bending form, His long black hair flowing down, His yellow *dhoti*, and His big garland of five kinds of flowers going down to His ankles. That is our goal, and Kṛṣṇa is waiting for us. You have seen the picture, the painting, of Gopa-kumāra when he gets back to the spiritual world.

When we get there, what is happening? There is a whole other life, and who is there to greet us? Kṛṣṇa will embrace you. So what does this material world have to offer compared to that? Absolutely nothing, absolutely nothing. So the duty of the guru is to convince you of that and present to you the positive alternative. For so many years, I was traveling, 50 years, telling people about the futility of material life, and I found myself in Vṛndāvana when the pandemic started. I thought, "Let me give to my disciples not just the bad news of this world, but let me give to my disciples the good news of the spiritual world." Because the preacher has two duties: to talk about how nasty material life is and get people to agree, and then to reveal to them the beauty of the spiritual world. So it is not that you just, when you see the spiritual world, no—you see through the eyes of Guru, Śāstra, and Sādhu, but it is real.

So then I took up speaking about Vṛndāvana, and I thought maybe I will give 10 or 12 lectures, but Vṛndāvana and the glories of Vṛndāvana are unlimited. We often say there are 60 billion holy places there. So now I have given, not 12, but 176 lectures about Vraja. I don't know how many have been translated into Chinese; Dāyānanda can tell me later. But we have a long way to go. So rather than hear the news of this world, let's keep our ears open and always hear the news of the spiritual world, and that way we will always be enlivened, we will always be enthusiastic, we will never get dragged down by material existence. Even if things are not going so well around us, if we are always hearing and chanting about the glories of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the glories of Vṛndāvana and Kṛṣṇa, the glories of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, no matter where we are, we will always be inspired on our journey back to the spiritual world. So that is my duty, that is my service: to keep flooding you with the nectar of Kṛṣṇa consciousness through transcendental sound vibration. Keep drinking deep—we say, "keep drinking deep"—this nectar of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the gift of the Lord. He came here, He showed these pastimes 5,000 years ago; it wasn't made up. These are not made-up stories; these were pastimes. Kṛṣṇa came, and just like a traveling transcendental circus, He just showed the bliss of the spiritual world. It was recorded, and it has been repeated down to the present day. So we have all this nectar to absorb ourselves in, and just by hearing it, our hearts are purified and the love for Kṛṣṇa that is dormant in our heart becomes awakened. So I will keep, by Prabhupāda's grace, I will keep pouring out the nectar. You open your ears and drink that nectar, and day by day, week by week, month by month, year by year, we will make very steady, very steady progress back to not just Vaikuṇṭha, but the topmost planet in Vaikuṇṭha, Goloka Vṛndāvana. And one day, all these things I am talking about, they will be happening right before our eyes.

That is the beauty. Well, we don't—no one needs to speak about them, we will just see them. Not only will we see them, but we will be participating in them. Wow, all for that day! So, yes, as soon as possible, you know, I will come to China. We don't have to see each other on Zoom, Zoom, Zoom—you know, this medium, it is pretty good, at least we can see each other—but we can see each other face to face, and I can eat some of those cakes that you are showing me on the Zoom conference. It is so cruel; I can see them and I appreciate the fact that you made them for me, but I can't taste them.

It is like almost being mean, you are showing me this, okay, and I can't eat it! So keep, you know, keep your culinary skills up and keep improving them, and when I come, we will take *prasādam* up to the neck! It takes so much *prasādam* that afterwards we waddle like ducks—you have seen ducks, how they walk like this—we will take so much *mahā-prasādam* and then we will have the big *kīrtana*, *mahā-mahotsava*, big kīrtana somewhere, big *mṛdaṅgas* and *karatālas*, and we will dance for hours. Then we will sit down, and we will have more Vṛndāvana-kathā. And the next day, we will do the same thing over—Beijing and Shanghai and all the towns there. Hopefully, we can just travel widely, and I can see all of you and sit down and, you know, hear your stories about how you came to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, what you did. We will talk face to face, as we will in the spiritual world. So we are in this for the long haul, we are in this all together. I will never abandon you; I will be with you whenever you need me, and I will help you with your problems and your difficulties. If you have some doubts, that is okay; we will dispel those doubts with transcendental knowledge, and we will dance and chant together in kīrtana as we conquer the ignorance of this world with the sublime knowledge that Prabhupāda has given us in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So I haven't eaten today; I am really hungry because I saw so many cakes.

And so many fruits, and I saw that special halibut they make in South China. I was thinking, "I would really like to taste that." So I send all of you my love, every one of you, every single one of you. A spiritual master has no favorites; he accepts each disciple with a loving heart and a desire to help them and liberate them back to the spiritual world. So I will take your leave now; I think they have some *khicari* for me. I am going to tell my cooks, "Where's the cakes?" You can't do that to me! They can't show me all these cakes and these delicious feasts, everything, and then I go to the table and there is some *khicari*. So I hope today they made some extra preparations. But believe me, when I come, we will eat up to the neck, we will dance in ecstasy, and we will have nice Kṛṣṇa-kathā. That is my gift, you know, my endless gift to all of you. So I am missing you; you are just missing one person—me—but I am missing so many of you. This is the difficulty in being guru. They told—they asked me, "Guru Mahārāja, what is the difficulty in being a guru? Is it the karma?" I said, "No, it is that I miss all my disciples." That is my difficulty; I miss all of you so much! I would just love to be with you all the time. But we will be. This pandemic can't last forever; nothing lasts forever in this world. It will come and it will go, and we will be back together in loving service to Śrīla Prabhupāda. So please keep safe; this pandemic is not over yet. Please keep safe, keep well, and keep strict in your Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and that will bring us together one day in loving service to Prabhupāda. So thank you, thank you for all the wonderful offerings, and I am going to get them, as Dāyānanda said, in written form, so I will read them again and I will remember each one of you with love and devotion. So please accept all my love, accept all my blessings, and accept the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda and the entire guru-paramparā for your progress. So Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you so much, yes, I will see you sooner than later.""