"*00258*.*
"# Lecture: I Want You to Build a Temple! – Indradyumna Swami, Mayapur

I want to offer my respects to my Godbrothers, the sannyāsīs, mahārājas, and to all the temple presidents, the leaders, and all the devotees who have gathered to celebrate the inauguration of this project. You are working hard, and it will be especially wonderful when we have the large chakra installed.

It is certain that the flows manifesting now—the temples, the community—will be famous throughout the world. Soon this project will be opened, and everyone will understand that this is the headquarters of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. It will become a very popular place of pilgrimage, with not just thousands, but hundreds of thousands of people coming—just as they go to other famous places of pilgrimage. Most likely, this will be the most popular one.

This project is not built on a foundation of sand or clay; it is built on a foundation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The construction of such temples is an integral part of our movement. If you travel—as I have been traveling for the last 48 years—you will see that the building of such temples is a very important component of our preaching work. It doesn't matter where it is; we need these centers. While we don't rely solely on large buildings for our own self-satisfaction—as we can chant the holy name anywhere—such magnificence is absolutely necessary to attract the masses. It helps give people a place to learn the process of serving, worshiping, and hearing. 

Lord Caitanya traveled and sent His followers to open centers so they could spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness throughout India and the world. Following in the footsteps of his guru, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura pressured his students to build temples. One student, for example, was a wealthy businessman in Calcutta. Through association with devotees, he renounced his business, became a renunciate, and dedicated his life to the service of his guru. Even when he was tired, he would keep up with his service almost around the clock.

I want you to build a very large, luxurious temple dedicated to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, so that everyone who comes will be impressed. It should be big, beautiful, and expensive. One may ask, "Guru Mahārāja, how can I build such a temple?" But with the ability to do business and the desire to serve, it can be done. 

There is a famous story about a devotee who, despite having sworn enemies, approached them for donations. Even those who were his rivals in business were moved by his sincerity and his commitment to building a temple for the Lord. He would calmly repeat the holy name, even when he faced opposition. Eventually, he collected enough to build a beautiful temple. This teaches us that if pure devotees desire to spread Kṛṣṇa's message, the Lord will fulfill that desire. Even if there are obstacles, the desires of a pure devotee are always fulfilled by the Lord. 

As followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we must have the same faith. When we work to build these temples, we are not just constructing buildings; we are creating light. The name of the temple has many translations, but one of them is "light." It means it emits light that disperses darkness. This is the teaching of the Lord. We can all participate in this miracle, and in doing so, we cleanse our own hearts.

According to the *Agni Purāṇa*:
*   By building a temple for the Lord, a person becomes the king of the whole earth.
*   By painting a temple, one attains the heavenly planets.
*   By performing the service of worshiping the Deity, a person goes to the abode of Lord Viṣṇu.
*   And if someone performs all three of these activities, they achieve liberation.

We are very lucky to see how these temples are manifesting. It happens despite any obstacles because, to serve Kṛṣṇa, it is possible only by the grace of the guru. Let us all together help in this great service. This is not just a big construction project; we must think of this as a light for everyone. 

Thank you all for inviting me and giving me the opportunity to be with you. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""