"*00285*.*
"### Come One, Come All! — Kartik Parikrama 2024

I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master, who has given me beautiful *japa-mālā*, a shining *tilaka*, and also the amazing form of a devotee. He has given me shelter; in one hand he holds my hand, and in the other hand, he holds a *ghī-lamp* which illuminates this dark ocean of the material world. *Śāstra* says that my Guru deserves great respect because only he can save me. Immediately, I bow to him again and again. I offer my respectful obeisances to the lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇavas. I pray that there will never be any offense in my attempts to serve them. To all the Vaiṣṇavas who will yet take birth, I offer my obeisances to their lotus feet.

I welcome you all to this beautiful, glorious *dhāma* on this wonderful day. This is the first day of our *parikramā* in Vṛndāvana, and you all made an important, right decision to come here. It is said in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* that those who realize that they belong to Kṛṣṇa, and who joyfully travel to the secret places of pilgrimage associated with the Lord, are the most devoted. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes this wonderful verse: the one who realizes that he belongs to the Lord and who joyfully travels to the secret places of pilgrimage associated with the Lord, this person is the most devoted. He says to go to the secret places of pilgrimage, and you can be sure that you have come to the most secret, sacred place; you could not make a better choice than this. The greatness of this *dhāma* is that for every three meters, you can visit a new holy place. Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead himself, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, made this place the site of his appearance, this place is not only the most sacred in the entire universe, but it is the most sacred in all of creation.

The spiritual world is very vast. It is called Vaikuṇṭha. While this place where we are now is called *kuṇṭha*—which means there is anxiety—Vaikuṇṭha is the opposite; it is a place without anxiety. The spiritual world is so vast that there is no end to it. Despite the fact that the spiritual world is infinite, its highest manifestation exists here; this is Vṛndāvana, where Kṛṣṇa is with his associates. Vaikuṇṭha is described as the official residence of the Lord, and Vṛndāvana is the place of the Lord's pastimes. 

This is the most sacred of all places, and we accept this because of the famous verse from *Brahma-saṃhitā*. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the son of Nanda Mahārāja, is worshiped in Vṛndāvana along with his transcendental abode, and the Lord experiences the greatest pleasure when he is worshiped by the gopīs of Vṛndāvana." Our precious Śrīla Prabhupāda also gives us instructions about coming to Vṛndāvana. He writes about this in the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*: "You must go to the forest of Vṛndāvana and take shelter of Govinda, and this will make you happy." We all want happiness, and here is the formula. The International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness built the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir to invite all members of this society, as well as all other people, to come here and live joyfully. This will help you achieve the transcendental world and go back home, back to Godhead.

My godbrother Hayagrīva, who recently left his body, wrote a book about the time when he was in Vṛndāvana with Śrīla Prabhupāda. Yesterday, I read this book to gain inspiration; it is called *Days in Vṛndāvana*. This is an old edition, so it is possible that it is not even available at the Rasa-bihārī Lāla bookstore. When I read page 47, it just amazed me. It was there that Śrīla Prabhupāda described how deeply he loves Vṛndāvana: "I live very simply in Vṛndāvana, and I am completely satisfied. The fact that I am in the company of Rūpa Gosvāmī... I currently have hundreds of temples, but despite this, I prefer to be here." 

When Śrīla Prabhupāda preached in the West, he also missed Vṛndāvana. He said, "And now I am sitting here in New York, which is the greatest of all cities, but my heart longs to be in Vṛndāvana." He speaks very touchingly about why exactly he loves Śrī Vṛndāvana. In places like Vṛndāvana, if you have the opportunity to hear from a pure devotee, then cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness becomes very simple. In conclusion, we can say that Vṛndāvana is the place where you can develop love for the Lord, and there are a large number of pure devotees here. 

I often tell you that it is good to come to Vṛndāvana, but it is even better to go to small villages and pastures in the fields and meet with the local residents, who are usually very conscious of the Lord. They greet you by saying, "Jaya Rādhe!" There is a rule of constant movement from Vṛndāvana to Mathurā and from Mathurā to Vṛndāvana, because it was Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu who revealed Vṛndāvana to us. Devotees move from Vṛndāvana to Mathurā and back because these places are imbued with love for God, and everyone wants to find it.

This place is open not only for pure devotees but also for beginners. Vṛndāvana is so merciful; therefore, it is recommended even for sinners to come here. Even if you are sinful, come to the *dhāma*. I thought, "Well, how is that? I thought it was for pure devotees, or at least for beginner practitioners." But for sinners? "No, don't come, leave me alone." No, come! As it is said in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the progenitor of all living beings. As George Harrison sang in his famous song, everyone is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa; just some have already realized it and some have not yet. Even if you are sinful, come here, but here, don't sin. Here, take time, and in this way, cleanse your heart.

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.24, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes about this very clearly: Vṛndāvana is the place where everyone can come, and it doesn’t matter if he is sinful, because with the spiritual atmosphere of life here, he will automatically begin to repeat the holy names of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. It seems that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is even more contagious than the most famous COVID. It is also said that Prahlāda Mahārāja himself, addressing his father, the best of the demons, advised him to go to Vṛndāvana. This is the famous verse in the Seventh Canto. He addresses his father and says, "O best of the asuras, the king of all demons, Hiraṇyakaśipu," and he is so inspired. 

As far as I learned from my spiritual teacher, any person who has accepted this temporary body—which is like a well that has dried up and is full of only suffering—should simply leave everything that belongs to him, or to put it more precisely, go to where Kṛṣṇa consciousness exists, which is Vṛndāvana, and thus accept shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But unfortunately, Hiraṇyakaśipu did not follow such a recommendation. If he had listened to Prahlāda Mahārāja, who is one of the twelve Mahājanas, then Hiraṇyakaśipu would have been lucky. He could have come to Vṛndāvana and received *darśana* of the beautiful Śyāmasundara form—bent in three places, *tribhaṅga-sundara*, with a beautiful flute, the color of a thundercloud. But instead, he did not listen and therefore received *darśana* of Narasiṁhadeva, who put him on his lap, tore his stomach, and pulled out his intestines; but thanks to this, he also received *mukti*. 

In his commentary, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes something wonderful: our Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness would like to invite all the elderly people of this world—we remember that there are 7 billion—so that they come to Vṛndāvana, stay here in retirement, thus progress in their spiritual consciousness, and gain Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

When we first came here, there was a small tree and there was only one car. This car belonged to the father of Śyāmasundara Prabhu, and it was used once every six months to bring some high-ranking people from Delhi to Vṛndāvana. If you wanted to, for example, make a phone call, it was all quite complicated. You had to go to the post office in the far part of Vṛndāvana. If you wanted to call Delhi, it took about three hours—you placed a request for a call and within three hours it happened. If you wanted to call America, it took at least three days, and when you got through, you also couldn't hear anything. I remember how I joked with my mom. She couldn't hear where I was, and I answered her that I was in the spiritual world talking about the Lord. She asked, "Have you already died or something?" What was wonderful at that time was that it was quiet; it was not a highway. You could very calmly walk through the parikrama path, and there were a large number of peacocks everywhere, parrots. Now the monkeys have displaced them, but Vṛndāvana always remains.

At that time, it was very quiet, calm; it was a village. Now everything has changed, and all this has changed thanks to this comment left by Śrīla Prabhupāda, which says that we are ready to invite all the elderly people from all over the world to come here to Vṛndāvana to stay in retirement, thus progressing spiritually. Of course, now millions come here to Vṛndāvana; sometimes it is very difficult, but I am sure that Śrīla Prabhupāda is very pleased with our preaching. 

I took this comment very seriously. Since I am already over 70, I thought that this invitation applies to me too. So I spend more and more time in Vṛndāvana, immersed in *bhajana*. But sometimes I feel guilty, and I think that maybe I should go to the West and preach more. I remember the instruction: "Work now, distribute Śrīla Prabhupāda's books." Then I remember all those cities: Kyiv, Dnipro, St. Petersburg, Paris, and I think that maybe it would be better for me to go there and preach. Then I turned to the letter that was written on November 9, 1975, and Śrīla Prabhupāda writes there that all those who can come here to Vṛndāvana and stay here permanently, please do. "I would like as many devotees as possible to come here and become *vrajavāsīs*; this will be a great inspiration for everyone." So you and I have every right to be here for a whole month. Whoever can stay longer, stay. This is an inspiration for all of us that we can become pure devotees of Vraja. 

By just coming here, being in this transcendental abode, in this forest, have mercy and pray. I turn to Kṛṣṇa: "Is there anyone who has not quickly attained transcendental bliss thanks to serving you? Therefore, I surrender to you and humbly pray that you be kind to me and please personally reveal to me the best way to attain *darśana* of your worship." 

Entering Vṛndāvana is not an easy thing. It is not just taking a taxi or a train; getting to Mathurā from there by cart is not so easy. Today is the first day of Kārttika, and we have gathered with you, so let's talk about how to enter Vṛndāvana, what mood one should be in. Among the Vaiṣṇavas, this has been talked about for many centuries. Who tells us how to behave in Kṛṣṇa consciousness? This is the instruction of Śrīla Prabhupāda, who tells us how to enter Śrī Vṛndāvana in a spiritual mood. He talks about this in *The Source of Eternal Pleasure*. You cannot get to Vṛndāvana just by buying a ticket. The process of how to go to Vṛndāvana is shown by Akrūra and Akrūra's journey to Vṛndāvana; it is very important. Anyone who plans to visit Vṛndāvana should follow the ideal example of Akrūra. It is said that an example is much more important even than an instruction. We have a desire to get into Vṛndāvana; we have the example of Akrūra who has already entered. So, being here and now, we can find out how to do this.

Let's take a few minutes. This is exactly how Akrūra came to Vṛndāvana. We know that 5,000 years ago, the demonic ruler Kaṁsa sent his demons here to kill Kṛṣṇa. They were very powerful demons, and at first, Kṛṣṇa was just a child. Despite the fact that when he was a baby in Vṛndāvana, he visited a huge number of demons, he is Kṛṣṇa—the Almighty—so it is impossible to defeat him. Thus, he saved his life in Vṛndāvana. Then Kaṁsa decided to change his plan. There is an expression: "Let your friends be close to you and your enemies even closer to you." Kaṁsa decided that he would invite Kṛṣṇa to Mathurā in order to kill him there. He was surrounded by demons; as his representative, he chose Akrūra. He was sure that Akrūra was also a real demon. Kaṁsa is an *asura* by nature, so he thought that everyone around him was also the same *asura*. But it so happened that in his company, there were great devotees. 

I flew here on a plane, and I met one gentleman. He said, "Are you Hare Kṛṣṇa? God, you are everywhere!" So, in the society of Kaṁsa, there were also devotees. We discuss this story because Kaṁsa sent Akrūra with the chariots in order to bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to Mathurā, where they had to fight with Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika. When you read *The Source of Eternal Pleasure* or the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, you might think that Akrūra is a demon because his task is quite demonic. But only by delving into the lines of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* can you find out the true mood of Akrūra. 

At that moment when Akrūra was going to Vṛndāvana, he meditated on how fortunate he was that he could approach Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, which is the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In fact, the sign of *vairāgya* is his humility. Therefore, Akrūra showed this sign, because he did not think of himself as a great devotee. Any great devotee actually feels very humble in the presence of the Lord, because he is aware of the greatness of the Lord. And this makes him naturally humble. When you see a big mountain in front of you, you can say, "I will enter this mountain and thus conquer this mountain, and I am so great, so big and powerful." But as you climb this hill, the closer you get to the mountain, the more you realize how high it is. Naturally, humility manifests. As soon as you begin to progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you understand the greatness and beauty of the Lord, so naturally, you feel small. This gives you this state of humility. 

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, we can read words about Akrūra that are full of humility. He turned to himself and said, "What auspicious events have I accomplished? What auspicious things have I done? What terrible austerities have I undergone? Have I given a huge amount of charity? Why am I still able to enter Vṛndāvana? I am an ordinary, terrible materialist who is completely immersed in sense pleasures." 

Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda writes that this is true humility, and it is a necessary requirement for those who want to enter Vṛndāvana. We must come to Vṛndāvana like those who pray for mercy. We are of no spiritual qualification; we are like beggars who ask for alms on the street. We must pray for mercy, and our mood should be such that we feel and realize that we have no qualifications to enter Vṛndāvana. We got here, and this is a place where sometimes even the demigods cannot get. All this happens only by the mercy of our spiritual master and also by the mercy of our *ācārya*, Śrīla Prabhupāda. We should be in such a mood. If someone asks you, "How did you get here?", you might start to remember: "First I took a taxi, then I flew on a plane, then a taxi again." No, all this is not so. In fact, you all got here simply by the mercy of Guru and Gaurāṅga. 

As the verse says, we must endlessly repeat the holy names in the mood of a devotee, the mood of humility. Therefore, our path to the *dhāma* is not a brisk walk; our path to the *dhāma* is on our knees, crawling in the dust of Vraja in order to take shelter of *vraja-raja* (the dust of Vraja), and also remember that this is possible only by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda who invited us here.

In fact, I experienced such an emotion of humility. How is it possible for me, a sinful *asura*, to offer favorable prayers to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Even at that moment, all the demigods under the leadership of the Lord, as well as all the holy people who said their prayers, did not satisfy the Lord. What to say about me, who is not qualified? And they were in *sattva-guṇa*. I am unqualified. In conclusion, I would like to say that if you are not meek and humble, then it is impossible to progress in spiritual life. 

Akrūra concluded, "But enough of such reflections. After all, such a fallen soul like me can also get a chance to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead because even conditioned souls who are in the endless river, one day they may suddenly reach the shore." He continued to meditate on how it will be when he meets Kṛṣṇa. If you worship Him according to the rules and regulations given to you, one day He will speak to you. One day you will have *darśana*. Śrīla Prabhupāda, at the moment when he installed the Deities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Los Angeles, addressing his disciples, said that if you address the Deities as copper statues, then they will not answer. But if you worship Them with all the rules, then after some time, They will start talking to you. Thus, we all have a chance one day to talk to the Lord.

Imagine a chariot with Akrūra; it moves forward and sways rhythmically. At this time, Akrūra dreams about how his meeting with Kṛṣṇa will happen. Materialists usually dream during the day that, "Oh, I will get rich, I will have the coolest car, a beautiful house," but all this is an illusion. In Bengali, when they describe empty dreams, they say that this does not come true, just like horses do not lay eggs; this is a meaningless activity. Therefore, empty dreams also do not come true. But those dreams that Akrūra was thinking about—they could come true because all this will soon become reality. 

He dreamed: "When I fall at the lotus feet of the Lord, the all-good Lord will place his palm on my head. In this way, all those who are already bound by this snake of time always seek refuge, and thus, falling at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, all fears go away." Akrūra very often, when describing Kṛṣṇa, says: "Lotus hand, lotus eyes, lotus body color." He often appears in the description of Kṛṣṇa's traits. There is a description that the white lotuses that are found in Vraja are called *sugandhi*, and they have a very beautiful aroma. There is a description that Kṛṣṇa's lotus hand acquires this divine aroma comparable to the aroma of these lotuses. This is because it is with this palm that he touches the lotus. This happens during the dance of the *rāsa-līlā*. 

When he was already approaching the *dhāma*, he began to think about how the *darśana* will happen: "What will I do now?" When we arrive, we think, "I'd rather quickly check into the hotel, go and eat pizza," we already have a bunch of plans in our heads. Well, let's see what Akrūra was thinking, because we want to enter Vṛndāvana like him. Therefore, it is important to know his mood. He said, "As soon as I arrive in Vṛndāvana, I will get off my chariot and immediately offer my obeisances to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma." Great yogīs who thirst for self-realization meditate on their lotus feet, and he also offered his humble obeisances to all the cowherd boys and all the residents of Vṛndāvana—even before going to get pizza. Akrūra was sure that Lord Kṛṣṇa knows the heart of Akrūra, so everything will be in the most favorable way. He was sure that, "The only purpose of my visit is to see Kṛṣṇa, so everything will be so." 

He shared that when he first arrived in Vṛndāvana, he had the feeling that Kṛṣṇa would instantly jump out from behind any bush, that this could happen at any moment. Akrūra was completely confident that Kṛṣṇa was in his heart, so He knows exactly why Akrūra is going there and everything will be for the best. He thought, "The Supreme Personality will not think that I am an enemy, despite the fact that Kaṁsa sent me. Everything is good. The Lord is in everyone's heart, so He knows all our reasons." 

Akrūra arrived during sunset, and the first thing he saw was the footprints of Kṛṣṇa. The footprints of Kṛṣṇa are everywhere in Vṛndāvana because Kṛṣṇa walks here with his cowherd boys and the gopīs. Of course, they clean up in the *kuñjas*; they sweep the floor so that everything is beautiful and tidy, but when they see the footprints of Kṛṣṇa, they do not touch them because they are sacred. There are a large number of verses that describe the glory of the footprints of Kṛṣṇa. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.21.1 it is written: "O friends, in fact, Vṛndāvana is a place that spreads the glory of the earth, because it was in Vṛndāvana that he left such a treasure—the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī." Peacocks dance like crazy at the moment when they hear the flute of Govinda, and other living beings climb the hills, and seeing all this, they fall into a stupor. 

Sanātana Gosvāmī also writes something wonderful about the footprints of Kṛṣṇa. He writes that in Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa always walks barefoot; here you will never see him with shoes. Therefore, all the countrymen have an even more glorious attitude towards Vṛndāvana, because on Vaikuṇṭha, the Lord just wears shoes, but here He walks barefoot. Thus, I meditate, seeing the prints of Kṛṣṇa's feet. Akrūra thus shows us an example, and he exclaimed, "Ah, this is that dust from the feet of my Master!" Then he began to roll around in the dust. 

In *The Source of Eternal Pleasure*, Chapter 38, Śrīla Prabhupāda gives us the same instruction, and we must literally follow this. Just like if you didn't congratulate someone on their birthday, it's okay, you can give them a gift in a few days. So even if you haven't done this, you can do it as soon as you hear about it. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes: as soon as you reach the border of Vṛndāvana, you must immediately decorate yourself with the dust of Vṛndāvana, smear it all over your body without thinking about any material position or any kind of prestige. 

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings his sublime songs; he says, "When will my mind be purified enough so that any contamination and desire for material pleasures leave me, and I can finally visit Vṛndāvana?" We are talking about this tradition of covering your body with dust; in fact, this is all necessary for us to remember our relationship with Kṛṣṇa. In fact, Kṛṣṇa answers according to how much you came here to connect with Him. It is said that Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He always answers us. In his lecture in 1967, Śrīla Prabhupāda says it doesn’t matter if he is some inveterate atheist or some completely useless person; at the moment he visits Vṛndāvana, he feels the presence of Kṛṣṇa here. Coming here, he changes his mood and says, "The Lord exists, I accept this."

Of course, the best way to enter Vṛndāvana is to do *harināma-saṅkīrtana*; this is the *yuga-dharma* of this age. Chant the holy names. You and I are very fortunate that with us there are a large number of beautiful hearts, and thus listening to the holy name, we will feel this connection with Kṛṣṇa. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 3.2.57, it is said that the holy names of Lord Rāma of course give liberation, but the holy names of Kṛṣṇa they easily transfer you to the other side of the ocean of ignorance. Thus, you become ecstatic. During the day, we should increase our taste for the holy name. In fact, it is much easier when we are surrounded by Vaiṣṇavas. I recently asked one *sādhu*, "How can I get *ruci* and increase my taste for the holy names?" He said, "Try to chant every day with such a mood that perhaps this is your last chance." 

I recently read such a spiritual article where various statements of holy people are listed, and there is such a beautiful expression. It refers to a saint who said that the night song of praise is the sweetest before dawn because it is connected with the fact that he is waiting for the moment when he leaves this world. Let's chant, chant, chant more while we have the opportunity. We are in such a wonderful company of *kīrtanīyas*, and let our devotion grow day by day, and someday we will exchange the blessing that we can forever remain in Śrī Vṛndāvana.""