Hare Krishna. One of the many blessings of being on our summer festivals, who are in Poland this year, is the opportunity to constantly chant the Holy Names. Śrīla Prabhupāda says, "Therefore, O sons of the king, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is situated in everyone's heart.

He is also within your hearts. Therefore, chant the glories of the Lord and always meditate upon Him continuously." In the purport, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, "The word *aśakṛt* is significant, for it means not just for a few minutes but continuously." The Holy Name of the Lord should be chanted twenty-four hours daily.

Therefore, in this Krishna conscious Movement, we request the devotees to chant at least sixteen rounds on their beads daily.

Actually, one has to chant twenty-four hours daily, just like Ṭhākur Haridāsa, who was chanting the Hare Krishna Mahā Mantra 300,000 times daily.

Indeed, he had no other business. So, while it may not be possible to imitate Haridāsa Ṭhākur, we take great pleasure in chanting many hours a day here in the towns and beaches while advertising our daily festival programs. What's more, the chanting continues every evening at our festivals with the special advantage of many guests chanting alongside us.

This is the deeper meaning of *saṅkīrtana*. The word *sam* in Sanskrit means "complete," and *kīrtana* means "to glorify the Lord." So, *saṅkīrtana* means the complete glorification of the Lord, complete in the sense that it is the perfect and complete way to glorify the Lord and call it *Yuga-dharma*.

Nothing else is required to awaken our dormant love for Krishna's holy names.

That's called congregational chanting of the holy names. But the word *saṅkīrtana* takes on an even deeper meaning and significance when it includes members of the general public. That's because the holy names have descended from the spiritual world not only for devotees but to awaken even non-devotees from the slumber of material existence.

A modern-day miracle we see every day on Hare Nāma, as people enthusiastically smile and wave at our *kīrtana* party.

Christmas story!

Each evening, as many chant and dance along with us in great happiness. Witnessing this, I often think of a verse by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākur in his famous *Gīta-mālā*: "The auspicious activities of sacrifice, charity, and penance in the age of Satya, the auspicious activities of great sacrifices in the age of Tretā, and the auspicious activities of great sacrifices and charity in the age of Dvāpara—by the mercy of the Golden Lord, those who simply by once uttering His name obtain direct association." In that regard, our festivals are holy and solely for the people.

We take great pleasure in our Movement's annual festivals like Janmāṣṭamī, Rāsa-yātrā, Gaura Purnima's appearance day, etc. But there's something extra special about these large cultural events we organize for many thousands of people each summer here on the Baltic Sea coast, chanting His holy names, both devotees and non-devotees alike.

In essence, this is a movement for the people of Kali Yuga, and it's all the mercy of the Yuga Avatar, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam captured it perfectly in the following verse: "His complexion is the color of polished gold, and He is the perfect form of beauty.

He destroys the contamination of Kali Yuga. His fame is far-reaching. He kindly bestows devotional love upon the people of all the worlds. May Lord Gaurāṅga, the best of dancers, reveal Himself in the midst of my heart." Oh my God.