"*00442*.*
"### Come Play With Me

Hi, Kṛṣṇa devotees, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. Happy to be with you. Kṛṣṇa, well, we're back in the Vṛndāvana forest today, just where we want to be, and we're going to continue with our wanderings. We've been using this term "wandering," as you know, for the last few weeks as we visit different holy places in the dhāma. However, I think we can all agree we're not yet satisfied in our wanderings because we know there's so much more to see. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, who we love to quote, expresses this sentiment of not being satisfied, although we wander all over Vṛndāvana very nicely, in one of his verses in his *Śrī Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta*, in the chapter *caturtham*. He puts it very beautifully, and I quote: "Oh dearest Vṛndāvana, full of the highest bliss, if I see the beauty of your moving and non-moving beings with millions of spiritual eyes, if I smell your fragrance with millions of noses, if I hear about your qualities with many ears, if I wander within you by millions of feet and offer respects to you with millions of hands and heads, I will still not be satisfied." We understand.

So, in our last wanderings, you may remember we finished at a place called Pāreṭhī, where Kṛṣṇa told the Gopīs that if they continued to tease Him, they wouldn't see Him anymore. So, those lovely milkmaids, they surrendered by saying, "Śyāmasundara, it will always be as You wish." So, from that famous place, Pāreṭhī, we're going to proceed some distance away—a couple of kilometers away—to a place that's famous; it's called Pāī. These are two sacred places that are connected together in one particular pastime, and what is that pastime? It's a game of hide-and-seek. I don't need to explain what is hide-and-seek; we were all children. In which Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī finds Kṛṣṇa; she catches Kṛṣṇa. Now, it's interesting that the śāstra says that both the cowherd boys and the cowherd girls play hide-and-seek when they're young, they're very young, but they continue to play this game and other games in their adolescence as well. But the ācāryas point out that the difference in their childhood games and the same games like hide-and-seek played during adolescence is that in adolescence, a quote, "amorous loving mood," as a dimension that makes such games more relishable. Just add the love; the same game becomes more relishable. And because these games in adolescence are permeated by such love, it's described they contain ecstasies that cannot be experienced in childhood. An ācārya puts it very nicely; I'll quote him: "The enjoyment that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa derive from playing children's games in their adolescence is greater than when they played those games when they were children because of bhāva, because of love."

It's interesting; Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states that Kṛṣṇa goes through three ages before reaching adulthood, which include His childhood and His adolescence—actually, because He's considered an adult when He reaches 16. It's so detailed, Kṛṣṇa consciousness; we know so many things about God. And the more we know about Him, because He's all-attractive, the more we can love Him. So, we thank Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī for revealing so much. And these three ages that Kṛṣṇa matures through, they're called childhood, which is *kaumāra*; boyhood, which is *paugaṇḍa*; and youth, which is *kaiśora*. And each of these three stages lasts five years. So Kṛṣṇa's childhood, *kaumāra*, lasts when He's between one and five; and His boyhood, *paugaṇḍa*, is from 6 to 10; and His youth, *kaiśora*, lasts from 11 until 15 years of age, through completely through the 15th year. And Rūpa Gosvāmī states that just before Kṛṣṇa reaches the age of 16, His body stops "aging"—because His aging is not like our aging, because His form is completely spiritual, it's made of spiritual energy, so it's different—but He stops aging when He reaches the age of 16. And He remains that age. Just like Prabhupāda said—you'll never see, I've heard him say many times in lectures, you'll never see a picture of Kṛṣṇa older than 16. Not like God, with all due respect, is depicted in other religious traditions as very old; although He is the oldest person, Kṛṣṇa remains a fresh youth. And therefore, devotional scholars say that Kṛṣṇa is eternally a fresh youth whose transcendental body never deteriorates.

A little more information on this subject before we discuss the hide-and-seek pastime because it's so fascinating. Rūpa Gosvāmī goes on to say that devotees attracted to the parental rasa, the vātsalya-rasa, they're attracted to Kṛṣṇa's childhood pastimes, *kaumāra*. Those who are attracted to His friendship pastimes, *sakhya*, are fond of His boyhood, *paugaṇḍa*, pastimes. And devotees inclined to enjoy amorous pastimes with Kṛṣṇa are attracted to His youth, *kaiśora*, pastimes. And Rūpa Gosvāmī shares an interesting note: he says that of these three different ages, this *kaiśora*, this youth, it's actually appreciated by all devotees. He says, regardless of their transcendental relationship with Kṛṣṇa, everyone likes Him in His youth. And he also writes that, quote, "Youth is the only age Kṛṣṇa displays pastimes outside of Vṛndāvana, such as Mathurā and Dvārakā." A little obvious, because as a child He wouldn't go. So, youth is the only age Kṛṣṇa displays pastimes outside of Braja, such as Mathurā and Dvārakā.

Now, one more interesting note is that each of these primary ages I described are further divided into three sub-periods. Each of those three is divided into three sub-periods, each lasting one year and eight months. They're called *ādya* (beginning), *madhya* (middle), and *śeṣa* (end), and Kṛṣṇa displays unique characteristics in each of these sub-periods. I was going to go on—actually I plan to go on—but I think that we can discuss this in more detail maybe in our next class because there's a lot of information, the different characteristics Kṛṣṇa has in these sub-periods of these three primary ages. Let's get on to some līlā; we'll get back to Pāī and *chalana-līlā*. The word *pāī* means "to get" or "to find." And in Vṛndāvana pastimes, there is a game called Pāī, which is equivalent, of course, to our Western game of hide-and-seek, or one person tries to get or find other persons, friends, who are hiding. And Kṛṣṇa and the Gopīs, now in adolescence, Kṛṣṇa and the Gopīs played this game in a very dense forest now known by the name Pāī. To find, of course, again, we're familiar with this game where everyone goes and hides and one person has to go and try to find them all.

So one day in this particular place called Pāī, Rādhārāṇī was chosen to find everyone. So Kṛṣṇa and all the Gopīs, they—Rādhārāṇī closed her eyes, you know, She closed Her eyes, and everyone runs. So all the Gopīs ran; they hid behind trees and bushes and boulders, and Kṛṣṇa also went and hid. So then when everything was ready, Rādhārāṇī uncovered Her eyes. And the ācāryas are saying that naturally, Śrī Rādhā felt like ignoring everyone else only to go and look for Kṛṣṇa. In Her heart, She just wanted to go and find Kṛṣṇa, forget everybody else—well, not forget them, but that's the nature of Her heart—but they say that to play along with everyone, She first found Citrā, then She found Lalitā, and She found Tuṅgavidyā; She found so many sakhīs and Gopīs. And like this, and it's nice to describe that She was able to find very easily these hidden Gopīs because of three things—because She's very intimate with them and they're very intimate with Her. So She found them quite easily. Why? Three things, so beautiful: by their unique fragrance, by their effulgence, and sometimes by their giggles. By their unique fragrance, by their effulgence, and sometimes by their giggles. So when She found everybody, everyone was satisfied. She played the game right. Then Her heart's desire became manifest. One name of Rādhā means that She's never really separated from Kṛṣṇa. So She, Rādhā, set out to catch Kṛṣṇa, to find Kṛṣṇa. And the ācāryas say that She was aware that He would be difficult to find because, well, somehow She knew that He could hide Himself even within an atom. So what She did is She decided to lure Him into the open, meaning instead of Her going to find Him, She would bring Him out of His hiding place. And how would She do that? Rūpa Gosvāmī says with Her transcendental feminine charms. He says, in pursuit of victory, Śrī Rādhā employed Her bodily effulgence, Her natural beauty, Her tinkling ornaments, and above all—this is my favorite—the sound of Her voice singing Kṛṣṇa's sweet holy names.

However, it's described Kṛṣṇa had hid Himself very well. He'd actually gone to the top of a nearby hill, a little rocky area, and He crouched behind a bush, and from there it's described that He could see every one of Rādhārāṇī's movements. And as She moved, He would shift locations, so She couldn't find Him until He finally saw Her getting closer. Now, it's said that when She came very close, the very sight of Her beauty, Her soothing effulgence, and above all the sound of Her chanting His names, all combined to freeze Him on the spot. He was shifting; when He saw Her and observed Her soothing effulgence and Her voice permeated with mahā-bhāva, chanting His names, He just froze. He wanted to run away, but try as He might, He was unable to move. So then it's described He attempted to crawl away, Kṛṣṇa on His hands and feet, but they also froze. And with great effort He was finally able to stand up, hoping to run away, but He took one more glance at *navaneśvarī* Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and Kṛṣṇa's whole body went numb with ecstasy, with ecstasy. And the other ācāryas say that it was only with great difficulty Kṛṣṇa managed to turn His eyes away from Śrī Rādhā for a moment and slightly get His arms and legs moving, but then, quote, "The spell cast by the mystical chanting of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, chanting His names rolling off Her lips, would not let Him move."

So now all the Gopīs, of course, had already been found and they were really enjoying this. It's said seeing all this, all the Gopīs watched in amazement; some laughed out loud, and others laughed so hard they were holding their sides, seeing Kṛṣṇa frozen on top of that hill with—how's it described—Rādhārāṇī stealthily approaching Him—that's how the translator gave it—stealthily approaching Him, all the while chanting His and Her names, like we do: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. "Oh my Lord Kṛṣṇa, oh energy of the Lord, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please engage me in Your service." Or as I've said many times, Prabhupāda one time explained to the meaning of the mantra actually at a public lecture: what does this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra mean? He said it means, "My friend, my friend, my friend." That's my favorite. And when you chant like that, that's really chanting from the heart. So She's stealthily approaching Him, and the śāstra goes on to say that Kṛṣṇa was like a deer mesmerized by a hunter's flute song. We don't see this, of course, in these days, but it appears there was a time when hunters would call the deer with a flute. So Kṛṣṇa was like a deer mesmerized by the hunter's flute song. And in that way, His ears, just described, His ears twitched at the sound of Śrī Rādhā's voice, just like those of a deer twitch upon a hunter's, hearing the hunter's flute playing.

So, unable to move—now there's a word here, unable to move, the word is *chalana*. *Chalana* is "unable to move." Kṛṣṇa stood helplessly on a particular stone on top of this hill; remember I mentioned it was rocky? He couldn't move, standing on a stone, which is *śilā*. So the *chalana-śilā*, that stone He was standing on frozen, He couldn't move; that became a very famous place. Devotees go there to see that stone. Kṛṣṇa was frozen in ecstasy of His association with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī on the *śilā*; He was frozen. So, *chalana-śilā*, where Kṛṣṇa stood unable to move. My dear devotees, we have another place to visit, another mystical place to visit, permeated with so much love in Vṛndāvana. We will put that on our list to visit on our next Kārtika parikramā.

So when Rādhārāṇī finally reached Kṛṣṇa, She placed Her hand on His arm and announced very loudly, to the ecstasy of the Gopīs, "Kṛṣṇa, You are caught! Kṛṣṇa, You are caught!" So Kṛṣṇa, He complained; I was reading Kṛṣṇa, He accused Rādhārāṇī of cheating because She used Her sweet voice to catch Him. You know, the idea is you're just supposed to go on to look for somebody, not lure them out, not freeze them. He said, "You cheated, You used Your sweet voice." But then all the Gopīs, they came around Rādhārāṇī and they defended Her. They all said to Kṛṣṇa, "There's nothing in the rules of this game that says one cannot employ the chanting of mantras." So it was one against all, and Kṛṣṇa very happily admitted that He had been defeated by the love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, *Rādhā-bhāva*. Then, still, you know, frozen there, really all He could do was talk a little bit. "You cheated, You showed my name." He's still frozen, can't move. So Kṛṣṇa pleaded, "My dearest Rādhā, I have one request." So She said, "Yes, my dear, what is it?" So Kṛṣṇa said, "Please stop chanting My name so I can start moving again." So She stopped singing, Kṛṣṇa came out of that frozen, frozen in love. "Please stop chanting so I can start moving again." *Hare Kṛṣṇa*. Isn't that a wonderful pastime?

Let's keep wandering. According to my godbrother Śrī Rāmānanda Svāmī, in his books which I often consult, he writes there's 60 billion holy places in the dhāma, of course not all of that have been revealed, but I'm sure that as we progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all these things will be revealed by the mercy of the six Gosvāmīs, the path back home. So, next we'll move on to another sacred place not too far away from *Chalana-śilā* in Pāī; the place is called Leṭārī. Leṭārī, L-e-t-a-r-i. You can write that one down. Where one day the cowherd boys, how's it described, exhausted from herding cows and collecting stray calves, decided they couldn't go on, they couldn't go any further. They got exhausted. That day the boys had herded their cows from one Vṛndāvana forest to the next, I was reading, while picking flowers along the way and stringing garlands—guess who?—for Kṛṣṇa. Isn't it wonderful? They're herding their cows and they're picking flowers all the way; they're making garlands and putting them on Kṛṣṇa, like this. And they're also—they would also collect mineral dyes to use for painting their bodies. And it's described that each cowherd boy would control his own herd of cows—get this—he would control his own herd of cows by playing his flute and blowing his horn while at the same time staying as close to Kṛṣṇa as possible. Isn't that sweet? Well, entertaining Kṛṣṇa with three things: jokes, funny faces, and gifts of fruit. These are things we have to learn; we want to become Kṛṣṇa's servants, so we can learn from the boys. They're herding their cows, blowing their bugles, their flutes, they're very expert with their sticks, but somehow they all manage to be near Kṛṣṇa and entertaining Him at the same time, because it's the love of their lives, with jokes, funny faces, and gifts of fruit.

And on this particular day, this one particular day, all of a sudden one of the boys said, "Dear Kṛṣṇa, our bodies have become lean from hunger and our throats parched from thirst. Why don't we open our lunch packs and satisfy the urgent demands of our bellies?" It's so nice how the ācāryas put it. So the ācāryas, they explain, quote, "The Gopas were or are eternal companions of the Lord with spiritual bodies, but in their roles as human boys in this world, they felt exhausted and hungry from playing all day, and so they appealed to Kṛṣṇa." And it's all part of the līlā because this also takes place in the spiritual world. So Kṛṣṇa, feeling as though He also had an empty stomach and weary limbs, He exclaimed, "Wonderful, wonderful, boys! What a wonderful proposal. Let's select a suitable place and see what our mothers packed for lunch." So all the boys yelled, "Jaya! Jaya!" And they selected a very shaded meadow under a banyan tree in Leṭārī, where they sat in a big circle. We've discussed cowherd boy pastimes before and we mentioned how when they take lunch, they sit in circles and Kṛṣṇa is in the middle, because it's in the center. So they did this again; they do it every day. And then the fun began. So what was the fun? Another three items to their fun. Their fun was that they raided each other's lunch packs. Prabhupāda discusses that very nicely in *Kṛṣṇa Book*, how they're going out to the forest and they're stealing, stealing each other's lunch packs—that's a big thing for boys, you know, because their lunch, they know they're going to be hungry, and their mothers pack the best lunches—so someone steals it and they get it back, and they still—you know, these are boys; boys will be boys. So the fun was they started stealing each other's lunch packs, they started joking amongst themselves, and they all begged for a morsel of the food that Kṛṣṇa had tasted.

You know, they're rabble-rousing around and taking in the lunch packs and then they're very eager to get one more, so the food that Kṛṣṇa had tasted. So finally one boy spoke up, quote, "Dear Gopāla, no doubt You have attained mystic powers as a result of Mother Yaśodā's cooking, otherwise what difference is there between You and us? The *yogamāyā*—dear Gopāla, no doubt You have attained mystic powers as a result of Mother Yaśodā's cooking, otherwise what difference is there between You and us? So don't be miserly, Kṛṣṇa; share some of Your lunch with us so that we can also kill demons. That way we can save You the trouble, my friend." So all the boys applauded it, and everyone scrambled to take food from Kṛṣṇa's plate. So after eating, the boys—what did they do? Oh, they drank water from a nearby pond and then rested in the shade, well, some boys fed Kṛṣṇa betel nut, other boys massaged His lotus feet, and still others they cooled Him by waving a peacock fan. Such is the daily simple life in rural Vṛndāvana for Kṛṣṇa and His friends. We often say that's the playground of God, the playground of God, and that is the life that we should aspire for. This is very nicely described in the *Nāradīya Purāṇa*. I found this verse; it's encouraging us in the same living this real life in Braja, hankering for that to be with Kṛṣṇa. Kaha, listen to this quote, this is Kṛṣṇa speaking: "Those who worship Me by a particular bhāva following after the people of Braja attain My abode and play with me." I think that's going to become one of my favorite verses. "Those who worship Me by a particular bhāva following after the people of Braja attain My abode and play with me."

Now a little more south of Leṭārī is Rāṣṭhalī. On the map I find these places—Rāṣṭhalī. And Rāṣṭhalī is named after a rasa dance Kṛṣṇa enacted there on the bank of a lake called Rasa-kuṇḍa beneath a large banyan tree. This rasa dance took place beneath a large banyan tree whose hanging roots spread out in all directions. You know, this is the phenomena of a banyan tree; it's planted, the roots go downwards, but then the tree grows, and from the tree branches roots come down and go into the ground again, and this way the banyan tree can extend for many—actually many 100 meters, 200 meters, 300 meters; sometimes I've heard of banyan trees extending for miles because that's how they grow. The roots are there, but then the tree grows and then the branches become roots, they grow into the ground and it gets bigger and bigger. This is a banyan tree. So this rasa dance took place beneath a large banyan tree whose, quote-unquote, "hanging roots spread out in all directions." Now this particular banyan tree played an important part of the rasa dance, for its upper branches not only provided cover from the hot sun, but its maze of hanging roots added variety to the dancers' movements. You can imagine; they're all dancing under this banyan tree, but all these hanging roots are there, so they have to—the idea is it's a maze—they have to dance in between and around all these hanging roots.

Special *rāsa-līlā* dance. In other *rāsa* dances, the dancers generally move in one or many concentric circles. It's quite simple: one circle is going this way, another circle is going the other way, then the other circle goes out like this, like you see waves—you throw a rock into the water and the waves can make concentric circles. So in *rāsa-līlā* those circles are going in different directions, they're oscillating. But at this particular *rāsa-līlā*, they twisted the circles of dancers; they twisted and they wove in a zigzag pattern through and around all these tangling, hanging roots of this gigantic tree. Can you imagine? That's the *rāsa-līlā*; they're all going—it's not like a circle like this, they're all together but they're going winding through. And the ācāryas say that despite the unusual patterns of this particular *rāsa-līlā* dancing at Rāṣṭhalī, the singing, the steps, and the music were the same as any other *rāsa* dance, and it was as such it was the same bliss felt by Kṛṣṇa and His dance partners in any other *rāsa* dance, but it was very unique. It's a very unique *rāsa* dance. And the ācāryas write, quote, "The ecstasy of the participants occasionally reached such heights that the roots of the tree also appeared to be dancing and the trunk of the tree seemed to be swaying in ecstasy," because all these trees, remember, they're fully conscious, fully enlightened pure devotees, Kalpa-vṛkṣa, desire trees; you can imagine how happy this particular tree was in this particular place in Vṛndāvana. So śāstra concludes, quote, "The only ones to feel excluded from this unique festival of dancing were the demigods who were unable to see through the tree's canopy from the airplanes above because it was so thick; they couldn't see this *rāsa-līlā*." Indeed, the śāstra says they could only hear the sounds of this most unique *rāsa* dance. *Hare Kṛṣṇa*.

I hope, I pray that today's lecture has left you hankering for more nectar about Vṛndāvana and this is my service these days; this is my service. So I'll do my best to try to satisfy your hankerings in a couple of days, every Tuesday and Friday. But before leaving, to further increase your hankering, we'll leave you with a very long, tantalizing verse from a book we quoted from about a month and a half ago, *Premā-bhakti-candrikā* by Narottama dāsa, a cowherd boy, very beautiful. He gives a very beautiful, detailed description of Kṛṣṇa, so please allow me to finish today. This will be like—you know, like that we have that saying, *hors d'oeuvre*, I think it's a French word but it's common in English, *hors d'oeuvre* means that the host gives you a little something to get your appetite going before the main meal, maybe some peanuts like that, some crackers, and some apple juice, and then, you know, you start getting hungry then when the main meal comes. This beautiful description of Kṛṣṇa will act as an *hors d'oeuvre* for next Tuesday's lecture. Please allow me:

"Kṛṣṇa has the complexion of a fresh rain cloud. He shines like millions of suns but is as cool as millions of moons. His beautiful yellow cloth shines like lightning. The garland in His crown is like a line of cranes flying in the sky. He has an attractive body which is eternally; His beauty defeats millions of Cupids. His cowherd friends are absorbed in bliss as Kṛṣṇa becomes king of Vṛndāvana. His beautiful brows defeat the bow of Cupid. The dots of sandalwood on His cheeks have the beauty of the moon. In His locks of hair is a peacock feather. He has musk *tilaka* with a line of sandalwood on His forehead. He has a yellow cloth around His waist with a belt. His arms, like elephant trunks, are decorated with bracelets. His nails shine like millions of moons. His palms shine like red shoots. His feet shine with curved anklets. Seeing all this, Cupid becomes greedy."

Kṛṣṇa, thank you, Prabhus. Yeah, be back in a couple of days. All right, Kṛṣṇa.

*Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Rādhā Śyāmasundara kī jaya!* Hey, thank you.""