"*00568*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone. I am very, very happy to be back in our beloved Māyāpur Dhāma. As you know, I spent the month of Kārtika in Vṛndāvana with a parikramā party of 350 devotees. We had many of our favorite compatriots there as well, like Śrīpāda, Badarī, and others. It was very relishable visiting all the various holy places; we have been doing it for 35 years, but we are not close to finishing because, according to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, there are 60 billion holy places in Vraja-maṇḍala.

The more that one becomes purified in devotional service, the more that one identifies Vṛndāvana as our actual home. You come to realize this as the years go by. Recently, on Pītapura’s departure festival in Vṛndāvana, I wrote as follows to him: "Having accepted the renounced order of life, my home is this Vṛndāvana forest. My bed is the soft dust of Vṛndāvana. The sky of Vṛndāvana is my blanket, and the flowering creepers of Vṛndāvana are my only belongings. The moon over Vṛndāvana is the lamp of my hopes, and my chanting beads are counting the days until I meet you again."

So, after cultivating such feelings over the years, one can imagine how difficult it is to leave that transcendental abode—our home. But that is not so if, upon leaving Vṛndāvana, one's next destination is Māyāpura. He writes, "One should know that Gauḍa-maṇḍala, the place where Mahāprabhu stayed, is equal to Vṛndāvana." That is also confirmed by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his *Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya*. He writes:

$$mandāra-kānana-cchāyā-cintāmani-puravāsāḥ$$

"May my eyes behold the 16-krośa land of Vṛndāvana as identical to Navadvīpa within Gauḍa-maṇḍala. These two eternal spiritual abodes are but the manifestation of one truth. It is in accordance with the different pastimes of the Lord that they have taken the form of two divine abodes."

Coming here to Māyāpura after spending time in Vṛndāvana is perfectly in accordance with our philosophy and our tradition. For example, our great ācāryas like Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī would spend six months in Vṛndāvana and then six months in Māyāpura most years. Also, they would spend significant time in each abode. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura showed his affection and attachment for both places by building magnificent temples in both Vṛndāvana and now in Māyāpura, and then inviting the whole world to come and visit. So, definitely, there is no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura.

I am happy to be back home. Actually, those devotees who are surrendered, they visit both Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura. We can say we have our favorites—maybe someone favors Vṛndāvana or favors Māyāpura—but actually, favoring one means you favor the other. It is inconceivable to mundane logic, and surrendered devotees should visit both. Māyāpura devotees should go to Vṛndāvana, and Vrajavāsīs should come to Māyāpura; that is a sign of surrender. The sādhus quote the following verse: "One who says to Kṛṣṇa with feeling from his heart, 'Kṛṣṇa, I belong to You,' and who joyfully travels to holy places related to the Supreme Lord, is considered to be a fully surrendered soul."

So, it is actually important as proof of this transcendental reality that Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura are actually the same—a little bit different flavor, but the same. It is seen in the fact that a pure devotee can see the pastimes going on in Vṛndāvana, or that may be going on in Navadvīpa, simultaneously. Because the electricity also goes off in Vṛndāvana sometimes, it takes a couple of hours. So, how long does it take for the electricity to come back on in Māyāpura? We will see. Will this go on for quite some time? Māyāpura wins; Vṛndāvana is sometimes the whole day.

So, my point that we were developing was that a pure devotee can see pastimes. If a devotee is in Vṛndāvana, because the abodes are the same, he can see pastimes going on at the same time in Māyāpura. And if one is in Māyāpura, being a pure devotee, he can see the pastimes going on in Vṛndāvana. For example, one time someone was giving darśana to some guests, and they said to him, "Bābājī, can you show us some miracle?" So Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī said, "I don't know how to perform miracles." Actually, I have read recently that the pure devotee has all the mystic siddhis, but he doesn't use them because he wants the general public to follow him for the knowledge that he is giving—the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Actually, it was an exception one time. Prabhupāda quoted one miracle that he performed. Some reporter was present at one program with Śrīla Prabhupāda, and he said, "Swamiji, can you show us a miracle?" So Prabhupāda said, "Yes, I can show you." Everyone, including the disciples, was very eager to see the miracle that Prabhupāda was going to show. So then Prabhupāda just waved his hand, indicating his disciples all sitting in the front rows. He said, "This is my miracle: that these Western boys and girls have become very nice Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs. That is a miracle."

Actually, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has one verse—I have forgotten the Sanskrit—but he said just as bell metal, an ordinary metal, can be turned into gold by a mystical process, in the same way, by proper diction and training, a low-class person could become a brāhmaṇa. In other words, if you want to see a miracle, just look in the mirror. You don't have to go very far. Look in the mirror or take a photograph of yourself before you joined the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement and look at yourself now; you will see the miracle appear right before you.

One of my disciples recently came to me—very fulgent, very blissful, very happy—and he had a photo album that his parents had sent him from when he was young. I looked at the pictures, and I said, "Before coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you looked like a yamadūta; now you look like an angel." And Prabhupāda noted this himself. He said one time, "Before coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, so many of you were addicted to sinful activities; you weren't clean, you weren't regulated, etc., but now that you've come to this movement, you look just like you've come from Vaikuṇṭha with your dhotīs, kurtās, sarīs, tilaka, and kaṇṭhī-mālā—just like you've come from Vaikuṇṭha." This is all Śrīla Prabhupāda's miracle.

Generally, we think of a miracle as something that just happens like that, like a bolt of lightning from the sky. But Prabhupāda's miracle will go on at least 10,000 years during the time of the Saṅkīrtana movement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. His miracle will continue to make devotees all over the world, and we could probably say all over the universe.

So anyway, these guests, back to Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī: these guests said, "Bābājī, can you perform some miracle?" He said, "I don't know how to perform miracles." And then, suddenly, to everyone's surprise, he picked up a stick and he started beating the ground very hard, beating the ground very angrily. So the guests, they took it that maybe they had offended him in some way, that he was angry at them or they had not asked the right question. So they began apologizing, "Oh Bābājī, we're so sorry; you don't have to show us any miracles. It's okay, don't get angry at us." So he said, "No, no," he said, "I'm not angry with you. I was chasing a goat who was trying to eat a tulasī plant somewhere near the cottage of Locana dāsa Ṭhākura."

What's amazing about this: he was in Māyāpura in Navadvīpa giving darśana to his guests, and Locana dāsa Ṭhākura's cottage was at Rādhā-kuṇḍa in Vṛndāvana. That place was being nicely maintained by those who eventually came to follow him several hundred years later. So these pilgrims decided to test Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī: "You're chasing a goat who is eating a tulasī plant near the cottage of Locana dāsa Ṭhākura, and like, how do you know that? Is that a goat?" They decided to test him. One can test the guru, Prabhupāda said, before initiation in order to gain faith in the spiritual master. However, after initiation, one cannot test one's guru.

So, to test him—actually they shouldn't even have tested him because he is a mahā-bhāgavata—but anyway, they sent a telegram to Vṛndāvana. Bear in mind this is the 1920s or 1930s. They sent a telegram to Vṛndāvana, specifically to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and they inquired: "Was there a goat that came that afternoon to eat a tulasī plant near the preserved cottage of Locana dāsa Ṭhākura on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa?" They got a reply pretty quickly. The message back was that yes, there was a goat who was just about to eat a tulasī plant near the cottage of Locana dāsa Ṭhākura, but suddenly it just got frightened, like it heard a loud noise, and it ran away. That was enough proof for the pilgrims.

So what's the conclusion for us? That although Navadvīpa and Vṛndāvana are separated by more than a thousand kilometers and miles, because both of them are manifestations of the same Dhāma and of the same spiritual world, personalities like the level of Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī can see these things taking place. He was in Navadvīpa, but he could see through his pure transcendental vision. One can see these things with eyes purified by loving devotion. And the proof was there's no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura, although the mood may be a little bit different, but in a wonderful way.

On another occasion—there are a number of examples—there was a brāhmaṇa Vrajavāsī who lived in Vṛndāvana, and he desired to go on pilgrimage to different holy places in India. So he went here and he went there, and eventually his good fortune was that he came here to Bengal. Because of the appearance of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Bengal is actually famous, if only for that. When we think of Bengali culture, we think of Mahāprabhu, miṣṭi-doi, kīrtana, Maṅgala-Gauḍīya, the Gaṅgā, etc.

I was very happy to arrive back home in Bengal yesterday, so much so that for a moment I broke my diet that I have been following for almost five months. I've only been eating quinoa and avocados, but I drove past the place on the way here to Māyāpura where they sell miṣṭi-doi. I said to the driver, "Stop." He said, "What? An emergency?" I said, "Yes, miṣṭi-doi." He was so fired up he jumped out and bought it for me, and I had three. Couldn't sleep last night, my head was spinning. Miṣṭi-doi, it's like a yogurt-type sweet. Have you had it? What, you live in Māyāpura and it's your first time in Māyāpura? My gosh. How many of you have had miṣṭi-doi? Say "Mmm!" There you go.

Right, actually our Kṛṣṇa conscious culture very much reflects Bengali culture. But unfortunately, with the advance of Kali-yuga, that culture is disappearing here, just like in Vṛndāvana the culture is somewhat disappearing as well. I think ISKCON has the responsibility to preserve the cultures of both these transcendental abodes. One time, someone told me that Prabhupāda told him on one occasion that he felt he was successful in inaugurating the saṅkīrtana movement in the West. So Prabhupāda said, "I am coming back to India to revive Kṛṣṇa consciousness in Bengal."

I think one of the great contributions that Caitanya Mahāprabhu made in appearing here is that this culture has lots of sweets, whereas other parts of India—I'm not going to criticize, but they have some sweets. Here, South India has kind of like a brāhmaṇa spaghetti or something, I don't know what it is. Other places, there you go to Bengali market, so many sweets. And taking prasādam is an integral part of our culture. So thank God Caitanya appeared in Bengal. We have to maintain that tradition. Ice cream is nice, okay, but Bengali sweets, that's very high culture. And pizza is nice, okay, but Bengali food cooked with mustard oil, it's one of my favorite prasādams. It's just so wonderful. Wow, thank you. What? Okay, thank you again, Māyāpura Dhāma. Kṛṣṇa just confirmed what I said; it's the day it is.

So anyway, this Vrajavāsī, he traveled around India and he eventually came to Bengal. He specifically came to Ekācakra, the appearance place of Lord Nityānanda. This is where Lord Nityānanda appeared. It's about a three-hour drive from here. From Ekācakra, you can consider it one place because this is Nadia. When he got to Ekācakra, not knowing very much about that place where Nityānanda appeared, he hired a guide to take him around. As they are starting to walk around Ekācakra, this brāhmaṇa says to the guide, "Is there anything special about Ekācakra?"

So his guide was actually a very advanced devotee, a very Kṛṣṇa-conscious person. So he said something very interesting; he said, "Yes, yes, actually my dear pilgrim, there's no difference between Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana and Ekācakra or Māyāpura-Navadvīpa. These are all one abode." Because when you speak about Vṛndāvana, you speak of Vraja-maṇḍala; not just the village of Vṛndāvana, but the vast area is called Vraja-maṇḍala. So Gauḍa-maṇḍala also includes Ekācakra and Navadvīpa. Śāstras say there is no difference between these two abodes, Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura.

So the pilgrim, he kind of chuckled. He said, "What are you talking about? There's no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura-Ekācakra? He said, "You haven't been to Vṛndāvana; it's very different there. I've been in Vṛndāvana, now I'm here in this Ekācakra; there's a big difference. You're calling it the same place?" So he said to the guide, "If this is Vṛndāvana, show me the Yamunā River." So the guide said, "Yes, we have Yamunā here; follow me, I'll show you the Yamunā River."

So they walked through the village and a little bit outside, because the Yamunā, she actually originally encircled Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana was almost like an island, you could say; the Yamunā River went all the way around like that. So he took him to the edge of the Ekācakra, and there was a little stream. He said, "There's the Yamunā." You know, you think of a river, and here is a little stream. He said, "Here is the Yamunā." So the pilgrim said, "What? This little stream? You've got to be kidding me." Anyway, he thought there must be something sacred about that stream because, well, Ekācakra is a holy place. So he concluded there must be something special about this water; it's not the Yamunā, but it's still sacred. So he put down his walking stick—he had a nice walking stick—on the bank of the stream, and he went into the water where it was flowing a little bit stronger, to chant his Gāyatrī.

He is thinking, "I chant my Gāyatrī in the Yamunā, it's up to here; it's flowing in little streams, barely up to my ankles—how can this be the Yamunā?" So he finished his Gāyatrī and he got out, but he saw that the little stream was going a little faster where he was and had carried away his stick; his walking stick was gone. That the walking stick had been washed into the stream. So he was very attached to that stick; he carried it all over India. But he got over it and he continued his pilgrimage around India.

Now, about a year later, he came back home to Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana. When he arrived there, his family members and his friends, they all gathered around him and they said, "How was your pilgrimage? Where did you go? What did you do?" So he shared with them everything, where he had gone, etc. And then he got to the part where he arrived in Bengal and told them about his travels there, and he said, "You know, it's funny, the people of Bengal, when you get to places like Ekācakra, they think it's non-different than Vṛndāvana. They're really funny people. He said, "They actually think it's non-different than that." And he concluded, "It was really funny: when I was in Ekācakra, there's this little stream, a bubbling stream running through the village, and they call it the Yamunā River."

So then, next day in Vṛndāvana, by the arrangement of the Lord, our pilgrim, he went to the Yamunā to chant his Gāyatrī. He's up to his waist, as he remembered, chanting his Gāyatrī. The river is flowing there. All of a sudden, boom, something hits his knee under the water. It didn't face him, he got stuck between his legs, couldn't move. So he finished his Gāyatrī and then he reaches down, and he pulls out a stick. What's the stick? The same walking stick that he had lost; it had been washed away in the little stream in Ekācakra.

So he came to the conclusion, because he's a brāhmaṇa, he has some knowledge, that actually there is no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura-Ekācakra. That realization was more important to him than getting back his walking stick. His walking stick just served the purpose of him coming to the realization that we all have by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our ācāryas: there is no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura.

So I am really happy to be back home. I left home to come home—how do you say that to somebody? These things are only—logic cannot understand. Much of our way of life has to be experienced by a devotee. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is something mystical, and you are all fortunate to be living here, and by practicing here, many wonderful things will be revealed to you. We'll finish with a nice quote from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*, one of my favorite books, text number 66, a really beautiful verse:

"O handsome, fragrant Tamāla desire tree, blooming in the Vṛndāvana forest and embraced by the mādhvī vine of the Goddess ruling this forest, O tree, the shade of whose glory protects the world from a host of burning sufferings, what wonderful fruits do the people find at your feet?"

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""