"*00104*.*
"I think the proper etiquette, and it would be most appropriate, is to thank my dear Godbrothers who came this morning and spoke so nicely, especially my very dear eternal friend and loving Godbrother Bhakti Bringa Govinda Swami. I think he deserves another big round of applause; he spoke straight from the heart, so I very much appreciate everything you said, Maharaja. For most of the morning, many of you were reading your offerings. I also appreciate your kind words. As you were all speaking, I was remembering something that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura said one time at one of his Vyāsa-pūjā ceremonies in the 1930s. I read this in *The Harmonist*. *The Harmonist* was much like our *Back to Godhead* magazine—an attempt to introduce the mass of people to Krishna consciousness. So, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī had a newspaper; it was called *The Harmonist*, and it was distributed to his followers, who I heard one time numbered 50,000, as well as the general public. A couple of years ago, one devotee gave me maybe 15 or 20 volumes of *The Harmonist*—the newspapers collected, printed, of course, collected like this. So, from time to time, I read just to hear some of the words of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī and also to learn a little bit of the history of how his movement began and developed in India. In one of his lectures at the Vyāsa-pūjā ceremony, he said that he saw his disciples present like his gurus. When I read that, I thought that was quite interesting. Addressing his disciples, he said, "I see you all like my gurus because you are teaching me how to have faith in the spiritual master, in Krishna." He appreciated their faith, and he was taking that as an inspiration for his own faith in his spiritual master, Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. At the end, he quoted that famous verse:

"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically revealed."

So, taking that cue, I also see you like my gurus today, because hearing your faith and your devotion, your love for me as your spiritual master, inspired me to deepen my faith, my trust, and my service to my spiritual master, Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda is the founder-ācārya of ISKCON, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. We are all serving his lotus feet. Actually, his name is indicative of who he actually is, because translated, "Prabhupāda" means "that master at whose feet all masters sit." Wonderful. "Prabhupāda" means "that master at whose feet all other masters sit"—that’s our Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, someone can say, "How can you say such a thing? There’s so many paths, there’s so many spiritual masters, there’s so many processes. How can you say that all the masters are meant to sit at Prabhupāda’s lotus feet?" Well, his name, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, is indicative, because the term *vedānta*—we say *bhakti-vedānta*—the term *vedānta* in Sanskrit literally means the conclusion, the *anta*, of the Vedas. *Bhakti-vedānta*. *Vedānta* means the conclusion, the *anta*, of the Vedas. And what is the conclusion of all the Vedic literature, all the knowledge we’re studying? It’s *bhakti*, or devotion to God, or to Krishna. That’s the *pramāṇa* of everything we’re doing: to develop love. So we have the perfect teacher and the perfect example in Śrīla Prabhupāda. So *Bhaktivedānta* means he who has realized the very height, you could say conclusion, of all knowledge, and that is loving devotion to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That’s the perfection of life, and it’s rarely attained. So, such a person as that is superior to all others, both teachers and students, on the path of self-realization. And thus, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, you could say alone in this age, he is the master at whose feet all masters sit. It’s a very noble title, a very prestigious title.

Again, Prabhupāda. In fact, one time on a morning walk here in Vṛndāvana—it was called the Chattikara Road previously, now it’s called Bhaktivedānta Swami Marg—but Śrīla Prabhupāda, and I’m sure Bhakti Charu Maharaja can attest to this, Prabhupāda liked to take walks in the morning, and from time to time he would walk on that road. Now, because Vṛndāvana has become so popular, in part due to the fact that we’re preaching Krishna consciousness all over the world and here in India, it’s very difficult to walk down that road, especially today on Sunday. You try to walk down Chattikara Road, Bhaktivedānta Swami Marg; it’s difficult. There are thousands and thousands and thousands of people. But in those days, our temple, you could say, was somewhat isolated. It was far from the Vṛndāvana proper. In fact, when Prabhupāda tried for the land that we now have our temple on, some of the devotees said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, it’s just so far away! Who’s going to come?" Now it’s almost like it’s the middle of the city; there are tens of thousands of people on big events, than even just on regular days. But just try to imagine in those days, you know, the temple as it was being constructed, Krishna Balaram Mandir here, and as when it was completed, the devotees were going out to preach—literally out; they go far away because it was so remote—our temple. But Prabhupāda had the vision, of course; he could see. *Trikāla-jña* means a pure devotee—he can see past, present, and future. So Prabhupāda could see how Vṛndāvana would one day become popular.

But in those days, he would walk down that road, and there was one time when the devotees were advertising a lecture that Śrīla Prabhupāda was going to give. I can’t remember the theme or the title of the lecture, but there were posters posted around Vṛndāvana encouraging the Vrajabāsīs to come and hear from their dearmost son, Śrīla Prabhupāda. And on the poster, even, I think there were a couple billboards, it said, "His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda will be lecturing at such-and-such a time." So the first morning that Śrīla Prabhupāda saw that advertisement, he turned to his disciples and he said, "When my Godbrothers see you have used that term 'Prabhupāda' for me, they’ll kill me." Why? Because all along that title had been reserved for his spiritual master, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. But the devotees didn’t remove the sign; Prabhupāda didn’t command them. He just made that point that "My Godbrothers are not going to like that you’re calling me Prabhupāda, when that’s the name of my spiritual master." But the devotees kept all the posters up because what is the saying? "The good son inherits the qualities of the father." And actually, in fact, a number of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Godbrothers did recognize what he did and did very much appreciate it. Krishna Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, he would often come to see Śrīla Prabhupāda, but he spent time with the devotees, showing us how to chant, what is the mood to chant, etc. A very prominent Godbrother of Śrīla Prabhupāda, his name was Sridhar Swami, he said one time that our Prabhupāda is *śaktyāveśa-avatāra*. *Avatāra* literally means one who descends from the spiritual world for the purpose of reestablishing *dharma*. Krishna is the original *avatāra*; he’s the source of the very much appreciated *daśāvatāra*—every Indian knows that—*daśāvatāra*, ten incarnations of Krishna. Krishna is *avatārī*, the source of all the incarnations. But sometimes it may be that Krishna will empower a particular person to represent him. I heard Prabhupāda say one time in Rome, "Along with the instruction of the spiritual master comes the ability to execute it."

And one of my Godbrothers who was acting as Prabhupāda’s secretary, one time he said that in a moment of intimacy, Prabhupāda revealed the moment that Krishna asked him to come to this world. Govinda Maharaja, I was listening to one of his lectures recently, he said there’s two types of souls who come from the spiritual world. Two kinds come to the Earth planet for preaching Krishna consciousness. He said one is the devotee who, understanding what’s going on down here, it appears their understanding, out of compassion he leaves the spiritual world to preach. And Govinda Maharaja said the other soul who comes to this world to spread Krishna consciousness comes from the direct order of Krishna. So another Godbrother told me that Prabhupāda told him in a moment of intimacy that Krishna asked him, our Prabhupāda, to come to the Earth planet and preach Krishna consciousness. But Prabhupāda said, "But I’m not so inclined towards austerities." So Krishna said, "That’s all right; you just go down and you spread this movement. You write books on the science of Krishna consciousness, and I will arrange everything for you." So that way, we can understand how dear our Śrīla Prabhupāda is to Krishna, because if you have an important mission, if you have an important work, you have an important business, something has to be done, it’s urgent and it’s extremely important to you, then you pick your best man to go forward and execute it. So we’re very proud to say that Prabhupāda was chosen in that way.

And similarly, he was the chosen son of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. We’ve heard how many times Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura chose Śrīla Prabhupāda to go to the West. In fact, I was reading also that some of Prabhupāda’s Godbrothers became a little—I don’t like to use the word, but a little jealous. They complained to Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura that he was giving so much association to this *gṛhastha*. Some of the *sannyāsīs*, they were saying, "You’re giving so much time to Abhay Charan, what about us? We’re the preachers." So on that instance, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura became angry. He said, "Do not talk like that. You will see, in the end, he will do everything." He told them, "He has the bhakti; do not speak like that. You will see, in the end, he will do everything." And he did, and more. There’s a saying in armies: to go above and beyond the call of duty. Śrīla Prabhupāda received the instruction to basically spread Krishna consciousness in the English-speaking language, because if you think about it, although there’s many languages on the planet, if a person learns a second language, it’s usually English—it’s not German or French or Portuguese—for worldly affairs, etc. But now we can see Prabhupāda has books in French and German and Spanish; we’re printing Bhagavad-gītā in Zulu language in South Africa. So therefore, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta, very early in Prabhupāda’s preaching, he said *śaktyāveśa-avatāra*—it means a person especially empowered to spread *dharma* in the world. And our Ācārya knew the heart’s desire of his spiritual master, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. Thus he left at the ripe old age of 70—I’m 75, I can’t imagine how Prabhupāda inaugurated this movement at this age; he was beginning his preaching—so he knew that, he knew the heart of Bhaktisiddhānta.

I read a quote the other day: "A father and son never truly part, maybe in distance but never in heart." "A father and son never truly part, maybe in distance but never in heart." Same holds true for the spiritual father, the spiritual master, and his sons and daughters. And now it’s history. But we may sometimes take it for granted that being empowered, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s work was easy. You know, you read through, and we all know how successful he was, but we don’t know really what it was like to initiate, to begin a spiritual movement in the material world. It’s almost, you could say, an impossibility. In carpentry, they have a saying: "to go against the grain." Like if you’re shaving wood, the wood has a nature—the grain goes like this—but if you turn it around and you try to shave the wood against the grain, it’s very difficult. But what took Christianity 2,000 years to spread all over the world took Śrīla Prabhupāda a mere 20 years or so. It wasn’t easy.

I once personally witnessed how hard it was, and what risk Prabhupāda took to spread Krishna consciousness in the Western world. Prabhupāda came to Paris in, I believe it was, 1974, and we had arranged a big program for him in a very prestigious hall down near the Quartier Latin—it means the Latin Quarter, where that prestigious Sorbonne University is situated. And it’s just a very—it’s like a student quarter, ultimately, you could say. And at that time, 1974, there was a rebellion of the French youth against all authority, practically speaking. They wanted to bring the government down. There were, like, big demonstrations every day in the Quartier Latin, and we used to go there and do *harināma-saṅkīrtana*, Hare Krishna, and the students couldn’t figure out why we’re singing and dancing and we’re so happy and they’re so angry. We were singing *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*, and they were chanting in French, "No master, no God." Very rebellious spirit. No master, no God. Sometimes we were having *kīrtana*, and they on the other side of the street, they tried to, you know, 20 or 30 of them would chant like that to drown us out. But you couldn’t drown us out because we were chanting with real fervor. So we decided to have a program for Śrīla Prabhupāda in Salle Pleyel. It had about, I think, 2,500 seats. Everyone kept saying, "You know, you Hare Krishnas, who’s going to listen to your message? Get up with the times. You’re speaking a message that was spoken 5,000 years ago in India. These are modern times; here in France we want to bring down the government. Revolution! No one’s going to come to your program." But lo and behold, we held the program. We were also amazed; 2,500 people came to Salle Pleyel because we had Prabhupāda’s poster all over the town, and there’s enough, enough people that were interested.

But unfortunately, what we found out by experience was that much of the crowd were the students who had come for a little revolution at our Hare Krishna program. Unfortunately, I could sense it when they started coming in. The whole main section was—I knew the faces from street *saṅkīrtana*. All these boys and girls, you know, dressed in a certain way, mumbling, grumbling, and you could tell they didn’t come to hear from a pure devotee; they came to cause trouble. So a couple of us, we kept our boots on. We did *saṅkīrtana* in those days with boots, because very wet and rainy—kept our boots on because maybe there would be trouble. And sure enough, when we had a nice *kīrtana*, Yogīśvara Prabhu, my Godbrother, was leading a very beautiful *kīrtana*, and the moment came when Śrīla Prabhupāda arrived. And the pious Parisians, they spontaneously stood up when Prabhupāda came in; it was very nice. But the whole middle section, nobody stood up. They were rumbling and grumbling like that. So Śrīla Prabhupāda sat down, he chanted *jaya-rādhā-mādhava* very sweetly, and then he did something that I really—it surprised me, because we had a Bhagavad-gītā on the table for him. He looked at the Bhagavad-gītā, he said, "Bring me a Bible." And none of us had a Bible. We have a Bible? And surely, surely the students, they didn’t have a Bible. And Prabhupāda was demanding, "Bring me a Bible!" Some old lady, I believe she was sitting there, she had a Bible in her purse. She—it was given to Śrīla Prabhupāda by his translator, Jñānagamya. And Prabhupāda referred to a particular part of the Bible where it glorifies the name of God, the word of God. And Prabhupāda had Jñānagamya read that passage about how the name of God is sacred. We read from the Bible, not the Gītā, not the Bhāgavatam. I don’t know if Prabhupāda ever did that anywhere again. He had her read from the Bible, and Prabhupāda spoke from the Bible. But it wasn’t difficult, because he was speaking about the glories of Krishna’s holy names, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

So Prabhupāda was about 20 minutes into his lecture, glorifying the holy name, chanting different verses, speaking about Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the *yuga-avatāra* who brought the chanting of Hare Krishna for you good Parisian citizens. And suddenly this big group—there must have been 400, 500 students—they tried to drown out, drown out Śrīla Prabhupāda. "Down on the ground! Down! Get off the seat!" They were saying, "Get off the seat and sit on the ground," because Prabhupāda was on a big *vyāsāsana*. We made it like three times as big as this. And they didn’t respect authority. "Everyone’s equal, everyone has a right to speak his mind, nobody’s better than the other, those in authority are exploiting us," which does happen in Kali-yuga. But they just couldn’t stand anyone who thought that they, you know, could sit in the big seat and tell them something. So Prabhupāda, it was getting loud, and Prabhupāda kept speaking very calmly. I was so impressed; I was getting all nervous and just... And then Prabhupāda turned to Yogīśvara. He said, "What are they saying?" And Yogīśvara said, "They want you to get off the *vyāsāsana*, Prabhupāda, and sit on the ground with them." So Prabhupāda was defiant. He said, "You tell them that I’m speaking about Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the most important person of all. And if any one of them thinks they can speak better about God, I will get off this *vyāsāsana* and listen to them." So Yogīśvara, he gave that challenge to the audience, and no, no, they know—they didn’t think anyone—but Prabhupāda, he stood there. And then one boy stood up, he pulled out a knife. So there were some German devotees there, they’d also come for the program, I think the one boy’s name was Mahāvir—I can’t remember his name—so he, myself, and one of the devotees, we jumped off the stage and we ran to where that boy was wielding the knife. And Mahāvir was a big, tough, you know, German devotee; he immediately disarmed that boy, took him to the ground. So we all picked him up, and, you know, we twisted him and turned him, he put his arm, and we started taking him out. But the students were all supporting him, of course, and we got to the back of the hall and some students came to fight, and more devotees came forward and they backed off, and it was a very tense situation. Prabhupāda was still speaking, because, you know, a hall of 2,500 people, there’s a scuffle, it doesn’t—like, not everyone’s seeing it. But then I heard that Bhava-nanda Dāsa and Yogīśvara, they could see trouble was brewing, so they asked Śrīla Prabhupāda to finish his lecture and get up. So although the Prabhupāda only spoke for 20 minutes, he very, you know, very casually but with, you know, determination, he said, "So as I was saying, this Hare Krishna *mantra*, this is the solution for all problems in the age of Kali." And he stood up, and they walked him through the back door.

So at that moment, it had a big impression on me: how despite the difficulty, the challenge, the danger, Śrīla Prabhupāda remained fixed and he kept giving the message. And I was thinking at that moment, "I want to be just like you, Śrīla Prabhupāda. You simply spread this Krishna consciousness movement wherever you send me in the world." And in that mood, one of my favorite quotes has always been from a Quaker—Quaker, I don't—you probably don’t know Quakers—Quakers is a certain Christian denomination, they live very simply, simple living with high thinking. In America they have their farming communities, they live very simple. So one of their famous—a famous Quaker’s name was Stephen Grellet, and he wrote as follows. I kind of—one time I thought it would—I would make it my mission statement. I’m just sharing it with you because you’re my—most of you are my disciples—but there’s that tendency, you make a mission statement, what you’re—what you want to do or what you want to achieve in life. You write it down, a paragraph or two. So when I read Stephen Grellet, I thought, "Yes, this is what he wrote":

"I shall pass through this world but once. Any good, therefore, that I can do, or any kindness I can show to any human being, let me do it now. Let me not defer it or neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again."

I’ll read it again: "I shall pass through this world but once. Any good, therefore, that I can do, or any kindness I can show to any human being, let me do it now. Let me not defer it or neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again."

So beautiful. So it’s a good sentiment. He was a humanitarian, but under Śrīla Prabhupāda’s direction, we are all doing the ultimate good, isn’t it? Prabhupāda coined that phrase, "spiritual welfare." If you look up at a thesaurus or a dictionary or whatever, you won’t see spiritual welfare. You’ll read about humanitarian activities: distributing food, medicine, clothing, housing. But Prabhupāda coined the phrase "spiritual welfare," because everyone needs welfare. *Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*. What is this world? Krishna says, out of all the 700 verses of Bhagavad-gītā, *duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam* is truth spoken concisely; it summarizes the whole phantasmagoria of material life. It’s a temporary place full of suffering. *Voilà*, they say in French, that’s it. So many people are trying to study material nature and figure it out, and how it works, and why, and this and that. *Duḥkhālayam*—it’s a temporary place full of suffering. So welfare means people are not faring well, so welfare—do something for their wellness, do some welfare. But whatever welfare you give, it’s only temporary, because—well, we’ve discussed this many times—you know, the karma comes up again. It’s like Rāvaṇa. When Rāma was fighting Rāvaṇa, he would cut off his head, one of Rāvaṇa’s ten heads, it grow back—maybe 10 heads he’d cut off, and they all grow back. So because of our past sinful activities, our karma manifests again.

So it’s a nice sentiment, but spiritual welfare—by distributing books, by chanting in public, holding festivals, establishing temples, farm communities, cow protection—we’re teaching people a life where, by serving Krishna in various capacities and donating every one of our activities to Krishna, and whenever possible chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*, our love for him will manifest, because love is reciprocal. In fact, Krishna loves us more than at this date we love him. So he goes way out of his way; every day he comes—in the day of Brahmā he comes—to remind us. So because we’re making some attempt, he notices. Prabhupāda said one time in Los Angeles that if Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sees a new devotee coming in and taking up Krishna consciousness, then Prabhupāda says she says to Krishna, "You see, there’s one nice young boy, one nice young girl, just starting to serve. Please give them your mercy." So therefore we appeal to her first: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. Dear Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, you, the tender-hearted, compassionate *hlādinī-śakti*, pleasure potency of Krishna, you are the personified; will you please introduce me to your beloved Lord? So that’s the solution to all problems. We’re showing people the way home. And like Śrīla Prabhupāda, it’s often not easy for us, because as we know, there’s enemies. Everyone has experience, because Prabhupāda says there’s two types of created beings in this world: the divine and the demoniac. And whereas the divine take great pleasure in helping others, the demoniac take great pleasure in exploiting others. So even though we’re innocent in our endeavors to spread Krishna consciousness, there may be opposition. There’s also opposition from within—there’s that saying, "I am my own worst enemy"—because we maintain, you know, those desires which are adverse to pure devotional service. Somehow, somehow we hang on: lust, anger, and greed. "I am my own worst enemy." But we have to persevere in purifying ourselves and we have to persevere in spreading this Krishna consciousness movement.

And if we do so, Prabhupāda will bless us because we took up his mission, which was his spiritual master’s mission, which was his spiritual master’s—all the way back to Krishna. They were not asking anything in return. So they appreciate that; that’s *amulya-kīrtana*—just let me serve you. Imagine if you went to some company, they’re advertising, you know, "Help Wanted," and you go in and you take the interview and they may pose the question, "Well, what kind of salary are you expecting?" And you say, "I don’t want any salary; I just want to work for your company because I know it gives pleasure to you." Who does that? Who goes to a workforce and says, "I’ll just serve you for free"? And if you would do something like that, there are people like that; they—they appreciate some company, so they’ll work for free for a while, or some cause they’ll work for free—political cause, humanitarian cause—they’re very much appreciated. So how much more if a devotee works his whole life for Krishna, not expecting anything in return? *Kṛṣṇa, mamāpi*, "I don’t want any material wealth, I’m not interested in illicit activity with the opposite sex, I don’t want name or fame, I just want your causeless devotional service birth after birth." If we can develop that mentality gradually in Krishna consciousness, the Lord reciprocates fully. He’ll even give himself to you. That’s why pure devotional service is rare, because—well, you’ve got Krishna under your thumb, like Rādhārāṇī. She doesn’t do what Krishna says; Krishna does what Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī says, because he’s controlled by her love. It’s a very beautiful thing. So we’re trying for that, by gradual purification, that love will come because it’s already in our hearts. Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī makes it very clear that pure devotional service is not something that you have to search for, find somewhere, or purchase; it’s already there in your heart. It’s just a question of purification. And it comes by blessings.

Most of our progress, to be quite frank, in Krishna consciousness comes by blessings. Like one time Prabhupāda was leading *kīrtana* in the London temple, 7 Bury Place. After the *kīrtana*, devotees were jumping and dancing and twirling, and then after the *kīrtana*, Prabhupāda had paused and he said, "Did you see them?" And devotees said, "Who, Prabhupāda?" Prabhupāda said, "Lord Brahmā and Nārada Muni." "No, we didn’t see them." Prabhupāda said, "Yes, they were dancing in the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu." That’s a recorded conversation. So one devotee said, "Prabhupāda, like, did they notice us?" And Prabhupāda said, "Yes, they were laughing a little, because you’re—you’re like Kali-yuga devotees." That comment wasn’t meant to discourage us but to rather encourage us that we’re devotees and by Prabhupāda’s mercy, we’re dancing with the demigods. What is our good fortune? So therefore our—we are who we are. Like Prabhupāda said one time, "Just as Lord Rāmacandra conquered Laṅkā with monkeys and bears, I’m conquering the world by my disciples." But he loved his disciples. When Prabhupāda desired association, it wasn’t that he went back to India and sought out some saintly persons or even necessarily the Gaudiya Math; he liked to be with his disciples because he could see that they were sincere in their awakening of *bhakti*. He liked to be with his disciples. So therefore we know that we’re here only by his blessings—each and every person, whether a disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda, or a disciple of a disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda, or a disciple, it’s all because of our founder.

So therefore the great poet Surdās—we gave a lecture recently about Surdās, a wonderful devotee—he wrote in Braj-bhasha language: *Iśu kṛpā guru-bin mālā, kā manohara bhīkā...* I say, "Śrīla, so beautiful." I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master who gave me beautiful *kaṇṭhi-mālā*, he fed me *prasādam*, the beautiful form of a devotee, and who offered me his shelter. In one of his hands he’s holding my hand, and with his other hand he is holding the lamp of knowledge, which helps me to cross over the dark ocean of the material world. Surdās says, "My Guru deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye. Therefore I bow down to him again and again and again." So by assisting Śrīla Prabhupāda in adversity—either, you know, conquering over whatever doubt a devotee may have, or whatever procrastination or laziness may come—there, we’re trying to conquer over these things. We’re trying to push forward the *saṅkīrtana* movement. Whatever adversity is there, we’re getting his mercy. He appreciates just like a small child takes its first step. Who in the world cares some baby takes its first step? But the father and mother care. In the same way, the spiritual master takes great pleasure in seeing the initial steps forward on the path of devotion. There’s that photograph of Śrīla Prabhupāda, you know, when he was at Sally Agarwal’s house, and the little son, Bridge—they named him Bridge or Brij, interesting—Prabhupāda was in the living room when little Brij took his first step, and there’s that photograph, Prabhupāda’s eyes are very wide and he’s smiling and he’s reaching out to hold his hand.

Or Tamal Krishna Maharaja, when he was for—for some time he was overseeing the construction of the Krishna Balaram Mandir, just for some time; many senior men were helping there, Śarabhāṅga Maharaja etc., but TKG was a staunch devotee. He told me one time, "I can turn any lecture into any verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam into a *saṅkīrtana* class." Oh really? Okay, *saṅkīrtana* devotees. So, but he was in charge of, you know, initial stages of construction, or he’s there helping—couldn’t—that was his duty there. And Prabhupāda came to visit the site and Tamal Krishna Maharaja got a complaint to Prabhupāda, "I mean, all day long I’m thinking about, you know, checking the—to make sure they’re not cheating on the quality and, you know, they’re not stealing this or they’re not using bad water or they’re sleeping on the job." He said, "I’m just thinking about construction and cement and bad water and illness all day long." And Prabhupāda said, "That’s all right. This is the temple, glorifying Rādhā and Krishna. It will come up, and if you just give yourself to this type of work, work day after day after day, at the end of your life Śrīla Prabhupāda will come and take you home."

Krishna Govinda Swami Maharaja, actually we can never fully appreciate all the mercy we’re receiving from our spiritual master because we are like children, or let us say infants, in spiritual life. What can a child know about the kindness of their parents? It takes time. It wasn’t until I was in my 20s I actually said to Mom, "Hey Mom, thanks for everything you did for me when I was younger." She’d—you know, I, she’d ask me to wash the dish, no, she’d say, "Brian, don’t you know how many times I changed your diapers?" But it took me time, some maturity, to really appreciate who my mother and father were. So although we have genuine affection for Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇava, we’re looking forward to that day when it’s fully manifest, when we—say, we really mean it. Not like, for you, but not you, for any—all the Vaiṣṇavas in the past, in the present, in the future. If we can say that or have that love for our spiritual master, have that divine love for Rādhā and Krishna, we’re—we’re just like our eyes are just beginning to open. *Jñānañjana-śalākāyā*, he who takes the scalpel of knowledge and opens their eyes to see things as they are. We’re praying to our spiritual master, "We don’t want to remain blind to everything spiritual." So we’re receiving, because we’re children we may not see what is the mercy that we’re inheriting by being members of this august *sampradāya*, Brahma-Madhva-Gaudiya *sampradāya*. Well, to make it easier for us, Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī has kindly detailed all the mercy, or much of the mercy, that we’re experiencing, so we can appreciate. Many of you know he wrote, "I bow down to the beautiful lotus feet of my spiritual master, by whose causeless mercy I have obtained the Supreme Holy Name." The Holy Name is everything; it’s our be-all and end-all of existence. "The divine mantra Gayatri, the service of the son of Śacī, Mahāprabhu, the association of Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rūpa Gosvāmī and his elder brother Sanātana Gosvāmī, the supreme abode of Mathurā, the blissful abode of Vṛndāvana, the divine Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Govardhana Hill, and the desire within my heart for the loving service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Mādhava in Vṛndāvana."

So we should reflect on that verse. It’s a prominent verse nowadays in this Gaudiya *sampradāya*, because devotees want to remember, lest we forget. We don’t want to forget; forgetfulness is our real enemy. We’re trying to remember Krishna, not forget him. We spent billions of years forgetting him; now we want to remember him. Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī says in *Manah-śikṣā*, text 30: "Oh Lord, just as the miser continually collects, counts, and remembers his money, in the same way, let us continuously collect, count, and remember your holy names, remember the mercy." So this is a day for remembering, in particular the kindness of our spiritual master, our founder-ācārya, Śrīla Prabhupāda, disciplic succession. So much mercy is flowing, and we want to remember it because there’s—following, imbibing that mercy, there’s hope for us. Even if we’re not perfect now, there’s hope we can become perfect. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta said on one occasion at initiation, "I see no reason why all my disciples cannot go back to Godhead in one lifetime." How can he say that? Because he had full faith in his spiritual master, in Krishna. Just like Prabhupāda said one time, "How was I successful? I had no money, but he had faith in instructions of my spiritual master, in the holy names." So even though we’re not perfect, we can hope against hope. Prabhupāda said in a lecture in Māyāpur, March 4th, 1974, "Dedicate your life for Krishna; that is perfection. Even if there are some faults, a dedicated life is a noble life. We maybe—maybe due to our past habits, we may commit some faulty action, we may make some mistake, there may be fall down, but a dedicated life is sublime. So don’t give up." Wow.

And in the Śāntiparva of Mahābhārata, Bhīṣma says three things are unbearable: the eyes of a snake, the eyes of a *ṛṣi*, and the eyes of the afflicted. If they look at you, unbearable. A snake is looking at you, the eyes of a *ṛṣi* can be very ferocious—*ṛṣis* are very intense persons—and it’s difficult to look into the eyes of the afflicted. But conversely, he says three things give solace: the words of a mother, the words of a friend, and the words of the spiritual preceptor. So therefore, Prabhupāda said, "You don’t read all my books, you’ll fall down," because that’s his mercy; his mercy is there in the books. If you want to know me, he said, "Read my books, and the books of all great Vaiṣṇava ācāryas; they’ll nourish our devotion." So by serving our spiritual masters, we become purified, and after purification, devotion for the Lord will spring from our hearts—just spring from our hearts. It’s ready. Like I’ve read how sometimes people working in a field and they dig in and suddenly, boom, this spring of fresh water comes forth. So that’s there in our heart; this *bhakti* is already there. And if we purify ourselves, it’ll come forth like a beautiful spring. But first purification. Work now, somebody later, we have to work on ourselves.

Purification—the Vedas say there’s seven types of baths: *Pārthiva* means using earth to take a bath, you know, the people would—earth, pure earth, would—is good, it would take away impurities. *Vāruṇa*—taking bath with water. *Āgney*—contacting air filled with dust raised by cows. Whoa! Go to Vraja, there’s, like, the cows there—beautiful cows—and when they’re coming back from the pasture, just stand in the dust. *Vāyavyam*—and *Divyam*—taking bath in the rain that falls while the sun is shining. Remember yesterday there was a little storm, and I was finishing my job outside and it started to rain, and Bhakti Charu Maharaja said, "Come on in, Giriraj, it’s raining." I said, "Wait a minute, it’s raining but the sun is shining, so I’m going to stand out here for purification." You know, we need all the help we can get; that’s a type of purification, you know, with the rain but the sun shining. *Hap-taka*—you stand in that, then *Mānasa*—chanting appropriate verses—*Mānasa* like *Śāstra*—and finally, *Mantrasnānam*—just meditating on Viṣṇu is considered a type of bath. But *Śāstra* says *Mānasa* is the best; it’s the best purification. With soap and water we can purify our body, but the mind, intelligence, and ego, being dragged through material creation since time immemorial, you can’t eat a bar of soap. But if you chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*, full purification will come, then the spring of *pure bhakti* will come forth from the heart.

So we’re very indebted to our spiritual masters because they’ve given us that mantra, they’ve given us that mantra, the panacea for all problems in this world. And what’s more, for awakening our love for Rādhā-Śyāma and going back and joining their *līlās* in the spiritual world, all from that Mahāmantra. The mantra is so powerful, anyone hears it, even if he’s a degraded soul, he’ll get some purification. Even *nāmābhāsa*—unconscious chanting—brings something, but to get *prema*, you have to be initiated into the mantra. So we’re so grateful to our spiritual masters that we’ve been literally initiated into that mantra. That means so much. We could speak for hours, but we don’t have time. We’ve been initiated into that mantra by the mercy of our spiritual master. So all we can do is thank our spiritual masters today on Vyāsa-pūjā, means honoring Śrīla Prabhupāda and his representatives. So all disciples look forward to this day so they can say "Thank you" to their Guru Mahārājas for giving us that panacea to all problems, and by chanting, going back home, back to Godhead. So we can conclude today with another one of my favorite poems glorifying the spiritual master: *Śrī-guru-karuṇā-sindhu, adbhuta-māyā-bandhāra, prapañca-prema...* "I bow down to the lotus feet of my spiritual master, who is a wish-fulfilling tree of divine love for Krishna, the most magnificent benefactor who initiated me into the valuable jewels of both the Gāyatrī and Mahā-mantras. How can I sufficiently praise his glories?"

Back home, back to Godhead! Key! Take everybody with us! Key! Gaur-premānande, Hari Haribol! Jay! Jay! Śrīla Prabhupāda, ki, jay!""