"*00463*.*
"# Demise of the Asuras

Hi everyone, a warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine*. Who is the revealer of the dawn. So today, I would like to relate a pastime of Kṛṣṇa killing a demon. We've been hearing lots of *mādhurya-līlās*, Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes with Śrī Rādhā and her maidservants, but His pastimes of killing demons are no less important or relishable. In his *Back to Godhead* magazine dated April 5th, 1960, Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote, and I quote: "These 12 rasas are standard rasas, and Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment of all these rasas. He is not only the enjoyer of the *mādhurya-rasa* or the *śṛṅgāra-rasa* with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, but He is also the enjoyer of the *vībhatsa-rasa* when He kills asuras like Kaṁsa and Jarāsandha." Unquote.

So as we've heard a number of times, when Kṛṣṇa was in Gokula as a baby for three and a half years, Kaṁsa sent a demon every single day to kill Kṛṣṇa. We all know the principal demons that Kaṁsa sent like Pūtanā, Tṛṇāvarta, Aghāsura, Keśī, etc. But how many others there must have been? Because three and a half years translates into approximately 1,277 days, so Kaṁsa sent at least 1,277 demons to Vṛndāvana to kill Kṛṣṇa. Among other things, Kṛṣṇa is famous as a demon killer. In fact, one of His most famous names is Madhusūdana, which translates as "the killer of the Madhu demon." 

It's interesting that in *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa is referred to as Madhusūdana at least five times. I found that name in *Bhagavad-gītā* in the first chapter, verse number 35; second chapter, verse 1; also in second chapter, verse 4; in 6th chapter, verse 33; and in the 8th chapter, verse 2. Kṛṣṇa is addressed as Madhusūdana. But in my research, I couldn't find a śāstric reference that Kṛṣṇa Himself actually killed a demon named Madhu. Of course, ācāryas confirm that He did. Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa writes that the Gītā's use of the name Madhusūdana implies that Kṛṣṇa can kill the grief (*śokam*) of Arjuna just as He had killed Madhu in the past. He writes: *madhusūdana-śokam-api mahad-ūḍhān*. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda also confirms that Kṛṣṇa did kill such a demon as Madhu. He writes in *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is* that by referring to Kṛṣṇa as Madhusūdana, Arjuna is poetically indicating that Kṛṣṇa should kill his doubts just as He had slain the demon Madhu in the past. But the question remains, when and where did that slaying of the demon Madhu take place? Where is it described that Kṛṣṇa killed Madhu and became Madhusūdana? Well, the answer is actually quite simple: it's in the Purāṇas. There, it's written that Kṛṣṇa killed the Madhu demon in His incarnation as Hayagrīva, not as Kṛṣṇa in His original form, Svayaṁ Bhagavān. It's written that this slaying took place in a Satya-yuga. So yes, Kṛṣṇa killed the Madhu demon, but in His incarnation as a horse, Hayagrīva.

Now, there's also a more esoteric explanation of the name Madhusūdana given by Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī, whom Prabhupāda often refers to as the original commentator on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Śrīdhara Svāmī has said that Madhusūdana can also mean, quote: "He who defeats honey (madhu) in sweetness—that's Kṛṣṇa—He who defeats honey (madhu) in sweetness." So that name aptly applies to our beloved Kṛṣṇa: He who defeats honey (madhu) in sweetness. And Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has also written, quote: "False ego is as sweet as honey and resides in the heart of everyone. False ego making one forget his own identity; it intoxicates everyone. This false ego—he who destroys false ego with the torchlight of knowledge is called Madhusūdana," and that's Kṛṣṇa.

All right, so the demon that we have chosen to speak on today in particular is Pralambāsura. Pralambāsura, who actually was killed by Lord Balarāma. Śrīla Prabhupāda has said that there's no difference between Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma except that Kṛṣṇa is black and Balarāma is white, but actually, it was Balarāma who killed this demon, Pralambāsura. We have discussed a little bit about Pralambāsura in the past, but not in much detail. This Pralambāsura was killed by Balarāma when He and Kṛṣṇa were living in Nanda-grāma, not Gokula, a little older. When they were living in Nanda-grāma, each day, as we discussed many times, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would take their cows to the forest to graze. Many of the demons sent by Kaṁsa appeared during that time when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were grazing their cows in the Vṛndāvana forests. These demons would appear just before it was time for the boys to have their noontime lunch, and Kṛṣṇa would kill them just before the lunch. Śrīla Prabhupāda said that the animated conversations at lunchtime with the cowherd boys and Kṛṣṇa were always about how Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma had killed a demon that day. That's what they discussed at lunchtime.

Now, Pralambāsura was actually killed in Bhāṇḍīravana, one of the twelve main forests in Vṛndāvana. I was researching and I found out that in reality, there are two forests called Bhāṇḍīravana: one is where Pralambāsura was killed and another is where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were "married"—quote-unquote "married." I was reading that Pralambāsura was killed in the summertime. Lots of nectar details there. Pralambāsura was killed in the summer, and summer's always extremely hot here in India, I can attest to that. But the ācāryas say that when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were present, "Summer displayed the qualities of spring; thus, spring is also known as Mādhava, another one of Kṛṣṇa's names."

So this pastime of killing Pralambāsura began when one day Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, and their friends and cows arrived in Bhāṇḍīravana. It's described that while herding their cows there, the boys first decorated themselves with peacock feathers, leaves, flowers, and buds. Unable to contain their youthful energy, they danced around in ecstasy, and Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, on the other hand, they sang together, they fed each other fruit, and occasionally called out the names of their many cows. Soon, as was often the case, a wrestling match started in which the boys paired off, and they were grappling with their opponents, and they were charging one another like young bulls. But eventually, the boys got tired of fighting and they crowded onto swings—big swings that hung from the branches of the trees—and they swung back and forth. And then later that day, they all ran to a nearby āmalakī tree, and collecting armfuls of the āmalakī fruit that had fallen to the ground, they started pelting each other with these fruits. I was reading that the sounds of that fruit fight, you could say the fruit fight, attracted the cows who had been grazing nearby, so they all came close to see the fun, but they too were hit with these missiles of fruits, so they quickly retreated to a more peaceful pasture. And about all of these cowherd boys' pastimes, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*: "In this way, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma played all sorts of well-known games as they wandered amongst the rivers, hills, valleys, bushes, trees, and lakes of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma." Vṛndāvana is such a nice place.

It's also written that while Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma played like this with their friends, demigods like Lord Śiva and great devotees like Nārada Muni disguised themselves to play amongst the cowherd boys. Kṛṣṇa especially, it's described, cheered the two brothers on as well as to taste the ecstasy of these pastimes. They disguised themselves; they wanted to taste the ecstasies of these cowherd boy pastimes. So the question in this regard has been raised as to why would the demigods and Nārada Muni in disguise—why didn't they come as devatās or you know, Nārada Muni? I mean, one respects Nārada Muni. But the answer is that they wanted to avoid interrupting Kṛṣṇa's play. Because had they come in their original form as devatās or Nārada Muni, the cowherd boys would have stopped their play to offer them respect, and these devatās and Nārada Muni, they didn't want the boys to interrupt their play. Nice answer.

Now, meanwhile, while this was all going on in Bhāṇḍīravana, in Mathurā, King Kaṁsa was becoming increasingly depressed by the fact that so many of his associates in the form of demons had already been killed by Kṛṣṇa. So one day, seeing this despondent nature of Kaṁsa, his servant Pralamba, Pralambāsura, approached Kaṁsa and he said, "O King, why do you lament? Why are you lamenting?" And Kaṁsa answered, "Because all my friends are dead. Who else is left? All my friends are dead, who else is left?" So Pralambāsura said, "Sir, if you give me the opportunity, I will solve your problem within an hour." In other words, he was confident he could go to Vṛndāvana and kill Kṛṣṇa. But in this instance, Kaṁsa simply laughed. That is described, his foolish servant Pralambāsura, who's described—how's it described?—"like a moth compared to a demon like Aghāsura; he's just a moth compared to a demon like Aghāsura." So Kaṁsa said sarcastically, "All right, go ahead. Follow the path into the blazing fire. Do as you wish. Go ahead, follow a path into the blazing fire, do as you wish." 

So although Pralambāsura had been insulted by Kaṁsa, he wanted to prove himself to his master, so he quickly left Mathurā and went to Vṛndāvana, where he found Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma playing with their friends in the Bhāṇḍīravana forest. 

Now, I wanted to mention that in a previous life, Pralambāsura had actually been a Vaiṣṇava. His name was Vijaya, and he was the son of Huhu, a Gandharva. In that life, Vijaya, this very nice Vaiṣṇava, had once trespassed into Kuvera’s—one of the great demigods, Kuvera’s—private garden to collect flowers for an offering to Lord Viṣṇu. This is Vijaya; he wanted to make an offering to Lord Viṣṇu, so he went into this special garden of Kuvera to pick flowers. However, he was unaware that Kuvera had made a curse: that anyone taking flowers from his garden would be transformed into a demon. Beware, you know, we often see these signs "No Trespassing," so if you trespass into the garden of Kuvera, watch out, he'd be transformed into a demon. And it was so: as soon as Vijaya picked a flower, he immediately took on the form of a very ugly demon, Pralambāsura. Alarmed by his new appearance, you know, Vijaya, now as Pralamba, he ran to take shelter of Kuvera. And feeling some sympathy for Vijaya, Kuvera said, "O devotee of the Lord, do not lament. At the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, you will be liberated by Lord Balarāma in the Bhāṇḍīravana forest."

So, forgetful of his past life, now absorbed into the form and the mood of an asura, Pralamba, it's described, he wandered aimlessly for years until he happened to come to Nanda-grāma in Vṛndāvana. It's good fortune. Where one day, there in Vṛndāvana near Nanda-grāma, he overheard an elderly gopī tell her son, or let's say an elder gopī tell her son whose name was Bhadra—this is a cowherd boy, Bhadra—that he couldn't go herding cows with Kṛṣṇa that day. "My dear son, for whatever reason, you can't go with Kṛṣṇa herding cows that day." So, during this cowherd boy Bhadra's morning bath, Pralambāsura came up with a plan and he stole Bhadra's cloak while he was being bathed by his mother. Pralamba stole Bhadra's clothing, his ornaments, and his walking stick. And assuming the form of the cowherd boy Bhadra, Pralambāsura went off to Bhāṇḍīravana. We've many times discussed how these asuras do the black arts, they have mystic powers, so he assumed the form of Bhadra, looked like Bhadra, and he went off to Bhāṇḍīravana—the ācāryas say, to meet his death, to meet his death. 

And when he arrived in that forest, the cowherd boys thought that he was actually Bhadra, the cowherd boy, and treated him like a brother. They invited him to join in their games. Now, while playing as a cowherd boy, Pralambāsura, it's described, he kept his eye on Kṛṣṇa, but after some time, he came to the conclusion that Kṛṣṇa's unlimited prowess made Kṛṣṇa invincible. Kṛṣṇa was invincible. So what did Pralamba do? He decided he would kidnap and kill Balarāma instead. Of course, Kṛṣṇa was well aware of what was happening, and to expedite this demon's death, Kṛṣṇa said, "O Bhadra"—addressing, you know, Pralambāsura but in the form of Bhadra—"O Bhadra, you're late, you missed the fun. Never mind, today we'll play a form of the game Hariṇa." And I did some research and Hariṇa is a game where the contestants bind their feet with a rope and then hop to a finish line. In that contest, Pralambāsura—who was appearing like the cowherd boy Bhadra—he was a loser in that contest, and as per the rules of the game, he had to carry Balarāma on his shoulders. He had to carry Balarāma on his shoulders. There's a whole description in the Bhāgavatam of how everything transpired, but essentially, because he lost, he had to carry Balarāma on his shoulders. 

Now, while doing so, carrying Balarāma on his shoulders, he was happy for that because he wanted to kill Balarāma. While carrying Balarāma on his shoulders, he suddenly darted into the forest with the intention of killing Balarāma there. Now, Balarāma was unsure where Bhadra—because he, you know, in the form of the cowherd boy Pralambāsura, is carrying Balarāma—so Balarāma's unsure where this Bhadra is going. And so, he exhibited some tremendous weight just to slow down his eager carrier. "Hey Bhadra, slow down!" So Balarāma became very heavy. But unable to tolerate that weight, Pralambāsura then assumed his original form, not as a cowherd boy but as a very horrible form, as a demon. In that form, it's described, he had blazing eyes, copper-colored hair, and long fangs. Seeing this ghastly form, Lord Balarāma just immediately struck the demon on his head with his fist. It's described, the Bhāgavatam says, just as lightning strikes a mountain, and the ācāryas say that one blow had all the force of the universe behind it. So it was not incredible that Pralambāsura's head cracked open. 

The demon, at once the Bhāgavatam says, the demon at once lost his life and his body fell to the earth, bleeding profusely. And then the scriptures say that as the demigods showered flowers, the soul of Pralambāsura—previously, as we mentioned, the Gandharva saint, Vijaya—immediately went to Vaikuṇṭhaloka as Kuvera had promised he would be liberated. So immediately, Vijaya went to the spiritual world. Then it's mentioned actually in *Garga-saṁhitā* that Balarāma, eager to escape the ghastly scene, ran to embrace His brother Kṛṣṇa. At that point, the cowherd boys all surrounded Balarāma to congratulate Him, while celestial voices were heard from the sky glorifying the Lord's, Balarāma's, display of incomparable strength. Then the cowherd boys came and again embraced Balarāma with so much love; it's described it was as if He had just come back from the dead. "We missed you so much! Where were you? It appeared this demon almost was going to kill you." So they embraced Him with so much love, it was as if He had just come back from the dead. So then they again praised Him, they offered Him profuse blessings, and the Bhāgavatam says they said, "Well done, my friend, well done." It's written that because the area around Pralambāsura's body was covered in blood—this is described in *Garga-saṁhitā*—the cowherd boys left it in disgust and returned to their playful pastimes. 

Now, the *Garga-saṁhitā* and the *Bhāgavatam* both describe this pastime in detail with some slightly different versions, as we know is sometimes the case. We know that Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vraja are repeated over and over again on a daily basis, and again with some variations. Actually, here in Vṛndāvana, there's a book in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute called *Dṛṣṭa-siddhānta*, which I've heard attributed to Vallabhācārya, which relates another interesting version of this pastime. Regarding Vallabhācārya, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, he writes: "Within the past 500 years, many erudite scholars and ācāryas like Jīva Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Vallabhācārya, and many other distinguished scholars, even after the time of Lord Caitanya, made elaborate commentaries on the *Bhāgavatam*, and the serious student would do well to attempt to go through them to better relish the transcendental messages." So with Prabhupāda's blessings, with the authorization, you could say, I'd like to relate the pastime that Vallabhācārya gives in his *Dṛṣṭa-siddhānta*. 

Another interesting version: there, he says that one day Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, and all the cowherd boys were playing by the Yamunā when they decided to play—he describes another game—they decided to play tug-of-war, where they would split into two teams and each team would stand on either side of the riverbank and pull a rope, and the goal was to pull the other party into the Yamunā, tug-of-war. So Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma took different sides. But just before the contest was to begin, Kṛṣṇa heard the sound of the ankle bells of some gopīs passing by with their pots of yogurt. Hearing them, and then seeing them, Kṛṣṇa desired to leave the game. And just at that moment, by the arrangement of Paurṇamāsī, who as we know oversees all these pastimes, Kṛṣṇa saw a strong-looking boy walking by. Now, this boy happened to be Pralambāsura, disguised again as a cowherd boy. So Kṛṣṇa looked at him and thought he looked strong and he could easily replace me—"This boy is so strong, he can easily replace me"—so he asked this boy to take his place. And this boy agreed, Pralambāsura, in the guise of a cowherd boy, he agreed. So then Kṛṣṇa ran off to be with the gopīs. Now, as we know, Pralambāsura had come with the intention of killing either Kṛṣṇa or Balarāma. So when the contest started, his plan was he didn't actually pull on the rope very much, and thus his side lost the tug-of-war. They were all pulled in the Yamunā, and as a result, all the cowherd boys on his team began to blame him for their loss. So he had kind of a sly smile. So he said, "Okay, as my punishment, I will carry the person on the opposite team who has the most *bala* on my back." So *bala* means strength, and that of course is Lord Balarāma. So Pralambāsura took Balarāma in this version on his back and began walking away. 

Now, in the meantime, a number of elderly gopīs arrived to where Kṛṣṇa was—who was not present actually, now he'd gone to be with the gopīs—they arrived to where Kṛṣṇa was with these younger gopīs whom he'd seen and heard their ankle bells. And approaching him, these elder gopīs, they accused him of teasing these young girls: "You're just teasing them, by your presence here you're making jokes with them, making fun of them." So they were a little upset. So as a punishment, they said they were going to go back and inform Mother Yaśodā of Kṛṣṇa's mischief. Now, while that was happening, the cowherd boys had—you know, the pastime was over, more or less over—the tug-of-war, and you know Pralambāsura, disguised as a cowherd boy, he was carrying Balarāma. So while this is all happening, all the cowherd boys had gone to a nearby forest called Muñjāraṇya. Muñja means dry grass in Sanskrit, so the forest of dry grass. And while they were doing so, a demon named Agnidaitya was hiding in Muñjāraṇya. Agni means, as you know, fire, and *daitya* means demon, so an Agnidaitya is the fire demon. So as all the cowherd boys, you know, were coming there to play, and Pralambāsura, disguised, was carrying Balarāma, this Agni lit the whole forest on fire. We know that pastime as well. So at that point, Kṛṣṇa, who was still being chastised by the older gopīs from a distance away, he saw this massive fire, so he quickly ran to Muñjāraṇya. And upon arriving, he saw all the cowherd boys trapped in the forest fire. And during this time, Pralambāsura had carried Balarāma off to some other, some distance away, with the intention of killing him. 

So Kṛṣṇa arrived, he saw the boys trapped in this forest fire, and as we know, he famously swallowed the whole forest fire. And as he was doing so, the Agnidaitya challenged Kṛṣṇa, saying, "You fool Kṛṣṇa, while you were here, Pralambāsura has carried your brother Balarāma away to kill him!" Kṛṣṇa just laughed. He said, "My dear asura, rest assured, my brother Balarāma, He'll be fine." And as we know, Balarāma was fine, and what's more, He soon killed that great demon in the same way as described in *Garga-saṁhitā* and *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Vallabhācārya says he hit him on the head like that, so he killed that demon Pralambāsura with a single blow from His fist. So, a few different versions—*Garga-saṁhitā*, *Bhāgavatam*, and Vallabhācārya—for us to relish today. Kṛṣṇa's killing the demons.

Actually, our ācāryas say that Pralambāsura was the personification of covered Buddhism known as Māyāvāda. And they say that Pralambāsura's attempt to steal Balarāma represents the Māyāvādī philosopher's efforts to disprove the personal identity of the Supreme Brahman, Kṛṣṇa, as well as to disprove any devotion to Him. He says that just as Pralambāsura disguised himself to enter amongst the cowherd boys, Māyāvādī philosophy itself sometimes enters into the Vaiṣṇava community in the guise of service to Kṛṣṇa. Something to think about. So, a nice pastime for all of you today, from all of us here in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. A few different versions you can meditate on. And we can finish today with a beautiful quote from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, 12th Chapter, text number 11. It's a verse that you may have heard a number of times in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* class: 

"In this way, all the cowherd boys used to play with Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of the Brahman effulgence for jñānīs desiring to merge into that effulgence, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead for devotees who have accepted eternal servitorship, and who for ordinary persons is but another ordinary child. The cowherd boys, having accumulated the results of pious activities for many lives, were able to associate in this way with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How can one explain their great fortune?"

Hare Kṛṣṇa. So thank you everyone from us here in Vṛndāvana-dhāma on a very cold wintery day. We'll say goodbye, and we'll be back in a few days with more nectar for all of you. All glories to the Christmas marathon around the world. Jaya! Jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda!""