So at long last, our purikuma party has come to our desired goal, amongst others. But the Jarikanda forest, actually it is a forest, it's in the state of Jarikunda. And the whole state is actually a forest. So as we know, Mahaprabhu, on his way from Jagannath Puri to Vrindavan, he passed through this forest.

And as all Gaudiya Vaishnavas know, he did kirtan in the forest, much to the amazement. And I think Balabhadra Bhattacharya was actually afraid. Mahaprabhu encouraged the animals of this forest to chant and dance by chanting the Hare Krishna mantra.

Tigers, rhinoceroses, elephants, deer, they all chanted on the order of Mahaprabhu. And they actually chanted the mantra as we chanted: "Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna." And such was that kirtan and the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, that the animals, they achieved prema, they gave up their envious spirit, and they hugged each other and danced and sang all together.

A wonderful, wonderful pastime. Even inanimate objects melted in ecstasy. And as a result, when we come here, we can see the footprints of all those animals who danced. Their dancing footprints, the elephants' footprints are here, the tigers', the deer's.

The tigers and the deer, their footprints are very close together because they were dancing together. All different animals tended and danced together. And many understandings of that pastime. But one, one very important purport is that the two-legged animals of Kali Yuga, like the four-legged animals here at the Jarikunda forest, they can also take up the chanting and achieve prema by the mercy of Chaitanya.

It is possible if we're strict in our practice of Krishna consciousness.

So we're so enthused to come here. We actually learned that Mahaprabhu spent two months in this forest. He traveled 300 kilometers. He would bathe in the hot springs here three times a day. He would eat shak, his favorite vegetable.

Malabar Bhattacharya would cook that for him. Sometimes they would encounter Brahmins, although there weren't many people living here at all. He would beg alms from them. I learned also that from studying the scripture that Sanatana Goswami, he was so inspired by this pastime of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu getting the animals to chant and dance and achieve prema that he came here twice.

He came here twice and specifically to embrace the lotus feet of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. This in the temple here, the feet are very obvious there. So he came to embrace those feet two times. On his second journey here, he acquired a skin disease by drinking some bad water.

Later, when he met Mahaprabhu, we know from Chaitanya Charitamrita, he didn't want to embrace Mahaprabhu. Mahaprabhu just embraced him, and all those sores went away. So many mystical, magical pastimes happening in Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's movement then and now, because we can see that people all over the world, however fallen, like the animals, they have come to the stage of even beyond prominence.

They become prominent Vaishnavas by chanting on Mahaprabhu's order and Chaitanya's directions. So glad we came here. And because Sanatana Goswami came here twice, I think to make our pilgrimage here perfect, to go deeper and deeper into Krishna consciousness, we have to come back again.

Please join us.