Over there, and the criteria of common ones. One day, one great devotee placed lipstick, holding your man. X gave them with chickens and told, 
"I'll help you." You know that Lord Ramachandra keeps a diary in which he records all his great ones.

We are with such she-begs. Keeps. I give, and so they get up, and water is quite... and Hanuman, of course, thought, "If Lord Ramachandra has a diary with a list of all the great ones, am I in it or not?" Here, in the good, he's become a boy, not a devotee.

You said, "Well, you just need to ask Rama." "Rama, put your arm around here." "You are here." "I will read." And Lord, "Yes, this is a harmful place." But we went to Ramachandra and asked if he has such a diary.

Collected his habits. And he forced, "Yes, there is a diary." "Korea, in it, they write down all the great ancestors." "Yes, exactly." "We choose this term." And exit, and you root, and change both cameras. You just looked at this whole diary, but the name, no.

But there was no. And Hanuman plunged into despondency. Forms like Taylor draw alliances. Main menu blows. This Numan went to Lord Rama and said something about not finding his name in the diary. And I, the Lord, said nothing about this diary from the second house.

I impose it, hid it, it is very close to my heart. But Gerrit van Mander, active zones, mcr, and when Hanuman asked the Lord, "Look in this diary," he showed him. There were only a few names. And maybe it is in that diary too.

Hanuman's name was the first one mentioned. Created by Edgar. Monster. Bye-bye, my name. And get donations with kernels and a house. He asked, "Why is my name only in this diary?

Not in the other one." I'm discussing myself. And the garden, ancient Kayla, gift, content. We change categories. You are membranes. And the Lord Ramachandra said, "This diary is a diary with those devotees who constantly remember me. Here, theirs is with holes.

This diary is certainly dear to her." From Moldova, like this, because Boris's diary consists of the names of those special harmful ones that I constantly think about. And... Super evil, crush. Here is his mode. The model to be successfully crushes on the fishing line, create figurines and bypassed him from the yoke of editors.

And so it turns out that the Lord has two diaries. One diary with those devotees who remember Him, and the second diary with all the devotees whom the Lord remembers. And on the rock war hangs out with... Then we need to strive to get into the second diary.

This, of course, is a rhinoceros hunt. It's not at all easy to do. Baby Expo, Pikachu's tooth, stagnant. And in Windows, this sauce. I read about the role. We fight, but it is quite possible that those devotees who have become dear to the Lord get into this diary, thanks to this.

And what kind of service should you do to get into it?

Photo two diaries that are most dear to the Lord. I want to become Krishna.

He says to talk about this. And they knew my amazing Windows Varg Vikernes. Months magnificent. Of course, if he wasn't on the TV show, I can't. You managed to twist it. Passed. You want. What in this world there is no one dearer to me than the one who spreads Krishna consciousness.

There will never be anyone dearer. We just peerless. But the outline of the risk. One sales in all. I do. I'm for the Russian cameras. Therefore, China, when Lord Chaitanya is. Compare yourself to a gardener spreading the fruits of love for God.

Buy or L1 visas. You will remain. You take the cost yourself. The goal is Amherst. That very one became windows. And describe the before excluding words in The Hague. They are Tuva Republic list, Boris control industry is the floor of measles.

If there is a sale of watches, 90 loves an angel. But thanks to his kindness and humility, he says that I am only one. So how many fruits can I spread?

So please, all devotees, help me spread these fruits. He loves God. If we do this, let's stop the film. Dear to Lord Chaitanya, just us. You will call upon reverence for elders of the sex named night. Chuck has read Kyrgyzstan.

Price wrote these fisherman's flags and again get to Avanttime. His warm snake, pier boiling water. Now, for us, the most important representative of the Lord. All this is not collected. Fall. And creating it is even easier than the Lord's nutrition.

He said about this directly that if you want to hit me. Distribute and books. Distribute books. Distribute books. We can dance with the killed on the site. Source vegetable soot. Only the cost of hell itself. Pancakes eat Dubrovin paired with meat.

Dialogue said yesterday ward from here. I see night. This is something successful. My Krishna to catch and convenient.

Any team you have legs, one food IP. In the paths on your true to that everywhere cookies known to you. Enemy and found. Or if this is not the distribution of books, then it must be the distribution of Krishna consciousness in one form or another.

Because that generally interested and that disappearing. And the Lord something not or Chris himself. But if we facilitate and time, then we become very dear to them. And we get everything changed. It took joined KV Churin liked to draw the Lord as he is not with...

In Thailand, I managed something so that life maybe because their bloom by Vanga and stealth Raksha Japanese as a layer of cheat. Or is it not the same as hunting a rhinoceros and an extra dwarf who is trying to remove the moon from the sky?

By the grace of the Lord, all this becomes possible. Paw, how much to... He gave a strap, a register of rosin, normals, scandi, water, masterfully folding. As a result, undercooked, indestructible, finishing drinking, disappearing, speaking at the bottom and the slope.

Which only nine years practiced Krishna consciousness.

Stone, returned home from Google. To him, his own, his name was TND and spilled practice on the American. His serial seagulls on the headlights. Krishna, about that time of the queen of category.

You call us the devil. And in the counter, that the head of a flashlight with the help of bets, like when the price to pick a heavy rain. Maman stings epicor and don't give up on vegetables. ICQ skirt, he current tax on will not step on the stand.

He only nine years of spiritual practice and after he left his body to disappear. He wrote them a letter in which he said that if you have any material desires left, then you have ended up on Svargaloka. But in accordance with my statements, since you listened to the chanting of the holy name, the tape recording, the rocket began to take pads, then I assert for this reason that you have returned to the spiritual world on Goloka.

Been down and we trust the one who took the dietary supplements knows what he's talking about. It's cold to you on women's Daivi in ​​the world. The Ob River and thieves were waiting. Greedy blush. Where do you want to go?

Lord Ramachandra, with whom the names of those harmful people he thinks about, just raise you on the tank. Where do you want to be?

In both diaries, especially in that diary, especially harmful ones. Okay, and connected the sights between remembering, say, Bagio Islam, and you could, maybe God could sweep you into both diaries. Here we have a special formula that was given there.

A number and a channel of troubles and gloomy Warren. It's boring. Everything teaches an animal. You can receive mercy and glad Krishna only by the mercy of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

Yanks, jivas were pumped out with liquid. In this run, we need to go. Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, huddled. Glad Krishna, weakening the area of ​​Harry's roof.

The further, of course, Chaitanya, the incentive rain. Two. This is when two are extremely important. My colleague, Fauner, is among doctors and kills the fan of incense. That's why before chanting the Hare Krishna mantra, we have time to do Panchi Tatu to free ourselves from the consequences of insults.

Olife Vanta muscles, his reverence for his picket, the sea, Tuesday, Canon, yes. But if we want to receive the mercy of Lord Chaitanya, we must first receive the mercy of Lord Nityananda. Owls, tea, secret train, colossal IP KT 03, to the mountains.

That's why we chant Nitai-Gaura Haribol. Before receiving the mercy of Genera, we must receive the mercy of Genera. It doesn't matter. Old man, you're the master of Nanda's houses and acts. We speak. We apply lids from A to Z.

But if you want to receive the mercy of Lord Nityananda, you must preach Jagai-Madhai boards, steaks, the tenant, block, mothers in Paris. And this is the secret of how to get into the Lord's special diary with the names of those harmful people from whom he himself always thinks.