Hare Krishna and welcome to our 2017 Discover India tour in the USA.

It was only natural that after years of holding festivals in Poland, Australia, South Africa, Brazil, and several other countries, that we would bring our program to the United States. Our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, first introduced Krishna consciousness in the West on the morning walk in Mayapur on March 9th, 1976. Śrīla Prabhupāda said, 'I was planning, I must go to America.

Generally, they go to London, but I was simply dreaming how to go to New York. Whether I shall go this way through Tokyo, Japan, or that way, which way is cheaper?

That was my plan. I was targeting New York always. Sometimes I was dreaming that I have come to New York.' Śrīla Prabhupāda's dream to come to America was born out of his spiritual master's order to spread Krishna consciousness in the English language.

When Śrīla Prabhupāda first arrived here in 1965, he struggled to establish Krishna consciousness for the year or so.

But by 1967, the movement was growing rapidly. Someone coined the phrase, 'the Hari Krishna explosion,' and from America, Krishna consciousness spread all over the world.

So last year, our festival group was invited to come to America by my disciple, Myápoora Das, and his family. They live in New York and promised to arrange everything for a festival tour, focusing mainly on universities. Myápoora Das's son, Hari Das, and his daughter, Brenda Darcy, were instrumental in setting up the programs with schools like Buffalo State University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Rutgers University, Penn State University, and others.

So we jumped at the chance to come and make our humble contribution to spreading Krishna consciousness here in America.

So far, we have found that our particular presentation, a cultural presentation, is very appealing to the people of America. We're averaging around 500, 600 guests per program. This includes US students and professors. We've even had a number of deans and heads of universities attend our function, as well as local mayors, some congressmen, and police chiefs as well.

On the way, we've received many favorable comments as to how well-organized the program is, how professional the performances are, and how talented the performers themselves are. And it's all centered around Krishna.

We performed the Ramayana, the pastimes of Sita, Rama, Lakshmana, and Hanuman, utilizing a combination of traditional and contemporary theatre. We find that it appeals to people of all ages. Using the same concept, we also perform a play we've entitled 'Bhagavata Purana,' which centers around Śukadeva Goswami's instructions to Maharaja Parikshit as he prepares to depart from this world.

In the two-and-a-half-hour show, we also include a martial arts performance, traditional Indian dance by the Chhona Dance Group from Mumbai, India. They've been with us for over eight years now. Besides their professionalism, they bring an air of authenticity to our Discover India theme.

And of course, there's a discourse on the Bhagavad-gita As It Is by myself. As I mentioned, the element of professionalism is evident mainly because many of the devotees on this tour were trained in theater and dance before joining the Krishna consciousness movement.

We have devotees from 14 different countries on our tour. Such talent allows us to do everything first-class, a high-class presentation of the culture of India. Ultimately, the culture of Krishna consciousness is very much appreciated.

When everything is presented in a first-class, professional, and most importantly, devotional way, people can't help but be impressed and inquire further about Krishna consciousness.

The proof is that after the program, many people purchase Śrīla Prabhupāda's books and inquire how to stay in touch with the local ISKCON temples.

Of course, it's not easy to be constantly on the road like this, traveling long distances each day, sleeping in a different hotel physically every night, preparing and performing continuously every evening for large audiences for over one month straight. That, along with engaging in sankirtan in New York City and other places, then there's radio and TV programs that we enjoy.

It's like drinking hot sugar juice. It's so hot it burns the lips, but it's so sweet we can't stop. And it's an honor to continue in the legacy that Śrīla Prabhupāda began by coming to America to create in the English-speaking language.

This visit, we are literally following in the footsteps of Śrīla Prabhupāda here on the East Coast of America, where you could say it all started.

So we take shelter in his words written on board the Jaladuta as he approached America: 'My dear Lord Krishna, you are so kind and fond of this useless soul, but they do not know why you have brought me here.

Now you can do whatever you like with me. But I guess you have some business here. Otherwise, why would you bring me to this terrible place?

Most of the population here is covered by the modes of ignorance and passion, absorbed in material life. They think themselves very happy and satisfied, and therefore they have no taste for the transcendental message of pure devotional service. I do not know how they will be able to understand it, but I know your causeless mercy can make everything possible because you are the expert..."