"*00100*.*
"# Don't Cross The Line! - Visit to Khambi Hill - Class on Kartik Parikrama 2022

Hare Krishna, welcome, everyone. The other day, we visited Yaśodā-kuṇḍa, and there we spoke extensively about Māyā-yaśodā and the *rasa*, or the relationship of *vātsalya-rasa*, or parenthood, where one sees Kṛṣṇa as their little child. Kṛṣṇa, we also mentioned at that time, there are three other relationships with Kṛṣṇa that one can have. Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, the author of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, he makes this very clear in *Ādi-līlā*, Chapter 4, verse 42: "Four kinds of devotees are the receptacles of the four kinds of mellows in love of God, namely: servitude, friendship, parental affection, and conjugal love."

Actually, technically speaking, there are five relationships that one can have with Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world, even here in Vṛndāvana. It is called neutrality; there are four, but there are actually five. One can have a relationship with Kṛṣṇa in the mood of neutrality, but it is not mentioned by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Goswāmī because it is not very much of an active relationship. Herding the cows is very active. If you have this parental mood—that Kṛṣṇa is like your child—you will be worried about Him all day: "He is out in the forest walking with His bare feet!" Oh, yes, yesterday. 

If you have this conjugal, romantic relationship with Kṛṣṇa, you are always scheming: "When can I meet Him? Where can I meet Him, so that my parents don't see?" This devotional service is very active. We mentioned that Mother Yaśodā—one symptom of her *bhāva*, or her devotion, is she is perspiring while she is churning the yogurt. So, this relationship of neutrality, this is not so much going on. So, Rūpa Goswāmī doesn't stress it so much, but it actually exists to some degree here in Vṛndāvana. It is very interesting; somehow it got in, neutrality. They don't go out with Kṛṣṇa during the day; they're not with Kṛṣṇa in a home, you know. They're just standing there. Vṛndāvana is so merciful that even the trees have a little *sevā* to do. They say as Kṛṣṇa walks to the forest with Balarāma and Their friends, the trees, they happily bow down and they offer Kṛṣṇa their leaves and their flowers, and when He passes by, they come back up and they offer shade. As Kṛṣṇa goes to the forest, there is some service. You know, it gets very hot in the summer; actually, most of the year it is hot here in Vṛndāvana, and we like to go to a shady place. Like today, we don't want to sit in the open sun. Here we are, we appreciate this beautiful tree.

Walk by, the trees bow down and they offer their fruits and flowers to Kṛṣṇa. We all love fruits and flowers, so they bow down: "Kṛṣṇa, please accept our fruits and our flowers." Now, I read something really interesting—it's kind of... well, some special mercy is given to these trees. It is described in scriptures that these trees in Vṛndāvana are even able to move from place to place to serve the Lord. The Lord passes by, and then they jump to the next place; and He passes by there, they jump to the next place. They follow Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. They can move anywhere and everywhere they want because they are liberated souls. They are not trees; they are enlightened devotees serving Kṛṣṇa in this little but important way. Everybody's account in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is...

This place was very rarely visited. I don't think any other ISKCON devotees have ever been here. This tree must be very happy, and as the sun moves like that, don't be surprised if the tree jumps up and sits over there to give you shade because you're Kṛṣṇa-bhaktas. Yes, my sons, this is so. Another personality in the mood of neutrality is described as Kṛṣṇa’s flute. Kṛṣṇa takes it and plays it, but it is a personality, and it has a neutral relationship with Kṛṣṇa. But sometimes it is said by the potency of Yoga-māyā, that flute will occasionally play on its own without Kṛṣṇa playing it; it just... Kṛṣṇa just watches. That is cool. This is the mood of neutrality described by Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī.

So, all in all, there is a variety of ways to serve Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world, and everyone has their particular *sevā* to do, and everyone is happy with their service. They are not jealous of someone else's service. Everyone is completely content doing what they want to do for Kṛṣṇa. Like the boys don't want to be girls, the girls don't want to be boys; everyone is happy. So, I was thinking—I said that many times last few days—is there a verse in our scriptures which states that everyone is happy just being who they are in the spiritual world? There is a saying in the Bible: "Seek and ye shall find." So, I was reading *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* the other day. I was in Chapter 4, and lo and behold, I came across verse 44, which is just the verse that I wanted. Oh my God, would you like to hear it? "Each kind of devotee feels that his sentiment is the most excellent, and thus in that mood he takes great happiness with Lord Kṛṣṇa." Trees were thinking, "I'm the best because I can walk all around Vṛndāvana and offer my fruits and flowers to Kṛṣṇa; cowherd boys can't do that, the girls can't do that." Everyone's happy in Vraja.

It is this non-envious, cooperative mood. It is also described in a verse in the Bible, the Holy Bible: "The wolf will live with the lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, the calf and the lion and the yearling together, and a little child will lead them." Even one of my favorite verses from the Bible is, *sevā*. So, we talked extensively—well, not extensively, we could go on for months—but we spoke about the *vātsalya-rasa* at Yaśodā-kuṇḍa. So, today, I thought I would share with you a very nice pastime in the mood of *sakhya-rasa*, the relationship of friendship with the Lord. It is like Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd boyfriends have with Him; He just makes it very obvious that, you know, He likes it. He was late today getting up and doing His *pūjā*, and we had to leave, but we made a special arrangement. There were no cars available in Alīpura, but somehow we found a car to pick Him up in time and bring Him here, because He is really going to enjoy this lecture; it wouldn't be the same without Him. Okay, so it is a very broad and very deep subject matter, but there are ways to summarize by quoting the *ācāryas*. What is this *sakhya-rasa*?

Or, to put it more poetically in the words of Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Goswāmī: "Eloquence is truth spoken concisely." So, there is a very famous devotee; his name was Nayanānanda, and he wrote a very famous book called *Prema-bhakti-candrikā*. It is all about cowherd boys and Kṛṣṇa and cows and playing in the forests of Vraja. So, he gives a very nice summary of this particular *rasa*, this particular mood of being friends with Kṛṣṇa, equal with Kṛṣṇa. By Kṛṣṇa's grace, here is what he writes: "With great trust in Kṛṣṇa, one thinks of oneself as equal to Kṛṣṇa. One associates with Him constantly without fear, thinking of being His equal, endowed with sweetness, and devoid of seeing Kṛṣṇa as the Lord. This is called *sakhya-rati* or *sakhya-rasa*."

So, the pastime we are going to share with you today will help us to appreciate and understand this *sakhya-rasa*, this friendship mood. Actually, we have a few pastimes, you know, three or four pastimes. I don't know how long Rasika is going to let us go on, but we could be here four days if you wanted. He doesn't mind; He could just stay here and sleep here and eat here and hear here and chat here. Okay. So, we know in His childhood, His older childhood, Kṛṣṇa lived in Nandagrāma with Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. And every day when He turned the cows out, He would take all the cows out to different pasturing grounds around Vṛndāvana with Balarāma. 

They discuss amongst themselves: "Have you heard from the brāhmaṇas where the richest, most tasty grasses are today? We'll go to that place and take our cows." Very often it was Govardhana Hill, because we've heard many times the grass there is very rich, it's very lush, and it's not sharp. This can only be understood by a cow, actually, because cows eat grass, but sometimes the grasses are sharp and the cows cut their tongues. You don't know this, but the cows would tell you if they could talk. But Govardhana Hill, the grass is not sharp and they can munch and munch and munch all day, and that milk is very special. Mother Yaśodā likes to make creamy things for Kṛṣṇa: *burfi* and *sandesh* with that milk. 

But there are other places as well. So, one day, Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, and other cowherd friends, they decided to come to the southernmost tip of Vṛndāvana, southernmost tip of Vṛndāvana, into a little hill—in English we call a hillock—called Khambi. Welcome to Khambi. Yeah, why Khambi? Because this particular little hill is a favorite of Lord Balarāma. He likes to come here because Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and the cowherd boys, they can have a lot of fun here by rolling and sliding down the soft grasses of this hill where their cows would graze. You notice we did walk up a hill right now? It is flat as far as the eye can see, but you can walk up this little hill; it's really cool. Yeah, 5,000 years ago there weren't all these houses, it was just a hill with soft grass. So, the boys would do—they slide down the grass and meet their cows who are munching at the bottom of the hill. Access is... so they came about this time in the morning and they'd run back up and run back up, laughing and enjoying. 

And suddenly, Balarāma becomes a little serious, and He calls for, "Hey, listen!" This is a word, but it just means He wanted to meet the cowherd boys and tell them something: "Come on boys, I want to tell you something. Come!" So, they were very submissive and they all sat just like you're sitting, and maybe Balarāma sat here, I don't know. He said, "My dear friends, listen very carefully. Again, this is the southernmost tip of Vraja." He said, "Vṛndāvana ends here at Khambi. Right behind there," He said, "I want to warn you that if you venture beyond this point, you will be under the jurisdiction of the modes of material nature. My dear friends, never go further than Khambi." So, you know, He said like something like that. So then, all the boys came real close to Balarāma to make sure they weren't over the line. The boys started trembling. Actually, "Where does it actually end?" In front of them, exactly where? So, Balarāma took a stick and He drew a line at the top of the hill here, pointing to the other side. He said, "Here is Kṛṣṇa, and there is my... be careful." 

Kṛṣṇa is... that Balarāma was very serious. Then all of a sudden He became very philosophical. Natural philosophers, you see, with the cowherd boys, it's just small talk and fun and games like that, yeah? But then He became more philosophical; He said, "My dear friends, inside this line, you're protected by the spiritual atmosphere of Vraja. On the other side of this line, you'll be victimized... victimized by illusion, by Māyā." Yeah, I'm speaking so seriously their mouths dropped open, yeah, they were stunned. Can you show us how the cowherd boys' mouths dropped open? But this is the nature of Yoga-māyā here in Vṛndāvana and in the spiritual world. They thought themselves to be ordinary persons, and therefore, they felt their only refuge was Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. They just sought their ordinary boys. They actually thought that if they crossed over that line, they would risk—Prabhupāda says—they would risk becoming demons.

They started speaking very seriously amongst each other. One said to one cowherd boy, "If you cross the line, I think you'll become like Tṛṇāvarta-asura." So, his friend said, "Yeah, well, if you cross the line, I think you'll become like Śiśupāla." And the one boy said, "Either one of you, if you cross the line, you'll become like Kaṁsa." And all the boys started trembling. So like this, they were, you know, warning each other, "Don't cross the line, don't cross!" So, just at that moment, you know, the word came that one calf had strayed off somewhere. Kṛṣṇa was busy with His cows over there, so some of these cows with Balarāma and His friends were taking care, one calf had slipped away. So, Balarāma said, "Excuse me, boys, I'm just going to go find that calf. You stay here, don't cross that line." 

But they were young boys, you know, cowherd boys are... they like a little challenge. What they're saying in English, "Curiosity killed the cat." So, they're kind of like, you know, they couldn't resist the urge to test Balarāma's warning. So, Balarāma is gone, and you know Kṛṣṇa was way off somewhere else and with His cows, they hadn't even seen Him that morning. Looking at each other, one boy says to the other, "I dare you to cross the line!" And that boy said, "No, I dare you to cross the line." Another boy said to his friend, "I bet you can't do it." That way, he said, "Sure I can do it. The question is, will you cross the line?" I'm kind of all looking around like that. So finally, one of the older boys said, "All right, then, let's just all of us cross over the line." So, the boys started laughing and joking, "Yeah, yeah, yeah." But it's described their voices were tinged with a little nervousness, "Let's do it." So, the line was here—we'll call this wall the line—and they all kind of like just tipped over one inch like that, but then they all turned around and ran back over the line. And they did that a few times and one boy said, "Nothing happened." Yeah, so they said, "Let's go further, let's go..." I don't know what the Sanskrit would be, he said, "Let's go 100 meters into Māyā's kingdom!"

Yeah, yeah, so following that, he was a little bellicose. They followed; they went the distance of a football field into Māyā's kingdom. Then one boy, you know, he taunted Māyādevī, "Hey, Māyā, look over here! Can you see us? We've all come, just try and come and get us! Come on, Māyā!" Then another one of the older boys, he said, "Actually, my friends, I think we're being foolish. We should do what Balarāma says and then we're always safe." So then the boys, they raced so fast—it was the fastest race in history—they raced very fast and came here and sat right where you're sitting now, in the kingdom of Kṛṣṇa. And just that moment, Balarāma came back with the stray calf. He said, "Everything okay, boys?" "Yeah, everything's fine! We're not in the kingdom of Māyā; we would never go there." 

But it was time for lunch, and when you're eating lunch, you know, very comfortable and there's lots of talk going on. So, the boys were speaking very loud. One boy said to the other, "Did you cross the line?" "Yeah," and his friend said, "Yep, I did." Then he said, "You crossed the line?" "Yes, I crossed the line, and I wasn't affected by Māyā in the least!" So, Balarāma overheard these conversations. So, He said, "Boys, put your *prasādam* down for just one minute. We're going to have another little talk here." The boys got all red-faced, you know, "Oh, okay, we're speaking too loud." No, you were speaking too loud. Balarāma stood up and He started speaking again. "So, you did cross the line," He said, "when I was gone searching for the stray calf?" And they all said, "Yeah, yeah, we did, but we didn't fall into illusion; we came back." So then, Balarāma said something very instructive.

Um, very important for all of us, because, well, we live in the kingdom of Māyā for a moment. And He said, "My friends, you should understand that you didn't fall into illusion because you're Kṛṣṇa’s fully surrendered devotees. But those who are not favored by Kṛṣṇa will be victimized by temptation outside of Vraja, and forget everything about Kṛṣṇa." He said, "People who live in the kingdom of Māyā, they're illusioned, they forget everything about Kṛṣṇa." All the boys went, "What is it? How is it possible to forget Kanhai? How's it possible to forget Kṛṣṇa? He's so amazing! He's our friend!" This is, remember, in Vṛndāvana everyone loves Kṛṣṇa more than anyone's ever been loved before, and the symptom of that is that they always remember Kṛṣṇa and they never forget Him. That's a symptom of love. If you love someone, you never forget them and you're always thinking of them. That's absolutely true in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

How can anyone forget Kṛṣṇa? Do they really forget? They've forgotten Him. Balarāma said, "Yes, there's plenty of them. People who forget Kṛṣṇa, there's plenty of them." The boys just stared at beyond Khambi. They just stare into that space. They're wondering, "How could anyone forget Kṛṣṇa?" Now they were understanding the real situation. So, the boys said, "Really? Well, we're never going to go there again, we promise, Balarāma." And they all stood up and they folded their hands and they looked at Lord Balarāma. And with one voice, it's described, in tears in their eyes: "Dear Balarāma, please warn everyone in Vṛndāvana never to go beyond this line You have drawn. Tell them never to go over the top of this hill, never go past Khambi. Please tell everyone." Balarāma, He carries the plow; He took the blade of His plow, and from a part of this hill—because remember, it's just a rock hill—from this hill He carved out the stone pillar that's just over here where the devotees are sitting. It's a reddish-brown pillar; He carved that out, that pillar, and put that pillar on the very top of this hill. 

And about 100 years ago, the British, who were always kind of fascinated by Indian culture, they dug down 50 meters, half of a football field; they couldn't find the bottom of that pillar. That same pillar is still there. Then Balarāma made a proclamation. He said, "My dear boys, this pillar marks the boundary between Kṛṣṇa's realm and Māyā's realm. Never go beyond this pillar." So, in a general way, that means don't go beyond this wall. And if you ever feel sometime in your life that you're being victimized, coming under the illusion of Māyā, just run to Vṛndāvana and grab hold of that pillar and pray to Lord Balarāma for the strength to maintain your vows and proceed forward to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma in the spiritual world. 

We're all going to have to leave Vṛndāvana and go beyond this boundary, back into the world of illusion. It's risky. One time, one of my Godbrothers said to me, "The problem with you is that you're not afraid of Māyā. You're playing with Māyā, a little trick here, a little sense gratification there; so that's your problem, you're not afraid of Māyā. You should be afraid of Māyā." Māyā tricks even the demigods. But because they were fully surrendered, they didn't fall under the illusion of Māyā. So, if we follow in the footsteps of the cowherd boys, let us say we follow in the footsteps of our Founder-Ācārya, follow all the rules and regulations, and always chant Hare Kṛṣṇa—that's the definition of a devotee—we'll also be protected from the illusion of Māyā.

It was... I said many times that Prabhupāda said one time, "Two things never lose their potency: in Kali-yuga, jewels which astrologers use, and mantras. They never depreciate; they're always powerful, even in Kali-yuga. A mantra is not affected, what to speak of the *Mahā-mantra*." Kṛṣṇa Himself. From a literal point of view, Śitā was a princess; she came to the forest, she was, you know, tender and white-skinned and feminine by nature, but she's in a big forest. But when Lakṣmaṇa left to join Rāma in the search for the deer, Mārīca in the form of the deer, before Lakṣmaṇa left, he drew a circle around Śitā and he chanted a mantra. And when Rāvaṇa came and tried to get that delicate little princess, he couldn't touch her because of that mantra. 

The problem is we don't have enough faith in the mantra. Therefore, to gain faith, we have to always be hearing the glories of the *Mahā-mantra*. Then, when some danger or Māyā may attack at a moment you're not aware—sometimes there's a hole, some offense—if you leave a hole in the chanting of your *mālā*, if you don't finish 16 rounds a day, Māyā can come in and grab you. "No, I've got him now! I've got her!" Just like Rāvaṇa got Śitā. You should also tremble just like the cowherd boys did. We've come here to Kṛṣṇa's playground; we're protected. It seems like only a crazy person would leave Vṛndāvana. "I'm not going back to America, I'm not going back to Australia, I'm not going back to Russia; I'm going to stay here! I don't want to go into the kingdom of Māyā!" 

But let us remember Śrīla Prabhupāda, who knows Vṛndāvana more than we'll ever know Vṛndāvana. He left Vṛndāvana for the purpose of bringing everyone back to Vṛndāvana. If you leave Vṛndāvana in that mood to share Vṛndāvana with the world, you'll surely be protected. *Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-yajñāya*. Prabhupāda said the last instruction someone gives is the most relevant. I've been giving you many instructions, but the last instruction is a summary of all; it's the most relevant. In each age, Kṛṣṇa comes and He gives a relevant process for that age, be it meditation or austerity or *yoga*. But in this age, He just came and said, "Everyone chant!" That's Lord Caitanya. No one can understand without the mercy of Lord Caitanya. Association, which means we're in Vṛndāvana consciousness. Wherever you are, that's Vṛndāvana. So, if you're serving Lord Caitanya's instruction to somehow facilitate the spread of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, you're with Mahāprabhu and you're in Vraja, safe and sound by the mercy of Śrī Caitanya. 

So just like we are in Vṛndāvana right here, you can run and leave from Vṛndāvana to New York. That's the playground of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. This is Kṛṣṇa's playground; Mahāprabhu's playground is every town and village of the world. You can run; don't be like the... you can run! *Gauḍīya-transcendental*, book distribution, *kīrtana*, *kīrtana*, *kīrtana*. 

But before you go today, you can put your head on that pillar and pray for Lord Balarāma's protection, because Balarāma means He gives spiritual strength to resist the temptation of Māyā and spiritual strength to get back home, back to Godhead, and take as many people with us as possible. But we're still in Vraja, so we're going to stir the nectar ocean of Vraja-bhakti by sharing just a couple more transcendental pastimes here in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Or should we stop and go back? Who wants to stay and hear more *līlās*? 

So, after playing here at Khambi for some time, the day wore on and Balarāma and the cowherd boys, they moved to other places for more pastimes. This was all Balarāma and His friends here, and they heard Kṛṣṇa is nearby; they wanted to go play with Kṛṣṇa and His friends. There's a nice prayer in this mood: "I joyfully offer respects to Govinda, the dark enjoyer, going to the pastures with Balarāma along with His cows and friends." Perfect. "I joyfully offer my respects to Govinda, the dark enjoyer, going to the pastures with Balarāma along with His cows and friends." Right here, wow, I'll pay for it, that's two. Oh, my Rising Dark Moon, you're going to be tattooed from head to toe, you little cowherd boy! I don't know, maybe. 

So just near Khambi, maybe two kilometers away, is another forest; it's one of my favorite forests in Vṛndāvana. Just hearing about it, it's called the forest of Hāsyavana. Somehow this forest reminds me of my name. They met Kṛṣṇa and His friends there, two groups—Kṛṣṇa and His friends, Balarāma and His friends—and when they saw each other, they all rushed forward and, by the influence of this particular forest, they all embraced each other and started laughing and laughing and laughing, and they couldn't stop laughing. They're rolling on the ground, holding their stomachs, because Hāsyavana means the forest of laughter. Actually, it means the forest of comedy resulting in laughter. Let's go there; if you have a bad day, just go there. You walk in the forest—my depression is gone, no more pills! The forest of comedy, they're telling jokes and they're laughing. I'm getting tired of His jokes; He needs some new jokes! 

There's a saying: "Laughter is the best medicine." Often reverberates with the sound of laughter. Yes, it says different parts of Vṛndāvana, you'll be hearing *gopīs* laugh, you'll hear the elderly *gopīs*. Vṛndāvana is such a wonderful place; it's reverberating—means often reverberating—with laughter. Kṛṣṇa is often telling jokes. I was reading that one time He wanted to play a joke on one of His servants at Nandagrāma. She was an old maidservant, her name was... A little boy, He walked up, and He put His hands like this on His hips, and He said, "My dear Jīji, the skin on your face is now slack and sagging, so your face exactly resembles that of a monkey; therefore, the king of the monkeys, Bālī-mukha, has selected you as his worthy wife. You can marry the monkey!" 

So at that point, Kṛṣṇa and all His friends just broke into laughter. But it's said hearing Kṛṣṇa's teasing words, she replied, "My dear little Kṛṣṇa, I am well aware that the king of monkeys is desirous of marrying me, but what can I do? I have already taken shelter of the Prince of Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the killer of many powerful demons and the protector of the residents of Vraja. Therefore, I have decided to wait and to marry Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone instead of the king of the monkeys." That's all *keli*, it's all playful pastimes. And now it was time for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Her friends to laugh. Here in Jīji's witty reply, all the cowherd friends, all the cowherd girls present, they started laughing uncontrollably and clapping their hands. Great reply! 

So laughter, it's the best medicine. Everyone loves to laugh. So therefore, the forest of Hāsyavana, which is just a little bit further down here, it's a favorite place for Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and the cowherd boys to go and play because they just laugh all day. I've heard from the residents of Vṛndāvana that some great souls, *paramahaṁsa* devotees with the Lord, they like to go there because of their purified senses; they can still hear the laughter of Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, and the cowherd boys. It's said like that. 

We have to be liberated. I found a *śloka* in this regard: "Liberated souls whose pure chanting allows them to hear echoes reverberating in the trees of Hāsyavana will recognize those echoes as the cowherd boys' laughter and will then themselves be overtaken by laughing spells and smiling." Let's go! So, now, after a good amount of time—you know, they spent there laughing and joking, telling the frog joke and everything like that—they got really hungry. So, there's a big banyan tree there, so all the cowherd boys, they sat down under the banyan tree with Kṛṣṇa in the center and all the boys around, and then all this stealing of lunches took place. You know, we often hear in *Kṛṣṇa Book* how the boys steal lunch or they steal Kṛṣṇa's. All this stealing of lunches, it took some time to settle down. I do that with my friends, you know, sometimes where I steal all this from... *ācāryas* must play, kindly agree—but the cowherd boys, they all want to steal Kṛṣṇa's lunch. So, Kṛṣṇa, He's the King, so He gets really special dishes. Mother Yaśodā cooks really special dishes; His lunch box is different than the other boys', simple cowherd's breakfast. So, this big battle going on, and Kṛṣṇa's lunch always gets stolen and is divided amongst the boys. And one of the boys, he gives his simple lunch to Kṛṣṇa. That's Vraja-bhakti. Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the love of His devotees; He'll eat the rice, stone-cold chapattis, and the samosas and the kachoris and the jalebis. Cowherd boys eat that, but they're eating it because it's Kṛṣṇa *prasādam*. 

Actually, we shouldn't distinguish; we should think this is Kṛṣṇa *prasādam*. Whether it's a dry roti or, you know, a sumptuous, you know, samosa, we should think this is Kṛṣṇa's *prasādam*. We should be willing to... but this is gradually, I'm sharing. But for ourselves, like this, when He would leave some *prasādam* on His plate—because the spiritual master has to leave something for the disciples—to be nice vegetables here, kachoris, and also here, He takes salt, and He puts, mix all the *prasādam* together, the sweet, the sour, the salty, and He puts salt in it like that, then He'd have His disciples eat it, just to emphasize that *prasādam* is *prasādam*, we shouldn't distinguish. It's all mercy. *Bhāgavata-prasādam-kī-jaya!*

So, you know, Kṛṣṇa was eating a dry chapatti, the boys were having, you know, nice samosas and jalebis, and then one boy said, "Hey, Gopāla, tell us truthfully, and don't mislead us, how did You, as a mere baby, kill Pūtanā and Tṛṇāvarta? And how did You, with only... only being a few years older, liberate Aghāsura? How did You do it? We saw it with our own eyes, You're just a boy like us! Do You know some demon-killing mantra that You've never shared with us? You know, we're friends, we have to share! Do You have some demon-killing mantra that You haven't shared with Your buddies?" Kṛṣṇa doesn't trust us with His demon-killing mantra! 

Another boy, you know, still chewing, he was mumbling, eating, he says, "Maybe Kṛṣṇa's power is not in mantras, but in the amulets His mother ties around His wrist and waist. Go ahead, You can tell us, Kṛṣṇa, we won't steal them from You! It's those amulets and those bracelets that give You that power, right?" Let's just stop and savor that moment for a while. Every moment in Vṛndāvana is like nectar. So, let's just savor that particular moment. The *ācāryas* say, yeah, at this point, the *gopas* had a good-natured laugh at Kṛṣṇa's expense, and Kṛṣṇa drank their joking words and friendly laughter through His ears as if they were liquefied, tasty honey-sweet draughts of love. This is poetry. Kṛṣṇa is dearer to the cowherd boys than they are to themselves. Their every word and gesture is an expression of divine love, completely free from enmity or acrimony; they can only love Kṛṣṇa and no one else. 

So then, Kṛṣṇa paused for a moment; suddenly He raised His right hand and He caught the cowherd boys' attention with the *jñāna-mudrā*. Like this, so they knew something was going to happen, so they all came in very close. Kṛṣṇa was just staying like this. He said, "Finally, friends, I will disclose My secret to you. But do you have the faith to accept what I say?" "Yes!" So, the boys kind of looked at each other, like, "Okay, what's going on now?" "Of course!" But it's written that Kṛṣṇa's expression somehow created an enchanting aura that obliged the boys to say, "Yes, we have faith in You!" And then from their hearts, in unison, they sang a beautiful *śloka*: "We offer our respects to the attractive dark enjoyer with the complexion of a fresh cloud, conch-like throat, wearing silk cloth, along with Śrī Balarāma." These are cowherd boys, but they're very... they love Kṛṣṇa, but from their heart come these beautiful verses. "We offer our respects to the attractive dark enjoyer with the complexion of a fresh cloud, conch-like throat, wearing silk cloth, along with Śrī Balarāma."

So, pleased with the cowherd boys' love, with that expression, that poetic verse, Kṛṣṇa said, "All right, because I see you have faith in Me, I will reveal to you the source of all My powers and how I killed all those demons." And now, because we've run out of time, I will share that information with you next year when we come here! So, at that point, all the cowherd boys leaned forward, eager to hear every single word of what Kṛṣṇa was about to say. My name is only a five-year-old boy, but, "Go on, Kṛṣṇa, killed those demons!" So, this part is very deep in the mood of *sakhya-rasa*. Listen to what Kṛṣṇa said to the boys: "At the time of My name-giving ceremony, Gargamuni disclosed that I am just like Nārāyaṇa, and that by My power I destroy all obstacles as well as anyone or anything that threatens My devotees." So, when He said, "Just like Nārāyaṇa," the boys went, "Hmm." "My dear friends, what you consider... what you consider superhuman feats, they're nothing for Me. For Me, killing the demons who terrorize Vraja is as easy as binding a small calf." Now listen to this: "Know for certain that although I am your friend, I am also the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for whom nothing is difficult, and who has appeared as a *gopa* just out of love for you." What He's telling His friends, He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He's just appearing as a cowherd boy to befriend them. He told it all. 

Right now, when the cowherd boys heard those words, they thought to themselves, "That's cool! How wonderful! Not only is Kṛṣṇa a village hero killing the demons, but He's also the Supreme Nārāyaṇa! He's really clever, yeah! He's God, but still He's our friend! But it's God, that's cool!" That the boys laughed at the new wonders Kṛṣṇa was telling them, well, Kṛṣṇa laughed at the *gopas'* boundless love for Him, which even knowledge of His supreme nature couldn't change. They just loved Him as a friend. When they heard He was God, that's another one of the things He can do, mainly He's my best friend—*sakhya-rasa*. As God, the more they loved Him as their friend and the more Kṛṣṇa saw the *gopas'* pure love for Him, the more eager He was to be their cowherd friend. It's very deep. 

In conclusion to this particular *līlā*, the *śāstra* says, in this way, the exchange of sweet laughter between Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys intensified, infecting all the forest creatures—birds, trees, creepers, and even insects—with its magic, until all of Hāsyavana was engaged in uncontrollable laughter. Everywhere, on the trees... All glories to the mellow of laughter, which is especially enjoyable amongst youths like the *gopas* and *gopīs*, which has Kṛṣṇa as its cause and which gives rise to jubilation, laziness, and concealment. The forest of laughter, with the sweet laughter of Kṛṣṇa and the *gopas*, still permeates the ether and where pure-hearted devotees can hear and taste this wonderful laughing of ecstasy of love even today. 

Now, I'd like to mention here before concluding, just a little bit north of the forest of laughter, is the village of Mohali, which is known for its very high Kṛṣṇa-conscious standard of living by the residents. What is this high standard of Kṛṣṇa consciousness that's being referred to here? All the people in that village have a very high standard of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. What is a high standard of Kṛṣṇa consciousness? The answer is going to melt your heart, maybe bring a few tears to the eyes of some devotees. Listen, what is the high standard of Kṛṣṇa consciousness? The residents there always have: number one, the name of Kṛṣṇa upon their lips; number two, the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa within their minds; and number three, attachment for Him within their hearts. To become like the residents of Mohali, that the name of Kṛṣṇa is always on our lips, His pastimes are always in our minds, and attachment for Him, deep attachment for Him, is always there within our hearts.

So, hearing this, I searched more about Mohali and the residents there. I wanted to run from my room somewhere in Vṛndāvana and embrace these residents of Mohali, "Where are you?" I'm simply running behind you, chanting "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." A resident of Mohali, before speaking to another person, will always say, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa!" Before he said, "Like Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa," and in reply, a resident of Mohali will first be replied by saying, "Rāma, Rāma, Rāma!" In other words, one person in Mohali will say, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, how are you today, my friend?" That's the spiritual world! In South Africa, when you meet somebody, you say, "How are you keeping, man?" "If you're keeping money, how's the wife, how's the business, how's your health?" Don't say that! Say, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa," how's my health? And I'll say, "Rāma, Rāma, Rāma, I'm just fine, because I'm always chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes within my mind, and attachment for Him is awakening my heart." Śrīla Prabhupāda, whatever one does, wherever they are, the residents are always dressed in devotional attire with *tilaka* and neck beads, and they always address each other very sweetly. 

They have different varieties of work and service; they make no distinction of who is higher or who is lower, and their dealings are free of envy and malice. Just what Prabhupāda wanted. How do they maintain this high standard? This is a very high standard. How do they maintain that high standard in the village of Mohali? Okay, when a child, he writes... this Kṛṣṇa-conscious atmosphere is, "quote, achievable anywhere by the potency of transcendental sound vibrations."

In that light, I would like to finish today with one verse, again from *Prema-bhakti-candrikā* by Nayanānanda Dāsa. It is actually two verses; they're a little long, but they summarize this nectar of *sakhya-rasa* that we've been speaking about today: "As the cowherd boys let the cows graze, they pick forest fruits and flowers to eat the sweet roots and fruits, drink water, and chew betel nut. Later, they assemble and drive the cows home, calling repeatedly the cows and cows' names: 'Oh, Dhavalī! Oh, Śyāmalī! Oh, Kāli! Oh, Pīalī! Oh, Haṁsī!'"

Thank you. He goes on: "The boys' bugle sound 'dun, dun,' and they are excellent flute sounds. Forest horns thunder joyously and the sounds of drums mixed with hand clapping and sounds from their armpits—the whole of Gokula becomes filled with the cowherd boys shouting along with the sounds of horns, flutes, the mooing of cows and calves, and the cry of *jaya, jaya!* Hearing this loud, musical cacophony, everyone everywhere in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma exclaims, 'All glories to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma! All glories to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma! All glories to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma!'" 

And all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, who wrote on the *Jaladūta* on the way to America in 1965. It says, "You are my eternal companion. Forgetting You, I have suffered the kicks of Māyā birth after birth. If today the chance to meet You occurs again, then I will surely be able to rejoin You." Oh, dear friend, in Your company I will experience great joy once again. In the early morning, I will wander about the cowherd pastures and fields, running and frolicking in the many forests of Vraja. I will roar on the ground in spiritual ecstasy. Oh, when will that day be mine? Because I have a great longing, I call to You. I am Your eternal servant and therefore I desire Your association so much, oh Lord Kṛṣṇa, except for You there is no other means of success."

*Lord-kī-jaya!* The pillar of Khambi-kī-jaya! Back home, back to Godhead-kī-jaya! Take all the fallen, illusioned souls on the other side of this line back with us-kī-jaya! *Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-yajñāya!* Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you very much. So much nectar to be found out here in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. How do we do that? Like treasure hunters, we go and dig up the ground and try to find some lost treasures? No, we find all these treasures by *śravaṇam* and *kīrtanam*. Kṛṣṇa's just hearing and chanting brings *smaraṇam*, or remembrance to the Lord. As Prabhupāda said, that's the goal: to always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him. And you can always remember someone and never forget Him if you're fully surrendered to them, if you love them. 

So just by sitting and chanting like this for an hour, an hour and a half, that love for Kṛṣṇa is slowly aroused. So it would be nice if we could go on all year doing this. By His grace, it can be done anywhere and everywhere in this world. So get a taste for hearing and chanting and you'll be happy wherever you go.""