Devotees, I'm addressing you today on the back of our stage, our massive stage, where out front we have about 3,000 people ready to watch our cultural performances. It's very satisfying for the hearts of the devotees to see so many people coming forward. Śrīla Prabhupāda said one time that "We will take the world over by culture." And when you think of culture, what do you think about?

Well, you think about theater, dance, some philosophy, good food. And we have the best of all of that in our Kṛṣṇa conscious movement, in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. And here along the Baltic Sea coast, for the last 35 years, we're doing our best to present that culture as it is.

My experience is that the cultural aspects of Kṛṣṇa consciousness really touch people's hearts and bring forth spiritual emotions. They may not realize who the Supreme Personality of Godhead is, but they love the food. The theaters are very attractive; they're well-rehearsed, they're professional, and they're devotional.

Many of our acts bring forth that feeling of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the hearts of the people. So it's so nice presenting Kṛṣṇa consciousness in this way. The Saṅkīrtana Movement means – I've explained this before – Saṅ means complete, and Kīrtana means to glorify the Lord.

So Saṅkīrtana is the complete glorification of the Lord. It means that everyone in this movement has something to offer the Saṅkīrtana Movement. And probably, like this cultural approach, it was more simple in the early days. I think the pioneers who get the credit for this cultural approach were the Vaikuṇṭha Players.

Prabhupāda had that added that up in the 1970s, and Prabhupāda would attend those little dramas, those little theaters, and he appreciated it.

I remember after one theater, I saw it online; he joked about Mr. Hiraṇyakaśipu, how he was performing. So Prabhupāda encouraged the Vaikuṇṭha Players to continue like that.

So we're taking up where they left off. We have a group of about maybe 50 or 60 actors and performers for all different aspects of our show. And I was thinking the other day that it's a miracle. Because there was one writer, one poet, Rudyard Kipling, he once said, "East is East and West is West, and never the twain shall meet." Never the two shall meet.

We could understand that in the 19th century, how the world was. That it wasn't possible. But Śrīla Prabhupāda proved him wrong by leaving India and coming to the West and transplanting, you could say, Vedic culture, more specifically, our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, the Movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in the Western countries.

You could say he synthesized the East and the West. Because our performance here, you couldn't – you could say it's not strictly Vedic. Like Prabhupāda was very innovative in his preaching.

We know that when he came to the West, he allowed ladies to live in the temple. That wasn't happening in India during those days. Ever before. Ladies would go out and preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness on the street. They received Gāyatrī mantra.

Sannyāsīs could dress in Western clothes to preach in certain places in the world, but it wouldn't be applicable to where Sannyāsīs dressed in so many ways. Prabhupāda was innovative.

We also have to be innovative without sacrificing our core tradition. This is the art of preaching. As every epoch, every age changes, we have to adapt Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that the general public can be attracted again, without sacrificing our core values.

Here on our tour, we're out on Saṅkīrtana dressed in dhotis and sāṛīs, with tilak and veils and shaved heads and flower garlands, and we're chanting and dancing. And people come to our festival. We have different booths and different attractions.

We teach yoga, we have a gift shop, we have a book shop, we have face painting, we have cooking demonstrations. It's all just pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But we found that on our stage programs, we adapt a little bit so that we get the attention of the people, and they feel comfortable.

One mayor in America, a couple of years before the pandemic when we were touring America with our show, he came and watched one of our theaters, I think it was the Rāmāyaṇa. And afterwards, he said to me, "You know, Maharaj, your show is as good as Broadway." I said, "Well, really, thank you." He said, "No, I mean it.

You, I can see you've rehearsed for probably many months, and your performers are, you know, I can see they've learned ballet, they've learned to sing, to dance, and express themselves. Very professional." He said, "But your show's better than Broadway." I said, "How is that?" He said, "Because you have a message.

You have a message." In each of our dramatic theaters, the message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness comes across very, very, very clear. So when I mean synthesis, we attract the people's attention in the West because they like to see ballet, they like to see different dances, the costumes, the scenery, sometimes Western, and they can identify with that.

And very often, they identify with the actors who are performing. They can see themselves in the actors, and they not only can they see themselves in the actors because we innovate a little bit in a Western way, they identify with the message that comes through those. (Music playing) We have many plays defining, you know, the existence of the soul, defeating voidism and impersonalist.

That's why Prabhupāda came to the West to do.

The message comes across. We are not these bodies; we are the spirit soul. And the spirit soul is a part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And Kṛṣṇa's not an old man, you know, aging with gray hair, but He's youthful, He's very youthful, attractive.

He speaks very well. He's Bhagavad-Gītā, and He's charming, He's debonair, He's lovable. So in this way, we have, you know, theaters which are a synthesis of Western culture and Eastern culture. So people can watch it and then identify with some spiritual message.

And we have straightforward Kṛṣṇa conscious plays like the Rāmāyaṇa or Mahābhārata, like this, where we're mixing in such a way that people get the message. And therefore, we've proved Mr. Kipling wrong. Excuse me, Mr. Kipling, we've proved you wrong.

You said, "East is West, East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall meet." Prabhupāda had the courage to leave India and prove you wrong because this movement is actually for the whole world.

Although our culture appeared in India, it's not Indian. Our culture is the culture of the spiritual world, even beyond Vaikuṇṭha. Our culture is the culture of Goloka Vṛndāvana.

That's our culture, and that's the natural state of every living entity to be Kṛṣṇa conscious. So what we're doing is, we're introducing neither Eastern culture nor Western culture; we're introducing the culture of the spiritual world. And if it's done in a very attractive, very colorful, very festive, professional, and devotional way, people can identify with it.

So therefore, during our programs, after our festival's over, I go to the book table and I ask how many books have been distributed. And every festival, between 25 and 50 Bhagavad-Gītās have been sold. And I'm very busy throughout the festival, actually writing a dedication and signing the books like this, with the date, because I tell the people, "You can, this is what you can take home from your summer vacation, something worthwhile that'll guide you through this life and onto the spiritual world.

It's the most valuable thing you can bring home, more valuable than your tan, which will fade away in a few days." So we're very happy trying to fulfill this particular prophecy of Śrīla Prabhupāda that "We will take the world over by culture," not only our stage show but the whole atmosphere of the festivals, just pregnant with Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And we actually thank the people; we thank the people for coming, because what would Saṅkīrtana be without the people?

They're all our brothers and sisters; they're the lost sheep, the black sheep wandering in this world. We see them as our brothers and our sisters, and we actually love the people, we truly do. During the pandemic, I missed many things in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but I really missed the people.

One of our ācāryas, I believe it was Baladeva, he said he's written that the Saṅkīrtana Movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is even more attractive in the material world than it is in the spiritual world. In the spiritual world, there's a part of Goloka, it's Rādhā-dweepa, where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His Saṅkīrtana party, uncountable purifiers of the Lord, are having kīrtana and performing with Mahāprabhu and His pastimes.

Some future devotees, I was reading, they have an identity in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes there, and also in Caitanya Mahāprabhu's pastimes. It's quite deep and mystical. But even then, Baladeva Movement in the material world is even more attractive. Why?

Because of the background of the darkness of ignorance in this world. What does that mean?

Well, we learn that in theater, when we're doing a performance, we have a black backdrop so that the actors stand out, their beautiful outfits and costumes, very colorful costumes. If you have a colorful background and colorful artists, it all kind of merges.

So this is one technique in theater; you have a dark background and silhouettes, everything very nicely. So in that way, with the background of the darkness of ignorance in this world, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's pastimes are very attractive. And it's just so satisfying to the heart to see the people of Kali Yuga, colossal, very, very fallen to various degrees, just to capture their attention and see this beautiful dance, this beautiful theater, this poem that we heard, this lecture we heard, this view that we tasted, it just opens our hearts like the lotus flower blossoming with the sun.

With this experience, we see people actually awakening to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is a miracle of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So we also thank the people for coming and seeing them experience this wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And I often think that I could do this for many births because Prabhupāda said that this is more attractive here.

And actually, we're here to fulfill Prabhupāda's mission, to give everyone an opportunity, somehow, to take up Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Rūpa Goswami says that somehow or other, somehow or other, get people to become attracted and take up Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we're doing it through the transcendental medium, and we're very happy to do it until Śrīla Prabhupāda is satisfied that the Saṅkīrtana Movement has touched the hearts of everyone on this Earth planet and beyond.

Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said he wouldn't be happy until the 14 worlds were chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So we found that this cultural approach is working. 3,000 people today, we had 4,000 the day before, almost 5,000 the day before. We judge something by the result. Yes, we're innovating, keeping our core tradition. The result is thousands of people are coming and enjoying and taking the experience home with them.

And sorry, we had the kīrtana at the end. Anyone who participates in the kīrtana, we dress them in a sāṛī; they get to keep it. Some people have been coming 10, 20 years. One lady said, "I have 15 sāṛīs; I started when I was a little girl." So like that, they leave the festival in sāṛīs, with gopi dots, Bhagavad-Gītā.

May we please you birth after birth?

Thank you so much for giving us this opportunity to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Thank you, Prabhus. We'll be back with more videos later in the summer. Conquered the world by culture, Śrīla Prabhupāda, all the people.

Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa. You.