"*00283*.*
"Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. On this auspicious occasion that we’re celebrating today—actually, the first people I met when I came here was the couple; they were doing a photo shoot—I’d like to share with you a very beautiful Nṛsiṁha prayer, which is chanted in the Śrī-sampradāya. Because in South India, where the Śrī-sampradāya flourishes, many temples and many devotees are worshiping Nṛsiṁhadeva. Most of the Nṛsiṁha temples are actually in South India.

In 1979, I took sannyāsa in Māyāpura at the big Māyāpura festival. As I was coming out of the festival, you know, a sannyāsī wears a kaupīna, and he traditionally does madhukarī—goes to four houses in the morning and begs for food, and whatever he gets at those four houses, that’s his sustenance for the day. So, I had just taken sannyāsa and was in this fresh, bright orange cloth—I remember—and I went out to collect some daikṣiṇa from my Godbrother, Mahābuddhi Prabhu. He is a big devotee, physically as well as spiritually. I put my uttarīya out, and he put a Nṛsiṁhadeva deity into my top piece—a small, old, ancient deity. So, I thought that was nice for protection in the new āśrama.

Then I decided I had a break; my temple president gave me a break for three months, so I decided to go to South India. I went barefoot with a little bag, in those days took the trains and buses, and walked on foot. I went to Ahobilam and Visakhapatnam and all the different places I could find Nṛsiṁhadeva temples. In that way, Nṛsiṁhadeva became my iṣṭa-deva. I especially appreciate going to Śrī Raṅgam, where the Jīyar is the ācārya; there is a beautiful Nṛsiṁhadeva deity there. I am still in touch with the priest there after so many years because it deepened my understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in many ways. I made many friends, and recently this priest sent me this prayer. It is the Nṛsiṁha-aṣṭakam—it means "eight prayers in glorification of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva." I believe it is not known to date in our movement. My dear Godbrother—actually not a Godbrother, but a dear friend of mine and a scholar that I often discuss with, Gopipārādhana Prabhu at Oxford University—we got the proper translation from him. Literally, Nṛsiṁha-aṣṭakam means, in English, "Octet to Nṛsiṁha." We’re familiar with aṣṭakams because we have the Ṣaḍ-gosvāmī-aṣṭakam, the eight prayers to the Gosvāmīs; we have the Nāmāṣṭakam, the eight prayers to the Holy Name; like that, we have the eight prayers.

So, on this auspicious occasion, I take great pleasure in reciting this mantra for all of you. It’s a tradition here at this haldī ceremony to glorify Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva for the protection of the couple as they take this quantum leap in their spiritual lives, working together to go back home, back to Godhead. Just a little note: after the first two ślokas—there are eight ślokas—the following six ślokas focus on His more gentle characteristics. We tend to think of Nṛsiṁhadeva as always angry; He gets angry. Actually, Nṛsiṁhadeva is Kṛṣṇa when He gets mad—that’s who Nṛsiṁhadeva is. You can conceive of it like that. Nṛsiṁhadeva is featuring Kṛṣṇa when He gets angry, and no one can become more angry than God. No one can do anything more than God, anyway, what to speak of when He gets angry. We tend to think of Him like that—as in the painting by Jadurānī—sitting on the throne and ripping out the heart and the entrails, the intestines, of Hiraṇyakaśipu. We pray to Him to protect us internally from our own material desires, which are obstacles in the path of pure devotion to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and externally as we all try to cooperate in the mission of spreading Lord Caitanya’s mission. But He has this very sweet side as well. Maybe it’s not as popular a painting, but there’s that painting of Prahlāda Mahārāja on His lap after the whole bloody scene is done, and there’s even a painting I’ve seen in India where Nṛsiṁhadeva is licking Prahlāda out of love. Animals tend to lick you if they love you.

So, Āśīṣa and Śraddhā-pūrṇimā—I only know you as Śraddhā-pūrṇimā-dāsī—we are going to recite this prayer. Worshipping the ugra form of Nṛsiṁhadeva is generally meant only for sannyāsīs. Worshipping that ugra form is mainly meant for sannyāsīs because it’s understood that in that form, Nṛsiṁhadeva takes everything away, so you have no other resort than to just take shelter of His lotus feet. Everything He takes. Traditionally, sannyāsīs live a life of renunciation, so in worshipping Nṛsiṁhadeva, He speeds up their renunciation so they have nothing left to do but to take shelter of Kṛṣṇa. So, worshipping that form is not so much recommended for gṛhasthas. Worshipping Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha is meant for householders because Lakṣmī is there; Lakṣmī is the goddess of fortune, and householders require prosperity. I was reading recently in the Bhāgavatam, Prabhupāda said that the human form of life is not meant to be lived like animal life in the jungle or in the forest, like ferocious deer life. There must be some prosperity there so we can be peaceful to focus on Kṛṣṇa in our sādhana. Therefore, traditionally, householders worship Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha, not Lakṣmī separately, because her consort is Lord Nārāyaṇa. The secret is if you worship Nārāyaṇa, you get Lakṣmī’s blessings. In household life, there is children; Prabhupāda said one time in Detroit, "What is the use of household life unless there’s children bringing forth the future army of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the great generals?" So to take care of children, you need a house, you need a kitchen, you need a playground, you need a school. So Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha can be worshipped by the householders.

There’s also Yoga-Nṛsiṁha or Śānta-Nṛsiṁha; Śānta means He’s peaceful. He’s not always roaring and ripping apart. He has His planet—all the incarnations of the Lord come from Kṛṣṇa, and every one of them has their own planet in Vaikuṇṭha. How many planets? To get a little idea, Prabhupāda said that there are more incarnations of the Lord than there are waves in the ocean. So there are so many; each of them has their planet. That’s where Nṛsiṁhadeva resides. When it was necessary in Satya-yuga, when His pure devotee, one of the great Mahājanas, Prahlāda Mahārāja, was in distress, Nṛsiṁhadeva came just to save one devotee. We were discussing this the other day in ISKCON, that Nṛsiṁhadeva came to see how merciful Kṛṣṇa is. Sometimes people say, "How can there be God? There is so much suffering, how can God be kind?" Well, for His devotee—if you wake up, revive your relationship with Him as Prahlāda Mahārāja has done—Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva came for one devotee. And then He killed Hiraṇyakaśipu and immediately went back to Vaikuṇṭha. He didn’t stay around very long. Kṛṣṇa was here 125 years, Mahāprabhu was here 48 years—just in a blink of an eye, Nṛsiṁhadeva came and went back. So He has His planet, and there He is very peaceful. Śānta-Nṛsiṁha. Actually, Hiraṇyakaśipu is there because we know he got liberation from Nṛsiṁhadeva tearing out his heart; the heart is the seat of lust, anger, and greed, and He destroyed that heart. So he achieved mukti, but more than that, by the touch of the nails of the Lord, he got prema. Actually, the Purāṇas describe that Hiraṇyakaśipu is living on the planet of Nṛsiṁhadeva as a guard to the palace with a big mustache. So there, Nṛsiṁhadeva is very peaceful.

Śānta-Nṛsiṁha is meant for brahmacārīs because brahmacārī minds can’t get disturbed. Brahmacārīs are meant to control their senses so their mind is not agitated by the flickerings of material nature. Their minds have to be peaceful because they have to study and learn the scriptures to preach. Youth is meant for acquiring knowledge, middle age is meant for acting on that knowledge, and old age is meant for realizing that knowledge. So, brahmacārya up to 25. The mind is peaceful, so when they chant "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare," the mind is not flickering, moving here and there. In this particular aṣṭakam, the first two prayers are about ferociousness—just to get started—and the others are more in His gentle mood. The author is a great ācārya in the South; he glorifies the gentle nature. I thought that would be appropriate today. We don’t... this is a pleasant, peaceful, wonderful, loving ceremony, so I thought it would be appropriate to sing this aṣṭakam with two prayers in the beginning and then six Śānta-Nṛsiṁha.

But I was studying the aṣṭakam, and before we begin, this poem has an interesting structure. The poet begins by requesting for the highest goal—you’ll hear the highest goal—and then he gradually lowers his demands. First, he asks for the topmost thing, but then you’ll see his requests become less and less. I looked it up; the ācāryas say that he does this perhaps out of humility, considering that his first request is beyond his reach; he lowers it, "Okay, I want this, but if I can’t get that—I probably can’t get it because it’s beyond my reach—then please..." Thus, we’ll analyze it a little bit. In verse one, he first prays to Nṛsiṁhadeva for liberation—liberation in the sense of liberation from material desires. It’s called mukti; it’s kind of 50% of the way. After you get freed from material desires, then you’re free to awaken your spiritual desires. It’s like if you’re sick, what can you do? You get over the sickness, and then real life begins. Mukti is not the goal; to get liberated is an opportunity to begin devotional service. In that sense, he’s praying for mukti. Then in verse two, it’s going down a little bit; he only asks to become free from suffering. In verse three, he just offers obeisances. Then in verse four, he prays that the Lord place His lotus feet on his head; what greater benediction could there be? If the Lord places His feet on your head! In verse five, he prays for the Lord to remember him at the moment of death. Because death is difficult—birth is difficult, disease is difficult, old age is difficult, but death is the most difficult because the soul is being torn from this material body where he’s been for whatever, 10, 20, 100 years. Torn out of his home; it’s terrifying. Therefore, we practice to remember Kṛṣṇa at the moment of death every day: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare."

Śrī Rāmānujācārya, just because he’s an ācārya—it means teaches by example—he posed a question to Raṅganātha, who’s the presiding deity in Śrī Raṅgam. He’s so big, He’s lying down, and Lakṣmī-devī is massaging His feet. It’s such a big altar that first you go and you take darśana of His head, then you walk a few meters and you take darśana of His abdomen, then you walk a few more meters down the altar and there’s Lakṣmī-devī massaging His feet. Beautiful ancient deity. Raṅganātha, one day he went with his disciples and he posed the question to Raṅganātha—because deities can speak, they can reply to you. At the installation of the choicest Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities in Los Angeles, early maybe late 60s or early 70s—I don’t remember—Prabhupāda said, "It’s the installation; if you think these deities are brass idols, they’ll remain brass to you forever. But if you worship them according to the rules and regulations as I’m teaching you in devotional service with love and with devotion, He said one day these deities will speak to you." He told us there’s no exaggeration. To think the glories of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa is an exaggeration, it’s an offense. Prabhupāda said, "They’ll speak to you." He gave us that hope. Like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said one time at initiation, "I see no reason why all my disciples can’t go back to Godhead in one lifetime." The words of the ācāryas are as good as the words of the Vedas, so we take it literally.

So, he asked the deity, "My dear Lord, what happens if Your devotee cannot remember You at the moment of death? What if you fall from a building, you’re in a car accident, you’re in a coma because of whatever some disease? You practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness your whole life." Actually, one of my friends is a doctor, Gopīsvara Svāmī, said 80% of the people die in a coma; they’re not awake. It’s not like the movies: "You tell my wife and children I love them, I’m going now, goodbye." Unconscious. So what if we’re unconscious? Would you like to hear what Raṅganātha said to Śrī Rāmānujācārya? Raṅganātha said to Śrī Rāmānujācārya: "If My devotee cannot remember Me at the moment of death, I will remember My devotee." Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. And in ISKCON, we hear a similar prayer: "Lord, please remember all I’ve done for You." So in verse five, this Nṛsiṁha-aṣṭakam is praying, "Hey, help me remember You at the moment of death."

Then in verses six and seven, he prays that he may be able to fully meditate on the Lord every moment—always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him. That’s the ultimate, maximum ultimate verse, śloka, Prabhupāda’s number one instruction. But he would agree that all the knowledge, all the activity, all the prayers we’re doing is to remember Kṛṣṇa at every moment and never forget Him. So how do you always remember someone and never forget them if you hate them to begin with, like Kaṁsa? Rūpa Gosvāmī says in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Kaṁsa, he was Kṛṣṇa conscious, fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, because of the omen from the sky. He heard that the eighth child of Devakī would kill him. He was always thinking, "Where is He? Where is He? I’m sending asuras every day." But Rūpa Gosvāmī says not that type of "always remember, never forgetting." That’s unfavorable; favorable Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the other way. You can always remember someone and never forget them if you love them, isn’t it? I’m sure the young couple here, they’re thinking of each other constantly, day and night, in preparation for the big wedding tomorrow. That’s natural; it’s love in this world—every boy wants a girl, and every girl wants a boy—but we purify it. We make it Kṛṣṇa conscious by working together to go back home, back to Godhead, if that’s gṛhastha life. And finally, in verse eight, he prays that he may simply spend his days chanting, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare."

So that was a warmup, a hors d'oeuvre. Now I’m going to read to you the Nṛsiṁha-aṣṭakam. I don’t think anyone knew there was this aṣṭakam. For Nṛsiṁha-bhaktas, this is pure nectar, and that includes every single devotee in ISKCON. Because Prabhupāda, when he was introducing the traditional prayers we chant after every āratī, he said we’re praying to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva for two things specifically. He said for the protection of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness as a whole—and because it’s a society, which means it’s made of people, so that we’re praying for ourselves, other devotees, the movement to progress, etc.—and he said these prayers are especially meant to protect our guru-jana, our spiritual masters, because without a spiritual master, what hope is there for us? So, here it is—and sit properly, as Prabhupāda said, and be all ears, all ears.

"Oh sustainer of Śrī—Śrī means Lakṣmī—pure like a billion spotless full moons, Your entrancing massive mane reddens Your radiance. Bestower of mercy, safeguard this soul drowning in life’s great ocean. Oh death of the finest demon—got a title there, the finest demon—oh Nṛsiṁhadeva, oh Narasiṁha, You incinerate the sins of sinners bowing at Your lotus feet, and Your banner bears the best of birds, Garuḍa. You are the greatest, highest sanctuary, oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha. Please compassionately preserve me, eradicating the afflictions which are inherent in worldly life. Your broad chest is spattered with the fresh kuṅkuma-like blood of the demon king mutilated by many sharp claws. Oh treasure of the scholars, come as an abode—oāśraya to You who sit on a lotus—oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha. Your lotus feet adorn, as it were, the crowns of the kings of mortal gods, the hearts of the yogīs, and the Vedas' highest part. Oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha, please place them, place them lovingly like radiant lotuses on my own head. Actually, it’s not immortal gods, it’s mortal gods. Lotus-eyed Lord, when I am in my final moments, when all my senses are paralyzed by pain, please come, come, oh Lord whose shelter should be sought, along with Ramā—means Lakṣmī—riding the Lord of birds. Oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha. Now we’re in verse six: May Your all-embracing form, decked with the brightest golden crown, with necklace and wildflower garland, and silver girdle, with shark-shaped earrings, with the greatest of gems, appear now, please, within my mind. Oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha, Your eyes are moon, sun, and fire—because three eyes—Your mighty arm is illuminated by the greatest disc. Oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha, home of Ramā, may my mind ever more delight in You who delighted the celestial king. Number eight: Om Narasiṁha, Mukunda, Murāri, oh Narasiṁha, please be a refuge for all who bow down before You. Compassionate one, cause of all, You grant desires, oh Lord of the immortals. May I thus spend my days worshipping You. Oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha."

And then, as is traditional, the poets leave us with a blessing: one who constantly recites these eight verses which destroy all fear and all sin, which grants one’s desires and destroys every enemy, disease, and threat, such devotees will surely reach Your ultimate abode. Oh Narasiṁha, oh Narasiṁha. 

He made it; it’s a great example. So, who’s the Master of Ceremonies? Should I finish here or should I go on? I just need some instruction. Where’s our fearless leader? Do you need more time, or... pīpī-pūr? Who here knows what pīpī-pūr is? Raise your hands. No? It’s the source of the haldī ceremony, of course! The haldī ceremony, where we’re going to rub them with all these nice turmeric and yellow liquids—it’s lots of fun. Should I continue or stop? I finished, but about Nṛsiṁhadeva... I was going to speak about haldī. Sure, it’s short. Okay, okay, five minutes.

Haldī: they’re dressed in yellow now, but soon they’re going to be dripping in yellow. So, the haldī ceremony, of course, is a traditional ceremony at these weddings. The day before the wedding, it’s been going on for millions of years. But we try to see everything in perspective of Vraja because that’s our parama-dhāma. Vaikuṇṭha is the official kingdom of God; it’s very official—"Sir, yes, sir." But in Vṛndāvana, it’s Vraja, where it’s the playground of God, where out of His causeless mercy and by the potency of yoga-māyā, everyone forgets God is God, and He forgets they are God, and they just have loving pastimes and different rasas and different mellows. So that’s the origin of everything. So, you could say that the haldī ceremony started in Vraja and filtered down the Vaikuṇṭha planets into this world and the tradition for marriages.

What is its original source? I’ll be brief. We could go on for hours with this pastime, but basically, Durvāsā Muni. Durvāsā Muni, he wanders around the world, he’s a great sage. If you please him, he’ll bless you; if you offend him, we say in Polish, "Uwaga!"—watch out. He can give the greatest of blessings and he can give the strongest of curses. So when he arrived, he didn’t have his 60,000 disciples in this particular pastime like he did when he was sent to the forest to give some trouble to the Pāṇḍavas. No, he came to Vraja, and he was hungry. And when sādhu gets hungry, there’s lots of people who want to feed them because by feeding a sādhu—when a gṛhastha invites a sādhu into their home by cooking and feeding that sādhu—all sins that may have been committed in the course of life are eradicated just by inviting a sādhu into your home. So Durvāsā is wandering around, but all the doors are closed; everybody’s home, they’re out farming, etc. But there’s this group of young girls, Vraja-gopīs, and they’re playing. It’s very sweet pastimes, and it appears they’re all worshipping one exceptionally beautiful young gopī, maybe nine years old, eight or nine years old, beautiful young gopī.

So in Vedic culture, girls are taught to cook at a very young age because when you get married, you know, the way to a man’s heart is through his stomach. That’s not Ṛg Veda; to please the husband because patī-sevā is part of our giving and receiving. Pāka was part of our process, so ladies should learn Yamunā’s cookbook back and forth. This was the great contribution of that great mata amongst her many other savors and qualities: she worked for years on that cookbook. That should be the standard, not Pizza Hut, five kinds of pizza. That’s Vedic culture, that’s Kṛṣṇa conscious essence. That book should be glorified throughout the three worlds. So girls learn to cook. So Durvāsā Muni—she’s a young girl—he said, "Could you please cook something for me?" So she got permission from Kīrtidā, who is Kīrtidā, the mother of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kīrtidā said, "Can I cook for this sādhu?" "Yes, of course." There’s no better cook in the three worlds and beyond than Rādhārāṇī because she cooked, and Durvāsā Muni was so pleased with her cooking, he said, "This is the best prasādam I have ever tasted." He gave her a blessing: "Whatever you cook, young girl, will always be ambrosia; it will be nectar." Can you imagine eating nectar? Just eating nectar! "That’s my blessing. Whatever you cook will be like nectar, and whoever eats it will live a very long life." Nice blessing.

He went on. News spread very quickly, because Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the most prominent personality in Vṛndāvana. Of course, Kṛṣṇa is there, but Rādhārāṇī doesn’t do what Kṛṣṇa says; Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhārāṇī says. That’s the nature of her loving passion. She’s the mahābhāva; she controls Kṛṣṇa with her love. That’s something wonderful. So the news spread that Rādhārāṇī had this blessing, that whatever she cooked would taste like nectar, whoever eats it would live a long life—almost immortal. So down the road, because here we’re speaking of Rāval, where Rādhārāṇī lives with her family at Nandagrām—who’s there? Nanda and Yaśodā. So the news spread to Mother Yaśodā: "There’s this girl that whatever she cooks tastes like nectar, and whoever eats it will live a long time." So who’s Yaśodā? Always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. "Can I... Lālā, come here. There’s one little girl, I’ve heard she—whatever she cooks tastes like nectar, and whoever eats it lives a long time. So I want you to have the best prasādam, and I want you to live a long..." You know, mothers are "I’ll never grow up, I’ll never grow up, not me." They don’t want their children to grow up because that special age between 5 and 10, then the teenage years... that’s all stories. Little children are so cute. Dāmodara, so many of the pastimes in the month of Dāmodara. So Mother Yaśodā said, "Oh, I’m going to see Kīrtidā." So she went over to Rāval, she met Kīrtidā and King Vṛṣabhānu and said, "Could you please have your daughter come to Nandagrām every morning and cook breakfast for my Lālā?" "Oh yes, of course, just children. They’re just children, you know, there won’t be anything, just the children." But little do they know that God is God even when He’s one day old or five years old. He kills big demons like Pūtanā and Tṛṇāvarta; He’s always God, but He appears in that form for the playful pastimes of Dāmodara.

So every morning, Rādhārāṇī would go with her girlfriends, sakhīs. And sakhīs are in number, but each sakhī has eight girlfriends who help her in her service; each of those gopīs has eight servants who help them; each of those have eight, eight ad infinitum. This is the spiritual world. So that all these gopīs came every morning to cook for Kṛṣṇa, and Rādhārāṇī is cooking, looking out the window at Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is there waiting at the table, looking at Rādhārāṇī—some pāka, some sweet pastimes of seeing each other before meeting. That’s pāka, heating up the whole mood of bhakti; love, transcendental love is coming up. And she would serve Kṛṣṇa, as well, and then all Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd boys are there as well.

So, after some time, seeing, you know, most adorable Kṛṣṇa with beautiful Rādhārāṇī, although like nine years old, Mother Yaśodā called Rādhā to the side one morning and said, "You know, I think you’d make a perfect match for my little boy, Kṛṣṇa. I think you should get engaged to Him." Because you know, Vedic culture, they engage very young. So she took some haldī, she took some turmeric paste, and she spread it all over the hands of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Yellow. You’ll see it won’t come off; tomorrow they’ll be glowing yellow because of the haldī. And she put it on Rādhārāṇī’s hands, and this is a sign that a girl is engaged to a boy. Now Rādhārāṇī, she’s shyness personified; this was just put on her, you know, like "What?" So Mother Yaśodā said, "You can go home now and make a big announcement that you’re engaged to my Kṛṣṇa."

So on the way, Rādhārāṇī is like, "How am I going to..." She’s just so embarrassed. So she gets almost to Rāval—we can take you there, it’s a little kuṇḍa there, it’s got a yellowish tint to it, it’s right near the āśrama of a very nice Bābā there that I know, right at the bottom of the hill of Rāval. She almost was home, and she came to that lake. She said, "Nope, I’m not going to go through with this. I’ll be embarrassed." So she washed her hands of the turmeric, the haldī, and the whole kuṇḍa turned yellow. Why are we wearing yellow today? Goes back to Vraja. Everything goes back to Vraja, and we want to go back to Vraja; we left that place to come to this horrible world. Crazy! She washed her hands, then she went back and Kīrtidā asked, "Welcome! How was today? Cooking?" You know, came back home from Nandagrām to Rāval. So, I mean, so washing her hands like that, yellow kuṇḍa... and then Kṛṣṇa is wandering somewhere. That’s okay, you can wander around Vṛndāvana because there’s 60 billion holy places in Vṛndāvana. One of my Godbrothers arrived in Vṛndāvana in 1972 and said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, what should I do here in Vṛndāvana? So many things, so many nine processes of devotional service—you can do cleaning and cooking and chanting." Prabhupāda said, "You just wander." So when the spiritual master gives an instruction to one disciple, a general instruction, it can be taken as an instruction to others. So now when I go to Vṛndāvana, I just wander. I go out to the villages. If you really want to understand what is Vraja, you just can’t go to Loi Bazaar, you can’t go to the shops. You wander, go 20, 30, 40 kilometers, walk through the villages. You’ll never see, you’ll never hear them say "Jai Kṛṣṇa" like in Jodhpur, "Jai Kṛṣṇa," no—"Rādhe, Jai Śrī Rādhe, Jai Śrī Rādhe." That’s Vraja. And you see them cooking for Rādhārāṇī, speaking about Rādhārāṇī, teaching about Rādhārāṇī, in the school like that.

So Kṛṣṇa was wandering in His own transcendental abode, enjoying His transcendental līlās and the līlā-sthānas, the places of pastimes, and He came across this lake and He was tired and hot. So He said, "I’ll bathe in this kuṇḍa." So He jumped into this kuṇḍa where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had washed her hands, and when He came back out, He was no longer blue; He was a golden yellow, just like we see—golden yellow. And what did Kṛṣṇa start doing? He started chanting His own sweet Holy Name: "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa..." Vraja-vāsīs, "Wait a minute, usually you’re chanting 'Rādhe, Rādhe,' now you’re chanting 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa'?" Why? Because by bathing in that kuṇḍa, He imbibed the mood of Śrī Rādhā. So His blue form turned golden, and He was calling out, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa," like Rādhā does. "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." And He came out, as He kept going, that mood faded, and He came back, and we’re saying, "Rādhe, Rādhe, Rādhe." The ācāryas are commenting on this; they say this is a precursor, I guess you say, to the appearance of Lord Caitanya. Because we know when Kṛṣṇa came to this earth, one of His internal reasons was to experience Rādhārāṇī’s love for Him. But here was a precursor, even at that time, 5,000 years ago, He was like that in the mood of... Gaura, everywhere Gaura was roaming, He was trying to imbibe this mood of Śrī Rādhārāṇī.

So that is haldī. That’s the original haldī. It’s nice we go through these ceremonies, it’s fun, but there’s very deep meaning behind them, deep bhāva. And we’re like Bhāminī, like Rādhā; we want to understand what is bhāva, we want to get the feeling, not to go through something mechanical. But that’s natural as we advance, but we’re praying to get some feeling when we chant, as Mahāprabhu is always saying, chant from the heart: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." And even if it may not be, you know, pure devotion, it’s something. It’s calling out to Kṛṣṇa, like a baby attracts the mature mother by his... he’s trying to speak for the mother, it melts the heart. So although we’re not so advanced in bhakti, if we chant, Kṛṣṇa hears it. And if we chant with the understanding, "I want to develop the same love, that unconditional, pure love that the Vraja-vāsīs have for Kṛṣṇa," we can make very quick advancement. So it’s important to understand haldī. Now we understand it, we’ll appreciate it, where it comes from, and we want to try to attain that mood. So we’ll continue with this ceremony. May Rādhārāṇī bless this couple, may Vṛndāvana-Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī who did the first haldī bless them, and most important, in this age, may Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu give them Vraja-bhakti as they proceed back home, back to the spiritual world. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""