"*00292*.*
"Welcome back. It is good to be with you. 

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.* 

Oh, glorious Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, today we will continue discussing the glories of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. Recently, in a telephone conversation, a devotee said to me, "Mahārāja, if only I was present to see Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes 5,000 years ago in Vṛndāvana, I might have made it back to the spiritual world. But now it is Kali-yuga, and I think it is too late." 

So I said, "Not necessarily." I said that is not our philosophy. Technically, we are Gauḍīya-bhaktas because Lord Caitanya is the yuga-avatāra, and we have heard many times how He is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa. I said, "I would like to share with you a verse that I read the other day in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that I think will give you hope." 

It is in the first chapter of the 11th Canto—actually, two verses combined, verses six and seven—and then I recited it to him: "When Lord Kṛṣṇa was on the earth, His words attracted the minds of all who remembered them. Kṛṣṇa considered that simply by hearing and chanting those glories, conditioned souls born in the future would cross beyond the darkness of ignorance. Being satisfied with this arrangement, He left for His desired destination." 

The boy said, "Yeah, yeah, that helps. I think I can make it." I said, "Yeah, just spend a lot of time hearing and chanting." 

So, the other day we wandered through the forests of Kāmyavana and Khadiravana, and today we will wander a little further, to begin with, to a very—it is described as a very densely forested area called Bhūlāvana. I had never heard of that place before, that forest before. Some say it got its name because many have lost their way there over the years, and others say it was so named because of the following pastime. 

One time, the cowherd boys were blissfully playing various games in that forest. But even though the boys were described as mad with happiness, the ācāryas say Kṛṣṇa Himself was very sad. As the boys ran here and there, Kṛṣṇa just sat despondent beneath a kadamba tree, lost in unhappiness. The reason was, the ācāryas say, because Rādhārāṇī was so far away, and also because there was no prospect for meeting Her that day; there was no plan for Him actually to meet Rādhārāṇī that day. So He was just lamenting under this kadamba tree. 

Noticing that Kṛṣṇa was absent from their games, Subala-sakhā, one of His dearest friends, went searching for Kṛṣṇa, and he found Him alone under that tree. So Subala said to Kṛṣṇa, "Oh friend, why are you lamenting instead of playing with your friends? What is keeping you away from the bliss of our game and from our love for You?" I thought that was sweet: "What is keeping you away from the bliss of our game and from our love for You?" 

Kṛṣṇa replied, "I will tell you. The truth is that when I remember Śrī Rādhā, I forget where I am and what I am doing. I am incapable of playing or reciprocating with anyone's affection." 

So then Subala said, "But Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā is in Varṣāṇā, and we are here. Just put thoughts of Her aside for now. Neither of us can do anything at the moment to bring Her here. When we take the cows back to Nandagrāma, I will make arrangements for You to meet Her. I promise." 

Kṛṣṇa smiled and replied, "Subala, I know you are a man of your word. I will come and play now, but don't forget *bhūlānā*." "Don't forget" is how you say it in Sanskrit—*don't forget* what you promised. Because Kṛṣṇa warned Subala not to forget—*bhūlānā*—the forest is called Bhūlāvana. Bhūlāvana, isn't that sweet? 

Now, there is another significant pastime place in Bhūlāvana. It is known as Caramaṇa. Late one evening, Kṛṣṇa left Nandagrāma in search of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The ācāryas say, either bewildered by love, lost in the dark, or both, Kṛṣṇa just wandered and wandered from forest to forest. And while doing so, He attracted a whole caravan of sympathetic forest animals along the way. All the animals saw Him, and seeing He is searching for Rādhā—they are sympathetic to His hankering for Rādhārāṇī's association—a caravan of sympathetic forest animals followed Him. By the time He arrived at this particular spot called Caramaṇa, His feelings of separation from Rādhā had reached a fever pitch. It is described that the hope that He would find Her was so remote because the night was almost over, that Kṛṣṇa fainted upon a bed of soft moss between the trees. In this particular pastime, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa did not meet up. 

This is prayer; you know, we have been speaking for months about their rendezvous and their meetings and how they are getting ready to meet each other, what happens. But on this night, Kṛṣṇa did not meet Śrī Rādhā. The ācāryas say such are the arrangements of yogamāyā to increase their feelings for each other. But there is a note, the ācāryas give a side note: however, Kṛṣṇa did relish the loving concern of all the forest animals, and they themselves were awarded the special privilege to witness Kṛṣṇa's love and separation from Śrī Rādhā. Wow. 

Now, the śāstras say that at the very southern edge of Bhūlāvana is a place called Hoḍala. Now, the description of Hoḍala is that it is an ancient dwelling place, and it is said that the Pāṇḍavas lived there incognito during their last year of exile. Nearby there is a lake, I read, it is called Pāṇḍava-kuṇḍa, naturally. We mentioned several months ago that the Pāṇḍavas, when they were younger, would often visit Vṛndāvana while living in Hastināpura, and they later stayed there when they were exiled from Indraprastha. It is mentioned that when they were in exile, they lived at Hoḍala in a place called Kāman, where they would go out and travel through the various forests of Vṛndāvana, as we described in another lecture. 

It is very interesting, I read that, but knowing that Duryodhana would try to expose them or find them in their final year of exile, they left Vṛndāvana "to avoid risking a conflict in Kṛṣṇa's land." Can you imagine if Duryodhana found them there? It would be this big thing and they would have to go into exile again. So in case that would happen, they did not want it to happen in Vṛndāvana; they left Vṛndāvana to avoid risking a conflict in Kṛṣṇa's land. 

So, not far from Hoḍala is the forest of Śeṣa-śāyī-vana, where Kṛṣṇa one time assumed the form of Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and Śrī Rādhā assumed the form of Lakṣmī. Now, how that happened—well, it happened one time when Kṛṣṇa and His friends were grazing their cows some other place, some distant place away, and at one point Kṛṣṇa snuck away from the cows and the boys to meet Śrī Rādhā and the gopīs in this very, very secluded forest of Śeṣa-śāyī-vana. He just came there and, somehow, in the midst of their pastimes in this special forest, the ācāryas say: "An image of Kṛṣṇa lying on a serpent in an ocean of milk came into Rādhārāṇī’s mind." They are sitting in that forest and there enters this image of Kṛṣṇa lying on a serpent in an ocean of milk into Rādhārāṇī’s mind. That got Her curious and She turned to Kṛṣṇa. She said, "Dearest Kṛṣṇa, I have heard that You are also Lord Rāmacandra, and others are saying rumors that You are Viṣṇu and other incarnations. If You think Me worthy, please show Me the form You assume as You rest in the ocean of milk." 

Kṛṣṇa was pleased with Rādhārāṇī's request and He began to play His flute. Hearing the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute, all His cows began soaking the ground of that forest with endless streams of milk, which quickly created this enormous lake. It became known as—like we have heard of the Ocean of Milk, right?—Kṣīrasāgara. Also, it is called Kṣīra-kuṇḍa. Then suddenly, in this vast expanse of milk—which I read the ācāryas also call it Mahā-kṣīra-kuṇḍa—there appeared this great transcendental serpent, Ananta-Śeṣa, with His thousand heads decorated with glistening gems, and His mouths were singing the Lord's unlimited glories. 

Now, I remember when I first read *Kṛṣṇa* book, there was that description about how He has been singing a different name of Kṛṣṇa every moment since time immemorial, and He never sings the same name twice. Kṛṣṇa is unlimited, Kṛṣṇa’s glories and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are unlimited, and each of those glories, each of those pastimes, has a corresponding name for Kṛṣṇa. So, Ananta-Śeṣa, one of His pastimes is that every moment He is singing a new name of Kṛṣṇa which He has never sung before, and He never repeats again. Wow, it gives us a bit of an idea of how amazing Kṛṣṇa is. 

So then He was there, Ananta-Śeṣa was in His thousands of mouths singing Kṛṣṇa's glories. Kṛṣṇa took Rādhārāṇī by the hand and walked alongside the body of this described celestial serpent. As He did so, He assumed the four-armed form of Viṣṇu, replete with a conch, a club, a disc, and a lotus. Kṛṣṇa, then Śrī Rādhā, She took on a four-armed form of Lakṣmī. Then Kṛṣṇa laid down, and He laid His back against the hoods of Ananta-Śeṣa, and He placed His feet on Rādhārāṇī’s lap, and Rādhārāṇī began to massage those feet—those lotus feet—just as Lakṣmī does to Lord Nārāyaṇa. Like that, that is the pastime in that forest, a special place. 

Now, in Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura's *Bhakti-ratnākara*, it is stated that Lord Caitanya came to that exact spot in Vṛndāvana for darśana of Śeṣa-śāyī in that form. Seeing the beauty of the deity—this was when Mahāprabhu came to Vṛndāvana for His famous parikramā of Vraja—He came to that particular forest to have darśana of that deity, and described seeing the beauty of this deity, His ecstasy increased. In that state of love, He became overwhelmed, and Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes—it is so beautiful: "Fortunate persons who saw the effulgence of the Lord Mahāprabhu also became maddened in ecstasy, and tears flowed from their eyes. They concluded that Mahāprabhu could not be an ordinary human being, but must be Śeṣa-śāyī Bhagavān Himself in the dress of a sannyāsī. While speaking, they looked continuously at the moon-like face of Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Well, that is *Bhakti-ratnākara*; it mentions that particular forest and the pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and how, when Mahāprabhu was in Vṛndāvana, He visited that particular forest, had darśana of that deity, and went into great transcendental ecstasy. 

So when I was reading this pastime about this amazing deity of Ananta-Śeṣa in Vraja, I remembered how it is described in *Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta* that in 1932, our Śrīla Prabhupāda participated in a Vṛndāvana parikramā party led by his guru mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. On the last day, you may remember, it was announced that since it was to be Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's last night on the parikramā, the pilgrims had two choices: they could either stay back and hear Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī speak, or a pilgrimage had been organized to go see Viṣṇu with one of the sannyāsīs—the same deity. 

So you had a choice: you could stay back and hear him speak *Bhagavad-gītā*, or you could go with one of the senior sannyāsīs and go see this amazing deity. In the *Līlāmṛta*, it mentions practically everyone—everyone—went to see Viṣṇu. Only our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, who was actually an uninitiated householder at that time, and 10 or 12 other devotees, actually senior disciples of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, decided to stay back and hear their spiritual master speak. Later on, some years later, Prabhupāda said he thought, "Reminiscing about that time," he thought, "What can I see at this Śeṣa-śāyī? Let me hear." 

And some years later, in Allahābād, when Śrīla Prabhupāda was introduced to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, his Guru Mahārāja said, "Yes, he likes to hear. He does not go away. I have marked him. I will accept him as my disciple." Well, when I first read that, I was thinking, "I hope You have marked me; otherwise, what hope do I have? Please mark me and engage me in Your service." So that is wonderful, is it not? That Prabhupāda is saying that famous deity—and we have heard this pastime—how wonderful it is. But he had the chance to hear from his spiritual master, see the deity. So actually, we know we see with the eyes of guru, śāstra, and sādhu. So Prabhupāda set a wonderful example for all of us. 

Now, a last note on this place and pastime. I read that the ācāryas say that "the Śeṣa-śāyī Viṣṇu manifested by Kṛṣṇa in Vraja is greater than the original Śeṣa-śāyī Viṣṇu expanded from Lord Nārāyaṇa." Just see the potency of Śrī Vṛndāvana. The Śeṣa-śāyī Viṣṇu manifested by Kṛṣṇa in Vraja is greater than the original Śeṣa-śāyī Viṣṇu expanded from Lord Nārāyaṇa. Wow, *śrī-vṛndāvana-dhāma*. 

So let us keep wandering. Let me think, next we will visit a very beautiful and secluded forest with a very interesting name. It is called Nandavana, or Nandavana. Like sometimes we say Vṛndāvana, we say Vṛndāvana. So Nandavana, or Nandavana. So Nandavana, of course, means—it is not difficult to understand—the forest of Nanda Mahārāja. And why? Well, it is said that Nandavana is where Nanda Mahārāja would often go to absorb himself in bhajana. I thought, "Wow, Nanda Mahārāja goes somewhere to absorb himself in bhajana?" And it said yes, because with so many subjects or personalities to care for, people to care for, and so many cows to protect, Nanda Mahārāja has little time for bhajana. 

So let us remember now that the Vrajavāsīs follow the norms of Vedic culture, even worshiping Lord Nārāyaṇa as Supreme, but they live with and they love and they have given their hearts fully to Kṛṣṇa, who is the Absolute Truth. They have given their hearts more than anything else to Kṛṣṇa. It is just the yogamāyā, in order to make the relationship very sweet, very intimate, they forget that Kṛṣṇa is God. But in the midst of that culture, they follow the rules and the rituals and so forth, going to the temple and worshiping Nārāyaṇa and Śiva, but just falling in love with Kṛṣṇa at every moment. Yeah, that is how things are in Vraja. They cannot forget Kṛṣṇa, they cannot forget Govinda for a moment. 

And this fact is so nicely described in this amazing verse that I read last night in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.58. Govinda, listen to this, it has actually become a favorite verse very quickly: "The greatest among the one-pointed devotees are those whose minds have been completely attracted to Govinda. Even the greatest mercy bestowed by Śrī-īśa, the husband of Lakṣmī, cannot take their minds away from Govinda in any way whatsoever." What a verse. "The greatest amongst the one-pointed devotees are those whose minds have been completely attracted to Govinda. Even the greatest mercy bestowed by Śrī-īśa—the husband of Lakṣmī, Nārāyaṇa—cannot take their minds away from Govinda in any way whatsoever." Wow. You get those verses and you just want to memorize them immediately. Prabhupāda said one time—I heard in Geneva—"If a devotee learns a verse and he quotes it seven times in his lectures, that verse becomes his." Meaning, that is your verse, you get to keep that verse, you can remember it, use it, utilize it in your lectures, in Kṛṣṇa's service. That verse becomes his. 

So Nanda Bābā was naturally absorbed in the love of his son Kṛṣṇa, but by the influence of yogamāyā, he thought himself an ordinary cowherd man who needed time for self-realization in bhajana—just the influence of yogamāyā. So he would visit this forest, Nandavana, which now bears his name, and he would do bhajana. And I was thinking—because I was reading this and I was thinking, "Boy, I hope the ācārya goes on and explains what his bhajana was." And that knowledge is there, that information is there. Nanda Mahārāja would sit there in that forest in seclusion and chant his dīkṣā-mantra and meditate on Lord Nārāyaṇa. 

But śāstra says that, however, as soon as he was absorbed in thoughts of Lord Nārāyaṇa, the four-armed form of the Lord would transform into that of his son. He has got this—he is meditating on Lord Nārāyaṇa with form, and then that form turns into that of his son. It is described that Nanda Mahārāja would be swept away in remembrance of Kṛṣṇa's naughty behavior. He would be swept away in remembrance of Kṛṣṇa's naughty behavior. And after some time, Nanda Bābā would notice that his mind had drifted from his bhajana, from his meditation on Lord Viṣṇu and Nārāyaṇa. So thinking himself inattentive in his bhajana, he would drag his mind back to the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha. But no matter how hard and how many times he tried, his thoughts of Nārāyaṇa would always transform into thoughts of Kṛṣṇa. 

After a while, he just remembered the words of Garga Muni. Remember, Garga Muni had spoken at Kṛṣṇa's name-giving ceremony. So he would remember Garga Muni's words, which were, "Oh King, this child of yours is as good as Nārāyaṇa." So then Nanda Mahārāja would conclude, "If my son is as good as Lord Nārāyaṇa, thinking about him is as good as thinking about Nārāyaṇa." Then his mind would become pacified, and he would remain absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa. 

So the ācāryas say that Nandavana, or Nandavana, is the ideal place to pray for the blessing of spontaneous attraction to Kṛṣṇa, because the Vrajavāsīs have this spontaneous attraction to Kṛṣṇa. We could see Nanda Mahārāja trying to meditate on Lord Nārāyaṇa, but his love is their spontaneous love for Kṛṣṇa, so he just ended up thinking of Kṛṣṇa spontaneously. So Nandavana is the ideal place to pray for the blessing of spontaneous attraction to Kṛṣṇa. So let us go there. Let us go there, and we have a lot of places to go on that next big parikramā. But when we go there, we will pray for a spontaneous devotion to Kṛṣṇa, spontaneous attraction to Kṛṣṇa. It is said that the ācārya put—there is a little bit more to that quote: "Nandavana is the ideal place to pray for the blessing of spontaneous attraction to Kṛṣṇa, so that even the form of Nārāyaṇa, what to speak of the illusory energy, will not distract one's mind." Pretty powerful place and a powerful prayer. 

Because of his unalloyed, pure devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa, we know that Nanda Mahārāja is worshipable by all of us. Hearing this pastime, we can understand that spontaneous devotion is a Vrajavāsī, so he is worshipable, and Rūpa Gosvāmī makes that very clear in *Padyāvalī*, verse 26. He says, "Those who are afraid of material existence worship Vedic literature; some worship the corollaries to the Vedas, and others worship the Mahābhārata. As far as I am concerned, I worship Mahārāja Nanda, the father of Kṛṣṇa, in whose courtyard the Absolute Truth plays." Thank you, Gosvāmī. 

So, as we move further along, I am kind of following that—I have the map of Vṛndāvana in my mind which I have seen many times. So we move further along, we come to a sacred place called Rādera. R-A-N-D-E-R-A, Rādera. This is an interesting pastime place. One time Kṛṣṇa was thirsty, and while looking for water, He met a group of gopīs who were carrying pitchers of water they had just drawn from a kuṇḍa, a lake. A very, very, very special lake—I was so happy when I read this. This lake is called Śrī Rādhārāṇī-kuṇḍa. There is a lake. 

So when Kṛṣṇa asked the girls for water—you know, in this pastime, He does not have to steal, you know, the deity, the yogurt, or the milk—they very happily gave Kṛṣṇa some of this water. After drinking it, He said, "Girls, this water tastes especially sweet. Where does it come from?" So when the gopīs told Him where it came from, Kṛṣṇa said, "Water in Vṛndāvana is never ordinary, yet this water is extra special because it comes from a lake that bears the name Śrī Rādhārāṇī-kuṇḍa. Therefore, it must be imbued with Her sweetness and qualities." Let me recite that again: "Water in Vṛndāvana is never ordinary, yet this water is extra special because it comes from a lake that bears the name Śrī Rādhārāṇī-kuṇḍa; therefore, it must be imbued with Her sweetness and qualities." 

So, because that is the place where Kṛṣṇa declared the water to be saturated with Śrī Rādhā's transcendental qualities, Rādera—the water there is saturated with Rādhārāṇī's transcendental qualities—and that is said by Rādera, the area is known as Rādera. And the ācāryas say that Rādera is always fondly remembered by the Lord, where He drank that extra special sweet water from Śrī Rādhārāṇī-kuṇḍa. Mark it on your bucket list, transcendental bucket list, to visit and drink that extra special sweet water. 

So the last stop in our wanderings today will be the forest of Gopavana, where there is a village called Nā-grāma, in the forest of Gopavana is a village known as—that is interesting—which literally means "No Village," but not in the sense that there is not a village there. No village—I will explain—Nā-grāma. "Where do you live?" "I live in Nā-grāma" (No Village). Yes, a special place because once, elsewhere in Vṛndāvana—not in this particular place, not in Gopavana, but elsewhere in Vṛndāvana—the gopīs were feeling extreme separation from Kṛṣṇa. So they went out to search for Him and, talking amongst themselves, they said, questioning each other: "Is He in that grove?" "No, that is just His shadow." "Is He behind that bush?" "No, that is just a curious doe." "Is that Him on the other side of the kuṇḍa?" "No, that is just a gopī drawing water." They were speaking like this; they could not find Him. So everywhere they searched, they found no sign of Kṛṣṇa. So they are going to all these forests looking, and they could not find Kṛṣṇa. 

So finally, they come to Gopavana and they all laid down beneath a banyan tree, completely despondent, thinking, "We have lost Kṛṣṇa forever." So the ācāryas say, there in that secluded place, the gopīs lost all hope and cried out, "Nā Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" "Nā" means "No," "sense" sounds good. "Nā Kṛṣṇa," which means, "How can You do this to us? How can You leave us like this alone?" "No Kṛṣṇa," they said. "Nā, nā Kṛṣṇa," the same thing, "No." So that place is called Nā-grāma. That became a village, Nā-grāma. 

But all was not lost. Śāstra says, remembering that Kṛṣṇa shows Himself only to those whom He selects, the gopīs sat down and with all their hearts and souls began having kīrtana, chanting Śrī Kṛṣṇa's holy names—*Hare Kṛṣṇa*, like that. They are all chanting a big kīrtana, pure kīrtana from the heart. So then, out of His causeless mercy, Kṛṣṇa suddenly appeared in their midst. But here is the twist, the transcendental twist—the plot thickens. By that time, the gopīs felt that they had been neglected for too long, and in response to Kṛṣṇa's offers to appease them, His sweet words, they continued to cry out, "Nā Kṛṣṇa! Nā Kṛṣṇa!" "No Kṛṣṇa! You abandoned us once too many times, Nā Kṛṣṇa!" So Nā-grāma, the village of Nā-grāma, the village where the gopīs said "No Kṛṣṇa." 

So, that was a noteworthy stroll through Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma today. And as we heard the verse in the beginning of the class—how as He was departing this world, Kṛṣṇa felt that simply by hearing and chanting His glories, conditioned souls born in the future would cross beyond the darkness of ignorance. So like this, if we regularly hear and chant Kṛṣṇa's glories as we find them in grantha Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, there is hope that we can cross beyond this darkness of ignorance. And who would not want to, having seen the scene or heard of the beautiful pastimes of the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana? 

So that means you and me, conditioned souls born into the future. And so even though we are just beginners again, we can also achieve that supreme destination. In the other lecture, we said, "Don't give up hope." We should feel that we can achieve that supreme destiny, as I told that boy, especially in the Age of Kali, because Caitanya Mahāprabhu is even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa. But we should know that the Lord is always with us to lend His helping hand. Kṛṣṇa is with us, Caitanya Mahāprabhu is with us. 

The Lord is always with us, and this is confirmed in a most beautiful—another most beautiful, inspiring verse I came across yesterday. This verse is written by Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa in his *Govinda-bhāṣya*, Chapter 4, Pāda 3, invocation, and we will end with this verse today where we can see that Kṛṣṇa is always there to assist us; He is always by our side. Here is the Sanskrit: *yaḥ śva-bhakti-patraṁ devaṁ sevā-labhā satodhiṣṭhāt prabhyam jaya-padam.* 

It is short, pregnant with knowledge, elegance, and truth, spoken concisely. A beautiful verse. "I love handsome and dark Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who shows, even to those who possess only a dim reflection of devotional service, the path that leads back home to Him." Wow. "I love handsome and dark Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who shows, even to those who possess only a dim reflection of devotional service, the path that leads back home to Him." I know for myself that is going to be a verse I carry forevermore within my heart. 

Thank you, prabhus, another wonderful session of wandering through Vṛndāvana. We are one step closer to the goal. I thank you, and I look forward to being with you in a couple of days. I love these sessions; it is my favorite part of the day, the week, the month, the year. Thank you. 

*Śrī Śrī Gauranītāī kī!* Jaya! See you soon. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""