"*00108*.*
"# Entering Mayapur Dhāma

Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our ongoing lecture series here from Śrī Vṛndāvana, India. 

*Oṃ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā, cakṣur unmīlitaṃ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ.*

We have been discussing several holy places that we visited on our recent trip across India, which Lord Caitanya visited in His travels 500 years ago. As we mentioned in an earlier class, our motivation, as always, was the words of Śrīla Prabhupāda in a purport in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Antya-līlā*, Chapter 4, verse 211. Prabhupāda writes: "A devotee should make a point of visiting all the places where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu performed His pastimes. Indeed, pure devotees of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu even want to see the places He simply visited for only hours or minutes." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So far, we have discussed our visit to Gayā and Bodh Gayā and the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. So today, we will conclude with our visit to Māyāpur. Our community in Māyāpur was the last stop on our pilgrimage. Because we have lectured extensively about Navadvīpa-Māyāpur in our recent lectures over the last two years, I will take a little different approach today and just speak about our arrival and our welcoming in Māyāpur from the Vedic perspective. 

First is how we prepared ourselves to arrive in Māyāpur. As we were approaching that sacred abode in our cars, I was meditating on Akrūra as he approached Vṛndāvana. Essentially, there is no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpur. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, one of our great heroes, sings in one of his songs, *śrī-gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi yeba jāni cintāmaṇi-tāra*. He writes: Once you know that Gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi—Māyāpur—is equal to Vṛndāvana, there is no difference between the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana and those of Śrīdhāma Māyāpur. Now, it is for this reason it is said that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are happy to live in either one or both of those sacred places. In my studies, I have seen that our ācāryas in the past, they go back and forth; sometimes they are in Māyāpur, then they come to Vṛndāvana, they go back to Māyāpur, maybe a quick trip to Purī—like that. But even our ISKCON devotees now, we like to go between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpur. Prabhupāda organized it that way. I remember in the 1970s, we would have our annual Māyāpur festival in his presence, usually in March, Gauṛa-pūrṇimā, and afterwards we would all go with Śrīla Prabhupāda to Vṛndāvana for the second part of the celebrations. 

There is a prediction like that, actually, in the *Garuḍa Purāṇa* that these two places—Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa or Māyāpur—would be the places where Vaiṣṇavas would like to live. The *Garuḍa Purāṇa* says: "In the age of Kali, devotees will abandon the service of other holy places and will live in either Vṛndāvana or Navadvīpa." *Purāṇa* means very ancient; so the *Garuḍa Purāṇa* is stating that in the age of Kali, devotees will abandon the service of other holy places and will live in either Navadvīpa or Vṛndāvana. 

So, as Akrūra approached Vṛndāvana, to begin with, he was meditating on his good fortune of even being able to come to an abode of our beloved Lord. In a mood of humility, he felt himself very unqualified. For example, he was thinking—this was from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, of course—"What auspicious acts have I done? What severe austerities have I undergone? What charities have I performed to be able to enter into Vṛndāvana? I am just a wretched, materialistic person absorbed in sense enjoyment." Here is a devotee approaching the Dhāma but expressing such humility. "I don't really have any qualification." This is a qualification for entering into the Dhāma. 

Now, the ācāryas say that the humility expressed by Akrūra is a prerequisite for anyone desiring to enter Vraja. And we see this same humility demonstrated when Prahlāda Mahārāja was asked by Lord Rāma to approach Lord Nṛsiṃhadeva. Prahlāda said: "How is it possible for me, who have been born in a family of asuras, to offer suitable prayers to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Even until now, all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā, and all the saintly persons could not satisfy the Lord by streams of excellent words, although such persons are very qualified, being in the mode of goodness. Then what is to be said of me? I am not at all qualified." Humility! Actually, unless one is meek and humble to make progress in spiritual life, it is very difficult. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, the author of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, he speaks in a similar way in *Ādi-līlā*, Chapter 5, verse 205. He says: "I am more sinful than Jagāi and Mādhāi and even lower than the worms in the stool." This is extreme humility, but it is not that he is just saying it; he actually feels it. *Bhakti* means to say things and do things and offer things with feeling, with devotion. So, he is not exaggerating; he actually feels like that: "I am more sinful than Jagāi and Mādhāi and even lower than the worms in the stool." 

And as we know, our Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in the mood of a devotee, He also stressed humility: *tṛṇād api sunīcena*. "One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking oneself lower than the straw on the street; one should be more tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige, and one should be ready to offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind, one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly." Such an important verse, actually. Lord Caitanya considered this verse, this instruction, so important that after proclaiming it, He added: "From the mouth of the Lord, raising My hands, I declare: everyone, please hear me! String this verse on the thread of the holy name and wear it on your neck for continuous remembrance." Wow! Raising My hands, Mahāprabhu says, "I declare, everyone, please hear me! Everyone, string this verse on the thread of the holy name and wear it on your neck for continuous remembrance." 

I remember in the early years, my dear godsister Kiśorī-dāsī, she would often cook for Śrīla Prabhupāda when they were in India, and she actually went to a tattoo artist—I think in Bombay at that time—and had that verse, *tṛṇād api sunīcena*, tattooed around her neck. So yeah, that was the first tattoo in ISKCON. 

So, raising My hands, I declare: "Everyone, please hear me! String this verse on the thread of the holy name and wear it on your neck for continuous remembrance." But we should note that while a devotee thinks himself or herself fallen, he is simultaneously confident that the Lord will pick him up. We are very fallen, we have no *adhikāra*, no qualifications, but we don't want it to lead us to the point of despondency because simultaneously we are confident that Kṛṣṇa will pick us up, as He has done; He has picked us up already out of the ocean of material existence. So in our fallen state, He can continue to pick us up. That is a hope we have. 

Rūpa Gosvāmī, he prays like this two times that I know of in *Padyāvalī*, his verse book. In text 60, this mood of helplessness—fallen but hopeful—is there. He writes: "I am drowning in the painful, fathomless whirlpool of repeated birth and death. O Lord, O friend of those who have no shelter, O effulgent moon of mercy, please, just this one time, quickly extend Your hand to save me." How many times have I quoted that? So many times. And in text 61, a similar sentiment: "The elephant of my mind is drowning in the waters of material illusion, strongly held by the ferocious crocodile of the threefold miseries. It anxiously cries with fear in its heart: 'O Lord Hari, please rescue it with Your glowing Sudarśana-cakra, which cuts the sufferings of the demigods to pieces!'" 

So this was the mood that Akrūra had in approaching Vṛndāvana: he was humble, he felt fallen, but at the same time hopeful. There are other interesting contrasts like that. Devotees are very jolly, but at the same time they are sober; they are under no illusion what this material world is like, but they are jolly, knowing that we are going home, back to Godhead. We just sing like that on the streets, "We're going home, back to Godhead." So a devotee is sober, never tricked by Māyā’s illusions, but very jolly that we have the solution to material existence, and we should share it with others. 

So this strong conviction that one will receive the favor of Kṛṣṇa—even a new *bhakta*, even a fallen *bhakta*—will receive the favor of Kṛṣṇa. This is called *āśā-bandha* in Sanskrit. *Āśā-bandha* means to think: "Because I am trying my best to follow the regulative principles of devotional service, I am sure I will go back home, back to Godhead." 

I was thinking that in this connection there is one prayer by Rūpa Gosvāmī—a very, very famous prayer—but it is very relevant to this particular topic. He writes, and we find this in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*: "I have no love for Kṛṣṇa, nor for the causes of developing love of Kṛṣṇa, namely hearing and chanting; and the process of *bhakti-yoga*, by which one is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa and fixing His lotus feet in the heart, is also lacking in me. As far as philosophical knowledge or pious works are concerned, I don't see any opportunity for me to execute such activities. But above all, I am not even born in a nice family. Therefore, I must simply pray to You, O Gopījana-vallabha! O Kṛṣṇa, maintainer and beloved of the Gopīs, I simply wish and hope that some way or other I may be able to approach Your lotus feet." And this hope is giving me pain because I think myself quite incompetent to approach that transcendental goal of life. But there is hope! The medical doctors, they say, "Where there is life, there is hope." The person has been injured in a war, a car accident, but there is some glimmer of life there in the eyes or in the breast, so there is still hope; we can still save that person. So no matter how fallen I am, Kṛṣṇa is so kind, my spiritual master is so kind, that if I try, I can be delivered. We have to have this hope. 

Actually, in commenting on that beautiful verse by Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Prabhupāda says: "The purport is that under this heading of *āśā-bandha*, one should continue to hope against hope that some way or other he will be able to approach the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord." Prabhupāda emphasizing the same thing. 

So again, this was Akrūra’s mood in approaching Vṛndāvana: humble but hopeful. And therefore, he concludes in the *Bhāgavatam*, he concludes—my memory fails me sometimes—it is really interesting: "But enough of such thoughts. After all, even a fallen soul like me can have the chance to behold the infallible Supreme Lord, for one of the conditioned souls being swept along in the river of time may sometimes reach the shore." 

So just as we are coming off the highway from Kolkata to Māyāpur, there is that side road that leads off the highway, leading towards our Māyāpur Candrodaya Mandir with the very large Temple of the Vedic Planetarium. You can see it in the distance. As we took that turn, I remembered an instruction of Śrīla Prabhupāda in *Kṛṣṇa* book, Chapter 30, where he writes—giving us instructions how to enter the Dhāma: "As soon as one reaches the boundary of Vṛndāvana, he should immediately smear the dust of Vṛndāvana over his body without thinking of his material position and prestige." You know, to roll in the dust and be all dirty—"What do I look like?"—but it is Vraja, it is one of the five personalities who grants entrance into Vṛndāvana. So traditionally, devotees approaching Vṛndāvana, they get out of the car and they roll in the dust. Do you do that? We should do that. Be careful, though, not to get way off the side; go in a little bit into the forest and roll there, not on the highway. 

And Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, "When my mind will be purified after leaving the contamination of materialistic sense enjoyment, I shall be able to visit Vṛndāvana." We have to be qualified to go to those sacred places—Vṛndāvana, Māyāpur, Jagannātha Purī. And during the year, we can think about if we’ve made progress. Because, well, we do! Prabhupāda actually invited us—I remember, at one point in the Māyāpur festival, he told the GBC members that all my disciples should come every year for the Māyāpur festival. And it created a big commotion in the GBC: "But Prabhupāda, what about the preaching and the finances?" Prabhupāda: "Not so important." So of course, time, place, and circumstance, but in our hearts we should want to come and make plans if we can, even in the way the world is today, to try to visit the Dhāma. But prepare ourselves throughout the year, should be one of our goals: "That this year, or next year, the next, I will go to Vraja, I will go to Māyāpur." Because coming there and practicing devotional service there, one can actually make quantum leaps in devotional service. That is the power of the Dhāmas where Kṛṣṇa appeared. 

So remembering that instruction in *Kṛṣṇa* book, I told the driver to stop. He’s like, "What’s happening?" I told everyone out, and I said, "Roll in the dust." "Yes, Guru Mahārāj." So we got out and we rolled in the dust. And of course, I prayed to our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, who was the source of all our auspiciousness, all success and strength in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because Prabhupāda is for us our connection to everything Kṛṣṇa conscious. So he is the revealer of the Dhāma. So anyway, by this time I felt ready to enter Māyāpur, and I also realized that by visiting Māyāpur, it is a well-known fact, I was actually preparing myself to enter Vṛndāvana as well. How was that? Because one of my heroes, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, he writes in his *Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya*, verse 78, that to enter into Vṛndāvana, you need the mercy of Māyāpur-dhāma. Interesting how Prabhupāda would always invite us to Māyāpur for the Gauṛa-pūrṇimā festival and then we would go to Vṛndāvana. Prabhupāda knew everything! So to enter into Vṛndāvana you need the mercy of Śrī Māyāpur-dhāma, and he writes it very clearly. Here is what he writes: 

"If you worship the nine islands of Navadvīpa, you are actually worshiping Vṛndāvana and can easily gain entrance into that confidential place. If you don't worship and take shelter of Navadvīpa-dhāma, Vṛndāvana will be very far away from you." Wow! "If someone will worship *dvija-suta*—Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the son of the prominent Jagannātha Miśra—that person will attain Vraja-nagara. If one worships Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is actually Kṛṣṇa Himself in Navadvīpa, one is performing complete worship of Kṛṣṇa. Worshiping Śacīnandana is as good as worshiping Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. If one does not worship Gaurāṅga, Kṛṣṇa will be very far away." Whoa! The path is very clear. The path is very clear, back to Godhead. We have that by following the footsteps of Śrīla Prabhupāda, as when he lived amongst us. He also chanted 16 rounds a day, he chanted three Gāyatrīs, he respected *prasādam*, he worshipped the deities. He is the perfect servant. He told us how to do it, but he did it in pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We are *sādhakas*, we are practicing, but not only his example, but in his purports, his ecstasies, he makes it very clear. So, if one does not worship Gaurāṅga, Kṛṣṇa would be very far away. 

I remember when my godbrother Gurukṛpa Prabhu, he found the first Nṛsiṃhadeva deity in ISKCON. This is going back to the 70s. No one had deities of Nṛsiṃhadeva; we had paintings. So he found a beautiful deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṃha in some antique shop somewhere in South India. He showed him to Śrīla Prabhupāda. He asked if we could worship the Nṛsiṃhadeva deity, and Prabhupāda said, "But Nṛsiṃhadeva is very angry, and if you make offenses it is very dangerous. But you can worship Him along with Gaur-Nitāi. You have to worship Him along with Gaur-Nitāi because Gaur-Nitāi, they accept no offenses." Like that. It is an interesting instruction. A lot of ISKCON devotees want to worship Nṛsiṃhadeva, but Prabhupāda's original instruction to my godbrother was that yes, you can worship the Nṛsiṃhadeva deity, but you have to worship Him along with Gaur-Nitāi. 

So we rolled in the dust, and we remembered Akrūra, we rolled in the dust, we chanted our prayers. And as we drove the remaining few kilometers to our big center, our temple, I was just so excited. But even more so, I was surprised when rounding that final turn on the road, we were greeted by a large crowd of devotees and a rousing kīrtana, because I have lots of students there. Well, they were all there. No, it was so nice! And I smiled, remembering what I had read recently again in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute about etiquette. Well, different types of etiquette in Vedic culture. And one passage that I read was that it is really interesting in Vedic culture: two things are celebrated in a very grand way, and that is the welcoming of *sādhus* and the other is their departure—their farewell—when they go to the next town. I didn't know that. I mean, we always like to receive—I love to receive devotees, my godbrothers, godsisters, and see them off—you know, we like to do that. But actually, these two things are really celebrated in a grand way. I was reading in Vedic culture, and I remember how true that was when, in the 1970s, we would receive Śrīla Prabhupāda. Our welcoming of Śrīla Prabhupāda in our temples was a grand affair—you know, greeting him upon his arrival and then seeing him off when he left were equally big occasions. We did it without even knowing that it is a Vedic conjunction or how big it is supposed to be. Both were equal, big occasions: receiving Prabhupāda and walking him to the car and crying as he left. Both were big celebrations, but with different emotions—deep spiritual experiences, even for the young devotees that we were. Meeting him satisfied our intense desires to be with him, and seeing him off increased our desire to see him again as soon as possible. These are all spiritual emotions; they also take place in the spiritual world with Kṛṣṇa, but through Prabhupāda we learn of these things. We get our first taste in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Meeting him, you know, when he came to the airport and we brought him to the temple, it satisfied an intense desire to be with him, and seeing him off increased our desire to be with him again as soon as possible. Because Śrīla Prabhupāda in the 1970s, he was very much—he really was the center of our movement in those days because of his personal presence on the earth. 

Nowadays, when I think about those yearly arrivals and departures of Śrīla Prabhupāda in the temples that I was in—like Detroit, I remember; New York, London, Paris, Geneva, Rome—what to speak of when Prabhupāda would come to Vṛndāvana or Māyāpur, we would receive him and see him off. When I think about that, I remember a poem that I found in the Vṛndāvana Research Center by a disciple of Gaurī Dāsa Paṇḍita. His name was Kṛṣṇadāsa. We have quoted both of them before. He was the disciple of Gaurī Dāsa Paṇḍita. We know Gaurī Dāsa Paṇḍita from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. Kavirāja Gosvāmī has written in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Ādi-līlā*, Chapter 11, verse 26, he writes: "Gaurī Dāsa Paṇḍita, the emblem of the most elevated devotional service and love of God, had the greatest potency to receive and deliver love." That is who he was. So he had a disciple named Kṛṣṇadāsa, and one time he sent this disciple, Kṛṣṇadāsa, to Vṛndāvana when he was a teenager to serve the Vaiṣṇava *sādhus* there. That is all he said: "You go to Vraja, you serve the *sādhus*." 

So then historically, many years later, Gaurī Dāsa Paṇḍita announced that he would visit Vṛndāvana. And as he was on his way, journeying there, this disciple Kṛṣṇadāsa, who later became a famous poet, he wrote the following poem in anticipation of his guru's arrival. It is known as *Guru-āgamana*. *Guru-āgamana* means the coming or the welcoming of the guru. It is a big thing, you know. We always have *vāṇī*, but we don't always have *vapu*. *Vapu* means the personal association. *Vāṇī* we will always have, but the *vapu* is sometimes here, sometimes not there. So when we get the *vapu*—so this disciple is, "Oh, my guru is coming after so many years," and he wrote this beautiful poem, and I feel that it perfectly, perfectly captures the mood of Prabhupāda’s arrivals at our ISKCON temples in the 1970s. And here it is, so beautiful: 

"Oh, today! Oh, today! My dear guru will come! When I hear the news of the arrival of my dearmost spiritual master, the happiness I feel cannot be described in words. O friends, sing this song of happiness! Decorate the earth and sky! As soon as the palanquin will arrive with my guru, the whole world will dance and sing His glories. Bring the goddess of fortune to sweep the way for Him. Call the king of elephants, Airāvata, to be His carrier, to sprinkle His way with water from its trunk. Oh, the birds are now chirping and the earth has become residence for angels! Blow the conch! Play the resounding drums and trumpets louder to welcome the Lord of my heart! Can’t you see the demigods are showering flowers from their flower-airplanes? Soon I will welcome my guru to reside within my heart." 

Thank you, Kṛṣṇadāsa. That is what it was like when Prabhupāda came. I remember the first time I saw Prabhupāda in 1971. He visited our Detroit temple. I had only lived in the temple—I don't know—some months. Prabhupāda came to the airport; many of his disciples came from different parts of the East Coast and the Midwest of America. When Prabhupāda came to the exit into where we were waiting for him in the hall, every devotee, without exception, started crying. And just everyone fell to the ground, "O Prabhupāda!" Tears. I remember very clearly; I am looking around, "Wow, all started crying!" The power of Śrīla Prabhupāda to bring forth *bhakti*. But how can one experience *bhakti* when one is just a new devotee? It’s *bhakti*—it may be green *bhakti*, not ripe *bhakti*, but it is *bhakti* because the object of that affection is something Kṛṣṇa conscious. A Vaiṣṇava, the guru, Prabhupāda, the deity; maybe we don't have pure devotion but something is there from the very beginning, and directed at something, was generally some person connected. It is *bhakti*. Prabhupāda gave the example of the green mango and the ripe mango. So generally, we prefer the ripe mango, but the green mango is also valuable because you can make *ācāra*—*ācāra* means pickle. I've become accustomed to *ācāra* living in India so many years with my meal—the pickled mango pickle, lemon pickle. So Prabhupāda said, "Yes, both the young devotion of an aspiring devotee and the pure devotion of Kṛṣṇa likes both." So what is the problem? So kind to help us experience, even from the very beginning, these emotions of *bhakti*, which encouraged us to go deeper and deeper and deeper into Kṛṣṇa consciousness to get *amala-bhakti*, pure devotion. 

So he is saying, "The demigods are showering flowers from their flower-airplanes; soon I will welcome my guru to reside within my heart." 

So another poem, there’s another poem by a poet—his name, Cītasvāmī. He was a disciple of Vallabhācārya. He wrote another poem I found that embodied this feeling of meeting the guru, welcoming the guru as he comes to the temple or comes into our heart. He wrote: "With a flood of love in my heart, with empty hands asking for mercy, holding a straw in between my teeth, standing humbly and bowing my head down with tears of hope—with tears of hope in my eyes—I will receive my guru and welcome him with the garland of my devotional desires." Wow! 

Now, our ācāryas and other famous Vaiṣṇavas also describe how to welcome one’s guru—or let us say just senior devotees, or just a godbrother or godsister whom you hold in high esteem, or perhaps a younger devotee who’s excelled in their preaching or their lecturing or their cooking or their admin—a keen devotee likes to honor all of the devotees, actually, as more advanced than himself or herself. So our ācāryas describe how to welcome—well, they are speaking about gurus—but even senior devotees, or as I was speaking, how to welcome such august personalities into one’s home. They write—I am just repeating what I read: "One should offer a fragrant garland to one’s guru and put it around his neck, and with great joy in one’s heart, welcome him into one’s home. Offer him a cooling drink prepared with black pepper, salt, sugar, and little camphor to remove his fatigue of traveling"—I am quoting directly here—"Then offer *pādya* water to wash his feet, and then dry them with a soft cotton cloth with the utmost care. After offering him fragrant oil, one should offer the guru flowers to his lotus feet, and then offer him a lamp. After this, one should offer cooked *prasādam* that’s been offered to the Lord to the guru and give him a donation from one’s heart." 

And then it is written: "One who follows this *vidhi*, this procedure, which is called *pādya-pādya-avani*—another nice name for a disciple—will get a chance to welcome Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa one day in a kuñja in Vṛndāvana." By properly serving our spiritual master, by serving our guru, we become qualified, we get the chance one day to welcome Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. "Please come, everything is ready for your enjoyment." Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

Actually, I remember there was once a disciple of Mādhavendra Purī. His name was Rasika-dāsa—nice name, Rasika-dāsa—who used to live near to the Yamunā river. And if I remember correctly, he was a farmer, and during the day he would work very hard for his family, and late at night he would cross the river Yamunā to meet his guru Mādhavendra Purī at Yatipura. This was going—this is historical, this is when Mādhavendra Purī was living in Vṛndāvana—so he would cross the river Yamunā to meet his guru Mādhavendra Purī at Yatipura along with other disciples. And at those meetings, it is described Mādhavendra Purī would discuss Kṛṣṇa consciousness and have kīrtana with his disciples for many hours. We are doing the same thing now. And this Rasika-dāsa, who also became later a Vaiṣṇava poet, he writes something very nice just about this relationship between guru and disciple; it is so sweet because we are being taught to serve the sweetest of the sweet, Kṛṣṇa. 

So he writes—Rasika-dāsa writes: "When our guru comes from Anyora to Yatipura in the evening, we welcome him by performing various dances. After that, he gives us the nectar of Kṛṣṇa-kathā, which makes us intoxicated with love of Kṛṣṇa." Just describing, describing an historical instance there. When I see my spiritual master, he writes, singing the names and glories of Śrī Gopāla, the Lord Himself comes and dances in the kīrtana. How blessed we are to be with our spiritual master. 

Now, I noted that, being the devotee that he was, obviously he is a very advanced personality, Rasika-dāsa, he also had glorification for his godbrothers and godsisters. He not only adored his spiritual master, but he adored his godbrothers and godsisters. I always think that by the mercy of my godbrothers and godsisters, by serving with them, I can understand the glories of my spiritual master. Without them, it is not possible. And by the mercy of my spiritual master, I understand the glories of Kṛṣṇa. *Hari-guru-vaiṣṇava-bhāgavata*. Narottama says, Lord, Guru, and the Vaiṣṇavas, service to all is equally important. So this devotee, Rasika-dāsa, after so nicely glorifying his spiritual master, he had words of glorification for his godbrothers and godsisters. He wrote about it—here is what he wrote, I read it: "Oh, when will they, the devotees, my godbrothers and godsisters, meet with me? Only by taking shelter in their names all ignorance is vanquished, and I feel bliss and happiness. For whoever falls in love with them, Lord Giridhārī will roam behind them. Whoever gets the association of such souls is most fortunate." So many valuable instructions. 

Now the śāstras say that when the spiritual master comes to the house of a disciple, the Lord protects such disciples from all sorts of miseries and problems. I was reading, and the Lord even stands guard at the door of that house to protect the disciples from the Yamadūtas. If your spiritual master comes to your home, because he is, for the disciple, he is Kṛṣṇa’s representative, he is the ambassador of the Lord in this dangerous world. So if you welcome him in some of the ways or all of the ways that we have been describing today, from ācāryas and from scripture and what these wonderful examples of the devotees who are receiving their spiritual masters and their saviors, those who inspire them in devotional service—then it says the spiritual master, when the spiritual master comes to the house of such a disciple, the Lord protects the disciples from all sorts of miseries and even stands guard at the door of the house if the Yamadūtas come: "Sorry, you can't come in." 

And we should never think that the glories of the holy names are exaggeration. There is no exaggeration in the philosophy or the practices or the results of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Now it is also written that walking in the welcoming procession for the guru—like the guru is coming and then, you know, you join that procession, and then your procession goes to the temple, and the spiritual master pays obeisances to Śrīla Prabhupāda and the deities, and then, you know, maybe you welcome him into your home—it is written that walking in the welcoming procession for the guru destroys the sins of 42 previous lifetimes. I read it. Walking in the welcoming procession of the guru destroys sins of 42 previous lifetimes. Also it is said that one who dances in front of the spiritual master upon his arrival will never dance in front of the material energy of the Lord ever again. One who dances in front of the spiritual master at his arrival—because this class is about, you know, the welcoming and the sending the guru off to the next destination—these two things. So one who dances upon his arrival, he’ll never dance again in front of the material energy, Māyā. 

Now, in Vedic culture, it is also said, *atithi-devo bhava*. It means the guest is as good as God. Just the guest and Kṛṣṇa demonstrated that in Kṛṣṇa’s kingdom in Dvārakā. It is described that if a brāhmaṇa came to Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa would send guards to welcome him. And many, many of you know, of course, there was once a friend of Kṛṣṇa who studied with him in gurukula, his name was Sudāmā, and he was from a poor brāhmaṇa family. And when Kṛṣṇa heard that Sudāmā had come to visit him, He ran very fast and welcomed him. Welcomed him! Not only that, but He placed him on, you know, His own royal seat—Kṛṣṇa has a royal seat in Dvārakā—and in front of the whole court He washed that brāhmaṇa’s feet with His own tears. And it is said that from one side Rukmiṇī was pouring—I was reading—from one side Rukmiṇī was pouring water on Sudāmā’s feet with a five-streamed water pot. I read this, Rukmiṇī was pouring, you know, water on Sudāmā’s feet, and that pot, that beautiful pot, had five streams coming out at the same time, but I was reading but Kṛṣṇa’s tears were more than that of that five-streamed water pot. That water pot is called a *pañca-mukhī kalaśa*, and Kṛṣṇa’s tears were bathing Sudāmā’s feet more than that waterfall. Oh, so much instructions on welcoming the Lord, the guru, the devotees. 

Yes, I... it is the same as in Tretā-yuga. I was reading in the *Rāmāyaṇa* the other day that whenever a highly advanced brāhmaṇa or a Vaiṣṇava would visit a king, the same way, the king would stand and place the *sādhu* on the royal seat and wash his feet with his own hands. There are many examples in the history of the Purāṇic history of the world how great souls were received, like Vasiṣṭha Muni, Viśvāmitra, Nārada Muni—there are so many examples. And I was reading that in olden days—I was reading a history book, so much nectar in that institute—in the olden days kings used to have what is called *catur-aṅginī-senā*. It means they literally had four armies to receive exalted persons upon their arrival in the kingdom. Four armies! Like what, some great *sādhu* is coming? So there are four armies to receive them. And what were those armies? Well, soldiers, but specifically this term *catur-aṅginī-senā*: an army of elephants, number one; an army of horses, number two; an army of chariots, number three; and an army of infantry, number four. Vedic culture was so amazing, so people from everywhere used to come and witness these events. 

Now, I’ve seen here in Vṛndāvana, you know, the greetings take a little bit different form because who has an army of elephants? Who has an army of horses? An army of chariots? Who sits on a royal throne? They can get off; we are trying to be humble Vaiṣṇavas. So here in Vṛndāvana, greetings take a little different form, although the devotion is still there; it takes a different form because of the natural humility of the *sādhus*, the Vrajabāsīs. So welcoming is done here; it is described with sweet words, beautiful garlands, and *prasādam*. Now, one *sādhu* told me in Vṛndāvana, "Welcoming means feeding." Vṛndāvana welcoming, you know, a lot of things you learn from the Vrajabāsīs. One devotee told me many years ago, "If you really want to know Vraja, you have to go out to the outer villages, you know, to where the people live, the simple life, and they are, you know, taking care of the cows and cultivating the fields, and they all have their deity, the main deity in the village, and they do all the festivals, and, you know, Western materialism hasn't contaminated those places so much. If you really want to know Vraja, go out there." And I do, and I love those Vrajabāsīs. 

So one Vrajabāsī, he smiled, he had no teeth, "Welcoming means feeding!" And he said there is a famous saying in Vṛndāvana that welcoming a guru or *sādhu* is incomplete without feeding them with six different tastes of food to their full satisfaction. And I see that also in the sense that, you know, when I go on *parikramā* with devotees, or just go on *parikramā* with one or two devotees, where somewhere in Vraja—some of the villages—or so often the people meet us and, "Please come for *prasādam*! Please come!" You know, they want to serve, they want to feed you, they want to feed you. I don't know how many times I am walking down a little lane, a little village, and some gentleman will come out, "Ah! *Prasādam*!" And you cannot say no. You... because to say no would be very offensive. You don't want to offend the Vrajabāsīs. Sometimes I walk through a village, I have five breakfasts! It is always *roti*, *sabjīs*, and some *dahī*, healthy, you know? They milk the cow in front of you, they grind the wheat, they cook—you know, this is really good. But that is the culture: feeding the *sādhus*. 

And also previously, in Vṛndāvana, I was reading that when an elevated *sādhu* would come, the people would greet him, and part of the greeting was they would lightly put what they called a type of soft dough made from flour on his eyelids to protect him from the evil eyes of envious persons who gazed at him in his travels as he roams around the country. So detailed, so wonderful, this culture. We can't lose it. We can't lose it! We have to imbibe this culture and spread it all around the world. We don't want to embrace—we have run away from Western culture, we don't want to drag it in to our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And our lifestyle is devoted—of course, you know, we... there is logic in that—like Prabhupāda said, "If you go out to distribute books, then you should wear Western dress if you can distribute more books," and we have our work and, you know, so forth. But when there is festivals and when we are in the Dhāma, and whenever appropriate, you know, we can be very proud to exhibit our culture. 

In conclusion, there are a few welcomings of the Lord that are very famous in our śāstras. I was reading this; there is—there’s actually four very famous welcomings—because we have been speaking about welcomings—the welcoming of Uddhava in Vṛndāvana by the Gopīs when he came to Vṛndāvana after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana. The second is the welcoming of Lord Rāmacandra to Ayodhyā after the asura Rāvaṇa had been killed; we celebrate that as Dīpāvalī. The third grand welcoming was the welcoming of Kṛṣṇa by the Dvārakāvāsīs after winning the battle at Kurukṣetra. And the other grand welcoming was welcoming Mahāprabhu by the Vrajabāsīs when Mahāprabhu came to visit Vṛndāvana. Wow! And for me, I remember the welcoming of Śrīla Prabhupāda. For me, it is just as important. 

So in this way we can remember these things, we can serve our spiritual masters, we can serve the devotees, we can think of all the Vaiṣṇavas in this way and honor them, respect them, and worship them, and that pleases Kṛṣṇa very much. So yeah, that, and then, well, we had a welcoming, we had a welcoming when we came into Māyāpur; it was very nice. And I got to speak, you know, when the *sādhu* comes then, you know, there is some honor given to him which he immediately gives to his spiritual master, but then it is his duty to share the most precious thing—what those devotees are hungry for: Kṛṣṇa-kathā and kīrtana. It is such a wonderfully simple movement: chanting, dancing, feasting, and then one day we all go home, back home, back to Godhead. Śrīla Prabhupāda did say one day we will have our ISKCON movement in the spiritual sky. We are so blessed, and let’s bring others into the fold so they can also be blessed and go back home, back to Godhead. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you so much, Prabhu. Really enjoyed sharing this knowledge with you today. And we’ll be back in a couple of days. 

*Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvanesvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!*""