In this material world, for whatever reason, everyone tends to celebrate their birthday. But the real fact is that birth is into illusion, because we've come into the prison house of material existence. When you think of a prison, you can think of four walls, which makes it inescapable, like a maximum-security prison.

So in this material world, there is birth, disease, old age, and death. It is impossible to get out unless you get the mercy of Krishna or His pure representative.

So we don't really have much to celebrate when we come to this world. But when the Lord comes to this world, we celebrate His birth, or we like to say His appearance, because by His appearance, the world, the people in the world, they have the opportunity to get out of this prison house of material existence.

So where He makes this appearance, that's called yoge peeth. It is worshipable. It is very auspicious where He chooses to appear, because He can choose to appear any place on this Earth. But we know that actually He always appears, the different incarnations appear in India, in Bharatavarsha, because, well, it is studied in Chaitanya Charitamrita that the most pious people in the universe they take birth in India, in Bharatavarsha.

And we can see that from especially past ages, where such sages as Valmiki and so many great sages have appeared in this world to enlighten us in Krishna consciousness.

So I'm standing before the actual tree under which the most recent incarnation of the Lord, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, made His appearance. Sachimata gave birth to Nimai Pandit under this tree. So what could be more auspicious?

What more auspicious place could you imagine in India, in the world, in the universe, in the material creation, than that particular place where the Lord appeared?

For what reason does He come here?

For a reason. What is His desire?

By the mercy of shastra and our spiritual teachers, we know His desire was, as always in an incarnation, to deliver the pious devotees, to annihilate the miscreants, and reestablish the principles of religion. So age after age, He appears, and that's going back eons and eons of time.

We don't have much access to those places or those pastimes other than hearing about them. But we're very fortunate that in this particular age, Kali Yuga, most recently, you could say in cosmic time, just a moment in cosmic time, Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu appeared with Lord Nityananda and the Pancha Tattva and all their associates to flood the world with the nectar of chanting the Hare Krishna Mahamantra.

So I feel very, very blessed to be standing here. I often think of this yoge peeth, the place where Mahaprabhu appeared, when traveling and preaching in different parts of the world under sometimes difficult situations. Asaprobhu told me personally one time, he said, "When did I ever say preaching is easy?" To push forward a spiritual movement in the material world, it's like carpenters say, "That's going against the grain." But we do it because Mahaprabhu asked us to do it, and His pure representative, Shrila Prabhupada, taught us how to do it.

And actually, those austerities are nothing compared to the joy of participating in the sanatana movement. And those special moments, those special, every moment is special for a devotee, but those special, special moments when we get to come to some place like this, just, you know, under the tree where Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu appeared.

I mean, what causeless mercy has brought us here?

I've come with a party of devotees who are doing parikrama. What have we ever done to bring us to this most auspicious place?

Just like the sun shines in a particular part of the sky, and the sun rays go everywhere, so the mercy of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is coming from this spot. This is where He appeared. This is His appearance. So it's glowing over the whole world.

And how have we come here?

We've come here by Shrila Prabhupada's mercy. It was Shrila Prabhupada who went to the West and captured our hearts and brought us back here to India from time to time so we could take inspiration from these holy places and then, of course, go back to our respective countries and share the mercy of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

So I'm I'm just kind of overwhelmed here, just standing in this sacred spot. And I paid my obeisances and gave my vows that I would continue preaching Mahaprabhu's mission in this world to my very last breath, and then, if necessary, by His mercy, to take birth again and again and again to spread His mercy until the whole world is chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

So from Navadvipa, Mayapur, under the beautiful neem tree, it's been preserved, it's been nicely taken care of. We share the blessings of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu with all of you, that you may also continue spreading His message, which is so easy: chant, dance, have some harer and take prasad, and you can conquer the world with this wonderful movement.

All glories. Krishna.

God is singing a song for. So on our tour of Navadvipa, we've come to Shridham Nadia. This is a very, very special place where actually, you could say the sanatana movement in essence started here, because this is the place where Lord Chaitanya Mahabhabhu would in the evenings, He would, in the nighttime actually, He would invite all of His associates, His pure devotees, to come and relish the chanting of the Holy Names.

At one point, however, as we know from Chaitanya Charitamrita, He asked them to go out of that house, of Shiva's house, and go village to village and chant Hare Krishna.

He made that prediction that His Holy Name would go to every town and village of the world. So that was the first step. They went to the different homes in the different villages, it was in here in Nadia, and introduced the sanatana movement.

So this is also a very, very special place where the Golden Avatar appeared to drown the world in love of God. It's a beautiful verse I was reading just the other day by Kavi Karnapur at the Chaitanya Charitamrita Mahakavya, first part, first verse.

It describes the success and why Mahaprabhu was so successful. Let me read it to you: "Krishna is the personification of condensed, sac-cit-ananda bliss.

Previously in the land of Shri Vrindavan, He danced along with golden-hued damsels of Braja. Now did it so happen that due to tightly embracing these Ganga, golden-hued gopis, He Himself turned into Ganga and is now ever victorious in the land of Nadia." Krishna, sanatana.

It means all glories to the victorious sanatana movement of Lord Chaitanya. Nothing can actually stop this movement. Actually, nothing can stop it. It will go on for the Golden Age of Kali Yuga. The Golden Age of Kali Yuga is described among scholars as the next 10,000 years.

It'll be victorious. There will be obstacles, there will be setbacks, that's to be expected. We see that in Vrindavan Leela, but it just makes the victory even more relishable. So we feel very inspired to come here, where the Holy Name was chanted by Gaura and Nita and their associates, just to be in this atmosphere, because that transcendental sound vibration remains here.

This is the beauty of a dhama. This is the beauty of a tirtha, a holy place like this, that that particular mood stays there. We go on parikrama because we want to visit different, different moods, different rasas, different tastes in Krishna consciousness.

There's variety. Variety is the spice of life. That's especially true, absolutely true, in Krishna Krsna.

So here's one taste that we're relishing on our parikrama. We're coming to where the pure devotees chanted, the Supreme Lord chanted, and where the devotees started the sanatana movement. And as this verse says, "He Himself turned into Ganga and is now ever victorious in the land of Nadia." And His pure representative, Shrila Prabhupada, on the order of Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, he took that victorious message all around the world.

And we will leave here and we will follow in his footsteps. Shri. He. May. Go. Chaitanya.