Here we are in the epicenter of the festival, Krishna's Village of Peace.

There are over 1 million people here, but as you look around this particular part of the event, you see a good number of the kids have congregated here, and for a good reason, because Krishna consciousness is all-attractive.

They've come for various reasons to our village. A lot of kids come here for the food, for the *prasadam*. They're just telling me over and over again, you know, how delicious it is. And this is the place they eat.

There are a lot of food stands at the festival, but our food is quite inexpensive, and it tastes great. And a lot of kids are into, you know, a natural, simple lifestyle. They like vegetarian food, a lot of them are vegans, so we're distributing vegan food.

They really like it. One kid told me, I was distributing *prasadam* there at the *prasadam* tent, and he came by. I gave him the plate, he tasted a little *prasadam*, and a big smile came over his face. He said, "You know, I've been waiting all year for that taste." Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare.

So, we're giving them a taste of Krishna consciousness.

Let's be quite straightforward. People come to events like this to be happy, to enjoy. But the real formula of happiness is on the spiritual platform, on the transcendental platform. So we have the best food. The recipes are great, it's vegetarian, it's nonviolent, and has that special extra ingredient: *bhakti*.

It's prepared in devotion for the spiritual master, for Śrīla Prabhupada, and for Krishna.

So they don't catch it maybe immediately, but they realize there's something special there. You can see behind me these long lines. It's just tens of thousands of kids coming through our event. Really, we're part of the greater Woodstock event, but we're adding something special to the greater Woodstock event with Krishna's Village of Peace: great philosophy, great food, greatest association, great singing, great dancing.

People come to Woodstock for the music, but what better music could there be than just that simple song: Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare.

So, we're here really as servants of the people, you could say, to facilitate giving them what Lord Chaitanya said was that taste for what they're always hankering for, and that's Krishna consciousness.

Because any material experience, even the highest materially experienced happiness that you can enjoy, frankly, it has a beginning and an end. But kids come here year after year after year because the taste of Krishna consciousness is ever fresh.

And we do it through *kirtan*, we do it through *prasadam* distribution. We have our questions and answers tent. And every year we find that the quality of people is higher, and they really come looking for answers to the questions of life, and they crowd into our questions and answers tents.

And I kind of see that from there they go to the book tent and they buy Śrīla Prabhupada's books. They want to take this experience home with them. They want to think about it after they leave. So they'll come here.

And if they don't immediately come into the event, we have our Ratha-yatra parade. There's only one main avenue leading through these grounds here, 1 million people. There's one avenue that's going through. And this year they've restricted the cars out of security reasons for coming in.

There are only really a few cars, food trucks that can go in at this stage of the festival bringing different goods and everything. But there's no restriction on Lord Chaitanya's movement and the Ratha-yatra festival that we take through the main thoroughfare.

Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

There's a million kids here. How could they not hear?

We're going out four hours a day with Ratha-yatra on the one street that cuts through the festival, chanting and dancing. A million kids during the Mahamantra, 150,000 tasting a full, big plate of delicious, nutritious, tasty *prasadam*. Thousands of books are going out.

And a lot of friendships. A lot of these kids, they know us from the years before. People come up and shake my hand and they say in Polish, *"Dziękuję, dziękuję, bardzo"*—thank you, thank you very much for being here and giving us this opportunity.

You look around, you see that they're all here. We try to make it just like the spiritual world. People come in and they feel the atmosphere here. This is a lot of kids, you know, they're drinking. Yes, no drugs, no violence.

That's the mood of this event. But they come here, but it's the atmosphere. If they experience that transcendental atmosphere, they are elevated to *śuddha-sattva* by the association of devotees, by *kirtan*, by *prasadam*. This is Woodstock 2017. We never imagined that we could go beyond our goals, but we've exceeded our goals this year.

We're very happy. And we take every item of success, every plate of *prasadam* distributed, every *kirtan*, every Ratha-yatra, every questions and answers, every kid who comes here and gets a favorable impression—we take all of that, and like the petals of the lotus flower, we offer that at the feet of our divine master, Śrīla Prabhupada, and thank him for this golden opportunity, this precious opportunity to be able to serve him in our humble way in spreading the message of Krishna consciousness in the Western world.

And we ask him for the blessings that we might be able to do this birth after birth after birth. Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupada. Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.