"*00203*.*
"So, although Lord Nṛsiṃhadeva’s appearance day has passed, we are still going to continue a short series on speaking about Him. Prahlāda Mahārāja and Him—He is dead and gone, but we are going to talk about Him. Actually, the Lord Nṛsiṃhadeva is eternally present in our lives, especially as aspiring devotees. One time, one of my Godbrothers said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, you are the greatest of all Vaiṣṇavas, you are the embodiment of humility." He said, "A Vaiṣṇava? I am just trying to be a Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava is a very special thing." So, we have to be honest with ourselves; until we are crying tears of ecstasy, we are all works in progress. 

Our business now is cleansing the heart. That may seem like a very laborious, very difficult thing to do. Many people don't like to clean, or they are too busy to clean. Śrīla Prabhupāda is the embodiment of cleanliness; he is a perfectionist. Even if there is one tiny bit of dust in the corner of the room, he will go and get it. What an ordinary person—you know, the time an ordinary person would take to clean my quarters, he takes ten times that long. He was in the bathtub for three hours; he wasn't taking a bath, he was cleaning the bathroom. One time, a devotee said, "Prabhupāda, did you ever hear that saying, 'Cleanliness is next to godliness'?" He said, "Cleanliness *is* godliness." So, we clean our external situation and our hearts as well. And actually, when he cleansed the Gambhīrā temple, where Lord Jagannātha comes to rest during the Ratha-yātrā before going back, he cleansed that whole mandira with his own hands and his servants, and he compared it to cleansing the heart—the cleansing of Guṇḍicā temple to cleansing our hearts.

There are many obstacles to our pure devotion. Some of them are very obvious, and some are not. I’ll give you an example of an obvious obstacle on the path. For a devotee—he was a brand new devotee, but he was known as being very talented—he was assigned the service of carving Jagannātha deities for the first San Francisco temple. Very nice devotee; actually, one of my heroes, he established the movement in the old days. So, he had not yet given up the habit of smoking. One day he was carving Jagannātha like this, and there was a Balarāma there, and he’s smoking a cigarette. So, he puts the cigarette on the top of the head of Balarāma with the idea he’d come back very quickly—when he finished this little work here, he’d come back and smoke it again—and the cigarette was burning on the top of Balarāma’s head. 

So just at that moment, Prabhupāda came in the room to inspect how the carving was going on, and he sees him carving Lord Jagannātha with a cigarette burning right next to Him. And Prabhupāda, very compassionately, he said to the devotee, pointing to the cigarette, "Why let such a thing as that come between you and God?" You know, smoking a cigarette—you are attached to that, but if that comes between you and God, you should give it up, because the pleasure of serving Kṛṣṇa is infinitely more than puffing on a cigarette which gives you cancer. 

Of course, we’ve all given that up because we have experienced the higher taste of Kṛṣṇa in the form of His holy name. But the race isn't over till it's over. At least we have to come to the stage of *anartha-nivṛtti*, which means that there are no weeds in the heart. Because we have these weeds, he is saying that after many, many lifetimes, one comes to the point of optimum full surrender. But we don't want to take birth after birth after birth. It would be nice, of course, to take birth in a devotee family, but still, you have to take birth, still you have to get disease, still you have to grow, still you have to die again. So, it is not a very good bargain. So, we should be very, very focused on our real business of life, which is awakening our prema for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

Yes, some materialistic thought comes in our mind; we shouldn't dwell in that. We should think, "Here comes my enemy." Very often, enemies come in disguised forms to attack you. One of the main things we learned in the military about fighting combat is secrecy and surprise. It comes in many forms and it looks nice, but it is a wolf in sheep's clothing. You have that saying in Russia, right? A wolf in sheep's clothing. Oh, cutie, cutie! So, you have to be very careful: "Kṛṣṇa, I am Yours, You are mine." At that point we have to come to. So, by sitting here and hearing this kathā, we are actually—this is the process of cleansing the heart. I often say, by sound we are conditioned, by sound we are liberated. What have we liberated from? Birth, death, disease, and old age. So therefore, every morning, even though we don't feel like it, we sit down and take the medicine to cure the disease, which is the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. At the very least, by chanting the mantra, you are protected. Everyone likes awareness—that's nice, but our protection is this mantra. Just like a soldier; he wouldn't go into the battle naked, he would go with all his armor. So, we shouldn't leave the house to go to work or we shouldn't leave the house to go to school unless we have the armor that protects us from the tricks of Māyā.

When we were in the 1970s, there was a young lady; she was a very famous rock singer, and in England she was joining the temple, so she used to make up songs. One day in class, she heard how Māyā is like darkness and Kṛṣṇa consciousness is like light. She is so tricky, she can turn the lights off very easily, which is real. She sang one song, "Just the trick of the witch, she flicks the on-and-off switch." Anyway, there was this part of the song: "Just the trick of the witch, she flicks the on-and-off switch." Everything is bright, and then it becomes darkness, and we’re shrouded in illusions. So, keep the lights on. It’s a job, and never get discouraged because you’re not alone. Nṛsiṃhadeva is inside, He is outside, He is like everywhere. If you call Him, He will come. If you don't call Him, He is not going to come. 

Rock climbing—she got stuck, and you know, she was missing, and then they were looking for her for days. They were very nearby, but they never found her. Finally, they found her. They said, "Why didn't you call for help?" She said, "I don't know, I just guessed you guys would find me." "But you almost died! If you had called out four days earlier, 'Help!', we would have found you." You have to call out. How do you call for help? "Here I am, Lord," and also you can chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.

It was interesting, a kind of different angle. We were talking about Nṛsiṃhadeva in Vṛndāvana, so I thought this evening we would continue that discussion. Now, remember the onion example? The onion has many skins; like, they can keep peeling for hours and you finally get to the core. So, we’re going to go a little deeper today than we did the last class. I remember when I was young and people were on the beach, they had these little round machines—they could look for metal on the beach—and you could think that metal detector could detect something like one meter under the sand; you couldn't see it. So, they would find many amazing things, like gold watches and rings and bracelets that people had lost years ago. So, we’re going to do like that; we’re going to go a little deeper—not beyond our capability to swim, but a little deeper.

I didn't have very much time to prepare today, so please forgive me if it's a short class. And then I look at the books of our previous ācāryas as well, which Prabhupāda encouraged us to do. So, the sources that I read this afternoon were Svāmī... and some commentaries, and also in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, we have access to certain book centers, Vaiṣṇava poets there. So, some months ago when we were doing that research there, I came across a book by a poet named Vaiṣṇava Dāsa; it was called *Vaiṣṇava Dāsa-kirtana*. Now, this person, he was the grandson of Nābhādāsa. Nābhādāsa is a famous devotee who wrote a book called *Bhakta-māla*. I don't know if you know about it, but it’s very popular in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and *Bhakta-māla* gives the history of hundreds or maybe thousands of previous Vaiṣṇavas and what wonderful service they did for the saṅkīrtana movement in general and Vaiṣṇavism as well. It is a popular book. And when we were staying in Vṛndāvana during the COVID, I got hold of different books because I was doing a lot of lectures, and one was called *Vṛndāvana-dhāma-niraka-valī*, which is a really interesting historical account of all the main temples in Vṛndāvana. The seven main temples in Vṛndāvana, but we don't know so much history. But there is a lot of history—how those temples were established, how they were run, who were the pūjārīs, who were the mahants, who were giving lectures and everything—and it’s recorded in this book.

Remember, in our first lecture, we discussed His ferocious nature as well as this very gentle and compassionate nature. Remember? And we compared His nature to sandalwood. If you take sandalwood and you burn it, it becomes ash, then you wear that, and it heats your body in the winter. And if you just take water and make sandalwood paste, you put it on your forehead, it cools you during the hot summer. Nṛsiṃhadeva is like a mystical thing: He burns up the asuras with the fire of His anger, and for the devotees, He cools down the burning fire of material existence. It’s such a nice analogy. He burns up His enemies, and I think it cools down His devotees. You know, by His mercies, He cools down their desires; the fire of desire goes down, but He burns His enemies. 

And here is a prayer by this pandita; it’s so nice, describing how this Nṛsiṃhadeva burns up his enemies. I think you’ll like it. Who would like to hear it? "Dear Lord, the effulgence of many suns is destroyed by Your uncheckable potency. The many weapons sent against You are like sacrificial offerings, and You reply with unlimited weaponry. Put down, strike, and slay my illusion, burn, Nṛsiṃhadeva, burn my adversaries with Your unbearable power."

And for the cooling effect, like sandalwood, it has a cooling effect. The cooling effect that Nṛsiṃhadeva has is on His devotees. And here is a nice passage: Svāmī says the following, "Thus I have made you all listen to this entire Nṛsiṃha Purāṇa. It removes all sins and makes men free from all pain. It ensures success in auspicious deeds and offerings. People who read or listen to either one or half of a hymn of it seldom die with their sins." 

Someone who listens to the Nṛsiṃha-kathā, or even just a half a hymn of it, they seldom die with their sins. It means their sins are washed away by hearing; it’s amazing. In the same light, that same Nṛsiṃha Purāṇa, it even guarantees release from hell. If, while in hell, you chant Kṛṣṇa's names—if you’re in hell, like you know, we’ve read about that hell where they just boil you in a lake of boiling oil—if you’re there but you chant Kṛṣṇa's name, immediately you ascend to Svargaloka, and from there you can promote yourself to the spiritual world. That’s how powerful is Kṛṣṇa's name. You’re boiling in oil in the hellish planets and you say, "Where’d he go? Svarga? I want to go too," with chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. No, no, they end up boiling in oil staying in the material world. But if you want to leave, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

Is that confirmed? How does the speaker confirm something? He refers to scripture. If we’re saying some spiritual point, we have to back it up with something from scripture. We don't make things up; we simply repeat with realization. So, I’ll back my point up with a purport, Prabhupāda’s purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* Second Canto, Ninth Chapter, verse 36. It is said that as the residents of hell began to chant the holy name of the Lord, they were elevated from hell to heaven. It also supported this view, he is the perfect speaker, he quotes, "Simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, the inhabitants of hell became released from the hellish persecution." So, like sandalwood, which can heat you in the winter and cool you in the summer, Nṛsiṃhadeva, He has these two features. He could be terribly ferocious, but He can also be super kind. Remember how He gave *abhiṣeka*—a non-abhiṣeka—to Prahlāda Mahārāja after the battle was over; He licked him with His tongue. 

This is indicated in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*—purring without growling—so he discusses this in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.5.119. It’s in the part where he’s describing the different relationships you can have with Kṛṣṇa. Remember, we have discussed a little bit that the twelve types of rasas, or loving relationships, you can have with Kṛṣṇa. In that part of the book, there are five main relationships that each of us has; something—one of those relationships—is in the heart. Like you can have a servitorship relationship with Kṛṣṇa, compassionate, there’s the astonishment relationship, you can laugh with Kṛṣṇa. Cowherd boys, they laugh and laugh, they tell jokes; that’s what boys do. So, Kṛṣṇa and cowherd boys are telling jokes all the way out to the forest, holding their stomachs. Oh, we have all these relationships here, but they get boring after a while. [He] writes that these twelve different kinds of transcendental relationships, it's a little technical, but he said they are represented by different incarnations of God. Since He had a friendly relationship with Indra, and He acts as the doorkeeper in Sutala for Bali... Prahlāda represents parenthood, which is very sweet, right? Mothers, you have children, it’s a very sweet relationship. So, why... but look what he... how He saved His servant. Prahlāda Mahārāja had treated Him just like a son; He put his son on His lap, right? He hugged him, and like that. So, you know, although He took Prahlāda very sweetly and put that there, and then He licked him—I don't think parents even lick their kids—that was a sign of His affection. He’s a lion, so He licks, you know.

So again, what’s the theme? Sandalwood sandalwood cools, and sandalwood heats. Nṛsiṃhadeva is ferocious, and Nṛsiṃhadeva is sweet, which is a loving relation between Father and Son. So, it’s really peeling off the onion skin here if you show me what love is. But generally, we like to think of Him as our protector. Prabhupāda himself, "Oh, You’re here, thank you." That’s how we think of Him. He’s ferocious, yes, because we’re in trouble. He’s ferocious, He’s going to help us. But I read a case where Nṛsiṃhadeva became ferocious, chastising an errant, misbehaving devotee. So be careful; He is ferocious. But in this particular instance, He was ferocious against a devotee. What, yes? Not a demon! He was ferocious against the devotee to teach him a lesson. So, ferocious doesn't always mean... yeah, come on.

That’s a really nice book; all great details about the life of Mahāprabhu. And there, in 1.2.23, he tells a nice story how Nṛsiṃhadeva became angry at a devotee. Who was that? That was... you know, Murāri Dāsa or something, not quite like that, but... so here’s the pastime. It’s written that in 1913, a brāhmaṇa from Orissa by the name of Kṛṣṇa-pūjārī, he was engaged in deity worship in the Yoga-pīṭha temple here in Māyāpura—you know that, where Mahāprabhu, His birth site, had the big temple. He was the pūjārī, the main pūjārī there in 1913. There’s Gaura-Nitāi, and there’s also a deity. So, this Kṛṣṇa-pūjārī had a bad habit: he would steal from the donation box that was meant for Lord Nṛsiṃha. That was in front of Nṛsiṃhadeva. He would steal—he’s the pūjārī—steal the donations from the Lord’s donation box.

And once in the middle of the night, he suddenly woke up screaming and he ran to a nearby house where Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī was sleeping. There, he tearfully recounted to Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura that he had a dream, and in the dream, Lord Nṛsiṃhadeva had straddled his chest like this: "You stole from My donation box! Now run, get out of My temple immediately!" He woke up—he had a dream. Nṛsiṃhadeva appeared to him in a dream, you know, threatening him: "You stole from My donation box, run, get out of here immediately!" Otherwise, he had a terrible dream. So he ran to Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, and he started rolling on the ground, oh, crying and crying. And no one could calm him down. So, after some time, he got up, then immediately packed his bags and he left for Calcutta, and he returned to his parental home. 

He’d learned his lesson, and that was proven by the fact that although he was due too much salary—because they gave salaries to the devotees so they could have for their living expenses—the temple owed him two months' salary, but he refused to even accept one paisa, one ruble, one dollar, one franc. He just... he wouldn't accept any money. He said, "I had stolen." He used to recount this story. He would always say that, you know, it was mercy that his devotee had fallen to illusion, but the Lord was so kind to rescue him from that illusion because, in the end, he realized he was wrong and he asked for forgiveness. So, Nṛsiṃhadeva appeared in 1913 in the mind of a devotee, but to chastise him. So, we don't want that type of dream. We want, if we’re so fortunate to have such a dream, we should dream that Nṛsiṃhadeva is blessing us. At one time, dreams are illusion, but if you dream of the spiritual master, Kṛṣṇa, even as a young devotee, he said, "That’s very nice." 

I don't know if it’s proper etiquette—we shouldn't always use ourselves as examples—but one time I had a dream that I was in Māyāpura. That’s a good dream, yeah. It wasn't one of those nonsense dreams we all have in our fallen nature, but I dreamed I was in Māyāpura and I was having a kīrtana with devotees, but they were all Bengali devotees. It was nice. I said, "Wow, this is... we’re standing down the road," and you know, we’re chanting, and I’m not exactly sure where we were going, but I was like fired up. I was really, you know, in the kīrtana, I was playing kartālas and my Bengali friends, they were playing drums. And suddenly, this car passes us on the road, and it was like a car from, you know, 1930s or something. One of those old cars, you know, it goes by, and one of the boys said, "Oh, Prabhupāda’s coming!" Oh, wow! You know, when you dream, it’s like you’re there, right? It’s happening. "Oh, Prabhupāda, see the Prabhupāda’s here! Wow, let’s hurry up boys, let’s... where is he going to? There’s a temple there, let’s call him... hurry up, let’s pray, it’s coming up." 

So yeah, we rounded it, and there’s this temple, and these whole Bengali devotee, he’s like, "Oh, that’s cool!" It didn't seem unnatural to me, it’s just okay. And we beat the car because the car was one of those old cars, it went really slow, right? And the car comes and, yeah, I can see Prabhupāda again. So, one devotee opens the door and out walks Prabhupāda. Wow! It just seemed like okay, you’re in the dream. I’m so blessed. And you know, he had a turban on, he was very tall, and he had a coat on like an English gentleman, shoes and dhoti, very regal, walking everyone down. I paid obeisances, I saw the shoes, look, wow! He started giving a lecture, and one of the Bengali boys said, "Should I translate it for you?" I said, "No," because when I was hearing the lecture, I heard it in English. And it was very, you know how he writes, it was very eloquent English, but I was hearing it... his English. They were hearing him, I was hearing in English, but very formal English. I’d like, really listen carefully, and I was understanding like I was reading *The Harmonist* or something, you know, which I like to do. I like to read *The Harmonist*, which is a newspaper that he published when he was living here. So, I like to read his lessons. Oh, he has an amazing point! 

So then the lecture was over and everybody kind of gathered in the courtyard and I was looking, and they had this huge deity of Nṛsiṃhadeva. They had Gaura-Nitāi and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and... you know, Gaura-Nitāi, Kṛṣṇa, and then but they had this huge deity of Nṛsiṃhadeva. It was in a separate temple outside the main temple. "Would you like to meet?" "Yeah, I would like to meet." I was like, "Oh!" So, they took me to where He was standing in the courtyard and they introduced me, "This is Indradyumna Svāmī," and in the dream, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī said, "Yes, I know him." And I started crying, started crying, and then... but later, it’s a good go-forward a little bit. When I woke up from the dream, my pillow was wet from the crying. He said, "Yes, I know him." "Yes," he said, "I know him, he’s doing well." I said, "Yes, I’m trying to preach." He said, "I understand." So, he said, "How was your visit to Māyāpura?" "I’m also looking for a deity of Nṛsiṃhadeva in my dream. I’m also looking for a deity to protect me as a sannyāsī as I travel." So, he said, "Would you like this deity?" And she’s like a big... it’s like a big deity, this is my dream. And I look, say, "Would you like this deity?" I said, "How can I travel with Him?" And that deity became, in his hand, the deity became the size in his hand and he handed Him to me. He said, "Kṛṣṇa consciousness is miraculous, it contradicts the laws of material nature, which is true." He said, "Never doubt the miracles of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Then I started crying again, and I was looking at this deity and then I woke up. 

Yeah, it’s closing... particularly, I mean... so yeah, that was my... anyway, not exactly sure why I told that dream. But that person, that Kṛṣṇa-pūjārī, he had a dream in 1913 about Nṛsiṃhadeva. So, you know, it is possible that the Lord can reciprocate or the spiritual master can reciprocate with us in dreams. Because Prabhupāda did say dreams are nonsense, but if you dream of Kṛṣṇa or the spiritual master, that is nice. So that was a nice dream.

So, in the dream that the pūjārī had, the Lord appeared to him in a very ferocious way, but the Lord can also appear to us in a ferocious way in the sense that He can destroy the *anarthas* in our heart. He’s, you know, He’s astonishing. You put a toe... Nṛsiṃhadeva, toe... you meet the toe on His finger, He’ll rip... He’ll rip out lust, anger, and greed if we welcome Him to do so. If we want to hang on to those things, all right, but if you want to let them go, He’ll rip them from your heart. We need His help, therefore every day we’re sending the Nṛsiṃha prayers after every Ārati. Prabhupāda established that; those prayers are so important for us to become pure devotees of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Yes, He may protect us from decoys and skinheads and tough guys on the street, but He can also attack the ignorance that is there in our heart. 

He can attack the ignorance in our hearts. Just a beautiful, beautiful prayer by Śrīdhara Svāmī, who is the original commentator on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*: "I offer my obeisances unto Nṛsiṃhadeva, who is always enlightening Prahlāda Mahārāja within his heart, and He always kills the ignorance that attacks His devotees. His mercy is distributed like moonshine, and His face is like that of a lion. Let me offer my obeisances unto Him again and again. He always kills the ignorance that attacks His devotees." So therefore, we love to hear about Him because He’s like our best friend. But a friend in need is a friend indeed. I saw a bumper sticker in America last year: "Real friends don't let their friends eat meat." You know, friends in material society, they enjoy, you know, sinful activities together; that’s like, you know, you’re helping your friend go to hell. But if you help a devotee, encourage them in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he’s the real friend. So Nṛsiṃhadeva is our friend because He’s taking away all these material desires. We can't do it alone, but He can do it. So, He’s our best friend, Kṛṣṇa’s our best friend. We have to see Him like that. Although it may be a little painful sometimes, the situation He puts us in, He’s our actual friend. Therefore, the Christians, they say, "Never take the name of God in vain." Don't ever swear using God's name, like you know, they have... I’m not going to say it, but don't, because He’s your friend, even though sometimes He puts you through some difficult things. The hardest lessons are the ones best learned.

I made the mistake one time of hurting someone who was really trying to help me. Should I tell you that story? After so many years of doing harināma on the streets—in those days we didn't have sound systems, we just had our vocal cords—so for like nine, ten years I was on the street with good friends like Bhāgavata Prabhu, Nanda, and different devotees, nine, ten hours a day, singing, distributing *Back to Godhead* magazines. I developed a polyp on my vocal cords, like a hernia on my vocal cords. You know, opera singers, or people who sell things in the markets, or you know, professors, they often get these because they use their voice like, too much, too hard. So, I went to the doctor, went to the American hospital, and they looked inside. The doctor said, "That’s the biggest polyp I’ve ever seen in my life! What, are you singing in your sleep?" He said, "He said you sing in your sleep." You know, he was very young when I took him on board, 15 or 16, and we traveled for 15 years together, which often sleep in the same room. I wake up at night, he was... he wouldn't remember, but it was nice, you know, like I was singing... Merry Christmas to sleep, Prahlāda... yeah, yeah. 

So, he said, "You need an operation," and he said, "I can’t guarantee that you’ll be able to sing again, because it may, you know, the damage, you have to sign a paper because it’s so big, I don't know what’s going to happen to your vocal cords, so you have to sign the paper." It’s all or nothing. So, I had the, you know, a week later I came and spent the night in the hospital and they prepared me for the operation. And you know, they give you the anesthesia to put you to sleep. I think it’s like an hour-and-a-half operation, I’m out, and they start—obviously they started operating on me—but the anesthesia—they made a miscalculation, didn't give me enough anesthesia, and I woke up in the middle of the operation. And you know, you’re delirious, you know, you wake up, little boy, I saw this guy with the mask and a knife trying to stab me in the mouth. That’s what I thought, because you know, it’s, you’re knocked out, like, and I wake up, and I panicked, and I went—they had me tied down—not, you know, they tie you down, but it wasn't tight enough. And the doctor's nose exploded, and the blood everywhere, and the anesthesia... 

So, I woke up because they gave me a really big dose, I woke up like, you know, an hour later or something, just as the doctor and the nurse were coming, his secretary were coming to check up on me. And I saw the doctor, he had big bandages. I said, "What happened to you?" So, the nurse said, "You did it! You hit the doctor, you’re gonna get in trouble, you..." He said, "No, no, the boy was under the influence of the... of the drug, so he didn't know what he was doing. I don't hold him responsible." And he kind of joked, he said, "Young man, you have a good right hook, like a boxer, you have a good right hook!" I thought, "I’m sorry." 

So, I thought about that actually a lot, because you know, in saṅkīrtana, people sometimes say bad words to us, or I’ve had people spit on me, you know, or try to fight with me, and you know, but I always think, "I can’t hold them responsible," because, with the intoxication, the influence of the material energy, they don't really know what they’re doing. So, I learned tolerance from that, you know, that whenever I was on saṅkīrtana, I never became angry. Of course, sometimes you have to defend yourself, but I always considered, "You know, these people are in illusion because of the intoxication of the material world." So, I can’t hold it against them, I just have to try to help them even if they hurt me. And I remember that’s what Jesus said, you know, "Forgive them, Father, for they know not what they do." So, it was a good lesson for me as a saṅkīrtana devotee. 

But my original point was that, you know, sometimes the Lord may deal roughly with us, but we shouldn't become angry. We should take... there’s a lesson to be learned here, in some accident, we get sick, you know, it really helps you become detached from the material world after you have a serious illness. I’m out of here. So, we should never get angry at Kṛṣṇa. 

So, whether the Lord treats us like ash sandalwood, or He treats us like wet sandalwood, we should always think that He’s our protector, and He has a plan for us, and we should surrender that plan knowing that He knows what’s best. In America in the 1950s, there was a television show, my father always had me watch it, it was called *Father Knows Best*. That was the name, you know? I was a young, rowdy kid—sit and watch this program: *Father Knows Best*. So at the end you’d say, "What did you learn? Father Knows Best. Can I go and play now?" 

You know, Kuntīdevī’s the highest and perfect example, you know, "Let these calamities come again and again." Why? "Because when these situations come, I have no other resort to call out for Your mercy, to remember Your lotus feet, and by remembering Your lotus feet, I never have to see the repetition of birth and death again." So, Father Knows Best. Śrīla Prabhupāda is another good example. His Holiness... I went to see him before—a few days before he passed away. "Are you okay?" It’s like, death is coming. "So yeah, this is, that’s the way it’s supposed to be. Yes, you know, this is, this is how it ends up. You know, I’ve been preaching about this my whole life." Said, "It’s all in Kṛṣṇa's plan, so I’m ready." I was really impressed. And I shared with him that quote I shared with you the other day, that Prabhupāda, talking about his spiritual master, said he came to the earth to preach with the consciousness, and now... then he left to go preach somewhere else. That’s even death, which is the most scary thing, these caliber of devotees, they’re just thinking of mission service. So, these are some lessons to be learned from sandalwood and the two main ways that Nṛsiṃhadeva deals with His enemies and His devotees. 

We’ll finish there. Actually, I was going to speak about the ten deities, but there’s not enough time. I can speak for three more hours. So, the plan was this would be my last talk, because you know I have a lot of things to do, I’m leaving in a week, and you know I have my Friday lectures, I prepare a lot for that, so because of the nature of the travels, I had to prepare three lectures in five days, and I spent hours on each lecture. So, I thought, "Okay, this is the last lecture tonight, I don't have time to give more lectures here." I’ll leave it up to you: should we continue these lectures when I come back in September, or should I give the rest of my lecture tomorrow night here? Who thinks I should finish this lecture next September, raise your hands? Who thinks I should give it tomorrow night? Okay, see you tomorrow, six o'clock, Nṛsiṃhadeva.""