"*00569*.*
"I feel very honored and privileged to be here with you this weekend. The first time I came to Italy as a devotee of the saṅkīrtana was in 1974, and at that time, it was the early days; I don't think we even had a book in Italian. I came with the saṅkīrtana group from France, and actually, we were giving out incense to raise funds for our project in France. I remember it was a long time ago, but I remember the Duomo; I remember this beautiful church where I was distributing incense. Then I came back later, still in the 70s, and I distributed one of the first books in Italian, which was the *Bhagavad-gītā*. And then Dhyānakuṇḍa opened the temple in Rome in 1974, and I remember we did a huge program in a very important hall in Rome, and there were more than 2,000 people. Often over the years, I returned for the Ratha-yātrā in Viareggio, and there were many festivals that took place here. Maybe four or five years ago, I came back again with a kīrtana group.

There was a small preaching center for the devotees, and there were about fifty guests. I gave a lesson, and I asked if there were any questions. There was a guest who was right at the back, and you could see that he was a little nervous; he raised his hand. He said, "Now it's time to have a battle, we need to discuss," but in reality, he was very respectful. He asked me a curious question and asked, "Mahārāja, have you ever put Śrīla Prabhupāda’s shoes on his feet?" I have traveled with Prabhupāda several times, but I couldn't remember ever putting shoes on his feet, and I replied, "No, actually, but I don't think so." He said, "Yes, instead, I know. Do you remember that big festival he did in Rome? I was the photographer that day, and I have a photo of you putting those shoes on Prabhupāda’s feet." He had the original photo with him, and it was big. He showed it to me; I almost fainted. Prabhupāda was getting up at that moment from the vyāsāsana; I was putting the shoe on his left foot. These are some wonderful memories of this trip to Rome, and so I am very pleased to have this opportunity to spend this weekend with you. I want to start by offering my homage to all the disciples, my fellow brothers. Of course, here there is not in the whole world, in the words of the great poet, he saw important... Devotees lived about 400 years, and I think you will appreciate the following poem.

The poet says: "I offer my respectful obeisances at the lotus feet of all Vaiṣṇavas, praying that I will not commit offenses in my attempts to please you, Vaiṣṇavas who have lived in the past." So we have gathered here for the next two days to have a festival, a very special festival—a festival of the Holy Names. As you know, festivals like this are an integral part of our activity of God, and in our movement, ISKCON, even more especially because in our annual Vaiṣṇava calendar, there is actually a festival almost every day. It is actually very important for our spiritual advancement that we celebrate all these festivals, not just some. It explains that there are, in particular, 32 offenses that we must avoid in our path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. To make things simple, there are things that must be done and those that must be avoided; there are rules and regulations. And if you read the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* that Prabhupāda translated as *The Nectar of Devotion*, you will find 32 offenses that should be avoided, and the second is very interesting; it explains that one should not miss the observance of the various festivals for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord.

As he was the pioneer in the modern era of our movement, he writes in the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, in verses 83-84: "It is written that a devotee should observe the appearance days of the Lord and all the important festivals. This effort will bring excellent, very good, auspicious results. The devotee should spend the whole day of the festival, night and day, singing and dancing the glories of the Lord in the association of devotees, saints." Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. So this is a festival of the mahā-mantra, and I was also thinking this morning, looking at the Vaiṣṇava calendar of September, that this is a month full of festivals. In January, there are few, but in September, a great abundance. And we can think in some way that all these festivals are preparation, exercise for the spiritual world, because in the spiritual world, "every step is a dance, every step a dance," and the flute is the instrument that guides the atmosphere. A gentleman was asking me, he was telling me recently, "I saw that your Kṛṣṇa movement is full of festivals. But why do you need so many festivals?" It is that in the spiritual world, there are festivals every day, so we are practicing to return home.

The interesting thing is that the spiritual world is full of festivals, but the Supreme Lord also descends into this material world and participates in the festivals here too. If you read carefully the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, you will notice that the Lord Caitanya also participated in many very large festivals like Ratha-yātrā and also small ones, but even the small ones are beautiful. What is written there? He went to saṅkīrtana every day, and at the end of the saṅkīrtana, there was a small festival, a mango festival. And so for every day for 12 months. A while ago, I explained this thing and I was asked the question, "Okay, beautiful. But what is it? What is so special about this festival?" and I replied, "Look, it is very special. I replied if you have a festival where you eat mango with Lord Caitanya, even a small piece of prasāda will make you perfect, and even just the fact that Prabhupāda is present there makes the event very special." But there were festivals in the time of Mahārāja Caitanya that had an even deeper meaning.

When I preach all over the world, I often say in the consciousness of Kṛṣṇa, there is something for everyone. In fact, how many of us have become devotees for the Sunday festival? Be honest. Festivals for the devotees are fully committed, as naturally anyone can benefit. It explains that even an ignorant person seeing the chariot of Lord Jagannātha pass by on the road will stand up; even that act alone will make him a devotee. And instead, a more advanced devotee will be able to perceive a deeper meaning that is actually available to everyone. It is explained in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* how Lord Caitanya went to Ratha-yātrā every year and danced in front of the chariot and once recited a very famous prayer. This was a love poem written by some worldly poet who had no real reference to the consciousness of Kṛṣṇa. And then all the devotees were perplexed: "What is Caitanya doing, who quotes a worldly poem?" Rāya Rāmānanda, a very dear devotee of His, had the intuition, understood the deepest meaning, and wrote it down for us to read. And here is the poem, and it is very deep and is present in our *śāstras*. 

Love—one of the reasons why He came to this world is because He wanted to understand the love that Rādhārāṇī had for Him, because He was the object of love and not the one who loved, and therefore He wanted to come down for this reason to understand the love of Rādhā. Mahāprabhu, who looked at Jagannātha and spoke like Rādhārāṇī, understanding the feeling of Rādhārāṇī, He spoke that poem in that mood. But Rāmānanda said, "You are not a mundane poet; You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are saying something deeper." So Rāmānanda rewrote the poem. And then he was in his home, he had to leave; he took it, slipped it into the thatched roof of his house, no one could find it. And then Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara, however, understood. He said, "You are not a worldly person; You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore this poem you are reciting it with a different intention." Svarūpa Dāmodara went home, transcribed the poem, and put it among the reeds of his hut and went away. And then to find—he was not present; he sees among the reeds of the roof of his hut this piece of paper. And here, when he read that piece of paper, he understood and said, "Rādhārāṇī knows my heart." And then he said, "She knows my heart, knows that I came here not only to distribute the chant of the mahā-mantra, but also to understand the feeling of Rādhārāṇī, is the feeling of Rādhārāṇī who loves Kṛṣṇa like..." 

So here is the translation: "Yes, here is what Rūpa had written: 'My dear friend, now I met my old dear friend Kṛṣṇa on the field of Kurukṣetra. But I am the same Rādhā, and now we are meeting.' Here is very beautiful, but I still long to return up to the beaches of the Yamunā River under the trees of the forest that is there. I want to listen to the vibration of His sweet flute that plays the fifth note inside the forest of Vṛndāvana." And so let it be the mango festival in which there is this little mango tree, this too—these profound pastimes. There is a festival for everyone to quote this very profound verse, but we must go deep into the consciousness of Kṛṣṇa. I ask that Prabhupāda wanted us to carry forward the saṅkīrtana movement with every fiber of our heart, but also to become pure devotees in this life. And so, how do you preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness and at the same time become a pure devotee? It is a very simple formula. This formula is explained: by doing service in the movement, sooner or later you get to the service of the Lord. We don't have to go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa and become babajis; instead, go to the nearest city that is near you, let's go to Milan in front of the Duomo and distribute the books of Prabhupāda, and that's how you become a pure devotee. And that's how now there are so many great devotees in this movement who shine. And so He made these pastimes for our benefit; some of these are very profound. You can imagine dancing Ratha-yātrā with the Lord Caitanya, eating mangoes with Him. Every day was a festival with the Lord; so singing, dancing, and eating, if it is enough for God, it is enough for us too. 

So when Śrīla Prabhupāda left this world, his devotees almost could not tolerate the separation. Proportionately to how much you are attached, you suffer; as if when you lose a pencil, you feel sorry, but when you lose an expensive pen, you suffer more. And therefore, when you develop attachment for the object of greatest desire, when you lose it, you can understand that pain. And therefore those who participated in these festivals with Lord Caitanya wrote, sometimes even His own thoughts, like Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, who writes a beautiful verse that we pray to be able to experience one day. But He left, He went away. Fortunately, any devotee of saṅkīrtana can appreciate this verse: "The auspicious citadel of Navadvīpa remains on the world, in the world the beach seafront remains of the city of Jagannātha Purī, the holy names of Kṛṣṇa remain, but alas, I do not see anywhere the same festival of Pure Love, Pure devotion for the Lord. O Lord Caitanya, ocean of mercy, I will never see your transcendental glory again." 

So we see the same feelings in a pure devotee, even His pure devotees, and we see this in our spiritual master. In fact, he has so many titles, Ācārya of our International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, but also the title of... why so many devotees have come? Because he had made Kṛṣṇa consciousness something joyful. If spiritual life is not joyful, how can you abandon the material one? He was observing the Ratha-yātrā festival when he was 5 years old, and when he came to the West, he continued that festival called Ratha-yātrā. When he was 5 years old, he heard about this festival, he asked his father, "Can we do it too?" It was cut, but Prabhupāda's father was a merchant from Calcutta and he replied, "I'm sorry, my son, but I can't afford a big wooden cart." This was on the road outside their house, and Prabhupāda says he started crying. So this attracted the attention of a Bengali lady who was passing by, who said, "Why is he crying?" Father replied, "Because my father doesn't let me do Ratha-yātrā." And this lady says, she said, "Don't worry, my son who is now grown up had a cart, perfect in size to make a cart of the Ratha." So he asked his father to fix it for the occasion, then he went around the neighborhood inviting everyone to the Ratha-yātrā. And we know that those Ratha-yātrās were very ecstatic. And I know because I was in London once; he said, "In my life, I never knew what is the sin and I have never forgotten the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa in this life. In my life, I have never known the sin and I have never forgotten the lotus feet." And the nature of a Vaiṣṇava, his pleasure is given by sharing this mercy with the devotees. And therefore also Ratha-yātrā, anyone who knows nothing about it, by seeing it, will develop, will be purified, and will come to devotional service. 

The Guru was present in 1970 after the festival, a declaration: "Chatra-pavana-darśanāt..." This should be... I do not encourage you to tattoo yourself, but if you want, you can have this declaration. Simply by seeing the Lord on His carriage, a person makes progress in the interruption of birth and death. And now you know why he did not go, Jagadānanda. That's why Jagadānanda came back from... for 5 years, a very humble, very special devotee, and died of leukemia in his 30s. And Prabhupāda was very attached to him because he inaugurated the saṅkīrtana movement in San Francisco, passed not long after one was alone in the room, was unconscious, and left the body alone in the room. All the others were at maṅgala-ārati. Prabhupāda, who had a diary registration, who was going, he wrote him a letter. He wrote a posthumous letter after he had already left the body and wrote: "My dear Jagadānanda, the disciple has already left, but the spiritual master remained. But the relationship is intact on the transcendental platform." Usually, it is the guru who leaves first, but if you respect the instructions of the guru, that transcendental relationship always remains intact. Otherwise, why Prabhupāda writes a letter to a disciple who has already died and left? He says, "My dear... accept my blessings. You were the first to come and give me a donation for the printing of *The Nectar of Devotion*," and he was a taxi driver for most of his life and gave all his savings to Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda says again, "You are the one who inaugurated the Ratha-yātrā festival in the West. Thank you." And says, "If you have any material desire, you will not be reborn here in America or in Italy, wherever you are, but you will go to Svarloka, and there you will satisfy those desires, and you will return to Kṛṣṇa. But continue because you were listening to the mantra, and it is a recording of... at the time of your death, I declare that you have returned to Kṛṣṇa."

Inaugurating this very important Ratha-yātrā festival brings such mercy. So still, the festivals are very important, we all know it, but we must go even deeper. What is the first festival that Prabhupāda inaugurated when he went in America? There was no Sunday festival. The Ratha-yātrā is a festival that Prabhupāda innovated, he started. And also, in the early 70s, it became... August 8, 1973: "Festivals possible that will keep both the public and the devotees alive. Festivals mean chanting, dancing, and distributing; this is our formula. Thank God we have just singing, dancing..." Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote to Tamal Krishna Goswami on August 8, 1973: "Observe how many festivals you can; these will keep the public and the devotees alive. The festivals mean singing, dancing, and distribution of prasāda. Thank God that these are the requests of festivals, and we do not have to stay in the Himalayas meditating alone." And so, it is a historic moment; we are in the right time, in the right place, and we are doing this festival in association with devotees. And so, in conclusion, to understand how important these festivals are, we can listen to Nārada Muni.

And so, in the *Padma Purāṇa*, we have this dialogue in which Nārada Muni is talking to Bhakti-devī that we invoke in our prayers... "I look in our movement; there are festivals." Nārada Muni says, "Devī, there is no age like this of the Kali-yuga because you will reside in every home and in every heart. Listen to my oath: if I do not preach your message and subdue all other religions and make devotional festivals predominant, then I must not be considered a servant of Lord Hari. In Kali-yuga, those people who follow you, even if they are sinful, will obtain the residence to dwell with Lord Kṛṣṇa without fear. Do not be afraid." And why this festival of chanting Kṛṣṇa is so important, because we come into direct contact with the Lord. There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa and His names. We are looking for God, but here He is, dancing on the tip of our tongues. Let's listen to one last verse of Tukārām, a great saint who took initiation from... This is beautiful; he writes: "If you lie down and chant, the Lord will come and sit with you. If you sit and chant the holy names, the Lord will come and stand near you. Stand up and chant the holy names, then the Lord will come and dance with you. And if you dance and sing with the holy names, then the Lord will come to embrace you." I would like to conclude with a beautiful verse that I found in the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and this verse is also present in the *Padma Purāṇa* and is also present in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. And so we understand that if in three places, it must be very important: "My dear King, when the devotees of Kṛṣṇa dance in kīrtana, they destroy everything that is inauspicious by the touch of their feet, the directions, everything that is inauspicious in the directions through their gaze, and the higher planets with their raised arms.""