When Guru Maharaj asked me, "If you get some money, you print books," I took up this from his mouth. He is very fond of books, and he told me personally, "If you get some money, read books." Therefore, I am stressing this point: where is the book?

Where is the book?

Where is the book?

So kindly help me. This is my request: print as many books in as many languages and distribute them throughout the whole world. I am entering the Bhadra campaign of 2021, going to Goloka a little late. There are just a few days left in this most auspicious yajña, but I didn't want to miss out.

I have been busy here in Vrndavan, India, with a new project in which we are cooperating with the prestigious Vrndavan Research Institute to preserve and publish the works of our previous ācāryas. Just the other day, I held in my hands the original handwritten copy of Śrī Rūpa Goswami's *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* as well as one of my great heroes, Narottam Das Thakur's *Prema-vilāsa*.

Being part of this important *sevā* has only deepened my appreciation for how our Śrīla Prabhupāda has presented these numerous teachings to the entire world in the form of his books.

Through his Bhaktivedanta purports, he has essentially summarized the vast knowledge of the Vedas and our ācāryas in a way that is understandable to common men and women. We cannot underestimate the value of such a contribution. Access to transcendental knowledge, by which one can conquer over the material energy and return back home, back to Godhead, is really the greatest asset of human society.

Jonathan Pôndit says: "Sa eva bhūṣaṇaṁ candraḥ, nārīṇāṁ bhūṣaṇaṁ patiḥ; sa eva bhūṣaṇaṁ pārthivaḥ, vidyā bhūṣaṇaṁ sarva-dhanaṁ" (The ornament of night is the moon; the ornament of women is a good husband; the ornament of the earth is the pious king; and knowledge is the ornament of everything).

Of course, knowledge is certainly appreciated in modern society, but more as a way to navigate through material life. I was reading the other day that the U.S. government spent $750 billion on 48 million children in public schools in the year 2019.

And while that is admirable and necessary, in the ultimate sense, spiritual education, spiritual knowledge, is the priority because material education is good up until the moment of death; you can't take it with you. But the gains of spiritual education are permanent.

There's that famous verse in Bhagavad-Gītā: "Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayat" (In this endeavor, there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear). Of course, we've all seen that most people in this world today don't see the urgency of spiritual life.

And with all due respect, they regulate it to, you know, one or two days of the week at most. But as devotees, we're trained to see differently. Janaka Pôndit says in his *Nīti-śāstra* 2.13: "Naivādyā kṣaṇam apy artham..." (Let not a single day pass without your learning a verse, half a verse, or a fourth of it, or even one letter of it, nor without attending to charity, study, and other pious activity).

All right, Kṛṣṇa. And people's interest in spiritual knowledge will actually decrease even more, even more, as Kali Yuga advances. Another famous verse: "Tato yugaṁ pralayato mama saṁsmṛtya" (Then, O King, religion, truthfulness, cleanliness, tolerance, mercy, duration of life, physical strength, and memory will diminish day by day because of the powerful influence of the age of Kali).

Nevertheless, nevertheless, it's our duty as Śrīla Prabhupāda's representatives to bring his teachings, the philosophy and culture of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to everyone's doorstep because we have faith that such book distribution can actually counteract the influence of Kali Yuga.

Yes, counteract the influence of Kali Yuga. That's how powerful it is. *Śrī Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana-gānaṁ dānaṁ... Jayate!* May it always be victorious.

Actually, we prefer to focus on another verse of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, um, 12.5.2. Famous but: "Atha yatrāpy anarthāgamaḥ...". Quote: "On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the transcendental glories of the name, fame, form, pastimes, and so on, of the unlimited Supreme Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental words, directed toward bringing about a revolution in the impious lives of this world's misdirected civilization.

Such transcendental literatures, even though imperfectly composed, are heard, sung, and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest." So today, the important line there is that our scriptures, this *Bhāgavatam* in particular, it can counteract the influence of Kali Yuga by a revolution.

Revolutions change everything. History has shown that. And what type of revolution is this?

A revolution in the impious lives of this world's misdirected civilization. And how to do that?

By this literature. In other words, we, as the humble representatives of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta and all our previous ācāryas who really, you could say, worked towards this moment where the saṅkīrtana movement would flood the world by their mercy, we can, as their humble representatives, hold back the tide of Kali Yuga by flooding the world with sets of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, with the purports of A.C.

Bhaktivedanta Swami Śrīla Prabhupāda.

It should be noted in this regard that Vaiśākhika Prabhu and his team from around the world are most expert at this. They have the drive, they have the motivation, and they have the means to deliver. It's remarkable that in the midst of a worldwide pandemic, during the past two years, 2020 and 2021, they have managed to distribute not hundreds, not thousands, not tens of thousands, but millions of books.

In 2020, the Bhadra campaign managed to distribute two million copies of *Bhagavad-Gītā* alone. And this present marathon, with just a few days left, you're all aiming for 25,000 sets of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Much of this success, I have to say, is due to Vaiśākhika's innovation, his spirit of innovation, born from Śrīla Prabhupāda's order to us to tax our brains how to distribute books.

This is Vaiśākhika Prabhu using the internet and just inspiring devotees in so many novel ways, traditional ways and novel ways to get those books out. Innovation is important. As time goes on, we have to innovate our preaching without compromising our core values and Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

The leaders can do this well. In a letter to Karandhar Prabhu on November 13, 1970, Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote: "The new procedures you are instituting on the saṅkīrtana party are very encouraging to me.

The opportunities for expanding the saṅkīrtana movement are unlimited. We should tax our brains as to what is the best way to present Kṛṣṇa consciousness to a particular people at a particular time and place." I know for certain that Prabhupāda is very, very pleased with Vaiśākhika Babu and his team, who have indeed found the most innovative and successful ways for increasing book distribution in these last two years.

The facts speak for themselves. I just quoted how many books have gone out in these last two years. And more. The facts speak for themselves. Or as we say in Sanskrit, *Phalinaṁ paricinte* – judge the success or failure of an activity by its results.

Nothing speaks louder than success. So this is actually an unprecedented moment, an unprecedented moment in the history of our movement. We should all recognize that and be happy. Janmashtami, Kṛṣṇa, and be happy. We chant to the world. So in these final few days, we encourage all of you spiritual warriors engaged in this *mahā-yajña* to make a final push, a final push to achieve the goal.

No doubt, this is the best use of your time. For Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī once said: "This preaching work will do good for you and for others as well." Meaning, it does good for those who preach because they get mercy, and those who hear the preaching, they get mercy.

And this particular type of preaching we're doing, book distribution, I would say that those people who get the books, they get double the mercy because they have Śrīla Prabhupāda's teachings that they can refer to for the rest of their life to navigate through life.

And some of them will become devotees, that's for sure. So this book distribution is so important. We should never make the mistake of regulating book distribution to something of the past. It is the responsibility of each generation of ISKCON devotees to maintain and increase the distribution of Śrīla Prabhupāda's books.

That is made very clear in Śrīla Prabhupāda's statement that his books would become the law books for the next 10,000 years.

He said that his books will be the law books for the next ten thousand years, spiritual law books, forming an authorized system of spiritual life based on the Yuga Dharma of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa.

He made it very clear that he wanted this for the whole time, for ten thousand years and beyond. He wanted this. He wrote, he spoke in one lecture: "This book distribution is the most important task in our society. Therefore, I am giving it so much stress and I am working so hard on this because this is my life and soul according to the order of my Guru Maharaj and by his grace it is to some extent successful.

I took it seriously. I take it seriously now. That is my life and soul. I never tried in India to construct big temples or even in your country we didn't. I never tried. But I was selling personally books. That is the history.

And that history must go on, Prabhus. That is the real history of the world, the most significant history of the world." So, as disciples and followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we are all obliged to fulfill that desire of Prabhupāda.

That's very clear. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.24.12 in the purport. This is such, for me, it's such an important part of that purport. Prabhupāda writes: "To honor the spiritual master means to carry out his instructions word for word." To honor the spiritual master means to carry out his instructions word for word.

Of course, this task before us is no easy task. Logic tells us that to implement a spiritual movement in the material world goes against the grain, to use a common saying. But it can be done because spirit is more powerful than matter.

And how will we do it?

How?

This is a great challenge. Those of you who have preached know it's never easy. Prabhupāda told me one time, he slammed his fist on the table: "When did I ever say preaching is easy?" Well, how to do this to fulfill this desire of Prabhupāda?

Well, Prabhupāda has said, and I quote: "Along with the instruction of the spiritual master comes the ability to execute it." And a part of the joy of doing saṅkīrtana, doing book distribution, is that the saṅkīrtana devotee can feel and experience that mercy that one gets from our higher authorities.

We are able to do these things because of the mercy of the spiritual master. Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote to my godmother, Yogendra Chandra Das, on December 7, 1975: "Yes, we are running on the mercy of the spiritual master." To understand this point is to get mercy more and more. *Bhāgavatam*.

So again, to do book distribution is to give mercy as well as to get mercy. Shakespeare writes in *The Merchant of Venice*: "The quality of mercy is not strained. It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven upon the place beneath.

It is twice blessed: it blesseth him that gives and him that takes." That is anchored on in the ultimate sense. So, I won't take too much of your time. We want you to get out and make the final push on this marathon.

So I'm just praying that my humble talk will reach the ears and the eyes of all you valiant devotees who are distributing *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* sets now. And I hope this little talk will give you the inspiration to achieve the goal of 25,000 *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* sets distributed.

And if other devotees, perhaps not those who are out on saṅkīrtana, but they can contribute, help in small ways the others distribute the books, you know, cook some nice *prasādam* and arrange things in such a way that the devotees can get out.

Whatever, if other devotees can come forward and assist you in any way, that would be wonderful. There's a saying, "Many hands make light work." This is essentially a chance for all of us to share our good fortune with others, to display that crest jewel of all the devotees' good qualities.

And devotees have so many good qualities, but what is the crest jewel of the Vaiṣṇavas' good qualities?

Compassion. So distribute. Be compassionate upon those who haven't come in contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Give them mercy, and you'll get mercy too. We all need mercy to get back home, back to Godhead. And saṅkīrtana is one of the best ways to get that mercy.

When Prabhupāda received news of the book distribution in Los Angeles and elsewhere in the United States in 1972, he was very pleased and amazed.

Although involved with, you know, many affairs throughout the world, he put them aside and relished the overwhelming victory of book distribution in America in that year, in particular, in the Christmas Marathon, as it became known. And hearing how the books had gone out and how, you know, how many devotees were involved, he immediately called his personal secretary and he dictated the following famous letter with which I will conclude my address today.

And surely, Śrīla Prabhupāda's words are the most inspiring of all.

Quote: "My dear Rameśvara, I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated December 27, 1972, and with great happiness I have read your figures of amount of books sold during the three-day period of December 22nd to 24th, 1972. It is scarcely believable that more than 17,000 books could have been sold by one temple in three days.

That indicates to me that people are at last becoming a little serious about this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement in your country. Otherwise, why should they buy our books?

But they can see that our boys and girls, devotees, are somewhat sincere and serious to distribute the message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They are once struck by seeing them, and therefore they appreciate and purchase. This is unique in the world.

So I am so much pleased upon all the boys and girls in Los Angeles and all over the world who are understanding and appreciating this unique quality of our transcendental literature and voluntarily they are going out to distribute despite all circumstances of difficulty.

By this effort alone they are assured to go back home, back to Godhead." Unquote. So I wish all of you book distributors and your supporters and helpers, you valiant soldiers, men and women, all success in the remaining just a few days of the Vajra campaign.

Make that final push. And I take the dust of all of your feet and put it on my head. Bunch of corporate creeps. Your humble servant, introducing women transcendental book distribution. Go pray. Thank you.