Hare Krishna  , that's what I wanted to say, that we are very happy to be together with the colored people again. I came to St. Petersburg for the first time 33 years ago. My head was in a mess, and at first, and here in St.

Petersburg, I dedicated my first student, who loves in her tenth year, was in the comments. And after some time, for example, after six months, I gave the dedication to my dear student, they drilled Darida, I think here. And now she is already on Goloka Vrindavan, and on Paul Davis, and the Livermore form is not said, but they themselves hit life forms.

I will give his stars to watch. It varies. In sung as I remember, that in the first days of the development of the St. Petersburg community, we had a house in the village. This was at a time when, like many of you, you weren't even born yet.

And we managed to do about as much as now, here today. It's nice to sing. Here's a small one, too, to place everything on the lip, the holder prayed and decided all the elements himself. And although with old age, as a rule, memory begins to fail a little.

Fixing everything in the material world is subject to destruction. I'll add a meeting of 15 reviews of the goal, but spiritual and subject to destruction. Although from a material point of view, I may forget some now, but I remember our first programs and harinams and the radiance that arose.

In fact, they are very close to my heart. I met various political leaders over the years. As far as I remember, I even met the mayor of the city a couple of times. A wonderful virus, or is this, of course, a very beautiful city, Sandanski?

I lose a whole 400 ELs. Sometimes I compare it to Paris. The most plusses are the carpets. It coincided with the people that we have here. Of course, there are a lot of old beautiful buildings. Even from an external point of view, many people strive to get there to see the sights, and obviously there were stadic 36, and you arrived enough to get it.

And here comes the blizzard. The site of your favorite argali. I remember how once all the wires came specially. Life, we thought that it would continue. Comments, communicate with a simple, drive out of the city by car to see the sights.

My wife, young, that's why I, because somehow strangely, for a pure devotee. But in fact, for a pure devotee, there is no difference materially because even material energy is the energy of Krishna.

Everything. Material price increases, then you will be him. One day I flew, disappear on a plane as assistants and showed a film began to veto. I was so determined that I didn't even particularly mind looking at the screen. I constantly resisted.

This means I continued to read and others. Why is it served on a plane to fly quite ascetic?

There is something funny in New York for minutes. I am shelling, but about the video release, he watches, and but it's not sexy. Prices from 700 letters for another. Look, the lawyer himself, and this old one, and later I found out what to watch, and later I forgive the group.

Why did we watch this film?

Chaplin. Charlie Chaplin's humor is very original. Nobody has Salaeva's secession, and others. Ivanovich, I smile, and Krishna is the source of everything.

Original tobacco source insulation Krishna manifestation talent excellent that looked roof positions superimposed on 11,500 series opening Krishna source hands or dream my pie.

I, of course, nothing of him who, and because I didn't see Charlie Chaplin Krishna in this film since we see Draupadi, but I submitted that a pure devotee sees Krishna in everything because he understands that the Lord's energies work.

In Berlin, from the site, perfect Tbilisi numbers to them, the cunning team of Maximarin, for example, there are many here, and there is one girl who loses her slippers. Her mother, then when the mother returns the next day, she finds her daughter's slippers, but little is translated north and boiled.

Enjoys, and the city itself is accepted. Dr. for them sat down on the shares of the child's gender, Krishna, subject.

And despite the fact that the material is not Krishna directly, but since it is connected with him, it is pure and pleasant to see the general.

Therefore, the material manifestation of Krishna and follows the principle of always remembering Krishna.

Never came here, your bark, according to the words we speak, lived on the site, our charms appeared, a tit on a timer, and therefore the ensign no longer had any problems when he wanted to see the sights and the sky.

And I don't know exactly how this happened, but he saw Krishna.

But wanted to see the sights, like any inquisitive traveler. Suppress Edurad, they really want to see a successful giraffe, an order to the highway to the gate from a material point of view, very attractive, very beautiful. From spiritual culture, try to be attractive thanks to the presence of all of you, mayor, 10 sheets, come with us, get in touch, your words, text online, and wherever I go, harmful, you, no matter where they are, although it may be material and the place, but thanks to this service, it becomes spiritual.

Any union officially, I don't know, you have an example of sannyasa there, they would like a. Ford Escort, Victor, there's no place for four to cook, infection about love, and buy mountains, a pebble is visible in the world, and it wilted.

There was a strong desire to turn Vrindavan into a spiritual place of miracles, a place of such glory as how to replenish it at night. He strives to go. It was presented in April. They could withstand it. It grew.

Let it not be so. They sent him Greek, a bicycle, your bag. Look on the street, settings Charlie, or maybe mountains, each other. And when he, in his own way, deceived him, harmful, he turned to one of them. "I want to go to the dugouts of scientists, sensations, wood, how much is it, okay, light sensors, you video, I'm a poet through k, but it's very important now, gal, that the Lord is there somewhere, you are there." His kind presence in his attacks to spread the city from the target, his face and those who follow the abandonment feel and presence influence on the service, therefore, and this wonderful combination of external beauty such as the beauty of the Winter Palace and the beauty of the community of devotees becomes one of my favorite places and 30.

And simple here can predict the head worlds of steel combinations with the flight of people are disrupted. Of course, I am often asked, what is your favorite place to like to travel, and it is usually difficult to answer this question, but it was difficult for me to say secretly if you promise not to tell anyone, because I come here so much periodically, text on and years.

St. Petersburg is one of probably three most favorite places. Read dogs I will talk and when I came here to perform, I heard how one of the greatest third they became history. I thought, I have not accepted the translation of the last visit.

I thought we should come here every year because we have a way to chant the saint, that is, is there a GTA 2 car and a fighter?

You want to develop this taste which is possible in society. On our own, we will break the taste, then we we chant the holy name, we pray that the time will not accept us again. There are many more opportunities for society, for example, if you go to some serious person, the mayor of St.

Petersburg, alone and start demanding that Mr. Mayor will not be with us, that one fell 3 Platonov, he will turn his high eyes on you, I understand, but if you gather ten thousand people and bring and although it is required, the same mayor will open the window in the game.

There is no terrible. Well, there, the sister asks again, that is why we came with you. And of course, japa is also important because the right, having given comments, that of all the instructions of the spiritual teacher, the most important is their hatred, and we are obliged to do this on this path, aguilera kirtans, water services, Jesus, dad and mom, but this kirtan that we perform and compete, he is the south avatar of the shares, sakshat bhagavat-pranitam, catch, slept, heal, the Lord gives processes, leagues for each century, an.

Image is built on a car, not 1 out of 5, and of course, talk and also, of course, says that from all kinds of this offering I present a roast individual mocked this name, but Krishna himself in the form of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu came after 500 years and he gave an instruction which is even more important.

The last speech of the Lord is the most relevant. Therefore, we should chant only Japan, but we should also gather together and chant together. The action of our 3 campus and chanting in the society of many countries is considered a very fast, easy way of creating feel curtain and rilay, when you feel that with each kirtanam of machines the real desire goes away, his taste for serving Krishna increases.

Turned out to be. Therefore, you decided correctly with the operation. You are many glad they brought Justin life. Always magicians or other, this I walked is chosen in accordance with the instructions mono walks, you are should 200 should time.

I am engaged in the most. You have gathered here in this wonderful city of St. Petersburg in order to engage in the most important activity. I congratulate you for having already settled here almost 12 hours. Water roll with soil layer and wanted everything spiritually shine.

Some look more immersed in the finder. The two-day non-stop festival was held, sometimes for two hours, and here, the giants are quite some of you look more exhausted. This was not in vain because before, it was certainly aesthetically pleasing to sit and keep up for so long for the physical body.

From a spiritual point of view, it brings so much nectar that it is impossible to stop drinking hot sugarcane juice, which is very hot. It is difficult to spot it with very sweet. It turns out that there are already eleven of us, woman, and we still have 10 minutes left.

The rural reflex of the girls with you says that the joint chanting of the holy name is powerful, that even a father in devotional service can feel reflections of spiritual ecstasy in this process. Seymour. We could say more on this topic in the description of the sweetness of this name in the next one.

We glorify not only the holy temporary, I put it in places such as you want, but therefore it is not different from chanting with meanings. To finish this, thank you for accepting us. We will try.