"*00211*.*
"Hi Cristiano. We're out here on Harināma-saṅkīrtana in one of the most prominent towns along the Baltic Sea coast here in Poland, Międzyzdroje—they call this the "movie star town." We came here to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with the people. We're doing what we like to do best: go out on Harināma-saṅkīrtana and distribute the holy name. As we've said before, this is the perfect formula for introducing people to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It's a formula that was introduced by the Lord Himself 500 years ago, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He would take His devotees out every morning and evening and chant the holy name and dance in ecstasy. He basically showed that spiritual life is meant to be very joyful.

In the Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa confirms, as He said, this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is *susukhaṁ kartum avyayam*. This is joyfully performed, and as soon as one takes up the yuga-dharma, without fail, one will experience what's called the *paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate*—the higher taste of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And it's infectious in a transcendental way. You can see all the people here that are watching us; they may have never seen us before, but generally, I see, at least here in Poland, 99.9% of the time it brings forth a smile. I like to call that a spiritual awakening.

There are unique features to every country in the world, and one of the unique features here in Poland that I've seen over and over again in my 40 years of being here is that Polish people like to dance. You don't have to encourage them and give a little lecture and tell them of the benefits; as soon as we start singing, they start moving in the crowd. So, we have our ladies go out, and with very little insistence, they grab the people and they bring them into the kīrtana party, and they start chanting and they start dancing with us. It's just... this is a pious country, so that piety means that one is more inclined towards spiritual life. It's a deeply Catholic country, Roman Catholic country, but I believe because the people follow that tradition, that qualifies them to be pious, and it allows them to appreciate this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So, we love to come out here and sing and dance with the people. We've been on the beach all day dancing, and they are singing with us, and now we're on the street here, and we've only been here about five minutes, and you can see the kīrtana party and all the girls have got everyone dancing with us. So, if we come out here as a movement around the world on a daily basis and we give the people this impression—this first impression—that spiritual life is joyful, especially when you're chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa, the yuga-dharma, so let's go, let's see what the people have to say. All right, Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana-kī jaya! Haribol! Prabhu-kī jaya!""