Every morning, I'm standing in the water at the Govinda Temple here in Jaipur with great satisfaction, joy, and happiness. When we come to Krishna consciousness, we lose our long-held material designations like: "I am the body," "I'm American, French, German, Russian, Australian," "man, woman," "black, white, yellow," "this family, that family." That's all cast aside by the instructions of our spiritual masters.

I remember Śrīla Prabhupāda first came to Detroit in 1971 or 1972.

He gave a darśan at the airport, and we were all young boys and girls at that time. We sat at his lotus feet in the airport. He was sitting under an ashoka tree, and I still remember it made a deep impression on me.

At one point, he leaned over very far, and as the ashoka tree, he said, "Please believe me when I say you are not these material bodies. Please believe me when I say you are not these material daughters." So, it may take some time, but as we mature in Krishna consciousness, we begin to identify with the verse: "My real identity is I am Krishna's servant." Just like George Harrison famously says, "Everyone's a devotee of Krishna; some know it and some don't." So, through the years, we've come to realize, actually, we are eternal servants of Krishna.

And we take on different designations. We like to be known as Rūpānuga. That's our first identity. We are servants of our spiritual master, because he's our connection with everything. Krishna consciousness will begin to understand other things as well.

For example, with Rūpānuga, Śrīla Prabhupāda means that we are followers in the footsteps of Śrī Rūpa Goswami. Śrī Rūpa Goswami is one of the six Goswamis, of course.

And that's a very nice designation to have. We can be embarrassed by our material designations, but you could say we could dovetail pride in Krishna consciousness, just being proud that we're proud Vaiṣṇava servants and we're followers of the six Goswamis, headed by Śrī Rūpa Goswami.

He's the Rasa Ācārya. He's taking us to the highest level of the six authorities to understand that we're one day, by power plus grace, we will be in the spiritual world, beyond all the material planes, to go to Vṛndāvana, and we will have, by grace, by mercy, an eternal relationship with Krishna, or one of different, different relationships.

So, we identify ourselves as followers of Śrī Rūpa Goswami. We're Rūpānuga. So, this place, Jaipur, and particularly this temple here, Radha Govinda Temple, is very dear to our heart. It resonates with our heart because the deities here are Radha Govinda.

And the energy is the deity of Śrīla Rūpa Goswami, who told the pastimes, the pastimes many times, how the Six Goswamis came to Vṛndāvana.

They had various instructions from Lord Caitanya, but one of them is to establish deity worship. Śrīla Rūpa Goswami, they had no possessions, they had no money, they had nothing. So, really, what happened was the deities revealed themselves to the Goswamis.

That's a very advanced stage. We're looking for service now, but a qualified devotee will come to us. That's His kindness. So, each of the Goswamis, they discovered, or Krishna discovered them, and they established the worship of those deities.

Like that, so it's a wonderful history how Śrīla Rūpa Goswami found his deity at Yoga Pīṭha in Vṛndāvana and how he established the worship.

He desired the temple, and it all came to pass. But dhanaṁ bhagavān, that means that the deity is the life and soul of that personality. So, here we are at the Temple of Radha Govinda, in front of the deity, doing kirtan around the deity, the deity which is most dear to the life, the life and soul of Śrīla Rūpa Goswami.

So, because we're Rūpānuga, trying to follow his footsteps and meet that highest stage by Śrīla Prabhupāda's mercy, we feel very much at home here and very much enlightened.

And we have hope that by his mercy, we can achieve that exalted stage. Not only ourselves, but you can see here in this video, thousands and thousands of people come every morning and every evening to see Radha Govinda. This was one of my first experiences in Krishna consciousness when I came to India, and I saw the bhakti, the devotion of these people for Govinda here in Jaipur.

And I understand that's why He never went back to Vṛndāvana.

The Lord is controlled by the love of His devotees. Love is reciprocal. We love the Lord; He also loves the devotees, depending on our surrender to Him. So, the people of Jaipur, you can see, they are very surrendered. This deity came hundreds of years ago.

He was supposed to go back to Vṛndāvana, as was Madan Mohan, as was Damodar, and Gopīnāth.

But they stayed because they are controlled by the love of the devotees. So, love reigns supreme here in Jaipur. And this is the center of this, we could say, this chakra, some people like that word. This is where people come to reciprocate with the Lord, and He meets the devotees there.

So, we're very much at home here. We feel very happy, and we feel honored to be able to represent Śrīla Prabhupāda and leave Vṛndāvana, leave Māyāpur for at some point, and go to the Western countries and share it with fortune, and bring all the people here to see Radha Govinda and all the other deities in Vṛndāvana.

So, a very exhilarating experience. And I hope you have enjoyed this video and you can get a taste of that bhakti that is here with this beautiful deity. If you have energy, it's eternal consort.