"*00128*.*
"Hari Kṛṣṇa, everyone. We are glad to welcome you to our ongoing seminar dedicated to the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana. 

To begin with, I would like to dedicate our conversation today to my beloved spiritual brother, His Holiness Bhakti Charu Swami Mahārāja, who unfortunately left this world a few days ago. He was a very close friend of mine, and I miss him as much as all of you and as much as our entire society does. 

Today we will talk about the forest called Lohavan. This forest is available to us by the grace of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who contains his works in *Vraja-mahimāmṛta*. In *Mathurā-māhātmya*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī also provides a text glorifying Lohavan. In text 352, he writes about the goddess, Pāṭhakoṭī-devī, who protected the demons and who destroys all sins. She is in the ninth forest, Lohavan, which is reduced to the mountain that turned into his bark. Mentions of this forest are also given by Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī in his work, *Bhakti-ratnākara*, the ocean of devotional service filled with jewels.

The forest of Lohavan is decorated with various trees and flowers and is one of the places where Kṛṣṇa grazes His cows. It is called Lohavan because Śrī Kṛṣṇa grazed cows here, killed the demon Bhaṇḍāsura, and performed His pastimes. If you listen carefully, you might have noticed that in all these verses we hear about a demon named Bhaṇḍāsura. I assume that none of you have heard of him before. When I studied, I also had not heard of this demon. In 1882, Mr. Growse published a book called *Mathura: A District Memoir*, which remains a famous work on the history and culture of Mathurā-Vṛndāvana. Mr. Growse was the magistrate of this district; at that time the British ruled, and he was an archaeologist and a scientist—he liked to study things. In this book, he mentions the forest of Lohavan. He says that a mystical demon named Lohajangha was killed by Kṛṣṇa in Lohavan, but apparently, he is not mentioned in any ancient Sanskrit book that I researched. That was one hundred and thirty-two years ago, and even then, many people knew of Lohajangha.

Nevertheless, a careful study of scriptures similar to the *Mathurā-māhātmya* that were compiled by Rūpa Gosvāmī indicates that near the lake known as Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa in Lohavan, there is a well called Kṛṣṇa-kūpa, and nearby, in a cave at the foot of the hill, lived the demon Lohajangha. Rūpa Gosvāmī designates him and even tells us where he lived. He greedily dominated the entire forest as if it belonged to him. 

In the oral tradition of Vṛndāvana, there are differences of opinion regarding who really killed the demon. We previously quoted a text stating that Kṛṣṇa killed the monster 5,000 years ago. But the *Vārāha Purāṇa* describes that it was the younger brother of Lord Rāmacandra, Lakshmaṇa, who killed the enemy. There is a version that claims Kṛṣṇa killed the demon near the well, and he had iron-like skin (*loha* means iron). Another source claims that Lakshmaṇa had difficulty killing this demon. 

How can we explain these differences? One of the explanations is that this happened in different places and at different times; Kṛṣṇa and Rāma appeared at different times. But all sources agree on one thing: this demon was killed in this forest, and that is why it bears the name Lohavan. Even now in Vṛndāvana, local residents say that on the shore of Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa in Lohavan, you can see what remains of his *loha*, or his iron form.

Another interesting point is that the Lohavan forest became a battlefield on which Kṛṣṇa defeated the king Jarāsandha. As we know from the book *Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead*, Jarāsandha attacked Mathurā 17 times. Each time he suffered defeat from Kṛṣṇa, lost all his warriors, and returned home. Since Mathurā and Vṛndāvana are so close—the distance is only nine kilometers—I suppose we can understand why the ācāryas say that all 17 battles took place in this circle.

After Kṛṣṇa killed Kaṁsa, his two wives, who were the daughters of Jarāsandha, returned to their father and cried, saying that Kṛṣṇa made them widows. Jarāsandha became so angry that he decided to move on Mathurā with a huge army. They set up their camp in the forest of Lohavan. Having heard about this, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma began to think how to defeat him. While they were engaged in strategy, 17 fully equipped military chariots appeared before them, descending from the spiritual world. These 17 battles began. Since Lohavan was on the other side of the Yamunā from Mathurā, it served as a convenient battlefield. 

It is said that Jarāsandha always had brāhmaṇas who performed sacrifices to ensure his victory. Despite the fact that he performed these yajñas, he still lost. After his 17th defeat, he threatened to kill his brāhmaṇas if he lost again. This created a problem for Kṛṣṇa, who swore to destroy the villains but was also bound by duty to protect the brāhmaṇas. Therefore, during the 18th battle, Kṛṣṇa simply left the battlefield. Śiśupāla approached under the pretext of saving Rukmiṇī, and considering Kṛṣṇa a weakling and a coward, Jarāsandha chased after Him all the way to Dvārakā. After some time, Jarāsandha was killed by Bhīma.

Besides these major military battles, Lohavan is even more famous because of Kṛṣṇa’s entertainment called *jal-vihāra*, or water games. These boat games with the gopīs took place on the lake I mentioned earlier, Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa. In fact, boat games take place all over Vṛndāvana, and most of us are familiar with Kṛṣṇa’s boat rides on Lake Mānasa-gaṅgā near Govardhana Hill. However, despite the fact that these games happen again and again, they are still new and fresh for all devotees. Every time we gather and talk about these games, a devotee listens with bated breath. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda writes about this eternal freshness in *Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead*. Spiritual themes do not lose their relevance over time; you can tirelessly praise the Lord and listen to Him, remaining attentive and wanting to listen again and again. 

As a rule, the story of the entertainment with the boat begins with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her friends needing to cross some body of water with their dairy products to sell them at markets. One day, when Rādhikā and her friends came to Lohavan, they needed to cross Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa, and all the boats except one were occupied. That boat looked old and rickety, but there was no choice. They offered the boatman a small donation, not suspecting that Kṛṣṇa Himself was hiding under the guise of the boatman. 

Before sailing, the boatman said his trip would not be successful unless his boat was cleaned with the water that washed the feet of the gopīs. They were surprised but eventually agreed. Rādhā washed the feet of the boatman, and then he proclaimed that their path was sanctified. Once they reached the middle of the kuṇḍa, the current became strong, and the boatman declared that due to the weight of the dairy products, they could not move further unless they gave him the products. He ate the dairy products, threw the empty pots overboard, and fell asleep. Rādhārāṇī then lost her temper, realized it was Kṛṣṇa, and complained. This is another wonderful pastime that happened here.

There is also a demon called Dantavakra who lived near this forest. We know he had twisted or slanted teeth. He wanted to kill Kṛṣṇa to avenge the death of his friend. During the duel, he became so excited he came to the battlefield without weapons, having only his great anger and a wooden club. When he walked, everyone felt the earth shake. We know that he and his friend Śiśupāla were actually the incarnations of Jaya and Vijaya, who were cursed by the four Kumāras. This shows us what devotees are capable of to satisfy their Lord: being born three times as demons and then returning and continuing their service. In fact, it was all arranged by God to satisfy His desire to fight. 

So let us return to Lohavan, where Kṛṣṇa fought the demon Dantavakra. It is described that they fought throughout the whole day. In the end, the Lord struck Dantavakra in the chest, crushing the heart of the demon. Kṛṣṇa was about to leave when Vidūratha, whose name was Rādhā, appeared with a sword, and the Lord quickly cut off his head with His Sudarśana-cakra. The ācāryas say that Kṛṣṇa considered these two demons as His last significant task on earth. When the Lord left, He left all His weapons there because He no longer needed them. This part of the *līlā* was completed—to free the demons and restore the laws of religion.

To finish today, I would like to quote a verse from the *Skanda Purāṇa*, in the *Mathurā-khaṇḍa* section: 

> "Vṛndāvana is the dearest beloved of Govinda. Madhava always takes with Him Balarāma, the cowherd boys, and cows to play in Vṛndāvana. Oh, how beautiful is the beauty of Vṛndāvana! Here is Girirāja Govardhana and many other holy places created by Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Being."

Thank you again to everyone for allowing us to share with you the beauty of the Vṛndāvana forest. The rainy season begins here in Vṛndāvana now, and we will prepare to meet again on Wednesday to discuss the next forest.""