Hare Krishna, everyone.

Today I'm addressing you from our base, a school actually, along the Baltic Sea coast in Poland, where we're holding our 31st annual Festival of India tour. I can't really say annual, because, well, for the last two years, we haven't been up here on the coast because of the pandemic.

It was difficult not to be here. We felt so much separation from our programs, from the people actually. And the people themselves, I can see already, because we've done two festivals, they were also feeling separation from us in a big way.

They're very glad to have us back on the coast. I attribute this to the fact that the Sankirtan movement in its variegated forms is the internal potency of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. It can only be that. Krishna says in Bhagavad-gītā, daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī, that this divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is very difficult to overcome.

However, Krishna is all-attractive, and if we present Him in a nice way through our preaching activities, people are naturally going to be attracted.

Especially when we go out and chant Hari Krishna on the streets, that's how we advertise our programs.

We go out, a large number of devotees and a very beautiful sankirtan party, beautiful melodies, nice chanting, and people are attracted. And then we give them invitations. We do about 10,000 invitations a day to invite people to our festivals.

Krishna's present in the sound of His name, actually even more so.

All of Krishna's pastimes are also present in the sound of His names.

That I read just this morning, I wanted to share this with you. It's a verse by [Unintelligible] The entire panorama of Lord Krishna's pastimes is present in the Hare Krishna mantra.

Lord Chaitanya has personally declared the Hare Krishna maha-mantra to be the highest absolute truth.

So no wonder people are attracted to, to, to Harinam. Actually, it was the first festival that, that we held in a town called Niendorf. We came back from Harinam, and people were already assembling at the festival. And I went to the restaurant, and there was one lady there, and she, she kind of grabbed me and she said, "Sir, I remember you.

I want you to know that I have been waiting anxiously two years for you to come back." That was the first festival. This, I thought this was going to be an auspicious summer. And, um, when I gave my lecture that evening, amongst the many, uh, shows that we have on stage, I give a lecture for about 40 minutes in Bangkok.

Afterwards, one lady came up to me and she said, "You know, I've been listening to you for many years. She said, I've actually memorized your philosophy, and I've read all of your books, but I needed you to come back to remind me how important it is.

Thank you so much for your talk." When you hear things like that, you know, whatever austerities you have to undergo in pushing forward this movement, it's, it's all worth it. Śrīla Prabhupāda also said one time, "My dear Lord, difficulties encountered in Your service are my greatest pleasure." And I finally come to realize that.

That first festival, I also met, um, a family who was very eager to take a photo with me, like really eager. And I said, "Okay," I was busy, but I said, "Okay, I took the time." And then afterwards, they pulled out a photo they say, which they keep, uh, on, on a table in their living room, of me with them 15 years ago.

And they said, "We wanted an update, but we had to wait two years." I also met, um, a, a lady who, who told me she's been coming for 30 years, like, "Wow, 30 years," to our event. And she said that she went through an extremely difficult time during the pandemic and she needed help, but she realized she needed spiritual help.

So she was lamenting. She said, "I never, I never bought that book, that book that you always showed during your lecture. I never bought that book. Now I want to buy that book. I'm sure that will help me." She said, "I walked all the way from my village.

I'm a poor lady, but I've saved enough money to buy that book." So this is all the internal potency of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, and it's so enlivening to see. It gives you so much faith to see how the people respond to Mahaprabhu's movement.

Of course, it wasn't easy for us to put it all back together again. Two years is a long time. Um, many of our devotees, how can I say, scattered to the four corners of, of, of the world. It wasn't sure we could even do it again.

Our finances dried up. We had to get permissions again from new people who are in, that particular job, or those bureaus. We had to pull, pull out all our material. We have tons and tons of, I think something like, we have 18 tons of, um, material altogether, including our trucks and our vans, etc., to take it all out of storage and get it back together again.

It was something like the phoenix rising from the ashes. That's how I, that's how I thought it. That's how I think of it. We were encouraged, however, by, um, many of the, um, the mayors and the city councils in the villages up here, because this is the, I guess you could say, the main place in Poland where people come for their vacation.

And they called us. They said, "Look, pandemic's down a little bit. Can you please come back?

Because it's been a tough two years, and we need you to bring some festivities, some color, and," what did one mayor say, "some joy to our town." And, um, Nandini and Jayatung, who have done, they get the credit for all the organization, they were telling me that sometimes these mayors are fighting over the dates.

Of course, we do. We're going to do 50 festivals this summer. But, you know, there's certain dates that, um, important dates on the calendar that they would love to have us there. So sometimes the mayors are quarreling. So I said to Nandini, "What do you do?" She said, "I flip a coin." So we had to put it all back together, together again.

Not easy. And, um, it's not exactly like it was before, in the sense that, um, you know, because of what's happening in the world, what's happening here in Europe, especially, um, our manpower is down to down 50%. Usually, we require about 250 devotees to do this event, and we have 110.

Now, due to the war going on in Ukraine, due to the economy, due to so many things, um, devotees themselves have, you know, fixed jobs. After two years, this takes a huge amount of manpower. We have 110 devotees, men and ladies.

A number of them are Ukrainian refugees, actually. We've taken them in, and they're very talented devotees. It's helped our stage show, actually, a lot. But I find many devotees doing the work of four devotees. Our school base is quite small, not like the schools we had before.

There's only room for about 80 devotees, so others are sleeping outside, cold showers. This year, many newcomers are not used to the intense, uh, schedule. But, um, they agree. I've told them many times that it's, um, this tour, you know, it's kind of like to be a special commando to be on this tour.

It's like drinking hot sugar juice. The intense schedule is so intense, it burns the lips a little bit, but you can't stop when you see the reactions of the people. I was thinking this morning that, you know, we have a festival every day, and that takes a lot of preparation, a lot of follow-up as well.

It's something like, I can compare it to a really, to a Janmashtami festival or Radhashtami festival in ISKCON temple. It's on that level. And, um, and then, uh, you know, after that event, in, in one of our temples, in our movement, it takes the temple a week to recover.

But we don't have a week to recover. We have to go out the next day and spend the chanting all over and encourage people to come and put on that, put on that event. So these are, I guess you could say, well, we would say, it's all happening again.

The Gaura Shakti, the internal potency of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. And I can also, I can say with all honesty that, um, these are the modern-day pastimes of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. These are the modern-day pastimes because He predicted the movement would go and spread.

We hear for the next ten thousand years. In particular, this, this period is described as the golden age of, um, of Kali Yuga. Sankirtan movement. So it's really difficult to get back together. There's a lot of austerities, but, um, it's nice to be part of the prediction.

It's nice to be part of the prediction, and we see that prediction through the eyes of the people, how much they enjoy embracing Krishna consciousness.

So. It was predicted. Um, one of my favorite verses is by Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya in his book, Śrī Gauraṅga. He has written this is verse 62. And this is speaking about all the members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness who, in their own ways, Sankirtan means the complete glorification of the Lord.

So every devotee in this movement is contributing in some way that makes it complete and makes it potent and spreads the Sankirtan movement. So all of you get the credit. And, um, here's a prediction of, of everything that we're all doing for Śrīla Prabhupāda under Prabhupāda's guidance, a Sankirtan movement.

He writes, "From the time that the holy name of Hari became manifest on the earth, the Vaisnava folk became everywhere adorned with faultless tilak and neck beads, equipped with the maha-mantra. In this manner, they became present in the very midst of the age of Kali, where they purified the atmosphere, chanting." So, so wonderful to be a privilege to be part of this movement.

And, uh, the real reward again for us is to, um, see the people coming forward and, and not only liking but loving Krishna consciousness.

One of the things that inspired me to, you know, make the phoenix come out of the ashes this year was remembering just a few years ago, after one of our puppet shows for the children, because we actually make this an event for the family.

It's a family affair. There has to be something for the children, for the young adults, for the parents, and even for the grandparents. There's, there's something for everyone. I remember when we, when one of our theater was finished, puppet show for children, there was just everyone applauded.

There's a big applause, and there was kind of a moment of silence, waiting. They wanted, you know, they're waiting for what happened next before the master of ceremonies came on the stage. So suddenly, a little girl, she must have been about seven or eight years old, she stood up.

Because the play was about Krishna in Vrindavan, there was a beautiful puppet of Krishna and Balarama and the Gopis, and there were big demons and cowherd boys.

So she stood up on her mother's lap, and I could see her from the distance, and she screamed out very loud, "Mommy, I want Krishna for me!" That was worth all the, the, the, the, the [unintelligible] I've done through these decades of organizing, putting on this festival. "Mommy, I want Krishna!" And just the other day, actually, um, one mother of a devotee who was unfortunately very antagonistic many years ago, very antagonistic.

Finally, after so many years, I think it's like 20 years, her daughter, who's my disciple, brought her to the festival, and we met, and it was cordial. It was cordial. But, um, she sat through my lecture, and at the end, she said to her daughter, "That was wonderful.

She said, I want that book. Please buy me that book." There you go. The internal potency of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu to, to, to touch the hearts of these people by His holy name, by His philosophy, by His food, by His devotees' association.

So it's wonderful to be out here. And, uh, everyone, please, um, keep us in your prayers. You, you, you bless us. A lot of hard work, service to do. Um, it's a little cold. It's this first part of the summer.

And, um, yeah, please keep us in your prayers that we can be successful in fulfilling Prabhupāda's words.

He said one time, "We will take the world over by culture." So we're trying our best to present it in an attractive way, in a professional way, a very professional way, an entertaining, fun way, and most importantly, filled with Krishna bhakti, with devotion to Krishna, which I think is the ultimate thing that touches the people's hearts.

So stay with us. We'll have some more videos, uh, throughout the summer. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, who took this Sankirtan movement from India and brought it to the Western world to flood the world with the sublime process of Krishna consciousness.

Thank you. Hari Krishna.

You.