This is our second stop, and we're sitting here on the banks of the river Ganges, very close to where she appeared. There's a beautiful temple here, guest houses for the pilgrims, and full facilities for drinking water and bathing. It is very pure here, but her actual appearance is about 17 kilometers north of here.

It's actually where she descended from the heavenly planets to mother Earth. It's a bit of an arduous journey, and we don't have the time this visit to go there. I know many devotees have, but this is good enough in the sense that we're sitting by her sacred waters.

The history of mother Ganges coming from the spiritual world, because she comes from the spiritual world, as we mentioned earlier, many transcendental personalities and items and things come from the spiritual world for the purification of mankind. Narottama Dasa Thakura talks about salvation coming from the spiritual world.

He says, "Gauravāñjita hari nāma saṅkīrtana." The *saṅkīrtana* movement of chanting the holy names has come from the spiritual world, especially in the stage to purify people. So mother Ganges also came from that transcendental abode. First of all, we read about the pastimes of Bali Maharaja.

Bali Maharaja is such a powerful king that he conquered the universe, conquered the 14 worlds, to the degree that everyone was a little nervous. But to make him a little humble, the Lord appeared as Vāmana. And Lord Vāmanadeva, you could say, with some transcendental trickery, he asked Bali Maharaja, as a young boy, "Could you please just give me three steps of land?" To Bali Maharaja, taking all the little child, three steps of land.

But Kṛṣṇa is *Yogeśvara*, and as Vāmanadeva, he expanded himself. He took three steps, and one of those first steps was his leg extended all the way up, up, up to the spiritual world. And there, with his toe, he poked a hole in the spiritual world.

It's all a pastime for our benefit and the benefit of anyone who comes in contact with spiritual life as we know anything. So that water trickled and continues to trickle till the end of time into the material world, and it's considered the *caraṇāmṛta* of the Lord.

People in India know that, not just the intelligent *brahmanas*, but India is an amazing place. Even the quote-unquote common person, he knows he's not the body, he knows his life after death, he knows there's a better chance, if the actual spiritual way to improve himself, to go back to the spiritual world.

So people know the benefits of touching mother Ganges, praying to mother Ganges, begging for the mercy of mother Ganges. And therefore, people live on the banks of mother Ganges all throughout India, as she flows from the Himalayas down to the Bay of Bengal.

People are living on her banks knowing that by bathing in her, sins wash away, just like dirt washes from the body. We have in our prayers, "kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam, yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ." By chanting the name of the Lord, or bathing in mother Ganges, the sinful reactions in our heart flow to a distant place, and in that healthy atmosphere in the heart, we can awaken our love for God.

This morning, we mentioned that the Yamuna River is considered a little more special in the sense of Kṛṣṇa bathing as a young boy there. Therefore, the *Acharyas* say that one can get more than freedom from karma and freedom from material desires by bathing in the Yamuna.

One could get love of God. However, Jiva Goswami, in order to glorify mother Ganges, this supreme celestial river, he writes, "We must consider how as Kṛṣṇa bathed in the Yamuna River, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu bathed in mother Ganges in Bengal." Another week, the same situation.

There's no difference between Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Radha and Kṛṣṇa. "Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya prabhu nityānanda śrī advaita gadādhara śrī vāsādi gaura bhakta vrinda." They became one in the personality, the divine personality, the golden avatar, who returned in Mahaprabhu. So let us think like that, that by bathing in mother Ganges, as Mahaprabhu did, we can achieve *prema*, we can achieve love of God.

Therefore, we are so grateful to come here. We owe everything to our Founder-Acharya of the Hari Krishna movement, His Divine Grace Śrīla A.C.

Bhaktivedanta Swami Śrīla Prabhupāda, for introducing us into all these transcendental phenomena: the chanting of the holy names, dancing in ecstasy, taking *prasadam*, reading *shastra*, and the opportunity to do as so many of our *gurus* have done, come to these holy places and actually become purified.

So, when the Ganges flowed from the spiritual world by the mercy of Vāmanadeva, she actually came as far as the heavenly planets, as she was coming, and so powerful because spirit is more powerful than matter. So this transcendental water is flowing into the material world, into the heavenly planets, so powerful.

So then how did she come to the earthly realm?

Before that, how did she come to the lower planets?

Because we know mother Ganges is so kind, she even flows in the netherworlds for the benefit of those fallen conditioned souls. So that history is very prominent here at Gangotri, this village of Gangotri. And that is that King Bhagiratha, his some of his ancestors had offended Durvasa Muni, and that created a great, very chaotic scene within that dynasty.

So to relieve his forefathers from the sins of offending a sage of the caliber of Durvasa Muni, King Bhagiratha, he came here at this exact spot, just not maybe 50 meters away, and he sat in meditation, and he prayed, and he prayed, and he prayed, and he begged, and he begged, and he begged.

And he supplemented, as we do, in chanting Hare Krishna.

This is a very, very intense endeavor to get spiritual mercy. He prayed for mother Ganges to come from the spiritual world to the earthly abode here, to purify the ashes of his ancestors. He sat there in meditation for 5,500 years.

So when King Bhagiratha, by his kindness, prayed to mother Ganges to come here, she came. But the people of the earth were very much afraid. The Sadas were very much afraid that the force of the Ganges would destroy the earth planet, everything below it.

So out of his kindness, out of his mercy, Lord Shiva appeared, and he caught the full force of mother Ganges in his hair. And in this way, the Earth was saved. Although she came to give mercy, she was so powerful she might destroy.

So Lord Shiva caught her in his hair. And when you see a picture of Lord Shiva, you see that the Ganges is flowing into her hair, or sometimes she's represented by the deity form. Another *Ganga* is there in the hair of the *linga*.

So we've come here as *vigrahā*, as the topmost piece of the *sannyasa* as *jheṭṭi*. This is traditionally meant for begging for foodstuffs, *madhukari*. A Gaudiya Vaishnava *sannyasi* living in a holy place, because he's spending so much time *shravanam* and *kirtanam*, *Kṛṣṇa smaranam*, he needs to eat.

So he goes to four houses and he begs with this *jheṭṭi*, with this. So here we've come to beg for the mercy of mother Ganga, this great transcendental personality who has flowed from the spiritual sky, through the heavenly planets, to this earthly realm, and even lower, to give her mercy.

In a very simple way, this is how nice transcendence is, especially in Vedic culture. It can be achieved in a simple way if one is honest. Just bathe in her waters, pray to her, drink the water, cook with the water, associate with her.

In this way, she would give him *prasad*. So this is why we've come here, our second stop on our pilgrimage to the Chardham. We wish that all of you could come with us. We feel so spiritually exhilarated here, so spiritually excited.

So we can't sleep at night. It's just so transcendentally enlightening here. We hope that one day you can come and also sit on the bank of the Ganges. If not, there is a prayer in our prayer book that you can call the Ganges, the Saraswati, and the Yamuna, where the very rivers into your *haṁsa* cup, my mantra, and you can take your mercy in that way.

If not, you simply pray to her. It's very, very important in our Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition. And we will be leaving tomorrow for Kedarnath, the place of Lord Shiva, and we'll continue our discussions there. And we'll finish with by doing our *Shri Ganga Ma ki, Shri Chardham ki, Himalayan mountains ki, Shri Radha Kṛṣṇa ki, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu ki*, Om Purnamadhah Purnamidam, *aum shanti shanti shanti*.