Tomorrow morning. Gopinath was brought here around the same time as Govinda and Madan Mohan, the three principal deities of Vrindavan. Of course, after invaders attacked Vrindavan, the devotees brought them here. It took actually many, many years for the Vrindavan deities to come here, and they have been very nicely worshiped since that time.

Generations of families have served these deities, the Goswami families. And through the years, by His Mercy, I have become very close to the family here who worships. So when we come, we devotees always get some special mercy. We are able, our group is able, to go right in front of the deities, and the pujaris bring us the sandalwood paste from the feet of the deities, and the Tulasi leaves, and the garlands, and the Prasad.

And this is what is meant by darshan. You go to see the Lord, but darshan also means the Lord sees us. It's not that we are just seeing Krishna.

Krishna is standing before us; He is a living person.

I often say that the golden rule of deity worship is always to remember that the deity is a person. Just like the small Brahmin boy, well, the young drummer boy, when he went to Vrindavan to ask Sakshi Gopal to stand as his witness in a trial, he requested the Lord, "You please come, stand as my witness." And the Lord replied to him, "I'd be happy to come, but," the deity said to the boy, "how will I come?

I'm a deity. How will I follow you?" So the Brahmin boy was very intelligent.

Brahmins are intelligent. He said to the Lord, "Lord, if you can talk to me, you can walk behind me." And that was the case. So the deity is there, fully conscious as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So when we go to see Him, He also looks directly within to our heart.

And prayers that those on Earth, those obstacles that are there between us and Him developing pure devotion, they can be removed. So we come before the Lord like that for His Mercy. This particular deity of Gopinath was discovered by a great devotee called Madhu Pandit.

Gopinath, like many of the like many of the original deities, was carved or was ordered to be carved by Parikshit Maharaja, the great, the great-grandson of Krishna.

And when the Lord left this world five thousand years ago, the Pandavas, they were devastated. They loved Krishna more than anyone has ever been loved before.

So in the Lord's separation, they were just crying, crying, crying like this. So Parikshit Maharaja had the very wonderful idea to establish different deities of Krishna again, which are not different than the Lord, around Vrindavan.

Different deities like Krishna and Balaram, except they were established by Parikshit Maharaja.

But through the eons of time, the millennia, those deities were lost to our vision. So when Lord Chaitanya appeared 500 years ago, He requested His followers, he calls them His immediate disciples, the six best families of Vrindavan, to come to Vrindavan to write books on the science of Krishna Consciousness, discover the lost places of Krishna's pastimes, and establish deity worship.

But the Goswamis didn't have any deities. They were renunciates. They came to Vrindavan basically just with their loincloths and their japa. So what happened is that they discovered, hey, that the Lords of their heart, in various ways, let us say the Lord revealed Himself to those devotees.

There is a history behind each deity of the Goswamis in Vrindavan. So Gopinath was discovered by perhaps a lesser-known, but not less important, personality, Madhu Pandit. He was an exalted pure devotee of the Lord, and many of our scriptures, the glories of Madhu Pandit have been described.

So one day he was like the Goswamis, wandering around Vrindavan, chanting the names of the Lord, trying to find Krishna.

And he came to Vamsivata, where the exact spot in Vrindavan where Krishna one evening, one night time, He played His veena, He played His flute to call the Gopis to come with Him for Rasalila.

It's a whole pastime. So that is a very, very sacred place. Vamsi means flute, and Vata means the place actually where Krishna played the flute.

So one day Madhu Pandit, a contemporary of the other Goswamis, he was looking for Krishna, and suddenly the Lord revealed Himself in the very dense forest.

Sometimes we use the word jungle. Much different 500 years ago, lots of trees and bushes and flowers. So, um, there he saw Gopinath and he discovered Him. And immediately, that became his problem, that, hey, the Lord of his life, and he established the worship of that deity, and the standard for that worship, like all the Goswamis, a very high standard of devotional service for the Lord.

So he is famous like that, that one of the three principal deities of Vrindavan was found by Madhu Pandit. One historical fact about him: he had a Tulasi coat made of thousands and thousands of Tulasi beads, and he had a hat made of thousands of Tulasi beads.

He was very famous. He used to walk around. This was his winter coat. It was a Tulasi jacket, Tulasi shirt. So when Gopinath originally had to be moved here because of the invasion of the invaders in Vrindavan, his followers, they placed the coat of, of Madhu Pandit in the box that came down with with Gopinath.

The hat and the coat, because of course by that time Madhu Pandit had passed away a couple hundred years earlier, 500 years ago. So here, when I came here some years ago, there was a little cubbyhole in the building, in the side of the building, and that's where they kept, that's where they kept the coat.

So I saw it wasn't being taken care of very nicely. So I asked the Mahant here if I could, um, serve the temple, serve Gopinath, serve Madhu Pandit by, you know, establishing, let's say, a memorial. Because here, I found out many people coming didn't know Madhu Pandit.

So they gave me that service. And just off to my left here, we established a memorial. There was a part of the temple that wasn't being used. We renovated it. One of my disciples, Raghuram, from Russia, is a very good painter.

He painted a beautiful painting of Madhu Pandit discovering Gopinath in the jungle. And then we took that coat and we put it in bulletproof glass there, safe from the elements and from people touching, etc. And then we put different verses in marble around the memorial so people could see or read the glories of Madhu Pandit.

And it's there today. It is visited by many, many, many pilgrims. So very satisfying, actually, when we were doing that. A few pieces of the cloth, the beads came off, and the pujari gave them to me. So I carry that in one of my necklaces.

So we feel very fortunate to to have been in service to Gopinath and Madhu Pandit here in, um, in Jaipur. So again, it's like coming home. Home is where your heart is. So our heart is with the Lord and His pure devotees, by His divine Grace.

So this is why we come to Jaipur, Gupta Vrindavan, a hidden Vrindavan, to become inspired in our Krishna consciousness and go deeper into our consciousness.

Tomorrow. Harmony. Songs.