Monday. Hare Krishna  and welcome to the city of Jaipur in the state of Rajasthan here in India.

I brought a small group of devotees down from Shri Vrindavan for a one or two-day excursion. Jaipur is famous for many things. It's famous for its tourism; thousands and thousands of tourists come here every year to see the beauty of this city.

It's famous for its textiles; it's famous for its jewelry. But for Gaudiya Vaishnavas, devoted to the Lord, the followers of Lord Caitanya, the city is very important because here a number of the original deities of Krishna, established by the Six Goswamis of Vrindavan, are being worshipped.

In the late 1600s, there was a foreign invasion in India, and the devotees had to remove these deities, a number of these deities from Vrindavan, and they were given protection here in the state of Rajasthan. Because Rajasthan is known for its Rajput kings, powerful Kshatriya rulers who, in those days, in the late 1600s, they were all great devotees of Krishna.

So one devotee in particular, one king in particular, his name was Jai Singh the Second. He actually built this city to protect those, those deities in particular. In particular, Lord Govinda, or Govinda Ji, as he's known affectionately by the devotees here.

When Jai Singh built the city, he built the temple of Govinda Ji right in the center, and everything else spread out very harmoniously from that center. And his own palace was just very close to the temple of Lord Govinda, Radha Govinda.

Eventually, and every morning when he would get up, the first thing he would see, he'd walk out on his verandah, the first thing he would see was the darshan of the deity. So he loved Krishna very much, and he loved the deity of Govinda Ji very much.

So he established that worship. And this was a real ruler. These kings in the ancient days were called Raja Rishis. They weren't just expert administrators but administrators, but they were also great devotees of the Lord. Raja Rishi means the saintly person sitting on the throne.

So he not only built the temple of Govinda Ji, the city to protect him. There's a huge wall, where there was a huge wall going around the city that painted it, painted later on centuries later, to receive important persons coming to the city, hence the pink city.

But he also established the worship of the deity of Krishna here.

And as a result, the people of Jaipur, their love for Govinda Ji and the other deities of Vrindavan that are present there, Gopinath and Damodar and Radha Raman, is very, very deep. When I first came to India in the early 1970s as an aspiring devotee, and devotional service is all about devotional love for Krishna, I got an overwhelming experience by coming here.

Because when I entered the temple one morning, I noticed that thousands and thousands and thousands of people were pouring into the temple before they went to work, before they go to work, they want to receive the blessings of the Lord.

And when I came back in the evening, the same thing happened. Thousands and thousands and thousands of people came to say goodnight to Lord Govinda, Radha Govinda. And their devotion was genuine. I could see the way they were singing the songs, there's so much feeling, so much emotion, so much devotion, even sometimes crying.

And I thought, this is real bhakti. This is real devotion. It's something I'd like to have. So every year, I make it a point when I come to India, make it a point to come down here and, you could say, just revive that sense, that that original feeling I had of overwhelming devotion for the Lord.

To come down here and in the association of the people of Jaipur, I like to ignite that fire of bhakti. Nectar of Devotion said one time that devotional service is something that's imbibed from other devotees. Monday. Shri Krishna.

Shri Krishna.

So this is kind of like a second wind for a group of devotees. Not far from here, and it's about three or four hours away. And I've sometimes wondered how it is that, you know, the deities never went back to Vrindavan.

They're the original deities, four or five deities that are here. Why haven't they gone back?

Because Krishna is controlled by the love of His devotees.

Although He is the Supreme Controller, He is controlled by the love of His devotees. And that's very prominent, very much present here. I think in this video, you'll see how much love the people of Jaipur have for Govinda Ji and their deities.

And that's why they stay here. And that's why I brought a small group of devotees here to get that Vrindavan experience here in Rajasthan.