Thank you very much to everyone who is with us and listening to us. Singing this process of singing the holy names of God is recommended for spiritual enlightenment for everyone who lives in our age. The words of this song are repeated many times here; there are only three words: Hare Krishna and Rama.

This is not a material song; this is a song from the spiritual world, and this song is described in the ancient texts of India. It is said that it gives eternity, knowledge, bliss, and happiness. We want happiness, but in the material world, happiness comes and goes, just like, for example, rain on a flower.

A drop of rain on a flower remains on the petal for some time and then falls to the ground. We also come here in the city center in search of happiness, in order to see something, hear something, eat. But this happiness comes and goes; therefore, life in the material world disappoints us because, by nature, we should always be happy.

This is our inherent nature, just like sugar is always sweet, salt is always salty, water is always wet. Therefore, the nature of the soul is to always be happy, but in this world, it is impossible to find happiness because here everything is temporary, lasting only a few moments.

Because in this world, we are accompanied by old age, illness, death, rebirth. This is an obstacle to happiness, and no achievements of science or technology can change this. Of course, science and technology can improve the quality of our lives a little; they can make our lives easier, but they cannot change the reality of the material world.

Ultimately, we have to grow old and pass away. This, of course, sounds a little sad because there is a world full of knowledge, eternity, and unlimited bliss. This is not a utopia; this is not a fairy tale. This is not just a fiction of philosophers.

There is a world full of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. The world from which we came here. According to the ancient texts of India, we must return to this world, and we can return to this world through a very simple process of chanting Hare Krishna.

This chanting is so powerful that it frees us from all obstacles that prevent us from awakening our deep spiritual nature. Saints in any spiritual tradition are those who are free from greed, anger, lust, and envy. Isn't that true for any saint, regardless of tradition: Christian, Muslim, Jewish, Buddhist?

Islam is a person with a pure heart, and we respect such personalities because they are free from lust, anger, envy, greed. Their pure hearts shine with love for God, and we are all destined to become saints. This is our original nature, and it can be developed by singing this song, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

It purifies the heart, awakens the qualities of saintly personalities, and after we purify, we return to the spiritual world. It is not very difficult; you can be anyone: students, politicians, businessmen. If you sing Hare Krishna, Hare Rama, you will return to the spiritual world.

This process is very attractive because it brings happiness. To those of you who have come to find happiness in the city center, you can see that the happiest here are the devotees of Krishna who sing and dance on the street.

It is said that an example is much more impressive than any philosophy. We can all agree that in this age, we all lack happiness, and where can we see an example?

You can see that on the faces of all these people who sing Hare Krishna, there is radiance.

They have a smile from ear to ear. And someone said, "Probably they are preparing for the celebration of May 9th, already drunk in advance and going dancing." But in fact, we do not use alcohol or drugs at all. We do not even drink coffee and tea because the happiness that we experience is within us.

Brothers and sisters, Christians say that the kingdom of God is within us, and these are well-known truths that are explained in all spiritual traditions, that true happiness is in the heart. This happiness is communication with God. If you try to quench your thirst with a drop of water, then a big pool.

If you draw into a clean lake with water, it will bring you complete satisfaction. The Supreme Lord has many wonderful qualities, and one of them is that He is the source of all pleasures. If we are connected with Him, we will also feel happy, and this is achieved through chanting the Hare Krishna mantra.

Although the Lord seems very far away, but we can establish contact with Him through chanting the holy names because He is present in His Holy Name. If you repeat "water, water" when you want to drink, just repeating this word will not satisfy your thirst because the word "water" and the water itself are different from each other.

But if you chant any holy name of God that you know, you will experience direct contact with Him and experience happiness. You can chant any holy names of God: Allah, Mohammed, Buddha, Christ. You can also sing Hare Krishna, Hare Rama.

We like the name Krishna; it is very attractive, and we ourselves experience happiness from chanting the holy names of the Lord, Hare Krishna mantras, and we want to share this happiness with everyone around us.

And those who pass by us without even knowing our philosophy can see that we are happy. This process is real victory; it is victory over the influence of the material energy. Of course, in a few days, we will celebrate Victory Day, a historical event which is a little over 70 years old.

But the final victory is victory over repeated births, deaths, diseases, and old age and return to the place where life is eternally filled with bliss and knowledge. This is a very simple understanding that we wanted to share with all of you.

People see how we sing and we dance, but behind these songs and dances, there is a very ancient and very deep spiritual philosophy, and we want everyone around us to also follow this philosophy and feel the same happiness. We have a lot of books that explain the science of Krishna consciousness.

Some of our devotees distribute books, for example, this *Science of Self-Realization*. There are a lot of different books; this is our *Bhagavad Gita*. If you want to know a little more about the process we talked about, you can purchase one of the books from our distributors.

Our devotees also meet and hold regular meetings; they sing and dance. Our process also includes food. Our process includes singing, dancing, and also wonderful vegetarian dishes that are offered to Krishna.

We have a wonderful restaurant right here nearby called Radha's. You can go there and try our treats. Before we continue, we want to help you learn the words to this song, which will bring you joy and real victory. Please repeat after me along with all our devotees.

Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.