
"New Year is nearing, and since it is not sad, it is time to go back. No one wants to say goodbye, but as my close friends and companions say, farewell has only one good thing: the gift of being able to meet again. Therefore, we will wait for new meetings. We will miss you no less than you miss us. In English, it is said that in separation, affection intensifies. This will not cool our spirits.

Our life consists of keeping up with the path of devotional service in the company of devotees. The association of devotees is what we live for. It is a big secret that we are chasing after the holy name. I see that everyone has their choice—to enjoy the chanting of the holy name in each other's company. This chanting counteracts all negative influences. As is known, the holy name is a wonderful text. 

Once, a person tried to convince Lord Caitanya with his philosophy, but Lord Caitanya, being the Supreme Lord, easily convinced him. At first, the man did not fully understand who the Lord was; he thought He was just a very attractive young sannyāsī. He invited Him to his home to entertain Him with his understanding of philosophy, but in the end, Lord Caitanya convinced him of the Absolute Truth. He realized that Lord Caitanya was none other than the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself. He composed, in a few moments, one hundred verses glorifying the Supreme Lord that emerged from his lips.

On one of these verses, he speaks of the medicine for the soul. Those who are bitten by the snake of material existence can find relief from this influence thanks to the tincture of chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa and through association with devotees. This is the cure for the snakebite of material life. 

Terrible manifestations of Kali-yuga—all the variety of sinful activity, environmental pollution, corruption, and so on—can all be counteracted by chanting the holy name. Once, Lord Caitanya decided to go to the court hearing in Kazi’s city. When He entered the courtroom, He saw the judge, the prosecutor, the lawyer, and various assessors. He said, "This place seems to be heavily desecrated by all the lies that lawyers utter." In such a formal setting, the devotees began kīrtana. They started dancing in the aisles, running up to the court and back. The judge sat watching all this, the jury scratched their heads, but the lawyers sat there. Thus, we continue the work of the previous ācāryas. By such loud chanting, the subtle atmosphere is cleaned. 

A man once walked into an ancient mansion where, over two hundred years, one can imagine how many sinful deeds were committed. A devotee entered this mansion, looked around, and said, "The ghosts here should be cleared." He began to knock with his cane on the paintings that depicted various influential people who lived there and at the same time repeated the holy name. He knocked on the frames and said that they all flew apart because they only lived in the paintings. If you talk about ghosts, they are not very scary; you have a sure chance to clear the atmosphere by chanting. In the śāstras, we hear that the holy name is the most favorable vibration. 

The power of the holy name intensifies when we reveal it in the company of devotees. Chanting is so powerful that, regardless of your level of consciousness, it elevates you to the transcendental level. During individual chanting, one might fall asleep or be distracted, which can be overcome during joint chanting because the power of association with devotees captivates everyone on the transcendental level. 

It is described that when Lord Caitanya went to communicate with the Kazi, almost everyone who saw Him joined the movement. It grew into a huge movement that ultimately affected the city. Even thieves and robbers, who were not interested in Lord Caitanya’s movement and saw it as an opportunity to plunder empty houses, heard the chanting of the holy name right in the middle of their robbery. They all ran out in ecstasy and joined the sankīrtana. Therefore, in the first verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka, all glory is given to the chanting of the holy name.

Please continue chanting individually and in the congregational kīrtana. You have a wonderful atmosphere here in Yekaterinburg. The reason I left is that you have a very successful service. Many programs are held, many hundreds arrive; a lot is happening. I am very satisfied seeing this happy community. You are quite consistent in your service. Accept my blessings and keep up the good work. Very soon, our group will return here again to receive your association. Usually, sannyāsīs and senior devotees go to give instructions, but here we want to receive your association. We must return home now to fly further to Moscow and other places, but we pray to return again. From the depths of my heart, thank you very much for your association."