"*00433*.*
"Hi, Krishna. Very dear devotees, a warm welcome back again to our ongoing discussions on our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Happy to have you with us. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guruḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvam, sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca.*

So, I was thinking today that because we have recently spoken about four of the aṣṭa-sakhīs—Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrādevī, and Campakalatā—it would be proper to also speak in the next few days about the remaining four sakhīs: Indulekhā, Tuṅgavidyā, Raṅgadevī, and Sudevī. As we all know, the aṣṭa-sakhīs are so important in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. Some of you may know that actually, there is a very famous temple here in Śrī Vṛndāvana dedicated simply to these eight very dear maidservants of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It’s down near Keśī-ghāṭa, and that temple is, I think, around 350 years old. There are beautiful deities of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and four sakhīs on one side of them and four sakhīs on the other side. My god-sister, Yamunā Devī, once said that Prabhupāda had told her that he originally wanted the aṣṭa-sakhīs to be installed in our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir in Vṛndāvana along with Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, but unfortunately, that altar area was too small.

But of course, we know that Prabhupāda's desire was ultimately fulfilled when the aṣṭa-sakhīs were installed in our Māyāpur temple along with Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava. So, today we'll talk about Indulekhā-sakhī and include a special pastime about her, as we have done recently with other sakhīs. But first, a brief review about her. Five thousand years ago, during pastimes on earth, Indulekhā appeared in the village of Indrolī, which is actually not far from Kāmyavana. Her father’s name was Sāgara, and her mother’s name was Veledevī. And the ācāryas say that Veledevī gave birth to a “contrary and hot-tempered little girl,” whom she and her husband named Indulekhā because she was like a moonbeam—*indu-lekhā*. Now, Indulekhā was born three days after Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and she’s actually famous as the sixth of the aṣṭa-sakhīs. I was reading that she has a tan complexion, and she wears clothes as reddish as sunrise, or sometimes described as the color of a pomegranate flower. Now, as a child, she learned the science of gems and the science of palmistry. Now, as far as gemology is concerned, I read in the institute that when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were in the gurukula of Sāndīpani Muni, they also learned everything about Vedic gemology, that’s called *ratna-śāstra* in the Vedas—*ratna-śāstra*, which is actually one of the 64 Vedic arts. And I was remembering that in his later years, when Śrīla Prabhupāda was very ill, he wore a 5-carat blue sapphire, the color of a peacock’s chest, I think you could say, as was advised by a jyotiṣa-ācārya at that time. So, you know, it’s part of our culture, gemology; we use it in various different ways. Now, Indulekhā also learned when she was young how to decorate teeth, chant mantras, charm snakes, and string necklaces, as well as weave cloth from very fine silk fibers.

In her specific village, which is called Añjanoka—remember, each of the sakhīs has their own particular village around Varṣāṇā where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, their queen, is living—her village is called Añjanoka, and it’s in the forest of Añjanavana, next to Varṣāṇā. And she is known as the leader of her friends, such as Tuṅgabhadrā (a close friend of Indulekhā) and Palindikā. These two are very close to Indulekhā, and Indulekhā taught them and other friends of hers to be skilled messengers in service to the divine couple. And by thus facilitating Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's communications, Indulekhā essentially increases the divine couple's mutual love. And consequently, the cowherd girls throughout Vraja come to Indulekhā for guidance in devotional service, because this is the essence of the sevā of the sakhīs and the mañjarīs: the Gopis want to unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They don't like to see them separated; they want to bring them together. So, because Indulekhā is so good at this, many of the girls—all the cowherd girls, actually—come to her for guidance in devotional service. She engages these enthusiastic, pure-hearted girls in fulfilling Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's desires. She also teaches them to make ornaments, to sew garlands, and, I read in one place, to oversee the divine couple's treasury.

And one time, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were playing a game of riddles. We often hear how they play this game of riddles. At this particular occasion, Kṛṣṇa asked Rādhārāṇī, "Who shows passionate redness when she appears, is very expert in various arts, and arouses amorous desires upon first sight?" So, pausing for a moment, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī glanced at the faces of her Gopi friends, and her glance fell on Indulekhā-sakhī. So, she pointed to her and she said excitedly, "It is my divine moonbeam, Indulekhā! It is my divine moonbeam, Indulekhā!" That's how I entitled this lecture: "Her Divine Moonbeam, Indulekhā." Also, it's interesting to note that in his eternal identity as Raṅga-mañjarī, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is a maidservant of Indulekhā. In fact, in one of his poems, he prays to her as follows: "My guru, Indulekhā, instructs me in the art of making beautiful garlands of pearls, jewels, guñjā-berries, and flowers so that I can decorate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the temple at the center of Rādhā-kuṇḍa." Now, speaking about Rādhā-kuṇḍa, in Rādhā-kuṇḍa's southeastern corner is Indulekhā's grove, or her kuñja. It's called Pūrṇendu-kuñja. Again, each of the aṣṭa-sakhīs has their grove or their kuñja around Rādhā-kuṇḍa, whereby they serve Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So, Indulekhā's kuñja is called Pūrṇendu-kuñja; it's named like that for its resemblance to the full moon and for possessing a whiteness that the ācāryas say exists because the ground is made of diamond dust, which reflects the light of both the sun and the moon, making anything and everything in that kuñja effulgent—really effulgent with a soft white glow. It's almost blinding. I read that since the bees and the parrots there are all white—everything is white in that kuñja—they can only be identified by their sounds. It's difficult to see them, but they are there. When the bees buzz and the parrots sing, they can be identified only by their sounds. And it's said that on a full moon night, if anyone accidentally wanders into that grove while the Gopis, who are also dressed in white, are entertaining Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, that person will see nothing but glaring white light; it's so effulgent.

And there's actually a detailed description of Pūrṇendu-kuñja in *Govinda-līlāmṛta*, Chapter 7, verses 81 to 84. And I'll quote that reference: "In the agni-koṇa, which means the southeast direction of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, is a kuñja named Pūrṇendu, meaning full moon. Pūrṇendu, which bestows unlimited happiness upon Indulekhā. The exteriors of this kuñja are decorated with sphaṭika-maṇi"—sphaṭika-maṇi means clear crystals—"and candra-kānta-maṇi, meaning natural moonstones." It goes on to say, "All the trees, creepers, bumblebees, and birds around this kuñja are pristine white in color," as we discussed. All right, Kṛṣṇa. Now, finally, we also found in a śāstra called *Sādhanāmṛta-candrikā*, second chapter, text number 23, Indulekhā's praṇāma-mantra, which I will recite for you: "O Śrī Rādhikā, I glorify your friend, Indulekhā-sakhī, who regularly celebrates a festival of dance, whose complexion is brighter than haritāla, whose clothes are of the complexion of the reddish pomegranate flower, and who wins over the brilliance of the rays of the moon by your own effulgence." A praṇāma-mantra.

So, now for our main pastime of the day. It's actually a pastime I'm told by the local Brajavāsīs is celebrated each year on the appearance day of Indulekhā-sakhī in her village next to Varṣāṇā. They celebrate this appearance day by singing about this pastime, chanting about this, and lecturing about this pastime, and I've heard they also have theatrical productions with the following pastime. So, it's very popular in her village.

One evening, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa met on the banks of the sacred Yamunā River, and after a few minutes, Rādhā said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, today Indulekhā-sakhī made a special effort to dress and decorate me for our rendezvous." So, stepping back to appreciate the service of Indulekhā, Kṛṣṇa said, "Dearest Rādhā, I have no words to describe the opulence of your detailed śṛṅgāra"—remember, śṛṅgāra means decorations—"and he continued, he said, 'Rādhā, your chin looks like a śālagrāma sleeping on the moon. Your long eyelashes capture me with your beautiful dark eyes. Your teeth defeat the beauty of a string of pearls, and the flowers in your dark hair put to shame the stars in the sky at night time.'" So, Śrī Rādhā asked, "Dear Kṛṣṇa, just how do you perceive my face?"

So, Kṛṣṇa replied—this is interesting—Kṛṣṇa said, "Dearest Rādhā, your face is like candra, your face is like candra, the moon. By remembering your face, my burning heart is cooled when I am separated from you." Because we know, we've all heard how the moon rays are very cooling at night time; someone is burned by the sun, then they can go out in the evening and somehow the moon rays are very cooling. So, Kṛṣṇa said, "By remembering your face, my burning heart is cooled when I'm separated from you. Your face is just like the moon." However, Śrī Rādhā was not happy with Kṛṣṇa's response, not at all. And she said, "Kṛṣṇa, why do you compare my face to candra, the moon? The moon has five faults."

So, Kṛṣṇa was a little confused, and he said, "What are those faults, O Rādhā?" So, Rādhārāṇī replied, "Well, number one, candra, the moon, is called niśākara; it means one who stays awake all night. Secondly, he's called viṣabindu—viṣa means poison—so the moon appeared from water mixed with poison during the churning of the milk ocean. We've heard of that pastime; when the devas and the demons turned the milk ocean, many things came out, and one was the moon. So, he was, at one point, that ocean was mixed with poison. So, he's viṣabindu; he appeared from water mixed with poison. So, thirdly, she said the moon is vakra, which means who is tilted. Like, if you look at the moon, you see the 'man in the moon,' as we say in English; a little tilted, right? The moon's a little tilted. So, she said he's vakra, he's tilted. Then she said, 'The fourth fault of candra is that he's kṣayī; he means he wanes.' We talk about the waning moon—after the full moon each day, he wanes, he gets smaller. She said this is a fault. And she said, 'And candra's fifth fault is that he's kalaṅkī; kalaṅkī, he becomes dark on every amāvasyā.' You know, the dark day of the moon, the moon wanes and wanes, and at the last, he becomes a little sliver. So, kalaṅkī, that's his fault; he wanes." So, she continued, she said, "So, you tell me, Kṛṣṇa, how my beauty is comparable to the moon."

So, Kṛṣṇa replied, "My beloved Rādhārāṇī, you misunderstood me," and he said, "In any case," as Kṛṣṇa said, "I was referring to the five good qualities of Candradeva." So, then he listed those. He said, "Candra is called rati-vardhaka, which means he who increases the love between two persons. You know how lovers look at the moon." So, Kṛṣṇa said, "He who increases the love between two persons, like you and me." He gave the best example of divine love, topmost love, like you and me. Then Kṛṣṇa said his second good quality is that he's also āhlāda-vardhaka, meaning the ocean feels pleasure seeing the moon; similarly, I feel pleasure seeing your moonlight face. He's trying hard here, Kṛṣṇa! And then he said, "Thirdly, candra's good quality is that he's oṣadhi-vardhaka." Which means that the moon nourishes medicinal herbs by its cooling rays, and this is part of Ayurvedic science; it's a well-known fact amongst Ayurveda physicians that the medicinal herbs in the forests of the jungle are somehow nourished by the rays of the moon. So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Similarly, you nourish my vīra-rasa," which means like his fighting rasa; when I kill asuras, just looking at you, I'm inspired to kill the rascals. So, fourthly, he said, "The moon, a good quality of the moon, is that he's tāpa-nīvāraka; tāpa-nīvāraka means that candra removes the scorching heat of the day by his moonbeams at night, just like by remembering your face, Rādhā, the burning heat of separation is removed from my heart."

So, then the fifth, the fifth... oh yeah, the fifth good quality Kṛṣṇa said about the moon is that he's rasa-vardhaka. He's a rasa-vardhaka, Rādhārāṇī; he increases the rasa in the hearts of lovers. He increases love in the hearts of lovers, just as you, my dear Rādhā, increase the love of all the residents of Vṛndāvana for you with each passing day. So, Kṛṣṇa thought he had her convinced; he was just speaking about, you know, using the analogy of candra and her face in a good way, these five good ways. So, then Kṛṣṇa looked up to the moon, looked up towards the moon, and he said, "Dearest Rādhā, just see the beautiful rays of the moon as they cascade down upon the water of the Yamunā. Can you see like that?" And he paused for her reply, but no reply came. Kṛṣṇa turned around; he looked back, and he noticed Rādhārāṇī was no longer there. She had left him alone on the banks of the Yamunā.

The ācāryas say because of his comparison of her face to candra, the moon, it had simply been too much for her, despite his attempts to appease her. So, what he did is he went and he sat down under the shelter of some nearby kadamba trees where the moon rays were coming through the branches, which were full—it's described—of yellow kadamba flowers, similar to Śrī Rādhā's complexion. It gave him some solace, and he cried and he cried and he cried in pangs of separation, *vipralambha*. And after some time, he got up and he began looking for her in the forest. So, sometime later, our heroine today—our heroine is Indulekhā-sakhī—our heroine was passing through the forest where Kṛṣṇa was searching for Śrī Rādhā. And as he was searching, he was crying, calling out her name. So, Indulekhā came up to Kṛṣṇa and she said, "Kṛṣṇa, what’s wrong?" So, Kṛṣṇa said to Indulekhā-sakhī, "Earlier, I compared Śrī Rādhā's face with candra, the moon, and she became angry and left me all alone in the forest." So, Indulekhā said, "Hmm, you definitely made a big mistake, Kṛṣṇa, comparing her incomparable beauty to the limited beauty of the moon. In fact, you could have saved yourself had you quoted Lord Śiva, who once said," and I quote: *sarac-candru-maṇḍale...* He said *śarad-indu-maṇḍale*, the moon is beautiful, and in the winter season, the moon looks even more beautiful, but if I combine the beauty of millions of winter moons, I will be unsuccessful in defining the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's face. If you knew, like you said, you should have quoted Lord Śiva. So, then she said, "But Kṛṣṇa, a far graver mistake was invoking the very name of Candra, for as you know, Candrāvalī is Rādhārāṇī's chief rival amongst the Gopi women of Braja."

So, Kṛṣṇa lowered his head, realizing his mistake, and he said to Indulekhā, "Indulekhā, I will worship your feet with these kadamba flowers if you can please help me find my Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and pacify her, pacify her māna and her anger." So, Indulekhā said, "Śyāmasundara, I will try my best," because this is, again, the essence of the Gopis' service: to bring the divine couple together. And then she left to find Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So, several hours later, she did find Śrī Rādhā alone under a banyan tree, and what was Śrī Rādhā doing? Well, she was singing Kṛṣṇa's names; it's described as tears cascaded down her cheeks in divine love. And then suddenly, to Indulekhā's surprise, Śrī Rādhā assumed the form of Kṛṣṇa, or you could say she appeared as Kṛṣṇa himself. And Indulekhā said, "Śrī Rādhā, you look identical to Kṛṣṇa in every way!" So, then Śrī Rādhā—you could say disguised as Kṛṣṇa, she assumed that form, but like a disguise—she said, "Yes, Indulekhā, and may I ask you, where is Rādhārāṇī?" Rādhārāṇī is asking, "Where is Rādhārāṇī?" (in the form of Kṛṣṇa, of course). And Indulekhā said, "Well, I’m not sure now, but I am sure that the real Kṛṣṇa is looking for her, looking for you, Rādhārāṇī, and if you’d like, we could go together to find him, whoever he’s searching for." So, just try to envision this: the two of them left, Indulekhā and Rādhārāṇī looking identical to Kṛṣṇa; they're going to look for Rādhārāṇī. So, after some time, they actually found Kṛṣṇa, you know, wandering in the forest, looking for Śrī Rādhā, calling out her name.

And but when Kṛṣṇa saw Indulekhā and then Kṛṣṇa himself standing next to Indulekhā, he was confused. He came up to Rādhārāṇī disguised as himself and he said, "This is odd. Who are you? You look exactly like me! What are you doing here?" So, Rādhārāṇī disguised as Kṛṣṇa replied, "I am searching for Śrī Rādhā. Do you know where she is? Can you tell me where she is?" So, at this point, Kṛṣṇa showed his loyalty to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—which is what she was looking for, really—and he replied angrily, "Whoever you are, you cannot search for Rādhā, because Rādhārāṇī belongs solely to me! Why are you searching for her?" So, Rādhā disguised as Kṛṣṇa answered, "No, Rādhā is mine! Why are you searching for her?" So, at this point, Kṛṣṇa just, you know, seeing this person looking like him in front, he looked deeply into that person's eyes to try to figure out what was going on. And looking deep into the eyes of that person, he saw Rādhārāṇī's love for him, which he would often see by gazing into her eyes. So, at that point, he understood what was going on, and he shouted, "Rādhārāṇī! I found you! I found you! You are none other than my Rādhā, for some reason disguised as me."

So, now having witnessed Kṛṣṇa's intense love for her—more than any other Gopi, more than Candrāvalī—Rādhārāṇī gave up her anger, which was the result of, you know, Kṛṣṇa's comparing her face to the moon and also,""