"*00232*.*
"Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, dear Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, we're back in action this summer on the Baltic Sea coast in Poland with our Festival of India. Believe it or not, we're very consistent; this is the 34th year. We're chanting in the same places that we've been chanting year after year after year. We do about 20 or 30 towns around during the day, and then at evening, we have a festival from 5:00 till 10:00. It's actually a great extravaganza. One time, my dear Godbrother, BB Govinda Swami, he said it's the greatest show on earth. It may not be as big as some entertainments in this world, but it has a message, and that's the main thing. People come for the entertainment, but we give a message about Kṛṣṇa consciousness: we're not the body, spirit, soul, life eternal; we have a relationship with God, and we call Him Kṛṣṇa. And because it's so colorful, so festive, so much fun, people sit and listen.

So now, we're just going to go on the beach—there's lots of people on the beach—and give out our invitations as we've been doing for 34 years. Actually, we meet many people who've been before—two, three, four, five, six, ten, twelve times—or we meet their children who are now adults, or their children's children; we're meeting the third generation. So, this is success: when we are able to make an imprint in society that we're part of the fabric here. Actually, I would say we're part of the fabric here in Poland, and people accept us, they love us. No opposition. There used to be opposition, but we beat the opposition with consistency and the joy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

So follow us this summer. We're going to be out here for two months. Follow us and relish from your homes or your apartment and give us your blessings that we can distribute as many books, as many holy names, and as much prasādam as possible within the two months of the summer. Kṛṣṇa summer, Hare Kṛṣṇa. All glories to...

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, hey.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa."