"*00127*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.

Once again, I am really happy to be with all of you because you relish [the nectar of devotion]. Before beginning, I take permission from Dīna Bandhu Prabhu, who is really our *patha-guru*. He knows every speck of dust in Vṛndāvana and he has traversed it over and over; he is covered with Vraja-raja. He is a real magnet for devotees who want to try to become *vraja-vāsīs*, which, in truth, is our goal in life. Beyond the official kingdom of the Lord is Goloka—*go* means cows, and *loka* means abode. So, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī coins the phrase that Goloka is a planet of cows. 

The other day, I was meeting with some Christian people, and we were just speaking about the highest destination in religion—to go back home—and they call it Heaven. It was a nice conversation. One of them asked me, "How do you describe Heaven?" and I said, "Goloka." They asked, "What does that mean?" I said, "It means Heaven is a planet of cows." They didn't really understand that so well, but it is a fact.

Because two things are particularly dear to the Lord: brāhmaṇas and cows. Brāhmaṇas, because after the Lord departs this world, he leaves his message behind. He comes and he reestablishes the principles of dharma by speaking the *Bhagavad-gītā*, the song of the Lord, and then he departs for his own abode. In his absence, his representatives—the brāhmaṇas—are sometimes considered to be like the mouth of God; they keep the movement going, and they keep the message going through the eons of time. So, they are very dear to the Lord—like father, like son—they keep the message going by their preaching. 

But when we learn about Vṛndāvana and the playground of God, we could surmise that the cows are even dearer, because every day Kṛṣṇa goes to the forest, not with herds of brāhmaṇas, but to the pasturing grounds of Vraja with Balarāma and the 900,000 cows that Nanda Mahārāja has—his *go-kula* has 900,000 cows. They all go to the forest, and Kṛṣṇa really spends most of his day in the pasturing grounds. He comes home in the evening, and he is received by the townsfolk. That is why it is said there is a festival every day in Vraja. When the Lord comes back from the pasturing grounds, for the Vraja-vāsīs—in different mellows and different humors—every moment of separation is like a thousand years or more. So, when the Lord comes back, it is a jubilant festival. As much as you are attached to someone, when you are separated from them, to that degree you feel separation, isn't it? Separation makes the heart grow fonder. It is kind of Kṛṣṇa's way of keeping the love *ad infinitum*, growing and growing in the spiritual world. He comes and he goes—it is all the art of love. So, the cows are very dear to Kṛṣṇa.

In my conversation with the Christians, there was one priest there. They said, "Well, you call it Vṛndāvana on this planet; we heard your little talk the other day at the Sunday Feast. You call it Vṛndāvana. Heaven is such a wonderful place, but why are you always talking about Vṛndāvana?" I said, "Because Vṛndāvana is Heaven on Earth. 'Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, on Earth as it is in Heaven,' and that is perfectly portrayed in Vraja-Vṛndāvana culture. That Goloka comes to the material world in the form of Gokula." 

When Kṛṣṇa leaves the spiritual world to introduce the process of *sanātana-dharma* or religion in this world, just like a king goes with his family, his ministers, his servants, some of the population, the chariots, the horses—it is not a perfect analogy, but when God leaves the spiritual world, he comes with that atmosphere. The atmosphere that we live in is very important. If you are in the mode of ignorance, you want to be in bars and discos—you know, that livens your mood. If you want to be in the mode of *rajas* (passion), you go to the cricket match and the whole stadium is rooting for their team, and you get all fired up. Then the mode of goodness means you go to the forest with your friends and you have a picnic. In the same way, the atmosphere we live in is very conducive to our consciousness. That is why you live in this beautiful temple; you come to this beautiful temple, and your consciousness is elevated. So, when Kṛṣṇa leaves the spiritual world for his purposes, age after age, he brings the whole spiritual world with him, including his dearest Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the gopīs, and the cowherd boys, etc. 

Vṛndāvana, here in India—a stone's throw from Hyderabad, so to speak—it is a very special place, because there the Lord manifests his original form. He has many other forms for different purposes. When the Lord comes to the world according to time, place, and circumstance to correct *adharma*, he may assume different forms for that purpose. Those different incarnations are him, but only partially him; they don't have all the opulence of the *avatārī*, the original form of Godhead. That is his *līlā*, his pastimes. But when God comes to Vṛndāvana, *Svayaṁ Bhagavān*, that is his original form. And that is very important, because religion—I think all modified religions will concur—the purpose of religion is to develop love for God. We lost that relationship, and we are trying to recover it. Actually, the word "religion" comes from the Latin verb *religare*, which means to reconnect. Religion means to reconnect, like *yoga* means to connect; it is the same connotation. 

We are trying to love God, but with all due respect to our brothers and sisters in other spiritual traditions, how can you love someone you know nothing about, isn't it? Those of you who are married, you chose your spouse because of the way they look, the way they walk, the way they talk, you like the same music, you like the same clothes—Love is in the details. This Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition is good for the whole world, irrespective of whatever tradition one is following; they can add this on. Because here in our Veda culture, we have a detailed description of the most lovable person: Kṛṣṇa—his name, his fame, his form, his pastimes. In fact, one time Prabhupāda, in a humorous way, said—because in those days there were no fax machines or internet—"We even know God's phone number." Then he joked, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa..." 

This is the beauty of our culture. This is India's gift to the world. Like one time Prabhupāda said, it is quite amazing actually; it takes many lifetimes to understand Kṛṣṇa. But Lord Caitanya, his most recent incarnation, is even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa, and in many ways, Prabhupāda is more merciful than Lord Caitanya, because we tried to follow the standard of being a devotee 500 years ago; it would be very difficult. So Prabhupāda adapted it; householders can do that. And one time he said, "Here is Kṛṣṇa, take him." This is astounding. This should be on the front page of every newspaper: "Here is Kṛṣṇa, take him." 

These are special times in the midst of this horrible Kali-yuga. These are special times, and that was noted by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Prabhupāda, when he first saw Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Rāmakeli in North Bengal—Mahāprabhu was going to Vṛndāvana, but he knew on the way up north, two of his eternal devotees, Rūpa and Sanātana, etc., were there as part of his mission. So he made a little detour; he went north to see Rūpa and Sanātana. And when Rūpa Gosvāmī first got a glimpse of Lord Caitanya as he walked into the village—it was actually a kingdom, but Rūpa and Sanātana lived a little bit outside of the kingdom—I was there recently, a beautiful little village and home they have with Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa and Govardhana Hill. So, when Rūpa Gosvāmī saw Mahāprabhu, from his heart sprung this beautiful verse, just like sometimes the underground water may burst forward from the ground. It is called a spring, a freshwater spring; it just bursts forth from the pressure of the earth. It makes a beautiful spring; it starts flowing. 

So, from the heart of Rūpa Gosvāmī, he said: "We are so fortunate that we get to look into the heart of these great ācāryas, these great pure devotees, by the words, almost like poetry flowing from their mouths." He was noting that this is most amazing: "This is Kṛṣṇa in a golden form. You who were bluish-black in the previous age of Dvāpara-yuga, you have now appeared in a golden form. You are the golden avatāra. Kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa-caitanya... You are the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to deliver the people of this age, the people of Kali-yuga, through the simple process of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." And what are you giving them? Vraja-bhakti, the highest understanding, more confidential, intimate, loving relationships you can have with God beyond just, you know, "Sir" and Vaikuṇṭha, which is also nice; Kṛṣṇa wants that. 

So Rūpa was very amazed: "You are here in Kali-yuga, the worst of all the ages. You are Tretā-yuga avatāra, you appear in Satya, you appear in Tretā, you appear in Dvāpara, but there is no mention in Śāstra of you appearing in Kali-yuga." It is almost like a four-letter word, Kali-yuga. But Bhāgavatam does mention the appearance of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He will come disguised as a devotee, chanting his own sweet holy names, introducing the yuga-dharma, the process for this age. And how can he be recognized? He is surrounded by his loving devotees who are singing congregationally the same holy names: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. 

So we are blessed that this movement is meant for the whole world. It is so nice to see how it is prospering. I am overwhelmed with my tour of South India; so many blissful devotees, so many temples, so many beautiful deities, so many books, Prabhupāda's books being translated into different languages. It is quite overwhelming. I am amazed. But really, it is a movement for the whole world. This is not an Indian movement. Hare Kṛṣṇa is not Indian. Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī, the great Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, one of our great heroes, Śyāmānanda, Śrīnivāsa—they took over the saṅkīrtana movement after the departure of the Pañca-tattva. He says this movement has come from the spiritual world; it comes to India because you may know in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* it is described that the most pious persons in the universe, they take birth in Bhārata. In Bhārata—it is the new way we say India now, your Prime Minister, Bhārata—but it is not an Indian movement. I have a Festival of India which travels to different parts of the world to introduce your culture to people, but with all due respect, I tell people, "This is the culture of the spiritual world. It is meant for everybody." 

Why? Because we are all ultimately servants of Kṛṣṇa. George Harrison, the famous member of the quartet of The Beatles, he said, "Everyone's a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Everyone. Some know it, and some don't, because we all have the same father." Kṛṣṇa is the seed-giving father of all living entities. He says it in one of the priceless 700 verses of *Bhagavad-gītā* that he is the seed-giving father of all living entities. So, if you have the same father, you are brothers and sisters, and this is the peace formula. If we want peace, prosperity, and love in the world, we have to preach this philosophy very vigorously. We are not Indian, American, German, black, white, yellow, green, any martians, men, women—these are temporary designations for these temporary bodies, but we are all brothers and sisters. 

So, this message is meant for Canada, France, Germany, Ethiopia, and South Africa. Myself and Dīna Bandhu Prabhu and others, we go to South Africa. It is really nice preaching because the African people, they like to dance, they like to sing, and when I preach in the universities, those very intelligent boys and girls, they ask nice questions. And through the years, I developed a very close friendship with the King of the Zulus, King Goodwill. He passed away recently, but we had many discussions; he was a Christian, and we had many discussions sharing our traditions with each other, with what religion should do to inspire each other. And one time, he asked me, "Mahārāja, what is your name for God?" So I said, "Well, God has many names, but in his own village, in his hometown, they call him Kṛṣṇa." He said, "What does Kṛṣṇa mean?" I said, "King Goodwill, it means the most attractive person." "That's very nice, Mahārāja." So I said, "King Goodwill, he's King—he was king of like almost 60 million Zulus—and I said, 'King Zulu, what is your name for God in Zulu?'" And I was shocked by what he said—would you like to hear? He said, "In Zulu language, we call God, *uNkulunkulu*." 

*uNkulunkulu*... okay, that sounds like Zulu language, because we have the BBT in all their glory, they have translated *Bhagavad-gītā* into the Zulu language. So instead of Kṛṣṇa, I said, "uNkulunkulu." So I asked, "King Goodwill, what does uNkulunkulu mean?" And I was shocked. He said, "Oh, uNkulunkulu means that person who owns the most cows." Yes! So, you see the similarities. So why fight over the small differences when there are so many similarities? And if we present Kṛṣṇa consciousness in a proper way, as ladies and gentlemen, and present the culture as it is, as the highest culture—we have a very high culture to support our philosophy—people will embrace these higher concepts, because it is only natural to become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, because there is so much we know about him. 

I was remembering on the way here—it is kind of corny—there was a song when we were young, we were teenagers, it was called "To Know You Is to Love You." You know, I shouldn't think about my teenage years, but "To know you is to love you," and one line went, "Just to see you smile makes my life worthwhile, to know you is to love you." Anyway, that is enough of that. So, especially in our Gauḍīya tradition, we have unlimited details to awaken our affection, our attraction, and our love for God. In that order, we say it differently—you know, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we have our *sambandha* relationship, and then there's *bhakti*, then there's *prema-bhakti*. But in common layman language, we develop some attraction, and by serving Kṛṣṇa, it turns into affection, and affection eventually turns into love. 

And how does it all happen? It is not mysterious. Rūpa Gosvāmī has outlined a ninefold process, step-by-step. You know, like when I was learning Polish, or trying to learn Polish, I bought a book: "The Polish Language in 10 Easy Lessons." But Polish is like Chinese backwards, so I am still on lesson three. So here, our ācāryas have chalked out a step-by-step process for awakening that love of God that is already there within our hearts. And the beginning, most potent: *kīrtana* brings Kṛṣṇa, hearing and chanting about the Lord. That is like the primary process; other processes, they strengthen that. Because in this age, the process is what? Hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa. 

So *Bhagavad-gītā* class is generally meant, you know, the ABCs course—not so elementary, but it is the beginning stages. And Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam class, Prabhupāda said, is for devotees who know the basic tenets of our tradition. So, because we are sitting in front of the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—must be your deities, I almost fainted seeing them—I am a neophyte devotee, but they are so beautiful and so well taken care of and so well dressed. We can always say, "Thank you, it is so nice, your deities." 

So, we are in front of your deities and we have beautiful paintings of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes on the walls here, in Govardhana pastimes. I thought that it is okay if we share a pastime in Vṛndāvana, because this—you know, what is our home like? We want to go home. So, like people, let's say in general, when they want to go on vacation, they look through a travel journal and they read about the details of Tahiti or Thailand, or God forbid, New York or someplace, and they read about the place and then they get, "Oh yeah, let's go there." Like that. So, we don't want that type of journey. We are on a journey home, like Rādhanātha Swami's illustrious, famous book, *The Journey Home*. So, what is our home? Our home is Vṛndāvana. That is our home. So the more we can hear about it, we can be convinced we want to go there. 

So, I will share a nice pastime with you about Vṛndāvana, and this pastime is in the mode of friendship with Kṛṣṇa. It is called *sakhya-rasa*. You know the cowherd boys, friendship. Kṛṣṇa is our every well-wisher; he is our dearest friend. One time, a disciple asked Prabhupāda that perennial question: "Śrīla Prabhupāda, what is the meaning of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra?" I don't know how many times Prabhupāda was asked that question for the answer. What was his general answer? "My Lord, my dear Lord, energy of the Lord, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please engage me in your service. I have been bereft of service for countless lifetimes. Just give me a little *sevā*, because by *sevā* I can attain you, I can awaken my love, be qualified to go home." So like that. 

But this time, it is like Jesus said, "My cup runneth over with love." Sometimes the pure devotees, they are so overwhelmed by their love, little tidbits come out. So Prabhupāda answered the question in a very interesting way. He said, "What does it mean, this Mahā-mantra?" and he closed his eyes, and he said, "It means: my friend, my friend, my friend." Oh, glorious! 

So, I don't in any way imagine myself to be in that relationship, but still, Kṛṣṇa is our well-wishing friend because he sent his dearest representative to pull us out of the quagmire of material existence. So, a friend in need is a friend indeed. So, we can consider Kṛṣṇa a friend in that way. But the friendship in Vṛndāvana, it is on a much deeper level. And this pastime, which I want to share with you, it will demonstrate that friendship with the Lord. We know there are different relationships you can have with Kṛṣṇa: you can... he can be your friend, he can be like your son—at least that parental mood is there—he can be a lover, as exhibited by the milkmaids of Vṛndāvana. 

Of course, in Vaikuṇṭha, it is a mood a little bit different. That Vaikuṇṭha, with all its unlimited planets, is called the official kingdom of God, and everyone there worships the Lord more or less in a mood of awe and veneration. And that is very nice, of course, to worship the Lord like that. But we are aspiring for something more intimate, if so be the desire of the Lord. Prabhupāda made a nice analogy. He said just like a man, he has his business—his business, whatever it is—most of you are aspiring IT, so you have a boss and you know if he is a good boss, you have a nice relationship. It is more like master and servant. But Prabhupāda said that when the boss goes home, he has his family, and his relationship with his family is more intimate. 

And I was listening to a lecture of Prabhupāda just the other day—it was a lecture on June 5th, 1976, in Los Angeles—and Prabhupāda, he told the story that—and you may have heard it, because it is quite popular—that once, someone came to see Queen Victoria's Prime Minister in England; his name was William Gladstone. I looked him up, he is a proper British man with mustache and hair, proper, sitting like this, quite arrogant—I don't know, for the photo, maybe—whatever, he was Prime Minister. And some person came to see him for whatever reason in his office in the Parliament in London. And this servant of the Prime Minister, William Gladstone, he told that visitor, "The Prime Minister is a little busy in his office; you are going to have to wait." So, this gentleman said, "Yes, he's a special personality. When I see him, I'll call him Lord, sir, yes sir." The formality will be there; I am trained in politics. 

But an hour passed, and this man was getting a little impatient, so he kind of opened the door to the Prime Minister's office and peeked in. And what did he see? He saw that the Prime Minister had become like a horse, or let us say, "horsey." He was down on all fours, on his hands and his legs, and on his back, Prabhupāda said, children—grandchildren, in this lecture, his grandchildren—were on top of him. "Haa, horsey, haa, ho!" The Prime Minister was going, "Nay, nay, nay." So, he is Prime Minister at that time, one of the most powerful nations in the world, but he had become like a little horsey for his grandchildren. So Prabhupāda used that analogy. Analogies are there to make perhaps difficult philosophical concepts easier to understand. So, Prabhupāda said God in the office and God at home. God in the office is Vaikuṇṭha, and God at home is in Vraja. 

So Kṛṣṇa likes that; he likes both, because variety is the spice of life and because of the desire of the Lord. So, we don't judge it as something inferior. It is like perfect, more perfect, and most perfect. And what is most perfect? Kṛṣṇa says it—it is quoted in [Bhagavad-gītā] 3.16: "Knowing my opulences, the whole world looks upon me with awe and veneration, but devotion made feeble by such reverence does not attract me." It is a little deep, but try to absorb: "Knowing my opulences, the whole world looks upon me in awe and reverence, but such devotion made feeble by reverence does not attract me." *Amala-bhakti*, pure devotion for Kṛṣṇa, like the gopīs manifested—Kṛṣṇa liked that the best. 

So the mood of one of those sweet relationships in Vṛndāvana is *sakhya-rasa*. It is friendship. And that is very nicely explained in one very nice devotee, his name was Nanda-nandana, and he wrote a famous book about *sakhya-rasa*. It is called *Bhakti-sāra*. It is... I know a lot of my friends really like that book, like Citra-rūpa Mahārāja, he really likes to read that book. And there, in this *bhakti*, this Vraja-vāsī, obviously a devotee, he gives us a little hint into what it is to be like a cowherd boy. Because you know, eventually, you will hear all this, and then from your heart will spring forth this desire to be in one of these relationships with Kṛṣṇa. And *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* says at that exalted point, when the heart is completely purified by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, strictly following the rules and regulations, the straight and narrow, under Prabhupāda's guidance, you will become attracted to a particular devotee in Vraja, and you will want to follow in their footsteps: how they... what is their mood of serving Kṛṣṇa, how do they dress, how do they walk, how do they talk? Like that. That is part of our process; that is coming in the future. 

But at least we know who we are and we know where we are going, because the ācāryas are so kind. So, listen to what he says about this particular relationship just to get a glimpse of the future: "With great trust in Kṛṣṇa, one thinks of oneself as equal to Kṛṣṇa. By Kṛṣṇa's mercy, one associates with him constantly without fear, thinking of being his equal, endowed with sweetness, and devoid of seeing Kṛṣṇa as the Lord. This is called *sakhya-rasa*." And he goes on, "When it is seen that the two have similar affection, it is called *sakhya-rati*. The devotee feels himself to be equal to Kṛṣṇa, acts similarly, relaxes with him—you relax with Kṛṣṇa in the cowherd pastures—and have no fear. They joke with no duplicity. This is called *sakhya-rasa*." 

Again, it is deep, but it is good to hear about it. Because this is what—you know, like Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says in his *Nīti-śāstra*, "You can only give up something if you get something better, right?" So, if you have, you know, five rupees and I have 100 rupees and we say "exchange," it is a no-brainer, 'cause you're giving up something but getting something better. But in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we're giving up something—suffering, *duḥkha-ālayam*—and concisely, what is this world? Kṛṣṇa says it in two words: *duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*. We're giving up something for something better, but we are giving up something for something best: the opportunity for *bhakti*, to go to Vṛndāvana, wrestle with Kṛṣṇa in the sands of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, like that. 

So, how do we know? We have to hear about it with humility. We are not there. One time, we were with Prabhupāda in Detroit, and Prabhupāda was giving a lecture, and then he stopped, and I was sitting right there, and he leaned over and he said to all of us, "My dear boys and girls, please believe me when I tell you, you are not these bodies." You know, we were like Brāhmaṇa-initiated, doing pūjā, giving classes, and Prabhupāda had put us in our own position. "Please believe me when I tell you, you are not these bodies." And I can be honest with you, I am still trying to understand, "I am not this body." But by hearing about these pastimes, the Lord's pastimes, we throw it away—this bodily concept, "on my team, be gone with you, I am a spirit soul." Come on, in my heart, I am a spirit soul. So, we have to hear. 

So, I will share a pastime with you which will help us to understand and appreciate *sakhya-rasa*. We heard about it, but it is like hearing about it—we come to see it. Because it is said that a saintly person, he sees through his ear, not through his eyes. So, we will see what is the *sakhya-rasa* by hearing about it. It is a beautiful friendship pastime that I read in a book—I recommend all of you, *Nava-vraja-mahimā*, which is a book by my very illustrious, scholarly, educated devotional godbrother, Śivarāma Goswami Mahārāja. He wrote a lot; this series is like, I think, nine or 10 volumes of a *mahimā*, the glories of Vṛndāvana, in the process of devotional service. He researched this knowledge and put it into book form. By Gopa-parana, [another] expert, he is another very dear godbrother who Prabhupāda took elsewhere for his mission—sometimes these things happen. The Lord has, like Tamal Krishna Goswami, these are devotees, very exalted godbrothers, who were required in other spheres to continue the *saṅkīrtana* mission with Śrīla Prabhupāda. But believe me, these scholars put together this amazing book. 

And this pastime I gleaned from there; it is as follows. It is one of my favorites; I hope you like it. It is not that long. So, as we know, every day, Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, and the cowherd boys, they would take their cows and calves to the various pasturing grounds of Vṛndāvana forests. So, in this pastime, they came to the border of Vraja, the southernmost tip of Vraja, to a little hill—we call [it] in English a "hillock." It is like, I don't know how it translates in your language, there are hills and there are hillocks. There is a hillock, a little hill. Hills are little because you have mountains, and little mountains are called hills, and little hills are called hillocks. So, they came to this little hillock, and it is called *Kuṁbhi-khaṇḍa*. And Mahārāja says that the ācāryas write that Lord Balarāma was particularly fond of this hill because the boys would have great fun there, rolling and sliding down the soft grasses of this hillock. 

Dīna Bandhu Prabhu will take you to other hillocks in Vṛndāvana. There is a famous slide—you know, when I just picture slides, I always think of Dīna Bandhu sliding down like he is a cowherd boy, like really, in Vṛndāvana, and everybody is there. He knows, you know, all these places—the slides and lakes and playgrounds. You go to Vṛndāvana, make an appointment with Dīna Bandhu. So Balarāma, he loves this hill, this hill at Kuṁbhi, because they can slide down the soft grass or their cows munch on the soft grass at the bottom of the hill. 

So on this particular day, the boys were playing on the hill when all of a sudden, Balarāma stood up and he said, "My dear friends, please stop playing and listen to me. I have something very serious to share with you." So all the boys, they gathered around Balarāma, and he said, "My dear friends, Vṛndāvana ends here at Kuṁbhi. I warn you that if you venture beyond this point, you will be under the jurisdiction of the modes of nature. My dear friends, never go further than Kuṁbhi." So, it is said that hearing Balarāma's words, the boys started trembling. "Beyond Vṛndāvana? We don't want to go there. We don't want to fall under this jurisdiction of the modes of nature." 

So then, to make it very clear, Balarāma took a stick and he drew a line on top of the hill, and pointing to it, he said, "Here is Kṛṣṇa; on this side. On the other side is the kingdom of Māyā." And then Balarāma became very philosophical. You know, usually the cowherd boys, it is all fun and games, you know, leapfrog and hide-and-seek and swimming and wrestling, it is just small talk. But for whatever reason, perhaps to enlighten us, Balarāma said, "My dear friends, inside this line you are protected by the spiritual atmosphere of Vṛndāvana, and on the other side of this line, you will be victimized by Māyā." 

Prabhus, we are all victimized by Māyā. No one can be proud. You can't have an ounce of pride in this world because you've been victimized by Māyā; she has many tricks up her sleeve. In the first verse of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, it mentions how even demigods can be fooled, as fire is seen on water or water is seen on land—mirages—even demigods, what to speak of us? We are all victimized. 

So the pastime goes on that when the boys heard Balarāma speak so seriously, their mouths dropped open. They were stunned. Did any of your mouths drop open when I said you were victimized by Māyā? Come on, you are victimized by Māyā. Okay. Of course, the cowherd boys are all transcendentalists; they are completely free forever, they are *nitya-siddhas* from any influence of Māyā—the Kṛṣṇa-associates. But the nature of Vṛndāvana is, they thought themselves to be just cowherd boys, and therefore, their only refuge is Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. This is the beauty of *bhakti*. It is another subject matter; this is all Prabhupāda's grace—he is creating these pastimes. 

So the pastime goes on that the cowherd boys actually thought that if they cross the line, they would risk... the boys are thinking, they become demons like Kaṁsa. The little boys, frogs and snails and puppy dog tails, you know, boys will be boys. What's the other side? Girls, sugar and spice and everything nice, Rāmācārī, cover your ears, sugar and spice and everything... it's an English saying. So, boys are frogs and snails and puppy dog tails, you know, boys will be boys. So these boys are thinking, "Gosh, if I cross the line here at Kuṁbhi, I'm going to become a little Kaṁsa," and one said, "Yeah, if you cross the line, you're going to become Danāsura," another boy said, "If you cross the line, you're going to become like Śiśupāla," and they were warning each other like that. 

But then, being enthusiastic young boys, they couldn't resist the urge to test Balarāma's warning. Curiosity killed the cat. So, when Balarāma went off to find a stray calf—boys will be boys—they started daring each other. Remember when you were boys, you dare a friend to do something? So one boy said to another, "I dare you to cross that line." Another boy would reply, "No, I dare you to cross the line." Another boy said to his friend, "But you can't do it," and his friend would reply, "Sure I can do it, the question is, will you cross the line?" You know boys, right? So like this, they were challenging each other at Kuṁbhi. 

Finally, one of the older boys, Raktaka, he stood up and he said, "All right then, let's just all of us together cross the line into the kingdom of Māyā." So all the boys, "Yeah, let's do it," whoa. They started laughing and joking, but a little nervous. Okay. So they crossed over the line that Balarāma had drawn on the hill of Kuṁbhi. But then, only after a little distance, they turned around and quickly ran back into Vṛndāvana. But then again, laughing and joking, they all run out and a little bit further and then ran back. And on the last venture, they went 100 meters into Māyā's kingdom, and they stood there very nervously until one boy taunted Māyā Devī, saying, "Hey Māyā, look over here! Can you see us? Well, come on then, bet you can't catch us!" 

So then, one of the older boys, Raktaka, he said, "Actually, my friends, I think we're being foolish. We should do what Balarāma says, right? Balarāma is known as the first spiritual master, he is the first expansion of Kṛṣṇa, he is *Dvivida*, he is the elder brother, so he has a relationship of subservience to Kṛṣṇa because he's an expansion of Kṛṣṇa, but he's the elder brother, so he is *dāyī*. So he has another relationship with Kṛṣṇa; he's very protective of Kṛṣṇa, and he has many services in a subordinate nature to Kṛṣṇa. He expands as the *ḍaṇḍa*, he expands as the *cāmara* whisk of Kṛṣṇa, he expands as the Lord's slippers, like this. So, he has many... he's very exalted. Actually, there's no difference between Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma really, just Kṛṣṇa is bluish-black like a monsoon cloud, and Balarāma is white like an autumn cloud. But Balarāma's also defined as the original spiritual master. So whatever the spiritual master says, the disciple has to take verbatim." 

So, the cowherd boys, they took it like that: "Balarāma said don't do it, so let's go back. Balarāma saved us." And just at that point, Balarāma returned with a stray calf. That afternoon, they all sat down for lunch as they do, and some boys could be heard saying to the others, "Did you cross the line?" Another boy said, "Yeah, of course I did, did you?" His brother would say, "Yeah." Another boy said, "I crossed the line," but a little bit louder, he said, "I wasn't affected in the least by Māyā." 

So the *līlā* goes on that overhearing this conversation, Balarāma stood up and gave another talk. He said, "My friends, you should understand that you didn't fall into illusion because you're Kṛṣṇa's fully surrendered devotees. *Rākhe Kṛṣṇa māre ke, māre Kṛṣṇa rākhe ke*," isn't it? Bengali, right? "Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you, and if Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you." So such a devotee like that, where he goes, Kṛṣṇa protects him. So Balarāma went on, he said, "But for those who are not favored by Kṛṣṇa, they'll be victimized by temptation outside of Vraja and forget everything about the Lord." At that point, the boys said in unison, "Is it possible to forget Kṛṣṇa?" Balarāma said, "If you go there, you'll be victimized, you'll forget Kṛṣṇa." 

So all the cowherd boys, all the residents in Vṛndāvana, they love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone has ever been loved before, and Kṛṣṇa loves them more than anyone has ever been loved before. So they can't forget each other; that's the nature of love, you're always thinking of your beloved. And if you have pure *bhakti*, you can meet that standard: always remember Kṛṣṇa, never forget him. I saw a T-shirt recently, in the front part of the T-shirt said "Always remember Kṛṣṇa," oh, that's a cool T-shirt. And the devotee walked by, in the back said "Never forget him." I said, "Can I have your T-shirt?" 

So, the cowherd boys, that's like inconceivable, somebody forgot Kṛṣṇa? How can you forget Kṛṣṇa? He's so amazing, wonderful Kṛṣṇa. So Balarāma said, "Yes, there are souls who have forgotten him." So the boys went, "No, no, no, no one can forget!" Balarāma went, "Yes indeed, and they live on the other side of that line." And when they heard that, all the boys became silent and stared in disbelief at the world beyond Kuṁbhi. So the boys said, "Well, we're never going to go there again, now we're convinced." 

So then, the cowherd boys, in the mood of true Vraja-vāsīs, they looked at Balarāma and they said with one voice and tears in their eyes, "Dear Balarāma, please warn everyone in Vṛndāvana, 'Never go beyond this line you have drawn.' Tell them never to go over the top of this little hill, never go further, never go beyond Kuṁbhi." So Balarāma, he took the blade of his plow—you know, he has a plow—and from that small hillock in Kuṁbhi, he carved out a stone pillar, and he put the pillar on the peak of that little hill, Kuṁbhi. Then he said, "This stone which I've taken from this hill, this marks the boundary between Kṛṣṇa's realm and Māyā's realm." 

And that pillar stands there to this very day, and I went there with the devotees. I took the... I didn't know the place exists, but from one Bābā, we found out where this pillar was, and we went there, and it is a large pillar, very large, sturdy pillar. And I went there with the devotees, and you know, some of them were my students, so the humble mood of Balarāma's representative, I said, "Don't go beyond this pillar." And there were a lot... you know, the village is there now, so everything is grown up, and there were sweet shops and, you know, cool water and everything on the other, you know, down the street. I said, "Don't go beyond this pillar because this is the... of course it is Vraja, but we are just speaking in a Kṛṣṇa-conscious way." 

So, we are very fortunate to hear these instructions of Lord Balarāma. But we know that there is a theoretical line between what we are doing and what we shouldn't do. We live in the world of Māyā, but Jesus said, but through the process of religion or through the process of spiritual life, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he said, "We can be in this world but not of this world." We can be in the kingdom of Māyā, but by chanting our rounds, following the regulative principles, associating with devotees, taking *darśana* of the deities, going to Vṛndāvana and becoming inspired, going to Māyāpura, going to Jagannātha Purī—you see, we can be inspired. If you are singing Rādhā's name, singing Kṛṣṇa's name, Māyā's going to stay far away. She has the thankless task of keeping us here, but when she sees that we are enthusiastic to become Kṛṣṇa-conscious, she slowly removes that curtain of Māyā, and one day we will have the real *darśana*, we will see Kṛṣṇa as he's standing here, and one day he'll talk to you. 

When Prabhupāda installed the Choṭā Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities in Los Angeles in the early days, in his lecture he said, "If you see these deities as brass, they will remain brass to you forever. But if you worship them according to the process I've taught you, as our ācāryas have taught you, and with love and devotion—" he said, this is 1971 or I don't know, he said, "One day these deities will speak to you." So that is all process; that is all possible. 

So the materialistic people, they say some things right, they say, "Trust no future, however bright." That is true, because this is the world of duality. But in Prabhupāda's guidance and the mercy of your beautiful deities and your senior devotees, and when you go to Vṛndāvana, you take shelter of the lotus feet of Dīna Bandhu Prabhu—he will explain Vṛndāvana really as it is—our future is very bright. So stick to the straight and narrow, be Kṛṣṇa-conscious, and go home. 

Prabhupāda told one of my godbrothers that when we get home to the spiritual world, Kṛṣṇa will be waiting for us. He was Prabhupāda's secretary, and he'll take our hands, he'll take us into the *kuñja*, he'll put it in the hand of Kṛṣṇa and leave us alone for some time. And then, Dīna-dayāla, another exalted, very exalted godbrother of mine, he lives in London—he was Prabhupāda's secretary for some time in Europe and he opened up a temple in Rome, so many things he did—so one time, Prabhupāda, in a moment of intimacy again, "My cup runneth over with love," Prabhupāda said to him, "When we get back to the spiritual world, we will all recognize each other." Wow! I heard that we'll have our ISKCON in the spiritual world, but I didn't know—I didn't know that when we get back to the spiritual world, we'll all recognize each other. Isn't that wonderful? 

So our future is very bright. Stick to the straight and narrow, don't cross the line at Kuṁbhi, and we'll see you soon in the spiritual world. Thank you very much, and before...""