Thank you, Gurumaharaj, for giving me the opportunity to speak so early in this ceremony. There's a common saying in society that you can judge the greatness of a person by how many people, or even more importantly, who attends their funeral or their memorial service.

So, as I look around here at this August assembly of `nāmas`, it's very apparent what a wonderful and great devotee, Brahmananda was. And he has certainly earned this epithet, which is on his, uh, Samar: "Indisputably the favorite son of His Divine Grace Śrīla Prabhupāda, Founder-Ācārya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness." We all have our personal stories of association with Brahmananda Prabhu.

For me, I see him as my first spiritual guide. Gurumaharaj, you remember that in 1970, I was working at the University of Michigan in Detroit, and I was wandering through the grounds and I came across the `kīrtana` party of four very effulgent personalities: Viṣṇujana Swami, Subala Swami, Gurudāsa Swami, and Brahmananda Swami.

This is what it took to make me a devotee. I'm going to get to that. And I was just swept up with their love and their devotion to Śrīla Prabhupāda more than anything else.

Viṣṇujana Swami was giving a talk to the students when we walked up, and then he asked for questions. And some of the students, it was an intellectual university, so they were arguing, but he defeated them one by one, and they all went away.

And just myself and my former wife were standing. Viṣṇujana Swami said, "Come, and they will tell you about my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda." So we sat down.

He spoke for about a half an hour. So he said, "What do you think?" And I said, "He's also my spiritual master now." They were so potent, so powerful.

Then Brahmananda was speaking with me, preaching to me, convincing me very quickly to become a devotee. And he said, "Now, do you know where we can stay tonight?" So I said, "Well, we're staying in an apartment building that's going to be condemned soon.

So just a few apartments, people are living in a few apartments. So there's an apartment next to us, you can stay there." So then Brahmananda Mahārāja said to Viṣṇujana Swami, "This nice young couple has invited us to stay with them." So we stayed there.

And then Viṣṇujana Swami said, "What do you think?" And Brahmananda Mahārāja said, "Well, if we can have a nice feast, some nice `prasādam`, we can stay with them." So I said, "Okay, guys," you know, "excuse me for my language, but that's..." He said, "God, let's, let's go back to my apartment." On the way, Brahmananda looked at me and he said, "So, do you have any money?" I had just got my paycheck, you know, for working as a gardener at the University.

I think it was around $450, $500. So I said, "Yeah." He said, "Give it to me." So he showed Gargamuni and Gurudāsa out of their heads. And so then he said, "Sign the check." So I signed the check. And then they cashed it at the supermarket.

And they spent every cent, every single penny of that paycheck on the `bhoga` for the feast they were going to cook at our apartment. And they cooked it. And I think Gargamuni was cooking, and Viṣṇujana Mahārāja was cooking, and under Prabhupāda was waiting.

And we sat down to take `prasādam`, and my former wife and I, we'd been on a fast for 20 days. Because in those days, fasting, you know, spiritual life meant fasting and meditating and everything. So I'm thinking, how am I going to eat this feast?

All cooked, offered, sitting down there. And I said, "No, no, you know, we're fasting." And Brahmananda and the `paramahamsa` said, "No, you're not." If you knew him, he could be very heavy. I sometimes remember him as, you know, strong as a thunderbolt and soft like a rose.

For myself, he was always very soft like a rose. But on this one occasion, he just pulled me into Krishna consciousness.

He said, "No, you're going to eat." And I broke a 20-day fast with a huge feast, and I survived. As we were taking `prasādam`, you know, I noticed that at the time it took me to eat one plate, he ate five plates.

In the end, he looked at me and said, "This is Krishna consciousness." You know, with Gargamuni's management, and Subala's kind of observing everything, and Viṣṇujana's lectures, and Brahmananda's brotherly love, I became a devotee.

So he's one of the persons who showed me the path to Krishna consciousness.

I can honestly say I would not be here today without his and those other `mahajanas'` mercies. So this is why I've come to offer my gratitude to Brahmananda. Through the years, we would meet from time to time. A couple of years ago, when I came here, I was asked...

I came to the temple, and I came in just before the `Bhagavatam` class had started. And Brahmananda was giving the class. And as I walked in, he said, "Oh, Indradyumna Swami has come." And he stood up. He sat down on the floor and he said, "You give the class." So I was so embarrassed because here's the person who made me a devotee, who convinced me to give up material life and take shelter of Śrīla Prabhupāda, although he was such a well-known personality and deserved so much respect, he showed genuine humility by stepping down and asking me to give the class.

He was instructing us in so many ways. And another wonderful attribute that I remember about Brahmananda Prabhu is his deep love and deep affection for Śrīla Prabhupāda.

I think in all our minds, this is what stands out, probably most. And that was demonstrated, that without exception, whenever Brahmananda Prabhu would give a class about his memories of Śrīla Prabhupāda, inevitably, sometime during the speaking, he would cry.

Tears would come to his eyes. And this, of course, we know is the perfection of Krishna consciousness when we can feel some deeper emotion and actually tears can come to the eyes, expressing our love for Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇava.

So, as Brahmananda Prabhu would cry whenever he would speak about Śrīla Prabhupāda, and it was never sentiment, it was based on deep realization of who Prabhupāda was.

It was based on the purification that he had achieved as a result of serving Prabhupāda.

They were genuine tears of spiritual love for Śrīla Prabhupāda.

In the same way, love is always reciprocal, it's never a one-way street, it's always reciprocal. It brings to mind one pastime of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

When he was flying somewhere with one of his secretaries, I forget who the secretary was. He told me the story, but old age affects our memory. Secretary Prabhupāda's secretary told me that he was flying with Śrīla Prabhupāda somewhere in the world, and he was opening Śrīla Prabhupāda's mail and reading it to Śrīla Prabhupāda, as was the custom of the tradition.

And one of the letters he opened was from Brahmananda Mahārāja, at the time who was preaching in Africa, of all places. What a challenge to go to Africa and spread Krishna consciousness.

But along with the instruction of the spiritual master comes the ability to fulfill it. So because he was such a surrendered soul to Śrīla Prabhupāda, he was successful against all odds in Africa.

Prabhupāda understood this.

And as Prabhupāda's secretary was reading Brahmananda Prabhu's report about his preaching, the secretary told me Prabhupāda started crying, tears.

And at the end of the reading, he said, "Brahmananda has done so much for me. He has sacrificed his very life for me." Problem of crime. So this is love. And the love is demonstrated. The genuine symptoms are there.

As Brahmananda cried out of love for Śrīla Prabhupāda, Śrīla Prabhupāda cried out of love for his disciple.

This gives us a glimpse of how deep was their relationship. So when he passed away, naturally in our community, devotees ask the question, "Where did he go?" We can't speculate.

But our next destination is determined by our consciousness at the moment of death. And no one can doubt where Brahmananda's consciousness was when he passed away. It's where it always was, the lotus feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So wherever Śrīla Prabhupāda is, whether he's continuing his preaching mission somewhere within this material world, or he's engaging in his `nitya-līlā` in the spiritual world, I have no doubt, and I'm sure none of you have any doubts, that's where Brahmananda Prabhu is.

So our loss is their gain. As Gargamuni Prabhu was saying, it's, these ceremonies are simultaneously very emotionally difficult but very joyful as well. As Vālmīki wrote that famous verse which is on the Samar Mandir, "Harṣaṁ śokam ca dṛṣṭvā" - "He reasons ill who says that "Vaisnavas die" when thou art living still." And a Vaiṣṇava dies to live, and while living tries to spread the holy name around.

So I'm convinced that Brahmananda was with Śrīla Prabhupāda, but it can only be because that's where his heart always was.

So that is very, very joyful. We miss his association. We, for so many years now, we've been coming to Vṛndāvana, we would always come to his talks in the evening at the, you know, over at the temple, and he would talk about Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we miss him. But we hope that we can become as qualified as he was, as wonderful a servant of our spiritual master as he was, have as much love for his spiritual master as he did, and be capable of rendering incredible service like Africa and pioneer preaching in New York, etc., etc.

And I think we can truly give him another epithet. This is one here, but I think for any ISKCON devotee, probably the most important title we can ever give a devotee, we can give it to Brahmananda Prabhu. He was definitely.