"*00263*.*
"I noticed something in particular: when, during Motiva's kīrtana, the sun came out.

"Rain, rain, go away, come again another day," is the saying. So now we have some very nice weather, and we're in a very nice place. Corny, but they have us saying, "It doesn't get better than this." This is day two of our 30-day journey together through Vṛndāvana during this most auspicious month of Kārttika. There are many special places in Vṛndāvana, and there are many—he researched the scriptures and he said with confidence that there are 60 billion holy places in Vṛndāvana. A special book he wrote. Text number 66 is one of my favorite of all favorite verses:

"Just open your hearts and let this verse into your heart: O handsome, fragrant Tamāl desire tree blooming in Vṛndāvana forest and embraced by the Mādhavī vine of the Goddess ruling this forest, O tree, the shade of whose glory protects the world from a host of burning sufferings, what wonderful fruits do the people find at your feet!"

There are many places, but I cannot imagine a more special place than Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Actually, we don't have to use the word "imagine," because Rūpa Gosvāmī has made it very clear the special nature of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in his *Upadeśāmṛta*. Text number nine. It's a long verse, but you can savor each word just like, if you're very, very hungry and you get a nice plate of prasādam, you actually relish each bite. It reveals that no place is more sacred, no place is higher than Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

"The holy place known as Mathurā is spiritually superior to Vaikuṇṭha, the transcendental world, because the Lord appeared there. Superior is the transcendental forest of Vṛndāvana because of Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā pastimes, and superior to the forest of Vṛndāvana is Govardhana Hill, for it was raised by the divine hand of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and was the site of His various loving pastimes. And above all, above all, the super-excellent Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa stands supreme, for it is overflooded with the ambrosial nectarian prema of the Lord of Gokula, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. So, where then is that intelligent person who is unwilling to serve this divine Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is situated at the foot of Govardhana Hill?"

This place is, traditionally, living or even visiting Rādhā-kuṇḍa is reserved—it's reserved for the topmost transcendentalists, the topmost devotees. Even Lord Śiva sometimes, and Nārada Muni, it's difficult for them to come here. They are great transcendentalists, but this is the abode of those who are merged in that mood of loving service to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Lord Kṛṣṇa—amala-bhakti, pure devotion, just like the Gopīs. But the Lord is so kind that He has allowed us, aspiring devotees—we're aspiring devotees—to come here today. He said, "All right, let them in." Actually, we were recommended, right? You can generally only meet an important person if someone recommends you. Our recommendation, our sole recommendation, is the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, at least physically, the doors were open, and one day we hope to open the doors of our heart and let Vṛndāvana into our heart when it is completely pure and full of love for Rādhārāṇī. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has a nice line in his song, "When will that day be mine?" I remember from a Bible class when I was a young boy, in 1 Corinthians 2:9, it's written: "No eye has seen, no ear has heard, and no mind has imagined the things that God has prepared for those who love Him."

Historically, Mahārāja—the Mahārāja gave my lecture before, that was what I was going to say. I'm just kind of living it here. He explained the history of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. This is a challenge when there's many speakers, and if you're the last speaker... Hare Kṛṣṇa. The pastimes are still going on today, if only we had the eyes to see.

When the eyes are cleared with the salve of love, what would we see today? What pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would we see with our own eyes bestowed by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda? We would see Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa dancing and joking; see them riding on swings on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. We would see them playing hide and seek; maybe over there we'd see them playing Holi. They would be playing dice, chess; they play with balls; they would just, don't remember; they would enjoy water sports. And they would enjoy hearing the poetry of parrots; they would enjoy hearing the poetry of parrots and eating sweet fruits from the trees. And if we could see it as it is, we'd see that on all sides of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, there are little bathing ghāṭas; they walk down the steps made of crystal or lapis lazuli—whatever you say—all different types of precious stones. The bathing ghāṭas are there, and the Mañjarīs are bathing there. Yes, and we see all types of luxuriant gardens here with all types of furnishings, like seats and swings, couches, and elegant places for dining. This is the real, eternal... but even now, with the naked eye, we can appreciate it is obviously beautiful here.

They keep it very simple out here—simple living with the highest thinking—because Rādhā-kuṇḍa is meant for bhajana. Śrīla Prabhupāda set the highest example by doing bhajana here for 48 years. And when my god-sister asked Śrīla Prabhupāda if she could open a preaching center here at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and have a harināma-saṅkīrtana every day, lots of book distribution, he said, "No, not Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Rādhā-kuṇḍa is for bhajana."

But that's Rādhā-kuṇḍa. We always say we're going to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, but Śyāma-kuṇḍa is no less important. So we came around the corner today and someone said, "Gurudeva, there's two lakes, but I thought we were going to Rādhā-kuṇḍa?" Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Giri Govardhana. Today our dear Mahārāja, he explained the history of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Rādhā takes bath in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and by their causeless mercy, perhaps today, or when we come back in a few weeks, you can also take bath in these two sacred lakes. But take bath in both lakes. The connoisseurs of rasa, they revealed to us a special secret: one gets the same love that Rādhā has for Kṛṣṇa by bathing in one, and one gets the same love that Kṛṣṇa has for Rādhā—so one goes back and forth like that.

Now, those of you who are new here, you'll notice that when you take your bath later, that Rādhā-kuṇḍa is more or less square-shaped, but Śyāma-kuṇḍa has an unusual octagonal shape. It's interesting: square and octagonal. Like, why such a big difference? Well, we know that they were discovered, rediscovered by Lord Caitanya 500 years ago, but it was Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī who came up with the idea of excavating—you know, these were little puddles, divine puddles—excavating it so in the future, devotees could come and take bath and become purified there. Instead of bathing in a muddy puddle, he took the mud and he made his tilaka, but they all envisioned a beautiful lake as it is to those who have spiritual vision. Make it beautiful so people can come here and chant and dance and be happy in this transcendental atmosphere.

So excavation began. The workers were digging the ponds and making them bigger, and one night, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī had a very special dream, naturally. In his dream, the five Pāṇḍavas—the symbolic vision: the five Pāṇḍavas, Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva—they appeared to him in his vision and they said that they were living as trees on the banks of Śyāma-kuṇḍa in five different places. The Pāṇḍavas were present that Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, growing as trees. So they said to him, "Please don't cut us down, we want to stay here and do our bhajana." And they manifested in the shape it is today. This is the transcendental history. But through the centuries, all but one of those trees has disappeared under the influence of time. There's only one tree on the bank of Śyāma-kuṇḍa. I can show you where it is; there's only one tree. And it's said that now all the Pāṇḍavas have moved into that one tree, and they're residing on the banks of Śyāma-kuṇḍa at the foot of Govardhana Hill in the form of creepers or little bushes.

So maybe 20 years ago, I took a parikramā party—it was much smaller in those days—and I told this pastime. We went to where that tree was, this one tree, we were having kīrtana. And it also started to rain; it's like it's been raining the last couple days. But then it turned into a storm; it was really unusual. All the devotees were running here and there, shutting their doors, locking, and it turned into Hurricane Ian. Oh anyway, a big hurricane. So we didn't have a room to run into, so we just came under the shelter of the tree and we're all like—I was hugging the tree like, "I don't want to get wet!" All of a sudden, a branch fell off. It hit my head here and fell on the ground. Big branch, ouch. I went to grab the branch and I picked it up and I went like this. Thank you.

So I kept that branch and I took it back, and I had one of my disciples make japa beads out of it. And when I initiated my brother, my brother's younger brother is my disciple, I gave him those beads. And this branch—I wasn't there, but I saw it still partly attached to the tree and then the pujārī pulled it off and I got this big branch, and I made these... this is actually Śyāma-kuṇḍa wood, what they tell you. Someone gave me this yesterday, so I have to switch one day, the next, one person. Yeah, so such illustrious personalities as the Pāṇḍavas still reside on the banks of Śyāma-kuṇḍa. We should not think that Śyāma-kuṇḍa is of any lesser importance than Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī helps us to go deep into that understanding, and his—his 10 appeals for residence at Govardhana Hill, which is millions of times greater than the Ganges and which was born of the touch of Kṛṣṇa's lotus foot, became dearer to Kṛṣṇa than even Śiva. From the touch of Kṛṣṇa's lotus foot, become dearer to Kṛṣṇa than even Lord Śiva. It's like dice. Kṛṣṇa played this game every day at that ghāṭa on the banks of Śyāma-kuṇḍa, but instead of, you know, coins and valuable jewels, Kṛṣṇa always wagers kisses and hugs as a reward for the winner. Unfortunately, Kṛṣṇa is not very skilled at this game; in fact, most often He loses to Rādhārāṇī.

And we mentioned Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī lived here for 48 years doing bhajana, and his samādhi mandira is just across the street. We all went there first and paid our respects. And I was reading one time he was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa when he glanced at a certain tree and he saw something that he'd never seen before. He saw a very special swing. It was bejeweled, it was a swing bedecked with various jewels that had two lotus-shaped seats that were facing each other. It was shining like the sun. He was thinking, "How did I never saw this before?" And then he heard this announcement—announced the appearance of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and many Gopīs. After the announcement, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they appear next to the tree. And as Kṛṣṇa climbed onto the swing, He said to Rādhārāṇī, "Please, you take the seat next to me and we'll swing together." Actually, He said, "My dearest one, please come make this lovely seat next to me even lovelier by your presence; let's enjoy the wind in our faces." I can take you to this place also, it's on the other side.

Rādhārāṇī said, "No, I will not sit there because whenever we swing together, you frighten me by making the swing go too high. So you swing alone and I'll watch you from here." "Okay, just come on, I promise this time it'll be very smooth and very peaceful." Yeah, but she'd had too many experiences where the swing goes like this. So she said no, but all her Gopī girlfriends insisted. "It's okay this time," Kṛṣṇa made a promise. So she reluctantly agreed, and she said... and then the Gopīs started pushing the swing very gently like this, and you know, "Oh, it's going to be okay this time." And just to be sure that Kṛṣṇa didn't change His mind, some of the Gopīs began singing of Kṛṣṇa's heroic deeds, and others showered flower petals on Him, and others sprayed perfumed water in the air around him to keep Him peaceful. It's a place near Rādhā-kuṇḍa where they have a memorial for this.

The swing began to move, Kṛṣṇa began to lean back and kick His legs in the air—you know, when you were a child, you can make the swing go higher—so here is the Supreme Lord's legs, and it got out of control. To slow down, He just rolled His eyes back and laughed, and everybody looked at her girlfriends and said, "Here we go again, He broke His promise again. He's a rascal." Long story short, it went around the branch like that, around and around and around. Her anxiety turned into fear, and fear turned into panic, and guess what? She threw herself onto Kṛṣṇa and wrapped her arms around His neck and begged Him, "Kṛṣṇa, please stop, that was nice, that was enough!" Finding Him, and then the swing went up like that and stopped, upside down and stopped.

That's a very special moment. At that moment, the ācāryas write that Kṛṣṇa enjoyed the combination of seeing Rādhā-kuṇḍa upside down and feeling Rādhārāṇī's desperate embrace. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who was watching all this, he fainted. And when he regained consciousness, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, all the Gopīs had disappeared. But he could still see that bejeweled swing there, still hanging from the branch, swinging to and fro. So he just fell down and did full daṇḍavats to that tree, offered his obeisances, and when he got up, the vision was gone, and in amazement, he left Rādhā-kuṇḍa, softly chanting.

By Hare Cakravartī Ṭhākura, it mentions another time that Rūpa Gosvāmī visited. It's one of my favorite pastimes, and I've related it before, but you know, repetition is necessary to understand something, but we're talking about Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s līlā. Yes, we're learning, but we're also relishing Kṛṣṇa’s love. On this visit, Rūpa Gosvāmī had just finished writing his famous book, *Lalita-mādhava*. He gave it to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī for his approval. The six Gosvāmīs worked very closely together. He gave this book to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī—presumably just over there—and said, "Please read this and you give your blessings." It describes Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Dvārakā. He was interested in hearing Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Dvārakā, which are flavored more with aiśvarya—you know, awe, reverence, the servant offering obeisances to God. Why would Rūpa Gosvāmī write a book like that? Because the whole time that Kṛṣṇa was in Dvārakā, He was missing Vṛndāvana; He was missing the cowherd boys; He was missing His parents; missing the Gopīs. That feeling of separation was extremely deep. He just spent so many hours thinking, "Oh, I left Vṛndāvana, I left the Brajavāsīs." But He would wake up, because sometimes in the middle of the night, Kṛṣṇa would call out, right? Like, Rukmiṇī is saying, "Who's that?"

For example, in *Lalita-mādhava* 2.10, we hear Kṛṣṇa expressing His feelings of separation from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī while He's in Dvārakā. He says: "She is the elephant of my mind, enjoys pastimes. She is the shining of the full autumn moon for the cakora birds of my eyes. She is the dazzling ornament, the bright and beautiful arrangement of stars on the border of the sky of my chest. Now, today, I have gained Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī because of the highly elevated state of my mind." It's pretty deep, just... Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he's the ācārya of these very deep mellows of understanding of these pastimes of separation between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So he started reading this book; he just started crying all day long. We're supposed to edit the book, but he's just imbibing that mood of separation. So he's crying on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, sometimes it's described he would wander around Rādhā-kuṇḍa just crying out Śrīmatī's name, but other times he would clutch that book, *Lalita-mādhava*, to his chest and fall down on the ground unconscious.

But they were also worried because, you know, he'd fall down on the ground and he'd forget things; he was just crying in ecstasy. So they were worried about him. So eventually, some of the locals, they went to see Rūpa Gosvāmī and they said, "What was that book you gave Bābājī? He's just crying all day and we're afraid he's going to hurt himself. Can you do something about it, please?" So by yoga-māyā, Rūpa Gosvāmī's arrangement, Rūpa Gosvāmī at that time was just completing another book called *Dāna-keli-kaumudī*, which focuses on saṁbhoga, or the happy pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meeting.

There's actually two ways of associating with Kṛṣṇa: one's meeting, and the other is vipralambha, being separated from Kṛṣṇa. Yes, so how do you associate with Kṛṣṇa if He's far away? If you're separated, how's that associating with Kṛṣṇa? We can understand meeting, "Hi, hello," but if you're far away, how is that also associating with Kṛṣṇa? There's a very nice analogy in a book published by his disciples called *The Embankment of Separation*. Consciousness is like a flowing river, and every river has two sides to it; they're called river banks. So he says the flowing river of Kṛṣṇa consciousness has two sides as well: union—or meeting—with Kṛṣṇa, and separation from Kṛṣṇa. And both meeting and separation from Kṛṣṇa bring great happiness to the heart of a devotee.

We always, in our classes through the years, we've many times used that phrase, "Separation makes the heart grow fonder." When you're with somebody, you know, there's some interaction, but when you're separated, you think of so many things about that person. And so it is in a transcendental way: when we're separated from Kṛṣṇa, our love increases a thousand-fold because we're just thinking of Him constantly. Like, I'll give you an example: during the pandemic, I was always thinking about Hari and Caturātma, because we spent so many years together doing this and other things, crazy things like going around Mount Kailash, 6,000 meters high. We did some stuff together, right? I'm always thinking of them, and a few days ago they walked in my room: "Hi guys, yeah, hi, how's it going, I know what are we going to do today?" It was nice to meet them, but I was always thinking of them. That love was going very deep, and then finally we meet. So I kind of get an idea that when you're not with someone, you think of Caturātma's hair, you think of his clothes, you think of his laugh, how he talks a lot, how he's fun to be with—so many things go through the mind. So it is with the Gopīs, when they're separated from Kṛṣṇa, so many things come to their minds. So separation is also a form of association.

This is intellectual understanding after so many years. One time, he was giving darśana on the grass outside, and he said, "Are there any questions?" And you know, I wanted Prabhupāda to see me, right, get his glance. So he said, "What is your question?" I had no question. My question: "Hi, Acyutānanda dāsa." So he said, "What is your question?" It's... Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who appeared in the role of a devotee to teach us how to be Kṛṣṇa conscious, He's saying that He's feeling so much separation from Kṛṣṇa; every moment is like, you know, a millennium in His sikṣāṣṭaka comparison. So it seems contradictory, Prabhupāda, that, you know, a devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere, but at the same time he feels separation. I don't understand. How do you see Kṛṣṇa in separation? And Prabhupāda looked at me, like, "I'll tell you what he said."

Prabhupāda tried to explain it to me. He said, "Kṛṣṇa separates Himself from you so you become mad after Him." But I'd only been a devotee a couple years, I didn't catch it. Prabhupāda said, "This you will understand when you're very advanced." Because I remember in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Mukunda, he couldn't see Mahāprabhu because he made, quote-unquote, an offense. So Mahāprabhu said, "I'll never see him. I, I, you know, I cast him out of my company." And then Nityānanda begged, He said, "Actually, a nice devotee, please accept him." Mahāprabhu said, "I'll see him in one million births." So Mukunda began dancing, "He's going to see me in a million births!" And so Prabhupāda said, "One day, when you're advanced, you'll understand." I took it like that, "Oh, one day I'll be advanced, thank you." It hasn't happened yet. "When, when will that day be mine?"

These are advanced subject matters, but at least we know what to look forward to. You have to always be honest where we're at in the process of devotional service. Right now, we're cleansing our hearts of lust and anger and greed, but we're doing that because we have a very detailed description of what is ahead by our ācāryas' mercy. What other spiritual movement knows what God looks like, how He dresses, what His jewelry is, what His favorite foods are, who His friends are? These are the details that bring forth this laulyam, or greed to love Kṛṣṇa, to love Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

And I thought it important to share these things with you. You know, it's important to know the different size and shape, and that's important, but there's a certain prevailing mood here that gradually we have to come to understand. So our prayer is to reside here at Rādhā-kuṇḍa at the foot of Giri Govardhana for eternity, that that desire will become prominent in your heart in due course of time. So these things should be discussed. We're thinking for so many lifetimes, "I'm trying to come close to Kṛṣṇa," and finally I've come close to Kṛṣṇa, then He goes to Mathurā, and I have to experience separation? "When, someday when you're advanced, we will understand." That's Prabhupāda's promise.

Actually, the advanced devotee prefers separation from Kṛṣṇa. Whoa. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 15.3, he says this very clearly. I couldn't believe it when I read it. Listen to this: he writes, "If I had to choose between union and separation, I would prefer separation from my beloved, because in union I see Him only in one place, whereas in separation my entire universe is filled with Him." This is Kṛṣṇa's words. The highest state of separation. Because the local people would worry, "He's going to bump His head, He's going to fall down," so they went to Rūpa Gosvāmī—maybe not completely understanding what was happening—"Bābā, you gave him this book, he's just going crazy for Kṛṣṇa."

"I've got the solution! I'll ask him to review my new book, *Dāna-keli-kaumudī*, which is about meeting Kṛṣṇa." Like playful pastimes, and *dāna* means like tax, so it's the description of Kṛṣṇa's pastime demanding taxes from the Gopīs as they traverse Vṛndāvana to sell their milk products. It's a really nectarian book, it's really ecstatic meeting episodes. And he hadn't quite finished it, he had a few pages, so he sat down and very quickly he finished it, and then he took it out to Rādhā-kuṇḍa to give to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Because he was hoping that by reading the meeting pastime, saṁbhoga, it would pacify Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's intense feelings of separation that he imbibed from reading *Lalita-mādhava*. Maybe it's not the best example, but you know, I really miss when they came the other day, "Ah, they're here again, let's have kīrtana, let's have a guitar, let's take a stroll," and then I actually felt really happy. Śānti, tuṣṭi means complete happiness, especially when Caturātma tells a joke and when Bhāṭahari sings. It's all on the absolute platform.

So he came with the book, and presumably just over here in the bhajana kuṭira, he handed Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī *Dāna-keli-kaumudī*. He said to him, "Taste its contents." Whoa. "Taste its contents." It's not, you know, it's not a google, how do you taste? Well, we can understand: we hear the word nāma-ruci, we make advancement, we get a taste, taste for chanting, which is the ultimate means of understanding these very deep topics and relishing them. Kṛṣṇa avatāra in the age of Kali, the Holy Name of Kṛṣṇa is the avatāra. It will deliver us from ignorance to full-blown Kṛṣṇa consciousness. All glories to the Holy Names. God is a technique—the Holy Name.

So, just to make sure everything was okay when he gave him *Dāna-keli-kaumudī*, he said, "Give me back, but I haven't finished editing." "That's okay, but I'll give it to Sanātana Gosvāmī." And sure enough, when Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī read *Dāna-keli-kaumudī*, he calmed down, experienced another ecstatic emotion in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Apparently, you know, the separation from Kṛṣṇa, vipralambha, is more turbulent emotion, but both emotions are relishable to advanced devotees of the Lord. And we pray to Śrīla Prabhupāda that one day we can come out of this initial stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness to that advanced stage, and then we could really help him spread the saṅkīrtana movement all over the universe.

Each of us says at the end of our names, "Dāsa" or "Dāsī." We see everything in relationship to serving our spiritual masters and Śrīla Prabhupāda; that is the key to our success. So we don't want to make advancement so we can just relish and enjoy these symptoms—no, we want to advance so we can be valuable instruments to their service in this world and also in the spiritual world. That's amala-bhakti, that's pure devotion. So these are just a few of the many beautiful pastimes that took place and are still taking place in this most auspicious place in creation.

God blesses us. We'll come back again one more time during our month-long Kārttika, for coming here, yes, and we'll conclude here. We'll do a parikramā slowly around Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and then we'll go down to the buses, and we're going to hear from one very elevated sādhu, very dear friend of mine, who has this laulyam, this greed for Kṛṣṇa consciousness here in Vṛndāvana, two of my god-brothers, His Holiness... we'll hear from them. For so graciously receiving us and speaking so nicely and showing so much wonderful affection for this Western Vaiṣṇava, it's really—it was a historical moment, and we're very grateful to him. We bow down to his lotus feet.

So for now, we'll just walk. There's no time to speak, just relish everything with your eyes and beg for mercy, and just, you know, follow myself and my god-brothers around, and we'll go around, just look and see, and then we'll go to the buses, and we'll go sit at the feet of Govardhana Hill and enjoy the association of these wonderful devotees. Variety of...""