"*00255*.*
"### His Thunderous Roar!
 **Bhaktivedanta Manor** 
*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.*

I am very honored to be here this evening. Thank you to the organizers for inviting me. I was very happy to walk into the *kīrtana* of Radhakaraṇjana. As many of you know, he is one of the foremost *kīrtana* singers in our movement. He speaks so sweetly about the holy names, and I have seen in various parts of the world, when he comes, people become very attracted to this process of *kīrtana*. He is still young and has a whole future ahead of him. You are going to see many wonderful things coming from his service to the Caitanya movement, and I just love being with him when he is doing *kīrtana*. I could just sit and not sing, but simply listen; he is so wonderful. It is good to do a duet here.

Of course, as most of you know, we are celebrating the appearance day of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, who is a very popular deity in the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. I assume that most of you—or all of you—have heard his glories this morning at the beginning of the day. Either you went to a temple and heard someone speak *Bhāgavatam* about Nṛsiṁha Bhagavān from the Seventh Canto, or perhaps you joined online. So, I will not give a long talk about Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, but I would like to spend a few minutes focusing on the actual moment that he appeared, because that moment is upon us. 

If you study the *Bhāgavatam* carefully, you know that Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared at twilight. It was neither day nor night; it was twilight. Now it is twilight, so we are approaching this auspicious day—that special moment. Of course, we know he appeared in a very interesting way. Kṛṣṇa always appears in quite interesting ways in this world. 5,000 years ago, he appeared in the jailhouse of Kaṁsa. His parents, Vasudeva and Devakī, had been imprisoned by Kaṁsa, so they gave birth to baby Kṛṣṇa there. Of course, Vasudeva took him from the prison across the Yamunā to Gokula, and he began his babyhood pastimes as Dāmodara. 

Our Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva *is* Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa gets angry—not angry at us, but angry at the *asuras*, especially when the *asuras* disturb Kṛṣṇa’s devotees—we see this. Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva came to protect his devotee Prahlāda, and then he went back home. He left Vaikuṇṭha solely for the purpose of delivering his devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja. Just after that, as he was flying back to the spiritual world, he passed over Navadvīpa-māyāpura and realized that in the Kali-yuga, I am going to come as Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So, he took a few moments to come down to Navadvīpa. The demigods, when they saw that Nṛsiṁha was taking a break from his flight back to Vaikuṇṭha to come to Navadvīpa, came and created a lake so he could rest and take a bath. That lake still exists; that little place is called Nṛsiṁha-pali, about a 45-minute drive from the Mayapur community. So, next time you go to Mayapur, say, "I want to go to Nṛsiṁha-pali and take a bath in the lake." There is a beautiful deity there from Satya-yuga. 

He came to save one devotee; this is how kind the Lord is. And this form of Nṛsiṁha coming out of the pillar—at this moment, just envision this. This is the best part of the day, his appearance day; this is when he came out of the pillar in his most ferocious form. That form of Nṛsiṁhadeva breaking the pillar, where is Hiraṇyakaśipu? That form is actually meant to be worshiped only by those in the renounced order. We have our Nṛsiṁha Bhagavān in Mayapur, and the devotees chose that form to protect our Mayapur community—to protect the whole world of devotees, actually. But technically speaking, that form of the Lord coming out of the pillar is meant to be worshiped just by the renunciates, because in that mood, Nṛsiṁhadeva takes everything away. 

That is good for *sannyāsīs*. *Sannyāsīs* are in the renounced order of life so that they have the strength to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, that form was worshiped by the renunciates. Just like Nṛsiṁhadeva went on to take everything away from his opponent, Hiraṇyakaśipu, he had to experience that. It means that Nṛsiṁhadeva took away the demon's material body, but also took away his subtle body—the mind, intelligence, and ego which reside in the heart, where all the material desires are accumulated. 

One time, Śrīla Prabhupāda said to us in Geneva, "If I reveal to you, my dear students, how many material desires you have in your heart right now, you would probably faint. But don't get discouraged; you can purify all those desires by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." So, that is the blissful way of getting freed of these material attachments and then awakening our love for Kṛṣṇa. 

Hiraṇyakaśipu had to have a heart operation—the original heart operation. By Nṛsiṁhadeva taking his sharp claws and taking out the heart of Hiraṇyakaśipu—later he took out his intestines, but he started with his heart—he took the heart out and threw it to the other side of the assembly hall. This signifies not just the organ, the heart, but the desires that were there in the heart of Hiraṇyakaśipu. That is why he was able to achieve *mukti*, or liberation. 

Actually, Hiraṇyakaśipu is one of the greatest *asuras* that has ever appeared. He later became Rāvaṇa. He got a new name, Rāvaṇa, and that name is very interesting. It means, "he who makes the universe scream by his audacious activities," especially in offending the Vaiṣṇavas, the devotees. So, in his birth as Hiraṇyakaśipu, he achieved *mokṣa* because the Lord was so kind. He took out the heart, threw it, and took away all his material desires.

And how do we know that he achieved liberation? Because later on in the *Bhāgavatam*, after all was said and done, Nṛsiṁhadeva asked Prahlāda, his dear devotee—this great Mahājana, one of the 12 authorities in the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness—to ask for a benediction. The Lord likes to give benedictions to his devotees because he knows that those devotees will use their benedictions in his service. So, when Nṛsiṁhadeva said, "Prahlāda, I would like to offer you a benediction," can you imagine? The Lord of all that be can give you a blessing. Someone might think, "Well, I will ask for an unlimited amount of money or fame or a beautiful wife or husband or a palace." No, devotees just want things by which they could serve the Lord better. 

Vaiṣṇavas are by nature very compassionate. They care about the spiritual welfare of others. They feel the benefit of liberation; they feel the benefit of *bhakti*. And *bhakti* is unlimited; love is unlimited in the spiritual world. So, they want to share that with others. If you have a lot of something nice, you should be generous and share it. So, what did Prahlāda ask for? He said, "Lord, can you deliver my father?" This is incredible. The father is the one who was trying to kill him in so many ways because he was a Vaiṣṇava. But Prahlāda thinks, "No, can you deliver my dad?" 

We see that in not-so-recent history, but 2,000 years ago, Jesus Christ was on the cross, the nails were in his hands and his feet, and the guard had stabbed him in the side with a spear. Jesus looked to the heavens and said, "My dear Lord, please forgive them, for they know not what they do." This is the ultimate compassion. It is hard to imagine. You forgive them because they are in illusion; they are not in their normal state of mind—Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, we see that in the character of all Vaiṣṇavas: they want to go out and preach, distribute books, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and get the population purified so they can realize their beloved Lord is Kṛṣṇa. 

So, Prahlāda is a great inspiration for us. Then Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva replied, "Your father is already delivered. Yes, with the strength of my sharp claws, I have taken away all his material desires. Not only is your dad delivered, but 10 generations before you and 10 generations after you—they will all be delivered." 

So it is a unique pastime that the Lord comes out so angry. He takes everything away from the demons, and sometimes the Lord takes everything away from his devotees so they have no other recourse than to take shelter of the Lord. Just like in the Eleventh Canto of the *Bhāgavatam*, Kṛṣṇa says to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, *yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ*. The Lord told Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira that his special favor shown to his devotee is that he takes everything away from that devotee's material opulence so that the devotee has no other recourse. *Kṛṣṇa, help me.* You become fully dependent. 

Of course, it does not happen all the time. You do not have to worry, because real renunciation means to use everything in Kṛṣṇa’s service. So if we learn this technique, you do not have to be worried. That form of Nṛsiṁhadeva, just in the *śīla śāstras*—where I have a deity like that, he is coming out of the pillar—is very ferocious. When my godbrother Gurukṛpa, back in the 70s, was the first one to find a Nṛsiṁha deity—there were no Nṛsiṁha deities in the beginning—he was in India and he found a beautiful deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha. He came to Prabhupāda in Mayapur and said, "Prabhupāda, can I worship this form of Narasiṁha?" Prabhupāda said, "You be very careful, because he is very angry, and if you make an offense when the Lord is angry, you could get a severe reaction. So be careful." So Gurukṛpa said, "I am not going to worship him." But Prabhupāda said, "But you can worship Nṛsiṁha along with Gaura-Nitāi, because Gaura-Nitāi don't accept a devotee's offenses. They only accept their service." So, don't take it, don't abuse that. But that is how kind Mahāprabhu is. He doesn't see our offenses; he only sees our service. He is so kind. So, therefore, Gurukṛpa got two beautiful deities of Gaura-Nitāi made, and to this very day, he is worshiping that deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha along with Gaura-Nitāi. 

So, if any of you householders have a deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha, which is recommended for *gṛhasthas*, actually make sure you have Gaura-Nitāi or a photo of Gaura-Nitāi. Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha is when the Lord is half-angry and half-pacified. He has a little grin, and Lakṣmī is there cooling him down. So Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha is for householders. The Lord also appears, according to *śīla śāstras*, as Yoga-Nṛsiṁha. I've seen many deities like that. There is a band around Nṛsiṁhadeva—the brass deity—and he is there. And this form of Yoga-Nṛsiṁha, or sometimes Śānta-Nṛsiṁha—*śānta* means peaceful—there is no other, you know, Lakṣmī is not there, Prahlāda is not there. This is for *brahmacārīs*, because when the Lord is peaceful, then the *brahmacārīs*, by worshiping him, their senses become controlled and they are very peaceful, and thus the *brahmacārī* can focus on spiritual life. 

So it is an interesting science: different forms of Narasiṁha according to where we are situated in devotional service. But this evening we are discussing *ugra*, angry—his most terrible form. Where is that demon who offended his devotee? Because another wonderful feature of our Kṛṣṇa—sometimes people would say "Our Kṛṣṇa," and I remember we were in Rome, he said "Our Kṛṣṇa," and I went, "Oh, he is mine too, because I'm serving Prabhupāda, we are all serving Prabhupāda." So he said, "Our Kṛṣṇa is so sweet." That was so sweet. So Kṛṣṇa—our Kṛṣṇa—is so amazing that he will tolerate offenses to himself, but he will never tolerate offenses to his devotees. And that is the first offense in chanting the holy names: to criticize those devotees who have dedicated their lives for preaching the glories of the Lord. This is the *hātī-mātā*, the mad elephant offense; one must be very careful of that. 

So when the Lord appeared from the pillar, because Prahlāda was being harassed in all the different ways that Hiraṇyakaśipu was trying to kill him, he immediately attacked Hiraṇyakaśipu. Now, we read in the Seventh Canto how he came out of the pillar and attacked Hiraṇyakaśipu, but in the *Narasiṁha Purāṇa*—that’s with the Śiva Purāṇa, the Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa, the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, our *Bhāgavatam*—the Lord actually appears many times, over and over and over, in different ages, because the world goes through cycles. In each of these ages, Kṛṣṇa appears, because but for the Lord, no one can initiate a religion or a spiritual tradition that is applicable for the people of that age. Ages are different, so the processes are different. But each time the Lord comes and does this pastime, this pastime of saving Prahlāda, because it happens again and again and again. 

There are some minor details in the appearance. In the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*, I was reading there today, we know how Nṛsiṁha appeared from the pillar, but in one of his appearances, he appears from a flower pot. I read it in the *Bhāgavatam*, he comes out of—of all places—a flower pot. And I was reading in another incarnation, Nṛsiṁhadeva walks in the room as a simple cat, then he appears as half-man, half-lion. And I read another part of the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*—because I like to worship Nṛsiṁha—he just walks into town, got his sword, "Where is your Lord? Is he everywhere? Is he here?" Fast, and then there are people all the time telling who is coming. There is a half-man and half-lion, he just walks in the palace, and the fight starts. 

That particular time, which is right now—that's why I'm speaking—we could say many things about Nṛsiṁhadeva. That Seventh Canto was one of Prabhupāda's favorite parts of the *Bhāgavatam* to speak from. There are so many lectures of Prabhupāda in the Seventh Canto about Nṛsiṁha, about Prahlāda Mahārāja, about the process of devotional service, but we are focusing on the twilight. It is neither dark night nor day. This is when he appeared. This particular moment when the Lord appeared is described in detail in a book called *Subhāṣita-ratna-bhāṇḍāgāra*, verse 15. It is an esoteric scripture, but it is *bonafide*. 

Text 15, and therein it is so interesting because details—you know, details are so important to attract us. They say love is in the details, so this may not be... well, this is a loving pastime in its own way, but we hear Hiraṇyakaśipu's last words. Would you like to hear his last words? So it is that particular era or *kalpa* or age when he walked into town. When Hiraṇyakaśipu saw his servant running to him in fear—the page there, the weapon—and Hiraṇyakaśipu sees his servant running to him in fear, the servant says to Hiraṇyakaśipu, "Oh Lord, a lion is coming." So Hiraṇyakaśipu says, "So what? A lion?" The servant says, "But my Lord, he is a lion with a human body. I have never seen such a strange creature." So Hiraṇyakaśipu, he was very arrogant, he conquered the 14 worlds, the demigods, Nārada Muni was his foot-servant. So Hiraṇyakaśipu says, "If that's the case, bring him here." So the servant said, "My master, he is coming on his own." So Hiraṇyakaśipu gets a glimpse of this half-man, half-lion, and he says to his servant, "Oh, he is here. Give me my *capa*." *Capa* means bow. "Run, give me my *capa* quickly! Bring my chopper quickly! Bring—bring my nails." He didn't get his bow fast enough, and the only word that came out was "ah"—his nails. 

Those were the last words of Hiraṇyakaśipu. Of course, he is talking about the Lord’s nails. So, the scripture says, "May that Nṛsiṁhadeva who thus tore the chest of Hiraṇyakaśipu with his sharp nails protect you all." Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, in commentating on this pastime, he says that this is interesting; Lord Nṛsiṁha's nails were actually a manifestation of his Sudarśana-cakra. It is just a detail, but for Nṛsiṁha, this is like *amṛta*. The nails are the expansion of the Sudarśana-cakra, and we know the power of that, like with Śiśupāla. So he concludes, because the nails were the manifestation of Kṛṣṇa's Sudarśana-cakra, he concludes definitely Hiraṇyakaśipu was delivered. 

So, there is another very beautiful, powerful verse I found from the mouth of Hiraṇyakaśipu as he realized the power of the Lord's nails as they tore out his heart and tore out his intestines. The intestines were just a victory garland. Like when you know a senior devotee comes, we honor him with a garland. So, the real thing is he took out the heart and liberated him. No one was coming forth because he was so ferocious. So he said, "I need a garland, a victory garland." So he took the intestines and—ah, that is his garland. So he understood the power of those nails—the manifestation of Sudarśana—he understood. 

In the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*, Chapter 45, Text 30, these are the words coming from the mouth of Hiraṇyakaśipu: "Alas, my chest, which is being pierced by Nṛsiṁhadeva at this moment, is the same chest on which the teeth of Airāvata, the elephant of Indra, were split into pieces, and the acute blow of Mahādeva’s axe was made blunt. It is rightly said that even a straw dishonors when destiny rejects." So little commentary is required; this saying, that a straw dishonors when destiny rejects, means that even something so simple as a straw can embarrass one if used to harm one or kill one as a result of destiny. We hear sometimes in Ramayana, that pastime where he was killed with a straw, and Hiraṇyakaśipu was relating in this way to the nails of Nṛsiṁhadeva. Previously, even the teeth of Indra's elephant couldn't harm him—Indra-deva sent Airāvata, "Go get this Hiraṇyakaśipu"—but he hit, the teeth, they broke when he tried to bite the body of Hiraṇyakaśipu. And even the axe of Śiva—Śiva tried to attack him, hit Hiraṇyakaśipu with the axe, and the axe went blunt. 

Paraphrasing here, but in the end, the simple—so-called simple—nails of the Lord did him in. But little did he know that those transcendental nails were going to be the cause of his liberation, because the Lord's nails are so powerful they can destroy one's material desires. And material desires are so strong they don't disappear at death. When we die, this gross body is destroyed, but the subtle body, we understand from our philosophy, goes with you to your next birth. Your subtle body—your mind, intelligence—it travels with you to your next birth. So therefore, by certain astrologers and psychics, they can understand what you were in your last life because how you are living, how you are right now. But that is a whole other lecture. But the Lord's nails are so powerful, they can destroy those desires that even death can't destroy. 

So we pray, when we see Nṛsiṁha-daya, we glorify his nails. Actually, the *Agni Purāṇa*, Chapter 31, Verse 3 says: 

> *Oh Lord, the tips of your hair are like glowing hot fire.*
> *Oh Lord, whose eyes exhibit a burning, dwelling fire.*
> *Oh Lord, the touch of whose nails are fiercer than the thunderbolt of Indra.*
> *Oh transcendental lion, Divasiṁha.*

I have one disciple, I gave the name Divasiṁha. He was a real mild boy, you know, in his teenage years, and somehow I mixed up the names that morning, and he was very humble. He said, "Your name is Divasiṁha—fire." That’s okay. "Oh transcendental lion, obeisances to you." A beautiful verse.

So Hiraṇyakaśipu was delivered on the appearance day of Nṛsiṁhadeva. So two amazing things happened on Nṛsiṁha’s appearance day. It became Nṛsiṁha's appearance, and it became Hiraṇyakaśipu's disappearance day. That is a big deal. So which one should we celebrate? We might naturally consider Nṛsiṁha's appearance, but not necessarily. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, in 1927, commenting on this day, he said—it's a little subtle, but I hope you can catch it—"In Satya-yuga, Hiraṇyakaśipu, more than Prahlāda, by the adoption of the method of negative propaganda, proclaimed greatly the glory of Nṛsiṁha." More credit goes to Hiraṇyakaśipu than Prahlāda. That is eloquent English, but it translates that Hiraṇyakaśipu's death at the hands of Nṛsiṁhadeva made Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva more famous than Prahlāda’s glorious past lives with Nṛsiṁhadeva. In other words, the killing of Hiraṇyakaśipu by the hands of the Lord was an act of extreme mercy and should be recognized and appreciated by all of humanity. 

The Lord is so kind. Sometimes people say, "What kind of God... he is just... people are suffering, how can there be God?" We actually see that we cause our suffering, but he is coming every day, knocking on the door: "Take up spiritual life in this age, so simple; just chant and dance to the song: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." 

So this is the moment, you know, like in a symphony, the symphony builds up to a crescendo, and you always finish on a high—or we finish, you know, right, that's the crescendo. I came in the crescendo. So this is our culture, the crescendo. This is the crescendo of the day right now. This is when it all happens. So we should be deeply meditating on this particular pastime, this particular moment. 

So I will leave you with the following verses to meditate on during our next *kīrtana*, which we will dedicate to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. We will dedicate the *kīrtana* to him. These five verses, which I will now recite, which you have never heard before, have been recently translated by a great devotee scholar in Oxford, His Grace Goptara Dāsa. They are from a poem known as *Nṛsiṁha-śataka*, meaning "a century in praise of Nṛsiṁha." The poem was composed by a devotee called Gaṅgādhara. He is a Vaiṣṇava who—there wasn't much information on him, but he appeared somewhere in South India some centuries ago. This poem is actually 103 verses, but I will just read five. 

For anyone who has some affection for Nṛsiṁhadeva—because we all have affection for him because he is, you know, "I am my own worst enemy." There is that saying, because we maintain some material desires which are obstacles to pure devotion to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. So he is very kind in the heart, and he purifies us. When we take up the mission of spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness in this materialistic society, sometimes there is friction, sometimes there are problems, but he protects his devotee ultimately. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura wrote a poem in which he reveals the ultimate purpose, that we worship Nṛsiṁha. It goes something like this: he is appealing to Nṛsiṁhadeva, "My dear Lord, I am rolling, I am wallowing on the threshold of your palace, Nṛsiṁhadeva, praying to you, half-man, half-lion, please remove the obstacles on the path of pure devotion to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Ultimately, I want to go to Vṛndāvana and worship Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. You are so kind, you remove the obstacles in the path. Dear Lord, please remove these obstacles so I can develop pure *bhakti* for Rādhā-Śyāma." 

That is the ultimate reason we worship Nṛsiṁha Bhagavān. And he is so kind. He helps. So we want to meditate on him today, right now, at this pristine moment of his appearance from the pillar of iron to protect his devotee. These five verses will give you food for thought, food for meditation. May they deepen your meditation on Lord Nṛsiṁha’s protective roar. 

Now, this poet—you know, poets are amazing people; they can take just a general piece of knowledge and present it in this way that attracts the heart. For example, it is said that what is the use of a bowman's arrow unless it can pierce the heart of his enemy? Right? What is the use of the arrow unless it can pierce the heart of the enemy? So what is the use of a poet's words unless they can melt the heart of his audience in *bhakti*, in love? So this poet, he will melt your heart in our meditation on Nṛsiṁha now. The English is very eloquent, actually; it has been translated by Goptara. So you have to listen carefully because it is high-grade English because it is a high-grade subject. So here we go, this is what he wrote:

1. With the howling hurricane of his thunderous roar rumbling through the confines of the cosmic shell of the universe, he heralds in all directions the tale of the vile, tiger-like demon's rapid destruction, as the bright comet of his lolling tongue furiously quivers over his cruelly curved fangs. May that Nṛsiṁhadeva who brings about pure bliss swiftly incinerate my sins.
2. It harmonizes with the rhythmic clamor of the drum-like cosmic shell, keenly struck by an immense drumstick made of Mount Meru, as it rises from within the column of the audience chamber, hammered by a club in the clenched fist of Indra’s irate foe. May Narahari's prime cry—his roar—make the whole world prosperous. (How does a roar make prosperity? It destroys all negativity; we become prosperous in *bhakti*.)
3. Horrid with the crashing, tree-like noise of the God-hater's utter insanity, its murmur maiming the troops of the massive army masked in the grand courtyard of the demon king. May that roar, like the deafening sound of a key turning in the front door of the dreadful king of the dead, piercing all with its peeling harshness, quickly accomplish the impossible. (There's a note in the Sanskrit text: the universe is said to be contained within Brahma's egg, *brahmāṇḍa*, a hard, closed, spherical shell that separates it from the divine realm that lies beyond, in the abode of Yama, the god of death.)
4. May Nṛsiṁhadeva's roar instantly annihilate all hosts of sins. Its reverberation is the blissful prologue that hurries the feet of all heavenly ladies to the playhouse, as it rumbles like kettle-like drums, proclaiming the most preposterous and supremely prominent sacred assault on the demon king, like thunder of twilight clouds directing the direction-elephants in the fine art of flapping their ears. 
5. Blooming like the rumbling melodies of beautiful clouds which nimbly whip up waves lauded by bees licking the itch that comes from the elephant's heads of the cardinal elephants' large earlobes. May the sound of the disbarring, lion-bodied Lord, fairly furious with his success, who quickly nullifies calamities with his resplendent might, make all the cosmic wardens blessed.

I told you it was deep, but I will publish it and you can hear it later. I read it about 20 times and then I got it. Let us thank that poet with a big round of applause. 

To that Nṛsiṁhadeva who is the protector of his devotees, we will offer this *kīrtana* to his lotus feet.""