00413,
Hi everyone, a warm welcome back again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. We are continuing with our mini-series on historical Vṛndāvana, and this will be part nine. In this lecture, I would like to discuss different purificatory rites and rituals that were followed by the people of Vṛndāvana, the Brajabāsīs, in olden days. By "olden days," we are actually referring to the period after the Six Gosvāmīs came and restored Vṛndāvana by locating its holy sites, writing books on the science of devotional service, and establishing temples. During and after that period, many devotees moved to Vṛndāvana, and a particular culture grew on the basis of the teachings of Lord Caitanya. Now, for rites and rituals meant to purify one’s life and to help one ultimately develop love for God, for Kṛṣṇa, Lord Caitanya requested Sanātana Gosvāmī to write a manual describing rituals called *saṁskāras*.

That is confirmed in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Antya-līlā 5.86, where it is written: *sanātana-dvārā bhakti-siddhānta-vilāsa*—Lord Caitanya exhibited the essence of devotional service through Sanātana Gosvāmī. Now, the term *saṁskāra* is formed by adding the prefix *sam* to the verbal root *kṛ* (*sam-kṛ*). It means to thoroughly and completely perform a Vedic activity. You could say the conventional meaning of *saṁskāra* is a purificatory ceremony or rite marking a major event in one’s life. Because of old age, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī gave this duty to Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī because he was younger as well as being a paṇḍita from South India who knew the Vedas very well. To fulfill this, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī wrote a book called *Sat-kriyā-sāra-dīpikā*. This book, you could say, is a guide for the Vaiṣṇava community on the path of proper conduct, which was called *sadācāra*. This very important book has two sections: *Sat-kriyā-sāra-dīpikā*, consisting of ten *saṁskāras* to be performed by householder Vaiṣṇavas, as well as a part called *Saṁskāra-dīpikā*, the process by which the renounced order is to be accepted. 

The *saṁskāras* mentioned are actually still followed today in the homes of devout Brajabāsīs, so I thought today we could discuss some of them and appreciate how a tradition of old, historic Vṛndāvana has been carried down and practiced to the present day. There are a number of *saṁskāras*. First of all, there are the prenatal *saṁskāras*, well, to begin with, the *garbhādhāna-saṁskāra*. This is a *saṁskāra* performed before conceiving a child in order to bring a saintly person into this world. *Garbhādhāna* is also called *garbhālambhanam*, which literally means "attaining the wealth of the womb." Then there is the *puṁsavana*; it is engendering a male issue. In other words, it is a *saṁskāra* to conceive a male child. It is not meant as discrimination against conceiving a girl child; rather, previously in Vṛndāvana, in Vedic culture, every family wanted at least one male child so that the parents could be taken care of by that child in their old age. This feeling is expressed very nicely by Devahūti in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Third Canto, 23rd chapter, verse 52. There we hear Devahūti speaking: "My dear Brāhmaṇa, as far as your daughters are concerned, they will find their own suitable husbands and go away to their respective homes, but who will give me solace after your departure as a sannyāsī?" So, families were hoping for at least one male child to take care of them when they got older. 

Then there is the *sīmantonnayana-saṁskāra*, which means the hair parting. The significance of this ritual is to wish for a healthy development of the baby and for a safe delivery by the mother. It is a *saṁskāra* where the lady parts her hair and there is a fire yajña, etc., for those purposes. Then, as life goes on—because these *saṁskāras* are performed at different stages of life—there are the childhood *saṁskāras*, beginning with the *jāta-karma* at birth. The birth ritual is called that, and then very soon there is the *nāma-karaṇa*, the name-giving, the name that you give the baby; this we will discuss in detail a little bit later on because it is really interesting. Then the next *saṁskāra* is called *niṣkrāmaṇa*; it means when the baby is old enough, there is a ceremony performed for their first outing, when they leave the home. *Niṣkrāmaṇa* literally means "going out" or "coming forth." That is when the baby leaves the house. Then, very popular in ISKCON, at six months there is the *annaprāśana*, which means the *saṁskāra* performed when the baby takes its first solid food—not just milk from the mother, but the first solid food. This marks the first time a baby eats solid food, typically cooked rice or any type of grain. In ISKCON, we call it the grain-giving ceremony. 

As the child grows up, another *saṁskāra* is *cūḍā-karaṇa* or *cāula*—sometimes they say *cauḍa*—it means shaving the head. It is also known as *muṇḍana-saṁskāra*, and you could say it marks the child’s first haircut. Not just a haircut, actually; in this *saṁskāra*, they shave the head. Then, a little bit later, there is the *karṇa-vedha*; *karṇa-vedha* means ear piercing. In this *saṁskāra*, both male and female children undergo ear piercing. It is actually done for protection from diseases and for decoration with earrings, but primarily it is done for protection from diseases; then we also put earrings in there. Then we come to the educational *saṁskāras*, beginning with *vidyārambha*; there is a ceremony as the child begins to learn the alphabet. As the child grows, for the male child, there is the *upanayana*. *Upanayana* means the child receives the sacred thread initiation. In this old Vṛndāvana culture, the son is initiated at eight years old by an ācārya or a guru or the family guru with the sacred thread. 

It is all a little technical, but it is part of our process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, so we need to learn these things. Then there is the *vedārambha*, the beginning of Vedic study. *Vedārambha* is a rite that marks the start of learning the Vedas. As the child grows older and actually becomes a young man, there is the *keśānta-saṁskāra*; it means shaving the beard—*keśa* means hair, and *anta* means the end—so the end of the hair, shaving the beard. This *saṁskāra* involves the shaving of the beard and long hair by the older student. Then we come to—it is like fast-forwarding in life—we come to *samāvartana*, the end of the student's studies. *Samāvartana* literally means returning home from the house of the ācārya. These are all significant moments in a person's life; therefore, the *saṁskāras* are performed at important moments in our life to make us pure and, ultimately, Kṛṣṇa conscious. 

Then there is the marriage *saṁskāra*; we call that *vivāha*, the marriage ceremony. Again, in ISKCON, we know this very well; we use this word a lot, the *vivāha-yajña*. Then, as part of that, there is the *gṛha-praveśa-saṁskāra*, the welcoming of the bride to the new home by the groom’s mother, father, brothers, sisters, and other relatives. There is the *vivāha-yajña*, and after the marriage, the girl goes home with her husband to her house of her in-laws; it is called *gṛha-praveśa*, a big welcoming ceremony. It is a little hard for her to leave her parental home, so she goes to the home of her in-laws. There is a big ceremony, and then a few days later, there is the *saṁskāra* of *caturthī-karma*, which literally means the rite performed on the fourth day after the wedding. Now we fast-forward, for want of time; there is finally the *antyeṣṭi*, the death rites, the death *saṁskāra*. It begins even before one is born and they go all the way up to one's death, from the cradle to the grave. This death *saṁskāra* we will also discuss in a little more detail later on. 

As far as performing these *saṁskāras* in the old days, I was reading that in Vṛndāvana, the *yajña-kuṇḍas*—you know, *yajña-kuṇḍa* means that *yajña-śālā*, the place where the fire is and there are the fruits and the colors, where we perform the ceremony—in the old days in Vṛndāvana, it is really interesting. We make these big ones today with bricks going around and huge fires, but in the olden days, these *yajña-kuṇḍas* were simple, flat, plain structures. There were no walls of bricks like we do today. I read that the reason behind this was because any *saṁskāra* performed in Braja was done with feelings of love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and because the Brajabāsīs' love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is limitless and has no boundaries, there were no boundary walls nor brick walls in the *yajña-kuṇḍa*. It was just flat. A very nice explanation, very rustic. In a poem written by one of my favorite Brajabāsī poets, Cīṭa Svāmī, we hear Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī refer to a *yajña-kuṇḍa* in a similar loving way. 

She says to Lalitā-sakhī: "Lalite, my heart is that *yajña-kuṇḍa* in which the fire of separation is constantly burning. My tears are the ghee which is coming from my eyes and is flowing into my heart. By repeating the words 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,' that is the *svāhā* of that *yajña*, and all of you Gopīs of Vraja, who are chanting mantras in the form of words of pacification for pleasing the Lord of my heart, my sweet memories of pastimes spent with Him are the final offering of this *yajña*." And the poet goes on, quoting Lalitā; so Lalitā says with a deep sigh: "O Rādhe, may the fruit of this fire sacrifice reach all your dear residents of Vraja." And our poet Cīṭa Svāmī concludes the work by saying, "The real truth of the Vedas is hidden in Vraja in the words spoken by Śrī Rādhā." The real truth of the Vedas is hidden in Vraja in the words spoken by Śrī Rādhā. Wow. 

Now, "as I mentioned earlier, let’s discuss a few details of these *saṁskāras*. Well, we’ll begin with the *vivāha-saṁskāra* because devotees are very well aware of this. From the Vedic marriage, even today in Vṛndāvana, the status of the families involved in searching for a suitable spouse—meaning the boy's family and the girl's family—used to matter a lot. The status of the boy’s family and the status of the girl’s family had to really match. The status was important—what type of status mattered? Considering who is going to marry whom, I was reading that the family's reputation in the village was something to be taken into consideration: their fields, their number of cows, their number of bulls, and the history of their grandparents. These are things that the bride's father and the groom's father would discuss even before considering a marriage: "How many bulls does your family have? How many cows? How many fields? What's the history of your grandfather?" Why? Because all these things taken together meant that the new couple would be compatible. 

Now, another interesting point is that in the old days, and even today in Vṛndāvana, a boy could not marry a girl from the same village. Yeah, a boy would not marry a girl from the same village. His parents had to find a girl from a village which was at least two villages away from their village; otherwise, a girl from a village closer to his would be considered like his sister and not marriageable. Because, maybe because of association, you're close, then you develop a relationship, and you know—it's more like because boys and girls don't associate intimately in Vedic culture—so then you would address another girl as mother or sister, like that. So, a girl from a village closer to his would be considered his sister and that is not marriageable. This particular tradition actually started in Kṛṣṇa's time when He was present on this planet. How is that? Well, as a playful pastime, we call that *keli-līlā*, Kṛṣṇa once playfully married Śrī Rādhā, and it was accepted as authorized because Kṛṣṇa was from Nandagrāma and Śrī Rādhā was from Varṣāṇā, between which there are four villages—two near Nandagrāma and two near Varṣāṇā. Those four villages separated Nandagrāma from Varṣāṇā. And actually, I researched it and I can give you the names of those four villages: Saṅketa, Kājīpura, part of Añjananoka village, and Domī-luvana village. Those four villages. 

Now, as regards weddings, I heard from some old Brajabāsīs that in those times, weddings would start seven days before the main ceremony. In other words, guests would come seven days prior to the couple taking their vows of marriage, and everyone would enjoy a week of festivities leading up to the main program. And this is really interesting, one of my favorite parts actually: that the day before the wedding, the bride in Vṛndāvana would visit three temples associated with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—one in Rāval, one in Varṣāṇā, and one in Yāvaṭa. The idea was that only when the girl to be married got blessings from Śrī Rādhā would she start her new life. Harī Kṛṣṇa. 

Now, in those days, a married woman—this is something else I researched—a married woman could only visit her father and mother's house with the express permission of her husband and her in-laws. However, there were three days when she could go freely to her parental home without even asking her husband or her in-laws' permission. Those three days were: on the day of Rakṣā-bandhana—Rakṣā-bandhana means, well, actually it's the same day as Lord Balarāma's appearance—on the day of Rakṣā-bandhana she could go to her parental home without asking permission to tie a thread on the wrist of her brother for his protection from evil eyes. Number two, she could go freely on the day of the birth of her brother's son. And finally, she could visit without asking permission on the day of her father's departure from this world. That is not to say she couldn't visit her parental home—in fact, the girls often went to their parental home—but they asked permission first. But these other days were considered so important she didn't have to ask permission. 

Now, here is another interesting point. In old Vṛndāvana, after children were born, they spent much time—a lot of time, a significant amount of time actually—with their grandparents so that they could learn the roots of Vṛndāvana culture, Vṛndāvana's traditions, and the mannerisms of Brajabāsīs from their elders. Now, the privilege of—because we mentioned the *saṁskāra*, the name-giving ceremony—the privilege of giving names to children was given to the sister of the father of the child. Nowadays, the parents name or someone else names, but the privilege of giving names to children in old Braja was given to the sister of the father of the child. This tradition is actually, I heard, still followed today in Vṛndāvana. And this name-giving ceremony was a huge celebration. Nowadays, the parents or whoever will give the name and they will say, "Your name will be...," with maybe a few people present, but it was a huge celebration in old Braja in which all the family members, and sometimes I was reading the whole village, would gather and sing songs about the pastimes of baby Kṛṣṇa. And I was fortunate in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute to find one of the songs still sung in the houses of Brajabāsīs on the day of the name-giving ceremony, and it’s really beautiful. I wanted to share it with all of you; that’s my seva to all of you, to share this nectar. 

Here is the song: The Gopīs are saying to Mother Yaśodā, "O Mother Yaśodā, by which name will I call your son? The killer of Pūtanā, Pūtanā-ghātana? The tamer of the Kāliyā serpent, Kāliyā-damana? The bliss of Vraja, Vrajānandana? The son of Nanda, Nandālāla? The lover of Gopīs, O Gopī-vallabha? The star of my eyes, Nayāntāra? The moon amongst cowherd boys, Gvālachanda? Or the son of your life? He is the one with the infinite names." So Mother Yaśodā replies, "Then let’s call Him Kṛṣṇa, which includes all of His infinite names in one." I just spoke it, but they sang it so beautifully. 

Now, on the day of the name-giving ceremony, a Brāhmaṇa would perform the ceremony while very loudly chanting mantras, and after that, the baby would then be placed on the laps of his father and all the elders in the house, like the grandfather and the great-grandfather, etc. And I read that the seventh birthday of a child was an occasion for a huge celebration. I couldn't find out why, but there it is: the seventh birthday of a child was an occasion of huge celebration. 

Another *saṁskāra*, of course, was the tradition of accepting a guru, and after accepting a guru, a young Brāhmaṇa boy wouldn't cut his hair until the time he would start getting marriage proposals. His hair would be very long. But at all times, young men would keep *śikhās*, and I was reading that in those days, the *śikhās* used to be very long. One reason was that there was a tradition to grow long *śikhās* so that in the evening during lectures—when the guru was instructing his young disciples in the evening—the guru would tie the *śikhā* of his disciple to something in the ceiling of the room so the Brajabāsī boy could sit up straight and study the *śāstras* and the Vedas late into the night. They would tie the *śikhā* to the ceiling; it was a very strict culture of studying, actually. In the daytime, the disciple would often have to stand, I was reading, straight like a stick in front of his guru with his hands folded behind his back and with his head bowed down to his guru's feet, because it is said that looking into the eyes of the guru was considered a big offense in those days. But don't misunderstand; there was a deep love and appreciation of the disciples for their guru and the gurus for their disciples. After all, the whole subject matter of their education was ultimately meant to awaken love for Rādhā-Śyāma. 

So, there is a poem written by—I call him "our poet" now because we quote him so many times—Paramānanda Dāsa, in which he describes the glories of such a guru in Braja. It's so nice. This is how those disciples, following a very strict way of life because they were by the mercy of the guru awakening their love for Kṛṣṇa, think of him. We find this in the poem of Paramānanda Dāsa. He writes: The disciple is thinking, "My dear spiritual master, may my body be your *āsana*. Use my senses in your service. Make me dance to your instructions and destroy my pride with strong words." Then the poet concludes, "I, Paramānanda Dāsa, pray: O Guru, may your beautiful form always reside within my eyes. O Guru, may your beautiful form always reside in my eyes." 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Now, regarding the final rites, the *saṁskāra* of any Brajabāsī: in the old days, when a Brajabāsī would leave their body, the dust of Vṛndāvana mixed with the water of the Yamunā would be placed in that person's mouth. Then the body would be placed on a bed made solely out of wood from the forest of Braja, and the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would be written all over that body with a paste made from the dust of Vṛndāvana. Then the devotees would place a small Tulasī leaf on the head of the departed soul's body, and after that, they would take the body of that Brajabāsī through the streets of Vṛndāvana and then on to the *parikramā* marg to go around Vṛndāvana while singing a famous *bhajana*. We should revive these old traditions. What was the *bhajana*? "Śrī-Rādhā-ramaṇa, Bhaṭṭa-Gopāla, Śrī-Vṛndāvana-nitya-vihāra." 

That’s how it was begun: "Śrī-Rādhā-ramaṇa, Bhaṭṭa-Gopāla, Śrī-Vṛndāvana-nitya-vihāra"—the famous *bhajana* which means, "May this Brajabāsī always reside in eternal Vṛndāvana and be part of the *nitya-līlā* of Rādhā-ramaṇa while serving under the shelter of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa and other Gosvāmīs." They would sing like that as they took the body. One for me, everyone could hear as they were singing, "May this Brajabāsī always reside in eternal Vṛndāvana and be part of the *nitya-līlā* of Rādhā-ramaṇa under the shelter of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa and other Gosvāmīs." Then, throwing flowers up in the air, they would walk in procession down to the Yamunā River, and there place sandalwood covered with cotton dipped in ghee and camphor into the hands of that departed Brajabāsī. Why? As their last offering to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in that body. Wow. 

The devotees placed sandalwood covered with cotton dipped in ghee and camphor into the hands of that body of the departed Brajabāsī as their last offering to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in that body. What a wonderful tradition. We are following everything meant to help us awaken our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Then everyone would circumambulate one last time around the departed soul and sprinkle Yamunā-jala on the body, and after that, they would place the body on a funeral pyre while chanting, "May this fire take you to the eternal Vṛndāvana." Then, with tears in their eyes, I was reading, they would raise their hands up in the air and call out very loudly, "Rādhe-Śyām! Jaya Rādhe-Śyām! Jaya Jaya Rādhe-Śyām!" And the next day, a man—they would call him an *anāyī*, a man called *anāyī*—he would go from street to street in Vṛndāvana and, in a loud voice, announce as follows: "That respected resident of Vṛndāvana who departed got the invitation to join the eternal pastimes of Rādhe-Śyām." 

Like the town crier, right? "That respected resident of Vṛndāvana who departed got the invitation to join the eternal pastimes of Rādhe-Śyām." And I was told that tradition still continues in Vṛndāvana; it’s called *Vṛndāvana-dhāma-ko-āyā*, which literally means an invitation from the eternal Vṛndāvana—"come join us," an invitation from the eternal Vṛndāvana. And then on the 15th day after the departure of that soul, family members and guests would gather and share their memories of that person; they would take *prasādam* together, and after that, they would go take a sacred dip in the Yamunā. Such was the culture of historical Vṛndāvana, where you could say birth was a festival, becoming a disciple was a festival, entering household life was a festival, and leaving Vṛndāvana to join Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in eternal Vṛndāvana was also a festival. It’s all celebrated. 

Thank you, Prabhu. I’d like to conclude today with a beautiful prayer, a poem actually, that was written by one of my favorite Vṛndāvana poets—you’ve heard me quote him many times—Aliṭa-Kashora. I’ll finish with his words from his heart, because his heart was full of *bhakti*, praying for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Braja. Listen to what he wrote: "My eyes were thirsty to see the beautiful festivals celebrated by the Brajabāsīs, the sweet and melodious sound of the flute outside the doors of the Brajabāsīs, and the dancing of the Brajabāsīs in great ecstasy. My ears are thirsty to drink the nectar of the poems about Kṛṣṇa from the mouth of the Brajabāsīs, and my tongue is thirsty to taste the nectar cooked by the Brajabāsīs." All right, Kṛṣṇa. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, who is the actual revealer of the *dhāma* for all of us. 

I thank you so much. Still up here on the coast, we’ve got another seven weeks of our Festival of India along the Baltic Sea coast. The first two have been more wonderful than I could ever imagine. Many people said, "We were waiting for you, two and a half years! Thank you for coming back." I’ve even seen people cry at our festivals. We’re giving them the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we’re giving the mercy of the Pañca-tattva and the mercy of Rādhe-Śyām, and even though they don’t know it yet, what it actually is, they are enjoying it—the theater productions, the *prasādam*, the kīrtana, and just the association of devotees after what they consider to be a very long time. So we are really happy up here on the coast; we feel we’re in the right place at the right time doing the right thing. Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana! And just looking forward to the rest of the summer. But throughout it all, I’ll do my duty, my seva to all of you, and every Friday we’ll have these lectures on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana, which is where we all want to end up, because there is a festival every day. Let’s take as many fallen souls back home with us. Thank you. See you next Friday. 

Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! Māyāpura-dhāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! 

Kṛṣṇa.