"*00483*.*
"# Historical Vrindavan - Part 1

Hare Kṛṣṇa, very, very, very dear devotees, welcome back again to our ongoing lecture series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. 

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate...*

So, after finishing our last series on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana, I was thinking what to speak about next. We’ve covered a lot of territory as regards Vṛndāvana in the last two and a half years. So, the other day, I decided to take a walk and think about a subject or a series we could speak on. And for inspiration, I actually ended up taking a rickshaw into Vṛndāvana town where I started to walk around. And as I did so, I began marveling at the old architecture that still makes up a good portion of what we now call Vṛndāvana town—you know, the many temples, the shrines, the old homes, the various structures built hundreds and hundreds of years ago that one finds in walking through a myriad of streets and old, tiny lanes here and there. And it suddenly dawned on me that this wasn’t the Vṛndāvana that Kṛṣṇa lived in. That is very clear from His statement to His father in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.24.24. Kṛṣṇa says:

> We quoted that verse many times last year, "My dear father, our home is not in the cities or towns or villages. Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills."

So, Vṛndāvana was actually still very much like that 500 years ago when Lord Caitanya visited—a forested area—and it remained so, even though the six Gosvāmīs came and they built a number of temples in Vṛndāvana on Mahāprabhu’s order. We know about that order; it’s in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 1.32, I believe. It says after going to Vṛndāvana, the brothers preached devotional service and discovered many places of pilgrimage. They specifically initiated the service of Madana-mohana and Govindajī, which included building temples. 

So, you know, factually speaking, it is Kṛṣṇa’s opinion that residence in towns and cities is in the mode of passion. That we find in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11.25.25:

> "Residence in the forest is in the mode of goodness; residence in a town is in the mode of passion; residence in a gambling house displays the quality of ignorance. But residence in a place where I reside is transcendental."

That’s from the mouth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. But although that’s the preferred Vṛndāvana—that’s the eternal Vṛndāvana—you know, the role of endowment, the cows and the pasturing grounds, and so forth; that’s how you think of Vṛndāvana when you read the *Kṛṣṇa* book. But at that moment, rather, that I was walking through Vṛndāvana, I was looking around and remembering that one time I heard Prabhupāda say, "In Vṛndāvana, there are thousands of temples." Once he said, "Five thousand temples." 

So as I looked around, I was wondering, "Where did all these old, ornate, beautiful structures come from?" I wasn’t thinking of the growing metropolis that has sprung up in the last several decades, but this vast array of even small, and you could say big, royal palaces that we sometimes don’t see because now they’re very old and gray. You know, rural Vṛndāvana, yes, but also Vṛndāvana since the time of the Gosvāmīs. It developed over hundreds of years with many palaces, beautiful buildings. So, I was wondering, "Where did all this come from?" This is also Vṛndāvana; it attracts the people to Vṛndāvana. 

So I started thinking, "What’s the history? How did this beautiful town, the residence of the Lord—where, because He resides there, it’s completely transcendental and in His deity form—how did it all come about?" So I went to visit a good friend of mine, Asada, who is a scholar—one of the mahants, the main authorities in the Rādhā-vallabha-sampradāya—and I discussed this with him. And he loaned me a book; it’s called *Vṛndāvana-anurāga-valī*, which translated means "The Creeper of Deep Attachment to Śrī Vṛndāvana." It’s a scholarly work; it contains a lot of history—a lot of the history of old Vṛndāvana, not so much philosophy, but history. And therein I discovered, somewhat to my surprise, that much of what we know of old Vṛndāvana and which still exists was built by royal families over the centuries. 

Now, while it’s true that Vṛndāvana is a place of bhajans and bhajanānandīs—sādhus who come in and, you know, renunciants, deep spiritual seekers who live simple lives in the forests and the hills of Braja, you know, chanting 192 rounds a day or going on Govardhana parikramā three or four times a day—well, that’s true. Vṛndāvana is also a place, I was reading, where the royal, the wealthy, and the powerful expressed their devotion to Kṛṣṇa. Because one can also be a king or a president or a prime minister or a head of a business or an athlete and be a great devotee. It’s a question of the heart, the consciousness, how one is serving Kṛṣṇa. So, I discovered that these royal families, they expressed their devotion in Vṛndāvana by building temples and shrines for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa and the many pastimes He performed there. 

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī says in his commentary to *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* 18.7, actually, that anyone who builds a temple for the Lord is assured of an elevated destination. Here’s the actual verse: 

> "One who creates a temple for Lord Hari stays in heaven for as many thousands of years as there are atoms in the temple." 

Of course, our goal is not svarga-loka, but it’s just Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī saying that by that activity, one is elevated to a very high position. Building temples—because temples mean the Lord’s installed in the temple and people come to see the Lord, to have darśana with the Lord. And darśana also means the Lord sees you. He sees into your heart and inspires you what you have to do to become His pure devotee. So I was thinking thus, that these kings, these royal personalities, they’ve actually done immense service to the Lord and derived immense benefit in their own personal lives by all this amazing old construction. And Braja was done very tastefully. 

So with that in mind, I decided to do a short series of lectures about the many devotional families—the kings, the queens, the princes, the princesses—and how they contributed, either as a family or many times just individuals in those families who came forth and became great devotees. How they contributed to the culture of Braja as it developed down through the centuries, you know, after Lord Caitanya sent the six Gosvāmīs to develop Vṛndāvana. His purpose, actually—Mahāprabhu’s purpose—was to make it a very attractive spiritual place. Because, you know, of course there’s the beauty and the simplicity of the forest, but Mahāprabhu’s movement is for everyone, regardless. And his idea was to make, you could say, like a spiritual headquarters, to make it look very beautiful so people would come just to see the beauty of this town and the deity worship and the sādhus speaking the scriptures and visiting the holy places. It had to develop so the whole world would come here. 

And what those royal families did is how Vṛndāvana looks today—of course not the big metropolis that’s going on, but very tastefully done. And actually, even as a result, both for its spiritual renown and for its architecture and beauty and scholarship, Vṛndāvana has become one of India’s foremost attractions, both for foreigners and people in this country. You know, the foreigners, they come in Kārttika or in Gaura-pūrṇimā time. But having lived here almost three years now, you would be amazed how many people come from Delhi and come from Agra and Lucknow every weekend. You can’t even walk on the streets of Vṛndāvana on the weekend because so many people come here. 

When I first came here in 1972, it was a sleepy little village and there was only one car. I remember one of the Gosvāmīs had a car. And to make a phone call, you had to go to the telephone exchange and wait for two or three hours to make a call to Delhi. And if I wanted to call home to my mother, it took—I booked the call for two days later. But nowadays, because—well, a lot because of the preaching of ISKCON under Śrīla Prabhupāda’s desire—Vṛndāvana has become very, very famous. 

But we should know for sure that the original, simple Vṛndāvana that Kṛṣṇa described in the verse I stated earlier, it still exists and it will exist so eternally. There’s *prakata*, there’s the pastimes when Kṛṣṇa is here and they’re visible; and after Kṛṣṇa goes back to the spiritual world, He actually remains *aprakata*, unmanifest pastimes, and they’re happening. But you have to have the eyes covered with the salve of bhakti, your devotion, to see them. That Vṛndāvana is still here, in all its simplicity and glory, and Vṛndāvana’s many forests; it’s all there. And that Vṛndāvana actually Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī describes in his famous *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*. Such a popular book; so many verses. He gives a beautiful description of what Vṛndāvana still is now to those who have the eyes to see. He writes:

> "I meditate on Vṛndāvana. The cuckoos sing the fifth note, the flute plays splendid melodies, peacocks sing and dance, vines and trees bloom. Splendid, charming forests are wonderful with many birds and deer, and where there are many splendid lakes, streams, and hills."

For us, that Vṛndāvana, *aprakata* Vṛndāvana, can only be seen and realized actually by the mercy of our Śrīla Prabhupāda. We often mention that the spiritual master is the "revealer of the dhāma." He reveals the dhāma to us by introducing us to the process of sādhana-bhakti, whereby we purify our hearts of all contamination, and especially by the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, we awaken our devotion, our love for Kṛṣṇa. So this way he reveals the dhāma. He doesn't—the spiritual master doesn't just wave his hand and then you have the vision. We’re works in progress. But it’s Śrīla Prabhupāda, our founder-ācārya, who came to Vṛndāvana, set the standard of how to live here, wrote about Vṛndāvana, came to the West and invited us to come to Vṛndāvana. Even there’s invitations in his books, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* and *Bhāgavatam*, to this very day, welcoming people to this transcendental abode. 

Therefore, in this series, we should remember him at every step of the way as we delve into the history of the sacred land of Braja-bhūmi. He’s the revealer of the dhāma. And in that regard, there’s one śloka that, at least for me, is a śloka that—how do you say it—cries out to Śrīla Prabhupāda from the very depths of one's heart. 

> "So beautiful. O spiritual master, O giver of divine wisdom, O friend of the fallen, you are the giver of your own bliss and you are the only ocean of mercy. Although dwelling in Vṛndāvana, you have descended for the welfare of fallen souls like me, and you are preaching the divine love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Please be kind upon me."

So with Śrīla Prabhupāda’s blessing, a little—these are history lessons we’re talking now, you know—and then so many līlās. Maybe not so much philosophy, but it’s all transcendental because it’s connected to Braja, how it came to look like it does today. So let’s discuss now where all these beautiful structures that we see in the town—you know, if you walk around Vṛndāvana, you know, almost every other building has some history to it. Of course, they’re knocking some of them down now, unfortunately, but still even today, as I was wandering that day, so many amazing structures. Where did they come from? 

Well, we did touch upon this in a previous lecture. You may remember how some months ago, in our series about Govindajī, we mentioned how Rājā Jai Singh II from Jaipur, who welcomed Govindajī into his new city of Jaipur and built a beautiful temple for Him, which is still there—Jai Singh, you may remember, would sometimes come to Braja. He was royalty; this was in the 1700s. He would come here for inspiration. Actually, I heard Prabhupāda say one time in his room in Vṛndāvana, when I was present for one of our big festivals every year in India, in Māyāpura and in Vṛndāvana, he said very simply, "Vṛndāvana is for inspiration. Now you must go back to the West and preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness, distribute my books." So, it’s enough just to come here for inspiration, what to speak of being so fortunate as myself and others we got locked down here. The lockdown’s over, but we’re still locked in; we developed some attraction for this residential place. 

So, yeah, you can come here just for inspiration, which he did. He was the king, you know. Jaipur’s a three-hour drive—it’s probably a day or two, three-ride on horses or palanquins or whatever—but he would come here. The king would come to Vṛndāvana, and although he was very wealthy and powerful and famous, we hear—we heard how he would often come incognito. He didn’t want to be recognized as anyone special because he knew the most famous person who has all six opulences, the Supreme Lord Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, came to Braja and He remained in His deity form. So, he would come not as the master, but he would come as the humble servant. He’d actually come barefoot as a simple pilgrim, the king, and he’d wander around, take baths in the kuṇḍas and the lakes, roll in the dust, visit the temples, hear from the sādhus—the king. 

But at the same time, to honor and make Vṛndāvana glorious, he actually constructed a number of residences, you know, for his family, because they would also come. And he would also come not just as a sādhu, but he would also come and reside here with his family and participate in the festivals. So he built a number of residences next to Keśī-ghāṭa; actually, just a few meters from Keśī-ghāṭa, that existed to this very day. I recently visited Śrīvatsa Gosvāmī, one of the very famous Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, a preeminent scholar at the present time, a very wonderful devotee. Śrīvatsa Gosvāmī, many of you may know, he’s contributed in so many ways to our ISKCON movement. So at the present time, he lives in one of those palatial buildings constructed by Jai Singh II on the banks of the Yamunā River in Keśī-ghāṭa. He invited me to come and we wanted to discuss some scholarly matters, and he lives in one of the buildings. And actually, there’s a whole complex there that has been rejuvenated, it’s been reconstructed, but the original—much of the original buildings are there. I was walking around and thinking, "Oh, this is how the kings lived, how the kings of old, and one scholar is living there, Śrīvatsa Gosvāmī." So it’s a beautiful Jai Singh II made a beautiful contribution to Vṛndāvana, and it was built in such a way that it still stands 300 years after it was built. 

Now, to say that many structures were built by royal families is evident by the fact that many of these temples were constructed out of red sandstone. This red sandstone was only available to the emperors in Delhi or members of royal families. No one else could even touch it; only those—the emperor or, you know, royal families—had access to that red sandstone. And they would—so you see in Vṛndāvana that many of these structures that were built by the royal families are of red sandstone because only they could afford it. Just like in any society, much of what is art and culture is well done by the government, at least in previous ages. I know in Europe, many of the beautiful buildings, many of the music, the art, the ballet, the dance, that was all supported by the kings and the governments because the common people couldn’t afford it. So you see this red sandstone; that’s a sign that it was done by royalty here in Braja. Therefore, Vṛndāvana is often referred to as a "red city" or *Lāl Nagarī*. *Lāl* means a city of love, because in Vedic culture red signifies love. So because there’s so much red sandstone here and all these buildings constructed by the royal families, it’s all red. It’s all connected. 

And there’s also numerous havelis, as I was walking around I noticed. Numerous havelis. Havelis are actually residential homes which were made and used by the kings and their relatives when they came to Vṛndāvana. And these havelis are like small temples, actually; they were the homes of the royalties, but because the royalties' hearts were with Kṛṣṇa, they brought their iṣṭa-devas from wherever they came from around India, mainly North India of course. They brought their deities and they made a home for their deities, and the people lived in the home. It’s not exactly a temple, but it’s a residence, very ornate residence where the royalty lived with their deities. And that’s one of the reasons we can say that there’s 5,000 temples in Vṛndāvana—it’s not like main temples, but smaller temples that are still maintained even to the present day by the descendants of those families. Or if, you know, they’re no longer connected, families live there and they take care of those deities; we, pujārīs are there to take care of those deities. But big temples and havelis and other shrines as well. So, yes, Vṛndāvana is attractive for every devotee, regardless of what that devotee’s profession may be. 

So, therefore, that answered my question, you know: "Where did all these ornate structures come from?" They came from the hearts of the royalty who wanted to serve Kṛṣṇa in that way. 

Now, I was reading—it’s really interesting—there was one queen, a queen. Her name was Surangī Mahārānī. She was a queen in Kashmir, a very beautiful part of India. She was quite wealthy, with her husband the king; they were king and queen of Kashmir. This is going back a couple of hundred years now. One day she was sitting on her couch, very ornate couch in her palace in Kashmir, and she said to her maidservant, "Please entertain me with a story or a song." So, this was no ordinary maidservant; she was actually a Vaiṣṇavī. This maidservant smiled, and she said, "Oh, my dear queen, I will tell you a story of a cowherd boy’s love with the daughter of a king. I will tell you a story of a cowherd boy’s love—guess who?—with the daughter of a king. Guess who? Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." 

So, the queen didn’t know what was going on, so she laughed and she said, "Oh, that sounds interesting; tell me in detail about that, you know, like a story or something." So this maidservant, she started describing Kṛṣṇa’s Dāna-līlā at Govardhana Hill in Vṛndāvana, you know, where we just go so many times, where He and His friends, you know, they hide in the bushes, they’re behind the rocks, and when the Rādhā and the Gopīs come by, you know, with their milk products to sell in the market, the boys jump out and they say, "This is our area here. My father’s in charge," Kṛṣṇa says, "Nanda Mahārāja. We’re going to tax you girls." And there’s these arguments go on, sometimes there’s splashing of milk products, and it’s all khelā—playful—līlā. 

So this maidservant started talking about Kṛṣṇa’s one of His main places, because this *dāna-keli* taxing pastime takes place all over Vṛndāvana. One of the main places is at Govardhana Hill. So this maidservant started telling this pastime, and it went on for some time, and the queen, she became mesmerized. It’s *brahma*, it’s transcendental sound vibration. It’s līlā. It’s a very sweet līlā. So, somehow, it struck a chord in her heart, like it does for us. You know, one time—well, many of us were not devotees, but we heard these—we heard philosophy from Śrīla Prabhupāda, and he shared with us these transcendental līlās from Vṛndāvana or Māyāpura, and our hearts became softened. We wanted to hear more and more and more and more. 

So the—you know, the maid went on for some time, and her last words were "Dānaghati." Meaning the place where the pastimes of *dāna* and *māna* happened in Braja. So the queen, again, she was very touched by hearing all this. And as the days went by, she kept saying to her servant, "Tell me that story again. Tell me the story how that boy would tax that girl." And she had this very—she developed this very strong desire, *lulyam*, to visit that place where such pastimes take place. The whole purpose of this, you know, these series of classes on Vṛndāvana for almost three years, is just to elicit this desire to come here, to come here to Braja. Because whatever you do here, the benefit is magnified a thousand times. You chant 16 rounds, 16,000 rounds—something like that. 

So she had this very strong desire. So she said to her servant, "Can you take me there?" So her servant said, "All right, my dear queen, I’ll take you there, but it’s a great distance away." It’s a fact. If you look at the map, even though Vṛndāvana’s in North India and Kashmir is North-West, it’s some distance away. What’s more, the problem was that, you know, the king is obviously not going to let his queen make this long, dangerous journey to some village in North India. He’s not going to allow her to go. But she had some *lulyam*; she had some greed. So she decided to leave secretly. And one night, she left with her servant and several palanquin-bearers—or not pallbearers, that said—she left with some, yeah, palanquin-bearers. They carry the palanquin. They all left from a secret exit in the palace. And that small contingent—it wasn’t, they didn’t want to attract too much attention, although she’s the queen and she’s wearing her royal dress and the palanquin is somewhat royal—they tried to remain as incognito as possible. And they traveled, and for months, and finally they arrived in Vṛndāvana. 

And immediately arriving in Vṛndāvana, this famous queen, she found some sādhus and she said, "Where’s Dānaghati?" She knew the name. "Where is Dānaghati?" Now, these sādhus were a little confused because of her royal dress, because she was not a simple village woman. So they asked her, "Who are you?" And her reply—by her reply we can understand her heart—she said, "Actually, I’m no one. I’m just a lost soul who wants to see the beautiful pastime place of Dānaghati. That is my only desire." 

To impress, they directed her to the place where Kṛṣṇa playfully taxes the Gopīs at Govardhana Hill. Now, it’s written that when she arrived there, this queen got off her palanquin and started dancing in great happiness. And as she did so, her large skirt, which was, you can just imagine, it was embedded with gold and fine, you know, silk thread and jewels and so forth and so on—as she started dancing, this skirt started twirling around with such force that the gold pieces and the gems started falling off, and the silk thread became unraveled. But all these gems were on the ground, and I was reading at one point her jeweled hair clips fell off, and then her necklace, and finally she was just dancing and dancing in such happiness in Dānaghati when all her jewels—all her jewels—fell off. 

Now, after she stopped dancing, celebrating the fact that she’d arrived in Vṛndāvana at the special pastime place, this līlā sthalī, to the surprise of everyone who was watching, when she stopped dancing, she didn’t bother to pick up the jewels or didn’t ask anyone to collect the jewels; she just walked away. And later that day, I was reading, she put on the simple white cloth of a sādhvī, a renounced lady in Braja. You know, the—we call the men "sādhus" and the ladies who come here and live a renounced life "sādhvīs." 

What’s more, records show that she took up a very humble residence at Govardhana Hill near to Dānaghati. And she would practice *madhukarī* every day. *Madhukarī* means that the sādhu or the sādhvī, for their sustenance, for their food, they go to four homes a day. Four homes where the householders are living, and whatever the householders give them as prasāda, that’s what they eat. If they get nothing, they don’t—they fast; that’s Kṛṣṇa’s desire. Today I’ll chant all day long, I won’t eat. But generally, the Vrajavāsīs, as I was mentioning in another lecture, they love to feed the visitors; they love to feed the sādhus; that’s Braja. 

So, she sustained herself by humbly begging door-to-door every day from madhukarī. And what’s really interesting, that she took up a sevā—because we come to Vṛndāvana to serve Kṛṣṇa, *jīvera svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya-dāsa* (we are servants)—so we have to find some service. So what service did she take up? She took up the service of taking a broom and sweeping the parikramā path around Govardhana Hill. Probably not the whole hill, but a certain portion every day. This queen from Kashmir, she would sweep with the broom around Govardhana Hill. And because she had renounced her royalty to become a simple sādhvī and became a very great devotee—because she was also doing *nāma-bhajana*, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare—she became very famous. 

To turn your back on material existence and face the Lord with the only desire to please Him, to serve, this takes courage. Because we’ve been trying to enjoy this material world since time immemorial. *Brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva, guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja*. Our history is very clear; you don’t have to go to a psychic or, you know, parrot cards or whatever. We know from that verse, we’ve been in this material world since time immemorial, going from one *brahmāṇḍa*, one universe to the next, one species of life to the next, one body to the next, and it’s the same sad story every time. But it takes time to learn. So that’s a very intense desire to be the big fish. So if you could turn your back on that and face Kṛṣṇa honestly and say, "Now from this day forth, Kṛṣṇa, I am Yours," that person becomes famous, like Prabhupāda. 

I mentioned this one time before: Prabhupāda told one of my sannyāsī godbrothers when he gave him sannyāsa, "Never look back and think that you’ve left anything valuable behind, and never envy the position of the materialistic sense-enjoyers. Just look towards the divine realm of Goloka and serve Kṛṣṇa to the best of your ability." 

So she became very famous and she remained a simple sweeper of the path the rest of her life. In fact, in her old age, she left her body sweeping. She just was sweeping one day and she fell over. And in Vṛndāvana, many times when I inquire about an old sādhu I know or a friend, I can't find him, they’ll say, they go like this. I said, "What does that mean?" "He’s gone to Goloka." So she left for Goloka. And when she died, because of her renunciation, because of her devotion, her bhakti, because of her sevā, they placed her in samādhi. Not because she was a queen—that terminology didn’t apply to her. No one knew her as the queen; they knew her as the sādhvī who—brajarino. So she was placed in samādhi. 

And they say her samādhi is out at Gokula in a very secluded place. Her samādhi—now the interesting thing is that not only was she placed in samādhi, but she was placed in samādhi with her broom. And I had to research a little bit for that one. In Vṛndāvana, in the old days, advanced sādhus were placed in samādhis with what they would say were the instruments of their service. The instruments of their service—it is—they write that their servant, their instruments, were their eternal friends. They were placed in samādhi with the instruments of their services: a broom or a pot; they were a cook or a weaver or whatever the sādhu was. The instruments of their service were their eternal friends because through these instruments they showed their devotion, they expressed their devotion to Kṛṣṇa. That was really interesting. They were placed in samādhi with the instruments of their service, their eternal friends. 

Also famous in this regard—because we know when you research one thing, it leads to another thing—also famous in this regard was the *teḍī-lakuṭa*, *teḍī-lakuṭa*: a stick from a Vṛndāvana forest, a stick from the Vṛndāvana forest where the Lord had performed His pastimes. Now, *teḍī-lakuṭa* literally means a "crooked stick." And you know, you can imagine, in the forest in the old days, even today, very old trees often twisted and gnarled. So the sādhus, they would approach such a tree in the mood of thinking, "This is a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree," and they would pray to the tree to please allow them to take a branch to use it as a support for chanting their japa. You know, if you sit and do 192 rounds a day, maybe your arm will get tired. So, in the old days, they had a stick, and they would have—you know, like this—it went like this, and you’d put your hand as you’re sitting and you would chant your japa like this. So they didn’t just want any stick, because they’re chanting, *śrī-nāma-kāli-kali-nāma-kṛṣṇa-avatāra*, the incarnation of this age is the holy name itself. So Kṛṣṇa’s present in His name, such, respectively—everything had to be *pukka*. So they would take a branch from a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree, and it would be turned and twisted in an attractive way, and they would chant like that. 

Yeah, I’ve seen—I’ve seen on several occasions, I’ve seen these stands, very old ones. In fact, I have one—one sādhu, where was it, in Orissa, he gave me his guru’s—his guru’s—and sometimes I chant, not 192 rounds, but I’ll chant my 16 rounds, history. And so actually, I’d like to share that gift with all of you, so you can see with your own eyes what is a *teḍī-lakuṭa*. Here it is; it’s crooked, gnarled, and it’s from a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree, and it’s given to me by that sādhu; it was his guru’s. And I’ve many times said, Prabhupāda told me personally, he said, "A gift from a sādhu is a very precious thing, a very special thing." So they would—broom here, they chant, they put it like this, and they chant their japa. 

Kṛṣṇa, when would you ever get to see your *teḍī-lakuṭa*? There we go. When such sādhus passed away, their *teḍī-lakuṭas* were also placed in samādhi with them. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Such culture. For dharma, now you understand why we hear in *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* by Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, "We should run to Braja. We should just run here." At least we should come here as often as history allows us. I think now that the world’s sort of opening up in some ways, closing in others, but opening other ways, many of you will be able to come here for the next Kārttika. And we’re going to have a nice Kārttika; you can join us if you want. And how that, how exciting that will be, you know, for many of you to be back here in Braja after hopefully hearing so many of the glories of Vṛndāvana and reading about it in Prabhupāda’s books, etc. 

So that—yeah, I can’t wait for you all to come. And if you can’t come, we can run to Vṛndāvana in our hearts, because Vṛndāvana is also a question of consciousness. If you have that Vṛndāvana consciousness, you can be—you can live in Vṛndāvana wherever you are. As Advaita Ācārya famously said to Lord Caitanya, who was attempting to go to Vṛndāvana but they weren’t allowing him to go, he said, "Lord, wherever You are, that is Vṛndāvana." So we can make our home Vṛndāvana as well. 

So, thank you so much. These are just a few of the interesting episodes and curiosities of historic Vṛndāvana that I discovered just by skimming the surface of some of these historical books. And I hope that such discussions awaken a strong desire in your heart to come here when the opportunity arises. I hope that that’s the result. And in that vein, I will finish with a quote from Śrī Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s *Bhakti-ratnākara*:

> "So nice. Shall I, a worthless person, ever again see the deities of Govinda, Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana, Rādhā-vinoda? Ever bring me back to Vṛndāvana and give me the opportunity to serve His lotus feet again? Shall Lokanātha Gosvāmī, the incarnation of kindness, bestow his grace upon me again? Catching hold of the hair of the sinner, will the gracious Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī ever bring me back here to Vṛndāvana again? Will Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, the embodiment of kindness, ever again fulfill my desires to go to Vṛndāvana? Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī is the light of the poor and the unfortunate people; will I ever see his feet again? O associates of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, will you ever bring such an unfortunate soul as me to Vṛndāvana and allow me to enjoy your company?"

Let’s have this mood, keep this mood, and achieve eternal Braja. Thank you so much, Prabhus. See you in a couple of days with more history. *Śrī śrī gaura-nitāi kī jaya!* All glories to the devotees!""