"*00510*.*
"# Historical Vrindavan - Part 4

Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We had a little break in the series recently because we were at the Sādhu-saṅga retreat in America—a kīrtan retreat. It was really blissful, but now we are back in action. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* So, we are continuing with our series on historical Vṛndāvana; this is Part 4. 

We have been discussing the contributions of royal families, in particular, in building very beautiful temples and shrines in Braja over the past several hundred years that contribute to the appeal and the charisma of Vṛndāvana. We have already mentioned several members of such prestigious families—a king and two queens—through whose inspiration three beautiful temples were constructed. We must also remember an emperor who contributed; "emperor" means king of kings, and that would be Emperor Akbar. I am sure you remember how he contributed generously to the construction of the temple of Govindajī for Rūpa Gosvāmī’s deity, so even an emperor was involved. 

I was reading that, historically, after such temples started appearing in Vṛndāvana, many kings and queens of various states in India started coming to Vṛndāvana after hearing about its glories. They, in turn, built for themselves *havelīs* in Vṛndāvana. Remember, we discussed *havelīs*; a *havelī* is a house, but built to look like a small temple, because the royal families would have their family deities installed there. This is one reason there are 5,000 temples in Vṛndāvana. An interesting note here is that where these temples and *havelīs* were built, there were previously *kuñjas*, or groves, on those spots where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had Their pastimes. There are *kuñjas* all over Vṛndāvana. So, the custom was that these royal families referred to their *havelīs* and their temples by the names of the *kuñjas* that were previously there. Actually, many of the old temple documents present in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute that I have seen are written with reference to the original *kuñja* name of the temple, not the temple name. It is really interesting. For example, the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple of our beloved Jīva Gosvāmī—in old Vṛndāvana documents, the original name ascribed to that temple is Jīva-gosāi-kī-kuñja.

And there were many such *kuñjas*, or groves. Today, one of the most popular holy sites in Vṛndāvana is Sevā-kuñja—I guess you could even say it is the largest *kuñja* or grove in Vṛndāvana proper—and in the old days, I was reading, it was shared by two *sampradāyas*. This is just interesting historic information: half of it, which was on the banks of the Yamunā, was under the custodianship of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, and the other half was under the custodianship of the Rādhā-vallabha *sampradāya*. An interesting thing is that just adjacent to Sevā-kuñja is a small grove called Kiśoravana—like a little forest—which, and you will find this really surprising, is actually inside Loi Bāzār, where many devotees go shopping. In Loi Bāzār, that little forest, that little *kuñja*, still exists on one very narrow street. You can go there and try to find it. The boundary of Sevā-kuñja and Kiśoravana is known as Advaita-jī-ko-kuñja, meaning the *kuñja* or grove of Advaitācārya. This is a place where Advaitācārya did *bhajana* during his time in Vṛndāvana. I was reading that Advaitācārya did *bhajana* in three particular places: Advaitā-vaṭa (the banyan tree), which is very near Madana-mohana’s temple; Advaita-jī-ko-kuñja, which we just mentioned, the border between Śīrovana, Kiśoravana, and Sevā-kuñja; and he also went to Nidhuvana, the forest which, if you look at a map, is next to Rādhā-ramaṇa. So, in these three places, he did his *bhajana*, and because of that, these three places were very dear to Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu as well, because He came after Advaitācārya. During Mahāprabhu’s visit to Vṛndāvana, He took rest in all these three places where Advaitācārya did, and it is written that while doing so, He remembered Advaitācārya.

Now, these three places—actually, I was looking at a map—make a triangle in Vṛndāvana, and lo and behold, in the middle of the triangle is the temple of Gopīśvara, Lord Śiva in the mood of a *gopī*. This triangle on the maps is referred to as "Ācārya Tikoṇa," meaning the triangle kingdom of Advaitācārya. And as we all know, Advaitācārya is also Sadāśiva, which explains the presence of Gopīśvara Mahādeva in the middle of the triangle. Now, many other well-known and beautifully constructed old buildings, temples, etc., were known by *kuñja* names as well. For example, the place where the security guards sent by Emperor Akbar to protect Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Govindajī temple resided, that particular place was known as Phaujdār-kuñja. *Phaujdār* means the army of security guards, so it is a *kuñja* where there was an army of security guards protecting the deity. And Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s temple, Rādhā-Madana-mohana—in the old documents, it is known as Baḍo-kuñja. *Baḍo-kuñja* means the "Big Grove," and I had to research more about the Big Grove. It is called the Big Grove because Sanātana Gosvāmī was the big brother of Rūpa Gosvāmī; therefore, his place was famous as *Baḍo-kuñja*, meaning the "Big Brother Grove." It is really interesting. The temple and the place of worship of our beloved Śrī Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa was famous as Dol-kuñja—the grove of the swing pastime—because *dola* is a place where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa swing. So, for the temple and place of worship of Rādhā-ramaṇa, they said, "Let’s go to the Dol-kuñja," which means, "Let’s go see Rādhā-ramaṇa, the grove of the swing pastime." To this day—actually, I was just down there recently—there is an old white marble swing near the samādhi of Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. The temple of Rādhā-Gokulānanda and its nearby area is still referred to as Paṭnīmal-kuñja. So, you see, in the old days, they just referred to the *kuñjas*. And I read that Keśī-ghāṭa was not called Keśī-ghāṭa in the old days; it was called Keśī-vadha-sthala, and only later, when the kings came and they made these beautiful ghāṭas there, did it become known as Keśī-ghāṭa. And there is the famous temple of Govindajī; the temple itself and its surrounding area is known as Gosāi-jī-ko-kuñja in the old documents.

*Gosāi-jī-ko-kuñja* means the place of the *gosvāmī*, Rūpa Gosvāmī. *Gosāi* is a word which is famously used, especially for Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, here in our beloved Vṛndāvana. And there, previously at that temple, I was reading that Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī would do theatrical productions of three of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s books: *Vidagdha-mādhava*, *Lalita-mādhava*, and *Dāna-keli-kaumudī*. I was reading he was actually a very good actor; Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī liked to do theater, so he would perform these theatrical productions at that *kuñja*, at that temple of Rūpa Gosvāmī. And during that time also, as we mentioned last year, there were regular discourses on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* by Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa. I was also reading that next to Govindajī’s temple, there was once a beautiful, beautiful manicured garden of banana trees meant especially for Govindajī, and it was known as Kadalī-kuñja—the grove of banana trees. Lots of *kuñjas* just near the temple; there was a banana grove, Kadalī-kuñja, the grove of banana trees. There was also a well-known, large *gośālā* for cows just nearby. We can still see the present temple, but the *gośālā* is not there any longer because, unfortunately, it was destroyed by the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb, such an evil person. Now, I want to make an important point here: in reference to the temples being referred to as *kuñjas*, this was also in part because the Gosvāmīs, or let us say the *pūjārīs* serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in those temples, were not thinking they were serving in a construction made of sand and stone like a building or temple, but rather they were imagining themselves serving in the *kuñja*—the flowery grove with the flowers and the bushes and the trees and where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes were. The place—they were actually thinking, "Oh, I am not serving in a temple; I am serving in a *kuñja*." So nice, so sweet, so relevant for rāgānuga-bhakti.

Now, unfortunately, we had to mention the name of the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb in relationship to his destroying Govindajī’s *gośālā*, but that reminded me of a very interesting twist in history regarding that terrible tyrant Aurangzeb that I thought I would share with you today. It is the story of Zeb-un-Nissa. Zeb-un-Nissa was the eldest daughter of Aurangzeb, his first child, and this story is about how she was influenced by Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava teachings and became a Vaiṣṇavī. I could not help but tell the story. A number of historians will deny this—especially our dear Islamic brothers and sisters, they will deny this; they say it would not be possible that the daughter of a powerful ruler in the Mughal dynasty like Aurangzeb would have a daughter who converted to Vaiṣṇavism, and they have written much about her without mentioning her being influenced or affected by our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava culture. But nevertheless, her story was chronicled by devotee scholars, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scholars at the time, and thus her glorious, but—I have to add—sad history, as you will see, remains known to all of us. Now, much of the material that I will share with you about this illustrious personality is from a number of books: one is called *Dīwān-i-Makhfī*, originally written in Persian and published by the Lahore Amrit Press. There is also another book I read called *Zeb-un-Nissa* by Paul Wali, written in 1913 in the context I am going to describe, as well as a book called *The Tears of Zeb-un-Nissa: Excerpts from the Dīwān-i-Makhfī* by W. Tāk. So, some scholars have written in this regard. So, let me begin. Zeb-un-Nissa was born February 15th, in the year 1638, again as the first child of Aurangzeb. Her mother’s name was Dilras Banu Begum, and she was actually the main queen of Aurangzeb. Now, this Zeb-un-Nissa, as she grew up, she was very, very beautiful and she was extremely intelligent and cultured. It is written that as a young girl, she actually memorized the entire Qur'an in three years, and in her teenage years, she studied philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, and literature. She also mastered Persian, Arabic, and Urdu languages. I was reading her personal library surpassed all other private collections, and she employed many scholars to produce literary works for her. Her library had literary works on law, literature, history, and most importantly, theology. It is written that in her theological studies, she came across the writings of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, which, as anyone can imagine, had a very profound effect on her, but which she kept secret for obvious reasons, because she is in a Mughal dynasty. But once that seed is planted, nothing can stop it from growing, except offenses of course. So, I was reading that Zeb-un-Nissa was a very kind-hearted person; she was always helping people in need. She had a very keen interest in music, and actually, she was said to be the best singer amongst the women of her time. Interestingly, she never married, but at one point in her life, she fell in love with—get this—a Rajput king named Mahārāja Chhatrasāl. Because in those days, you know, there was a lot of mixing between the Mughal dynasty and the Rajput kings; there were treaties between them so they didn't have to destroy, fight, and destroy their kingdoms; there was intermarriage, etc. I have discussed that before. So, for whatever reason, she saw this personality, she heard from him—from a distance, obviously—but she fell in love with the Rajput king, Aurangzeb’s daughter. Again, his name was Mahārāja Chhatrasāl. Unfortunately, Mahārāja Chhatrasāl was not initially interested in Zeb-un-Nissa because she was a Muslim; he didn't want to complicate things, so he wasn't very interested in her. What’s more, Mahārāja Chhatrasāl happened to be Aurangzeb’s biggest enemy. There were no kind words between these two; there were no alliances in this particular relationship; they just fought battle after battle after battle, and Mahārāja Chhatrasāl always won.

So, you can see the plot developing here. So intent on actually making contact with Mahārāja Chhatrasāl, Zeb-un-Nissa began secretly writing him many letters, which he basically ignored. But as her secret love—remember, her secret love for Kṛṣṇa was also blossoming at the same time—she started privately composing and singing very beautiful poetry about Kṛṣṇa and Braja in Farsi and Urdu languages, which she would share in secret letters with Mahārāja Chhatrasāl. Somehow she had her spies, or her messengers, going to Rajasthan and delivering these love letters—love letters about Kṛṣṇa, but also, obviously, if you wanted to entertain this Rajput king. But it is written that although Mahārāja Chhatrasāl began to appreciate her devotion for Kṛṣṇa—and why would he appreciate it? Because he, it is also described, was a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa as well. He was a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa; many of these Rajput kings were great devotees of Kṛṣṇa. So, you know, he is hearing these poems she is writing and these songs, you know, it is kind of touching his heart, but he continued to hesitate to contact her for obvious reasons. So finally, this princess, in desperation, she disguised herself as an actor who sang devotional songs about Kṛṣṇa and Vṛndāvana, and she secretly traveled to the court of Mahārāja Chhatrasāl and she performed there. And it is written that when Mahārāja Chhatrasāl heard her singing—her beautiful voice—again, remember, she is the moon amongst the stars of the ladies of those days. When she sang, it touched his heart, especially what she was singing about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And when he inquired who was this new girl, a relationship started developing, with Kṛṣṇa at the center, as we say today. To make a long story short, their love affair was discovered by Aurangzeb’s spies, and when Aurangzeb was informed that his beloved daughter, his firstborn, was in a relationship with his worst enemy, he became like fire. Anger consumed everything, including whatever intelligence he may have had. He became very angry with her. Actually, I was reading he beat her, but rather than publicly humiliate Zeb-un-Nissa by revealing her love affair with his greatest enemy and thus, you could say, tarnish his own reputation, what he did is he threw his favorite daughter—previously his firstborn child, Zeb-un-Nissa—into a dark, damp prison. It was in the Salimgarh Fort in Delhi—there are several forts in Delhi—so the Salimgarh Fort in Delhi, he threw her into that damp, dark prison. I was reading it had just an earthen floor, no windows.

But being the devotee that she became after reading the writings of Rūpa Gosvāmī, she continued her writing and her poetry glorifying her beloved Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It is said that when she received the news that her father, Aurangzeb, had destroyed the birthplace temple of Kṛṣṇa in Mathurā, which he did, it broke her heart, and from that day her health started deteriorating. So, you can see how attached she was to Kṛṣṇa, to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. But somehow she survived these austere conditions in the prison for more than twenty years—more than twenty years—and Aurangzeb never came to see her, of course; she just rotted in prison. And it is written that when she took her final breath on the 26th of May, 1702, she was 64 years of age, her final breath was singing for Kṛṣṇa, and it is written, dreaming to take her next birth in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. She was singing about Kṛṣṇa and dreaming that, "I will now take birth in Vṛndāvana and be a Vrajavāsī in my next life." And her samādhi—because she was a princess, so there had to be something—her samādhi is in Agra, near one of the forts. I was actually thinking of going there, paying my respects to this great Vaiṣṇavī. All right, Kṛṣṇa! Is that a wonderful story? So, I would like to finish today with an excerpt from one of her early poems, you know, when her love is just awakening for Kṛṣṇa after reading Rūpa Gosvāmī’s writings, where she is clearly revealing her love for Kṛṣṇa. Here it is:

"Oh, You with dark curly hair and breathtaking eyes, Your sidelong glance leaves me undone. Oh, You with eyes that pierce my heart and then withdraw like a blood-stained sword. Oh, You with eyes with dagger lashes! Oh unbelievers, you are mistaken; this is in fact heaven. Never mind those making promises of the afterlife, join us now, righteous friends, in this intoxication of divine love. Never mind the path to the holy temple, for today sanctity resides in the pure heart. Don't squander your life, my friends; God is right here! Just come see His beautiful face, see His continual light. This is where I belong. I am thrilled here, right here; there is no book anywhere to properly describe His beauty. Only when I see Him do I understand. My friends, if you wish to see the beauty of God, share it with me! Awaiting the tiniest morsel, I am here, waiting for you."

She is already so enlightened, but she is begging her friends to come with some morsel of mercy from Kṛṣṇa. Wow. We will finish here. We will be back in a couple of days after I unpack and put all my things away after coming back from America. I will be back in a couple of days with more beautiful history of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. I can tell you, it is so nice to be back, and we are waiting for many of you to come for Kārttika. Merry Christmas!

Transcendental book distribution! The chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra in every town and village! All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!""