"*00138*.*
"### Historical Vrindavan - Part 7

Very dear devotees, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Vande ‘ham śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swami, who is the revealer of the dhāma. So, we are again continuing with our series on historic Vṛndāvana, and this will be part seven. 

In the olden days, life in Vṛndāvana was very different from today. Previously, Vṛndāvana’s culture, traditions, clothing, lifestyle, worship, spiritual practices, and cuisine were all strictly according to the śāstras. In *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes how any and all activities should be done for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa. That famous verse, *anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam / ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā*. He writes: one should render a transcendental service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation; that is called pure devotional service. So, *ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā* means activities which are favorable or pleasing to Kṛṣṇa. 

Thus, in old Braja—and by this we mean we are talking about the last three or four hundred years—the way people dressed, their lifestyle, their language, their foodstuffs, their cuisine, everything was done with Kṛṣṇa in mind. We are also trying to be like those Vrajavāsīs. We know that statement: "Always remember Kṛṣṇa, never forget Him." So, they were so expert at doing that in all their activities, and even today there are so many wonderful Vrajavāsīs like that. But there was something special about the past, and because that was so, we aspiring devotees can gain a lot by hearing about the customs of the residents of Vṛndāvana in those times. We can follow in their footsteps. Actually, we can follow in the footsteps of the Vrajavāsīs in particular. In *Upadeśāmṛta*, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in verse 8:

> The essence of all advice is that one should utilize one's full time, 24 hours a day, in nicely chanting and remembering the Lord’s divine name, transcendental form, qualities, and eternal pastimes. Thereby, gradually engaging one’s tongue and mind in this way, one should reside in Vraja and serve Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of devotees. One should follow in the footsteps of the Lord’s beloved devotees who are deeply attached to His devotional service.

So, therein Rūpa Gosvāmī stresses we should follow in the footsteps of the Lord’s beloved devotees, specifically those who live in Vṛndāvana. We want to be Vrajavāsīs. All glories to Vaikuṇṭha, the official kingdom of God, but our hearts are in Braja, which is the playground of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We must never forget that. True Vrajavāsa is very dear to Kṛṣṇa. One often hears the following words of Kṛṣṇa here in Braja. One time, Kṛṣṇa announced in Vṛndāvana before leaving to Mathurā, "I take a vow in the presence of the King of Braja, Mahārāja Nanda, that I will never forget my heart and soul, my dear Vrajavāsīs." The Lord’s heart and soul is the Vrajavāsīs because they have the purest, selfless form of love for Kṛṣṇa. So, this is how much Kṛṣṇa loves Vrajavāsīs. 

Today I thought we could focus on one of the cultural items that we were mentioning—that people serve the Lord with in old Braja—and that is the food or the cuisine of old Vṛndāvana. In our last lecture, we talked about kaṇṭhi-mālā, dropping beads, and so many things in old Vṛndāvana. Let’s talk about cuisine in old Vṛndāvana. I am always remembering Yamunā’s cookbook; Yamunā Devī, what a great gift she gave to the Vaiṣṇavas now and in future generations by compiling all those wonderful recipes that are part of our tradition of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. All glories to Yamunā Devī. So, let’s talk about cuisine—what the Vrajavāsīs ate and what foodstuffs they offered to their deities in the temples. I picked food and drink as the focus today because there’s a popular saying nowadays, isn’t it? "You are what you eat." But I found a similar statement in Braja language. There’s always a perfect counterpart here in Braja: "Desires are affected by the food one takes, and the voice is affected by the water one drinks." The same thing, but more eloquently. Elegance is truth spoken concisely. Yes, we are what we eat, but the Vrajavāsīs say, "Desires are affected by the food one takes, and the voice is affected by the water one drinks." Vaiṣṇava poetry. 

To begin with, śāstra says that in Vṛndāvana, one should only eat prasādam, food cooked and offered to the Lord. Actually, Kṛṣṇa Himself is very specific about this. There are 700 verses in *Bhagavad-gītā*, and one verse in particular addresses this point—that we should just eat prasādam. Chapter 3, verse 13: The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat food which is first offered in sacrifice. Others who prepare food for personal sense enjoyment verily eat only sin. 

As for water, in the old days, a Vrajavāsī simply drank the pure water of the Yamunā River and from various lakes and streams. Previously, there were something around 27 lakes just around Govardhana Hill. You know, we sometimes think, "I am going to go to the Sierra Nevada mountains or the Rocky Mountains in America and go high into the mountains and drink from the lakes and the streams." We just have that desire. Pure water. So water was also pure—what it still isn't in a transcendental sense—but in those days it was pure, pure, pure and transcendental. So when you’re hungry, you stop and you take some water from a kuṇḍa, stream, or the Yamunā River. 

And as for foodstuffs, the Vrajavāsīs ate what they first offered to the Lord. One foodstuff in particular they liked, because Kṛṣṇa liked it, was buttermilk. Kṛṣṇa loves buttermilk. He loves milk sweets. A great Vrajavāsī poet of the early 15th century, Paramānanda Dāsa, writes: "The buttermilk made from yogurt by the Gopīs has become the rarest thing to achieve, even by the creator of this world, Lord Brahmā. Just see, the humble Gopīs are distributing that buttermilk to everyone. It is that very adhara-amṛta, which is the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus lips." Then he goes on: "That Lord of the 14 worlds, while ruling in Dvārakā, eats 56 sumptuous food items, 36 special types of dishes, 108 types of different drinks, and many types of snacks. Yet that same Lord hankers for drinking a handful of buttermilk prepared by the Vraja Gopīs." Just a handful. He wants it from the Vraja Gopīs—buttermilk. 

The glory of buttermilk is nicely described by the poet Raskhān. Remember we spoke about him? He was a Muslim who became a pure Vaiṣṇava, Raskhān. So the role of buttermilk is nicely described in one of his poems. He writes: "The glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are sung unceasingly by Lord Ananta-śeṣa, Lord Gaṇeśa, Lord Śiva, the Sun God, and Indra. The Vedas declare Him as beginningless, endless, unlimited, indestructible, and void of differences. And great sages like Nārada, Śukadeva, and Vyāsa have accepted their defeat while singing His glories; they can never fathom His glories. Yet, Śrī Raskhān says that the power of the love of the maidens of Braja is such that it makes Kṛṣṇa dance for a sip of buttermilk from the palms of their hands." All the Gopīs, ghee, buttermilk—Kṛṣṇa loves buttermilk. 

Of course, Kṛṣṇa eats more than buttermilk. We’ve discussed in previous lectures how devotees in Vṛndāvana offer Him *chappan bhog*, or 56 types of food items, to Kṛṣṇa during various big festivals. Whenever there’s a big festival here, you’ll always see that you go to the temples and you’ll see the altars are full of different varieties of foodstuffs, specifically 56 food items. So He’s more than buttermilk. And in my research, I found a very interesting history behind the origin of these 56 types of food offerings, *chappan bhog*, on festivals. That is, when Indra flooded—he was a rascal—he flooded the whole of Vṛndāvana with water and Kṛṣṇa had lifted Govardhana Hill to save the Vrajavāsīs. Māta Yaśodā was just fretting; she was worried that Kṛṣṇa wasn't eating because He was standing and He was holding the hill up with His hand, with His finger. So she decided to feed Him, and she fed Him every *prahara* of the day. So, what’s a *prahara*? A *prahara* lasts for three hours, so there are eight *praharas* in 24 hours in one day. So because Kṛṣṇa held Govardhana Hill for seven days, that means she cooked 56 foodstuffs and offered them to Kṛṣṇa in those seven days' time. Eight *praharas* a day equals 56. So each *prahara* she cooked a special preparation. So 56 *chappan* in that mood is offered to Kṛṣṇa. Isn't that interesting on festival days? 

Now, a little more research revealed that the meaning of *chappan*—56 bhogas or offerings—is that this is really interesting: during the Rāsa-līlā dance, the Vraja Gopīs arranged themselves in three circles around Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the middle. There’s one circle of Gopīs, then there’s a wider circle of Gopīs, and there’s yet another circle of Gopīs in this one particular Rāsa-līlā dance. And it looked like the firmament of a lotus; the lotus is there with different petals coming out extending like that. So it’s compared to a lotus. The first layer of the lotus, the first circle, was described as eight petals representing the eight main Gopīs. The second layer of this lotus in the Rāsa dance had 16 petals representing the 16 secondary Gopīs. The third layer, the ring of the lotus, had 32 petals representing the 32 Gopīs in that circle. And at one point in this particular Rāsa-līlā dance, all these Gopīs started offering bhoga that they had cooked to Kṛṣṇa, and the total number of the offerings came to 56. Why? Because there’s 8 Gopīs in the first circle, 16 in the next, plus 32—you do the math, 56. So *chappan bhog*! There’s different explanations why in Vṛndāvana we have this tradition of offering 56 preparations to Kṛṣṇa spread out on the altar on special days. It’s really beautiful. At Raman Reti temple, I’ve gone—so beautiful when they distribute it to all the devotees. *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma*. 

So, in conclusion, Kṛṣṇa does love buttermilk, but He’s also adept at eating 56 preparations on special festival days. So now, let’s discuss some of the traditional foodstuffs that Vrajavāsīs themselves cooked and offered to Kṛṣṇa and then respected in days gone by. I was reading in the institutes that in the 14th and 15th centuries, the food was very simple in Braja, obviously reflecting the simple lifestyle of people who lived there in those days. You can just imagine, most of the residents of Braja in those times were farmers; they worked very hard, you know, 12 hours a day, and they needed food which was full of nutrients, proteins, and carbohydrates. Therefore, historians say that was when the famous dish of Braja, the *roti*, was created. We know the *roti* because we try to follow in the footsteps of the Vrajavāsīs. Sometimes we go out with my friends and we do *madhukarī* in the villages; it means you’re allowed, or *mādhukarī* is allowed, to go to four houses for one's sustenance for the whole day, and whatever they give you during those visits to four houses, that’s what you eat. But Vrajavāsīs love to feed the sādhu, so sometimes you get full at the first house. But what we often get is a *roti*—*roti* with some pickles and *maṭṭhā*, or a little *sabhjī*, some *dahī*, some yogurt. Ah, what a meal! You feel completely satisfied just by the nature of those ingredients and the fact that a Vrajavāsī is giving it to you with love and devotion. So this is when it manifested; it manifested at that time, the famous *roti* of Braja. *Rotis*, you could say, are like thick chapatīs made with milk and ghee. 

Lino, the famous singer, she wrote one time that during their lunches five thousand years ago, Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys they ate such *rotis* with creamy butter in their hands. She has a song like that: "They ate *rotis* with creamy butter in their hands." You don’t need to be satisfied by going to a huge supermarket and shopping in all directions and putting... oh, in Vṛndāvana, offer it to Kṛṣṇa, eat it if you please. There’s that song in ISKCON: "Eat it if you please." So again, the Vrajavāsīs they also ate *ācāra*, like pickles made from mangoes and lemons and so forth and so on. They would take that with the *roti*—little spice, little punch to it. Actually, I was reading one poet, he wrote that such spicy pickle preparations when mixed with the *roti* and touching the tip of the tongue manifest an ocean of *rasa* in one’s mouth—tastes, literally. Such spicy pickle preparations when mixed with the *roti* and touching the tip of one's tongue manifest an ocean of *rasa* within one's mouth. Now, if it’s a little difficult for you to comprehend because it’s just a few ingredients, you have to come to Braja and go on *madhukarī*. You know, when they invite you into their home, you sit down, they have an open fire—the cow dung fire—they’re cooking, the ladies are so expert, they make that *roti*, they throw it, *bang*, it lands on your plate. One of the children comes, they put a little *sabhjī* there, and then there’s some *dahī*, some *ācāra*. It’s all offered, you know—the first one's offered—they keep making, they throw that *roti*. *Roti*. I love it. We love Vraja; this is our home. 

So, in *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta*, chapter 6, verses 52 to 58, one of our great heroes, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, writes—so interesting—that the first meal of the day, the breakfast meal, should always be accompanied with a little humor. And he gives the example of Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala. We’ve many times mentioned Madhumaṅgala; he’s Kṛṣṇa’s funny brāhmaṇa, cowherd boyfriend, who just loves to eat unlimited sweets. He’s not embarrassed with his bulging belly, not at all; he displays it very proudly. So Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes that one day during breakfast, Kṛṣṇa said to Madhumaṅgala, "Madhu, have you studied all the *rasa-śāstras*?" Because he’s a brāhmaṇa. "Madhu, have you studied all the *rasa-śāstras*?" You know, the *śāstra* is about deep loving attachment to Kṛṣṇa and the different mellows that one tastes in serving Kṛṣṇa through these different *rasas*. So Madhumaṅgala replied, "Oh yes, I have, Kṛṣṇa. *Rasa-śāstra* is described as eight *rasas* headed by the *rasa* of loving Kṛṣṇa as a maidservant." Kṛṣṇa was impressed. Then, with a coy little smile, He said, "However, in my opinion, there are only six actual *rasas* which are experienced when tasting the form, softness, fragrance, sweetness, melodiousness, and the emotion of joy when eating prasādam." *Madhumaṅgala ki jai!* And that’s cute, and we laughed. There’s some humor, but there’s a lesson to be learned in Madhumaṅgala’s words. For when we respect prasādam, and Prabhupāda’s emphasis, we don’t just eat, eat on the run—no, we sit and we respect prasādam as the mercy of the Lord. Prabhupāda would always use this word: "respect." When we respect prasādam, we can, in the words of Madhumaṅgala, admire the attractive form of the food, touch its softness, smell its wonderful fragrance, taste its sweetness, hear its nice sound while we’re munching—you know, you’re... there’s a crack, snap, and pop, you know, when you take some foodstuff—and mentally feel ecstatic joy from eating. Think about that: we can admire the attractive form of the food, we can touch its softness, we can smell its wonderful fragrance, we can taste its sweetness, we can hear its nice sound while we’re munching it, and we can mentally feel ecstatic joy from eating. 

This is a good lesson we’ve learned from Madhu, and we should take it to heart. What we hear in these lectures, when we hear in the lectures of the Vaiṣṇavas in our ISKCON society, what we hear from Prabhupāda—we were meant to take it to heart and act on it. *Paripraśnena sevayā*—that famous verse in *Bhagavad-gītā*. Accepting a spiritual master, we hear from him and then *sevayā*, we serve those instructions. So the spiritual master is very happy when he sees us taking *mahā-prasāda*, not just because it’s nourishing the body. Yes, Prabhupāda often replied in his letters or concluded his letters, he would say, "May this meet you in the best of health. Your ever-well-wisher, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami." So, healthy? Yes, but the pure health of going back home to the spiritual world, where there’s no birth, disease, old age, and death—part of that journey is fulfilled by taking prasādam. 

Now, while prasādam was simple in the olden days in Braja—you know, *rotis*, chickpeas, *sabhjīs*, some fruits—with the arrival of Lord Caitanya and our Six Gosvāmīs, as well as ācāryas of various Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas, the art of cooking in Braja blossomed in households with the introduction of deity worship. Remember, Mahāprabhu asked the Six Gosvāmīs to come here to write books from the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, discover the lost places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and establish temples with deities and deity worship. For themselves, as time went on, the Vrajavāsīs they were content to eat simply, but for Kṛṣṇa they went all out in developing many tasty preparations which are standard here now in Braja. This, you could say—like I could say in my research—was particularly due to *go-mātā*, the mothers, and brāhmaṇas. And brāhmaṇas, because they continue preaching the message of Kṛṣṇa when He goes back to the spiritual world, and cows, because Kṛṣṇa loves cows. In the spiritual world, He doesn’t go to the forest with an army of brāhmaṇas; He goes with cows. He’s a cowboy, Kṛṣṇa. 

So when the deities came, when the deities started manifesting—the deities of the Gosvāmīs and then other Gosvāmīs and then kings and queens and their *havelīs*—you know, as we’ve been describing the last month or so, dairy products formed a very important part of the cuisine of Braja. Many foodstuffs manifested: *paneer* cheese, ghee, *barfī*, *sandesh*, *rasmalāī*. Actually, one of the most famous sweets in Braja to this very day is *peḍā*. It’s a kind of sweet milk *laḍḍu*, you could say, which was and is prepared with natural sugar, *guḍa*, and a little cardamom powder. Nowadays, the *peḍā* of Mathurā is famous all over India. 

Now, to go on, isn't this interesting? I was also reading that in the olden days, the spice boxes—because in those days the ladies, they didn’t have plastic or glass containers—the spice boxes of the Vrajavāsī housewives were described as storehouses of Ayurvedic medicine. What does that mean? They mixed in the medicine into the spices? No, śāstra says these herbs, these spices themselves were Ayurvedic medicine; it’s a natural medicine. Thus, there was very less disease in those days and less need for doctors. Vrajavāsī life is perfect life. The fact that these spices, these herbs, have Ayurvedic propensity—a curing propensity—is made very clear in another one of the 700 verses in *Bhagavad-gītā*. Kṛṣṇa is speaking, you know, profound truth there, but He takes the time to mention the healing herb. I think I’m correct: 9.16. Kṛṣṇa says: "But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the ancestors, the healing herb." The healing herb! "I am the healing herb and the transcendental chant, I am the butter and the fire and the offering." Ayurvedic medicine. So you know, the spices they used to cook, just by eating, you’re getting freed from any illness. Wow, perfect culture! 

Now, regarding water: because there were various types of drinks and they required water, again, the source of water was always the Yamunā River as well as, you know, lakes and sweetwater wells. Of course, we’ll hear in a few minutes that a lot of the water in Vṛndāvana is not sweet water; it’s salty. But there’s a transcendental reason for that. Now, the daily routine of the household women in Braja was to go with these very big clay pots on their heads to such water sources and fill the pots for water and for cooking. But like I was saying, it wasn’t always easy; you had to find sweet water, because why? Much of the underground water in Vṛndāvana is salty. I know now, when I take a shower and, you know, I have a bar of soap that really makes lots of suds—you know, a lot, you get lots of soap suds when I’m in the West—when I bring it to Vṛndāvana with the water here, I rub it and I get one bubble of soap, maybe two bubbles, because the water is very salty. So, who is that? How is that? Well, that can be explained in the following pastime. It is written that after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, He sent Uddhava—another one of our heroes—with messages back to here, to Vṛndāvana, for His friends and His parents and His lovers and so many letters. So, upon arriving, who was carrying these letters? He just got to Braja; he was a Dvārakāvāsī, he hadn’t yet experienced Vṛndāvana. So when he got here, he asked one Gopī, "Um, can you give me the address or can you direct me to Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā’s home? Because I have a letter from Kṛṣṇa for them." So that Gopī replied—this is very interesting, very subtle, very rustic—she replied, "My dear Uddhava, follow this river, and where it ends, that will be the home of Mother Yaśodā." Follow this river and where it ends, that will be the home of Mother Yaśodā. So it was a flowing river. It wasn’t difficult to follow a flowing river throughout the land, watering the land. He followed that river, and when he came to the home of Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā, he was stunned. Why was he stunned? Because he saw the source of that river: the tears of separation from Kṛṣṇa falling from the eyes of Nanda and Yaśodā, and actually all the Gopīs, gopas, cows, peacocks, His parents, even the trees—all they were crying in *vipralambha-bhāva*. Those tears formed a river that was flowing throughout Braja. Now, those types of tears are salty, and it’s because of those salty tears that all the underground water sources in Vṛndāvana are mostly salty. So, when I’m trying to set up, you know, soap, I’m not worrying, "Oh, I’m not getting this lather," I’m thinking, "Ah, the tears of the Gopīs. Let me never leave Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa."

So now, regarding cooking for the deities in Vṛndāvana: most of the dishes and recipes in old Vṛndāvana, and even today in many temples—this is really interesting—come from Jagannātha Purī. Spices, the way of cooking, the style of the pots and utensils, the names of the dishes, how to serve them—all came from Jagannātha Purī’s big kitchen. You know, there’s a big kitchen in Jagannātha Purī because they are offering Him 56 offerings a day; big kitchen, huge kitchen. So, what we have here in Vṛndāvana today as far as, you know, cooking for the deities, this all came from Jagannātha Purī’s big kitchen. How so? It started when Lord Caitanya sent His servant Kaśīśvara, who was a priest and a cook in Lord Jagannātha’s temple, to assist Rūpa Gosvāmī in his new service to Govindajī. You may remember we gave a full lecture on that—how Rūpa Gosvāmī, how he established his worship in the forest of Braja; even before there was a big temple, there was some simple hut He was worshipped in, but very simply, you know. The Gosvāmīs, they had their mission—besides deity worship, they had to write books, they had to go out and find all the lost holy places. So Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and said, "Could you send some servant to help me?" So Mahāprabhu sent Kaśīśvara, for he was a devoted follower, disciple; he worked in the temple. So He sent him along with the deity, remember, for him to worship because "I’m leaving, Yamunā Mahāprabhu." So Mahāprabhu gave him a deity that he could worship when he was doing the worship for Govindajī in Vṛndāvana. So it was Kaśīśvara, who having spent so much time in the Purī temple, he introduced those kitchen standards in the kitchen of Govindajī. And because Govindajī’s temple was the headquarters in Vṛndāvana for all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas—and you could say the example for temple standards for all the temples coming up in Vṛndāvana—eventually, the pūjārīs and the cooks in all these other temples in Vṛndāvana cooked the same way for Rādhāramaṇa, Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana, and other deities. And the priests and pūjārīs continue to do so in most temples in Braja today, the same standard that was there in Jagannātha Purī. So it has a certain history, but it also has a certain, you could say, standard that is offered to the deities in Vṛndāvana. 

It consists—it has to consist—of six different tastes. We’re going into nectarian details here. The cuisine, the food offered to Vṛndāvana’s deities—and you may want to write this down because you are serving your deities all over the world in the same mood as the Vrajavāsīs; Prabhupāda was the Vrajavāsī, he is eternally a Vrajavāsī, it’s made very clear by the poems he wrote on the childhood of Govindajī in America. So we serve our deities in that way, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are served in Braja. So here’s something that you can write down: what are the different tastes which you want to offer to your deities? Six different tastes. The taste of the foods: they have to be sweet, salty, pungent—which translates into spicy—bitter, to be some bitter preparations, sour, and astringent. Now, a plate devoid of any of these tastes is considered as an incomplete meal for the Lord and His devotees here. Moreover, according to the *Gurvaṣṭakam* verse 4, food prepared should also be considered of four types. But we’re getting the detail here; we talk about sweet, salty, pungent, bitter, sour, and astringent. But here’s another guideline: food prepared for the deities must be of four particular types: *bhakṣya*, which means food which is first ground by the teeth and then gulped down—it means you don’t drink it like maybe a soup, but you have to chew on it, *bhakṣya*. That has to be there, for example, like *rotis* or any type of bread in general. There has to be *bhojya*, food which is directly gulped down without chewing, like yogurt. *Lehya*—which means food with a suck, meaning juices and curries etc.—and *peya*, food which is licked, like chutneys—you lick up the chutney. This is mentioned in the *Gurvaṣṭakam* in verse four. So these four types of food, full of six flavors that we mentioned, are always being prepared for the Lord of Vṛndāvana. 

An interesting note is that vegetables that grow under the ground like potatoes, radishes, and carrots are not used for cooking for Vṛndāvana deities. Like I’ve seen in Poona, jackfruit is also forbidden, as well as any new Western-style food—pizza, spaghetti, vegetarian burgers—no way. They can be offered in your home, to offer them with love and devotion, but not strictly in Vṛndāvana temples. Actually, even wild rice, wild vegetables, and wild fruits are not allowed for cooking for the deities. Only vegetables, wheat, rice, and fruits that are grown in the gardens here, the deity’s gardens—because the kings and of yore have established big gardens for the service of the deities in the temples—only vegetables, wheat, rice, fruits, flowers grown expressly for the deities are used here in Braja. Wow. These dishes and recipes are used for deities like Rādhā-vallabha, Rādhāramaṇa, Govindajī, Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana, Bānke Bihārī, Lāl Gokokulānandajī, and a few others. Same tradition still goes on as in ancient times. And as we all know from our training from Śrīla Prabhupāda, such food must be cooked and served in a particular consciousness. This is the art. It must be cooked and served in a proper consciousness. And there’s a very nice incident that I was reading about in the late 15th century to illustrate this, how one—what, when one is cooking, what is his consciousness? One time, the ācārya of the Rādhā-vallabha sampradāya, his name was Hita Harivaṁśa, he’s the ācārya of the Rādhā-vallabha sampradāya, he was cooking *kicari* for his beloved Rādhā-vallabha deity. And suddenly, a scholar came to debate with him. But because Harivaṁśa was cooking for his Lord, he didn’t reply; he didn’t utter a single word to the scholar the entire time he was focused on cooking. So the scholar became very frustrated and he said, "Why are you not debating with me?" So Harivaṁśa, after completing the cooking for his beloved Lord, he turned to that scholar; he said something very profound. He said, "Sir, if I see you, hear you, reply to you, or in any way debate with you during my cooking, my consciousness will affect the bhoga offering to my Lord. Thus, the taste, the mood, and the flavors of that food will not come out as they should be. Therefore, while cooking food for the Lord, one should never entertain his or her senses in any activity other than chanting the Lord’s holy name and thinking about His pleasure."

I hope you like these spices. You know, it’s like Mother Yaśodā; she’s always singing, glorifying Kṛṣṇa while she’s cooking. We want to be Vrajavāsīs. Practice makes perfect. Let us not procrastinate; procrastinate means putting off for tomorrow something that should be done today. Now is the time to imbibe according to time, place, and circumstance. I could say, although I would like to follow all these things strictly and from within my heart for my deities, we’re getting a glimpse of what it means to be a Vrajavāsī, which Rūpa Gosvāmī said in the very beginning, which we should follow—his mood, Prabhupāda. So after hearing that answer, the pride of that scholar vanished and he bowed down and grabbed the lotus feet of Hita Harivaṁśa—lotus feet. Now, the actual mood behind cooking and serving food for deities in the Vṛndāvana temples is—it’s very well known—that the head cooks are just assisting. They’re the head cooks, but they’re in the mood of assisting. So what, the question may be raised, if they’re head cooks, who are they assisting? You’ve got the head cook, you do that, but no, the head cook is thinking, "I’m assisting." It’s a type of meditation. What is their meditation? This is the meditation for cooking for Kṛṣṇa in Braja: that Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Rādhikā herself, is cooking the meal, and Vṛndā Devī will take it and serve it along with all the sakhīs to Kṛṣṇa. So this was and is the mood and meditation when cooks cook for Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana temples. They’re thinking, "I’m just assisting Śrī Rādhā and her maidservants." Always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him. Here’s the quote-unquote "technique" which should become spontaneous. But practice makes perfect, yes, we’re all works in progress. But these things we should know. We should, Prabhupāda said one time, "We should know His books like a lawyer knows the law book—his law books." So in the same way, we should know Vraja and the residents of Vraja and how they serve Kṛṣṇa. Who is Kṛṣṇa? This is our goal. We have to... these things, I could say, these classes are very important. I’m not important, but I’m just sharing all this nectarian knowledge and we can all imbibe it in our hearts, because Prabhupāda said that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is something that we imbibe within our hearts from the sādhus, from the śāstras, from our visits to the dhāma, from our worshipping our deities. It’s all imbibed. So let us remember all these things. These pūjārīs are just assisting Rādhā and her maidservants, and we are allowed to think like that because, well again, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu Rūpa Gosvāmī said in the very beginning of this lecture that we should follow in the footsteps of the residents of Vṛndāvana. Specifically for us, that means Śrīla Prabhupāda, and he has introduced all these principles according to time, place, and circumstance in the Western countries. So let us just do everything the way Śrīla Prabhupāda did it. And if we can embellish it a little bit with some of these hints from old India, all the better. 

So in conclusion, we can see how important cuisine was in Braja culture, both in the lives of the Vrajavāsīs and in the service of their deities. I was reading that in Braja culture, it is said that *sevā* has to have three things in order to be complete. Now, we’re all servants. We’re learning to be servants. One time I told you, the devotee said to Prabhupāda, "Prabhupāda, you’re the greatest Vaiṣṇava." And Prabhupāda, in his humility, just bowed his head; he said, "I’m just trying to become a Vaiṣṇava." A Vaiṣṇava is a very special thing. So we’re trying, and Vaiṣṇava means servant of Kṛṣṇa. So in Braja culture, it is said that *sevā* has to have three things in order to be complete: *rāga*, *bhoga*, and *śṛṅgāra*. *Rāga*, *bhoga*, and *śṛṅgāra* means that this—we’re talking about practical service here—*rāga* means singing different melodies to the Lord, like when, you know, singing during your service. *Bhoga* means cooking and offering foodstuffs to the Lord. And *śṛṅgāra* means decorating or adorning the Lord. You could say this specifically refers to deity worship, because again, whether Yaśodā’s cook when she’s cooking, she’s singing, the cooking’s there, and then we decorate the deities. So *rāga*, *bhoga*, *śṛṅgāra*—for it to be complete, there has to be singing, there has to be cooking, and decorating the Lord. One without the other two will be incomplete. Thus, the *sevā* in Vṛndāvana is complete when all these three things are done. Therefore, one of those things was food, that was cuisine. And as we tried to explain as best as we can possibly do, this food, this cuisine, is such an important part of historic Vṛndāvana. 

So in conclusion, I would like to quote a verse, one of my favorite verses from one of my favorite devotees of all time, Śrīla Prabhupāda, in his immortal *Padyāvalī*. He writes about cuisine. He says: "Oh Lord Hari, You greatly enjoyed the sweet rice presented by Śyāmalā, the *panita*, the sweet named *surata-phenī* presented by Kamalā, the lotus given by Bhadrā, and the sugarcane juice offered by Candrāvalī. I hope that the delicious food I have prepared under Rādhārāṇī’s guidance, and I now place before You, You will enjoy a hundred times more than what was offered by these other Gopīs. All right, Kṛṣṇa, isn’t that beautiful?" Also, we’ll do a final conclusion here with a beautiful poem by Sūradāsa—we’ve quoted him so many times, haven’t we? That poet, what is it? What do they say? "What is the use of an arrow unless it can pierce the heart? Kṣatriya. What is the use of an arrow unless it can pierce the heart? What is the use of poetry unless it can melt the heart?" That’s Sūradāsa. So let’s conclude with some of his poetry about cuisine in Braja. He writes: 

> Oh maiden of Vraja, please mercifully feed me with the remnants of Kṛṣṇa’s food even if it has fallen to the ground. When the tasty *sabhjī* and chapatīs touch my tongue, *rasa* starts dancing in my mouth in six various forms, like we spoke earlier, the six tastes: sweet, salty, etc. The sweet curd and ghee give the power to continue my service. What else can Sūradāsa say? The prasāda of the Lord is the only maintenance, maintenance of my life.

All right, Kṛṣṇa, Lord, You attend to Your secret weapon, *bhāgavata-prasāda*. Let us take it with respect and let us be very, very merciful to the fallen conditioned souls of Kali-yuga and spread that prasāda far and wide. Thank you. Another lecture about historic Vṛndāvana. We will continue with another lecture next Friday. I can apologize, we cut out Tuesdays, but there’s going to be a lot to do this summer, but we didn’t want to miss out on Braja. We want to remember Braja. So yes, these lectures—thank you, Prabhupāda—see you next Friday. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dhāma. All glories to Prabhupāda. You.""