"*00416*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees! Welcome back once again to our ongoing series about the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. I address you today from San Francisco, California, in the United States. I have come here for a kīrtana retreat—a sādhu-saṅga retreat—and I literally just got off the plane. It was a long ride, 20 hours, and I have jet lag, but that is not going to deter me from giving this lecture today. All right, Kṛṣṇa.

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste...*

So, we are continuing with our short series on the history of Vṛndāvana’s many temples, shrines, and havelīs that were built by royal families, or in some cases individuals of those royal families, since the time of Lord Caitanya. As we mentioned in our first lecture, constructing these beautiful structures was a way that these wealthy patrons could express their devotion to the Lord and add to the charm of Vṛndāvana as we see it today. 

Of course, with the advancement of modern society, and in particular the influence of Kali-yuga, some of that charm has disappeared. That was evident even in the year 1883 when the Englishman F.S. Growse published his famous work, *Mathura: A District Memoir*. In that famous book, he writes—using some Victorian-era English—"Though the groves of Vṛndāvana, in which Kṛṣṇa sported with the Gopīs, no longer resound with the echoes of His flute; though the waters of the Yamunā are daily polluted by the blood of the sacred kine—cows—still Mathura is the sacred Jordan of His fancy, Kṛṣṇa’s fancy, on whose banks he may sit and weep for the glories of Mathura, his Jerusalem." 

So, we get an idea that even in 1883, things had changed. Times have changed, but even now, if one is determined, he can find intact some pristine gems of the past—some buildings in good order. As I did the other day, needing some inspiration in preparing this lecture, I went back to Vṛndāvana town and wandered through those small streets and lanes, trying to unravel the mysteries of how those old, beautiful, and ornate structures came about.

That day, my roaming brought me to the famous Lala Babu Temple. Some of you may know about that; we always go there during Kārtika parikrama. It is a very beautiful structure, and it was built by a disciple of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. From there, I walked to the nearby Brahmā-kuṇḍa, where many of you know Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī found his beloved Vṛndā Devī deity. There, I inquired from several Vraja-vāsīs who were sitting peacefully on the banks of that kuṇḍa if they knew of any important or historic places nearby. One sādhu pointed to a small lane nearby and said, "Have you ever been to Karmatī Bāī Kuñja? It is 20 meters down the narrow lane over there."

I replied, "No, I have never been there. And who is Karmatī Bāī?" The sādhu said, "Oh, she was born in a royal family but came to Vṛndāvana in her youth and became a great devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa." In memory of her, he said, the Braj Foundation—which is a foundation trying to restore many of the old places in Vṛndāvana—established a statue of her (a diorama) here at Brahmā-kuṇḍa. Pointing with his finger, he said, "You can see her sitting right over there."

He said nearby are remnants of a beautiful temple that she had constructed—or had others construct—for Lord Kṛṣṇa. I thought, "There you go, my wanderings brought me to the right place." Fascinated and thinking this would be great material for this lecture, I asked where I could find out more about her, as I had never heard about her before. The Vraja-vāsī, who appeared to be a scholarly person, asked, "Mahārāja, do you know the book *Bhaktamāla* by Nābhājī?" 

Of course, we have spoken on that book many times in our series about Vṛndāvana. He said to me, "Is that book authorized in your movement?" I was a bit surprised by his probing question, so I replied in full. I said, "Yes, the *Bhaktamāla* by Nābhājī was actually recommended by one of our teachers, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. He said it is an authorized source of Vaiṣṇava biographies, and I said that he actually recommended it as one of the books to be studied in his institution, Gauḍīya Maṭha, for biographies about previous ācāryas." To satisfy this Vraja-vāsī’s question, I added, "There is actually another *Bhaktamāla* written in Bengali by someone called Lāl Dās, but that book was rejected by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī."

Satisfied, this gentleman said, "Then you can read about Karmatī Bāī in *Bhaktamāla*. Also, you can read in more detail about her in Priyādāsa’s—a student of Nābhājī—commentary on *Bhaktamāla*." I said, "Oh, there is a commentary on *Bhaktamāla*?" He said, "Yes, he had one student—of course, the student appeared many years after—but he wrote a very complete commentary on the *Bhaktamāla*."

Now I had some direction. I hurried back to my room in Ramaṇa-reti and did my research about Karmatī Bāī using both Nābhājī’s *Bhaktamāla* and Priyādāsa’s commentary. I would like to share that with you now. To begin, I found out that Karmatī Bāī—not to be confused with the queen called Karmabāī, as I have heard there is sometimes confusion—was born in Rajasthan in a lineage of kings known as the Shekhāwat dynasty. It is a lineage of kṣatriyas, and that lineage, I was reading, comes from Kuśa, who was the younger twin son of Rāmacandra. Therefore, the former name of the Shekhāwat lineage is Kuśāvatī Vaṃśa. This is some history lesson here: the family of kṣatriyas who appeared from Kuśa. 

Hundreds of years ago, these Shekhāwat kings fought many battles against the Mughals who ruled India for some time. It is said of these Shekhāwat kings: one who milks the lioness is a Shekhāwat; one who kills the enemy with the first arrow is a Shekhāwat; and one whose head is cut off while still fighting is a Shekhāwat. 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Several hundred years ago in Rajasthan, there was such a king named Mahārāo Shekhāwat. He ruled from a city called Śrīkar, and he was known as Dharma-priya, one who is favorable towards dharma. He was also called Nyāya-priya, which means one who likes justice and treats everyone equally. One day, as was tradition, this particular king appointed a priest as the head priest—that position is called Rājaguru, the guru of the king. He appointed him as the head priest in his court and his kingdom. This priest’s name was Parashuram, and he quickly became a favorite of the king because of his knowledge and his personality. They were very close. 

In time, Parashuram’s wife gave birth to an exceptionally talented, charismatic, beautiful daughter who, at the same time, was very shy and very chaste. The Rājaguru named her Karmatī—it means one who appeared as a result of good karma. I thought that was interesting. As a young girl, Karmatī played and ran freely around the palace of the king, and because of her sweet nature, the king became very attached to her as well. Noticing this, people began recognizing her as a royal personality—she must be royalty—and they gave her an affectionate name; they called her Karmatī Bāī, the "Bāī" being an affectionate term. In time, Karmatī Bāī became very proficient in various arts and dance, but it is described that her favorite activity, above and beyond anything else, was listening to the beautiful poetry from a particular court poet about the pastimes of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. 

Now, when she became of age, her father and the affectionate king started looking together for a husband that would be qualified to marry such a girl. In time, with great effort, they found a very nice brāhmaṇa boy. But when informed about this, Karmatī Bāī just said, "Look, I am not interested. I am not interested to get married." 

This came as a shock. Her father and the king asked why. She said, "I have given my whole heart, body, and mind to Kṛṣṇa," obviously as a result of just hearing about Kṛṣṇa. From that court poet always describing Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, her love naturally evolved. She was not interested in marrying anybody. Actually, I was reading that every day she would worship Tulasī Devī and pray to her as follows: "My dear Tulasī Devī, please call me to your forest where day and night I can serve Rādhā-Śyāmasundara without restrictions." 

Despite her objections, her father went ahead and actually arranged a date for her marriage with that brāhmaṇa boy. As that date approached, the whole town of Śrīkar became decorated like a new bride. The king himself, out of affection for her, arranged many presents for Karmatī Bāī and the groom as well. The whole town, as well as surrounding towns and villages, were all making preparations for this marriage. As this was going on, Karmatī Bāī was very unhappy. She thought, "Why get married to a person who will die one day? Let me be a servant of the Lord of Cupids, who always remains with me." 

That night, the night before the wedding, she actually decided to run away to Vṛndāvana. She did so; as everyone in the palace slept, she managed to sneak by the guards and go into the forest and started walking in the direction of Vṛndāvana. Pretty brave girl! Now, the next day, when it was discovered that she had left, obviously the king was very upset, as was her father. So, the king sent his whole army on horses to find her. She hadn't gotten that far, obviously. When she heard the noise of the horses running, she was frantic trying to find a place to hide, but she just felt there was no place to find cover from an army of soldiers. What to do?

Suddenly, she saw a large dead camel. Without any hesitation, she cut open its abdomen very wide with a knife—remember, she is coming from a kṣatriya family, so she opened up the abdomen with this big knife. She disemboweled it, meaning she took out all the organs from the camel, and then she went inside and hid inside the dead camel for three days until the army had left that area searching. Afterward, she took a bath in a nearby pond, and when she had finished and dressed herself to continue her journey, several sādhus who had witnessed her hiding from the soldiers in that dead camel approached her. They were like, "Whoa, how did you survive in the stomach of that dead camel? How could you have not fainted from the terrible smell?"

Karmatī Bāī replied famously, "The foul smell of the material world is worse than the smell of a dead camel." 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. And then she continued walking to Vṛndāvana. A month later, it is described she came across some brāhmaṇas who were preparing to bathe in a sacred river. She very humbly approached them, offered them words of praise, and then she gave all her valuable jewelry to them, reminiscent of our first class where one queen had also given away her jewels on the way to Vṛndāvana. A few days later, she met an elderly female sādhu on the road and she begged from her for her torn sarī. She said, "In exchange, I’ll give you this silk dress." The sādhu agreed, and now Karmatī Bāī was wearing an old torn cloth. She kept walking and walking and walking, and after two months, she finally arrived in Vṛndāvana-dhāma. 

After spending time wandering in a number of Vṛndāvana’s forests and visiting many holy places, she decided to take up residence at Brahmā-kuṇḍa, where it is described she spent her days and nights just chanting the holy names of the Lord: *Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma Hare Hare*. All that time, her father, the Rājaguru Parashuram, had been searching for her, and his exploration finally brought him to Mathura, to Vṛndāvana, where he inquired from the local brāhmaṇas if they knew the whereabouts of his daughter. By this time, Karmatī Bāī’s renunciation and her devotion were well known, and the brāhmaṇas directed Parashuram to Brahmā-kuṇḍa. 

When he arrived at Brahmā-kuṇḍa, he found Karmatī Bāī sitting on the banks of the kuṇḍa, weeping in separation from Kṛṣṇa. She had made the sacrifice; she went through the austerities; she was determined; she only focused on that one thing, Kṛṣṇa, and her bhakti had awakened. Approaching her, Parashuram said, "My daughter, you ran away from your wedding, and therefore I was defamed in the town and the whole society. I was defamed. Please return with me to the city. It is so unsafe; you are living here alone in a dense forest. What if a wild animal or tiger will eat you?"

Karmatī Bāī, with full faith in Kṛṣṇa, smiled and said, "Father, I will not return to the false relationships of this world. I will not return to the false relationships of this world. I want to stay in the beautiful forest of Vṛndāvana where the Divine Couple roams. I want to become their servant, part of their family, so to speak." 

Her father said, "My dear daughter, don't worry. Just come. I promise that you won't have to get married to anyone. Just stay with us, your parents, and serve your Kṛṣṇa at home." 

But she was unfettered. Karmatī Bāī replied, "One who has nectar in his hand and runs towards the so-called pleasures of this world is most foolish. Father, you should also remain here and do bhajana in Braj. Leave everything behind and take shelter of Vṛndāvana." 

Then she did something really amazing: she made a beautiful deity of Kṛṣṇa out of the mud of the Yamunā river and gave it to her father, Parashuram. It is written that when Parashuram returned to the town of Śrīkar, he basically just stayed home and served that deity every day with great love. One day, the king said to his chief minister, "I haven't seen Parashuram for some time. Why is he not coming to the court? Go and find him and bring him here." 

The messenger went to the residence of Parashuram. Some discussion took place, and then he came back to the court and informed the king that the Rājaguru Parashuram would not be attending court anymore because, like his daughter in Vṛndāvana, he had now become the servant of the King of Kings, Kṛṣṇa. He is the servant of the King of Kings; before, he was the servant of the king, now he is saying, "I am a servant of the King of Kings." 

Now, Kṛṣṇa, let us remember that Parashuram and the king were tight; they were very close. So, the king just smiled, and he went to where Parashuram lived, and he said, "I think to resolve this issue, I will myself go to speak some sense into your daughter and bring her back here with me." The king himself went to Vṛndāvana with many soldiers, and after some time, he found that Karmatī Bāī was living at Brahmā-kuṇḍa. He went there and tried in every way to convince her to come back to the kingdom. At one point, he said, "My dear girl, how can this dusty village of Vṛndāvana compare with the royal opulence of my palace?"

She replied, "My dear king, what to speak of your palace? The opulence of just one grain of Vraja-reṇu—dust—here in Vṛndāvana is more precious than the entire opulence of the material creation, for it alone can bestow prema upon a pilgrim." 

More conversation went on, and finally, the king understood her feelings. He asked for forgiveness from her, and he agreed to let her stay there. Before leaving, he asked Karmatī Bāī, "Is there anything I can do for you? Is there any service I can render you?" 

She replied—and this was very interesting—she said, "You can make a temple for my Lord Kṛṣṇa here on the banks of Brahmā-kuṇḍa." Again, we see the royalty, in an interesting way, being called to Vṛndāvana to make a beautiful temple for the Lord. "Yes, you can make a temple for my Lord here on the banks of Brahmā-kuṇḍa." 

The king agreed, and some months later, the construction of that temple began in earnest. It took a number of years to complete, and when it was complete, Karmatī Bāī did her bhajana there for many years until her last breath. Now, in time, that beautiful, ornate temple was destroyed by foreign invaders, but remnants of it remain because it was a huge complex. So, it was destroyed, but there are certain parts of that huge temple that remain even today. One such remnant can be seen in the present-day Ranganāth Temple complex, which is not far from Brahmā-kuṇḍa. This Ranganāth Temple complex is also very large, and it was built afterwards. There are some remnants of her temple inside that complex; out of respect, they kept those remnants there so we can go and see it. It is not far from Brahmā-kuṇḍa where she did her bhajana. Actually, Karmatī Bāī’s samādhi is near to Brahmā-kuṇḍa as well, where there is that diorama on the banks of Brahmā-kuṇḍa that I mentioned previously. 

Once again, we have heard how a royal family contributed to the building of a temple in Vṛndāvana. Now, when I was researching that history, I was very pleased when it came to the part where Karmatī Bāī was glorifying Vraja-reṇu as being more important than the king’s palace—the Vraja-reṇu, the dust of Vṛndāvana—and then I went into searching more about Vraja-reṇu because it played an important part in that pastime. I came across several references to how, in the olden days, the Vraja-vāsīs would adore and worship that dust, and rightfully so as they do today. 

It was, as I will be explaining, something they really got into. I found in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, 30th Chapter, 29th verse: "The dust of Govinda’s lotus feet is so sacred that even Brahmā, Śiva, and the Goddess of Fortune, Ramā, take that dust on their heads to dispel sinful reactions." And Śrīla Prabhupāda says in one lecture: "If you want something from the dust of Hyderabad, you cannot get it because that dust is material. But in Vṛndāvana, even from the dust, if you want anything, it will be delivered immediately." 

So, I was reading that previously in Vṛndāvana, 100 or 200 years back, there was an annual festival called Dhūlaṭ-utsava, in which the Vraja-vāsīs would come together with mṛdaṅgas, karatālas, and trumpets, and they would do parikrama around Vṛndāvana while throwing the dust of Vṛndāvana at each other in a playful mood, rolling in the dust, taking big pots of dust and throwing it on each other. You know, like people do with colors today, but here they were doing it with the dust. They filled big pots with the dust and poured it on top of each other. "Dhūlaṭ" means the dust, and "luṭ" means rolling or playing. So, *dhūlaṭ-utsava* means the festival of rolling and playing in the dust of Braj—a festival just for that, just for the Vraja-reṇu. You throw it, you pour it, you are rolling in it, you put some in your mouth—a whole festival around the Vraja-reṇu. 

And there is a nice verse in the Vraja-bhāṣā language that glorifies this immortal dust: 
*Rāja, āja gopāla kṛṣṇa, o gopāla, āmi mukti-dātā, kintu ke mukti dibe āmāre?* 
"Oh Gopāla, I am liberating everyone, but who will liberate me?" 
So Kṛṣṇa, so Gopāla, said, "If one particle of dust of Braj will touch your forehead, you, Mukti, will also get liberation." 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Now, it is also said that in olden times, Vraja-vāsīs, as I mentioned, would eat a few particles of Vṛndāvana dust from time to time. It is not surprising; we know even Kṛṣṇa, once as a small child, ate the dust of Braj, the dirt. It is the same. Last Kārtika, I watched a theater about Kṛṣṇa eating dirt, performed by some Vraja-vāsīs on the parikramā-mārga. This was during the Kārtika month, outside on the path. I had someone there to translate for me, and I found the dialogue to be very interesting. When Mother Yaśodā asked Kṛṣṇa, "Lālā, your brother Balarāma said that you have eaten some dirt, some dust. Why would you do that? I always arranged for you to eat butter and curd. Why would you eat the dust of Vṛndāvana?" 

So, so cute. Kṛṣṇa replied to Mother Yaśodā as follows (I am getting better at Vraja-bhāṣā): "This sweet taste of the dust of Braj is not found even in sweet butter and milk, neither in the 56 tasty kinds of food items." 

Unfortunately, the *dhūlaṭ-utsava*, the festival we described, is no longer practiced as far as I could see. Maybe because there is less and less dust in Vṛndāvana due to the modern construction going on, the apartment buildings, the roads, and what-not. There is not much dust left. In previous years, the whole parikramā-mārga that we walk around—that 11-kilometer walk around Vṛndāvana, the Vṛndāvana parikramā—the whole parikramā was just thick dust. I remember in '73, '74, '75, in those early years, it was just dust. It was so nectarean. Now, it is all gone. That is just a concrete highway that literally goes around Vṛndāvana. All cars and trucks and motorbikes and scooters, and it is not the same. 

So maybe, just maybe, someday the city council in Vṛndāvana will make plans to revive the dust of Vṛndāvana. In this mood, we will finish today with a quote from the poet Hariśūri. In the same mood, he writes: "Kṛṣṇa, You blessed the residents of Earth with the dust of Braj. We who are in the heavenly planets feel cheated because we never received it." The devas say, "We feel cheated because we have never received it. Dear Lord, there are devotees in the lower planetary systems also, like Bali Mahārāja, who also feel cheated that they have not received this dust of Vṛndāvana. Please be merciful upon us all." 

So, let’s hope that the city council revives the dust, brings it back, lets it manifest again so we can roll in it and throw it and play with it and put some particles in our mouths. 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. I hope that you enjoyed this history lesson about Vṛndāvana as well as the glorification of Vraja-reṇu. We are very busy here in America; this big festival is coming up and we have to travel. But I will do my best to continue our series every Tuesday and Friday. Maybe, just maybe, when the summer comes—June, July, and August—when we are on the Polish tour (it is a big challenge this year, reviving the Polish festival tour; we are planning to do it), I may just lecture on Fridays. But let's see, let's see. I’ll try to do two a week, but if not possible, at least one a week. And then, you know, after the summer tour is over, I will be back in Braj and we can continue. Let's see how it goes. But I will be back in a couple of days here, so from America, thank you very much.

All the beautiful buildings in Braj kī, the 5,000 temples kī, back home, back to Godhead, Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dhāma kī, *jaya*! *Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya!* Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you so much.""