Hare Krishna!

Very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vrindavan Dhama. So, we are continuing with our series on historical Vrindavan, and today will be the final part, part 10. Today, we will discuss the different forms of art in old Vrindavan.

And actually, for this information, we need to go back further than the time of Lord Caitanya. We actually need to go back 5,000 years, because it was then that many of the art forms, a few of which we see in present-day Vrindavan, were manifest during Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes on earth.

We know this because such forms of art are actually described in detail in śāstras like Govinda Līlāmṛta by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, Kṛṣṇa Kamudi by Kavi Karnapura, and Kṛṣṇa. These were the scriptures that I referred to for this class, and therein we heard the Gopis in particular were very expert in such art as making designs with henna on the hands and feet, making artistic designs in kuñjas and nikunjas from various vines, flowers, and beautiful leaves, making jewelry and outfits from flower buds, clothes, gems, pearls, and stones, um, the art of singing in higher and lower notes, making garlands of different colors, sizes, shapes, and patterns, dancing in various dance forms, making jokes that will make someone laugh in ecstasy, I read, the art of saying something in the most confidential way, and also playing with words in rhyme and rhythm, disguising Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa according to their pastimes, oh yeah, telling lies to Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā, making puzzles and being expert in solving them, um, appeasing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī during her times of anger, and, um, making tasty sweet dishes.

Actually, I could go on and on. For one, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura wrote that the number of art forms practiced by the Gopis were equal to the number of stars in the sky, drops of water in the ocean, and particles in the air.

One very famous form of art in the olden days in Braja was the, uh, Dhrupad school of music. This was a form, actually, of classical. Of course, um, I was reading it. It was famous or is famous throughout India, but there were many places around Vrindavan where this form of music was actually taught.

There were schools. This form of music, formerly, many of the famous Dhrupad singers used to live and teach in Kamyavan, and there was also a large school of music in Nidhivan. Nidhivan, which we've mentioned several times in the last few years, is in the area of Sevakunj, and a lot of devoted musicians used to live there in that area of Sevakunj.

In particular, there was a community of, a community of instrumentalists near the temple of Rādhā-Vallabha about 150 years ago. In learned circles, it is said that this style of music came from the Gandharvas, who passed it down to the Gopis of Vrindavan, in whose care it evolved and reached perfection in glorifying Kṛṣṇa.

Tansen, the great musician of Akbar's court, whom we've mentioned several times in our lectures, as you know, he was very expert in this style of music 500 years ago, and during his times, musicians used to hold large concerts of this Dhrupad style of music out at Govardhan Hill.

These concerts were actually very popular with the residents of Vrindavan, and who, I was reading, would come from far away. They'd walk, or they'd come in their ox carts to, to participate in such functions, to go to a concert at Govardhan Hill.

With this classical music, now this music was especially used in the service of the Deities in the Vrindavan temples, like during, you know, festivals or any special ceremonies. This music was played and sung. Devotees who were trained in this type of music would come and sing for the pleasure of the Deities in special rāgas according to the, the mood of the event, as well as the season, the time, or the day of the festival.

There are various rāgas which bring out certain emotions appropriate for a particular time of the day. And I was also reading that this classical form of music, it was very difficult to learn. In fact, a practitioner would continue studying it his entire life, and as a result, there are very few acharyas of this specific music school today left in Vrindavan.

Only on rare occasions, it can be heard in the, uh, Rādhā Ramaṇa and the Rādhā Vallabha temples, as well as, as well as a few āśramas in Vrindavan. Now, another interesting form of art was making outfits for the Vrindavan Deities from jasmine flower buds by stitching the buds to the deity dress with the needle and thread.

In our ISKCON movement, pujaris, you know, we use glue for this purpose, but, uh, we don't offer the, I mean, we offer these flower outfits on big festival days, like for example, Rādhāṣṭamī. But in old Vrindavan, such hand-stitched flower outfits were offered every single day.

On summer evenings, old Braja. Every evening in the summer, you come to the temple, and the Deities will be dressed in a new flower outfit, stitched, not glued. Now, another very interesting art form was making fragrant oils for the Deities.

There used to be a copper pot in which the priest would prepare these flavored oils for the Deities. This copper pot had a long neck, and it was connected to a copper pipe leading to a small container. So, after water and flowers were put into the pot and then heated with fire, the, uh, how could you say, the resulting vapors would go into that small container which contained unscented oil.

And after many hours of heating, the, the flower vapor would transform the unscented oil in the container into a, a slightly perfumed oil. And sometime later, the container was sealed, and after cooling, it would be placed in, in wet, muddy ground.

And after a number of days, that container of oil matured into a deeply fragrant oil which was ready to be used in Kṛṣṇa's service. So, they made their own oils, they made their own rose water, kevaḍā water, the temples like that.

So, this was the art of making oils, and I learned that these old instruments are still preserved in some of the temples in Vrindavan. Now, another form of art which we touched on, I think last year, was the making of Sanjhi.

These are very beautiful and detailed designs of the pastimes of the Lord that they make on top of water with dry colored powders. And instead of, like, you know, a board or on the ground, they use these dry colored powders, and they make designs on water, on a pot of water.

And the amazing thing is that the nature of these dyes is that, um, on these floating paintings, they never mix with the water. They're floating paintings, but they never mix with the water. Almost a lost art, of course. Such designs were also and still are made on the floors of temples as well.

It's very popular in Vrindavan. Sanjhi. Another traditional art form in Vrindavan was making jewelry from pearls, conch shells, guñjā berries, vaidyānte beads, sandalwood, and gold and silver. There was also, um, a famous style of, um, makuṭas, we say in English, crowns for Vrindavan’s Deities that they use that they made hundreds of years ago.

They were known as makuṭas, and they're all made from natural materials. Another makuṭa I was reading about, it was called the Līlā Cāmarika, and it was constructed on a frame made of cow dung. They dry the cow dung and they made a frame out of cow dung, which is auspicious, onto which cloth was sewn and then decorated with gemstones.

The old-style crowns the Deities wore. Um, other art forms included embroidery work called Zardozi, Kāśidākāri. More details for you to know: embroidery. And this, these particular styles of embroidery were seen in Deity clothes and on the borders of doharis and sāris, as well as shawls and, and chādar worn by the Bhāgavatās.

Nowadays, very few workers and artists are left. Artists are left to know this type of embroidery. There's a few at Loi Bazaar, I think. Devotees work closely with them, making Deity outfits for our Deities around the world, but it's slowly becoming a lost art.

Um, painting houses with lime was another very beautiful art form in Braja, which was done by ladies on their houses on every Pūrṇimā, or every full moon night. I don't think this exists anymore. They would take lime, different colors, and they would do beautiful art form, art forms on, on their, uh, on their houses on every Pūrṇimā, or full moon night.

A very fine art or, or painting in those days was known as Pichhwai, Pichwai, which was used for painting specifically backdrops for Deities. This was done by very expert painters of those days with permanent colors on, on fabrics. Now, in modern times, of course, many of you know that these Pichwai paintings are available, especially in Jaipur.

They're being mass-produced now as a business, but the quality of such paintings is nothing like what the famous artists of the past did just for Vrindavan's Deities. Uh, those Pichwai paintings are found now only in museums. Like I've seen them in Bharatpur, I've seen them in a museum in Delhi, I've seen them in the City Palace of Jaipur.

They're just magnificent, and I think some of them are also found in private collections. Different types of Pichwai than we, we see these days. And I was reading that making jewelry from silver coins, uh, mixed with a little bit of gold, was also a popular art form in Vrindavan in the old days.

An example is that women and men used to wear these coins as pendants around their necks, and they wore smaller coins in their ears as studs. Unfortunately, as I mentioned earlier, many of these traditional and rich art forms are slowly becoming extinct.

The Vaiṣṇava poet Gareb Das, he once wrote, "O beautiful maiden of Braja, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please return the roots of that old Vrindavan to me, where I can dive deep into the ocean of that sweet love of yours." Wow. But of course, eternal Vrindavan is and will always be decorated, you could say, with these evergreen and ever-fresh art forms, rituals, languages, poetries, scriptures, cuisines, and architecture that we've described in these ten lectures in the series of historical Vrindavan.

And one day, with purified vision, we'll be able to see it. By Prabhupada’s mercy, we can discover it. I was remembering that, uh, one time, my godbrother Gurudas, while in Vrindavan, he said to Śrīla Prabhupada, how did he put it, Śrīla Prabhupada, "I still don't see how this is as good as Goloka Vrindavan." It was in Vrindavan, so he's looking around, he said, "Śrīla Prabhupada, I don't see how this is as good as Goloka Vrindavan." So Prabhupada replied, "Then you must try to rediscover Vrindavan.

That you must do. It is a question of consciousness. The real Vrindavan is there in your own heart, hiding herself from you." So, we have to rediscover Vrindavan. And of course, we all anchor to go to that eternal Goloka Vrindavan at the end of our present lives.

That's what we're working for. That's what we're serving for, by Prabhupada's grace, to go to that eternal Vrindavan. And in that mood, I would like to end this series. We have more series, and I would like to end this series with a poem by, uh, Sūradās, in which Uddhava, um, his eyes full of tears, is addressing Kṛṣṇa.

It melts the heart. What it says: "O my dear friend, my heart is hankering for residence in Vrindavan, where vines dance with the melody of the sweet-smelling air, where the heart laughs in ecstasy, where every pleasure that one can imagine resides in the sacred dust, with the days and nights pass in satisfaction, and no worries disturb one's mind.

My dear friend, please take me to Vrindavan, where my heart resonates with the twinkling sound of the ankle bells of Braja Gopis." And thus we finish this series. I hope this series has deepened your devotion, if you've been diving down.

And we'll continue with something. I still have to do some more research, but we'll continue next Friday. It's been such a pleasure delivering this specific series of lectures on historical Vrindavan. Thank you so much. O glorious Śrīla Prabhupāda, ki jaya!

Again, the revealer of the Dhāma, Śrī Gaura Nitāi ki jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarāma ki jaya! Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara ki jaya!

Vrindāvaneshvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ki jaya!

Māyāpur. See you soon. You.