Hare Krishna, very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vrindavan Dhām.

As you know, we're doing this every Friday now through the summer months. I am at the present moment on the Baltic Sea coast in Poland. We're just about to start our summer festival tour, called the Festival of India. This will be the 31st year.

We're actually planning 50 festivals, so a bit of a challenge, but do keep us in your prayers, please. So, we're continuing with our mini-series on historical Vrindavan, and this will be part 8. As you know, previously we discussed different aspects of historical Vrindavan: the old and ancient architecture of Braj, the dressing style of the residents, their food, their cuisine.

We also discussed the original form of Vrindavan in its kuñjas and nikunjas, and we discussed the writing style and techniques of writing the scriptures in Vrindavan in the old days, as well as different cultural festivals, traditions, social gatherings, etc.

So, today in this lecture, I would like to speak about the languages spoken in the old days of Vrindavan. It's actually really interesting. In India, they often say that there's a different language after every krośa. A krośa is four miles.

So, in India, they say there's a different language every four miles, and I've actually experienced that in my travels in India. But it's a little different in Braj. Braj is big, the whole of Braja Maṇḍala is quite extensive, and we're speaking really about 108 primary villages.

But as we've discussed before, there are, you know, sub-villages and sub-sub-villages and sub-sub-sub-villages. But historically, the language in all these villages and all of Maṇḍala is pretty much the same. It's called Braja Bhāṣā. Sometimes I quote verses from the poets.

However, there are slight changes in every village. How is that?

In the people's accent, their style of speaking Braja Bhāṣā, how they pronounce the words. And I was reading that in the old days, Braja Bhāṣā speakers used to know someone's village name even without, uh, asking someone for it. They would just listen to that person from a particular village in Braj.

They just listened to his accent, and by the accent, they knew, "Oh, you come from that village. Your accent is such, you're from that village, you're from that village." There's not a different language every four miles, just a little bit of a different accent.

And whatever the accent, the Braja Bhāṣā speakers are very proud of their language because within it are words and terms for glorifying their beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa. There's a lot of bhāva, a lot of rasa, a lot of nectar in Braja Bhāṣā.

I was reading actually that Vrindavan scholars say that the success of any language is in its ability to glorify the Lord and His pastimes. That Braja Bhāṣā is pregnant with all these words and terms you can glorify Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Of course, Braja Bhāṣā scholars are very proficient in Sanskrit. They can read and write Sanskrit, which is the language of the Vedas. And we know that most of the works of our Six Goswāmis were written in Sanskrit. But later, for ease of understanding, the deep meanings of those Sanskrit texts were brought forth by the medieval poets of Braja.

They translated the dramas, the scriptures, and prayers from Sanskrit, uh, into Braja Bhāṣā. The works of the Goswāmis, there's the Sanskrit, they turned it into Braja. And in due course of time, scholarly devotees in Bengal, like our hero Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, also started translating Sanskrit texts into Bengali in such a way that even simple people could understand their meaning.

They took the Sanskrit and translated it into Bengali. And actually, when Bengali devotees and scholars like Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, Śyāmānanda Prabhu, and others came to reside in Vrindavan for some time, as devotees would do, those ācāryas, they introduced a new language to the world, which is a mixture of Bengali and Braja Bhāṣā, and it's known as Braja-Buli.

Braja, of course, refers to Braja Bhāṣā, and Buli refers to the Bengali language. Now, this Braja-Buli, this language, it actually shows the ingenuity of Sācī-tanaya's disciples because they combined two commonly spoken languages into a simple language, thus giving everybody an opportunity to read the scriptures.

Therefore, it's safe to say that our ācāryas were revolutionary in their preaching methods, as we know our Śrīla Prabhupāda was so expert in revolutionizing the preaching and Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the Western countries.

Now, Buli was a language very much favored by Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura. In fact, all of his writings are in the Braja-Buli language, thus his works are popular both in Vrindavan and Bengal as well. Now, getting back to just Braja Bhāṣā, um, as it is spoken today in Vrindavan, in the old, olden days in Vrindavan, sādhus used to come to Vrindavan just to learn Braja Bhāṣā, just like scholars used to go to Benares in ancient days to learn the Sanskrit language and its literature.

Devotees would come because, again, in that Braja Bhāṣā language, there are so many ways to understand and to glorify Kṛṣṇa. I think we should have a course in ISKCON in Braja Bhāṣā. And there's a big list of names of famous poets who wrote in it.

Many of them I've quoted in the last year or so. For example, the Muslim devotee Raskhān, the other devotee Ṭāha Bībi, Gadādhara Paṇḍita Goswāmi, he was from South India, but he wrote in Braja Bhāṣā. Rasikottama, we quoted him. And there are actually eight, or you could say, the eight famous poets of Braja, they also wrote in, in Braja Bhāṣā.

Who are they?

Sūradāsa, Parama nanda dāsa, Nandadāsa, Kṛṣṇadāsa, Vitthala svāmi, caitanya dāsa, Viṭṭhala svāmi, and a poet named Govinda svāmi. Also, we've quoted many poets like Kiśoradāsa, Lalita Kiśora, and Kṛṣṇakavi. We've quoted their verses in Braja Bhāṣā. And so many devotees. And interestingly, there are many, many documents in the Vrindavan Research Institute which are written in, in Braja Bhāṣā.

When I was there a few months ago, I saw in that institute the actual final will and testament of Jīva Goswāmi. It was written, or rather, you could say, he spoke it on his, his deathbed, and the scribes wrote it down.

Mainly in Sanskrit, but I was pleased to also see there were many words in Braja Bhāṣā. And also saw many documents related to the Rādhā Dāmodara temple written in the time of Jīva Goswāmi. They were also in, in Braja Bhāṣā.

And one really interesting thing I found, there's a very famous, uh, set of, um, prayers in the institute. They're known as the apology prayer letters, and they're known as Kṣamā Prārthanā Patra. Kṣamā Prārthanā Patra. And they were letters that were written by various Braja Bhāṣā devotees or servants, different, different Vaiṣṇavas who had misbehaved, they'd made a mistake or they made an offense, and they wrote these letters, uh, to apologize to Jīva Goswāmi and other ācāryas at that time.

What did they write? "Please give me another chance.

Please don't kick me out of Vrindavan. I, I'm repenting. I, I made, I made a mistake. Please don't kick me out." They're called the apology letters. And I noticed that at the end of their letters, they all made one statement in Braja Bhāṣā: "Śrī Gosāiji, say..." which means, "If I repeat my mistake again, then I will have to be very far from Śrī Rūpa Goswāmi and Śrī Sanātana Goswāmi.

Please let me stay." They couldn't bear the separation. So, the glories of Braja Bhāṣā, its, uh, poetic nature is well known to us. We've discussed it many times, actually, in the last few months. And therefore, I was very pleased to find, um, a stanza written by a poet named Gariba Dāsa, G-A-R-I-B, Gariba Dāsa, who in his glorification of Vrindavan in general, he also mentions the Braja Bhāṣā language.

And I think it's going to become one of my favorite ślokas. Listen to this: "The abode of Braja, the food of the Braja-bāsīs, the dust of Braja, the kuñjas of Braja, the company of the Braja-bāsīs, and the words of Braja Bhāṣā are the five life-airs of those who are dear devotees of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." The abode of Braja, the food of the Braja-bāsīs, the dust of Braja, the kuñjas of Braja, the company of the Braja-bāsīs, and the words of Braja Bhāṣā are the five life-airs of those who are dear devotees of Śrīmatī Rādhāraṇī.

Let them also be our five life-airs. Another poet, Parama nanda dāsa, who we mentioned earlier, he also wrote about the glories of Braja Bhāṣā. He writes, "All glories to the Lord of sound and words, Lord Vāgīśa, meaning Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of all knowledge and powers.

But the glories of Lord Vāgīśa, Kṛṣṇa, is less than the glories of Mother Yaśodā, who is teaching her baby Kṛṣṇa how to speak the first letters of the alphabet of the glorious Braja Bhāṣā language." Pure nectar!

We thank that poet. He continues, "All glory is to the language of Braja, which is coming from the lotus mouth of the Lord of the Universe, in such a way that it attracts and intoxicates the ears and minds of His devotees.

All glories to the language of Braja, to its dhvanis, sound, its anadhvani vibrations, and to its pratidhvani, its reverberations. In that great Braja Bhāṣā language, these poets are sharing such deep realizations with us." So, such were the words written by these poets in glorification of Braja Bhāṣā.

Now, another interesting thing, really interesting, is I also read that the great Emperor of India, of course, there are many emperors, but we favor one, Akbar. Remember we talked extensively about Akbar. He was actually a very big fan of Braja Bhāṣā.

His court poet and singer, that famous singer, Pandit Tansen, he used to only sing in the Braja Bhāṣā language, not any other language. Why?

Because he'd learned it from the singing of Haridāsa Swami, a very famous Vaiṣṇavācārya who used to live in Vrindavan at Nidhivan. Akbar loved Braja Bhāṣā so much that just to hear beautiful poems sung in Braja Bhāṣā, he would sometimes come to Vrindavan, disguised as an ordinary man, to sit and hear the singing of poems in Braja Bhāṣā sung by Haridāsa Swami himself.

The Emperor. And I was reading that, you know, in old Vrindavan, men and women, what was the entertainment in the evening?

They used to just sit outside their homes and sing all these poems in the Braja Bhāṣā language and dance in ecstasy. That is the entertainment of Braja-bāsīs. And we want to become Braja-bāsīs. There was no TV, there was no Internet, there were no mobile phones.

I just flew from Cyprus to Berlin yesterday, actually. And, you know, nowadays there's a facility, you can go on the internet, log on to the internet on the flights. And I was, actually, continuing a little search, research for this class, and I looked around, everybody had their mobile phones on, they were watching cartoons and the news and movies and things.

No seeing the, the, the poems of all these great devotees in the Braja Bhāṣā language. Remember, Kṛṣṇa consciousness was everything for a Braja-bāsī. And it said that once you understand it, you have a chance to dive deep down into the sweet ocean of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.

And while I was researching, I was curious to know or to learn what language Kṛṣṇa spoke, what were the different, was there just one language or several languages that Kṛṣṇa spoke with the residents of Vrindavan 5,000 years ago?

I never heard anything about it. And, um, actually, I found out that Kṛṣṇa spoke several dialects in Braj. And how did I find out?

By reading Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. Rather, I had someone translate for me the original Sanskrit, and we came across the verse 2.1.65. "He who is expert in the dialects of various regions, Sanskrit and Prākrit, and the languages of birds and beasts, is known as vividha-buddhi-bhāṣā-vita, the knower of many amazing languages, and that is our Kṛṣṇa." A little research showed me that the Prākrit language referred to therein is actually a group of languages, including Ardhamāgadī, Mahārāṣṭrī, Śaurasenī, etc.

Now, these languages were spoken in Dvāpara-yuga, and with a few exceptions, they are no longer spoken now. But the next verse in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu is really interesting because Rūpa Goswāmi goes on to say, "And now, we, now we know what Kṛṣṇa spoke." He writes, "With the ladies and the residents in general of Braj, Kṛṣṇa speaks the Śaurasenī, a part of the Prākrit language.

With Indra, who bows his head down, Kṛṣṇa elaborately speaks Sanskrit language. And with the Khasiyās, who Rūpa at that time refers to as tribals, and the birds and beasts of Vrindavan, he speaks the Prākrit language named specifically." That's how Kṛṣṇa speaks to the birds and the beasts, Rūpa Goswāmi is writing it therein.

Then he concludes, "How did this little Kṛṣṇa become such an expert in all these languages?

How did this little Kṛṣṇa become such an expert in all these languages?" So, in that second verse, Rūpa says that Kṛṣṇa speaks in the Śaurasenī language specifically with Braja-bāsīs.

And again, Śaurasenī is as a, a part of the Prākrit language. And this Prākrit language was lost over time, but traces of it are still found in the Braja Bhāṣā language that we hear today. So we can understand that it is a version of the Prākrit language from Dvāpara-yuga that Kṛṣṇa spoke.

So, I was thinking, it's very relishable to know that our Lord Kṛṣṇa spoke in so many different languages. Actually, He can obviously a beginner, He's present everywhere, He knows everything. He can speak in any language, making it easier for us, as an international society with so many languages, to share our hearts with Him in our own tongues.

You can also pray to Kṛṣṇa in English and French and German and Russian. One time, Prabhupāda said that even if you don't pronounce the Sanskrit properly, Kṛṣṇa is in your heart.

He knows what you're trying to say. All glories to our beloved Kṛṣṇa. So, we'll finish today with a special verse. It's not a long verse, as we often do to finish our classes. Um, it's, but it's, it's short, but it's very, very sweet.

Listen to this: "That Hari from whom unlimited words in the vocabulary arise, that same Hari only utters the expression, 'Hmm, okay,' when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī instructs Him." One more time: "That Hari from whom unlimited words in the vocabulary arise, that same Hari only utters the expression, 'Okay,' when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī instructs." So, I hope that you enjoyed this lecture, interesting lecture about the different dialects that Kṛṣṇa speaks and the Braja Bhāṣā language and Vrindavan, etc.

And I have to run off now. Our very first festival is starting in about an hour and a half, first festival this season, so I have to go. But I'll continue the lecture series somehow or other during these summer months, and I'll be back again next Friday.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma ki jaya! Śrī Rādhā-Sundara ki jaya!

Hare Krishna.