"*00412*.*
"# Historical Vrindavan - Part 5

Dear devotees, once again, welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. 

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine.*

We are continuing with our series on historic Vṛndāvana, and this will be part five. In my research and studies at the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I learned that before Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu visited Vṛndāvana, the local people considered Kamyavan alone to be Vṛndāvana. In olden days, Kamyavan was referred to as Ādi Vṛndāvana—the eternal Vṛndāvana. It was only when Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu came that He revealed Vṛndāvana to be much larger than the area of Kamyavan. And it is a fact, because according to śāstra, Vṛndāvana, as Mahāprabhu revealed it and as we know it today, meets all the śāstric criteria for being called, you could say, the "real" Vṛndāvana, or let us say, the greater Vṛndāvana. 

And what are those śāstric criteria? They are called *lakṣaṇas* in Sanskrit—characteristics meant to distinguish Vṛndāvana from all other holy places. It is the playground of God; it is the topmost of all holy places. Well, the śāstras and ācāryas say that in Vṛndāvana there should be various types of *kuñjas* (12 in number), meaning light groves. There should be four types of *nikuñjas*, which means smaller *kuñjas*. There have to be three different forms of the Lord in particular present. There have to be gardens of Tamāla and Kadamba trees—or let us say, forests—and there have to be twelve ponds. That’s Vraja. It’s really interesting, isn't it? 

So, when our beloved Six Gosvāmīs came to Vṛndāvana on the order of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they identified these *lakṣaṇas*—these characteristics—here in Vṛndāvana. They identified them for us. It was all, you could say, part of the mission given by Lord Caitanya to, as we know, discover the lost places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, establish temple or deity worship in Vṛndāvana, and of course, write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is an instruction we find in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 1, text 32:

> *bhakti-pracāra, sarva-tīrtha-prakāṭana*
> *śrī-madana-gopāla, govindera sevāpana*

"After going to Vṛndāvana, the brothers preached devotional service and discovered many places of pilgrimage. They specifically initiated the service of Madana-mohana and Govindajī."

So, the Gosvāmīs, in their research in Vraja, identified Vṛndāvana as Vṛndāvana because they identified the 12 *kuñjas*—one of the criteria. And those 12 famous *kuñjas* are also one more *lakṣaṇa*; they found them all by divine revelation. They also discovered four kinds of *nikuñjas*, meaning smaller *kuñjas*. This is all from śāstra. They found *nikuñja-vivṛtā*, *nikuñja-nivṛtā*, and *nivṛtā-vivṛtā-nikuñja*. There you go; they discovered this. 

As for the criteria of Vṛndāvana having three particular forms of the Lord, while the Gosvāmīs were here, they established the three principal deities of Vṛndāvana: Śrī Govinda, Gopīnātha, and Madana-mohana. As we know, we’ve discussed before, when we approach Vṛndāvana, we approach these three deities in succession: Madana-mohana, then Govinda, and then Gopīnātha—in that order. Gopīnātha means that one is very dear, and he serves in the mood of a gopī. So they established these three principle deities: Madana-mohana was established by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Govinda by Rūpa Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopīnātha by Madhu Paṇḍita, also one of the famous Gosvāmīs in Vṛndāvana.

Now, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, in his famous poem *Jaya Rādhe, Jaya Kṛṣṇa*, glorifies Vṛndāvana by praying to these three main forms or three deities of the Lord in Vṛndāvana: *Jaya Rādhe, Jaya Kṛṣṇa, Jaya Vṛndāvana, Śrī Govinda, Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana*. It is a famous song devotees like to sing sometimes in kīrtana: "All glory to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Vṛndāvana! All glories to Śrī Govinda, Gopīnātha, and Madana-mohana!" 

And that is why the present-day Kanak Vṛndāvana, which is just as you enter Jaipur—we’ve spoken about this in our Govindajī series—is there. There’s that Kanak Vṛndāvana just before you enter into Jaipur. They’ve made it very beautiful, a little bit outside Jaipur. It’s called Gupta Vṛndāvana, or the "hidden Vṛndāvana," because at one time, as we discussed in our Govinda series, all these three deities were situated there for some time before they were moved into the city of Jaipur. So it’s called *Gupta Vṛndāvana*—it gets the title of Vṛndāvana, but hidden Vṛndāvana in Jaipur.

Now, as for the criteria: Vṛndāvana must have large gardens or forests of Tamāla and Kadamba trees. You see them everywhere, but the Gosvāmīs had no difficulty showing these two trees growing abundantly in Vṛndāvana. Actually, in my research in the institute, historical records show that Loi Bazaar was originally a small sub-forest of Tamāla trees. Historical records show Loi Bazaar, where we go and do our shopping, was originally a sub-forest of Tamāla trees. So, next time you come to Vṛndāvana and you go shopping and all those shops, just in your mind, picture it as it is—even today unmanifest to our eyes—as a sub-forest of Tamāla trees. 

And where Śrīla Prabhupāda’s *samādhi* is—years ago, it’s just off the *parikramā* path—at one point, when we’re going around Vṛndāvana, a little distance from Keśī-ghāṭa, that was a forest of Kadamba trees. Actually, that Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s *samādhi-mandira* is one of my favorite, all-time favorite places to go in Vṛndāvana and read *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, glorifying Vṛndāvana. It’s secluded; it’s off the *parikramā* path. Not many people know about it, a little *samādhi*. The *mahant* there, the chief *pūjārī*, takes very good care; they’re very welcoming to devotees there. It’s just such a nice place to sit, chant *japa*, and read the writings of Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. That was formerly a forest of Kadamba trees. And there are still a few Kadamba trees in various areas elsewhere; for example, there’s a 5,000-year-old Kadamba tree from which Kṛṣṇa jumped into the Yamunā River to fight the Kāliya serpent, also just off the *parikramā* path around Vraja.

Now, to go on in detail, the 12 ponds—or you could say they’re more like small lakes—that our beloved Six Gosvāmīs discovered are Govinda-kuṇḍa, Kāliya-kuṇḍa, Lalitā-kuṇḍa, Piśāca-kuṇḍa, and Dāvānala-kuṇḍa, that’s at Govardhana Hill. You have to visit them, or some are not manifest these days. Actually, unfortunately, many—or let us say most—of these *lakṣaṇas* or criteria that define Vṛndāvana proper have disappeared from Vṛndāvana because of time, because of invasions, neglect in modern times. The 12 different *kuṇḍas* have almost completely disappeared, mainly because of farming. You know, they go and they cut down the trees and they fill in the land and they do agriculture, and the same is true for the four types of *nikuñjas*; they’ve also been many of them cut down, not present to our eyes.

The three main deities we identified, which are crucial to making Vṛndāvana "Vṛndāvana," they went to Rajasthan. That was their desire. They went to Rajasthan due to Aurangzeb’s atrocities and because of the *bhakti* of the residents of Jaipur. The deities can’t leave. I was always wondering, "Why did they come back to Vṛndāvana?" But God is great, but devotion to God is, in one sense, greater. He can be controlled by a devotee, just as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who’s the top devotee, she controls Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa doesn’t control her; she controls Kṛṣṇa by her *bhakti*. So I think that’s why these famous deities have... you know, that left. Madana-mohana, of course, went on to another town, another city, but Govinda-jī and Gopīnātha—they stay because of the residents of Jaipur’s *bhakti*. You just go to a *maṅgala-ārati* there and you can see how that love keeps Kṛṣṇa there. So they’ve also left Vṛndāvana. And the gardens of Kadamba and Tamāla trees are no more to be seen because of so many streets, roads, and buildings, and the twelve ponds are also disappearing because of time and neglect. Nevertheless, as we pointed out, there is eternal Vṛndāvana. 

When Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes were manifested and when He leaves, He stays. He stays in Vṛndāvana, but invisible to our eyes. But, *eṣa kṛṣṇa-caitanya, bhaktyā-vittā*, when one's eyes are covered with the salve of love, then we will see these things. And when will that day be ours? I found a very beautiful verse in the Braja language by a Vrajabāsī poet named Harivaṁśa, which talks about eternal Vṛndāvana: *candra miṭe, dinkar miṭe*. It’s really beautiful. At one point, the moon or *candra* can disappear; at one point, the sun can also disappear from this world. What more is there to say? He writes, at one point this world made of the three modes of nature—sattva, rajas, and tamas—can also disappear. But the poet Harivaṁśa says with firm faith that the eternal *nitya-līlā* pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa will go on and on without any material disturbance whatever. 

Excuse me for a second. So, we Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, or let us say we aspiring Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, accept both the "original" Vṛndāvana as it was seen by the Vrajabāsīs—Kamyavan—for hundreds of years, and the "greater" Vṛndāvana as revealed by Lord Caitanya and the Six Gosvāmīs as equally important and worshipable. Kamyavan is considered very special. I was reading because Kṛṣṇa had pastimes with Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā, and His cowherd friends there, and in some regards, even demigods were able to serve the Lord there in various ways. But for the more intimate and confidential pastimes, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Their intimate associates would go far away from there to the dense forest of Vṛndāvana. Because it doesn’t look dense anymore, but previously it was—here it was—a very dense forest for their intimate, loving pastimes. In Vṛndāvana, there are only the pastime places of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in different forests and different *kuñjas* where the *rāsa-līlā* dances happen. Therefore, even Lord Śiva, as Gopīśvara Mahādeva, tried to enter the *rāsa* dance in Vṛndāvana and not in Kamyavan, because this is where that topmost of pastimes has taken place. 

Also, they would go to the thick forest of Vṛndāvana because these forests were filled with many types of birds and animals and butterflies, which added to the pleasant atmosphere, which was conducive to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. And I was reading that previously there were hardly any monkeys in Vṛndāvana. Now there’s a multitude of monkeys, and they steal. Not only did they steal your glasses—beware when you come for Kārtika—now they also steal iPhones! One monkey—and this is a true story—he stole my iPhone out of my hand. I was just holding it very loosely. He stole it and he ran to the top of a tree. Even though I threw him bananas, he wasn't interested; he wanted, like, a *gulab jamun* or something. Some local person came and got it back for me. The big *gulab jamun* up there! Vṛndāvana monkeys, they’re pests, of course they’re Vrajabāsīs, but... ah, but there weren't very many even during British time. I was reading there weren’t many monkeys here. 

Therefore, we see why our poets... because you know, now I’m reading a lot of literature in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute to prepare for these classes, and I always hear... they’re always... the poets especially like to read the poets, because the way they describe Vṛndāvana just touches the heart. So, they’re always writing about peacocks. I don’t hear anything about monkeys. One *sādhu* told me that many years back, when the sound of the bells, the *mṛdaṅgas*, and the kartālas would resound from Vṛndāvana’s temples during *ārati*, peacocks could be seen dancing on the roofs of the temples. Wow, I said, "Really?" He said, "Yes, during the *kīrtanas*, the peacocks would dance on the roofs of the temples." I miss that one. Peacocks were a very prominent and welcome feature in Vraja. The Vrajabāsīs say that in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, peacocks would hide Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī from the eyes of her in-laws who were looking for her by opening and expanding their feathers. So, Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā, they would come looking for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; they’d only see Kṛṣṇa standing there. They weren’t interested in Him, and a whole bunch of peacocks, with, you know how they do, they fan out their feathers like that, hiding Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Therefore, it says that all of the *rasas* in Vṛndāvana—the various *rasas*, *vātsalya-rasa*, etc., *sakhya-rasa*—they all serve the *mādhurya* in Vṛndāvana. They all, in their own ways, serve the very intimate, loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

So here you have a peacock. We think of a peacock as something inferior. Not in Vraja! It’s a self-realized, pure devotee who cries tears of ecstasy for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and they’re facilitating Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s *mādhurya* pastimes by spreading those beautiful feathers. Therefore, one often sees peacocks portrayed in different positions and poses in the architecture of the old temples and *havelīs*—remember homes—in Vṛndāvana. For example, there’ll be dancing peacocks, there’ll be peacocks strutting, there’ll be flying peacocks portrayed in the architecture in the entrances to temples or our homes inside the temples. Peacock, speak, no monkeys! As peacocks, I even... I’ve even seen Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa portrayed as a peacock and a peahen; that’s one pastime they actually have. 

More criteria! And specifically, there’s one very, very beautiful 250-year-old temple in Vṛndāvana. It’s famous for peacocks which are carved inside the temple walls. It’s called Ṭikārī Rānī Mandir. Note that down: Ṭikārī Rānī Mandir. I went there; peacocks, so tastefully and so beautifully done. Ṭikārī Rānī Mandir. I actually researched that temple, and... yeah, I’ll tell you the story of that temple, how it came about. It does fit into our series here. We’re discussing a lot about the architecture of Vṛndāvana, and how inspiring it is to see it today, so tastefully done, so beautiful. And you know, we were discussing how many kings and queens and princes and princesses contributed to this. The same is true, but this—I would call it the "Peacock Temple," I guess that’s okay—Ṭikārī Rānī Mandir. Ṭikārī is a region in the state of Bihar. Remember, I went to Bihar a couple of months ago, to Gaya, actually. So Ṭikārī is a region in the state of Bihar, very close to Gaya where they have that famous footprint of Viṣṇu, and nearby Bodhgaya, where Buddha got enlightened. We went there. Now, in the region of Ṭikārī, there is a forest said to be visited by Lord Rāma when He was in exile for 14 years. That forest... I missed it; it’s worth going back. But that forest is called Ṭākārvan, which means the "forest of ṭikā trees." And that forest, to this day, is well known amongst sādhus because the fruits there—there’s various fruit trees—are famous for controlling the six senses. That’s why the sādhus go there. You eat those fruits, just by eating those fruits, *vācā-vegam, mana-vegam, jihvā-vegam, udaropastha-vegam*... as Rūpa Gosvāmī writes: "A sober person who can control the urge to speak, the mind’s demands, the actions of anger, and the urges of the tongue, belly, and genitals is qualified to make disciples all over the world." So, we’re attempting to do that by engaging our senses in the service of Kṛṣṇa—that’s the sure, steady path, *sādhana-bhakti* to *rāgānuga-bhakti*, spontaneous devotional service and pure love. 

But here’s a little secret: if you go to that Ṭākārvan, the forest of ṭikā trees, eat the fruits there. That’s one way. And don’t think, "You know, this is mythology or this is exaggeration." No, to think these things are exaggeration is an offense to the holy names. You will find that you can control your senses. Of course, you just have to eat fruits! Can you do that? It’s said for that reason, Lord Buddha—for one reason, Lord Buddha came to Ṭikārvan in the region of Ṭikārī to sit under a banyan tree—that’s what that banyan tree is—and attain enlightenment, 48 or 49 days later. That part of the Ṭikārī state region became known as Bodh-Gaya. So actually, I did go there, now I think about it. I didn’t see any fruit trees, but... yeah, we were... it looks like we were there, Bodh-Gaya. 

And I was reading that sādhus used to come from all over India to stay in that part of Bihar, that particular region, Ṭikārī, for worshiping that famous footprint we discussed in one lecture of Lord Viṣṇu, as well as for drinking the water of the nearby Phalgu River, which is considered flowing *caraṇāmṛta*. Again, no exaggeration, of course. That’s a river that was cursed by Sītā for a particular reason, and therefore, she cursed it to always flow underground so no one could appreciate its beauty. Nevertheless, it’s a very auspicious river. So you go there, you dig in the sand, and the river comes up, pure water. You just drink it to your heart’s content. And what is it? Is it water in India, no? According to our śāstra, it’s flowing *caraṇāmṛta*. And how much do we respect *caraṇāmṛta*? *Caraṇāmṛta* means the water that has washed the body of the Lord. So every day in our temples, when there’s the opening of the deities, we greet the deities and then we make a line, and the water that has washed the deities, mixed with, you know, yogurt and some honey like that, we get a small spoonful in our hands and with great devotion we sip that *caraṇāmṛta*. Because we know it’s directly connected to the Lord. So what about the Phalgu River, which is a river flowing *caraṇāmṛta*? 

This is Bhārata, this is India, even today. Probably like India is not like it was previously, obviously, but Prabhupāda gave that analogy one time: an elephant is so valuable when it’s living, but even when it departs naturally, one can use the tusks or the leather from that beast, or sometimes there’s a pearl on the head of an old elephant—one of the types of pearls. So he said, "India was glorious before, the 'Wonder that was India,' and now it’s changed, but you can still find flowing rivers of *caraṇāmṛta*." Oh my gosh. What about the condensed nectar of living in or visiting Śrī Vṛndāvana? Therefore, Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura says, "Whatever the case, run to Vṛndāvana!" And Kārtika is coming soon. 

So, yes, we... I remember I did eat some fruits there, so maybe that’s helped me control my senses. Now, while I was there in Gaya and nearby Bodhgaya, in that forest, you could say I became very intrigued hearing the story—you could almost say, the pastime—of a famous queen named Rānī Indrajit. We’ll just go ahead quickly here, who established that temple of peacocks in Vṛndāvana. But let’s hear how she did it. She was a queen living in far-away Bihar. Bihar is at least a three or four-hour plane ride from Delhi. So this Queen, Rānī Indrajit, she was living with her husband, the King, there in that region in the early 1800s. We’re not going back too far here; in the early 1800s, many of the kings and queens we mentioned earlier in our series here, "Historical Vṛndāvana," that was three or four hundred years ago. This is the early 1800s. And although happy and content in that deeply spiritual environment, one day she walked away from it when she heard the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. 

When she heard the glories of Vṛndāvana, she went straight to that highest of all spiritual abodes. So her history is very interesting. Her husband, the King, was named Mahārāja Nārāyaṇa Siṅha. Mahārāja Nārāyaṇa Siṅha, he was also a very spiritual person. It’s said that he used to go every day in his chariot to that famous Viṣṇu temple that we visited, and he had *darśana* there in Gaya. He had *darśana* of Viṣṇu’s footprint. He used to worship that footprint. But one morning he woke up and he told his wife he’d had enough of royal life. We’re hearing this a few times in this series, but that doesn’t mean that all the kings were like that; this is the exception to the rule. To be a king and surrounded by so many servants and guards, and have an army and a palace and a treasury and name and fame—what we’re discussing here are exceptions to the rule. One morning, this King, he woke up and rolled over and he said to his wife, "I’ve had enough." And without saying another word, he changed his clothes into a very simple dress and walked out of the palace in bare feet, with only a stick in his hands. 

So after that, our heroine Rānī Indrajit... the whole burden of management of a kingdom fell upon her. But these are *kṣatriya* women, and they are also endowed with special qualities that *kṣatriyas* have. She was very shy, of course, very beautiful, but she could rise to the occasion and manage a war, manage a kingdom, conquer and divide, chastise, well, you know, the *kṣatriya* girls. But one day, in the midst of all this ruling and making decisions and managing and, you know, so forth and so on, a Vaiṣṇava *sādhu* came to the palace and gave a lecture on the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vraja. *Brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva, guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja*. We’re wandering in this senseless material world from one universe to the next, from one body to the next, life after life. But *guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja*—the mercy of Kṛṣṇa or His representative, the spiritual master, they intervene, stop this materialistic entanglement. Serve the lotus feet of Gauranītāi; serve the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This is what life is meant for, just as they have done in our lives. We have that experience, all of us. 

So this *sādhu* came and he gave a lecture, and something in her heart, it resonated with her heart, and she asked that *sādhu* to stay in Ṭikārī, in that region, and to continue enlightening her in what—Vraja-bhakti, *bhajana-bhakti*. And as a result, she very soon became a very devout devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. *Bhakti*... remember that a few hundred years earlier, Caitanya Mahāprabhu had introduced the idea, the understanding, the mood of Vraja-bhakti. It had not been there before; this is a special gift. *kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te, kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ*. Rūpa Gosvāmī said, "What is this incarnation? He’s unlike any other incarnation, even Kṛṣṇa Himself, because He’s flooding the world with *bhakti*." And what world is it? A world of people in Kali-yuga. The paraphrasing, the paraphrase in the verse. So that concept was there in the 1800s. So this devotee, he just spoke, and by speaking she became Kṛṣṇa conscious. *Śravaṇam kīrtanam viṣṇu-smaraṇam*. It brings remembrance of Kṛṣṇa. 

So she was ready. Actually, it’s said from that point on, whenever she heard the word "Vṛndāvana," she’d break down crying. Whenever she heard the word "Vṛndāvana," she’d cry, "When, when will that day be ours?" It’s also very well known that she had this habit of writing the word or the name "Vṛndāvana" in any room that she stayed in. So after some time, a year or two in the palace, every room was covered with the name "Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana." And it’s said that whenever she saw those names, she would call out the name "Vṛndāvana" and feel the presence of Vṛndāvana. She’d walk in and, "Oh, Vṛndāvana!" and by saying the name she felt the presence of Vṛndāvana, because all transcendental names are imbued with transcendental potency; you could say they’re non-different than what they’re describing: *nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktiḥ*. 

So in that mood of, you know, she’s seeing Vṛndāvana in all the rooms—a little room; she’s not in Vṛndāvana, but she’s experiencing Vṛndāvana. The poet Aśkaraṇa—he’s a very nice Vaiṣṇava poet I read in the institute—the poet Aśkaraṇa, he writes, and this is in glorification of the gopīs: "The gopī who was feeling deep separation from Kṛṣṇa’s playful pastimes in the forest made her own house the forest of playful pastimes of Kṛṣṇa." Like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he writes, "One day I woke up and I saw my house transformed into Vaikuṇṭha." Again, when, or when will that day be ours? And it will be by Prabhupāda’s grace, rest assured. Then one day, in the same mood as her husband, she left the palace along with her *iṣṭa-deva*. She had a small deity of Gopāla. And well, she didn’t go alone like her husband; she’s a lady and a Queen. So she ordered her large army to accompany her to go where? To Vṛndāvana. She got into a palanquin and they carried her to Vṛndāvana. And I can tell you again, it’s a long way from Bihar, from Gaya, from that forest to Vraja. 

She went all the way from there to Mathura; it took several months. And when she finally reached the borders or, you know, coming towards Vṛndāvana, she and her contingent of soldiers camped for one night on the further shore, the other side of the Yamunā River. Like, you know, we’re here in Vṛndāvana now and then there’s the Yamunā. So, they camped on the other side of the Yamunā River. But that night, the encampment was attacked by a large group of very ruthless armed *dacoits*—thieves, bad guys. And when Rānī Indrajit’s soldiers saw that, they took out their swords and their axes and their shields, and there was a ferocious battle. I was reading about the battle, a ferocious battle taking place because they’re protecting the Queen. And the *dacoits*, they heard she was a Queen and they wanted whatever they had imagined she might be traveling with, you know, jewels and so forth. It was a big fight. 

But in the midst of that fight, our *kṣatriyā* Queen, Rānī Indrajit, she jumped into the Yamunā River while holding her Gopāla deity, and she managed to swim in the strong current—in those days it was a very strong current—to the side, to the other side. Just see these *kṣatriya* ladies! She swam with her deity in her hand in a strong current. Well, right behind her, her soldiers are engaged in a huge battle. Now, when she got to the other side, there was... on the banks of the Yamunā, there was a small grass hut, and in that grass hut lived one old *sādhvī*. *Sādhu* means a male saintly person; *sādhvī* means a female saintly person. So there, on the banks of the river, there was this old *sādhvī* living in a grass hut. So our Queen, she took shelter there, and she actually stayed there for several months doing what? Chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa—*Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma*—worshiping her Gopāla deity and continuing *śravaṇam kīrtanam viṣṇu-smaraṇam kṛṣṇa-smaraṇam*, hearing about Kṛṣṇa from that old renounced Vaiṣṇavī whose humble hut she shared. 

Now we’ll move forward a little bit. Hearing of her new life, or let us say real life, in Vṛndāvana, and curious as to how she was surviving, living in a forest on the bank of a river, a number of her very faithful, loyal followers back in Ṭikārī, they came to Vṛndāvana to see her. News spread that she made it, and shocked to see her living in such a humble dwelling, the Queen... they offered to immediately build her an opulent *havelī* home. But she just laughed and she said she was most happy in Vṛndāvana and had no interest in returning to her previous way of life. As Prabhupāda told one of my sannyāsī godbrothers when he handed him the *daṇḍa*: "Never look back and think that you’ve left anything valuable behind and never envy the position of the materialistic sense-enjoyers in this world. Don’t look back, just look forward to Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world; keep that as your north star." Our north star is Goloka Vṛndāvana. 

So, exasperated, her loyal followers... but, "Dear Queen," she said, "Don’t call me Queen. I’m not a Queen, I’m just a humble servant of Rādhā." They asked her if there was anything, anything they could do to serve her. So she thought for a moment and smiled. She replied, "Yes, you can build an opulent home here in Vṛndāvana for my Gopāla." He’s a little deity. "You can build a big, opulent home"—meaning obviously a temple—"in Vṛndāvana for my Gopāla." And then she kind of got a little bit of her *kṣatriya* back; she ordered her royal accountant, that person who was a royal accountant, to donate everything in the treasury, a large amount of money, for the construction of a very big temple there, actually right where she was on the banks of the Yamunā River. That’s where you’ll find the temple today, the very place, the very place she swam across the river and landed next to the hut of that old woman who she lived with and continued to live with in the grass hut to the end of her life. She didn’t move in the temple; that’s where they built the temple. And her followers soon began construction by building a large red sandstone *ghāṭa* on the river, and then in time, a beautiful temple for Gopāla. And the temple was built in the Rajasthani-style architecture, which I found interesting. 

Later, I discovered she built large quarters for *sādhvīs*, particularly widows in Vṛndāvana, in that same area. That building contains 108 rooms, still being used. And at the end of her life, our heroine Rānī Indrajit requested her *sādhvī* friends not to put her in a *samādhi* as queens would—that was as they did with queens—not to put into *samādhi*, but to burn her body to ashes and spread her ashes on the banks of the Yamunā River, where she said she could always stay and peacefully serve Kṛṣṇa. So in time, that temple was actually—was built, at least partially built—during her lifetime, and it became known as Ṭikārī Rānī Mandir. That’s the story I told you, I tell it, Ṭikārī Rānī Mandir. And again, when you walk in there this Kārtika, hopefully you’ll see, it’s distinguished by the many peacocks that are portrayed on the walls inside. No monkeys, of course! The monkeys are also Vrajabāsīs, but in this temple, Ṭikārī Rānī Mandir, please visit it. 

Several decades ago, maintaining that temple services became difficult. The priests, they wanted to sell the property. However, following the advice of some Vrajabāsīs, they donated the whole property to the famous saint Devarāhā Bābā. Many of you have heard of him; he’s a famous *sādhu* who passed away some years ago, but he lived to be several hundred years old. It’s no exaggeration. Interestingly enough, he also never lived in that temple, although it was donated to him. He lived in a small hut on the banks of the Yamunā. And I went there many years ago with Govinda Mahārāja to have his *darśana*. And when we went there, you know, he’d come out—he’s very old, literally hundreds of years old, he was a mystic—and there was a large group of people there to have his *darśana*. He would just come out and do his hand like this, maybe speak a few words. But we had brought a *Bhagavad-gītā*, Prabhupāda’s *Bhagavad-gītā*, and we gave it to his attendant, a servant who took it up—he was living on, like, a thatched heart on the top of some bamboo sticks—and he gave that *Bhagavad-gītā* to this Devarāhā Bābā. And he looked at the book, and he said to... he actually spoke, it was unusual, he would speak very much... he spoke to the people there, he said, "Like these two Western boys, these followers of A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, you should follow the teachings in the *Bhagavad-gītā*. Don’t be a yogī like me," because he was a mystic yogī, obviously. He said, "Don’t try to be like me. Those times are over. He said, going back hundreds of years, you follow the teachings of the *Bhagavad-gītā* as explained by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Prabhupāda in this *Bhagavad-gītā*." I was like, "Wow, I just... [indistinct]." It was so nice. 

So now the temple property is under his followers’ care and it’s well maintained, and the deity, Gopāla, he’s looking as young as ever. But because that place is unknown to most people, only—I saw only a handful of local Vrajabāsīs visited daily to take *darśana*. It’s such a huge and magnificent temple. But this coming Kārtika, if Kṛṣṇa wills, I plan to take devotees there during our annual Kārtika *parikramā*. Yes, we’re starting it up again, just as this summer we’re starting up our summer festival tour along the Baltic Sea coast in Poland. Against all odds to get it all back together again and get the permission and find the devotees and the talent and the money, somehow or other, by Mahāprabhu’s mercy, we are getting it together. So we’re going to do a summer tour in the Baltic Sea coast. You’ll be seeing some videos by Ananta Vṛndāvana, etc. Anyway, after that, there’s Kārtika, and please join us for Kārtika! I’ll make sure that we take you to this beautiful temple established by this amazing queen. 

So we’ll finish today with the understanding that every stone and wall in Vṛndāvana tells a lost history of the glories of historical Vṛndāvana. But in conclusion, let’s hear some strong advice from Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura in his illustrious *Śrī Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*. He writes—these are strong words, but sometimes we need that—he writes: 

"Oh friend, by great fortune you have attained this body where you have heard Vṛndāvana’s wonderful glories and learned that everything in this world is like a dream. Don’t put any faith in the mind and body. My advice: run to Vṛndāvana." (That’s the first section, verse 118). 

That he writes: "Don’t senselessly fall into the net of illusions about your body, home, and everything else. Know that death will destroy all your plans. Don’t melt your heart for anyone. Make your heart harder than a thunderbolt, and, oh friend, run, run, run to Śrī Vṛndāvana." 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. At least, please come for Kārtika, and we’ll take you around and see these places, all by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dhāma. We’ll be back in a few days. 

*Śrī Śrī Gauranītāi kī! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī...* 

Transcendental book distribution king, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa in every town and village of the world kī!

*Śrī Kṛṣṇa.*""