"*00304*.*
"# Historical Vrindavan - Part 6

My dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvan. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine*. So, we are continuing with our series on historical Vṛndāvan, and this will be part six. As I mentioned on my Facebook page, because summer is just around the corner—at least here in the Northern Hemisphere—I will be traveling extensively again for a few months. So, I will only be posting one class a week from now on, each Friday. No Tuesdays, only Fridays. Actually, I was advised to stop altogether because I’m going to be really busy with the Polish tour until September, but I love this service so much, and I hope you do too, so at least you can look forward to those Friday lectures. In this way, we’ll always remain in touch with our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvan-dhām. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

For the last few weeks, we had been discussing the history of a number of Vṛndāvan’s temples—specifically how they were built by devotee kings and queens from various parts of India. But today, I would like to discuss another very interesting facet of Vṛndāvan’s history that I came across in my studies at the Vṛndāvan Research Institute. You may be surprised, but it’s about how people dressed and ornamented themselves in Vṛndāvan from the 16th to the 18th centuries. I hope you’ll find it interesting, because I actually did. There’s an old maxim: "Style is a way of saying who you are without having to speak." That was certainly true in old Vṛndāvan.

As you will see, in Vṛndāvan in the olden days, Vaiṣṇavas would wear wooden shoes called *khaḍau*. These wooden shoes were made from the wood of a very special berry tree whose wood never got spoiled, either by water or insects. Isn’t that interesting? These shoes during those times were made in different shapes like rectangular, oval, or pointed. Merchants used to wear extra-long shoes called *mojarīs*, and they were actually made of a hard fabric that I was reading extended up to their ankles. On their ankles, these Vrajavāsī merchants used to wear very heavy silver bangles. In fact, every single man and woman in those days wore these heavy silver bangles on their ankles. Sometimes I see them when I go to my antique shops in India; there’s lots of these bangles because no one wears them anymore.

In those days, people without these bangles were considered uncultured. I read that all women would wear ankle bells, and they would paint the upper soles of their feet with that red lac that we see very often in the paintings on the Gopis' lotus feet. This red lac is called *alta* in Bengali. Only widows would not paint their feet in this way. You know, this red lac was on the upper soles of the lady’s feet, but widows would not wear this lack. In those olden days, widows would live in a separate part of the family house—and in those days, remember, people lived with extended families—so they would live in a special part of the house, and they would wear only dull white sarees. They would also cook their own food, and they wouldn't participate in festive gatherings. Now, this may seem unkind, but actually none of this was imposed upon them; rather, they considered themselves like renunciants, and they were very focused on going back home, back to Godhead, back to the spiritual world, so they acted in that way.

Now, women in general in old Vṛndāvan used to wear five types of clothes on their upper body—and by "together," I mean by mixing five types of clothes on their upper body—and three kinds of clothes on their lower body every day. In detail, they used to wear a long blouse covering their upper body, and over that, they wore a big jacket with long sleeves, and over that a small and thin jacket without sleeves—a sleeveless jacket—and over that a cotton shawl. Now, over the cotton shawl, the wives of priests, like head priests in temples, wore a special cloth called *oḍnī*. That cloth was either red, pink, or orange in color, and it covered a woman’s upper bodily ornaments, plus her ears, her hair, and her face. I just thought this was very interesting how people in those days were so much different than today in the village in Vṛndāvan; this is how they dressed. And on their lower bodies, the ladies would wear a petticoat, a long skirt, and a colorful cloth to cover their waists. All women used to wear bangles on their wrists—plenty of them made out of lac—and these particular bangles were decorated with different colorful stones.

In winter, ladies wore a long, four-layered cotton shawl called a *dulāī*. A woman’s forehead was always decorated with a red bindi if she was married, and unmarried girls wore a small black bindi. As far as the men were concerned, in these olden times in Vṛndāvan, they would always wear red *kopīnas*, *dhotīs*, and *bhagal-bandīs*. In the Braja language, *bhagal* literally means armpits or sides, and *bandī* means to tie a knot. So, a *bhagal-bandī* is a shirt, actually, that’s tied with strings of cloth into knots on the sides of the shirt. You kind of have to see one to understand, but there were no buttons in those days; everything was tied here, here, and here like that.

Originally, the tradition of wearing *bhagal-bandīs* came from the Rajput kings in Rajasthan. I researched that—where did it actually start? It started in Rajasthan with the Rajput kings. They were very proud to wear these *bhagal-bandīs*, and there was a rule, actually, that to enter the king’s royal court or the royal palace, one himself had to wear a *bhagal-bandī*; otherwise, he couldn’t enter. I was reading that, therefore, at the entrance of the forts and the palaces, there were these large storehouses or stalls with these *bhagal-bandīs* that people visiting the king or coming to the royal court for whatever purpose could rent. You come inside the palace, do your business or attend the festivities, and then afterwards you come out and you return it there at the entrance to the palace or to that particular area. You could rent your *bhagal-bandī*. Here in Vṛndāvan, we still see some men wearing *bhagal-bandīs*. Personally, I have five; I just love the old culture of Vṛndāvan, it just resonates with me. So, I have five: three short-sleeve and two long-sleeve *bhagal-bandīs*.

But I was reading that there were four different kinds of *bhagal-bandīs* in those days, which are actually not in fashion; you can't see them anymore. Now, in winter, men used to wear large, long *bhagal-bandīs* filled with cotton that went all the way down to their knees. The ones I wear would go to my waist, but these would go down to their knees and they were filled with cotton; it was called a *faruāl*. And men also used to wear a long cotton cloth called a *uphī*—it's an interesting name, so *uphī*—which they would actually tie around their waist to secure their *dhotī*. Sometimes you see ISKCON brahmacārīs, as I’ve seen, they also do that. They’ll tie this—they don’t know, they don’t know that’s an old tradition—maybe they tie it around their waist to hold their *dhotī* when they’re in *kīrtana*. But in olden times, the men would also use this piece of cloth to wear over their shoulders.

And of course, as is popular today, all the men wore *cādars*. A *cādar*—in fact, I was reading if a man didn’t wear a *cādar*, he was considered uncultured. A *cādar* or a shawl, a long, strong stick, a long mustache, and a turban were the signs of a gentleman in old Vṛndāvan. And on a morning walk in Rome in 1974, I was fortunate to be there with Prabhupāda; we went to see the Colosseum. I heard Prabhupāda say that in his days, a gentleman carried either a stick, an umbrella, or a cane. In India, in Vṛndāvan, that was it—a gentleman did that: a stick, an umbrella, or a cane. You don’t see that anywhere in the West unless someone’s incapacitated, but it was maybe not even necessary; they would have a stick, an umbrella, or a cane. A gentleman!

And I was also reading that this is really interesting: one could understand a brāhmaṇa’s status by how he wore his *cādar*. Brāhmaṇas who studied and followed only one Veda were known as *ekavedī* brāhmaṇas, and they wore only one *cādar* over their left shoulder. Brāhmaṇas who studied and followed two Vedas were known as *dvivedī* brāhmaṇas, and there were two *cādars*, as you can imagine, one on each shoulder. And brāhmaṇas who studied and followed three Vedas were known as *trivedī* brāhmaṇas, and they wore three *cādars*—how so? One on each shoulder and the third one around their neck. Now, brāhmaṇas who followed all four Vedas—because there’s four Vedas—were known as *caturvedī* brāhmaṇas, and they wore four *cādars*, specifically one on the left shoulder, two on the right shoulder, and one around the neck. I find this fascinating.

Now, in old Braja, a long and wide mustache indicated that a man belonged to a good family, was respected among society, and had power and influence. Along with long mustaches—you see them sometimes here in India, especially at the major hotels, they’ll have someone outside to receive people when they come in a car, and they’re dressed in old Rajput style and they have these big mustaches. Actually, I came across a saying in those days that a man without a mustache is like an elephant without tusks. Now, of course, a turban was also a very, very major part of everyone’s dressing for men in those days in old Vṛndāvan. And I really looked into this part; there’s a whole section in the Vṛndāvan Research Institute about dressing and a couple of big books on turbans, and there were many types and styles of turbans that the Vrajavāsīs wore a hundred or two hundred or three hundred years ago. One that tilted to the side was called a *teḍī pagā*; a tall turban was known as *sāthā*; a straight and narrow one was called a *pāg*; and one with rolled material—like sometimes you see they roll the turban like that—it was called a *jalebī pag*. Actually, there are many more, but we have to move on with many different types of turbans. And I was reading that it was common for men to decorate their turbans with a small branch from a rose bush—a flower from a rose bush put in the turban—or a small branch from the *āmlā* plant, which means Indian gooseberry. They take a little branch, so nice. Who does that in London or New York or Sydney? The men don’t decorate their hair with flowers or their turbans, or they don’t have turbans, but they have hats. Braja culture is so sweet.

Now, in essence, the main decoration for all Vrajavāsīs in those days—the main decoration, because they’re all Kṛṣṇa-bhaktas—were their Tulasi neck beads. They were a very essential part of their dressing. According to the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* 4.307, a Vaiṣṇava may wear neck beads of different kinds of wood. It is stated or quoted in the verse, "An individual must wear mālās offered to Kṛṣṇa; such mālās can be made out of Tulasi branches, lotus seeds, Tulasi leaves, or the āmalakī fruits—again, the Indian gooseberry." You can have a *kaṇṭhī-mālā* made of these different elements, but Vaiṣṇavas generally preferred Tulasi wood. And there were many different traditional styles of these Tulasi neck beads in those days. Rectangular neck beads were only worn by the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Bābājīs; round neck beads were only worn by followers of the Rādha-vallabha sampradāya; long, round, circular beads were only worn by Nimbārka sādhus; and very tiny, square-shaped beads were only worn by Puṣṭimārga Vaiṣṇavas, meaning the followers of Śrī Vallabhācārya.

Now, getting into detail here because it’s just nectar, these different spiritual groups, these different traditions, these different sampradāyas who lived in Braja, they also were to be identified by their sampradāya; they wore different numbers of strands of these Tulasi beads around their necks. One strand around the neck was called *ekalī mālā*, two strands around the neck were called *dulī mālā*, three strands around the neck were called *trivalī mālā*, and five strands around the neck were called *pañcamālā*. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, our lineage, were either two, three, or five strands around their necks. I think it’s traditional now, three—at least in ISKCON, three, hopefully. Sometimes I see after initiation, devotees don’t wear neck beads, they wear some pretty necklace or something, but we should wear *kaṇṭhī-mālā*. Even if it’s very small, we should wear *kaṇṭhī-mālā*. Followers of Nimbārka-svāmī, they wore only one strand; followers of Vallabhācārya, they were either one or two strands; devotees of Baṅke Bihārī from the Haridāsa sampradāya, they wore two strands. And I’m sure that these different sampradāyas are still following this practice.

Now, one can only imagine how many Tulasi plants were required for these different devotees, different sampradāyas, to have their *kaṇṭhī-mālās* which were so dear to them through the ages. Where’s all this Tulasi coming from? Well, as you know, Tulasi grows everywhere; she’s so kind here in Braja. But because so much of this sacred wood was needed, there were—and there still are today—big Tulasi plantations in a village near to Vṛndāvan called Jait. Did you know this? I didn’t know. We just go to the market, and there’s the Tulasi-vālā, the man who sells the Tulasi beads and the neck beads, but where does it all come from? There’s a village near Vṛndāvan called Jait, or sometimes it’s called Jīvana, and this is where this mass production of Śrīmatī Tulasīdevī is coming from. And she very kindly gives her wood in that way for her devotees to protect them. We’re protected when we wear the Tulasi mālā.

I was also reading in the Vṛndāvan Research Institute that some sādhus used to make their neck beads out of old tree logs, from the wood that had—the tree that had fallen over—from Nidhivan. Nidhivan is one of the most sacred *vanas* or groves or forests in Vṛndāvan; actually, it’s in Vṛndāvan proper. Many of you know what I’m talking about, Nidhivan. So, when an old tree in Nidhivan would fall over, then some sādhus used to make their neck beads from that wood. Now, in those days, I was reading there was also a very special tree whose wood, how could you say, matured at a very early stage, from which sādhus would make their neck beads, and that wood would turn black very quickly. And as a result, their neck beads were known as *śālagrāma-kaṇṭhī*. *Kaṇṭhī*, by the way, means literally "beads which touch the neck"; *kaṇṭhī-mālā* means a string. So *kaṇṭhī* means beads which touch the neck.

Now, these various *kaṇṭhīs* or neck beads were often carved with the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra on them. This is something that’s been revived, I’ve seen, in the recent years here in Vṛndāvan, especially out at Rādhā-kuṇḍa; the sādhus, they carve Śrī Rādhā’s name or Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name in the wood. And it’s interesting that in those days, the sādhus used to install their neck beads around their necks by chanting the following mantra. And one famous Vrajavāsī, he writes in the book—I found the *Dvādaśa-yaśa*, it’s the name of the book—you couldn’t imagine how much nectar is in that Vṛndāvan Research Institute. So, this Vrajavāsī poet is famous—you know, these poets, they bring out emotions, spiritual emotions, from our heart—he has a book called *Dvādaśa-yaśa*. So he writes there that these sādhus, or rather he’s recommending, he’s saying that one should first mix his new neck beads with the dust of Braja. Usually, when something falls on the ground, right, you pick it up and you dust it off—no, not in Braja! One speck of *braja-raja*, one speck of the dust in Braja, is considered more opulent, more valuable than all the opulences of Vaikuṇṭha, the official kingdom of God. So he’s recommending when you get your new neck beads, roll them in the dust of Vṛndāvan, and then dip them in the waters of the Yamunā River, and then touch them to the lotus feet of a deity in Braja, and then have them touched by any great Vaiṣṇava. Only after that one should tie this sacred Tulasi necklace around his neck. *Śrī Vṛndāvan-dhām kī jaya!* The culture of Braja, we have to keep this culture, this tradition.

There was a common saying in the old days that wearing *kaṇṭhī-mālā* made of Tulasi is equivalent to wearing a band of love around one’s neck. Wearing *kaṇṭhī-mālā* made of Tulasi is equivalent to wearing a band of love around one’s neck. So if you’re, you know, kind of shy and you don’t want to show beads—maybe you’re in school, your office—forget it! Run to your closet, run to the door, take out your Tulasi mālā, and wear it around your neck with pride because it’s equivalent to wearing a band of love around one’s neck. And the famous poet we’ve quoted many times, Harirām Vyās, he says in Braja language: *mohi vṛndāvan raja mālā mudrā*. My business is getting better; he writes, "I love this: my only business, my only business is with the dust of Braja, my *kaṇṭhī-mālā*, and my japa beads, and tilaka is my only decoration." My only business is with the dust of Braja, my *kaṇṭhī-mālā*, and my japa beads, and tilaka is my only decoration.

Now, there was a very historical incident that happened, let me remember now, in the early 16th century in Vṛndāvan related to Tulasi neck beads. There was a very powerful Māyāvādī sannyāsī, his name was—let me remember—Cittarūpa Mahārāja. He was a Māyāvādī, and he was an avowed enemy of Vaiṣṇavas. He was very good friends, interestingly enough, with the Muslim emperor of India at that time, because remember there’s different alliances going on, you know? The Muslims and the Hindus, they worked together, but sometimes there was friendship made. So, this Māyāvādī sannyāsī, he was close with the Muslim emperor of India at that time, whose name was Nūr-ud-Dīn Muhammad Salīm, who ruled from 1605 to 1627. Way back here. But this Muslim emperor, he was better known by his imperial name, Jahāngīr. Jahāngīr. Now, Emperor Jahāngīr was actually the third son of Emperor Akbar. You remember Akbar? We all know him very well from our lecture series; very favorable to the Vaiṣṇavas in Vṛndāvan. So, this Jahāngīr, he was the third son of Emperor Akbar. His mother was Akbar’s favorite queen, her name was Mariam-uz-Zamani. And this Jahāngīr, he had two elder brothers, twins, Hassan Mirza and Hussein Mirza, but they died in infancy. So I’m saying all these details so you’ll understand how very, very dear he was to his father, Akbar.

Now, when Akbar died, Jahāngīr ascended the throne, and somehow or other, he was very inclined to this Māyāvādī sannyāsī, Cittarūpa Mahārāja. Extremely envious of the Vaiṣṇavas and especially those living in Vṛndāvan, he somehow convinced this Emperor Jahāngīr to pass a decree one day that no one within the boundaries of Mandala-bhūmi, the greater area of Vṛndāvan, could any longer wear *kaṇṭhī-mālā* neck beads or tilaka. You see how envious this Māyāvādī sannyāsī was? He convinced the emperor to pass a decree that from this day forth, no one in Braja can wear *kaṇṭhī-mālā* or tilaka of any of the sampradāyas. And the decree said that anyone caught wearing *kaṇṭhī-mālā* or tilaka would be arrested, beaten, and thrown in prison. Tough times, tough times. And to ensure this decree was followed to the letter, Emperor Jahāngīr even established a small army in Vṛndāvan to catch offenders. We think we have problems, you know, with the local government, the town councils, and we get arrested for book distribution—listen to this part of history, there’s an army to catch you if you’re wearing tilaka or *kaṇṭhī-mālā* and they beat you and throw you in prison! We should take advantage; these are golden days. Make hay while the sun shines for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And I was reading that a number of very staunch sādhus who refused to follow this decree were, in fact, arrested, were severely beaten, and thrown in jail, and the key was thrown away. So as a result, at this point in history, the Vrajavāsīs started applying water from the Yamunā River as tilaka. You just take the water, and—at least something, well, not at least, Yamunā-jala is so special—but it was invisible. However, no one wore neck beads, and this went on for many years. Everyone, let me say, except one devotee. His name was Gokulanātha Dāsa, and he was actually a grandson of Vallabhācārya. He’s described as a very great devotee of Śrīnāthajī, who was presently worshiped in Nathdwara, and he was a very renowned scholar of the times. In his younger years, I was reading, he traveled all over India preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness with his disciples. And eventually, when he was around—excuse me. This is the result of sleeping with the AC on at night, because at night here in Vṛndāvan it’s 110 degrees, so you have to put on the AC and you get a little cold. All right, Kṛṣṇa. So, eventually when he was 80 years old, he stopped traveling and he settled down back here in Vṛndāvan, and this was after the decree that Emperor Jahāngīr had declared.

Now, he, our hero here, was the only one who didn’t give up his tilaka and *kaṇṭhī*. He was the only one. This Gokulanātha, this grandson of Ācārya, he just refused. He said, "No, I’m not going to give up my tilaka and my *kaṇṭhī*." In fact, he wore them very proudly. You could say defiantly, wherever he went in Raja-mandala. And I was reading that as a result, Emperor Jahāngīr’s soldiers confronted him and threatened him many times, but afraid of his power—his spiritual power and his influence—they hesitated to arrest him. They could see this person, "When I go to touch him, he’s got some śakti," so they hesitated to arrest him. So this went on for some time. So eventually, tired of the situation and feeling compassion for all the Vaiṣṇavas who were suffering—because we take pride in our tilaka, we take pride in our *kaṇṭhī-mālā*; one time Prabhupāda said our *kaṇṭhī-mālā* shows it’s like a dog collar with the dogs of the spiritual master, in a good sense—so one day this devotee, he left Vṛndāvan, Gokulanātha, and he walked all the way to Kashmir where this Emperor Jahāngīr was spending some time dealing with some bad health.

Arriving one day at the palace in Kashmir, which is far from Braja, where Emperor Jahāngīr was staying, Gokulanātha was somehow granted a darśana with the emperor where he therein expressed his very deep disapproval of Jahāngīr’s decree. It is said he presented hundreds of references and verses from Vedic śāstras supporting the use of *kaṇṭhī-mālā* and tilaka. And this impressed the Emperor Jahāngīr, but Gokulanātha’s main argument—for his main argument, he said as follows, and I’m quoting him: "Emperor, during your father’s rule"—which means Akbar—"we all lived peacefully in Braja without any restrictions on our religious practices. Your father even encouraged us in our practices by donating land for our purposes and helped to build temples; we know that history. Surely he wouldn’t be pleased with the harsh decree that has descended upon us. We beg you, sir, remove it." So it is said that impressed with the arguments of 80-year-old Gokulanātha, but even more by Gokulanātha’s purity and saintliness, Emperor Jahāngīr immediately abolished the decree and sent an order that all his soldiers should immediately leave Vṛndāvan and return to their base in Agra. Hare Kṛṣṇa! We bow down to that Gokulanātha. So many heroes! We have heroes we know about, and there’s so many Vaiṣṇava and Vaiṣṇavī heroes in the history of Kṛṣṇa consciousness through the millenniums; we will never hear of them, or like this, we’re fortunate to hear about them. At their point in history, they defended Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and we should also, as followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s movement against the atheists, against the atheistic scientists, against the politicians who try to stop us, against our own attraction to what’s left of this material energy, we should defend like this great devotee did.

So historically, I learned that Emperor Jahāngīr, he actually died one week later while traveling back to his main headquarters in present-day Lahore, Pakistan. Just in time, he made this—he abolished that decree. What’s also interesting is that the actual document canceling the decree is preserved in the Vallabha-sampradāya; somewhere in one of their temples or headquarters, they actually have the document, very old, this is going back to the 1600s. They keep it. Now, when Gokulanātha Dāsa, you can imagine, arrived back in Vṛndāvan, all the people in Braja, all the sampradāyas, were there to welcome him with an elaborate ārati, a foot-bathing ceremony, and *puṣpāñjali*, flowers, so many flowers. And later, the heads of all the sampradāyas met and conferred upon him the title *Baḍe Mahārāja*. *Baḍe* (B-A-D-E) Mahārāja, the Great Mahārāja of the Braja, and he certainly deserved it. People in Vṛndāvan still remember him; this is 400 years ago. There’s a famous saying: "Gokulanātha Baḍe Mahārāja, tilaka mālā," meaning "Hail to Gokulanātha, who is a great king and who saved our tilaka and mālā."

Now you can have even more pride in the sense that we’re marking the body as the resident of the Lord in the heart; it’s a temple, and we’re using it properly in Kṛṣṇa’s service, so we can proudly wear our tilaka in twelve places and our *kaṇṭhī-mālā*; we can show it. Hare Kṛṣṇa! Isn’t that a wonderful pastime? There must be so many we don’t know about, oh Kṛṣṇa! But we have the pastimes of our beloved, how he traveled the world at least 12 times, spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and introduced *kaṇṭhī-mālā* and tilaka to literally tens of thousands, let us say now millions of people. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, he’s decorating the world with this tilaka and *kaṇṭhī-mālā* and the holy names of Kṛṣṇa.

So we will conclude today with the description of the importance of wearing *kaṇṭhī-mālā* or neck beads from our GBC handbook or deity worship book they put out. Those who compiled this very important work, how we should conduct deity worship, they have written: "Urdhva-puṇḍra beads worn around the neck indicate a devotee’s surrender to the Lord, and therefore a person wearing Tulasi beads around his neck is dear to the Lord. However, a person is an offender if he wears Tulasi neck beads simply to imitate a Vaiṣṇava but is not seriously trying to surrender to the Lord. Some devotees also wear other kinds of auspicious mālās, either made of Tulasi beads, lotus seeds, rope from Jagannātha-rathayātrā, or silk pavitras like this one, while performing pūjā, japa, or other sacred functions." They go on to say, "These should be removed when bathing or leaving the temple or house. The *kaṇṭhī-mālā* is worn permanently, for these beads protect one from bad dreams, accidents, attack by weapons, and the servants of Yamarāja; upon seeing Tulasi-mālā, the Yamadūtas flee like leaves scattered by the wind." Hare Kṛṣṇa!

I love the research, I love sharing it with you. There’s just—we’ve got a gold mine over there at the institute. And although I’m going to be traveling now, I have my helpers, little elves who are over there researching. So again, not two times a week, every Friday. I hope you look forward to it; I do, even in the midst of my travels. And the Polish tour—wow! We’ve got about 50 festivals lined up along the Baltic Sea coast; we get about three or four thousand people a night. I’m leaving Braja; it’s very hard, very hard to leave Braja. But like Prabhupāda, we leave with the purpose to stay in Braja, to share Braja with the world, so I’m doing it very happily. Back on *saṅkīrtana*, back on the beaches, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, distributing books, and my festival lecture—I’m going to give it over 50 times. All right, Kṛṣṇa. Thank you, all. See you next Friday. 

Vṛndāvan kī jaya! Thank you.""