"*00422*.*
"I would like to take this opportunity to officially welcome all of you to this year’s Kartik Parikramā 2022.

A special thank you to all our godbrothers and godsisters who are participating in our function. Looking around, I can understand that some of you are here for the very first time, some of you have been coming for many years, and many of you are coming back after a very painful break of almost three years due to the pandemic. But whatever category you fall into, let us first and foremost, today on the first day of our Kartik parikramā, remember that it is by the grace of Kṛṣṇa that all of us are here today. We must remember that throughout this month—through every week, through every day, through every hour, every minute, and every second—Kṛṣṇa is the source of all our supreme good fortune.

Of course, we have many beautiful prayers to remember Him and our spiritual masters; the following is one of my favorites: "O friend of the fallen, You are the giver of Your own bliss, and You are the only ocean of mercy. Souls like me need You, and You are preaching the divine love of Rādhā for Kṛṣṇa. Please be kind upon me."

So, let us take a moment to reflect as we all begin this 30-day journey together. The month of Kārtika has 30 days, and we have come to the best place, at the best time, for the best purpose. So, what is the best place? Not only on this planet but in this universe—not just the universe, but in the entire creation of Kṛṣṇa—what is the best place? It is Vṛndāvana, because this is the playground of God. And what is the best purpose or the best reason to come here? It is to learn as much as we can about the divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and how to serve Them with pure devotion. We have come here to learn. We say in English, "I hope it can be translated," while in Vṛndāvana, we are all ears. One sees not through his imperfect eyes, but he or she hears through the ears from an authorized source, and everything is revealed.

So, we are like eager students on the first day of school. I can still remember when I was six or whatever, my very first day of school, I couldn't sleep the night before. I had my school bag, my pen, my paper, and my clothes out. I was so eager to learn. And that is to develop love—pure love—for the divine couple. But to do that, we have to learn about the divine couple and learn how to serve Them properly.

This is our first day of transcendental school in Kārtika. There is a very beautiful saying here in Braj-bhāṣā—not Hindi; Braj is the language of the local people—I just discovered it the other day. So many wonderful things to discover in Braj. In the transcendental classroom of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Love is the teacher, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are the students, all the Gopīs who are listening attentively are their classmates, and they are learning the great knowledge of relishing līlā, or pastimes, together. Some things are always worthy of repeating, like the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, over and over and over. So, I would like to recite this verse again: In the transcendental classroom of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Love is the teacher, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are the students, all the Gopīs who are listening attentively are their classmates, and they are learning the great knowledge of relishing pastimes together. And that is why people come to Braj. Our own beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, he lived here for many years as a sannyāsī. As soon as he left, gave up all "material activities," he ran to Vṛndāvana.

He didn’t come here, like many great souls do, to become a *bhajanānandī*—meaning a sannyāsī who comes to a holy place to stay until they die. It is noble. Vṛndāvana wishes to stop on the way to our Śrīla Prabhupāda in his service to his Guru, Mahārāja Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, from the very beginning with the intention of going to the West, ultimately to bring everyone home—either here in Gokula Vṛndāvana, or for the most fortunate souls, Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual sky. Śrīla Prabhupāda is the leader to take us here, and ultimately there.

He wrote in the Fifth Canto, 13th chapter, text number 8, and made it very clear: "One must go to the Vṛndāvana forest and take shelter of Govinda; that will make one happy." The International Society for Krishna Consciousness is therefore constructing a Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple to invite its members as well as outsiders to come and live peacefully in a spiritual atmosphere that will help one become elevated to the transcendental world and return back home, back to Godhead. We have a saying in English, "Like father, like son." We can never be like Prabhupāda, but we can imbibe his mood, which is what he very much wants. 

He often revealed how much he loved Vṛndāvana. In his memoirs—a book he wrote called *Vṛndāvana Days*—Hayagrīva Dāsa, one of Prabhupāda's first and most cherished disciples, recounts how Prabhupāda had once said, "I lived very simply in Vṛndāvana, content to be in Rūpa Gosvāmī's presence. Now I have hundreds of temples to go to, but I still like Vṛndāvana best of all." And even when Prabhupāda was preaching in the West, he always hankered for Vṛndāvana. In that book, *Prabhupāda*, we read: "Here I am now sitting in New York, the world's greatest city, but my heart is always hankering after that Vṛndāvana." And he made it very clear why he loved Vṛndāvana. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 4.29.40, there is a beautiful purport: why did he love Vṛndāvana? He writes, "In a holy place like Vṛndāvana, if one gets the chance to hear from pure devotees, then the cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very easy. It is actually meant for developing love of God, and therefore so many devotees accumulate here—now you can't even get through the traffic anymore."

Highest people come, devotees come, pure devotees—one place you can get love of God quickly. The Dhāma is merciful, as we know; the Dhāma is an expansion of Lord Balarāma and is known as one of the original spiritual masters. It is so merciful that it is even recommended that sinful people come here. It is so merciful that Vṛndāvana opens its arms to sinful rascals. In the Third Canto, 20th chapter, in the purport, he writes [regarding] verse 4: "Still, in Vṛndāvana, any person may go there, and even if he is sinful, he will at once contact an atmosphere of spiritual life and automatically chant the names of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā." As we all know, as we are all preachers, how difficult it is to get someone to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. But the power of the Dhāma is, even if a slow-born, sinful rascal comes here and spends some time in this atmosphere, that while he is here, he will call out, "Rādhā! Kṛṣṇa!" Take into consideration that millions of years ago, Prahlāda Mahārāja, one of the 12 mahājanas—the authorities on devotion—he recommended his father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, to come to Braj: "As far as I have learned from my spiritual master, any person who has accepted a temporary body and temporary household life is certainly embarrassed by anxiety because of having fallen in a dark well where there is no water but only suffering. One should therefore give up this position and go to the forest (Vana)." More clearly, one should go to Vṛndāvana where only Kṛṣṇa consciousness is prevalent, and one should thus take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

And in that purport, Prabhupāda writes something also very wonderful: "In our Kṛṣṇa conscious movement, we therefore invite all the elderly persons—it's my generation—all the elderly persons of the world to come to Vṛndāvana and stay there in retired life, making advancement in spiritual consciousness." Oh my God, Prabhupāda is inviting the whole world.

In letters to disciples, I found out another thing very amazing. At the end of this, you can't go home because you are already home. In a letter to a disciple on November 9, 1975, Prabhupāda writes, "Anyone who can stay permanently is welcome. I want that as many devotees stay permanently and become Vrajavāsīs; this will be very inspiring." [In] 8.4.2 in the purport, the last one is: "One who is very advanced in spiritual life, it is recommended that he stay in such a holy place as Prayāga, Mathurā, and Vṛndāvana." 

So, whether you are participating in this program for just a few days, or a week, or a month, because you have school or work, take full advantage. You have many choices; there are many devotees coming, many parikramās, there are lots of places to go, things to see, things to do. But look, we have Badahari, we have Madhava, we have Caitanya Atma, we have Mātā Śītalā—they are the leaders, the lieutenants of this program, and they know how to—they know Braj, they love Braj, and they can guide you through this wonderful 30-day journey. Stay with us in Vṛndāvana. If you stay with us, you can quickly attain transcendental bliss. Yes, listen as he reveals his heart: "O Vṛndāvana forest, was there ever anyone in this world who did not quickly attain supreme transcendental bliss by serving you? Therefore, I surrender to you, and most humbly petition you: be kind and personally disclose to me the best way to receive the darśana of your worshipable Lords, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa."

How to properly enter into this playground? We have many times heard that statement that one cannot just buy a plane ticket or a train ticket and enter into Vṛndāvana. It's not just being physically present here. In fact, that is exactly what Prabhupāda says in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter 38: "The process is shown by Akrūra. Akrūra's journey to Vṛndāvana is exemplary. One who intends to visit Vṛndāvana should follow the ideal footsteps of Akrūra." We have a saying in English, "Follow the leader." Yeah, just like Badahari—after Kārtika, he is going to Māyāpura; he is going to do a course on how to do kīrtana. What better person to lead the course than Badahari? So, if we just follow his instructions and his example, we can also sing Hare Kṛṣṇa and please [Kṛṣṇa].

So, let's hear briefly about Akrūra when he came to Vṛndāvana. We have a lot to learn from his example. No little background: 5,000 years ago, we know that in Mathurā, the evil King Kaṃsa was sending a demon every day to kill Kṛṣṇa in Gokula. However, he was unsuccessful in every attempt—every single attempt—because Kṛṣṇa is *Ajita*. *Ajita* means He is unconquerable. And if you know in management, if Plan A doesn't work, you have Plan B. It was not working, so Kaṃsa changed his plan. He decided to invite Kṛṣṇa to Mathurā. We say in French, "immédiatement," Kṛṣṇa. So, he chose one of his best men, one of his ministers, Akrūra, to go to Braj and bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma back to Mathurā. 

Now, one thing about Akrūra that Kaṃsa didn't realize is that Akrūra was in fact a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa. But being very humble, like devotees are, *gupta*—*gupta* means hidden—he kept his love for Kṛṣṇa hidden in his heart. Like Gopīs—Gopīs are young girls, they love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone’s ever loved, been loved before, but by social custom, they can’t show that love. So they are Gopīs—*gupta*—they are hiding their devotion. The devotee is very humble. They don't show their *japa-mālā*, they don't proudly announce who is their Guru, they are very humble, they keep *gupta*. They keep these secrets close to their hearts. 

Akrūra was so excited. He had like, "Yes, I will go!" He had to keep his ecstasies from manifesting, you know? Perspiring, tears coming from his eyes, falling on the ground—he had to control it all. "Yes, I'll get those two rascal boys, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, and bring them back to you." Yeah. Then he got on the chariot with the horses, and he started going to Vṛndāvana. As he was going, he was meditating on his good fortune of being able to even enter Vṛndāvana, the abode of his beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa. He was thinking as follows: we hear in *Bhāgavatam*—*Bhāgavatam* is very deep, and this is how Vaiṣṇavas feel. Because when you realize something is very big, you feel very small. So one sign of a realized devotee is he realized how great Kṛṣṇa is and how small he is. So naturally, a devotee has humility. It’s a question of realization: when you actually realize that God is great and you are very small, then that humility naturally comes from the heart.

Akrūra again reveals his mentality; he said, or he thought, "I am just a wretched, materialistic person; I engage in sense gratification." So, here is the first instruction how to come to Braj: even the genuine humility expressed by Akrūra is a prerequisite for anyone coming to Braj. So if we don't have it, we have to desire to desire to have it. That's good enough! You can still get in. Actually, we see that humility in all great devotees. They may be different in their personalities and the way they serve Kṛṣṇa, but they all have this humility. 

The same humility was demonstrated when Prahlāda Mahārāja was asked by Lord Brahmā to approach Lord Nṛsiṃhadeva; Prahlāda expressed his humility, how unqualified he felt. One of the great authorities—listen to his humility: "How is it possible for me," he says, "who have been born in a family of asuras, to offer suitable prayers to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Even until now, all the demigods headed by Lord Brahmā and all the saintly persons could not satisfy the Lord by streams of excellent words, although such persons were very qualified, being in the mode of goodness. Then what is to be said of me? I, Prahlāda, am not at all qualified." So unless one is very meek and humble, it is very difficult to make progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We see the same mentality in Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, the author of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. He speaks in a similar way. He is saying, "I am more fallen than the worms in stool," and Mahāprabhu’s *tṛṇād api sunīcena*—that one of the first things he mentions is his humility, and that verse in *Śikṣāṣṭakam*—one time he said we should wear that verse like a garland around our mind. That you should wear like a garland around your mind: "Soon as raising my hands, I declare, everyone please hear me! String this verse on the thread of the holy name and wear it on your neck for continuous remembrance."

So, you know, we very humbly admit, "I'm unqualified, I don't have any good qualities, I can't do anything." This is a prerequisite for entering Vṛndāvana. But how can a person who admits apparent weakness be strong enough to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Well, here is a very nice reply: the answer is that the devotee knows that the Lord's mercy is greater than his or her disqualifications. Akrūra felt very fallen, but he was confident that when he got to Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa would uplift him. That's the hope of every devotee. What other hope is there? That we can be elevated to the transcendental platform? Even after 50 years, many of us in this first generation, we are not crying when we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. We're fully dependent on the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, Lord Caitanya, and Rādhē-Śyāma. In the long run, Akrūra shows that as an example. He prays like that in his humility. Please, Kṛṣṇa, *pāmara*. And in verse 61 of *Padyāvalī*, if you stay here, listen to this: "The elephant of my mind is drowning in the waters of material illusion, so strongly held by the ferocious crocodile of the threefold miseries. It anxiously cries with fear in its heart: 'O Lord Hari, please rescue it with Your glowing Sudarśana-cakra, which cuts the sufferings of even the demigods to pieces.'"

The beauty of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is that by his example and by his teachings, he can take us from *śraddhā* to *prema*—from the beginning steps of Kṛṣṇa consciousness to *prema*. We are all *Rūpānugas*, we are following in Prabhupāda's footsteps. So in many ways, we owe everything to Rūpa Gosvāmī who revealed the real glories of Vṛndāvana. So we take shelter of his lotus feet. "For purification of my physical body, I bathe regularly using water; however, for the complete purification of myself, in my existence, I bathe in the nectar of the words of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī."

There's some hope for me too, and he expressed that in the *Bhāgavatam*; it's another one of my favorite verses for hope against hope: "But enough of such thoughts," he thinks, "after all, even a fallen soul like me can have the chance to behold the infallible Supreme Lord, for one of the conditioned souls being swept along in the river of time may sometimes reach the shore." Oh wow, you know? There is a river, and all the sticks and the leaves are together, and they are being washed to destruction. But sometimes, you know, the waves push one of those little leaves or sticks to the shore where they are okay. "But enough of such thoughts, after all, even a fallen soul like me can have the chance to behold the infallible Supreme Lord, for one of the conditioned souls being swept along in the river of time may sometimes reach the shore"—Vaikuṇṭha, or Goloka. Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy is possible. 

So, as Akrūra was proceeding towards Vṛndāvana, he started imagining what it would be like to meet Kṛṣṇa. He is a devotee, he hasn't met Kṛṣṇa yet. "Like, wow, all these lifetimes I've been serving the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. Now by Prabhupāda's mercy, *ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam*, the bad things are gone, *saṁ-bhakti*, I'm going to meet Kṛṣṇa! What a moment that would be, to come face to face with Kṛṣṇa." That will be your good fortune one day. That is what we are doing—what we do: all the austerities, the penances, the vows, the rules, the regulations, the chanting, the parikramā—it all concludes when you come face to face with Rādhē-Śyāma. We don't have any other desire in life. If something doesn't facilitate that, whatever it is, we kick it to the side. And if something is favorable to that, even if it's a little difficult, we embrace it because we are in this movement for one purpose: to go back home, back to Godhead, to assist Śrīla Prabhupāda in his perfected service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That's all we think about: Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, he!

And that's what it means to chant from the heart, as Prabhupāda is always encouraging us to do. You know, what are you thinking about when you are doing these very deep kīrtanas? Understanding the temporary nature of this world, Prabhupāda replied, "When I'm chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, I'm thinking that this is my last kīrtana, this is my last opportunity to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, oh! And that way, one calls upon the Lord with feeling: "Please take me out of this world of birth and death, fix me as an atom at Your lotus feet." This is pure, God is there. Like Prabhupāda says, "Like a dying man looks at a picture of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." That always stuck in my mind, concerned with the *Kṛṣṇa* book: "As a dying man looks at a picture of Kṛṣṇa..." I saw a video the other day, it was of a famous Christian priest, he was elderly, about 86, and he was giving a sermon, and in the middle of the sermon, he left his body. He had a heart attack, I think. And you could see he's glorifying God in the video, and then death is there and he calls out, "Oh, my Savior!" and he died. And that brought tears to my eyes watching that video. His last words, "Oh, my Savior!" And that means in English, "Oh, my Lord!"

Kṛṣṇa is... So, Kṛṣṇa is thinking, "I'm going to get to the Braj," because from Mathurā to Vṛndāvana, it's not so far. He's thinking, "What will I do when I see Kṛṣṇa? And what will I have found at His feet?" The almighty Lord will place His lotus hand upon my head; for those who seek shelter in Him, because they are greatly disturbed by the powerful serpent of time, that hand removes all fear. The lotus hand of the Lord on your head. One time, Prabhupāda was visiting our first temple in Paris. Fontane rose and used to come down every morning, take off his slippers, and go into the temple room to give class. So, one time I took his slippers and I held them in my lap. There were about 20 devotees. In one of those slippers, I kept them. And then when Prabhupāda came out, I very carefully put them on his lotus feet, and he rubbed my head. He said, "Good boy, that's enough for a lifetime." He said, "Good boy," he rubbed my head—good boy! I tried to be a good boy. Yes, I was reading that the Purāṇas, they call the lotus flower found in the Mānasa-sarovara Lake, they called it *saugandhika*. *Saugandhika* means a pristine, pure white lotus flower. Has a particular scent, a very beautiful scent. So, we talk about Kṛṣṇa’s lotus hand, and the scriptures say that it also smells very nice, like that white lotus flower. They say the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus hand, He acquired the fragrance of this particular flower from this particular lake by coming in contact with the beautiful faces of the Gopīs. Kṛṣṇa touches the faces of the Gopīs, and His hand has the scent of that beautiful white lotus flower from the Mānasa-sarovara Lake.

Akrūra is thinking: "What should I do?" It’s like, what are we thinking? You know, we've come from New York, from Sydney, from Moscow, you know? We're coming, I'm very good at my room, take a hot shower and go to the MVT and have a pizza. What’s Akrūra thinking? *Bhāgavatam* reveals—the king of scriptures reveals—he thinks, "I will alight, I will get off of my chariot, and bow down to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. Their feet are meditated upon by great mystic yogīs striving for self-realization." Then he says, "I will also offer my obeisances to the Lord's cowherd boyfriends, and to all the other residents of Vṛndāvana, to the Gopīs, to all the Vrajavāsīs and others." And Akrūra thinks, "And when I see Kṛṣṇa, He's going to know I'm not a minister of Kaṃsa; He's going to know I'm a devotee. Kṛṣṇa will know my heart." He’s sent me; after all, the omniscient Lord perfectly knows the hearts. 

Footprints everywhere. What? The Kṛṣṇa is a cowherd boy, He doesn't wear shoes, He goes barefoot. He always goes barefoot. The land is covered by His footprints, which make Vṛndāvana wear slippers. See, each other, I like this. You will be just covered with dust, you won't even recognize him because he loves to roll in the Braj-raja—one of the personalities who reveals the floor, the dust—Balarāma. He should immediately smear the dust, maybe in the mud now of Vṛndāvana, all over his body, without thinking in his material position and prestige. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, in a celebrated song, "When my mind will be purified after leaving the contamination and material sense enjoying, then..."

So, this is the way we enter into Vṛndāvana. And throughout the next days and weeks, we'll discuss how to live. After one very short month—the shortest month in your life, because you don't like your work, it seems like forever, but if you like your work, it goes very quickly—so this month is going to go very quickly. We'll teach you how to live in Vṛndāvana, but that's way, way far away. Don't worry, keep composed.

So again, you have many choices here. Like you see sometimes in the airplanes, "Thank you for coming on [Airline]. You have many other choices. Thank you for choosing our Kārtika parikramā." Stay with us! It's going to be the month of just transcendental bliss, loving this. It is starting tomorrow, day two of our 2022. So tomorrow is a very, very special day. Usually, the spiritual master is happy because you are all fresh and you just got here. It’s a full day of... be on time. We don't break. We're going to... right, we're going to the topmost place first. The buses can't go all the way in, so we're going to park some distance, maybe half a kilometer away, walk through [the] forest. We're going to have kīrtana and class and dharśana and take mahā-prasāda. Bring your things and whatever else you need for a nice bath. If you want to, we're going to take the buses, we're going to go to a beautiful parikramā, which has been developed at Govardhana, run by His Holiness Śacīnandana Swami. And tomorrow is the grand opening, and you are the invited guest to that amazing function.

We're going to have dharśana at two o'clock at that wonderful Govardhana retreat facility, and then Śacīnandana Swami is going to give a lecture on the glories of Govardhana. Oh my, oh my God! All right, maybe we can get a chance. And the third day—oh my God, I can't even tell you, it's a new place we discovered. So much nectar, so much līlā, so beautiful flowers blooming, the birds, the peacocks everywhere. But I won't go into detail because it's getting late. Most amazing day in your life, actually. 

Very short little talk here that we're going to conclude with... this is it.""