"*00445*.*
"I think I have the longest Vyāsa-pūjā celebration in the world, to give facility for all my disciples to reveal their hearts to me, and me to reveal my heart to all of you. We’ve been having Vyāsa-pūjā with a different yātrā—meaning a country or region—now for a long time. I think even before my birthday, May 20th, we were celebrating my birthday. But this is important because this is a movement of love. Actually, one of my godbrothers said one time, "This is a movement of love disguised as philosophy." We’re preaching a lot of philosophy around the world, distributing books, etc., but behind it all is the desire to awaken our dormant love, our natural love for Kṛṣṇa’s devotees who are very dear to Kṛṣṇa, for our spiritual masters who are delivering us from the vast ocean of material existence, to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the master at whose feet all masters sit, and of course, hopefully one day, for Rādhārāṇī.

So, this is an important part of the procedure where we come together on this celebration. Although we’ve been separated for a long time now—I mean, it’s been at least a year and a half or two years, or I can’t even remember when I last had the good fortune to be back in Hungary, the lotus feet of Govardhana in Budapest and then, of course, Rādhā-Śyāmasundara in New Vraja-dhāma—at the same time, we’re all intimately connected. Very intimately connected. That bond can never be broken. The guru-disciple relationship cannot be broken; it’s always there. And it’s mainly nourished, as I’ve often said, through the exchange of knowledge. Just like my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda—he passed away many years ago, in the 1970s, and we’re already into the next millennium—I feel more connected with him than ever because I’m constantly hearing from him.

That’s the connection to knowledge, constantly hearing from him about the futility of material life, so we don’t get tempted to go back. Why would anyone go back, anyway? But the spiritual master reveals the futility of material existence and the wonderful alternative of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not only in the spiritual world, but even on this planet, one can be perfectly happy—even on this planet, which is part of *duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*, the temporary world full of so many sufferings—if one is fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just like Arjuna: we read from Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura—he describes in one of his books that during the Battle of Kurukṣetra, a very fierce battle, everyone died except the Pāṇḍavas. That’s a pretty fierce battle; on both sides, everyone died, and death is never a very wonderful experience. There were arrows and missiles and brahmāstras being thrown, but whenever a missile or an arrow would penetrate the body of Arjuna, because he was so absorbed in his service—Kṛṣṇa said that he should fight, he was a kṣatriya, so his duty was to uphold dharma, sanātana-dharma, the dharma of reviving our lost relationship with God, with Kṛṣṇa—that’s our ultimate dharma or duty. So, he had to protect the innocent of society: the brāhmaṇas, the ladies, the cows, the animals. Prabhupāda refers to them as innocent members; they cannot defend themselves against the asuras like Rāvaṇa.

So, he was doing his duty, and he had that Kṛṣṇa said, "I am the ability in man," so Arjuna was a fighter. So he’s fighting, so much absorbed, remembering Kṛṣṇa in the midst of his duties. He was so absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Viśvanātha Ṭhākura talks about it; he says he felt the arrows to be like flowers, like someone throws flowers on you. Does that hurt? No, it’s a blessing. That’s a real blessing, to have someone shower flowers on you. So, the onslaught of material existence for a devotee who is absorbed in serving his spiritual master, serving our founder-ācārya, we don’t feel the onslaught of material existence. And what is the connection? My guru left a long time ago when I was an infant—I was a baby in spiritual life—but I feel very connected to him because the connection is there through the exchange of knowledge. Therefore, we have to find time. We have to find time for many things in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You get out of something what you put into it; that’s just nīti-śāstra, that’s logic. If you want to be an athlete, you have to work out. If you want a Ph.D. from a university, you have to study. So you get out of something what you put into it. So in the end, at death, it will be judged what we put into our efforts to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. We have to make time. There are different management books about how to manage your own time, how to manage companies, how to manage, and it’s all about discipline, setting your priorities, and then disciplining yourself to find the time.

And that’s absolutely true in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Of course, Prabhupāda set up a wonderful society and a timetable for all of us: morning program, including our morning gāyatrī, noon gāyatrī, evening gāyatrī, 16 rounds minimum, encouraging us to read, to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But still, there are so many other things you have to do—there’s "body maintenance," a polite way of saying taking care of these bodies, body maintenance. Every social life, we have taxes to pay, so many things we have to do, and it sometimes seems they are more urgent than the business of sādhana. But time will tell who stood and who fell. And therefore, to protect ourselves and make sure we make it back to Godhead, we have to hear, hear, hear: *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ kṛṣṇa-smaraṇam*. And therefore, during this last year and a half, it seems like eons of time, my responsibility has been to speak, to study, and to speak. That’s what the guru does, mainly. He studies. Like brāhmaṇas—I would mention in another lecture how brāhmaṇas in India, they don’t work with their hands and build temples like śūdras, they don’t necessarily go out in the early morning and milk the cows and then check over the balance of their businesses. They’re not fighters; they’re not UFC fighters trying to gain glory in cage fighting. No, brāhmaṇas, they read, and then they become the mouth of God. Brāhmaṇas are considered the mouth of God in this world—not that they are God, but they are the mouth of God in this world. They just sit, and they talk, and they talk, and they talk. Whereas in the material world, every subject matter has a beginning and an end—everything material has a beginning and an end—but Kṛṣṇa consciousness is *anādi-anantam*, it’s infinite. Ananta-Śeṣa, he’s coming up with a new name of Kṛṣṇa every second. He never repeats the same name twice. So, because God has infinite knowledge about God, and his pastimes are infinite, with a brāhmaṇa, you can’t stop him. He can go on and on and on and on. They have those Bhāgavata-saptāhas in India; that speaker goes on for 12 hours a day for a whole month, and even then, you have to drag them off the āsana: "Baba, it’s over! You spoke for a month, but I only finished one verse of commentary!" My good friend—what was his name? The Muslim—he spoke for two years, two years every day on the same verse from Bhāgavatam, which was glorifying the holy name. He never said the same thing twice. This is a brāhmaṇa. Devotees want to be brāhmaṇas, but a brāhmaṇa is characterized by his eagerness to absorb knowledge and his eagerness to speak knowledge.

So that I learned this last year and a half. I used to be footloose and fancy-free; even when I was a teenager, I wanted to be footloose and fancy-free—I don’t know if you can translate that into Hungarian or Russian—but that I did for 50 years. And then Rādhārāṇī slammed the door when I was in Vṛndāvana and the coronavirus started. I couldn’t even go out of my house. I was pacing the room back and forth, what to do? But I thought, "What is my responsibility now? I’ve preached so much to the non-devotees." Let’s boil the milk—and that was Prabhupāda’s term—take care of the devotees, because the devotees are our best, our most important, precious asset. You can have everything in place: all the temples, all the books published, all the money in the bank; if you don’t have any devotees, what does it mean? Prabhupāda came to make devotees. And several times in the process of pushing on the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, he slowed into, "Whoa!" Like you have your horse, you’re riding your horse, and at one point, "Whoa, Nelly, whoa! Slow down!" So devotees don’t know that well; they maybe don’t remember that there were several times when Prabhupāda was amongst us, "Whoa, Nelly," he slowed everything down. He said, "Just read, just chant, managers go around." One time he said—it’s even in a letter—one time, the most important duty of the GBCs is to make sure devotees are chanting 16 rounds, following the regulative principles, and studying our books. GBCs, they have a lot to do, I promise; that’s the first thing. And Prabhupāda was always concerned about us, not just spiritually but materially, in the sense he would sign his letters, "I hope this meets you in good health." What, I’m not the body? But Prabhupāda knew that unless the body was fit and sound and healthy, no one could go on with service.

So I consider these last 16 months to be one of the most important parts of my career. I went out and I threw all the seeds, the *bhakti-latā-bīja*. Like we have in America, Johnny Appleseed. Johnny Appleseed, he was a historic person, actually; it’s history. He started walking from the East Coast towards California, from New York to California, with a big bag of apple seeds, and everywhere he’d go, he would throw the apple seeds. People said, "What are you doing, throwing these little brown seeds everywhere?" But he had a vision for the future. And now you walk the same trail, the Johnny Appleseed walk from New York to California, it’s all apple trees. And now you can pick the apple, offer it to Kṛṣṇa, eat it if you please, big, juicy, red apples. What’s life without nice fruits? So like that, for whatever reason, Prabhupāda instructed me to spread the seeds. And when you spread the seed, then, okay, you have to tend the garden, make sure there’s no weeds choking the seeds, choking the tender creepers. So, in the same way, the spiritual master has to protect his disciples. He plants the seed and they begin to grow, but because we’ve been in the material world for such a long time, we have to expect there’s going to be some weeds there. No one should be embarrassed if they have material desires. Sometimes we may slip, sometimes we may fall, sometimes we may make a mistake; it’s because of the powerful nature of this material world, because of our past desires in this world. You know, maybe we’re not so attentive in our sādhana for some time; it’s to be expected. If you’re a mom or a dad, you know how many times you put a band-aid on your son’s elbow or your daughter’s knee when she fell off her bike. So, this is guru. He’s like a doctor, he’s like a psychologist, he’s like a teacher, he’s like a coach. I never knew this—I had to become a psychiatrist, I had to become a dad, literally a dad, to give emotional support to sons and daughters going through a difficult patch. I have to give money sometimes—often I give money to my disciples who are going through a hard time—it’s many roles all rolled into one. That takes time and experience, actually. But that’s been my greatest pleasure. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said one time, "My Lord, difficulties encountered in your service, those are my greatest pleasures." To solve the problems of others, disciples and people in general, that I have found is the greatest pleasure in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I will admit to you, my eyes don’t overflow with tears of prema when I chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, when I see the deity; I don’t exhibit the eight symptoms of ecstatic love of God and fall unconscious on the ground. But I do love my disciples, and I do love the people, and really, that’s what I live for. Nothing more, nothing less. And I can do that for many births, actually. I can say that confidently because, you know, whatever you do, whatever you say, it’s recorded. People don’t realize that Yamarāja has his scribes, and they’re like pretty powerful people, and whatever every human being does, it’s all recorded. Not only what you do, what you say, but what you think. And on judgment day, when you die, at judgment day, they pull out the scrolls and they read it before Yamarāja, and then either you get sentenced or you get freed, mukti, or you get bhakti, you go back to Godhead. So, I can make a statement like that in front of the deities—"All right guys, get your pens out!"—I don’t mind coming back again to serve, to preach, or for Prabhupāda, because I know how much pleasure it gives him to see others getting Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I don’t know Prabhupāda’s intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world; I’m excited to find out. There’s a song like that, "I’d really love to know, I’d really love to know," what is my spiritual master’s relationship. But that’s a private affair right now. I may be invited someday to know, but whoever and whatever his service is in the spiritual world, I know who he is in the material world, and I know what his heart is in this world. He made it very clear; he didn’t hide anything. Gopīs are called guptā, which means that their love is hidden, but you know, everyone knows what—who, everyone knows what, who Hanumān loves. Everyone knows about—others were mentioning, you know, the heart. If you look in Hanumān’s heart: *Raghupati Rāghava Rājārām*. You look at the heart of Jesus, there’s a bleeding heart for humanity. So, I know what Prabhupāda’s heart was. He was a preacher. How many times did he say, "Distribute books, distribute books," his favorite books. And he also indicated other innovative ways of sharing. He said, "Tax your brains, how to distribute these books, how to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness." One time he said, "What is the meaning of being American unless you can do something big for Kṛṣṇa?" And I’m sure he would say the same thing for every country when he went there, if he had the time and knew the people. So that’s what I want. What do I want? I don’t want anything separate from my spiritual master, because I know it will lead to degradation and I’ll lose my good fortune; that scares me to death. So I only want what he wants, and he made it very clear. And if I want Kṛṣṇa, I have to have my guru, because guru is the revealer of the Dhāma, and within the Dhāma, Rādhā-Śyāmasundara.

So, as my spiritual master gave his every breath—even his last breath; you see Prabhupāda lying on his deathbed—I’ve actually never watched that video. Now, I’ve never watched that video, Prabhupāda’s departure. And even the day Prabhupāda departs, I go to my room and close the door and think about him, but I don’t like to think of him that way. Because what does Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura say? He says, "He reasons ill who says that Vaiṣṇavas die, when thou art living still in sound! The Vaiṣṇava dies to live, and living, spreads the holy name around." So, I’m very sure that Prabhupāda is with us; his mercy is cascading down from the heavens, down from Goloka, and he’s observing us. And if we want—if that’s what we want, if we want to share our good fortune with others—he will give us unlimited opportunities. If you want sense gratification, Māyā, she’ll open the door and give you so many opportunities for sense gratification. If you want bhakti, if you develop greed for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, how much mercy you can take and utilize! We don’t realize when we’re holding back. "Well, maybe, you know, but I don’t know, I’m going to hold on to this, I’m not..." *Ātmanivedanam*. For me, how do I know Kṛṣṇa is real? How do I know the spiritual world’s there, that the Creator has four heads, and all that nonsense that may go through the brain sometimes? If that’s our mentality, then there’s some restriction. But if you have full faith in your spiritual master, in the words of your spiritual master, Prabhupāda, the kingdom of God is awaiting you. And the kingdom of God is also on this planet. "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven." When I went to church a few times—I remember from the Bible, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven." In other words, as the spiritual world is there, it also comes here. But with all due respect, little do they know how that takes place, because Kṛṣṇa has to come. He promises, "Whenever and wherever there’s a decline in religiousness and an increase in adharma, I come." So he has to fulfill that process. So when he comes, he can’t leave Anapanya. Who is Anapanya? One of the names of Śrī Rādhikā. Anapanya means "she who was never separated from Kṛṣṇa." Even in separation, they’re together in the intensity of their bhāva. So Kṛṣṇa said, "Can you come?" And Rādhā said, "I’ll come, but only if there’s the Yamunā river, only if there’s Govardhana Hill, and the forest of Vṛndāvana; otherwise, what is the meaning of our pastimes unless we have that wonderful ambiance of Braja around us?" The Dhāma is actually an expansion of Lord Balarāma. So Kṛṣṇa came and he displayed his transcendental pastimes for all of us. It’s very clear what is there. If you hear about that from your spiritual master, then you will lose all attraction to this world. It’ll just vanish, like you—maybe you’re writing a document on your computer and then you hit the delete button, it all goes away. It’s like that. If you hear about Kṛṣṇa, all the phantasmagoria, the whole 14 worlds, all the phantasmagoria, it’s a horse’s egg in the sky; it doesn’t exist, it doesn’t mean anything, it goes away. And what are you left with? The wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So we’re indebted to guru. We don’t even know, we can’t even comprehend what the guru-paramparā has in store for us. We cannot comprehend that because we still foolishly hold on to this world. But gradually, step by step, we learn to walk in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and then we learn to run, like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said, "My dear Lord, I’m simply running behind you, shouting, 'Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!'" And you can’t say Kṛṣṇa, it’s *Kṛṣṇa*, you can’t hold back. *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa*. Like in the Hungarian form, they don’t say "Rādhā-Śyāma," they say "Rādheśyām," because under the tutelage and under the spiritual guidance of His Holiness Sivarama Swami, you know, you’re learning to chant from the heart. Because Kṛṣṇa consciousness is something that’s imbibed from others. So we expect that all of the Hungarian devotees will leave this world at the end of their lives. Why? Well, you have, you know, we have cities, we have towns, we have villages, and there’s cities and amongst towns there’s towns and amongst villages there’s villages. So like in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we have cities like Dvārakā, we have towns like Mathurā, and we have villages like Braja. So, in the same way, in this world, we have countries like America, France, Belgium; we have yātrās like Germany and Australia and Indonesia. We have programs, this and that. But in Hungary, Hungary is one of the most—you could say, qualitatively—the most successful country in the world as far as Kṛṣṇa consciousness is concerned, as far as yātrās are concerned. Oh my God, OMG, what a yātrā! And as far as projects, what compares to New Vraja-dhāma? In my eyes, it’s an extension of Vṛndāvana. Just like Narottama, after the whole book episode, he went to Viṣṇupur, because that’s where the books were taken to when they were stolen. Birambir, he got the books back, and then he initiated the King, and they initiated the Queen, initiated all the ministers; he initiated a whole town of Viṣṇupur. So he decided to stay there and water the seeds. So him and King Birambir, they went to Vṛndāvana; you read about it in *Nava-vraja-mahimā*, you know, that book by Sivarama Swami, you read how they went to Braja and then the King, he studied the town where the temples were, where the holy places were, where Girirāja was; whether then he came back and he made an extension of Vṛndāvana in Viṣṇupur. And if you go to Viṣṇupur today, you’ll see thousands of temples; some are still operating, some are dilapidated, but you get an idea what he did, he made another Vṛndāvana. And that’s what Sivarama Swami has done. Others have tried—I don’t want to be, you know, I have to be fair, there’s many, many wonderful projects—but when you walk into New Vraja-dhāma, you’re, like, overcome by the bhakti. Maybe they don’t have as many buildings, as many cows as some other projects, but when you walk in there, it’s like, you know, sometimes a person wears too much perfume, you know, somebody, a man or a woman, put on too much perfume, when they walk in the room, you start coughing. So when you walk into New Vraja-dhāma, it’s like you’re overwhelmed by this aroma of bhakti. It’s not easy. I remember the early days, you can see the black and white photos, what the devotees went through in the beginning. Lest we not forget the blood, sweat, and tears that have developed that community. It didn’t just happen like a Disney movie, "doom," then there it is, and you go. No, blood, sweat, and tears. But that’s what it takes to become Kṛṣṇa conscious; you have to make the effort.

So, in Hungary, you have everything. And your temple in Budapest, it’s like it was constructed by Viśvakarmā, the architect of the demigods. It was there, and you transformed it; you have such beautiful, merciful deities, and you have your preaching centers around. Everything’s good, everything’s *kusum-sarovara*, everything’s—thank you God for what he’s given all of you. So please, take advantage. You don’t have to go anywhere else, don’t think, "Oh, I have to go here, I have to go there." Yes, come to Braja, come to Māyāpur, go to Purī, but your Prabhupāda-datta-deśa is the Hungarian yātrā. The people of that country, they need some mercy. I read the news—I won’t go into details, what are the politics going on there right now, you know, much of the EU is snubbing, turning their nose away from Hungary—but that’s not your business. Your business is not politics, your business is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So be happy, be content with what you have, work hard to make it better, take advantage so that you know, when the grim reaper comes, when Yamarāja comes and he says, "You come with me," you smile, you say "Kṛṣṇa," and tears just flood from your eyes like torrents of rain. You’re not even aware of what’s happening in this transformation. And when you wipe the tears away, you’ll be in the original Vṛndāvana, Goloka Vṛndāvana, in the spiritual sky, with all the wonderful Hungarian devotees and all the other devotees, eventually. But I think you might be the first ones there. So please, when you get up there, give a reminder for the rest of us down here—"How’d you get there? How did you get here? Oh, Sivarama!" So, when you’re there, then you pray for all those who are down here so they can also get back, going back to God. So that’s my short—you asked for a short talk, Duramati—that’s my short talk. And very happy today to be here with all of you. I remember all of you; don’t think I forget. I do not forget. I remember each and every one of you. You’re in my constant prayers, and we will meet again. It’s only a question of time. Better days are there ahead. Do not worry. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""