"*00424*.*
"Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jayacandra, Jaya. Gobhaktavinda, Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jayacandra, Jaya. Gorabhakta, Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jayacandra, Jaya. Gol Bhaktavinda.

Good morning to the devotees and Vaiṣṇavas. We feel very blessed in your company, and we are grateful for the opportunity to savor the journey of Lord Caitanya from Jagannātha Purī to our Vṛndāvana, the land of love. And I don’t want to rush him, but today will be the day he enters the great, glorious Vṛndāvana, where we learn about Vṛndāvana from the Vrajavāsīs. If we want to understand Vraja, then we have to associate it with the Vrajavāsīs.

I spend six months a year in Vṛndāvana, and then I go out into the fields to meet the farmers, the ladies who cook, and the little boys who play, and they still have that atmosphere today. They build the fire—it’s wonderful—but you can only go to houses for tradition; what they do means he goes to houses every day. And if a person gets hungry, all he has to do is go to one of these little wooden doors and knock, and then say, "Mātājī, I’m hungry." And then they light a fire and cook you sabjī, roṭī, and all kinds of things. But you can only go to four houses, because it was the custom of the Gosvāmīs to only do madhukarī in four houses a day.

And in return, since love must be reciprocated, you need to do a little chanting and kathā—tell them stories, because this is Vraja-rasa—so that you can reciprocate their love. And in almost every home in Vraja-maṇḍala, which is the larger area of Vraja, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma is depicted. I remember a devotee said during darśana that there are more than 7,000 temples in Vṛndāvana. And I was always confused because we always went to the same temple on Mondays, and one more temple. And then I always wondered where the other 6,998 were.

But after we had been doing the Kārtika parikramā for so long, then I realized that it means that every home is a temple, and they have mūrtis that live generation after generation. And of course, our heart and soul is in that Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, where there is Gauranitāi, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, and the most sacred of the universe is Śrīla Prabhupāda’s samādhi. I have been in Vṛndāvana for years, but my heart is with every parikramā, and I make my report this year: "I preached here, I preached there, I did this, I did that, I did all this service on your behalf." For the past 52 years, I have traveled across India, but when I arrive in Vṛndāvana, I always go to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s samādhi to report where I preached and what I did in the past year, and I place it all at the lotus feet, because it is Prabhupāda who manifests the dhāma. And he wanted us to come to Vṛndāvana. Once in the early years, one of my godbrothers went to Prabhupāda when he reached Vṛndāvana and asked him, "Should I do parikramā here in Vṛndāvana?" And Prabhupāda said something that has since become my mission statement: "When you’re in Vṛndāvana, I’m here to just wander around."

Another goal: Meet the Vrajavāsīs. Not too long ago, we walked—he must have been in his 90s—and he was singing bhajans like that, passed down through what we call oral tradition from grandfather to father, like this for many centuries. They may not even be recorded yet, written down, but they are in the hearts of the Vrajavāsīs. I mentioned that we were once on Govardhana parikramā and we met an old devotee who must have been in his 90s, and he was singing Vṛndāvanī bhajans. These were bhajans that may not have been recorded yet, but they were passed down from generation to generation in their families, but they sang with all their heart. There was no mṛdaṅga, no cymbals, no kartālas, no harmonium, no bass guitar, no saxophone. They heard it. Mahārāja loves it very much, and I love it too, but there was no time for this, so not all the sounds were completely clear because sometimes it was a little faint, but it was so beautiful that I asked to let me walk with him for a while.

"How can I wear it? What is this machine? What is this machine?" He was from another era. And then I said, "So, you want to record it?" And so, I don’t remember how long, but we walked with her for hours, and just like Mādhava Prabhu is one of our best singers, she sang from her heart, and she promised—I promised—that I would play a little bit of it here so that you can understand what it was like. This bhajan is about life in Vṛndāvana. Don't cry.

The first line says: "I want to live alone, and even if I could get there, I wouldn't want to go there. I just want to go to Vṛndāvana."

*[Music]*

It says that this is how Govardhana merges into the plant of Vṛndāvana. He says, "May I always live in Jatipura, may I always live at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, may I always live at Rādhā-Govardhana." Please, let me be born again and again in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Every day I will come to the kuṇḍas, drink their water and bathe in them, and just throw the powder of my Vṛndāvana in it, and let me be born in Śrī Vṛndāvana. We have 15 of these devotees. This new one, which comes from the heart of Mahārāja Śivarāma Swami, is obviously his offering to Śrīla Prabhupāda. And since this is a copy of the original, I think that in 50-60 years, some of them will be walking and singing exactly the same way.

Once after a lesson, we were at Śrīla Prabhupāda’s house, and he said that in Vṛndāvana you are meant to get this impression. And then when you get the impression of Vṛndāvana, you go to your own countries and create it everywhere. And now, as you develop this place, there are these holy places everywhere where you can wander, and then you can also sing these bhajans that come down word by word.

And I also promised to share how the entire spiritual world is contained in this pebble. And it has tiny pieces of the original objects that I'm going to mention now. And don’t ask me how I got all this, because it’s so mystical that even when I listen to myself, I wonder what it is. A little piece of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s wooden shoes and slippers—a 500-year-old small piece of shoe. A Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī shoe, a tiny piece of the original Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, handwritten by Rūpa Gosvāmī. A tiny piece of the original manuscript of Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha. A small fragment of the original manuscript of the Prārthanā of Narottama. A tiny piece of the kurtā he wore last time. A tiny piece of Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s slippers from 500 years ago. There is a story behind each one.

There is a pillar in a village, which Lord Balarāma placed there, and thus he said that up to this point it is in Vṛndāvana, and from here on it is Māyā. And my brother personally placed this there. A piece of that column is in this. I said that the entire spiritual world is here. A tiny piece of it. Original manuscript, a small piece of the last chapter of Antya-līlā. And as I mentioned, a piece of the stone that bears the inscription Caitanya Mahāprabhu left in the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. A tiny fruit or a tiny piece of the tree—its trunk—under which the Lord Buddha attained enlightenment. There is a tiny piece of the tulasi that Mahāprabhu gave to Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī in the Rādhā-ramaṇa temple. And there is a piece of Mahāprabhu’s kaupīna. There's a little one in there.

Yeah, now is the time. There’s a giant in it—a tiny little Nṛsiṁhagrāma, only in its class. And it has an original musk that comes from the navel of this musk deer when it is mating season to attract females. And this has a very, very strong smell. You can still feel it a little. This is a very old one that I received in Nepal, from the mouth of a Śālagrāma and the world of Śālagrāmas, set in gold. So I keep the Lord very close to my heart for inspiration.

We continue our short series in which the moving devotee goes into hiding. And this is the fifth part. Last night we followed the Lord’s procession and the Balarāma Bhaṭṭācārya as they entered the greater Vraja-maṇḍala and ended the evening lesson there when they reached the banks of the Yamunā River. And for practical purposes, they came to Viśrāma-ghāṭa, which is technically in Mathurā. But there is a boundary line between Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, and on it lies Viśrāma-ghāṭa, and generally our Kārtika parikramās. There are many reasons why this place is so special. And the original is that the Lord came here to rest after being killed by the news—as if the Lord must rest. Of course, his rest is completely different from ours, when we dream all sorts of things. His rest is in yoga-nidrā; like a pure bhakta, he does not really sleep but is in yoga-nidrā and dreams, but his dreams are realities. One day, he woke up and said that he had a dream, and I told him that I went to the planet where Muhammad went after he died. Muḥammad... of course, Prabhupāda’s dreams are all about Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and Vṛndāvana.

Back to it: As he said, in the same way as the Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva killed Hiraṇyakaśipu and on the way, when he flew over Navadvīpa like this, then it occurred to him that, "Well, I will appear here in Kali-yuga." And then the demigods prepared a lake for him, and he thought, "Well then, let me see Navadvīpa," and then he landed there and bathed in the water. And every now and then he rested there for a while. And then this rest—in English it’s not called a nap, but it’s called a snap. And then he told Śrutakīrti that, "I am going to snap." But Śrutakīrti said that it was not. He said, "It wasn't a rest."

And the myth says that Māyā was created in the image of God. The Bible, therefore, says that man is made in the image of God. Have you read the Bible? It’s okay, read the Bhagavad Gītā. So the Lord has his dualities, and his sleep is for the yogic mind, but then he rests sometimes. So after the Lord killed him, he came and rested there for a while. And this is the same place where Kṛṣṇa rested after killing Kaṁsa. In the arena, Kṛṣṇa killed Kaṁsa, and he got tired, and then he went and rested. Actually, after Kṛṣṇa killed Kaṁsa, he dragged his corpse through Mathurā, so that the people of Mathurā could see that the terrible king was really dead. And this is called such a terrible race. His race is the same. If someone says, "I’m a Muslim," then you’re in such a terrible race, and I’m more in the race of a mādhurya. So, before our mental eyes, we can see Kṛṣṇa dragging the corpse of Kaṁsa through Mathurā. And well, that’s enough, it’s terrible, but then we can calm down if the terrible, terrible demon is dead. Just like they say, "The Wicked Witches of the North are dead." And it is said that at the moment Kaṁsa died, Nanda Mahārāja sent a message throughout Vṛndāvana with the good news.

And when they heard this, the Vrajavāsīs held such a great kīrtana that it could be heard for miles. Our kīrtana can be heard 50% of the time, but theirs is heard very far away. I heard something very interesting recently. It is said that Kaṁsa sacrificed himself or dedicated himself to killing Kṛṣṇa because there was this omen from heaven at Devakī’s wedding that her sixth son would kill you. And therefore, just as the gopīs were searching for Kṛṣṇa everywhere, Kaṁsa was also searching for Kṛṣṇa everywhere. And so Kṛṣṇa was conscious in one sense. So, this is a very simple definition of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that Rūpa Gosvāmī did not create this term in his writings, that Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and Prabhupāda took it from there. But what does it mean to always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him? So technically, Kaṁsa was Kṛṣṇa conscious because he always remembered Kṛṣṇa and never forgot Him. But Rūpa Gosvāmī says that this is not the kind of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but a loving one, so one must think about it lovingly and remember it in that way, and not forget it.

But they say that when this demon was finally punished for his sins, Kṛṣṇa, who had family connections to him—like his nephew—then arranged for Kṛṣṇa’s funeral, which was befitting a warrior and a king. Just like Jesus says, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." He organized a grand ceremony, a funeral ceremony for him, befitting a warrior and a king. How do you estimate that we should talk about forgiveness? Jesus gave the same example. His hands were pierced with these irons, right, and a soldier stabbed him with a spear. So you can see in the pictures that his side is bleeding, but he still said, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." This is an example for us, or a teaching, because sometimes when we go out to do saṅkīrtana, people say nasty things to us. In the 70s in France, we went to a market where they sold fruits and all kinds of things, but meat. They still sell it now, and a man threw a piece of raw meat at my face like this, so it even went into my mouth. I’m saying that... Kṛṣṇa, forgive me.

Once, I had an operation, because after singing on the streets for 10 years, I strained my vocal cords, and a little lump formed on them, and then I had to have an operation. And then when I went into the operating room, they said—I was 19 years old at the time—"Son, I’ve never seen such a big group of people; are you an opera singer?" And then they put you in this gown, pushed you into the operating room, and then they insert the needle, and you fall asleep in an instant. And then I fell asleep, but the anesthesiologist made a mistake and didn't give me enough medication to keep me asleep throughout the surgery. And I woke up in the middle of the surgery, and you’re completely confused at that point. And then I saw this guy with a mask and a knife coming towards me like this. He had a mask on. His eyes were so big, and he had a knife. I pulled one on him—my dad always said my right hook was really good. You get into a fight at school, and that’s how my father always told me to do it. And then I got one of them. And then the scoundrel doctor gave him such a high dose of medication that he was out for three hours, because the surgery only lasted 20 minutes. A little naughty boy. I was in my room and I woke up just as they came to check on me.

I opened my eyes, and the doctor was so tired. So there was a stick on his nose, tied up like that with such big ropes. And what did he mean? The nurse came in and she was screaming at me like this, "You American kid, what broke his nose in three places!" And then I didn't even remember. And then the doctor told me not to treat him like that. "Well, no, he wasn’t under the influence of the sleeping pill. He didn’t know what he was doing. He must be forgiven." And I thought about this for a few days, because when people say bad things about us, or even write bad articles about us, they are under the influence of material energy. And so everyone is a bhakta. Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā that He is the seed-giving father of all living beings. And Prabhupāda talks on an album that we were all originally Kṛṣṇa conscious. Everyone is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, but some know it and some don’t.

And then after a week or two I went back to do saṅkīrtana, but in France at that time saṅkīrtana was very difficult, wasn’t it? And so I learned the lesson, because from this I learned that whatever people do, we have to forgive them, because they are under the influence of material energy. So Kṛṣṇa—or Kaṁsa—constantly wanted to kill Kṛṣṇa, but when Kṛṣṇa finally defeated him, He organized a big funeral for him, and then they shouted, "Long live the king, long live the king," but he's already dead—it's okay, let him live. So the ācāryas say that, overwhelmed with ecstasy on returning to his home in Gauḍadeśa, Lord Caitanya jumped into the waters of Viśrāma-ghāṭa and played in the Yamunā like a small child. Kṛṣṇa is the oldest of the old, because He is the original person. However, He will never be older than 16 years old; He is forever young. He has this youthfulness, this energy. Like how your children are here, how the children bring a very good youthful energy to Vṛndāvana as well. They are also conscious in their own way. They always appear when I arrive. Of course, they disappear during the lesson, but when I arrive, they come to see if they can bring my stick.

He is older, but plays like a child. And when the people of Vṛndāvana saw this Sannyāsī there, playing like a child, they agreed that this was a very special person who could only be the son of Yaśodā-mātā and no one else. So if you haven’t been to Viśrāma-ghāṭa, then the next time you go, definitely go, because that’s where the parikramā usually starts.

*[Music]*

If nothing else, it’s because they say that if someone sees Viśrāma-ghāṭa at sunrise, when the Lord’s radiance is especially visible there, then they will attain liberation. And if one offers sesame seeds and water to one’s ancestors there, then those fortunate souls ascend to Vaikuṇṭha. And our love for the dhāma brings a deep understanding of the subject. In his poem *Mathurā*, verse 228, he says, "For the ear, the Viśrāma-ghāṭa destroys all sins." This is the eternal resting place of those conditioned souls who travel in pain in the desert of material existence. Are there any of you who are traveling through the desert of material existence, filled with pain? Go to Viśrāma-ghāṭa. And the ācāryas also say that by visiting the customs gate at the beginning of his parikramā, Mahāprabhu set the example that the Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā should begin at the Yamunā, i.e., at the bathing place of Viśrāma-ghāṭa.

Now, after coming out from... *Jala* means water, *krīḍā* means playing. I gave that name to one of my disciples. "What is your name? What is my name?" It means playing. So when he came out, so it came out of the water from this spot, which means playing in the water. I gave one of my students this name, just to be safe, and when he asked what it meant, I said it meant playing with water, so he didn’t understand that I named it after water. And then these are water crossings, whether in a boat or swimming, but one should never doubt the power of Vṛndāvana’s waters. They say that Rādhā-kuṇḍa is liquid prema, liquid love. This is not water, but liquid love. And Śyāma-kuṇḍa is liquid love. If you bathe in the Rādhā-kuṇḍa, you will receive the same love that Rādhā feels for Kṛṣṇa. And if you bathe in Śyāma-kuṇḍa, you will receive the love that Śyāma feels for you. So we always say we’re going to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, but technically we’re also going to Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Those people go, they bathe in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, but then they go through there and bathe in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, then back to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, so back to Rādhā and so on.

So after his bath, when he came out of the water, a brāhmaṇa approached him. We talked about this yesterday, how many brāhmaṇas went to the Lord. And this brāhmaṇa is called by Kṛṣṇadāsa, "Caturvedī." Actually, the title is Caturvedī. The brāhmaṇas of Mathurā are called Caturvedīs, who are very, very pious brāhmaṇas. Caturvedī brāhmaṇa and... you know, many years of lectures on us, up to 700 lectures all about Vṛndāvana, so we know a very young brāhmaṇa, but very knowledgeable. And if we have finished this Vṛndāvana series, which is already at the 700th lesson, but if we ever finish it, then we will go to Mathurā, and there the brāhmaṇas of Caturvedī will take us around the holy places of Mathurā, so that we can get inspiration from there too. The real connection between the guru and the disciple is that he gives him vijñāna, illuminates the path to the spiritual world. So the real connection with the guru is to hear from him.

Hours researching, 10 hours—at least 10 hours—researching it for a 40-minute [talk], you know, goes by quickly. A lot of research goes into it, and authoritative research to quote the scripture, so it’s not some... so that’s my service to my disciple. So if you really want to be with your guru, I consider it my main service. I consider these lessons to my disciples, although I do festivals too, but I put 10 hours of study into my lessons, every single lesson, and it may only be a 40-minute lesson, but there is a lot of study behind it, to be authoritative, and to quote the śāstra. So this is how you should hear from the guru.

Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gītā, "Hey, listen to this." And when the Sarasvata priest received Prabhupāda’s request for initiation, he said, "Yes, I will accept it because he hears well." We can sing, we can talk, but first *śravaṇam, vandanam, kīrtanam*, and that brings the viṣṇu-smaraṇam—the remembrance. So hearing always comes first, and it’s a science. And of course, we should always hear from the founding master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, first, because he is the master at whose feet our other masters stand. We need to make time for this.

So this brāhmaṇa was called Kṛṣṇadāsa, and somehow when the Lord saw him, He went up to him and hugged him. So for a servant, this is the highest expression of love, when the master hugs—so for the gopīs, it might be a little more visceral, because He hugs them, sometimes even kisses them. But for a servant, it is the highest order when his master embraces him, whether truly, physically or in his heart. When my godbrother Ghanaśyāma came back from the Eastern European countries where they preached, the master was so pleased that he hugged him, and Ghanaśyāma thought that he had reached a vow and then he became a bhakta. And Hanumān, after all that he had done, found the site, they burned the tail. He came back and after that there was a huge battle where many rākṣasas were killed and then Sītā was recovered, and Rāma was so pleased with Hanumān that he asked him, "My dear servant, how can I repay you for what you have done for me? What can I give you?" He verbally told him, "Sir, could I have a hug?" So for a servant, this is the highest order.

Back in the old days in France, when Prabhupāda came, we just wanted him to see us. "But if you look at us, you know I exist," and then we were happy with that. Of course, there is more to this. Once, a journalist asked Prabhupāda how he knew what his disciples were doing in the world, that he was fit to show them the way. There were 5,000 students. Then 5,000 students asked, "How do you know what they are doing?" Prabhupāda said, "Kṛṣṇa will tell me." Don’t doubt it, Kṛṣṇa-dāsa is mystical. It’s a natural force, just like an embryo is nurtured by its mother in the womb, and it doesn’t know how it happens, but it happens anyway, and when it grows up, it will have a personal relationship with its mother. So we don’t understand it, but it happens. Then Kṛṣṇa thought, "Oh, Mahāprabhu embraced me," and then Mahāprabhu gave him service. Like when a boy likes a girl, then the girl says she’s fine, so prove it, then do something for me. Buy me a diamond ring or something. So love means service to Kṛṣṇa. We show our love through service. *Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa*... If we don’t have service that day or at that hour or moment, then we perform the highest service and call upon the names of the Lord, the Lord, and thus we beg for service. This is all about you, not me. This is the bhakti.

This is about you, not about me. Just do me a favor. After all, material consciousness is about "me," "that," and "mine." But a student thinks, "I gave my life. Please, please, please." Are you crazy? And then Mahāprabhu whispered in his ear to take him to all the keli-sthala—that would be a very pretty name for a little girl. And then he told him to take me to all the locations of the divya-līlā, all the locations of the playful, divine lilās. Not on these paths in the Mathurā, where Kṛṣṇa drags the corpse like this, but on these where they go boating, where they go to the Govardhana mountain, and how we shout that, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa!"

And he was a Caturvedī, a very learned brāhmaṇa. So I told the Prabhu that Kṛṣṇa is always walking back and forth through the various forests of Vṛndāvana. So we have to look at a lot of things. And then one of the places we’re going to look at is Govardhana Mountain, said the brāhmaṇa. And then the Lord Caitanya lost consciousness. So they arranged to go there the next day. And then because he was expecting Kṛṣṇa consciousness—he was expecting Kṛṣṇa-conscious things to happen, spiritually uplifting things—so Mahāprabhu went to rest early. If you go to bed early, you can get up early. "Early to bed and early to rise makes a person healthy, rich and wise"—well, I don’t know how rich, but wise for sure.

He got up early with the intention of seeing the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana and then all the sub-forests—and there are many things to see. Mahārāja Mahimā writes in his book that there are 60 billion holy places. So they started walking, and there were these forest cows, cows that live in the wild, like I was in Kazakhstan recently, and there are these stud farms of more than 100 horses in the northern region. We were in Kazakhstan and the eastern part of Kazakhstan. There was a secret program there where we went, and we always had to stop to see these wild horses crossing the road by the hundreds, and I always looked and thought, "Wow, they’re beautiful." You know, a bhakta told your professor that he thinks cows are the most beautiful animals. But Prabhupāda said, "No, well horses are the most beautiful, cows are the most useful, but horses are the most beautiful." He said a century ago, there weren’t any people yet, people rode horses, and a couple of people said that these are the legends of...

Thirteen years old. From the age of 13 to 18, my father sent me to a farm in the village, where I supervised 30-40 horses and had to learn how to care for them, groom them, and feed them. I knew when to call a vet, I could even change our horseshoes. They also have different personalities, just like cows, some are angry and some are friendly. There were some among them with whom I studied in the evenings. You continued, "Once upon a time there was a horse who loved me and then changed his mind or didn’t love me anymore." In the morning we drove them out to pasture, and then in the evening I rode out on my own horse and drove them back to the stable for the night. So we went out and we got them going, and we galloped down this trail and there was a branch coming out over the trail here and [the horse] ran through that branch, knocked me—the horse, I knew, did it on purpose. And one day we were driving them out, and somehow this horse, who loved me anyway—and obviously we don’t usually go that way, but he had obviously been there before—changed his mind, and as we were galloping down the hill, he went under a tree, like its branch was just sticking out so that he could still go under it, and he swept me off, and I fell off. And I knew he was doing it right away.

I lost consciousness. I lost consciousness, and then when I woke up, I had to walk 10 km back, and when I got back, we talked about what I did and he just got angry. And then I asked, "What was that now?" And they said, "Well, sometimes you have to change horses like that, so you change horses." But they are beautiful, very, very beautiful animals, especially the stallions from the Middle East. And your groom said they were the most beautiful. But Kṛṣṇa loved cows. So now we’re back to the cows. I don’t know what this has to do with this lesson. So, Mahāprabhu saw the forest cows, and then I associated them with the wild horses in Kazakhstan, but I hope that when I leave my body, I will remember the cows, not the horses. And these forest cows surrounded Mahāprabhu and started licking Him. So, animals are people, right? And they express their affection and love by licking each other. If you had a dog or cat, that’s why we...

Don’t really want to keep dogs and cats in Āśrama. There is one; she is my favorite cow. And when I go there, she always licks me, and then I tell her that she loves someone, but her tongue is so rough that it rubs your hand off like that when she licks it, but you put up with it. And then she licked Him, licked Him, and when He petted them,""