"*00273*.*
"Dear, it's very good to see you after you've had a good rest in the service of a blissful day. Those who live here are so blessed, and those who come here are also very blessed. *Jaya jaya Śrī-caitanya jaya Nityānanda, jayādvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vṛnda.*

Today we are going to start the seventh part of the series; when it was the last one, we will end it with this. I am very sad that we have now reached the end. This morning, I was thinking that in this lesson we would talk about what the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was when She arrived in Vṛndāvana. We've touched on this a little bit, but it is a very deep topic. We are going into this more now. Why was Akrūra so enthusiastic about what Kṛṣṇa said? Why did he want to go to Vraja?

We have heard this before, how much the Lord loved Vraja. We can appreciate it even more if we hear from the devotees who were Their inner companions about the glory of Vṛndāvana and why the Lord loved it so much. In this regard, we will quote how much He appreciated Vṛndāvana, as described in the *Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad*.

Let's read the sixth verse of the first chapter of the first part. I personally feel that this is one of the most wonderful eulogies of Vṛndāvana that has ever been written. Listen carefully; it's a bit long, but thank you for making it so long. There is a place called Vṛndāvana. This land brings great favor to the devotees of God. This forest has the power to liberate all living beings in all worlds. If the cleansing breezes touch anyone, it will drive away all problems. Its touch opens the door to the prison of the three evils, which are economic development, sense gratification, and material piety. The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not give the gift of devotional service easily, but in the land of Vṛndāvana, He gives it very freely and easily every time. The demigod Brahmā desired in his heart that he might be born in Vṛndāvana, even if it meant taking a low birth. But he loved Vṛndāvana and thought that if he got in touch with Vṛndāvana, it would be the beginning of his good fortune.

Things are going very mystically. Things work like this everywhere here, and while it may seem contradictory at first, it always gets resolved in the end. Even if someone doesn't have poetic talent, even if a poem is written about them, that is glorious.

The happy Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda, appears again and again in Vṛndāvana, His land, to help the inhabitants of this world, always striving for happiness in a new way. We can feel how our hearts are purified by this transcendental sound vibration. As members of ISKCON, as we follow the lotus feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda and the previous ācāryas, we also want to achieve the eternal Vṛndāvana. We know honestly every day that in order to achieve this, we have to be very capable, but we try, just maybe, because it is possible if we also have the mood. Akrūra also had the mood. He realized his good fortune when he went to Vraja and was one of Kaṃsa's ministers, despite the situation. He was instructed by Kaṃsa to go and bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, and he thought, "How lucky I am that I could go in a dream, because I had no qualifications to bring Them, to do this service of bringing Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma on a cart, but I will try." We remember that we talked about this the last couple of days, that Akrūra was in a mood of "I must get to Vṛndāvana." Even such a fallen soul was given the opportunity to glimpse the infallible Supreme Lord. 

The river of time sometimes carries conditioned souls to the shore. There have been many floods recently, and those who survived and reached the shore were very fortunate, and perhaps there will be some among us who will be so fortunate that we will reach the shore and reach the final goal. If at first something doesn't work, try again and again. Kṛṣṇa also says that after many, many births, someone gets the opportunity to engage in My *bhakti*. It may be that a person has to go through many births before his heart is purified and he reaches *prema-bhakti*, and he can see Kṛṣṇa in the face of the saint. But I can remember that the ācāryas were much more merciful than Kṛṣṇa, and there was even one who liberated him, and he liberated all the animals in the forests. In the company of the *bhaktas*, I can say this: the *bhakta* is even more merciful than the Lord. There was a lesson when he said, "Here is Kṛṣṇa, here, take Him." Okay, we will take Him, so don't lose the vision because he was born in the right *yuga*. But then, it is Kali-yuga, but we know that the demigods are lined up in the sky to be born in ISKCON.

Where do you think these little girls come from? I only see such cute little girls. And finally, how fortunate they are, because they are conceived by the *garbhādhāna-saṃskāra*, which means that the mother's womb is already prepared for their reception, and they already take devotional service into their mothers' wombs by hearing and reading the *Bhagavad-gītā* and feeding them *prasādam*. I was 19 years old when I started Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But we can reach them too. They think we have to catch up with them, but I always think we have to catch up with them. Years ago, I was in Māyāpur and I met a little girl there, and we talked about dreams, and it occurred to me that when Śrīla Prabhupāda was a housekeeper, he told me three times in a row that Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was telling him to take *sannyāsa*. He said that we usually dream of silly things, but if we dream of Kṛṣṇa or the spiritual master, that is very good. And we talked about this with the *bhaktas*.

I asked the *bhaktas* if any of them sometimes have Kṛṣṇa-conscious dreams. A little girl about that age raised her hand and said, "Yes, Mahārāja, I have them." Then she said, "I don't really sing, but I'm a writer in my head, and the parrots are playing, and they don't chirp, but sing the glory of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa." Of course, that's what she really meant. "And we sit there with the Mañjarīs in the corner and make a garland. And not to Kṛṣṇa, but to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, because it is Her love that controls Kṛṣṇa." You know these things naturally. So then she comes into the *kuñja*, so you give her the garland? "No, I give it to my mañjarī, who gives it to her head, who gives it to Lalitā-devī, and Lalitā-devī gives it to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, because that's how things work in the *kuñja*." I was ready to get off the stage to take over the place for her. And then I told her, "Oh, this is a wonderful ministry; I would like to do this ministry too." Or not. I asked because this is something only the *gopīs* can do, so that we can think about who is next to us. And Akrūra was also there—this *maṅgalam*—to get to Vṛndāvana. And he felt very unqualified, just as we feel unqualified, but our only qualification is *śaraṇāgati*. 

We talked about how Mahāprabhu started His journey to Vṛndāvana and left from there in His 12th year. He spent quite a long time in Vṛndāvana, but slept at Akrūra-ghāṭa every night. This is on the banks of the river Yamunā, and He slept there every night, and every morning He walked to Imlitalā, which is a very sacred place, and there He performed His rounds under a tamarind tree. Mahāprabhu appeared in the mood of a devotee to teach us how to perform devotional service in the Kali-yuga. And He also did a certain number of laps every day, as we are instructed. I have never seen a picture of Mahāprabhu without a bead bag. Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura describes how the Lord had such a counter tied around His waist, and He counted how much He was chanting. Under that tamarind tree, He slept, and then He started on His way. He should not have had to perform this *sādhanā*, but for our sake, He showed us an example. *Imlī-talā* in English means tamarind tree. And that's why this place is so special, because this was the place from where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī disappeared from the autumn *rāsa-līlā* dance, leaving Kṛṣṇa to search for Her in great desperation. There are a lot of *rāsa* dances. There were *rāsa* dances in the spring, there were in the winter, at different times of the year and in different places. When you are in Vṛndāvana, you can discover such places even in deserted forests, which the Vrajavāsīs set up in memory of the *rāsa* dance.

But there are some *rāsa-līlās* that are very famous. For example, this *rāsa* dance that took place in Sevā-kuñja, from which Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī simply disappeared. It is a very spiritual place that embodies this very strong love felt in separation from Kṛṣṇa. We built a temple there next to the spring. And long ago, when the *parikrama* in Vṛndāvana was not yet built, we would set off on this dusty road from the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, and we would always stop at Imlitalā to have a drink. I was in Vṛndāvana for the first time in '73 or '74, still a fairly fresh *bhakta*, and that was the first time I saw someone worshipping a tree, and they said, "Well, this is a wish-fulfilling tree," and we didn't even realize then that they had offered a lot of money to it, and they held a *kīrtana* for it. In fact, the worship of this tree and the Nidhuvana tree began during the time of the Gosvāmīs, the *pūjārī* of the nearby Rādhā-Madana-mohana temple. The Madana-mohana temple is very close, but when Aurangzeb attacked Vṛndāvana in the 1700s, they took Madana-mohana, along with Govindajī and Gopīnātha, and then they neglected the worship. In the 1930s, he and his students bought the land around Imlitalā and built a very beautiful mansion there. Prabhupāda often lamented in Vṛndāvana in the early days. There was a very special *gaudiya-matha* devotee; he would come to every *kīrtana* around the time of sunset, if I remember correctly. Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Bābājī was a very special *bhakta*. He said he was a *paramahaṃsa*, and he had the realization, and we always asked him to sing *kīrtana*, and he played the mṛdaṅga very well. We couldn't keep up with him as we danced, and the color of everything came to Imlitalā, and he danced all night.

I miss these great souls so much. The perfection of life is our eyes, that we can see, and the perfection of the ear, that we can hear from such persons, and that we can touch such persons—then that is the perfection of touch and the culmination of service. This was one of the old mother's favorite places. So if you have been there, go too. It was good for God, so it is good for us. There are many tamāla trees there, and there are kadamba trees, and we know why, because if Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī saw a tamāla tree, it was dark, then it reminded Her of Kṛṣṇa. And the kadamba tree is so bright, and that reminded Her of Kṛṣṇa. But there are no tamarind trees. Why? Well, once Kṛṣṇa hid behind a tamarind tree when He left the *rāsa* dance. He became very angry. He cursed you so that you wouldn't have a place to be. If you see one, then signal it. A special place, one moonlit night, 5,000 years ago, there was a big *rāsa* dance on such a moonlit evening at Sevā-kuñja, and that whole area is called Sevā-kuñja. And He, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, felt neglected. She felt that Kṛṣṇa was paying too much attention to other *gopīs*. And then She took the *rāsa* dance, and Kṛṣṇa immediately noticed that She was gone, because He knew *anapāyinī*, which means that She is never far from Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa went to look for Her, He immediately noticed that She was not there.

He didn't know where to look for Her. And He searched for Her for a while, and then He sat down under the wall next to it and rested there. And Rādhārāṇī felt such a strong urge that She fell into the *bhāva* and started shouting Your names, "Rādhā!" He left the *rāsa* dance, and Kṛṣṇa called Her in such a great separation; that's why He called Her names. All this was the aspect of this Imlitalā, so we definitely have to go there to dance. Your name is all over the place. And when He heard Her, His heart was touched, and then He too began to move towards Imlitalā, and then He found Kṛṣṇa. Then this *kelī* deepens very much because a very amazing thing happened. Are you ready? It is said that the continuous chanting of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's name revived the mood of Rādhā with Kṛṣṇa in Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was pleased with His joy. They know this request very well. And so Kṛṣṇa will repeat Her name over and over again, so He really wanted it. This transformed Kṛṣṇa's identity, and instead of becoming Prince of Vraja, He transformed into Princess of Vraja. 

In short, Kṛṣṇa thought of Himself as His beloved. And with this new identity, Rādhārāṇī's beautiful golden color also manifested. And He sang the names of Rādhārāṇī and took on Her mood, and the bluish color changed to this more golden color because He took on Her *bhāva*. One of the *ācāryas* says that Kṛṣṇa changed the blue color of the rain cloud to the color of molten gold. 

There is Kṛṣṇa in the mood of Rādhā; this is the *bhāva* of Vṛndāvana, and because He had just identified Himself with Rādhā, He started to feel alienated from Kṛṣṇa. And so, usually He felt a separation from Rādhārāṇī, which was why He was in the mood of Rādhā. Now He started to feel a separation from Kṛṣṇa, and He started talking to the *gopīs*, who He thought were there. He is in a very spiritual mood, He is golden, and He is talking to some *gopīs*. "Dear friends, please listen to me; what can I do now? Where should I go?" He told these illusory *gopīs* to please tell Him where He could find His Kṛṣṇa, and then things would get even more complicated.

And then Rādhārāṇī returned, because She heard Her beloved calling Her, and when She got there with Her *gopī* friends, She was very surprised at what could happen. There is Kṛṣṇa, repeating His own names, and He is not blue, but golden. She asked Lalitā, "Who is this?" Lalitā said that He looks like Kṛṣṇa, but with a golden complexion. Then Rādhārāṇī, since She knows, said that He is Kṛṣṇa. Even if you dress up in a costume for Halloween, your parents will know. And maybe His mother appeared in such a disguised form, but inside, They knew who He really was. You couldn't be fooled. This is Kṛṣṇa.

So, Rādhā and Her girlfriends were completely amazed and just stared at this golden Kṛṣṇa, who was present in a mood like Their love affair. He directs Kṛṣṇa towards You with His love. And Rādhā doesn't do what Kṛṣṇa tells Her, but Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhā tells Him. When Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī appeared, Her presence had such a great impact on Kṛṣṇa that He began to get out of Rādhārāṇī's mood and return to His original mood—that we are not Rādhārāṇī, but Kṛṣṇa. But the color did not return. Maybe it just needed a little more time. And then He asked Him, "Why are You sitting here, and why is this golden body holy? It looks like Mine on Your body." And then Kṛṣṇa chose for Him that when He disappeared from view, "I was so sad that I had offended You, that I had searched all over and couldn't find You anywhere, so I came here with this tamarind tree. I started chanting Your divine names, and I felt like You, that I had become like You. I picked up on Your mood. Cloud-blue luster. I like that. We refer to Kṛṣṇa as blackish, but I like cloud-blue luster. And Your gold color has been taken over by blue luster. It covered My sky-blue skin tone. And I really like that Kṛṣṇa is called the 'sky-colored' here, because we usually say that I make such a dark black."

And He came closer to Him to take a closer look at this and said to Him, "I have never seen You like this before." These are some significances of this golden form of Kṛṣṇa. This is a very beautiful transformation. As Kṛṣṇa gradually regained His sky-blue form, He told Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī that in Kali-yuga, Kṛṣṇa would appear as Caitanya in this golden form and not as an *avatāra*. And this was His prophecy, that in Kali-yuga, He would appear as the *yugāvatāra*. "I will do this from the golden base, and in the golden color. I will swallow You in Your color, because in Your mood." And He said that if someone worships Him in that form as a new *bhakta*, then He will bless them with this special emotion of the people of Vraja, which is the feeling of separation. And this is the only way for someone to see God face to face. When Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī heard this, She, who was compassion incarnate, had Her heart melt. And She started shouting, "Oh, how wonderful that my dear Lord, You will mask Me in gold in Kali-yuga!" And to those who stood nearby, watching the divine couple thus in each other's arms, it sometimes seemed to them as if they were in two different forms. They were present at times, but sometimes they seemed to be one person, which meant that they saw them as a bit of a mother figure. Kṛṣṇa is also very amazing. And maybe *bhaktas* haven't even heard this before, and they wonder where the scripture is written about where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī has already heard about where Kṛṣṇa got His stories from. That if we go into Vedic circles, if we tell stories, we always have to be able to support it with scripture. Now I bow to our love, our Gosvāmīs; it is written in their book that the nectar of dreams comes from the *Laulilya-mañjarī*. 

I have read it. This is about a state that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī saw one night when She was sleeping in Nidhuvana in a forest in Vṛndāvana. You can also go to Nidhuvana. This is also in the area of the Sevā-kuñja. There are very beautiful trees there. And the *gosvāmīs* and *gopīs* explain that Vṛndāvana is not a *gopī*, not a cowherd boy, not in the Vraja, but he is a tree. And in Vṛndāvana there is nothing ordinary, but everything is special. And every living thing there is a tree, and the trees are very special, wish-fulfilling trees. And he is in a tamarind tree where the most outrageous gossip takes place. And it was he who appeared before the creation of the Caitanya-līlā as Mādhavendra Purī, to introduce this understanding of emotions. He could handle all the Kṛṣṇa love; he was a saint of these very awakenings. And even before the Caitanya-līlā, he appeared and began to talk about these deep feelings, and the three of them—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Mādhavendra Purī, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu—are the real experiencers of these deep emotions. He is in one person.

This is about a dream he only wrote about when he was in Vṛndāvana, something he had when they fell asleep in a dream. He fell asleep next to Kṛṣṇa, and in the morning when he woke up, he said he had told Kṛṣṇa his dream. He had a dream that both expanded his heart and confused him. "Kṛṣṇa, I had this dream here in Nidhuvana." Kṛṣṇa told him, "Okay, tell Me what kind of dream you're describing." "In my dream I saw a *sannyāsī* dancing and singing, surrounded by people on the banks of a river. Sometimes he shouted, 'Oh Kṛṣṇa!' and sometimes he sighed, 'Oh Rādhā, where are You?' From Mahāprabhu, He was born into the Brahmin family and sang on the banks of the Ganges River. And this drama was that He fell to the ground, sometimes He behaved in a very happy way and lost consciousness, sometimes He was dancing, and sometimes He was alone with His companions. And I saw every living being made to chant the holy names of Kṛṣṇa, from the blades of grass to Lord Brahmā. And in my dream, I was very attracted to this Brahmin who had prepared the whole world for singing and dancing. And since He was shouting, 'Oh, I love You, I love You,' I thought He was You. But the next moment He was shouting, 'Oh Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,' just like I used to shout after You. So I thought maybe I was this Brahmin. And then I was very confused; if this Brahmin was You, then where was I, but if it was Me, then where were You?" And then Kṛṣṇa took Her hand and started teasing Her. He called Her a very nice name. We'll write it down and give it this name. 

This is one of Rādhā's names, which means She is curious. *Kutūhala* means that anyone who is very curious should inquire about Kṛṣṇa-tattva. Kṛṣṇa told Rādhā that She could have seen My incarnation in the past. These incarnations have not disturbed You. Of course, it's confusing that You can't identify this Brahmin You saw in Your dream. Why don't You know who He is? The point of view is that He is a very interesting incarnation because He is God, but He does not come as God, but as a devotee to teach them the process. And He did not come as God, because in this era everyone wants to be God, and then everyone would not want to follow Him, but to become one with Him. You saw Rādhā as a Brahmin from this *bhāva*. You should know who He is. And then something amazing happened. Kṛṣṇa touched the Kaustubha-maṇi stone on His forehead. This is in Him. And the Kaustubha-maṇi stone knew what it all meant, so it began to shine. And in a flash, every detail of the state was revealed. It was this moment that She realized that the Brahmin in Her dream was Kṛṣṇa and He Himself. And there is a quote in verse six: "My dear, now I know what is good in Your heart that makes You smile. You are Him, and I am Him." *Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare.* Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that Rādhā realized that She had become one with Kṛṣṇa in the person of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is the golden one who will appear one day in Kali-yuga to teach the celebration of the Holy Name.

Originally the Lord was one person, but He expanded His pleasure, and then He became two persons. There was also the Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who both became one and appeared as Mahāprabhu in the Kali-yuga to spread the chanting of Kṛṣṇa. The Lord also speaks about the same in the first verse of the first part. Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment of eternity, knowledge, and constant happiness. He appeared before this, where He danced with the golden ladies, into and what happened was that He embraced these golden *gopīs* very tightly and He Himself became a Gaurāṅga. And He appeared in the land of the eternally victorious Navadvīpa, where He acquired His golden color by embracing the *gopīs*. Vṛndāvana goes on to talk about how he came to the conclusion that it was a golden *avatāra*. He remembered Garga Muni's words to Kṛṣṇa at His naming ceremony, that Kṛṣṇa and this little boy Kṛṣṇa would one day appear as an incarnation with a golden, yellowish-golden complexion. And he writes that Rādhārāṇī is talking about Kṛṣṇa. She tells Kṛṣṇa that in the presence of the King of Vraja, this learned scholar Gargācārya said that You will appear in golden color. This dream was not a lie; it is true, not an illusion. In this dream I saw You directly in this golden form. There is a popular Bengali song about this. It is about the new Kṛṣṇa who appeared in a united form.

In order to taste the greatest emotions, Kṛṣṇa appeared in a united form in the garden of Nidhuvana and played on the flute. They took on this form and atmosphere. This is how Lord Caitanya appeared in Navadvīpa. And he wrote about this dream, which he had about Kṛṣṇa, a prediction, and then at the end he gives a blessing. I hope you can follow me. But we told it the way the devotees described it, and we have to catch that. And you might have to listen to this song a few times, because if you understand this, you can understand what Vraja-bhakti is.

This is the last poem he writes: "If the reader's bee-like mind discerns these nectarean words of the world-destined Svāmī, then the intelligent reader will quickly awaken from the sleep of material doubts." But if anyone reads or hears about this captivity, they will reach Vṛndāvana. We also told you about it so that you can quickly reach the Lord's heart. This is such a silent listener. Soon such a reader will be able to immerse himself in the ocean of pure love. You will not only be able to surf the surface of the ocean, but you will also be immersed in it. And I hope that by telling you about this gardening, I too can end up there; I too can immerse myself in this garden. And such a listener will reach the infinite of the King of Vraja—a very sweet one and with honey too. And if you think about it, we have all experienced the blessings of the *yugāvatāra*. This is a very wonderful image, but in reality, if we look in the mirror, we can see that we are also a part of this miracle. There are these tableaux that public schools do. I also looked at my high school picture, then looked in the mirror, and then I thanked Śrīla Prabhupāda. The change was visible.

If someone asks me if I believe in miracles: "Yes, I believe." Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has a writing called *Vairāgya-śataka*, which is the 100 verses of wisdom, and a *bhakta* published it, but only 100 copies were published. And I got one of those too. "Did you gain faith in miracles? Then listen, it will happen now. When a lightning bolt similar to Kṛṣṇa appeared in Gauḍadeśa, the glass turned to gold. Gold has become such a philosopher's stone. The *vaiḍūrya* sky stones created sky stones of similar tireless value. The boys were as tall as Garuḍa. Trees with ugly, crooked branches became holy trees. And such barren trees have become productive trees." And he concludes by saying, "Well, isn't that wonderful?"

*Jaya Śrī Rādhē*
*Jaya Jaya Śrī Rādhē*""