"*00306*.*
"Very dear devotees, a warm welcome back to our continued series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. But first, let us offer our respects to the revealer of the Dhāma. So today, we will conclude with our short series on the Aṣṭa-sakhīs of Vṛndāvana. We actually have two sakhīs left: Raṅgadevī and Sudevī. Now, the task is made easier by the fact that the two of them are actually twin sisters, so we’ll do both of them in one lecture.

To begin with, Raṅgadevī and Sudevī’s mother’s name is Sukuruna, and their father’s name is Dharma. And I was reading that he is described as a great scholar in the Vedas. Now, the village which they live in—because remember, we have described many times how the Aṣṭa-sakhīs all have their villages around Barshana where their queen lives, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—their village is called Sunhera, and it’s situated on a hill known as Suvarṇācala, which literally means "hill of gold." Their age—remember they are twins—their age is 14 years, two months, and eight days eternally, although Raṅgadevī is considered the elder of the two by a few minutes, and they are seven days younger than our beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Now, Raṅgadevī’s complexion is the color of lotus filaments and her clothes are the color of a red rose. It’s written that she possesses a very sweet temperament, and her main service—this is interesting—her main service is to apply red powder to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā. I also read that she engages hundreds of maidservants in the service of the divine couple, but her main helpers are Maṅgalā Mañjarī, Kuṇḍa Mañjarī, and Madhana Mañjarī. And there are also eight other prominent gopīs whom the ācāryas describe as sisters in every way, and their names are Kalā-kānti, Śaśi-kalā, Kamalā, Madhurā, and Prema-mañjarī.

Now, Raṅgadevī’s twin sister is Sudevī, and well, obviously, they look alike. Let’s describe that: Sudevī looks very similar to Raṅgadevī, being twins, so much so that very often Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they will call Sudevī by the name Raṅgadevī, and Raṅgadevī by the name Sudevī. It’s like we can say in English, identical twins, but of course there are differences in the sense that Sudevī’s color is that of black gold, and her clothes are the color of red coral. Now, her main service is *jala-sevā*. Like we talked about *jala-līlā* before—we’ve spoken about Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in the water like the Yamunā or Manasī-gaṅgā—her main service is *jala-sevā*, meaning any service that is related to water in the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And her main maidservants are Tārakā Mañjarī, Sudhāmukhī Mañjarī—what a beautiful name, Sudhāmukhī Mañjarī—and Padmā Mañjarī. She also has eight other main gopī helpers, and they are Kāverī, Cārukā-bhāra, Sukeśī, Mañju-keśikā, Haraharā, Mahā-hīrā, and Manoharā.

I read that Sudevī’s specific qualities are that, number one, she is expert in decorating the long braid of Śrī Rādhā. She is expert in teaching parrots how to send messages between the divine couple, and she is also expert at arranging friction between two parties—like partridge birds, demigods, and even the divine couple—you know, some arguments which are resolved in Vṛndāvana’s ways to increase the love of everybody. She is also described as a scholar in the language of birds. Here in Vṛndāvana, we have so many different varieties of birds; it’s really what helps make Vṛndāvana what it is. You hear the chirping and the singing of so many birds even today. It’s so sweet, it’s so nice. So, she is a scholar in the language of different birds; she can speak to the birds. Now, remember, the birds are all self-realized souls; they are all Vrajabāsīs. It’s just their *sevā*.

I was reading that it’s really interesting that Sudevī is so potent, so powerful in her *sevā* to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, that she can control the climate of Vṛndāvana. She controls the time the sun rises, she controls the rain, and she controls the heat. These are her special powers in giving pleasure to the divine couple. I was also reading that she has a special group, a very special group of maidservants that roam around Vṛndāvana to learn of Candrāvalī’s secrets in order to inform Śrī Rādhā. Remember, Candrāvalī is Rādhārāṇī’s main rival. So, Sudevī has a group of maidservants that wander around Vraja to learn of Candrāvalī’s secrets when she meets with Kṛṣṇa, in order to inform Śrī Rādhā. This is Vraja.

Like all the other six sakhīs, both Raṅgadevī and Sudevī have their individual kuñjas or groves. As they have their villages around Barshana, the Aṣṭa-sakhīs also have their particular kuñjas or groves around Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s dear bathing place, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, in order to serve her. Now, Raṅgadevī’s kuñja is situated in the southwestern corner of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and is described as a very mysterious black grove that delivers—we say—unlimited happiness (*sukha*) to Raṅgadevī. Therefore, it’s called Raṅgadevī-kuñja. Everything in that grove has a blackish hue; for example, the tamāla trees—well, tamāla trees by nature are blackish—are entwined with blackish vines. Rādhā’s attraction for Kṛṣṇa increases whenever she goes there because whatever she sees reminds her of Śyāmasundara, who is bluish-black like a monsoon cloud. So when she visits Raṅga’s kuñja, she is reminded of Śyāma; everything has that blackish, bluish-black tinge. I was reading that the ground, the platforms, and the pavilions are all covered with sapphires so close together that they impart a blackish hue to whomever and whatever enters the kuñja. Thus, when Kṛṣṇa is there—because he is bluish-black like a monsoon cloud—everything is tinged with that transcendental bluish-black color. When Kṛṣṇa is there, he is hidden from persons like Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā who are looking for him very often to see if he is with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Actually, one time Jaṭilā heard a rumor that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were together at Raṅgadevī’s kuñja, so she very quickly left Yāvat and came there as quickly as she could. And when she arrived, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were there, but because Kṛṣṇa was completely, you could say, merged with the grove’s bluish-black interior, Jaṭilā only saw effulgent Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sitting there. So after praising her daughter-in-law’s chastity, Jaṭilā cursed whoever was spreading those rumors that she and Kṛṣṇa were together at Raṅgadevī’s kuñja, and she left. So the color of that kuñja protected Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes—one of Raṅgadevī’s services, you could say.

Now, in the northwestern corner of Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the emerald kuñja of Sudevī. It’s called Sudevī-sukhanda-kuñja, where the vines, the trees, the birds, and even the bees are all green. Everything is green. The pavilions and the platforms there are all studded with green. And within a cottage on one such platform, Śrī Rādhā, surrounded by her friends, and Kṛṣṇa, they very often play games of dice. This is where they play dice. I was in my readings; I often come across Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa playing dice and chess; they play different games like that. So in Sudevī’s kuñja at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, this is where the divine couple plays dice.

Now, it’s really interesting because I was reading that the ācāryas write that Kṛṣṇa, like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, is very much attached to playing dice, but he’s not very skilled at it. In fact, they say that when he is playing Rādhārāṇī in dice, he loses more often than he wins in Sudevī’s kuñja. So, one time, on the advice of Madhumaṅgala, Kṛṣṇa challenged Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to play dice, which they call *pāśa-khela*. By the way, when we say dice, in Vrajabāsī, it’s called *pāśa-khela*. Under Madhumaṅgala’s advice, Kṛṣṇa challenged Rādhārāṇī to play *pāśa-khela* at a place called Viṅga-grove. Now, actually, the cowherd boys arranged the practicalities of this pastime because they all reasoned that the unique Vastu configuration of Viṅga would favor Kṛṣṇa and ensure his victory, in the same way that Sudevī’s grove always seemed to favor Śrī Rādhikā and her friends’ victories in the dice game. However, the ācāryas say the boys had not considered the fact that Śrī Rādhā is the Goddess of Victory, *Jayaśrī*, and being, how can we say, fully independent, she is unaffected by Vastu as she is by any planetary influence. And thus, there in Viṅga, Rādhārāṇī once again beat Kṛṣṇa in the game of dice. *Jaya jaya Śrī Vṛndāvaneśvarī! Śrīmate Vṛṣabhānusutāyai!*

So now, for the main pastime of the day. The Vrajabāsīs call it *Rāja-māna-līlā*. Now, we’ve many times heard the word *māna*, which means when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī becomes upset with Kṛṣṇa—she becomes angry. So *Rāja* means the king, and *līlā* means pastime, so *Rāja-māna-līlā* means the "king of Rādhā’s māna pastimes." The king of Rādhā’s *māna* pastimes—that’s what we’re going to share with you today.

One time, Raṅgadevī and Sudevī went to a village nearby their home to sell *makkhan*. Kṛṣṇa is called *Makhan-chor*; he’s the thief, he steals butter. So Raṅgadevī and Sudevī went to sell *makkhan*, butter, in a village not far from their home—this is what gopīs do. On their way, who did they meet? Kṛṣṇa, who was standing with, you could say, his favorite cowherd boy, Madhumaṅgala. Kṛṣṇa stood there on the road, and he refused to let them pass by. You can just imagine, now he’s once again, he’s eager to perform his *dāna-keli*. *Dāna-keli*—*keli* means playful, and *dāna* means that tax pastime. He was going to play his pastime of taxing the gopīs, which he does all over Vraja. So Kṛṣṇa stood before Raṅgadevī and Sudevī with his arms folded, and he said, "Ladies, this is my grandfather’s road. He constructed it. If you want to walk on this thoroughfare, you must pay me *dāna*, you must pay me tax."

Now, when Raṅgadevī and Sudevī heard these words of Kṛṣṇa, they adamantly refused. So what did Kṛṣṇa do? He broke the pots, covering them with butter all over, and then, sitting down, he ate the remnants of that butter in great happiness, with Madhumaṅgala laughing and joking, they’re taking the *makkhan*. At that time, Raṅgadevī and Sudevī became furious with anger, and they stormed off to report to their queen, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, what had happened. Now, when they went to Barshana and they met Śrī Rādhā in her quarters, there Raṅgadevī and Sudevī shared the whole scenario that had taken place. And they concluded by saying, "Śrī Rādhā, it happens over and over and over again. This *dāna*, this taxing—Kṛṣṇa’s such a rascal. Śrī Rādhā, we used to complain to Mother Yaśodā about his mischievous activities, but she’s blinded by her maternal love for him. And as far as Nanda Mahārāja is concerned, he always laughs at our complaints. And Mother Rohiṇī, she just sees faults in everything we say. And Kṛṣṇa’s brother, Balarāma—well, those two brothers are exactly the same."

So Śrī Rādhā said, "My dear girls, if all those venerable souls are unable to do anything about these *dāna-keli* pastimes, why come to me?" So Raṅgadevī and Sudevī said—it’s so sweet—"Because, dear Rādhā, as a bee is controlled by flowers, a peacock by dark clouds, the moon by the darkness of night, a fish by water, and a body by the mind, similarly, Kṛṣṇa is completely controlled by you." And they continued, "The whole world is in fear of *kāla*, time; and time fears Mahākāla; and Mahākāla fears the Goddess Mahākālī; and the Goddess Mahākālī shivers in fear of Kāliya-Kṛṣṇa. But Kāliya-Kṛṣṇa fears the raising of your most beautiful eyebrows." Isn’t that beautiful?

Hearing the pleas of her sakhīs and seeing their anxious faces, Śrī Rādhā’s heart melted, and she said, "All right, I will see to this matter. Now you may go." So then, that afternoon, while contemplating on Kṛṣṇa’s dealings with her sakhīs, Rādhārāṇī manifested her *māna*; she became angry with Kṛṣṇa. And she said to herself, "Enough of this rascal boy taxing my gopīs. This time, for sure, I will never see him again." How many times has she said that? But she said, "This time, for sure, I will never see him again." Now, minutes later, one of her maidservants informed her that Kṛṣṇa had come to see her in Barshana. So what did she do? She quickly hid herself behind some curtains in her room. And unable to see Śrī Rādhā when he entered her room, Kṛṣṇa called out, "Rādhā, you are my heart and soul, I am here. Please show yourself to me."

So Śrī Rādhā spoke up from her hiding place behind the curtains, and she said, "And who may I ask are you?" Kṛṣṇa got flustered; he said, "I’m Kṛṣṇa." So Rādhā said from behind the curtain, "If you are Kṛṣṇa, what meaning of Kṛṣṇa is Madhusūdana, the bumblebee? So please go to the garden." So Kṛṣṇa said, "No, you don’t understand, I’m Gopāla." So Rādhā said from her hiding place, "Then, Gopāla, go herd the cows." Then Kṛṣṇa said, "Śrī Rādhā, do not speak riddles with me. I am your Ghanaśyāma, I am your Ghanaśyāma." Now, in Sanskrit, *ghanaśyāma* means like dark clouds. So Śrī Rādhā said, "If you’re Ghanaśyāma, then go and feed the thirst of the fields with your rainwater." So poetic! "If you’re Ghanaśyāma, then go feed the thirst of the fields with your rainwater." Which—he didn’t have anything more to say. "When Rādhā is upset, what has happened? What offenses have I made to your lotus feet?"

So the ācāryas say that when no reply came—this time there was no reply from Rādhā—Kṛṣṇa understood that Śrī Rādhā had become *māna*, angry with him, and he felt that only separation would bring her back to her senses. So he left the palace. He felt that only separation would bring her back to her senses. Separation makes the heart grow fonder, how many times have we quoted that English thing? So he left. This was his strategy; he left.

Now, when Śrī Rādhā understood that Kṛṣṇa had left, well, his plan worked. She started crying in Vṛndāvana, and it didn’t take long—one moment. She started crying, and as she started falling down on the ground unconscious, she uttered the words, "I will never be angry with Kṛṣṇa again. I will never manifest the mood of *māna* with my beloved as long as I live." I see the turbulence of emotions, transcendental emotions, in Śrī Vṛndāvana. This is what we’re hankering for. That is where we want to live, not with the emotions of this world, but the emotions of the spiritual world, all focused on the divine couple. And Kṛṣṇa, we know—when will that day be ours?

So, hearing these words from the mouth of Śrī Rādhā, "I’ll never be angry with Kṛṣṇa again, I’ll never manifest my mood of *māna*," hearing these words from the mouth of Rādhā, Raṅgadevī, our heroine today, quickly left to find Kṛṣṇa. And after much searching, she found Kṛṣṇa sitting on the banks of the Yamunā River. And what was he doing? I was reading this in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute—when I got to this part, it was like, "Wow." She found him sitting on the banks of the Yamunā, throwing small pebbles into the river with a sad face. Kṛṣṇa was throwing small pebbles into the river with a sad face.

So, Raṅgadevī came up to Kṛṣṇa and asked, she said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, why are you so sad? Did your mother chastise you? Did you have a fight with Balarāma? Did you lose something?" It’s a hint here; she’s hinting, "Did you lose something?" So Kṛṣṇa replied, "Yes, Raṅgadevī, I have lost my everything. Yes, Raṅgadevī, I have lost my everything. It appears I’m sitting here, and it appears that the moon has lost its cooling nature, trees have lost their stability, the Yamunā has lost her waves, and cuckoos have lost their musical notes. And me, I have lost my dearest Rādhā."

So, hearing these words of Kṛṣṇa, Raṅgadevī’s heart melted—with a lot of melting hearts here today—as the ācāryas say, as did her anger at the way he had tried to tax her and her sister earlier. Everything’s resolved in *Rāja-līlā*. So she said, "Śyāmasundara, I will arrange a meeting for you with Śrī Rādhā." But Kṛṣṇa, in this particular instance, he truly felt that there was no hope; he truly felt that this time there was no hope. And he said, "Mādhavī, Raṅga, she’s in her *māna*, it’s not possible to arrange a meeting." But then Raṅgadevī said—you know, she smiled and she said something so amazing, when I was reading this, so amazing, I’d like to share it with you—Raṅgadevī said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, you do not know the true nature of us sakhīs. Sakhīs can make fire in water, we can stop time, we can freeze the sun, we can churn the clouds, and we can float mountains. We can make the Lord of the three worlds dance by the movement of our eyes." We can make the Lord of the three worlds—which means Kṛṣṇa—dance by the movement of our eyes. Then she continued, "And just as we can control a mad elephant by binding its legs with the creeper of *mṛṇāla*..."—*mṛṇāla* is the ultra-soft and sensitive segment inside the lotus flower. "Just see how powerful the sakhīs are—with those ultra-soft and sensitive segments of the lotus flower, they can bind the legs of a wild elephant. So," she said, "in the same way, we can bind a mad elephant like you with the soft *mṛṇāla* of Rādhā’s mercy, Rādhā’s love for you." So she concluded, "So I will go now, and with my sister Sudevī, we will bring Śrī Rādhā here under the cover of darkness."

So, finding Śrī Rādhā in her palace at Barshana, Raṅgadevī asked Śrī Rādhā to follow her and her twin sister Sudevī to see her beloved Kṛṣṇa in the forest under the cover of darkness. But Śrī Rādhā hesitated, and she said, "But what if someone sees me going to Kṛṣṇa in the forest in the dead of night? What will people think of me?" So Sudevī spoke up—we’re going to hear from Sudevī—Sudevī said, "O Rādhē, do not worry. The darkness of your *kuraliya* and the darkness of your shadow will hide you from any person who happens to pass by. Do not worry; I’ve filled your ankle bells with the dust of Vraja, so no sound will come from them. I will cover you with a dark blanket, and Raṅgadevī will walk before us to guard the way with, quote, 'a lamp of separation' in her hands." Wow, Raṅgadevī is going to walk before them with a lamp of separation in her hands.

So that night, Raṅgadevī and Sudevī arranged for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to meet, thus extinguishing the burning fire of separation within their hearts. When this news was carried by the parrots to all the other Aṣṭa-sakhīs and their maidservants of Vṛndāvana, the joy of their hearts knew no bounds, for all these gopīs live solely for the purpose of uniting the divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, in their pastimes of love. That’s the pastime, and that’s the nectar, the *amṛta*, for today.

A note here that in Kali-yuga, Raṅgadevī appeared as Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa in Gaura-līlā, and our other heroine, Sudevī, appeared as Ananta Ācārya Gosvāmī. So today, we’ll conclude as we often do with words of wisdom from one of our great heroes, Śrīla Prabhupāda, in his illustrious *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta-ṣaṭka*, text number three, a very important śloka:

> "Lord Gauracandra freely distributed His causeless mercy to all fallen souls who are devoid of any good qualities, who are the source of unlimited faults, who are most sinful, and who are guilty of all their misdeeds. May that Gauracandra, by whose mercy this unfortunate soul came to know about the sweet forms of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the loving abode of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, may that Gauracandra become the ultimate goal of my life."

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So, you know, we finished our kind of a spontaneous mini-series on the Aṣṭa-sakhīs, but it was so nice to discover those pastimes and, by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy, relate all of them to you. So we’ll think about what’s the next mini-series we can have on the glories of the twelve forests of Śrī Vṛndāvana and all the illustrious Vrajabāsīs who live there. So, I’ll be back in a couple of days. Thank you so much, Prabhus.

*Śrī Śrī Gauranitāi ki jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma ki jaya! Śrī Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma ki jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ki jaya!*""