"*00502*.*
"### I Must Take Sannyāsa - Kāṭhikā Parikramā 2025

Harē Kṛṣṇa, Harē Kṛṣṇa.

As we often do, we ask for blessings before we attempt to speak on such wonderful subject matter. I especially like to ask the blessings of two Vaiṣṇavas who are much more erudite and learned than myself: Nāro-Gopāla and Pūrṇacandra. Give them a big round of applause. Certainly, Vaidarbhi can raise the roof with his kīrtanas. That was just an imitation.

Anyway, today it is our great fortune that we find ourselves at Kaṅkā-grāma, also known as Kāṭwā. This very sacred place was previously the āśrama of one sannyāsī whose name was Keśava Bhāratī Mahārāja. As many of you know, you were looking forward to coming here. This is the place where our Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, at that time Nimāi Paṇḍita, took the renounced order of life. It is a very wonderful pastime, and at the same time, it is extremely deep.

His Holiness used to say, and I heard him say it on two occasions, that Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books are like an ocean, and at the bottom of the ocean, there are precious jewels and gems. To get those precious jewels, we have to dive deep into the ocean. In other words, we have to go very deep into books as well as books like *Caitanya-maṅgala*, *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, and Murāri Gupta’s diary, and that is what we will be doing today.

So, in essence, there was no need for Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu to take the renounced order of life. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, forever detached from this world of māyā, or illusion. Even when He comes here, He is unaffected. Prabhupāda gives the analogy: when a king leaves his palace and goes deep into his kingdom, he is not affected by all the rules and regulations. He is the king; he can do what he wants, so to speak. So, *sannyāsa* means two things in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition: renunciation from this material world and developing strong attachment to Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When Śrīla Prabhupāda gave his *tridaṇḍī-sannyāsa* to my godbrother, Sat-svarūpa Mahārāja, in the 1970s, he gave an instruction: "Never look back and think you’ve left anything behind, and never envy the position of those who are enjoying in this world."

But there is no reason for Kṛṣṇa to renounce this world. He is totally in charge of it; it all belongs to Him. Prabhupāda writes in the purport to the Tenth Canto, 3rd Chapter, text 14, that this material world of three modes of nature—sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, and tamo-guṇa—is a composition of earth, water, fire, mind, intelligence, and false ego, all of which are energies coming from Kṛṣṇa. Yet Kṛṣṇa, being always transcendental, is aloof from this material world. That is true for Kṛṣṇa and all His incarnations. So, why then did this incarnation, who was introducing the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, take *sannyāsa*?

Well, historically, at that time in His youth, He was known as Nimāi Paṇḍita. He ran a *toḷ*—He had a school where He was teaching. The very name He had, Nimāi Paṇḍita, was a very respected name, like *kavi*, like "scholar," showing how respected He actually was in His learning and His ability to teach others. His school was very popular. But as the pastime unfolds, at that time, some of the so-called educated persons of Navadvīpa began to criticize His knowledge and His realization. So, He began to think: "I have descended in this world to save the fallen conditioned souls. If they criticize Me, how will they ever be delivered? You can't make advancement if you're an offender." So, He decided to take *sannyāsa*.

What is the connection? Well, we've heard many times, if you listen to Prabhupāda’s tapes or even in his books, he says, "Vedic culture has always been such that when people see the saffron cloth of a sannyāsī, they pay obeisances. They show respect." But like many pastimes of the Lord, there are external reasons to explain His pastimes and there are deeper internal reasons to explain His pastimes. Just like we all know that Kṛṣṇa came as Caitanya Mahāprabhu to inaugurate the *yuga-dharma* because, but for the Lord, no one can introduce the process of *dharma*, or religion. Only Kṛṣṇa can do it; He comes in every age and gives a specific process. But we know from reading *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* very carefully, which was the favorite book of Bhaktisiddhānta, that Kṛṣṇa had a more confidential, internal reason as well, and that was as a devotee to experience the love of Kṛṣṇa’s best devotee, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, that she had for Him. That is the internal reason, and that He did in Jagannātha Purī, as we will be hearing in a few weeks from one of Ananta Prabhu, about how the Lord danced in front of the cart of Ratha-yātrā. This was a means of experiencing Rādhārāṇī’s love for Him.

Now, according to Nityānanda Dāsa, who was a disciple of Jīva Gosvāmī, in his book *Premavilāsa*, he explains that Caitanya had an external reason for His appearance and a deeper internal reason as well. Vikram will find this very interesting; he likes the deeper stuff. Revealing His mind one day to His associate Lokanātha, Mahāprabhu said, "Loka, I carry a deep pain within My heart. One reason is that there is a brāhmaṇa who has not recognized Me. Therefore, he has not recognized Kṛṣṇa. Instead of worshiping Kṛṣṇa, he worships Kṛṣṇa’s servants who are known as demigods. Without knowing Kṛṣṇa, he will surely be misled. So, for the sake of brāhmaṇas who do not recognize Kṛṣṇa and are offensive to Kṛṣṇa, I must take *sannyāsa*." I had never heard that *līlā* before, but that is there.

But then He gives another deeper reason for taking *sannyāsa*. Mahāprabhu says to Lokanātha that He was feeling great pain in His heart because He felt that He owed a debt to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī for her service and separation. Kṛṣṇa felt indebted to Rādhārāṇī for her service and separation from Him. He said to Lokanātha, "Before I left Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī wore a blue-colored *sārī* which would remind her of Me, Kṛṣṇa. But after I left Vṛndāvana, she wore a saffron-colored garment in the mood of separation. And after I left, she wouldn't eat or sleep. She was mad in the mood of separation from Me. I feel indebted to her. She didn't care for her body. She didn't care for anything. So, Loka, the only way I can reciprocate her love is if I take *sannyāsa* and wear the saffron color of separation. And like her, I won't be able to sleep at night. I won't eat properly. I’ll lie down on the bare floor just like Rādhārāṇī did in separation from Me. The only way I can reciprocate with Rādhārāṇī’s love for Me is if I leave home, leave My loved ones, leave My friends. Therefore, again I tell you, I must take *sannyāsa*." We are indebted to that disciple of Jīva Gosvāmī for giving us that information.

So, all of us know that He ended up taking *sannyāsa* from a Māyāvādī sannyāsī named Keśava Bhāratī. Many times the question comes up: Mahāprabhu was a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, the origin; why did He take *sannyāsa* from a Māyāvādī? We could discuss that for hours. But let’s just quote Śrīla Prabhupāda: "Seek and you shall find." The Bible says it, and Prabhupāda answers this question in his *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* purport. He writes: "During the time of Lord Caitanya, the influence of Śaṅkarācārya in society was very strong. People thought that one could accept *sannyāsa* only in the succession of Śaṅkarācārya. Since Mahāprabhu’s acceptance of *sannyāsa* was also designed to attract public attention and respect, Lord Caitanya, not wishing to disturb the social convention, took the renounced order of life in that *sampradāya*." That’s basically it. But for us, it's all resolved because in *Caitanya-bhāgavata* and elsewhere, it is described. So, in English we say "no problem." Yeah, no problem.

Now, it is very interesting just how—and this I heard from Nāro-Gopāla in 2018. I am not old, but I have some memory of that class. That was seven years ago. So, give me an applause for trying to remember, and him an applause for giving all that knowledge. That’s your brother or that’s your relative—the same family. So, by living here—this was the āśrama of Keśava Bhāratī—he was hearing so many wonderful things about Lord Caitanya. Just mention the name and people used to talk about how learned Nimāi Paṇḍita was, how beautiful He was, how humble He was. And hearing that news here, Bhāratī had this strong desire to go to see Him.

So, one day Mahārāja went to Navadvīpa and enters into Nimāi Paṇḍita’s house at Yogapīṭha. He just walked in. We are world citizens; there are no borders for him; he just walked in the house. So, Nimāi’s mother, Śacīmātā, was present at the house at the time. And when Keśava Bhāratī walked in, she became very nervous. She didn't mind when, you know, devotees came to see her son, but whenever a sannyāsī would come, she’d get very nervous. Bear in mind, Śacīmātā had lost eight of her daughters. Historically, they all were born, but they left their bodies. Her elder son, Viśvarūpa, was the ninth child of Śacīmātā. When he was very young, he took *sannyāsa* and left. And when Nimāi was 10 years old, Jagannātha Miśra, her husband, departed the world and went back to Godhead. And she’d also arranged for Nimāi to marry his first wife, Lakṣmīpriyā. But sometime later she got bit by a snake and went back to the spiritual world. So, she didn't want to lose her son. No mother wants to lose her son, especially if He’s the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, every time Śacīmātā saw Nimāi talking with a sannyāsī, her heart trembled in fear: "Like his older brother, he's going to leave me and take *sannyāsa*."

So, of course, Nimāi knew this. So, when Keśava came, Nimāi took him to a secluded place in Yogapīṭha and there He washed Keśava’s lotus feet with His tears. And then He said to him, "You are a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and you are here to deliver Me. I have been waiting for you to come. I would like to take *sannyāsa*. I want to travel around the earth looking for Kṛṣṇa dressed like you. This is the business of a sannyāsī, actually—not just renunciation, but looking for Kṛṣṇa. Are you there on Govardhana Hill, or are you with Bṛndāvana? The business of all of us." Bhāratī was like overwhelmed. But the *śāstra* says that at this first *darśana*, this is their first meeting, and Mahāprabhu realized that Nimāi was the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

But what stunned Nimāi Paṇḍita—what rather, what stunned Keśava Bhāratī Mahārāja—was the humility of Mahāprabhu. Here was Mahāprabhu at his feet, begging him to deliver Him from the world. So, when Mahāprabhu kept begging, "Give Me *sannyāsa*," the sannyāsī didn't know how to respond, so finally he said, "You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead; I can only do as You request. I will accept Your order." I was thinking there would be more to the conversation, but at that point, they both stopped speaking because they could see Śacīmātā and her sister, Sarvajayā, watching from some distance away. So, after he left, Sarvajayā said to Śacīmātā, "If you are so fearful that your son is talking to a sannyāsī, just go talk to him." But *śāstra* says Śacīmātā was too traumatized. She couldn't speak. "Oh, he's with another sannyāsī." She couldn't speak. So, Sarvajayā she said, "Then I will speak to Nimāi." So, they both went to Nimāi, and Sarvajayā started speaking: "Nimāi, who was that person? What were you talking about?"

So, Nimāi is Bhagavān; He is all-pervading and all-knowing. He understood their minds. He said, "Everything's okay. I myself and your Bhāratī were just talking about Kṛṣṇa. Don't be worried. I would never leave home. I would not do anything without your permission." But even though Nimāi tried to pacify them, they knew something was wrong. So, that's the first meeting. Pretty profound meeting. We always remember the first time we met someone. You know, the first time you do something nice, it's extraordinary. "How I met devotees." That’s a very common topic for every devotee. First time, this is the first meeting: Bhāratī and Nimāi Paṇḍita. It's very interesting.

So, Bhāratī only stayed one day and then he came back here, and he waited for Nimāi to come to take *sannyāsa*. So, a few days before Nimāi—now He was determined, He’d asked for *sannyāsa*—a few days before He left home, Nimāi had told a few of His friends, including Nityānanda, Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and Mukunda, and a few others, "The time when I will accept the robe of renunciation is very near." And the day before He left to take *sannyāsa*, there was this spontaneous gathering of devotees in His home to celebrate Lakṣmī-pūjā. And Nimāi, knowing that that night He would leave Navadvīpa to come here and take *sannyāsa*, He invited many of His followers to the celebration. And many of them came with flower garlands to offer Nimāi. But after accepting them, He took the garland and placed it back on the neck of the devotee who presented it to Him, saying, "Always chant the name of Kṛṣṇa. Under no condition do you ever give up this Kṛṣṇa-nāma."

And later that evening, when—remember we had discussed him—when He arrived, he came with a nice pumpkin. So, Nimāi thought, "I have spent almost My whole life snatching so many things from him, and now on this last night, he's brought me this wonderful pumpkin. I can't resist." So, He said to Śacī-devī, "Mother, Śrīdhara has given Me this pumpkin. Take some milk and with this pumpkin prepare some nice sweet rice." That was the last thing He ate before He left. Now the drums are rolling.

On that fateful night, at about 3:00 in the morning, Nimāi got up from bed. He's with His wife. Very quietly, He left the house. He left Viṣṇupriyā in bed asleep. Now his mother, Śacīmātā—Śacī-devī—sensing that He was about to come, was staying awake all night guarding the exit to the house. And as He passed by her, Nimāi bowed down, paid respect to her, and then left. And He swam across the Ganges River, and then it's about 25 miles actually, by the way the crow flies. He was all wet, but He ran all the way here to Kāṭwā. He didn't walk; He ran. Like we often hear, "run to Vṛndāvana," so He ran to Kāṭwā. And according to solar calculation, it was a day of an auspicious conjunction of the stars.

Now, early the next morning, devotees as usual came to Nimāi’s house to see Him. But all they found was Śacī-devī sitting at the door like a statue. They all got around her. They said, "Śacī, what's wrong? What's wrong?" She said, "I was waiting for all of you. Please take possession of this house. I shall go elsewhere. I cannot enter this house anymore. You are Nimāi’s devotees. You are the true heirs. Please take possession." See, once again, we see the theme of *vipralambha*. It's like a golden theme that runs through both Kṛṣṇa’s and Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes, because love makes the heart grow fonder. Separation makes the heart grow.

A lot of crying and separation. As I said, I think recently somewhere in India, when a newspaper reporter came to Govinda Mahārāja and asked him, "You're a new boy, just got a job. He said, 'Swamiji, could you just give me the essence of the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement quickly so I can go back and publish it? What's the essence?'" So I would have said something. "Well, this movement is the *yuga-dharma*. We're spreading our essence: crying, crying, crying." Pity, pity. So that's true in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and it's true in Mahāprabhu’s pastimes. Why? Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī combined together to appear as Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this world for the *yuga-dharma*. But for deepening this *vipralambha*—Kṛṣṇa wanted to know, "How is, what is this love that Rādhā has for Me? Especially this love in separation. It's all connected. Kṛṣṇa and Gaura-līlā, it's all connected. It's very intimate." Crying, crying, crying.

There is lots more nectar here. I was just thinking how fortunate we are because over here we have the shrine where you can—well, in the shrine is Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s hair that was shaved off for *sannyāsa*. There's the *samādhi-mandira* of Keśava Bhāratī. There's the place—this tree—this is where they shaved His head. And then, oh, there's the place where—we'll talk about this later—but Mahāprabhu got the *sannyāsa-mantra*, all in this little compound.

So, He arrived here at this āśrama at early morning. It was on a Friday, and very elated to be—that He’s going to have His *sannyāsa* ceremony—He began alone to dance in ecstasy. He was singing and He was dancing. And as such, the people of Kaṅkā-grāma, they woke up hearing this beautiful, amazing kīrtana. Can you imagine if the Lord Himself is singing His own sweet holy names? Actually, the people had never heard such a beautiful voice. Everyone woke up and they looked out at their homes, and the whole town ran here to see who is singing these names of Kṛṣṇa. And by the time they arrived here, Caitanya Mahāprabhu was sitting under that banyan tree. You look behind you. He was sitting under that banyan tree just crying for Kṛṣṇa. So later, when Mahārāja came out of his room, he fell at Mahāprabhu’s feet, and Mahāprabhu fell at his feet. And Keśava Mahārāja was a little bit in shock, a little embarrassed, because he pretended he didn't know who this person was. He said, "Who are you? Where have you come from?"

So, Nimāi, with great humility, said, "My name’s Nimāi. People call Me Viśvambhara. I’m from Navadvīpa. You agreed to give Me *sannyāsa*. That's why I'm here. Now you can't even recognize Me?" He was a little embarrassed. So, by that time, many of the associates of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they began arriving. So, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He asked Mukunda Datta to lead the kīrtana. In the lecture the other day, I was sick, lying in bed, but I heard it in my own ears. Mukunda is one of the greatest kīrtaniyas that we've ever known. He started leading kīrtana here at this place. So, it was something like when Vaidarbhi leads kīrtana, you see so many people came. So, when Mukunda was leading kīrtana, people came—it's described from everywhere, not just the town but everywhere. Vṛndāvana Dāsa Ṭhākura, he uses the word *arbuda*. *Arbuda* means like tens of *crores*. That’s like millions. Millions of people got here. Don’t exaggerate—how we're 300, we're cramped. But millions came because of the chanting, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare."

From the lips of a pure devotee. Prabhupāda has said many times, "Best to hear the chanting from the lips of a pure devotee; has special effect." And when these millions saw Mahāprabhu with Nityānanda and other prominent devotees, that they were engaging in this singing and experiencing ecstatic symptoms, just the whole place just exploded in nectar. He writes something interesting: "I cannot explain the way Mahāprabhu cried in that kīrtana. The way He danced, the way He cried. Even Lord Ananta cannot describe it." Rivers of ecstatic tears literally flowed from Mahāprabhu’s eyes.

My favorite part. I wish I was there. While Mahāprabhu was crying and spinning, His tears began to sprinkle. You know, like this—like they take that water sometimes—His tears started sprinkling on the millions of people. You don't have to be too close. You can be way at the back, but that's just God's mercy. Those tears, everyone got *prema*. Everyone got full love of God.

So, seeing all these devotees cry so intensely for Kṛṣṇa, which was the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, solely by this kīrtana you can achieve perfection. It's the beginning and the middle and the end eternally. He was very pleased. So, Mahāprabhu became humble. Became humble. Love brings gratitude, and love is reciprocal. So, He became humble and He went to each of those devotees and begged for their mercy. He said, "You are like My mother. You are like My father. You are like My sister. You are like My brother. I beg you, please bless Me so I can achieve Kṛṣṇa." Just see, God did not appear as God in Kali-yuga. He appeared as a devotee to teach us the process of devotional service: "May I can achieve Kṛṣṇa."

Now, knowing well that Mahāprabhu was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mahārāja, at that point, he was very, very reluctant to initiate Him. It’s understandable. Here’s God, here’s the servant of God. One time I asked Tamal Krishna Goswami, "How did I put it? What’s the difficulty in—are there any difficulties in being a spiritual master?" I hadn't started initiating. I was thinking if I should or shouldn't. So I said, "You know, what's the difficulty?" He said, "The difficulty is that sometimes you have to initiate people who are more advanced than you." And I’ve actually experienced it, especially in the second generation, the young children who some of them I knew when they were four or five. Now they're in their 20s. I’m initiating. I’ve seen things in them that I prayed I had them myself, but this is the order that I take up the service. So, that’s so I can understand Mahārāja is a little hesitant to initiate God.

So, he used a little diplomacy to—you know, "Okay, let's finish with this, go home." He said to Him, "You’re not qualified to take *sannyāsa*. How can You take? You’re only 24. *Śāstra* says You should be at least 50 years of age to take *sannyāsa*. You can't take." Mahāprabhu listened very patiently. Then He replied, "Sir, You are saying I should only take *sannyāsa* at the age of 50. But can You guarantee Me—guarantee Me—I’ll actually live that long?" That’s true. But we always go deeper and deeper, isn't it? We have an onion—an onion. We don’t eat onion. Onion has—I remember, onion has many skins. You keep peeling and peeling and peeling. So, there’s deeper understanding. He said, "Human life is most rare. Even more than that is getting Your association."

A disciple of Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja, I remember she wrote in her offering to her Guru Mahārāja, "It took You so long to find me. Never kick me away." We think traditionally you go to find the guru, but according to *Brahma-saṃhitā*, *bhagavān*—*guru-kṛṣṇa-prasādē pāya bhakti-latā-bīja*—at one point, Guru-Kṛṣṇa enters, intervenes in your material life. "Stop your nonsense. What? Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." You meet them on the street, the devotees, you get a book, you see something on the internet, they intervene. This is called causeless mercy. Very rare to get that. "Guru, never kick me away. It took You so long to find me. I didn't find You; You found me. Please never kick me away." Yes, this is the attitude of a disciple.

"You know, I don't know if I'm going to live long to be 50. But the most important thing is it’s so rare to get the association of someone like You. I could die at any moment. Lord, don't trick Me. Give Me *sannyāsa*." Like to His spiritual master, "If You don't accept Me as Your disciple, I’m going to jump in this river and die." That’s how bad we should want initiation. Please give Me *sannyāsa*.

Once there was a disciple, he said to his guru, "If You initiate me now, it’ll be to Your credit. I’m famous and Your fame—" and Your fame—"was bad." I think I'm ready for initiation. Yep. I’ve been following regulative principles for three days and I chanted three rounds yesterday. So, give me dīkṣā. How bad do you want initiation? Yeah. The guru said, "Come with me." They went down to the river and they went waist-deep into the river, and then the guru took the sikha there and plunged the aspiring disciple's head underwater. Held it there for four minutes and 23 seconds, because you can only live without air for four minutes and 36 seconds. Held it there, looked again. Pulled out. "How bad did you want water? How bad did you want air?" I was sick for seven days in bed. So, give me a little allowance here. "How bad did you want air?" Like life itself. So when you want initiation in the same mood, like life itself, then you come back and see me. But that mood of hankering that was there in Caitanya, "Give Me *sannyāsa*, please."

Bhāratī wasn't finished with Nimāi. "I’ll give You *sannyāsa* on one condition. One condition." That’s pretty easy, right? Not 10, 20, 30 things. Just one condition. "What is the condition?" So Bhāratī said, "You go back to Māyāpur. You talk to Your wife, Your mother, and all the devotees, and if You can pacify everyone—they give their blessings for You to take *sannyāsa*—then You come back to me." Well, what are the chances of that? No one wants to see the Supreme Enjoyer—and rightfully so, because He enjoys with His *nitya-siddha* ever-liberated devotees—to become a renunciate. Kṛṣṇa to become a renunciate with a shaved head? Huh? Do you think Śacīmātā would agree? Do you think that all of the associates would agree? Do you think anyone of the Prabhupāda followers in that pastime? No one. So, this is a cinch. It’s done. But He knew Nimāi was very clever. Actually, what Bhāratī was thinking was that the moment Nimāi would leave this place to go across the river, He would go hide Himself someplace and then forget everything. Have to deal with the problem. Everyone’s watching. So, Nimāi leaves, and then I’ll just go hide somewhere and start—story is over.

So, Nimāi said, "Sure, let's give it a try." So, He started walking towards the Ganges, and Keśava Bhāratī thought, "What am I doing? I'm thinking to run away from here and hide. But He’s the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul. He's everywhere. How can I hide?" Nimāi, "No, no. Come on back. Come on. Let's go. I’ll give You *sannyāsa*."

But that’s what the people didn't do that. They started crying. All the people started crying. Their Nimāi Paṇḍita, the clever, funny boy who was able to defeat even Digvijayī, He’s going to take *sannyāsa* and go away because sannyāsīs are meant to travel and preach. He’s going to leave. Everyone started crying. So, just so that Bhāratī wouldn't change—just so that Keśava Bhāratī wouldn't change his mind—Nimāi said to Candraśekhara, "Get all the ingredients ready for the ritual. Assemble all the necessary ingredients." And then, to the horror of everyone, He said, "Go get the barber named Madhu." The barber.

Everyone’s attached to their hair, ladies. How many men have shaved heads? And who’s the most attractive with hair? One of the beauties of Kṛṣṇa is His long, black, curling hair. Oh, His eyes reaching to His ears. His nose like a sesame flower. His lips red like *bimbu* fruit. *Tri-bhaṅga-sundara*. But this flowing hair, so beautiful. Same person. "You’re going to shave Kṛṣṇa? WHAT?" Yes, gentlemen. If I asked, you know, if I said, "What would you think if I asked your wife to shave her head?" No way. And that’s puppy love. What about bhakti? Real love for the Supreme Lord. They’re going to shave His head. Actually, it’s described the 14 planetary systems were filled with cries. Not only hundreds of millions of people were crying, but all 33 million demigods were crying because they’re all Kṛṣṇa-bhaktas. Everyone was crying.

"Except," but Kṛṣṇa is by definition the All-Attractive. Why try to make Him unattractive? But the barber came, and it’s one of the most touching pastimes in our entire Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava history: to shave off the beautiful hair of He who’d go on Harināma with Nitāi and His associates—beautiful flowing hair, flowers. They would wear jewels, beautiful colored *dhōtīs*. There’d be banners and balloons, and it was all this huge *mahotsava* party. And now, that person, you’re making a sannyāsī? Why? We explained why. This is the... somewhere the policy was breached.

So, Mahāprabhu sat under that tree. There’s the banyan tree right there. And the barber came with his—how would you say, his razor? For exactly what happened? Let’s listen from *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, Chapter 28. "Māhāprabhu jagatara īśvara," okay then: Mahāprabhu, the life of all, sat down to have His head shaved. "When the barber Madhu came to shave the Lord, a tumultuous sound of weeping arose." The barber hesitated to shave the Lord’s curly hair. Before he even touched the Lord’s head, he began to cry. "The devotees, headed by Nityānanda, all started weeping and rolling on the ground." Just imagine: here hundreds of devotees rolling ON THE GROUND. NO, NO, NO. Hidden from view, all the demigods also cried. In this way, the entire universe was filled with crying. And to think the glories of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa is an exaggeration, and it’s offensive—this is that’s an offense. This is all absolute truth, reality.

Viśvambhara got up and exclaimed, "Chant, chant very loudly." As Mukunda began to sing, the Lord continuously danced. This is spoken to kīrtana. In this way, the Lord constantly roared "Hari." Thus, the barber was therefore unable to perform his task because Mahāprabhu was just roaring. "Somehow or other, in the mellows of ecstatic love, the Lord's head was finally shaved by the end of the day"—that’s how long it took—"and then the barber Madhu threw away his razor. He took a vow: 'I will not engage in this occupation for the rest of my life. I would rather live by begging.' But actually, he became a sweetmaker. And since that time, none of his descendants have ever been barbers. They’re all sweetmakers." There's more. Are you ready? Are you tired?

So when that was all done, Mahāprabhu was requested to go to the Gaṅgā, take bath, and put on His saffron cloth. All connections gone now with this world. Although it was never there. This is a sign of saffron cloth: all connections gone. Just Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. All family attachments finished.

My coming home from my ceremony was a little different. Sorry. When I came back to France after taking [sannyāsa], the welcoming was a little different. When I took *sannyāsa*, I have no explanation for that, but it just was all Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. We're very close now. But they told him that, you know, he used to call me Prabhu, so, "No, you can't call him Prabhu anymore. When he comes back, you have to call him Mahārāja." And they practiced: "Don't say Prabhu, Mahārāja. No pizza. No, no, no pizza. Mahārāja." So, I came into the, you know, I got out of the car and my *daṇḍa*, and I walked in the temple room. There were hundreds of devotees sitting down. My son stands up, "Prabhu—Mahārāja."

So, He came back; He looked very indulgent. And then Mahāprabhu told, "I had this amazing dream before that a great personality came and gave Me the *sannyāsa-mantra*. I would like to chant that mantra in your ear, so if You can see it’s a proper one or not. It’s a technical matter. I heard it, but I’m not sure. Can I—can I chant it in Your ears and You can tell if it’s right?" "Yeah, go ahead. Chant." So Mahāprabhu chanted the Vaiṣṇava *sannyāsa-mantra*, which has to do with Gopī-bhāva, in His right ear three times. The moment that He chanted the mantra in Keśava Bhāratī’s ear, Bhāratī experienced the eight symptoms of ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa. So all the devotees were stunned to see this because, you know, previously as a Māyāvādī—"not this, not that"—he was very grave. Suddenly he’s crying in ecstatic love of God. And then he muttered the same mantra into Mahāprabhu’s ear and he said, "What name should I give You now?" Mahāprabhu just smiled and didn't say a word, and then suddenly a transcendental voice from the sky like thunder. This happens in Vedic pastimes. This voice came from the sky: "Nimāi Paṇḍita should be named Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya." So *Caitanya-bhāgavata* says Keśava then said to Lord Caitanya, "Because You will make the whole world chant Kṛṣṇa’s name, You should be known as Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya." Then Mahāprabhu and he embraced. They began to dance, and millions of devotees danced with them here for three full days.

So, this is the very place that these amazing historic pastimes happened, in this little courtyard which my Yogamāyā must have expanded. And I was thinking that taking Mahāprabhu’s example, many of His intimate associates also later accepted the *sannyāsa* order, like Śuddhānanda Svāmī, Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and even Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī; they became renunciates of incomparable example. Again, there’s special things here. There’s the shrine with Mahāprabhu’s hair. You look back, just as you enter the gate, that white dome there—that has the hair of Mahāprabhu. Of course, you can’t see it, but it’s there. There’s the tree under which the barber Madhu shaved the head of [Mahāprabhu]. Through the other side here, there’s a little door that goes in. That’s the place that the mantras were exchanged. The *sannyāsa-mantra* was exchanged between Mahāprabhu and Bhāratī. And at the end of that courtyard, there’s the samādhi of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

And in this beautiful āśrama lived a great devotee, Dāsa Gadādhara, and these are his deities here: very beautiful Gaurāṅga deity, Kṛṣṇa deity, 500 years old. We’re so blessed. It’s hard to imagine how we’ve been allowed to come here and have kīrtana. When we were having kīrtana, I was thinking, "I’m singing. Little old me is singing in the same place that Mahāprabhu sang with His devotees." It’s like, wow. So what now? We’ll do what 33 million demigods did, millions of devotees did, Caitanya Mahāprabhu did. What we do, we’ll have kīrtana with another great kīrtaniya, my dear [Vaidarbhi].

But I’d just like to thank all of you. And especially, I couldn’t deliver any lecture, anything like the two of you would have done, but because you’re present, maybe something came out. Let’s give them a big round of applause, our true pundits. I just want to say one more thing: Gaurāṅga! Glory!""