"*00207*.*
"So this evening I’ve chosen an interesting verse. I hope you like it. Well, you have to like it because it’s *Bhāgavatam*—*grantha-rāja*, the king of all scriptures. First Canto, Chapter 6, verse number two. I’ll just chant it myself here:

*tatraivaṁ vṛddha-sammate*
*pṛṣṭavān idam īśvare*
*kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyanaṁ vyāsaṁ*
*devarṣir bhagavān naraḥ*

"Nārada Muni said, 'What did you, Nārada Muni, do after the departure of the great sages who had instructed you in scientific transcendental knowledge before the beginning of your present birth?'"
 **Purport:** Vyāsadeva himself was the disciple of Nārada Muni, and therefore it was natural for him to be anxious to hear what his spiritual master, Nārada, did after initiation from his spiritual masters. He wanted to follow in his footsteps in order to attain the same perfect stage of life. This desire to inquire from the spiritual master is an essential factor for the progressive path. This process is technically known as *sādhu-saṅga*.

So, in this beautiful verse of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Śrīla Vyāsadeva, the literary incarnation of the Lord, is inquiring what Nārada Muni, his spiritual master, after receiving *dīkṣā*, or initiation, was doing. He is curious—his *guru-mahārāja* is Nārada Muni, and he is asking, "After my spiritual master took *dīkṣā* initiation from the sages, what did he do?" And I was thinking, it is natural for a disciple to be curious about what his spiritual master does in devotional service to the Lord. Why? Because in the eyes of the disciple, the guru is the best example of a devotee. That is why you have chosen Vāsuka Prabhu, or Bhakti-Mādhava Mahārāja, or whoever as your *dīkṣā*-guru—because in your heart, you feel that devotee is the best example of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There is that saying in English: "Follow the leader." So Kṛṣṇa inspires you from the heart. All the spiritual masters are qualified; they are recognized by our Governing Body Commission. But in your heart, Kṛṣṇa causes you to choose this particular person. I often say that many devotees ask me, "How do I know who is my spiritual master?" They are all saying the same thing. You will know who your spiritual master is by the arrangement of the Lord, because when you hear him say the same thing, it will resonate with your heart and you will say, "Now I understand." Now I understand, because you have to understand what your spiritual master is saying; otherwise, what is the use of having a spiritual master? So the guru is the best example of a devotee for the disciple. The *Purāṇas* put it very nicely:

*ācāra-prabhavān dharmān*

An *ācārya* is one who fully understands the conclusions of revealed scriptures and whose behavior reflects his deep realizations. He is a living example as he teaches the meaning of the scriptures both by words and deeds. He is a living... we have the *grantha*, and we have the personal *bhāgavata*. We have the *Bhāgavatam*; it’s the main scripture. But the guru is the living *Bhāgavatam*. That is the meaning of *ācārya*. We generally use *ācārya* in the term "Prabhupāda," but it can also be used for any spiritual master. Prabhupāda is the founding *ācārya* of ISKCON. That is his preeminent title in this world. But *ācārya* also can apply to any guru because you watch your guru to know how to live the *bhāva*. It is stated that one can become Kṛṣṇa conscious just by the *bhāva*, or just by having the personal *bhāva*. They are so powerful. But if you have both—to use a common phrase—it’s a "double whammy." The *grantha-bhāgavata* and the personal *bhāgavata*. So the disciple actually desires to be like his guru.

*niju-giri*—give to the servant just one drop of mercy. "I am lower than a blade of grass. Give me help. Give me strength. Let me be as you are, without desires or aspirations." We need to see that. We can read about it, but seeing it is something very important. When I was doing a public speaking course in high school, the teacher said, "Show me, don't tell me." You have to be able to speak in such a way that you create a vision; you don't act like a parrot. Speak in such a way that the people understand, that they see what you're talking about. "Show me, don't tell me." Give me—show me some examples. So for the disciple, it's the living *Bhāgavatam*—he is a person. So it's essential to have a spiritual master because, okay, you can read the books, but we know how important it is to follow in the footsteps of the *mahātmās*.

So Vyāsadeva, he is naturally curious: "What did my *guru-mahārāja* do after he got initiated? What did he do?" We know the story of Nārada Muni: "I was born, at least in this *kalpa*, as the son of a maidservant." She was a *śūdrāṇī*, a pious woman, but not so spiritually advanced. But as time would have it, his mother died of a snakebite, and then he was alone, and then he met the sages, and then he traveled, and then eventually he met his spiritual masters, and he became Nārada Muni, the eternal spaceman. So that is something, but Vyāsadeva, he really wants to know. Just like Śrīla Prabhupāda—it’s not just to know that Śrīla Prabhupāda is the preeminent *ācārya* of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness; we know he is a lover of God. For us, that is also a very important epithet. He is a lover of God, he is a resident of Vṛndāvana, he is a *senāpati-bhakta*, a great general in the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Mahāprabhu. We would like to know more about him. Therefore, after Prabhupāda’s departure, the GBC asked Satsvarūpa Gosvāmī to write in detail about Prabhupāda’s life. Therefore, we have the *Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta*. Thank Satsvarūpa Mahārāja for that; he gave us that.

Sometimes I ask devotees what their favorite book is. Many say *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* because that was the favorite book of Prabhupāda. Some say *Bhāgavatam*. Some of my godbrothers and godsisters, they say, "How many times have you read it? Over and over and over," because it’s not just transcendental knowledge; it’s looking into the heart of our founder-ācārya, of whom all of us have a very intimate relationship. It’s not that the disciples of Prabhupāda have more chance to become Kṛṣṇa conscious because they took initiation from Prabhupāda or saw Prabhupāda or served Prabhupāda. No, he is part of the *guru-paramparā*. He collects us, he connects us to the whole *guru-paramparā*—his *guru-mahārāja*, and his *guru-mahārāja*, and the Six Gosvāmīs, and all the way back to the *ādi-guru* Kṛṣṇa. It’s like an electric line; it comes from the powerhouse and it goes all the way across the city. Some function, so wherever you cut into that electric line, you’re going to get the same power. It’s not that someone cut in—you know how they do sometimes in India, they cut into the power—so you cut in there and someone else cuts there, he’s going to get less power. No, you get the same power. That’s *guru-paramparā*, isn't it? It’s wonderful. So by taking initiation, you’re getting the *kṛpā* of all the *ācāryas* from the past. Of course, you think it’s all by the mercy of my guru, and it is, but that’s how it’s to be understood.

So he wants to know more. Just like we—I sometimes imagine, "Make more videos of Śrīla Prabhupāda." Why didn't we? Well, more videos, more recordings of *japa*, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, more *bhajanas*. Prabhupāda went to Paris in '74; we said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, there are many *bhajanas*, could you record more?" He said, "Yes, of course." He took the harmonium right then and there, sat down, and we recorded him. He was happy to do it, but we were naive. It’s not... so, anyway, how much more we could have done. At least we have that *bhakti-sāra*. There were recordings in those days; they were the 30s. There were radios. People were recording. I heard there’s one recording of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura in a television station now; it was previously a radio station. They came and did a radio interview with Bhaktisiddhānta. It was taped, but no one can find it. I volunteered: "I'll go into that radio station, all through those tapes—there’s like thousands of miles—and I’ll find it." We could hear his voice. So, we want to hear about our spiritual benefactors, both what they say and what they do.

So, if he’s curious what might—"guru," actually it says here plural: "spiritual masters." This indicates that one can have a number of spiritual masters. More precisely, one has his *dīkṣā-guru*, but any number of *śikṣā-gurus*. I often tell my disciples that my solemn duty—because *guru* means heavy—my solemn duty is to get my disciples home, back to home. There’s no place like home. Home is where the heart is, and the heart is meant to be with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So anything I can do to facilitate that journey, I encourage it. So I tell my disciples, if they see another initiating guru, a godbrother, a godsister, any devotee for that matter, who is *pakkā*—can I use that word here? *Pakkā*—and is strictly following and speaks well or shows a good example, I say take that person’s *śikṣā* to heart. Just like here in ISV, I have disciples, but I’m so happy they’re under the tutelage of... I sometimes tell them: "I’m on one side, Rādhikā is on the other side, and Prabhupāda is pushing from behind. You better make it back to Godhead!" So we can take from wherever we see it if it’s actually in that light.

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11th Canto, I was reading the other day, there’s a discussion between a King, Yadu Mahārāja, and a mendicant named Dattātreya. And this Dattātreya, he was an *avadhūta*—means they’re just oblivious to this world. They’re just totally absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I had one friend, Moan. We were chanting *japa* some years ago—he’s departed this world—but we were chanting *japa* together for hours, and he just stopped at one point and he said, "Mahārāja, I am not of this world." And I tell you, the hair on my... it wasn't ecstasy, but the hair on my arm stood up. He said, "I am not of this world." I thought, I said to him, "Bābā, I want to be just like you." Go initiated by a disciple of... or disciple of disciple... Mahārāja, "I am not of this world." So that’s an *avadhūta*. Therefore, they’re kind of careless in the way they do things materially; they don't eat much, they don't sleep much, they’re just chanting all day long, Kṛṣṇa, etc.

So this Dattātreya, he actually—he was so detached, he used to travel naked without any belongings, and sometimes he was seen laughing, sometimes he was weeping, sometimes he was rolling on the ground. People thought he was crazy, like Bābā said, "We have to become mad for Kṛṣṇa." So one time this King, Yadu Mahārāja, met him, and he said, "I am... Bābā, you appear extremely happy, but I cannot understand your mood. Why are you weeping and laughing and rolling on the ground?" So Dattātreya replied that "I have become self-realized by the mercy of my guru." So the King... oh, so he—he didn't, you know, put two and two together and get four—"You become self-realized by the mercy of a guru?" That’s also our understanding. We have our *sādhanā*. How good are we at our *sādhanā*? We have our good days and our bad days. We actually make progress, we make advancement by blessings. We please our spiritual masters, we please Mahāprabhu, we please Kṛṣṇa. Like Shakespeare said, "It falleth from heaven like a gentle rain upon those below." We get *kṛpā*—*guru-kṛpā, Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*.

So the King, obviously, he was a *rājarṣi*—means that a *rājarṣi* is a king who’s very expert at material affairs, because the Vedas also teach how to live a sensible life, so you have time to serve Kṛṣṇa. So he was a *rājarṣi*. He was a saintly person sitting on the throne. *Rājarṣi*. So he said, "You reached this ecstatic stage of self-realization. Who is your guru?" So Dattātreya, he smiled. He said, "Oh, I have 24 gurus." The King said, "But I... I mean, I know a little bit about the philosophy. I know you approach a guru. You inquire from him. You render service. The self-realized souls can give you knowledge because they see the truth. You have 24?" "Yes, I have 24." So the King said, "Who are they? I’ll pick one." So Dattātreya said, "No, they’re all my gurus." "What are they?" So Dattātreya said: "The earth, air, water, fire, the moon, the sun, the pigeon, the python, the ocean, the moth, the bumblebee, the elephant, the honey collector, the deer, the fish, the prostitute named Piṅgalā, the hawk, the baby, the young unmarried girl, the arrow maker, the snake, the spider, and the wasp." The King went, "Oh my gosh." Of course, we don't think of these things as gurus in the traditional sense. But if one uses his intelligence in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he can take lessons even from the material world. How? Because it’s Kṛṣṇa’s creation. It’s working under His direction. He said everything comes from Him—all that’s material and all that’s spiritual. So it’s His energy. So maybe we can look at it and get some inspiring ideas, and yes, we can. 10th chapter of *Bhagavad-gītā*, "Opulence of the Absolute"—by seeing beautiful, powerful things, we see how Kṛṣṇa is organizing this whole world. So we can get inspiration to some degree by studying the material world.

For example, using our intelligence, which is God’s special gift to human beings—because animals have intelligence. But... "itsy-bitsy-teeny-weeny." What’s that *śloka* from the Vedas? "Itsy-bitsy-teeny-weeny." They know that if danger comes, run that way. If they know there’s food, go eat it. We have *buddhi*. We have intelligence. Just like "Buddha" means the most intelligent one, the realized one. So we can observe with our intelligence: "This material world’s a miserable place." And that observation of matter encourages us to become detached. "I’m done with it." Like they asked Prabhupāda one time, "I’ve been everywhere and seen everything." He circled the globe 12 times. "I’ve been everywhere and I’ve seen everything." So, wonder what he said. "But what’s your advice?" "It takes... [unclear]." Gradually, and then we can make a heartfelt, a heartfelt decision to go back to Godhead, just by studying the material energy. It’s material, but there’s some lessons to be learned. The hardest lessons are the ones best learned. So sometimes we suffer because Kṛṣṇa is allowing it. So we become detached. Like Mommy tells the baby, "Don’t touch the candle." "I want to, don’t touch the candle." "I want to." Okay, touch it. "Oh, Mommy!" "I told you. Listen to me next time." So by studying material nature, I hope we don’t fall in love with it. But we can make a heartfelt—our intelligence can lead us to a heartfelt decision as devotees.

Actually, once a saintly person walked into an assembly of a king and his ministers, and he placed a human skull on the table. And he said, "Who here in this assembly, the King or the ministers, can tell me whether this person who had the skull was very intelligent or foolish in his lifetime?" Is that interesting? He’s got a skull there. So he’s saying, "Who can tell by looking at this skull if this guy was a fool or intelligent during his lifetime?" So all the ministers, they got bewildered. But finally, one of the ministers—his name was Kālidāsa, famous Kālidāsa—he took a straw and he put it in one ear of the skull and out the other. *Whoop!* Went like that. So he said, "This person was foolish, for if the straw would have gone in one ear and then down towards the heart, that would have indicated intelligence." It’s a little... our intelligence should... our heart should be moved. "I’m done with it. I’m out of here. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa."

So with our intelligence, we should see the world as it is and make a heartfelt decision: "I’m going home, back to..." Actually, you’ve probably never heard that, but in the early days when I joined the movement, 1970-1971, we would go in *harināma*, we’d sing Kṛṣṇa, and at one point the *kīrtana* leader would start singing, because big people are passing by, "Hey! We’re going home, back to Godhead! We’re going home, back! We’re going home!" People are like, "What? Why don't you get a job? Why don’t you work?" This is our work. We’re going home. So with our intelligence, we can see the world and make a heartfelt decision: "Oh Lord, I’m drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence. Oh, You who give shelter to the shelterless, please just this one time extend Your hand and save me." This is a heartfelt prayer.

So, therefore, the spiritual master will often talk about material things, not spiritual things. I thought he was supposed to be a spiritual master, not a materialist. Yeah, but he’ll talk about the material things in the proper context just to convince us we don’t have to travel 12 times around the world. We can hear from guru. It’s called "lazy intelligence." You just sit in the privacy of your home. Who needs to travel around the world by hearing those who know the world, as either they’ve traveled around or they’ve realized it. Just sit in here and accept. They’ll speak about material things to convince us, first of all, we can’t be happy here and we should look for an alternative. For example, the guru may speak like what’s called *nīti* logic. *Nīti* logic or *nīti-śāstra* means encapsulating certain lessons from life. *Nīti-śāstra*—Cāṇakya Paṇḍita wrote *Nīti-śāstra*, cute little things about the material world just so you know how to live an intelligent life, to avoid most of the miseries, like "Don’t take drugs, don’t gamble, no illicit sex." You like that? That’s *nīti-śāstra*. Just be intelligent, do things that keep you alive as long as possible so you can reach the goal.

So the guru will just speak *nīti* logic sometimes. Like, for example, the guru may say, "We now have taller buildings, but shorter tempers, right?" We have tall buildings but shorter tempers. We have wider highways but narrower minds. We’ve conquered outer space but we’re still struggling with inner space. I sound like... "We buy more but we enjoy it less. We’ve multiplied our possessions but we’ve reduced our values. We lose our health trying to get wealth, and when we spend that wealth, we try to get our health back." This is not one of the 700 verses, but it helps, right? The guru is speaking about material life. We have more experts but less solutions. We have more degrees but less sense. We’ve expanded in technology; we’re more connected than ever, but we’re further and further apart. Did that all make sense? I took it from one of my godbrother’s lectures.

I like to speak about Vṛndāvana. But it’s interesting that Dattātreya said he had 24 gurus composed of matter. Right? I mentioned this; they’re all matter, right? Material things. But after mastering material nature as a means to become detached, how can we—how can we refer to such things as some spiritual inspiration? Like, talked about those things, but those are material things. So how are we going to get inspired from them? Well, here’s what he saw in matter, because a pure devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere. He can see Kṛṣṇa and get a lesson from the earth. Dattātreya said he learned tolerance and forgiveness. If everyone’s stomping on the earth, I don’t walk. We’re abusing the earth nowadays, you know; we’re raping the earth, the air, the seas for our sense gratification. So he said, "From the earth, my guru, the earth, I learned tolerance and forgiveness." People dig the earth, they make houses, cities, but earth never complains. Tolerant and forgiving. Have you ever stepped on the ground and she complained? No. What did he learn from the air? The air is always detached. It can absorb a bad fragrance, he said, and a good fragrance, yet be detached. From the sky? The sky is everywhere, giving sunshine and rain, never asking for payment. Blessings freely given without discrimination. The sky. Water? What did he learn? He said water offers refreshment. When you take a bath, your body feels pure and refreshed. When you drink water, you feel refreshed. Our association with saintly persons is also refreshing. Fire? What did he learn from fire? Fire can burn impure things, but it always remains pure itself. Just like a *sādhu* can destroy our ignorance by his words. He’s using power to destroy; he’s burning up our desires, but he remains pure. The moon gives light in darkness. So that inspired him.

So like this, one can have any number of *śikṣā-gurus*. They can be personalities or just objects of the world. But this is how saintly persons see things. This is the meaning, again, of a devotee seeing Kṛṣṇa everywhere. Just like Prabhupāda—in 1962 there was the Indo-China war. Actually, India was at war with China, and they were exchanging bombs. So Prabhupāda was sitting—he wrote one time—in his home in Kolkata, and the bombs were exploding around Kolkata. Some of the bombs were coming close to him. And his wife came and said, "Why don't you just leave this patio? Maybe you’ll—the bomb will hurt you." He said, "No, everything’s Kṛṣṇa’s desire. If the bomb hits our house, it’s Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement." The Bible said, "There’s a time to laugh, a time to cry, a time to sow, a time to reap, a time to be born, a time to die." So our death is predetermined by the Lord, when He wants to take us to our next chapter of service, take us back to the spiritual world. So Prabhupāda saw the bombs as Kṛṣṇa. That’s really seeing Kṛṣṇa everywhere.

So again, Vyāsadeva is interested to hear, "What did my guru do after getting initiation?" because he wanted to follow in his footsteps. He wanted to be a good disciple. What’s a good disciple? Very easy. You just reverse the video to that day. You’re sitting in front of your guru and you’re taking your vows: "Dear Gurumahārāja, I promise to follow four regulative principles and I promise to chant 16 rounds every day." That’s a good—because from that, everything will come. So you plant a good seed into the ground, a beautiful flower will grow. So the seed of your devotional service is your promises. Don’t make promises you can’t keep. *Guru-mahārāja* knows that. That’s a song from when we were young: "Don’t make promises..." I like that. You want to be a good disciple. We don’t want what Bhaktisiddhānta described as *daṇḍavat* devotees. *Daṇḍavat* devotees—he warned us as being the kind of disciple who pays full *daṇḍavats*, "Accept my humble obeisances," but in daily life, he can’t keep up with the practices of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Another time, Prabhupāda referred to disciples as "sons of the mother" or "sons of the father." I read that and I thought, "What does that mean? What does Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī mean that the disciples are sometimes referred to as sons of the mother and sons of the father?" So he compared two different kinds of disciples. The sons of the mother are the kind of disciples who take advantage of the facilities offered by the guru, much like a son enjoys the comfort of their mother’s home. How many times when you were young did your parents ask you to take out the garbage or mow the lawn or make your bed? You went, "Oh..." Or maybe you didn't, but I did. Don’t let—don’t listen to me. My guru didn’t make his bed. I was actually like that. Sorry, Mom.

Then he said there’s the sons of the father. That type of disciple, they want to be disciples who take up the work or the profession or the business of their father. I’ve many times said recently, you see in India, "Agarwal and Sons," "Sharma and Sons." You don’t see daughters; they get married and go off. "Agarwal and Sons"—he, that’s what he meant by "sons of the father." Like when a son grows up, he takes the father’s business. So a good disciple will take up the business of his guru. What was Prabhupāda’s business? Sitting at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and chanting? No, he could have done that; he was qualified to do that. He came on a boat, a cargo ship. It wasn't a passenger ship, a cargo ship. And he had heart attacks and he sailed across the sea. When he got to America, he said to us, "I didn’t know whether to go left or right, but from that, everything came." So, pushing on the mission, of course. Well, here you’re pushing on the mission, each and everyone—"to each his own," as we say in communism... everyone has a particular ability which they’re using. So therefore, the spiritual master loves all the disciples, because he understands that all are works in progress. What they give when they’re five may not be what they give when they’re 25, and when they’re 25 it may not be what they give when they’re 75, perhaps with some realizations. But in this movement, all devotees are engaged in what? Missionary work. And that’s why this *yātrā*, ISV, and so does... people kept asking me, "What does ISV mean? Is it from the Ṛg Veda?" No, it’s from the "Yājñavalkya-veda"—Silicon Valley. Here you have that sense of the missionary spirit. So that’s why you’re happy. This is a happy *yātrā*. That’s why I like to come here. You like to be around happy people. I have to go where people are sad because I have to preach. I go to the flats and the townships and you know where there’s famine. In Sri Lanka, there was that hurricane, I... where I go. But to get refreshed, I come to ISV, Silicon Valley, because why? Because you have the missionary spirit. Why do you have it? Because of Vāsuka Prabhu and the Guru-mātā. We love you.

[Audience shouts: "We love you!"]

In London, we’re going to all crowd at one time. Maybe you’ll hear us in London. One, two, three.

[Audience shouts: "We love you!"]

Oh, he’s got a loud voice. He said, "I love you, too." Oh, he’s coming back soon. So that missionary spirit, that’s real adventure. I—I had this sense when I was young, even before Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because I heard a quote from a Quaker. His name was Stephen Grellet, and somehow it just touched my heart. I didn’t know why at the time, but maybe Kṛṣṇa had a plan. He said, "I shall pass this way but once. Any good that I can do, or any kindness I can show to any human being, let me do it now. Let me not defer nor neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again." I was a teenager. I heard that, right? "I shall pass this way but once. Any good that I can do or any kindness I can show to any human being, let me do it now. Let me not defer or neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again." So when I heard that I was in high school and it kind of resonated with my heart, but I didn’t know what it meant—how to do good for others. I was thinking maybe after I graduated from high school, I joined the Red Cross. We had the Peace Corps, remember? We had the—many of my friends joined the Peace Corps. They went around the world and helped people in the fight. But it wasn’t until I became a devotee I understood the full word and the meaning: that is to help others by giving them *prasāda*, a book, or the mantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare.

Prabhupāda would refer to that as spiritual welfare, because by that welfare, you go back to the spiritual world and all problems are solved. So let us be the "sons of the father," right, not "sons of the mother." Stay in the temple, take comfort for the Sunday feasts—unfortunately, that happens sometimes. Devotees end up, you know, with all due respect, coming to the temple just for the Sunday feast. We want to be "sons of the father," to give our blood, sweat, and tears to the mission of *guru-gaṅgā*. And we’ll see that here in the *Bhāgavatam*—Vyāsadeva’s inquiry will show that his spiritual master, Nārada Muni, did just that, because he was a preacher and he goes anywhere and everywhere. He’s one of the best. He always tried his best, if you read the *Bhāgavatam*, but he wasn't always successful. It wasn’t his fault. It wasn’t his fault, but the people to whom he preached weren't just ready. But still, you have to try. Especially in this age, with Lord Caitanya, you get some people... you get some special mercy. But a preacher has to learn this: he has to be tolerant, isn’t it? Sometimes you approach people with books; they’re not at all interested, right? Oh, you want so much for them to take the book or the set, but they just don’t, and maybe you meet five, 10, 20 people in that day. Is that... am I correct? But that’s just the way it is, but you can’t get discouraged.

Actually, there’s a nice pastime of Nārada Muni in that regard, trying his best. We can take inspiration from it. Nārada Muni has a special service—that he goes back and forth to the... between the material world and spirit. He’s the only one... Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā*, "Having once come back home, you never go back to the material world." But he’s such a selfless personality, Nārada Muni. He’s with Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world, but he comes to the material world, he travels, he makes so many different disciples—Vyāsa, Prahlāda, Dhruva—so many, then he goes back into the spiritual world and he gets the report. In my life, every year I do service in the West, and when I come to India to Kārttika, I always go to Prabhupāda’s *samādhi*. "Gī-mā, this is what I did." Like a kid shows a report card to his parent: "This is what I did this year, I hope you’re pleased." I do my obeisances. So he’s the eternal spaceman; he’s up and back and here and there, going back and forth.

And so, one time he was with Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world and Kṛṣṇa asked him, He said, "You know, there’s somebody down there in the material world called... Cāṇḍāla. Have you ever met him? Do you think he’s interested in coming back home?" I remember him. "He left, but we—we may forget Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa never forgets us." Let’s applaud that.

So Kṛṣṇa is thinking, "What about this Cāṇḍāla? Have you ever met him?" And he said, "No, I haven't met him." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Well, when you go next time, try to meet him and convince him to come home." So on his next sojourn to the material world, Nārada Muni did in fact track down Cāṇḍāla. He found him. So one day he went to his house. He knocked on the door. So Cāṇḍāla, he was like pious, recognizing a great saint. He invited Nārada Muni into his home. He said, "Mahārāja, we’re very happy to see you. Please come inside and sit for a while." Nārada Muni said, "No time for that. Life is short, and then you die. Cāṇḍāla, but you’re fortunate. Kṛṣṇa’s inquired about you. He’s inviting you back home to the spiritual world. Come on, jump on my back. Let’s go." Something like that. So Cāṇḍāla, he said, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is very great. He’s very kind. But Nārada, look, I just got married. My life... my wife’s very young. She’s very beautiful. Beautiful, beautiful. If I leave her now, that would not be proper. Give me some time, then I’ll come with you." He said, "Okay, well, all right. When shall I come back? How much time do you need?" "So, let my wife settle down, couple of kids. She’ll forget about me and I’ll come with you. Come back in a few years." So he left, and *zoom*, traveling around. And then, you know, he spent some time, some years, and then he came back. And when he came back, he saw that all of Cāṇḍāla’s children had grown.

And moved on. He was gone so long; the children grew, and they were all gone. So he said to... "Well, that part’s over. You just couldn't go because you know, you got married and you had these kids. You’re going to have kids and I didn't even see them, but they’re all grown up now. So let’s go." So Cāṇḍāla replied, "Mahārāja, I’m ready. But you can see one problem. My mother is old and now she’s living with us. I can’t leave now. Come back in a few years and I’ll be ready to go. That’ll be fine." Nārada said, "Yo, okay, these are good reasons, but time’s running out." So Cāṇḍāla said, "But no worries. No worries. I will come with you."

So, many years later, Nārada Muni returns to Cāṇḍāla’s house. And by this time, his mother had passed away. So Nārada Muni said, "Okay, Cāṇḍāla, now’s the time to go. Now’s the time to go. Come on, let’s go. I’ll take you back to Godhead." Cāṇḍāla said, "Not just yet. I need to take care of my grandchildren. My sons and daughters had lots of kids, so I should take care of my grandchildren. Come back in a few years." Oh boy. So Nārada Muni flew around and came back in a few years. Even the grandchildren had grown up. Nārada said, "Everyone’s gone. Mother passed away, wife passed away, grandchildren passed away—the grandchildren. So come on." Cāṇḍāla said, he pointed to the old family dog. "But if I come with you back to the spirit, who’s going to feed my dog? Come back in a few years." Oh boy, what am I going to do? So he went, and he came back a long time later only to find, when he arrived in the yard, one little puppy: *woof woof woof woof woof*, seemingly very attached to the house. Hint: little puppy. Said, "Cāṇḍāla, now it’s too late. Look at you. You’ve lost all hope. But I’ll try again. When you go through the cycle of birth and death, and one day you’ll come and be an intelligent human being, and you’ll listen to me, and you’ll take it to heart, and you’ll chant Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare."

So we don’t want to be like Cāṇḍāla. I don’t know if he made it, maybe he did. I’m sure everyone’s destined one day to go back home, back to... sooner than later. So we have full facilities to go back home, back to Godhead. We have... we’re lucky, we’re born in Kali-yuga. "How can you say that?" Well, the demigods, Prabhupāda said, are waiting in the heavenly planets to take birth on the earth planet because there’s a concession made just by chanting. You can achieve the same result that the *ṛṣis* and yogis and mystics did in the past, just in the comfort of your home, by working in it—with Google or Microsoft—and coming home to your children and seeing them grow up and be having their grandchildren. Because whenever that moment comes, that Yamarāja comes to take you, for sure, because of your good training, and especially living at ISV, Silicon Valley Temple, you’ll be accustomed to chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare.

And maybe Nārada will appear before you and he’ll say, "Let’s go! Jump on my back, back home, back to Godhead. Kṛṣṇa wants you home." Thank you very much, Kṛṣṇa.""