"*00575*.*
"# I Will Arrange Everything For You

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. I’d like to begin by saying how happy I am to be back.

Wait a minute, I was born in America; how can I call Kolkata my home? Because this great city, the City of Lights, Kolkata, is the birthplace of my spiritual father, Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

With all due respect to my maternal father, my spiritual father, Śrīla Prabhupāda, is more important because he is the one taking me out of this world of darkness to the world of light. He is taking me out of the world of ignorance to the world of real knowledge; he is taking me out of the material world to the spiritual world, and most notably, the topmost planet in the spiritual world, Goloka Vṛndāvana. And besides that, I’ve spent half my life in India; I’ve been coming to this great country of Bhārata since 1971.

Only skin color is different; I am your adopted son, so I feel very comfortable coming to Kolkata. I first came here in 1972—very different. There was no "New City," what they call New Town; there was no New Town, just this old town. And it was old then, but forever and ever, it’s an exalted place because our spiritual master, the Founder-Ācārya, appeared here. I don’t say he was born here. When we speak of birth, it means someone takes birth according to their destiny, according to their karma. Just like we don’t say Kṛṣṇa took birth; Kṛṣṇa was not conceived like an ordinary, conditioned soul. He appeared in the mind of Vasudeva, and he was transferred to the womb of Devakī. She didn’t give birth like an ordinary child is born; when the time came, Kṛṣṇa appeared as four-armed Viṣṇu. Very unusual—you can imagine, ladies, if you are in the maternity room and the child comes and he has four arms and he is standing before you, very tall. "My baby." And actually, that was the maternal mood of Devakī.

It’s a natural inclination of a woman to have a baby, but this was no ordinary baby. In his babyhood, Kṛṣṇa maintained his godhood from the very beginning. Kaṃsa was sending different demons to kill him, and as a very young child, he killed huge asuras like Pūtanā. No ordinary baby. So, we don’t say Kṛṣṇa took birth; Kṛṣṇa made his appearance by his divine will. So, in the same way, with our Founder-Ācārya Śrīla Prabhupāda, we don’t say that his birth was because of karma or destiny. No, he is a *nitya-siddha*. What does *nitya* mean? *Nitya* means an eternally liberated soul, eternally liberated, never conditioned, and he came to this world out of his causeless mercy. From time to time, great souls come from the spiritual world as representatives of the Supreme Lord with the same mission: to remind us, fallen, conditioned souls, who we are, who is Bhagavān, and what is our eternal relationship with him. And śāstra says there are two types of *nitya-siddhas*—eternally liberated souls who come to this world of birth and death. One is the resident of the spiritual world who comes of his own accord.

This means that in the spiritual world, those liberated souls are conscious of our struggle here in this world because they are all Vaiṣṇavas, and the nature of a Vaiṣṇava is that his or her pleasure is seeing other persons take up Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and their sorrow is seeing people bereft or without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the distinguishing mark of a Vaiṣṇava or Vaiṣṇavī. So, there are certain souls who come of their own accord; they just decide, "I will come." They are concerned for our spiritual welfare—special personalities. Yes, Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, "Don’t go to a place where there is not clean flowing water; don’t go to a place where there is not a pious king; don’t go to a place where there is not a qualified physician/doctor; and don’t go to a place where people hate you." So, we come to this world because we are envious of God. That envy is not allowed in the spiritual world; it’s a world of love and bliss, not lust, anger, and greed. For all it’s worth, this material world is really a place where people come to forget God. So why would those persons in the spiritual world come to this world where people are envious of his master, Kṛṣṇa? They come out of compassion. 

The second type of person who comes from the spiritual world is the liberated soul who is instructed by Kṛṣṇa: "You go." Sometimes Kṛṣṇa calls someone—"You go." The Lord is also concerned about our fallen condition, so sometimes he calls someone who is chosen. There is a saying, "Many are called, but few are chosen." It’s a saying in English; many people may be called, but only a few people out of those people who are called are chosen for important work. So, one such person was Śrīla Prabhupāda. How do we know? We know—well, I’ll tell you a pastime. When Śrīla Prabhupāda left this great city of Kolkata to board the *Jaladūta* to go to the Western countries, before he left, he went to a medical facility in this city and got a yellow fever vaccination to go to America. You don’t need a yellow fever vaccine to go to New York, but Prabhupāda was envisioning the instruction of Caitanya Mahāprabhu that "one day my holy name will be heard in every town and village of the world"—not just America, South America, Africa, Australia, perhaps even to the penguins in the North Pole, I don’t know. 

So, he got a yellow fever vaccination, and some years later, it became very valuable because Prabhupāda went to Africa, Nairobi, to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There’s plenty of yellow fever in Africa, just like here in India there’s lots of dengue fever—unfortunately, we don’t have a vaccination for dengue fever. So he went, and he didn’t get yellow fever because he had the vaccination. But after he finished his preaching in Africa, his destination was Nairobi, Mumbai, and when Prabhupāda arrived in Mumbai, immigration—because he was in Africa—immigration said, "Let’s see your yellow fever vaccination, because maybe you caught yellow fever; you’re going to bring it to India." So immigration officer, "Let me see your yellow fever vaccination." Prabhupāda turned to his secretary, "Please give him my card that I got the yellow fever vaccination." And his secretary had lost it. Prabhupāda, we always think of him, you know, very sweet, very loving, very natural; he could get angry, like one time I traveled with Prabhupāda to Hyderabad by train from Kolkata. And when we arrived after a long journey in Hyderabad, Prabhupāda immediately wanted to start preaching. I wanted to go sleeping. So we had acquired some land outside of Hyderabad where we were starting a farm, and we took a taxi out to the farm, and Prabhupāda decided to preach to the local villagers and they gave darśana. I remember one lady, she asked Prabhupāda, "Svāmījī, can you tell me the real reason that Lord Rāma appeared on this planet?" And Prabhupāda said, "Yes," and we were all listening. Prabhupāda said, "Lord Rāma appeared in this material world to show the difficulties one has in accepting a wife." The men are laughing, ladies are not laughing. Sorry, ladies, but I’ll get back at the men also. 

So afterwards, Prabhupāda kept speaking, but I fell asleep. I fell asleep. You don’t want to sleep when your Guru’s speaking. It was a long journey, it was hot, I was tired, we couldn’t keep up with Śrīla Prabhupāda. He was in his 70s, I was 19; I couldn’t keep up with him because he was working under the *yogamāyā*, the internal energy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So I was, and in the middle of a sentence, Prabhupāda said, "Why are you sleeping, my disciple, when I am speaking?" So I was like dreaming, and I heard this voice of my Guru chastising me, and it was not *yoganidrā*, so I woke up. And Prabhupāda’s lip was quivering. There were different stages of Prabhupāda’s anger, but when he really got angry, his lip would quiver, and it was quivering. So he said, "Why?" And so because Prabhupāda was speaking in Hindi, and the only Hindi I know is "thoda," I’d learned that because when I came from America to India, we’d go to the programs and the ladies would cook, they would feed us this much prasādam. So I learned the only way you can stop the mātājīs from putting prasādam on your plate—you put your hand over the plate and you say, "Thoda." And it worked. How did I get to the angry part? How did I get to the angry? "You forgot to take your beads." So he became very angry. So I said, "Well, Prabhupāda, I was sleeping because I don’t understand Hindi." Prabhupāda said, "That’s okay. This is *śabda-brahma*; this is transcendental sound vibration. You listen, it will act on your heart even if you don’t understand Hindi." Very nice. *Śabda-brahma* means transcendental sound; even you don’t understand it, it’s purification. 

Just like we may not understand the mahā-mantra completely when we first come, but it purifies the heart anyway. Back to the story/pastime: so they stopped Prabhupāda, he asked for the yellow fever vaccination, his disciple said, "I lost it," and Prabhupāda’s lips quivered. So they put Prabhupāda in what’s it called, quarantine. Quarantine. And Indian quarantine is not like New York quarantine for 14 days, 14 days Prabhupāda had to stay in quarantine. *Punaḥ*, I don’t know in Bengali. 14 days. And one day he was, you know, in the room with the bars and the door locked, and he was chanting, and his disciple, the secretary who had lost the yellow fever vaccination, came to check up on him—chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. And Prabhupāda turned to the secretary, he said, "I did not want to come to this nasty place. I did not want to come to this nasty place." "Prabhupāda, I’m so sorry I lost the vaccination certificate, you had to come here." Prabhupāda said, "No, no, I did not want to come to this nasty material world, but Kṛṣṇa asked me to come." We’re talking about two *nitya-siddhas*, remember, who come to this world to remind us of who we are. One comes with his own initiative—very special soul. They come by the order of the Bhagavān: "You go." How special is that? The Lord entrusted his mission: "That you like I do, you deliver the devotees, annihilate the miscreants, and reestablish dharma." So if you have a very important mission and you can’t immediately accomplish it, you take your best man: "You go and be successful in this business." So what is the business of God in this world? No business. He only wants to deliver the conditioned soul. So he didn’t always come; sometimes he sends his representative, who is Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

So Kṛṣṇa said—Prabhupāda’s, you know, remembering—he said, "But I didn’t want to go. I said to Kṛṣṇa, 'I’m not so much inclined towards austerity.'" So Kṛṣṇa said to Prabhupāda, "That’s okay. Here in the spiritual world it’s all transcendental love and enjoyment, but you go to the material world, you go to the Earth planet, and you write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and I’ll arrange everything for you." So Kṛṣṇa came—not, Prabhupāda came—not because of some previous karma or some material destiny. He didn’t take birth; he appeared in your glorious city. Therefore, Prabhupāda’s appearance on September 1st, 1896, is the most important history in this city. 1896. I bought a book in the airport because I wanted to come and like know more about Kolkata—big fat book, and so many historic events took place here: the good, the bad, the ugly. Where’s the chapter on Śrīla Prabhupāda appearing in 1896? There was no chapter. I threw the book away because, like Prabhupāda, he appeared for the same purpose as Kṛṣṇa states in *Bhagavad-gītā*: he comes to deliver the pious, annihilate the miscreants, and reestablish the principles of dharma. Same business as the boss, same business as the master, same business as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No other reason. And because he was empowered to do that, he was successful in those three ways. Like father, like son. In fact, one elevated personality in the Gaudiya Math in those days, he actually went so far as to say that Prabhupāda was a *śaktyāveśa-avatāra*. We know the *daśa-avatāras*—every Indian, every Indian knows the *daśa-avatāras*, not every Indian, not every, but many—Matsya, Kūrma, etc. *Avatāras*, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in a particular form for time, place, and circumstance to deliver the pious, annihilate the miscreants, and reestablish dharma—as a fish, as a boar, half-man, half-lion, beautiful woman. It’s all Lord has his plan. But *śaktyāveśa* means a soul who’s empowered by Kṛṣṇa for the same work. Śāstra says Prabhupāda was *śaktyāveśa-avatāra*. Buddha was *śaktyāveśa-avatāra*. They’re particularly empowered to spread dharma. 

So, who a respected person in India, he said, and he didn’t award that distinction in a superficial way. You can speak next from the mouth of a child, maybe in about 20 years. So, did Prabhupāda deliver the pious in his preaching? How do we know he delivered the pious? Go look in the mirror. You’re wearing—look in the mirror. You weren’t always devotees; you became devotees because you’re pious. According to, in a purport, Prabhupāda said the most pious people in the universe when they have to take birth again, they take birth in—well, it doesn’t always look like that, but for whatever reason, in general, pious people, they take birth here, and through his teachings, reviving Kṛṣṇa consciousness in Bengal, you are all sitting here today. Piety means mode of goodness. There’s ignorance, passion, and goodness. So, but piety is not transcendental. Being clean, truthful, kind, austere—that’s the beginning of religion. But religion is perfected by practicing the yuga-dharma: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. By chanting, you transcend the three modes of material nature, even the mode of goodness, because mode of goodness can also be binding. In the sense that, "Oh, I’m doing good, I have money, I’m famous, beautiful wife, nice children, I’m very clean, I’m in the mode of goodness." It can also condition you: "I’m happy here." Who’s happy here? Mode of goodness can be conditioned. We have to transcend; we have to go to pure goodness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But it’s pretty easy to deliver the pious; it’s not so difficult. 

Doesn’t take much to make them transcendentalists. I heard Prabhupāda say in Geneva, Switzerland, in W, and he said, "My countrymen, people in India, you just scratch their skin, there’s Kṛṣṇa consciousness underneath." Don’t get proud of that. Pride is also an obstacle: "Oh, you scratched my skin, I’m Hare Kṛṣṇa." So at the end of my life, before I die, "Whoop, Hare Kṛṣṇa." No, so not so difficult to deliver a pious man. Much more interesting, much more commendable is if Prabhupāda could deliver the impious. Kṛṣṇa comes to deliver the pious; Prabhupāda, the modern-day representative of Kṛṣṇa, of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he delivered the impious. Even worse, he delivered the hippies and made them happies. He delivered the sinful people who are addicted to sinful act: meat-eating, intoxication, illicit sex, and gambling, and he even delivered the dacoits. 500 years ago, there was Jagāi and Mādhāi—that, you know, they were dacoits; they were fallen brāhmaṇas addicted to very sinful activity, I won’t even mention it in front of our devotees here. Lord Nityānanda is glorified because he delivered Jagāi and Mādhāi. He’s given credit. Mahāprabhu, he preached to the intelligentsia, Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, you know, Rāmānanda Rāya, government people, spiritual people, high-class. Nityānanda went out with Haridāsa Ṭhākura and delivered the rascals, the dacoits, even the demons. 

So Prabhupāda said, "In those days there were two Jagāi and Mādhāis; now many Jagāi and Mādhāis." I was going to say everyone, but not everyone. In my country, almost everyone. So this is the glory of Prabhupāda, that he delivered hundreds of thousands of Jagāi and Mādhāis. Founder-Ācārya, his hometown, Kolkata, his birthplace. Yes, he delivered so many Jagāis. Actually, I just recently gave *sannyāsa* to one of my disciples, he had a beautiful name and then I named him Śrīdhara Mahārāja, a Russian man, very good preacher. So on the day of his *sannyāsa*, in his saffron robes, flowing saffron robes, his tilaka, his shaved head, you know, with his bead bag, and Kolkata—many years of service—very effulgent. He showed me a picture of what who he was before he became Hare Kṛṣṇa. Oh my God! You know, in Prabhupāda’s books there’s always paintings, so there’s a painting of the Yamadūtas coming to take, um, who they taking? Ajāmila. And you saw the Yamadūtas. So I said, "Did you pose for the painting in the Bhāgavatam of the Yamadūtas? I got frightened looking at it." I said, "That’s you." He said, "No, that’s not me, now I am what I am by your mercy." I said, "So Prabhupāda gets the credit of delivering hundreds of thousands of Jagāi and Mādhāis." So yes, he did more than deliver the pious, by the mercy of his Guru Mahārāja. 

And did Prabhupāda annihilate the miscreants? Whoa. We think of Kṛṣṇa doing that, he’s got a *Sudarśana-cakra*. Śiśupāla—Śiśupāla was constantly blaspheming Kṛṣṇa. He came out of the womb—this Kṛṣṇa is a nonsense—it wasn’t goo-goo gaa-gaa like babies, he came out speaking just, "Kṛṣṇa’s a real rascal, he’s a non—he’s a thief, you know, a womanizer" as a small baby. So the deal was, you know, Kṛṣṇa would tolerate for 100,000 abuses like that from Śiśupāla’s body. On the 100,000th, "Off with your head." So there was a big assembly, and Śiśupāla 900, you know, whatever, and the 100th, 999th, and the 100th time he said something in the assembly hall about Kṛṣṇa, took *Sudarśana*, all the way across the assembly hall, and that head—boing, boing, boing. Kṛṣṇa killed. Kṛṣṇa killed the blasphemers. Look at Pūtanā, Tṛṇāvarta, Kapithāsura... it’s German... didn’t act like that. Who was Mahāprabhu? He was Kṛṣṇa combined. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. He was the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in one. The two became one in the personality of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And he didn’t kill the asuras either. What did he do? Like for Jagāi and Mādhāi, by his mercy, he killed their demoniac mentality and made them Vaiṣṇavas, Kṛṣṇa bhaktas. This is annihilating the demoniac consciousness, not their material bodies. Prabhupāda did the same. He took away our material desires, our demoniac propensities. How did he do it? He simply begged us, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa..." How powerful is that mantra? Even fear personified is afraid of those three words: "Kṛṣṇa" and "Rāma"—flee distant place. So what to speak of material impurities like lust, anger, and greed? As long as you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, all the bad qualities in your heart go away. And that golden seed of *bhakti* that is there within everyone’s heart—even the cockroach, even the spider, even the tree—when you start chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa long enough, that seed is watered, and the *bhakti-latā-bīja* begins to grow in anyone and everyone. 

And did the *śaktyāveśa*, His Divine Grace, help to reestablish dharma in this world, true religion? What’s the fundamental principle of religion, dharma? The foundation of dharma—what is it? Cleanliness, truthfulness, mercy, and austerity. That makes one a civilized person. And once you’re civilized, somewhat purified, you can get the full advantage of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. And Prabhupāda’s movement, ISKCON, has had a great effect on the world in making people more civilized, more religious. One time Prabhupāda said, "If it was not for this ISKCON movement, this world would be in a much worse shape. Believe me, it’s true." If it wasn’t for the chanting, prasādam distribution, the temples, cow protection, this world would be in a much worse state. All glories to ISKCON! All glories to the founder, Śrīla Prabhupāda! 

But what’s the, what’s the perfection of religion? The perfection of religion is to one day cry in love of God, feeling your separation. *Yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam*. "Considering a moment to be like 12 years and more, tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain—oh Kṛṣṇa, I’m feeling all vacant in the world in your absence." That’s love of God, that’s real religion. It’s the perfection of religion. Prabhupāda is giving the whole world, even Jagāis and Mādhāis, a chance to reach the perfection of religion, to cry some tears in love for God. Not that we want something from God; we want to serve God and please him through our *bhakti*, through our devotion. Then we’re reinstated in our original constitutional position. Prabhupāda is getting so many people to engage in that process, and one day, if we stick to this ISKCON movement, we will reach that goal. 

So, Prabhupāda is the true ambassador from the spiritual world, from Kṛṣṇaloka. Therefore, we can conclude: on September 1st, 1896, Prabhupāda did not take birth in Kolkata; he appeared by the divine will of Kṛṣṇa for the sacred mission of continuing the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Lord Caitanya in this city, in Bengal, in India, and the whole world. So I thank you for this opportunity to be with all you, more than pious people; you, Kṛṣṇa bhaktas, you Gaura-bhaktas. I feel very privileged to be in your association. 

Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda!""