"*00130*.*
"Before we begin, I’d just like to make a quick, little, short announcement. This is the original banyan tree under which Kṛṣṇa spoke the immortal wisdom of the *Bhagavad-gītā*. I’ve noticed sometimes devotees, when they go to holy places, like to take a little something home. I saw last time here devotees were picking little parts of the branches and the leaves, but we shouldn’t do that. Don’t pick the tree leaves; just put your head on the banyan tree and pray for pure devotional service. *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. I couldn't ask for a more beautiful and more auspicious setting than where we are today, and the weather’s also perfect. India is a tropical country, so quite frankly, most of the time it’s hot in this country, like blazing, and for a couple months, you know, December, January, it’s very frigid. But there are four months which are quite temperate, like October, November, which by Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement is Kārttika, and February, March is also very nice, and that’s Gauḍa. So it’s all arranged.

So, dear devotees, this morning we find ourselves at Jyotisar, which is this place under this banyan tree where Kṛṣṇa spoke *Bhagavad-gītā*, the song of God, 5,000 years ago. Just reflect on our good fortune. Such an historical thing happened 5,000 years ago here; Kṛṣṇa spoke the *Gītā*. And we’re sitting here. In the 1960s, there was a book put out—I forget who it was by, but it was called *Be Here Now*—and that rings true here. We should "be here now." When we go to a particular holy place, we should meditate on the mood there, we should meditate on the pastimes there, we should meditate on the transcendental personalities who participated in those pastimes.

So at this very spot, Kṛṣṇa spoke 700 concise verses of spiritual knowledge for the benefit of human society, then, now, and forever. More relevant: truth is good for time, place, and circumstances, but absolute truth is good past, present, and future. It’s the nature of absolute truth. Of course, we know it wasn’t the first time; it wasn’t the first time that Kṛṣṇa spoke *Bhagavad-gītā*. He himself mentions in the fourth chapter of the *Gītā* that he had previously instructed the *Gītā* to the sun god, Vivasvān, and he further elaborated that Vivasvān instructed Manu—who’s Manu? The father of mankind—and Manu in turn instructed Ikṣvāku. This is how transcendental knowledge comes down; it comes down through disciplic succession from Ādi Guru, the original Guru, Kṛṣṇa or God. He has perfect knowledge. We don’t have to speculate, "You know, what is spiritual knowledge?" It’s all handed to us on a plate: guru to disciple, guru to disciple, guru to disciple. But as things sometimes happen in this material world, in course of time, that succession was broken and the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness was lost.

But this knowledge was spoken to the sun god Vivasvān a long time ago. It’s interesting, in his commentary on *Bhagavad-gītā*, Śrīla Prabhupāda estimates that Kṛṣṇa spoke the *Gītā* to the sun god 120 million years ago. There’s a common saying these days, "Just do the math," so Prabhupāda did the math, calculated it, and we accept it as 120 million years ago the *Gītā* was spoken to the sun god. Then Prabhupāda says—he concludes—the *Gītā* has existed in human society for over two million years. Then those very same teachings, as we have it today, were repeated here, right here. Can you just imagine? There’s the chariot, there’s the battle, there’s millions of soldiers about to fight, just on the verge of the battle, and Kṛṣṇa takes about 45 minutes and speaks absolute truth to Arjuna. That classic *Gītā*. We saw that diorama yesterday, this gigantic diorama: there’s the chariot, there’s the horses, there’s Kṛṣṇa, and there’s Arjuna; he’s a little confused at that point for a reason, and Kṛṣṇa’s about to speak to him. Arjuna—I have one disciple in Russia, I named him Arjun. Kṛṣṇa, you really love that. Oh wow, Gurudeva, thank you, you give the best names. So devotees are very introspective; they’re always questioning and trying to find answers to their spiritual questions. This is the benefit of human life.

So, naturally, one might come up with the question, "Why not? Why did Kṛṣṇa specifically choose Arjuna?" Kṛṣṇa had been around for a while, you know; he was little Dāmodara, and Kṛṣṇa danced with the gopīs as a teenager, then he went to Mathurā, then he went to Dvārakā, and then he came back here for the battle. How many followers did Kṛṣṇa have by that time? Actually, you couldn’t count them, because when Kṛṣṇa left the spiritual world, he brought an unlimited number of devotees here to this world to help him in his mission of delivering the pious, annihilating the miscreants, and reestablishing the principles of religion, *dharma*.

He didn’t come alone. Prabhupāda said you’ll never see a picture of Kṛṣṇa alone; he’s always surrounded by some type of loving devotee. Prabhupāda said even a peacock, and Prabhupāda gives the analogy—because analogies help us understand complex philosophical points—"I don't get it." "You give an analogy." "Oh, now I get it." So Prabhupāda said, "Just like a king, when he leaves his kingdom, he goes somewhere else, he takes his military guard, he takes his family, he takes his soldiers, he takes the cooks, he takes the, you know..." That way Kṛṣṇa came. So Kṛṣṇa could have chosen any one of those persons to speak *Bhagavad-gītā* to. Why Arjuna? I remember when I—I think probably my first *Bhagavad-gītā* class, I was a brand new, green-behind-the-ears walker, 1970 in Detroit, Michigan—and I, you know, was sitting in *Bhagavad-gītā* class, I asked that question, "Know, um, Prabhupāda—we call you Prabhupāda, yeah—Prabhupāda, why did Kṛṣṇa speak to this, this person, Arjuna?"

So I remember very clearly he answered the question by referring to the *Bhagavad-gītā*, which is complete knowledge. All questions you have about spiritual life can be answered in the *Gītā*. He said why did Kṛṣṇa choose Arjuna? Kṛṣṇa answers that question in Chapter 4, verse 3 of the *Bhagavad-gītā*. Kṛṣṇa says, "That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is told by me to you, Arjuna, because you are my devotee as well as my friend and can therefore understand the transcendental mystery of the science." The ninth chapter of *Bhagavad-gītā* is called "Confidential Knowledge." In the ninth chapter, Kṛṣṇa goes deeper into spiritual philosophy. Confidential knowledge is not meant for everyone. The general public will have no understanding of spiritual life, but for devotees, aspiring devotees, it’s considered confidential knowledge.

I remember we—I was doing traveling *saṅkīrtana* in Corsica, which is a part of France in the Mediterranean Sea; it’s an island—and while we were there, we met an admiral in the French Navy. He was walking by with some sailors; I was giving a class in a yoga studio, and we had a big window, so he walked by in his uniform, you know, the admiral and like six or seven sailors, and he looked in, and he saw me. He looked like that, and then he opened the door and he came in and he sat down, all the sailors like, "Like, you're the admiral of the French Navy, what are you sitting down in front of this guy with a bald head and a ponytail?"

I was speaking from *Bhagavad-gītā*, and I gave my usual two-hour lecture. He sat there just transfixed. Afterwards, I said, "Any, uh, any questions?" He said, "I don't have a question. He said, "This is what I’ve been looking for." All the other sailors are like, "Admiral, what are you talking about?" "No, this is what I was looking for in life." So afterwards, we were taking *prasādam*; he was sitting next to me eating, eating with his hands. Admirals don’t eat with their hands; they eat with a silver spoon. And during *prasādam*, the telephone rang—we didn’t have, you know, phones in those days, it was a black phone on a desk—and it rang, and then the yoga instructor said, "This, this call is for, uh, for you," and there was our Temple President back in Paris, like really 3,000 kilometers away. He said, "Get on a boat, cross over the Mediterranean, get to Marseille and drive as fast as you can to Paris, because Śrīla Prabhupāda is coming in two days from London, a surprise visit." Wow, Prabhupāda’s coming!

So I came back and I said to the admiral, "Admiral," I said, "Sir, I’m sorry, we have to leave because my spiritual master is coming to Paris." He said, "Young man, what’s a spiritual master?" I took a chance and said, "Why don't you come with me and see?" So he said, "I’m coming." Oh my God, I’m taking an admiral to Paris! Admiral is a big position in the Navy; only four or five admirals in any country. So he excused all the other sailors, he called his wife, two children, and said, "We’re going to Paris to see a spiritual master." His wife said, "A what?" He said, "I don’t know, but come and see." So they packed their car and they followed us to the port, and his car and our truck, we boarded the boat, went to Marseille, and the two vans drove to Paris. It took us like, you know, two days to get there. This admiral—and he was still in his uniform.

So we got there one day before Prabhupāda came, and the next day Prabhupāda came. The admiral stayed in a hotel with his family, and then Prabhupāda heard that we brought an admiral to the temple. He said, "I want to meet the admiral." So I went across the street, I got the admiral—I thought, "Wow, I get to go in the room too"—and I brought the admiral in, and he, you know, his uniform and his medals, and he sat down in front of Śrīla Prabhupāda. I can still see Prabhupāda sitting there on this, you know, very aristocratic, educated, famous person sitting in front of Śrīla Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda started preaching to him very strongly: "You’re not that body, you’re not an admiral." And the wife went, "What? My husband’s not an admiral?"

And the admiral just ate it up, whatever Prabhupāda, you know, going like this, everything, the wife’s going like this, the husband’s going, and the kids are falling asleep. So I was thinking, everyone has their moment of spiritual awakening. You may be a young girl like this young girl here—she’s nine, but she’s so serious, she’s always listening to my lectures, and her hand is always in her bead bag all day long, her lips are always moving, *Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa*, all the time. Give her a big round of applause! She’s a kiwi. Kṛṣṇa arranges it. When he sees this little spark in our hearts just glow a little bit, he arranges that we come in contact with a bonafide spiritual organization, like ISKCON, and we become captivated, and we start practicing. We don’t even know what’s happening. It’s like a tsunami; Kṛṣṇa’s mercy just catches us in this wave of nectar, and we just flow along with the devotees, and gradually we become Kṛṣṇa conscious, like Henry and Samantha. Kṛṣṇa conscious is just... they didn’t know what happened, you know? Here they’re in Kurukṣetra, the devotees were like, "What’s happening here?" But Kṛṣṇa saw their hearts, and he made an arrangement that they met the devotees, and now they’re being swept along in this tsunami of *bhakti*, or love for Kṛṣṇa, and they’re enjoying every minute of it, right? Stand up.

So Prabhupāda spoke for two hours to the admiral. I was so jealous! Prabhupāda never spoke to me, you know, for two hours. Admiral, Prabhupāda said one time, "You have your plan, and Kṛṣṇa has his plan for you." So at the end of the *darśana*, the admiral said, "My dear spiritual master, my dear spiritual master, please give me an instruction: what chapter of *Bhagavad-gītā* I should focus on?" I said, "This guy’s making pretty fast progress." So Prabhupāda had this way that he would look at you and you, you knew he was looking into your heart. You ask Prabhupāda’s disciples, many of them will say that, you know, when Prabhupāda looked at them, it was like he was looking into their heart; he could see the good and the bad and the ugly. So Prabhupāda, he could see where this—although he was an admiral—Prabhupāda could see something. He said, "You should, every day for the rest of your life, you should read..." I thought he was going to say "second chapter." "Prabhupāda, you read the ninth chapter of *Bhagavad-gītā*, most confidential knowledge." Wow. "Why not?" you know. "You read the ninth chapter of *Gītā* every day. That’s my instruction to you." Like my hair stood on end.

Confidential knowledge is meant for those who you have confidence in; they won’t misuse that knowledge. So the admiral, he said, "Yes, my spiritual master, I will read every day." Prabhupāda didn’t say, you know, "Chant 16 rounds, follow the regular principles." On that occasion, he said, "Just read." So the admiral looked at me, he said, "What should I do now?" I said, "Bow down." You know, in the Navy, the military, everyone, quote-unquote, bows down or shows allegiance to an admiral. He just—boom—he made, his head hit the ground, *boom*. He bowed down and he stayed a long time. He got up and his wife and the children, they left, and I never saw them again. Eight years later, maybe more than that, Prabhupāda had already left this world and gone back to the spiritual world, and I was still in France, I was still doing book distribution, and I like to go where there were big crowds of people because, you know, not everyone was interested, but you always find somebody who is interested in, you know, we say in French, *as it is*. And I’d been distributing books for 11 years, that was my training in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but I didn’t speak French. I just memorized some mantras, "Take it," and give some money, money, money, money. But I always smile, you know? They, I think they bought me, not the book. I did a lot of books.

So eight or nine or 10 years later in Paris, on Champs-Élysées, they have the Arc de Triomphe, that famous Arc de Triomphe, there was a military parade, some national holiday, I forget what it was, and the Army was there, and the Navy was there, and the Air Force with all the big guns, all the big guys, you know? They had this big bleachers, so they’re all sitting, and the parade’s going by, and you know, that, that was where I liked to be. So you know, I was in *dhoti*, and you know, I’d always get the garland from Ratha-yātrā Paris every day, I put big huge *tilaka* on, that long ponytail, *śikhā*, and it was a summertime, and you know, I’m going through the crowd, looking at me like I was from the moon or something. The French, "Mary, you’re crazy." "Yeah, I’m crazy for Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, we funny. Leave you, take a book, you’ll know what is Kṛṣṇa."

So I wasn’t having much luck, you know, with the public, so I thought, "Well, there’s the soldiers, maybe they’re more realistic about the struggle for existence." So I started approaching the soldiers and the sailors; I think he did a couple of books. Then I saw all the Army generals, you know, and the Air Force, you know, guys in the, and the Navy, you know, all their admirals were sitting in the bleachers. I thought, "I’m going to, I’m going to sell a book to one of those guys." But there was big security, there were, you know, lots of policemen. I couldn’t break through the line of policemen. I just tried, snuck here, and I crawled here, and they caught me, and you know, *saṅkīrtana* devotees are very determined. Everything, I’m looking at the bleachers; all of a sudden, I see the admiral. He’s sitting there in all his glory. I think he had even more stripes by that time. "Hey, Admiral! Admiral! It’s me, in your *dhoti* now." The police say, "Shut up, boy!" and four policemen came and picked me up.

They were smaller than me, so when they picked me up, you could see this part of my body, and the admiral saw me. You hear a scream, "Stop! Leave that boy alone!" So the police are like, "What?" You know, he said, "I told you, leave that boy alone! You bring him here to the bleachers!" So that, you know, all the soldiers and Navy men, Air Force, they parted like—it was like, you know, Moses when he caused the Red Sea to part, like that—and I walked, everyone was watching me, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa*, like, seriously. And then the admiral, he came down from the bleachers, he met me at the beginning, and he came for it, give me a big embrace, a big hug. He said, "You’re the one that brought me to my spiritual master!" And again, the hair stood up on my arms. And we started talking, and he was reminiscing on that day when he met us in the yoga studio, and how he drove so far, and how Prabhupāda—he said, "He said my spiritual master spoke to me for two hours." I said, "Yeah, I know." He said, "His name is A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami, because that’s on the book that he gave me, the *Bhagavad-gītā*."

And I said, "Yes. You remember the instruction he gave you?" He said, "Yes. One should never forget the instruction of the spiritual master." In his uniform, everyone’s watching, he said, "He told me to read, read the ninth chapter of *Bhagavad-gītā* every day." And I can tell you, young man—'cause he was much older than me—he said, "I have followed that instruction every day since I met my Guru. I’ve read the ninth chapter, Śrīla, I knew it backwards and forwards, you know? Every day I read the ninth, ask my wife, you know, we, every day." Now, what happens if one follows the instruction of the guru? It’s a transcendental fact that one makes spiritual progress. And I could understand that he’d made spiritual progress by the next thing I’ll share with you.

He said, "How is my spiritual master doing?" And I said, "Admiral, I’m so sorry to say that, um, His Divine Grace has left this world. He’s gone back to Godhead a few years ago." I’ll always remember that moment. The admiral just burst into tears. It was like an explosion, this, um, he, he went like that, and he started crying, and the tears were like flowing. He said, "No, no, no, no, no, no! Tell me it’s not true!" And everyone’s watching, said, "No, it’s not possible. AC... he’s not gone. How could he go? Why would Kṛṣṇa take him?" He said, "I said, well, it’s a final lesson with the art of dying. That’s the only way I could express it. I said Prabhupāda was always teaching us, so he taught us the art of dying, how to remember Kṛṣṇa and go back to Godhead." He just lost it, he started sobbing, and the, this, the rent-a-new that was with him, they thought maybe he was having a stroke or a heart attack, 'cause this was a private conversation. They came running over and they grabbed him and said, "No, go!" like that, and he just stood there. Oh, and I’m looking, *Hare Kṛṣṇa*, who is she, the power?

So then somebody higher than him—I don’t know what’s above an admiral—came and said to, "Sir, the parade must begin. Please take your seat." Then he turned, and he shuffled up the steps and sat down, and the police said, "Enough, young man, go." And I had to go. So I was so shaken by that experience, I couldn’t do any more *saṅkīrtana*, and I just went back to the temple and chanted my rounds in front of the deities. You know, in those days, we didn’t think like we do now; I didn’t take his name or his address. It was just, you were just young, naive devotees, so I never saw him again. And he was older, he must have been in his 70s or something, admiral, so certainly, you know, he, he passed away, and I keep thinking, you know, maybe he’s with Prabhupāda. He had a very strong attachment to Śrīla Prabhupāda, and that’s the perfection of life. Prabhupāda himself said one time, in humility, he said, "I do not know who is Kṛṣṇa. I only know my Guru Mahārāja." So it’s interesting that Prabhupāda told him to, to, you know, read the ninth chapter, confidential knowledge, because you don’t give confidential knowledge only just someone that you can entrust that knowledge and take advantage of it.

So why did Kṛṣṇa speak *Bhagavad-gītā* to Arjuna? "That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today told by me to you, Arjuna, because you’re my devotee as well as my friend and therefore you can understand the transcendental mystery of this science." You’re not just a professor or a scholar; you’re my devotee. We have a confidential relationship. Therefore, I will enlighten you. And this is where Kṛṣṇa enlightened Arjuna, and as a result, all of us at this very spot here. So, naturally, the inquisitive student, the next question may be, you know, like, "Well, how did Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna get here? What is the history of how they were on the chariot here on, on a, just before a battle, and Kṛṣṇa’s speaking *Gītā* to it? How did, how did that all come about?"

Like what’s it all about? Like, what’s the history? So let’s have a history lesson. I hated history lessons in high school, I got bored. You, I’ve heard the same thing, ma’am, I’m saying, this battle, this politician, this drought, this, this is real history. The history of the disciplic succession spreading divine knowledge in human society, this is a history lesson we want to hear. So how did Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna get together on a chariot under this banyan tree before millions of men who are going to have a big battle? Like, how’d that happen? Well, briefly, there was a royal family called the Kurus, without going into too much detail, which Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa were both connected to that, you could say, dynasty. And unfortunately, as sometimes happens in big families, at one point there was a disagreement between Arjuna and his five brothers, called the Pāṇḍavas, and another group in that Kuru—Kuru family referred to simply as the evil Kurus. All related, but Pāṇḍavas and Kurus, like cousins. And the point of succession came up, that, you know, who’s going to be the next king? It often happens in these royal families, there’s a lot of money, a lot of prestige, a lot of power. So, you know, in this Kuru dynasty amongst all these people, like who’s going to be the next king? And there was some competition between these five Pāṇḍava brothers and the Kuru clan.

So the pious Pāṇḍavas, they said, "Look, actually, let’s just settle this dispute in a peaceful way. Let’s not make push come to shove." The Pāṇḍavas met the Kurus. They said, the Pāṇḍavas said, "Look, you guys have the kingdom, we don’t care. Just give us, um, five small villages that we can rule over, because we’re *kṣatriyas*, we’re soldiers, so you can be the, the whole thing, just give us five villages, we’ll be happy with that." Like, who, who wouldn’t accept the deal? Like you got the whole thing, just give us five little villages. But there’s three gates leading to hell: lust, anger, greed. Lust, anger, and greed. So these Kurus are so greedy, they said, "No, no, we’re not even going to give you as much as, as much land as you can fit on the top of a pin. You guys, the only way we’re going to settle with this, we’re going to fight with you, and whoever wins the battle, they can choose someone amongst them to be the king."

Now, there’s an interesting twist to all of this. Without going into, into too much detail, Kṛṣṇa’s... because Kṛṣṇa is related by birth to both groups, he didn’t want to get involved, of course, he was hoping it could resolve, but he said, "I’m not going to directly get involved in this fight." You guys really want to fight? Said, "Yeah, yeah." Pāṇḍavas said, "Well, for *dharma*, to protect the innocent, we have to stand up for *dharma* and protect the innocent from these, these rascals, these oppressors who won’t rule properly." There are *kṣatriyas*—in Sanskrit, *kṣatriyas* means one who protects others from hurt. *Kṣatriyas* are very bold, they’ll stand up and fight if necessary for religious principles to protect the innocent who are oppressed by, you know, unqualified rulers, the innocent who cannot protect themselves. So much children, ladies, brāhmaṇas, and cows, they’re often exploited by the rulers. So Pāṇḍavas said, "Well, okay, we’ll fight. We didn’t want to fight, but we’ll fight to protect the innocent because you guys are going to oppress them." So there’s this big battle about to happen, the Battle of Kurukṣetra. But Kṛṣṇa’s not going to get involved because he’s connected to everybody. So he offered a compromise. Kṛṣṇa, he said, "I won’t fight." But he said, the two sides could choose to have him either present as a personal advisor to one group, and the other group could take Kṛṣṇa’s army. Kṛṣṇa had a huge army. "You guys decide who wants me on their side and who wants my vast army. You can have one or the other, but you guys can’t have both. So you send a representative to see me and then we’ll discuss this matter, either me or my soldiers."

This is history. So it was decided that Arjuna would represent the Pāṇḍavas and a general named Duryodhana would represent the Kurus to come meet Kṛṣṇa and make this decision. So the date was set, the place was set, and the time was set, and Duryodhana was, you know, he was like, "I’m going to get there before Arjuna and make, make my plea, and then I’ll, I’ll get what I want. Arjuna can just get out of here." Evil-minded Duryodhana, he, he arrived first at Kṛṣṇa’s camp near here to where the battle was going to take place. Now, when he arrived, he was informed that Kṛṣṇa was sleeping, so and he’s in some hut or something. So eager to achieve his goal, Duryodhana, Duryodhana came in and he stood right next to Kṛṣṇa’s head. This is a good vantage point, because he wakes up, he’ll see me, say what I want, this, whatever, right? If someone’s sleeping, you come and just tower over them in their head, wake up, time to make the decision, fulfill my desires. But next, just a few moments after that, Arjuna arrived. And of natural humility, he stood at the foot of Kṛṣṇa’s bed, near Kṛṣṇa’s Lord’s feet. And both Duryodhana and Arjuna were waiting for Kṛṣṇa to wake up.

So in time, Kṛṣṇa opened his eyes and he saw... he didn’t see Duryodhana, he saw Arjuna. So then Kṛṣṇa said, "Since you are both part of our greater family, I must satisfy you both. The only way I can do that is to offer my army to one of you, and to the other I will offer myself. What would you choose?" We following in the footsteps of the mahājanas, we following in the footsteps of Arjuna. But he said to Arjuna, he said, "But you should know that because we’re all family, the one who chooses me will only have me as an advisor, not a warrior. I’m not going to fight. I’ll just be an advisor, for I cannot raise a weapon against my own kin, be the Pāṇḍavas or..." So at that point, Duryodhana interjected it—he wanted to just beat Arjuna to the thing and, you know, say "I want this first"—but Kṛṣṇa cut him off. Duryodhana, to speak first, went like this, "Brother, I saw Arjuna first. Let him make his request."

So Duryodhana, he got really flustered, said, "But I was here first!" Like a little kid, you know, "I was here first!" But Kṛṣṇa insisted. And turning to Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa said, "Friend, I can stand by your side unarmed on the battlefield, or you can have my army, the most powerful army in this land. What do you prefer?" And sometimes there’s certain lines that are spoken that are, you know, just affect your heart, that’s not to be a long talk, somebody can just say something, a one-liner, and he just... So the *Gītā* says that Arjuna’s response was immediate. He said, "Oh, my friend Kṛṣṇa, even if all the warriors in the universe were on one side and you were on the other, I would only choose you, Kṛṣṇa. It’s not about me, it’s all about you." So when Duryodhana heard that, he just started laughing. He could hardly believe his ears. It said he thought, "Arjuna is a great bowman, but he’s made a big blunder here. This mistake will cost him the war and the throne. Soon I will be crowned king." So hearing Arjuna’s reply, Kṛṣṇa turned to Duryodhana and he said, "Duryodhana, my army’s at your disposal. Every last one of my soldiers will meet you at the time and place of your choice." Like a real *kṣatriya* answer, you know? "Name the weapon, name the place, name the time, is it fist or is it knives? My army is at your disposal, of every, every last one of my, will meet you at the time and place of your choice. You just know."

So Duryodhana could hardly contain himself, he was just overjoyed, and, you know, he thanked Kṛṣṇa profusely. "Well, thank, thank you, you know, too much devotion is the sign of a thief. Thank you, thank you, thank you, yeah, get out of here, you." And he left that place at once, eager to share the news with his brothers. Now, this is, you know, for today, we’re speaking basic principle, going to a little *rasa* here, how Kṛṣṇa relates to his devotees who are surrendered to him. So once Duryodhana had left the room, Kṛṣṇa called Arjuna to come and sit beside him on the bed. How intimate is that? Two friends sitting together on a couch, this is God, the Almighty, but he’s asking his devotee, "You sit next to me." This is God philosophy, how one can have a very intimate, loving relationship with God. Like many of you, I was searching for God when I was young, but when I heard that you can sit next to him, he’ll be your—and I said, "I’m never leaving Kṛṣṇa consciousness." This is what I was looking for, just like the admiral. This is what I was looking for. What better friend could you have than Kṛṣṇa? So Arjuna, seeing, they’re kind of shy and all like, so Kṛṣṇa takes Arjuna’s hand, he dressed him as, calmly said soberly, "Blinded by affection, you’ve made a strategic error. Strategic... Certainly your brothers will not be happy to hear what forces—meaning the army—they have lost, and what the Kurus have gained. How are you going to tell the your brothers you lost the army?"

But Arjuna smiled, and he placed his hand on Kṛṣṇa’s other hand, sort of like, and looking into Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, he said, "Kṛṣṇa, when I return to my brother’s camp with you at my side, my brothers will do nothing but praise my decision. Oh Lord, whether we win or lose, it’s up to you. A victory without you is worthless, but a defeat with you by my side, though impossible, would be worth more than the control of the entire universe. Me and my brothers will fight to put my righteous elder brother, Yudhiṣṭhira, on the throne because I know that’s your desire, and we’re just your instruments. Yeah, we Pāṇḍavas would never fight a war in which our opponent, or a war in which you are our opponent, or in a war that you disapprove." So to kind of tease our Arjuna, our friends, you know, like my Godbrothers sometimes tease me, "Bhakti Yoga," you know, like to to tease, um, Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa said, but, uh, *Gītā* will say something like, "Okay, right, put us in our place." So Kṛṣṇa, smiling, Kṛṣṇa said, "Arjuna, didn’t you hear? I’m not going to raise a weapon in this battle. If I wanted, I could annihilate the entire Kuru army with just my *cakra*, finished, yeah? But they’re related to me, and so I will fight against neither them or their soldiers. I’m not going to fight."

So that there’s that famous saying, "With God on our side," people use that phrase, you know, this group, this, this way, "God’s on our side," you know. Okay, see what side he’s on. So Arjuna said something very interesting, said, "I hear you. I am always listening to you. I like to listen to you, but Kṛṣṇa, you need not fight. With you beside me, certainly I can defeat their army all by myself." And then Arjuna, he paused for a moment, and with a voice, uh, quivering with emotion—*bhakti*, *bhakti* means emotion, it’s love, but it’s transcendental love, not love of this world, but transcendental selfless love. Love means to give more than you take; that’s selfless love. And that’s there in Vraja, that’s there in the spiritual world. So his voice quivering with emotion, Arjuna said to Kṛṣṇa, "My friend, don’t you know that day and night I only think of you? Every particle of my existence wants to be with you only, whether awake or asleep, eating or fighting with the enemy, I only think of you. My life is for you. Every moment I’m away from you, I live only in the hope of seeing you." It sounds like the *gopīs*, right? He’s a warrior, he’s a fighter, he’s a soldier. So it doesn’t matter who you are and what you do, you can be a dentist, a doctor, a candlestick maker, or whatever, but Kṛṣṇa will accept your, your service to him if you’re his devotee. You don’t have to change your position; you just be who you are, stay like you are, but develop your love for Kṛṣṇa, and through your profession you can serve him. This is the beauty of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the modern era.

So at that point, Kṛṣṇa placed his hand over Arjuna’s mouth, choked with emotion. Love’s a two-way street. He says, "As all of them as they surrender unto me, I reward them accordingly." Of course, to encourage, as Prabhupāda said one time, "You take one step towards Kṛṣṇa, he takes a thousand steps towards you." Kṛṣṇa is so kind. We have the best God. You take a step towards him, he runs toward you with open arms, my devotee. Then Kṛṣṇa whispered in Arjuna’s ear, he said, "I know, and so I belong to you. Whatever you ask of me is yours." But then Kṛṣṇa stopped speaking, assuming something was on Arjuna’s mind which was causing him not to speak further. Kṛṣṇa is in the heart of every living entity; he knows, he knows us better than we know ourselves. So Kṛṣṇa said, "Friend, tell me, what’s on your mind? You can’t hide your thoughts from me."

So Arjuna began very slowly. He said, "Kṛṣṇa, the upcoming battle here in Kurukṣetra, that that will be my ultimate service to you. I will be but an instrument in reestablishing *dharma*. My prayer is that I may never, I may never lose sight of you. My prayer is I’ll never lose sight of you. Oh Kṛṣṇa, you are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but I request you, personally act as my charioteer throughout this great war, for your unmatched skill in steering horses in the thick of battle is well known. If you drive my chariot, victory is assured, but most important, I will have the great fortune to see you constantly." We’re always asking for protection, isn’t it? Naturally, you know, we’re afraid of this accident, or tripping on this, or, you know, getting into some legal case, or, ask me for, but the real protection we should pray for is to never forget Kṛṣṇa. That’s the real thing. We’re, we ask for, "Protect me from illusion so I don’t forget Kṛṣṇa." That’s the prayer. "Please Kṛṣṇa, may I never forget you. Whatever else happens, whatever else happens, let it happen. But in happiness and distress and sickness and health, let me always remember your lotus feet." Yes, that’s how we should pray, Kṛṣṇa. *Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa*.

So the hair on Kṛṣṇa’s body stood on end and he, he embraced Arjuna. He said, "Yes, yes, of course, my friend, let me drive your chariot, for seeing you will be the perfection of my life." Just see how intimate this is! *Sakhya*—this is friendship. This is not *gopī*, whatever, but this is, every devotee has a particular relationship with Kṛṣṇa, very deep, doesn’t want to be anything else, fully satisfied in any *rasa* relationship you have with Kṛṣṇa. Variety is the spice of life. So we see in this friendship relationship, very deep, satisfying. So later while relaxing together, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna just laughed as they made plans for the upcoming battle. And actually, Arjuna refers to this, uh, relaxing they did before the battle in *Bhagavad-gītā*. He’s saying to Kṛṣṇa, "You know, in the *Gītā*, you’re God, but you treated me as a friend, you let me sit on the same seat as you." This is history, I’m... we’re not speculating, we’re quoting history here. Later Arjuna refers to the fact, "We laughed together, we ate together." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, this is the relationship we want with God. And by connecting with God, we have the connection with all of God’s pure devotees, so wonderful. *Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇava*.

So soon as the, you know, army assembled on this battlefield like millions of men, soldiers, news spread that Kṛṣṇa will be driving Arjuna’s chariot. Kurus were laughing: "Just going to be a chariot driver." The reactions were different amongst various soldiers, because the role of a chariot was generally reserved for *śūdras*. So it’s said that ignorant persons were confused and irreligious persons were critical of the fact that Kṛṣṇa was going to be the chariot driver of Arjuna. We think it’s wonderful. The Lord is so kind; he appears to be subservient to his devotee. Why? Because of love. Love reigns supreme in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and it’s nice to be subordinate to the love of your lover.

So ignorant persons were confused and irreligious persons were critical, but it’s described that devotees like the great general Bhīṣma, they were wiping away tears of ecstasy as they searched amongst the fences of soldiers to catch a glimpse of Arjuna’s charioteer, *Pārtha-sārathi*. So to this very day, thousands of years later, devotees glorify Arjuna’s eagerness to love Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s eagerness to love his devotees. They glorify Kṛṣṇa’s eagerness to serve Arjuna and Arjuna’s eagerness to serve Kṛṣṇa, because love means service. If you love someone, you don’t just stand there like the girl says, "If you love me, like, give me a flower or something." So if you love someone, you have to do something. So therefore, devotees are not just silent in the Himalayas, "Oh no," they’re busy, like, showing their love for the Divine by rendering service.

And to remind us as members of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness of Arjuna’s—or rather, Arjuna’s—affection for his devotee, Arjuna, Śrīla Prabhupāda installed deities of Rādhā-Pārthasārathi in our ISKCON temple in New Delhi, which has actually become the most famous temple in the city of Delhi. So, the battle’s about to begin, and, and so Kṛṣṇa took, you know, a few minutes. I mean, you can read the the literal translations of the *Bhagavad-gītā* quite quickly; it took 45 minutes or an hour to speak the *Bhagavad-gītā*. To, and in that regard, there’s a nice analogy that has been made by, uh, Ādi Śaṅkara in his *Gītā-māhātmya*. It’s text number six, you know, how they were just, how Kṛṣṇa was speaking *Bhagavad-gītā* to Arjuna, Arjuna was relishing it, and this is going on. Śaṅkara, in his *Gītā-māhātmya*, text 6, he describes it in a very poetic way, it’s so sweet. He says, "All the Upaniṣads are like a cow, and the milker of the cow is Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda. Arjuna is the calf, the beautiful nectar of the *Gītā* is the milk, and the fortunate devotees of fine theistic intellect are the drinkers and enjoyers of that milk." Wow.

So there’s 700 verses in this famous discussion, still in the ether, all relevant and important even today. But if you had to choose, you could say the essence of the *Gītā* can be understood in two almost identical verses. The first is *Bhagavad-gītā* 9.34, "Engage your mind in always thinking of me, become my devotee, offer obeisances to, obeisances to me, and worship me. Being completely absorbed in me, surely you will come to me." In *Bhagavad-gītā* 18.65, similar: "Always think of me, become my devotee, worship me, and offer your homage to me. Thus you will come to me without fail. I promise you this, because you are my very dear friend." Two phrases in that verse can give us great inspiration: "You will come to me without fail," and "I promise you this, because you are my friend." It’s a simple way to go back to Godhead. Why, why take this if you’ve got an important, um, appointment, why take the stairs when you can take the elevator? Why are the yoga and the *jñāna* and the *tapasya* and the austerities? Just become a lover of God; that’s your qualification for going on. And let us remember that we’ve been introduced to these deep, immortal, um, instructions and wisdom of the *Bhagavad-gītā* by our founder of ISKCON; we’ve benefited greatly. So let us assist him in distributing *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is* all over the world for the benefit of the entire human race. We don’t want to be creeping, we don’t want to be misers, we want to be *brāhmaṇas*, we want to share our good fortune with others. And when Kṛṣṇa sees we’re doing that, he gives us even more mercy. We’re taking up the mission that he started, we’re continuing with that, so that he very much appreciates that. Distribute books, distribute books, distribute books, share your good fortune with others. And this, this is also the advice again of Śaṅkara in his *Glories of the Gītā*. In this age, when people are very eager to have one scripture, one God, one mantra, he says, and one occupation, let that scripture be *Bhagavad-gītā*, the one God for the world, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, let the mantra after which everyone is seeking be the names of the Lord, and the common religious occupation of all souls, service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

And serving Śrīla Prabhupāda in this way, we will benefit, and the whole world will benefit, for the Lord has said in the final verse of *Bhagavad-gītā*, "Wherever there is Kṛṣṇa, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion." Śrīla Prabhupāda, it is back home, back to Godhead. *Kī*! Take the whole 14 worlds with this *kī*! More payment on the all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn. Thank you very much.""