"*00411*.*
"And we would like to warmly welcome you all here, wonderful devotees, in this sacred place of Śāntipura, the place of the appearance of the Ācārya. And we wanted to welcome the thousands of children who came and are here with us today. Let's give a round of applause. [applause] It is very cool, very valuable to see those third, fourth generations of devotees who are already carrying forward this mission of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. And as you can imagine, this morning we will be discussing here the glories of Advaitācārya, one of the main members of the Pañca-tattva, who is one of the main members who came from the spiritual world to spread the yuga-dharma of chanting the holy names. Here, of course, there are many nitya-siddha great souls; they also do not leave Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Ācārya is a very important and prominent figure in many of Lord Mahāprabhu's pastimes. When I was preparing for this lecture, I found out that he is mentioned 820 times in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. And many authoritative basic ślokas describe him. And one of the most famous, which we can build today's lecture on, is a verse from the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, Chapter 1, text 13:

> "Because He is non-different from the Supreme Lord Hari, He is called Advaita. And because He preaches the religion of devotion, He is also called Ācārya. He is the Lord Himself, appearing in the form of His devotee. So I surrender myself to Him."

And the very important point is that in this verse it is said that He is not different from Hari, not different from Kṛṣṇa. How so? Because He is the incarnation of Mahā-Viṣṇu. And when we chant kīrtana, we glorify the Pañca-tattva by chanting their names. And we also glorify the Mahā-Viṣṇu avatāra, Advaitācārya. It also represents an expansion of Sadāśiva. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, there is a description of Sadāśiva. I quote the scriptures describing that Advaitācārya is directly this expansion or manifestation. And thus we can understand that He is Advaitahari-nāma; He is indistinguishable from Lord Kṛṣṇa. The interesting thing is that whenever Kṛṣṇa comes as His God or His other incarnations, He always sends His devotees beforehand to prepare everything for the pastimes themselves. Similarly, before our Kārtika Parikramā started, I sent a team of devotees here who could come, see all the places, make sure that we were not sitting in the scorching sun, that everything was comfortably organized, and that there was also a wonderful setup.

And also the Lord, as we say, He appears here, is born, therefore He also needs to send His father and mother earlier so that they appear here, since they should still be older. If you look at the Pañca-tattva here in Māyāpur, the Advaitācārya is white-bearded and has become quite tall. And He is most likely the first one that Kṛṣṇa sent before He appeared as Caitanya. Actually, Advaitācārya appeared in 1434, before the appearance of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In fact, He was 52 years old when Mahāprabhu appeared. And do you know how long He lived? Up to 125 years. But the interesting thing is how He looks, how He is manifested, because He seems to be old, but He doesn’t look old. It is difficult to describe this, but we can even give an example of our founding Śrīla Prabhupāda. He was forever young. And those of us who were lucky enough to be with Him, we were there when He was 70 and 80, but at the same time we saw that He was eternally young. He always looked very young and He was always radiant.

And one day Śrīla Prabhupāda was walking along the road in London with his disciple, the secretary Śyāmasundara Prabhu. And the policeman stopped Śyāmasundara and said, "Look, your teacher is shining like the sun." Śyāmasundara breathed in and said that the soul is more radiant than 10,000 suns rising at the same time. Therefore we should not think of the Ācārya as an old man, because Mahā-Viṣṇu is there. He is always eternally young and always existing. In fact, the biography describes that once Śrīnivāsa Ācārya received darśana of Advaitācārya when he visited Śāntipura. Of course, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Narottama, and Śyāmānanda, they were second-generation devotees, so they did not personally see the Pañca-tattva. 

Therefore, when Śrīnivāsa Ācārya once visited this place, the Advaitācārya appeared to him, not in a dream, but in a vision. And he saw that Advaita had a charming body of golden hue. On His forehead was a beautiful tilaka, around His neck was a garland of fresh tulasī leaves, and His long arms extended to the trunk of an elephant. He had a broad chest, a thin waist, and beautiful legs. It describes how He fascinated people all over the world. And so it is described that His beautiful legs enchanted people all over the world. Therefore, Advaitācārya, He was not a weak man, an old man; He was Advaita, an excellent one. This is to touch only the tip of the iceberg [laughter] of the amazing stories of Advaitācārya, because there are so many of them. We can spend days, months, years praising Him and discussing His games. There is not really much information about His early life, although I did find one great story. And in the śāstras it is mentioned that before His birth in the womb of His mother, her name was Nābhādevī. 

She had a dream that Yamarāja appeared in her womb. Wow. Just imagine, this is how Yamarāja manifests in a dream, and he is in the womb. She wonders, "What is he doing there? I have a baby there." And we accept Yamarāja as one of the mahājanas, the authorities of the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness spirituality. And in her dream, Nābhādevī sees Yamarāja addressing her unborn child with the question: “What is the purpose of your appearance in this world?” In fact, it is very favorable. And the child answered very eloquently: He said, "My dear Yamarāja, I have come to this world to begin the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa as a means to remove the sufferings of Kali-yuga. I also intend to urge the Lord of all that exists to enter this world." Then Yamarāja, he glorified that child in the womb itself, walked around Him, and left to witness the pastimes of Advaitācārya. You know, like demigods, they take their places in their lodges on flower vimānas. And so Yamarāja also took his place to watch the līlās.

And at birth, or as we say, when He appeared, His parents gave Him the name Maṅgala. But later, when He grew up, He was called Kamalākṣa. And later, when He received initiation from Mādhavendra Purī, He received the name Advaita. And then He was awarded the title of Ācārya of the Vaiṣṇava community. And exemplary personalities should stand out not because they want to become famous, but because we, for example, should follow them in order to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. And that is why sometimes such devotees are given titles, for example, kavi, like the Kavi-karṇapūra. Another example is the three disciples of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. You know, he had a school and there he had just three students: Narottama, Śrīnivāsa, and Śyāmānanda. Can you imagine how great it would be to study with them? And they were exemplary students, and Jīva Gosvāmī with his transcendental vision could see that they were destined to continue the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And it was at the graduation ceremony that he bestowed titles on them. Narottama became Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. And since Śrīnivāsa was a little older and was an excellent organizer and leader, he actually organized the festival in Kheturi, and he was given the title of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya.

And at a certain point, when Advaitācārya received initiation from Mādhavendra Purī, He was given the title Ācārya. And one of the many definitions of ācārya is someone who teaches by example. And everything He did was an example for us on how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious and in particular how to serve the Mahāprabhu mission. And it is said that when He grew up, but He was only 5 years old, He had already mastered the Sanskrit alphabet, and at 6 years old He received brahminical initiation. By the age of eight, He had mastered six branches of philosophy. And by the age of 10, He had completed all four years of study. 

And here’s an example for you, if you listen carefully to the kids, here’s how you can develop. And so, as you know, boys and girls, sometimes you have lessons outdoors, in open spaces. And after careful study, I found that one day Advaitācārya was studying outdoors with a group of boys near the Ganges River, but there were many thorny bushes around. But there was also a lake nearby. If you drive through Māyāpur, you may notice that there are many lakes. And in the middle of such a lake grew a beautiful lotus flower. There was just one flower, this pinkish-red, and it exuded an intoxicating, enchanting aroma, and you could smell it from a kilometer away. And for one reason or another, at some point the teacher turned to the students and said, "Can any of you boys come to the lake and bring me a lotus flower?" But the problem was that there were a lot of thorny bushes around, and there were snakes in the lake itself. Well, the disciples hushed it up, saying, “Guru Mahārāja, the path is full of thorny bushes, and there are snakes in the water. We're not sure we can.” Now, Advaita, who was still Kamalākṣa at that time, He stood up and said,

"What touches our hearts, especially the hearts of saṅkīrtana devotees—if you give me an order, I have no fear." Isn't that wonderful? He would be traveling by train. In the 70s, we very rarely went by plane—it was unheard of. We all went by trains or buses. One time, Prabhupāda was traveling from Calcutta, I think down to Hyderabad, and they came to one stop in one village, and Prabhupāda told two of his disciples, "Get out and start a preaching center here." They didn't have anything, just the clothes on their back, maybe a few rupees. And at that time, actually, during our time with Prabhupāda, we very rarely traveled by plane; it was unheard of. Basically, everyone traveled by train. And once, when Prabhupāda was traveling from Calcutta, as far as I remember, to Hyderabad, he said to two devotees at one of the stops, "Well, get out and start here, open a preaching center." The devotees were so surprised; they didn't have much with them, basically just the clothes they were wearing. But Prabhupāda said, "Come on down, get out." We were so devoted to Prabhupāda at that time. And in fact, later a wonderful temple project flourished there.

And, of course, a spiritual master never gives impossible tasks to disciples, but they can pose a certain challenge. There can be certain difficulties, but here we can take the example of Advaitācārya, the answer He gave to His teacher: "If you give me an order, I have no fear." I remember how in Rameśvara, Prabhupāda told us that along with the instruction of the spiritual master comes the opportunity to fulfill this instruction. Therefore, along with the instruction of the spiritual master comes the opportunity to implement and fulfill it. So have no doubt. To everyone's amazement, Advaita jumped from His seat and ran across the tops of the thorny plants. He didn't walk through them; He ran straight across the tops of these thorny plants, jumped into the water, pushed aside all the snakes, and plucked a lotus, offered it to the spiritual master. And the master, he was so amazed and said the famous phrase that without a doubt this child is the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And he actually had no idea that this Kamalākṣa Advaita is in fact Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself and non-different from Him.

And later, as it happens, Kuvera Paṇḍita and Nābhādevī, His parents, left this world. Advaitācārya was still young at that time. He went on trips to various holy places. And we also heard how Balarāma, Nityānanda, Mahāprabhu, and other eminent associates, they traveled throughout this holy land, visiting various holy places. And you and I are following in the footsteps of the mahājanas as part of our Kārtika Parikramā. We are visiting various places in Māyāpur, Navadvīpa, and later we will go to Calcutta, and then to Jagannātha Purī. In 1979, when I took sannyāsa here in Māyāpur, I was only 29 years old. Instead of immediately returning to France and resuming my duties, I then told my GBC authority that I was going to spend six months traveling through the holy places of India. I don’t want to immediately return to France and resume my responsibility of service as a manager. I want to wander through the holy places of India. Like one of my godbrothers, when he first came to India in the early seventies, he didn’t know what exactly to do here.

So he went to Śrīla Prabhupāda and asked him, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I came here and what should I do here?" Prabhupāda made a gesture with his hand and said, "Just wander, just wander here." I say, just wander here. After all, every particle of dust is cintāmaṇi. Every tree is kalpavṛkṣa. Everywhere there are many saintly devotees and Kṛṣṇa's most beloved animals, the cows. And just wander here. And when I told this to my GBC, he said in response, "This is not authoritative." But I was ready. I said, "But actually it is authoritative." I quoted Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śaraṇāgati 31.3: *bhramana-raṅge...* "Those places where my Lord Gaurasundara traveled for His pastimes, I will visit in the association of loving devotees." And to him there was nothing to answer. And we are now duly following the instructions of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, doing the same as described here, that we visit all those places where my dear Lord Gaurasundara traveled together in the company of His loving devotees. And now it will be very, very difficult to choose just one. Once, during one of His pilgrimages, Advaitācārya visited Vṛndāvana and stayed near Seva-kuñja, the place where the rāsa-līlā takes place, in a place called Keśarī-vana.

But one day He went to Gokula. And Gokula, it is located closer to Mathurā. Before you cross the river, Gokula is right there. And there Kṛṣṇa performed His childhood pastimes, which we celebrate in this month. And it is described that while visiting Gokula, Advaitācārya discovered the deity Madanagopāla. And this deity Madanagopāla, as I generally believe, is not that the devotees find the deities of Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa Himself, He finds and chooses devotees. And that deity Madanagopāla, who was then, as it were, found by Advaitācārya, and later became known as Madana-mohana. You know, it's a beautiful temple, which is located on the road in Vṛndāvana. And so, if you know, this deity, the consequences of which Sanātana Gosvāmī worshipped, there is a large temple there. And the deity Madana-mohana itself, it was quite large at that time, Madanagopāla. And it was Advaitācārya who brought Him back to Keśarī-vana and worshipped Him there. And whenever we think of Madana-mohana, we immediately think of Sanātana Gosvāmī, who worshipped Him. But the first person who worshipped Him was Advaitācārya. And one day, when He went on business, Muslim soldiers came, having heard that a deity was being worshipped in Keśarī-vana.

And the main thing these soldiers, tyrants did was to destroy the deity. They wanted to do this. And Advaitācārya had installed this deity on a small altar. And imagine, it turned out that there was no one to protect this deity. And Madanagopāla, He jumped off the altar and hid in the bushes. Imagine the deity—if you listened carefully—the story about the deity who Himself jumped off the altar and hid in the bushes. That's why He says, "You are not a statue, Lord, You are the direct son of Nanda Mahārāja." And you know the story of Śrīpāda, when the little brāhmaṇa, he approached the Lord of Vṛndāvana, asked Him to be his witness, and went to Orissa with Him. And this little boy had so much śraddhā, so much faith. And when he asked the Lord, "Will You go with me?" He said, "Yes, I will follow you." And this is Caitanya-caritāmṛta. But the boy said, "Well, You are a deity, how will You walk?" Śrīpāda said: "Young man, if I can talk, then I can walk." And the deity followed him. Before the disappearance, we install small, large-sized deities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Los Angeles, he said that if you look at these deities, perceive them as a piece of metal, then they will not be like that, but if you treat them as a person, then one day they will speak to you. Therefore, this is not a fairy tale, this is not an exaggeration, otherwise it would be just an insult. We know the power of this. This is all true.

And the soldiers, having searched the entire area, were unable to find the deity who was hiding in the bushes. They were looking for Him, and He came running and jumped into the lap of Advaitācārya. This is more than this. And when Advaitācārya returned home, He did not see Madanagopāla anywhere. He was looking for Him. He learned about what had happened, that Muslim soldiers had come, but He could not find Him. And the deity itself found the Advaitācārya and jumped onto His lap. And this is the story. This is līlā. This is really happening. This is much more interesting than the various news that are broadcast to us. It's all the same thing over and over again.

And imagine [laughter], it is described that this deity, it was trembling with fear and excitement. And it is described that Advaitācārya calmed Him down. It turns out that the Lord Himself calmed the Lord. The deity, just a minute, is also full of pastimes. Thus He told Him everything that had happened. And since the place where they were was at a distance, the Ācārya decided to take this deity to the family of the brāhmaṇas so that they could worship Him there. And this is a separate whole story, in which, in the end, the son, when he went asking for madhukarī, he looked into the house of one of these families and saw how they were playing with the deity. Children and family members, they were struggling with it so much. Sanātana Gosvāmī looked into the house and said, "I don't want to be with you any more than you want to give Him; you give Him to me." And when Sanātana Gosvāmī saw such treatment of the Lord, he immediately entered, approached the head of the family and said: "Well, what is this? We must worship with reverence and respect. And what are you doing?" And what happened at that moment? In fact, at that moment the deity fell in love with Sanātana Gosvāmī. And later that night He came in a dream to the head of this family and said, "Next time he comes, please hand Me over to him." And these are all līlās.

And, of course, later he organized the construction of a beautiful temple and later named this deity. I will tell you one last detail in connection with this story. You may not know about this, but it is said that during His stay in Keśarī-vana, Advaitācārya discovered a picture of Kṛṣṇa painted by Viśākhā. And this picture is 500 years old, but over time it was lost, and no one knows where it is now. And finally, returning here to Māyāpur, Advaitācārya got married and settled here in Śāntipura. And He simultaneously married two women. In those days, this was very common. One of His wives was named Sītā Devī, and the other Śrī Devī. And the ācāryas say that they were both the personification of the expansion of Paurnamāsī, the energy of the Lord. And here is a description of the wedding ceremony. And what I noticed is that Sītā Devī was sitting next to her husband, Advaita. She says that he is the highest among all men, and standing here he shines like gold. And his other wife, Śrī Devī, said about Advaitācārya that He is a treasure trove of all beauty and grace in one form. Girls, take notes on how a woman speaks of a beautiful husband.

And you can give a separate lecture on how Sītā Devī and Advaitācārya had five sons. And Śrī Devī, they had one son. And one fine day, the great saint Mādhavendra Purī visited the house of Advaitācārya. And there is a small altar for Mādhavendra Purī. And we all know that Mādhavendra Purī was the one who introduced the concept of mādhurya-rasa in rāgānuga-bhakti to the whole world. And we are so fortunate that we are in the present time, living, because quite recently, one can say, this information about love-manifested relationships in rāgānuga-bhakti, which was not previously available. And another interesting point is that when I read Govardhana-līlā, he is described as a tree. And not an ordinary tree, but a kalpavṛkṣa. And everything in Vṛndāvana has a personality and everything acts to please the Lord, enjoying His divine miracle. And so he is a kalpavṛkṣa tree, fulfilling desires. It is said that he stands at Nidhivana [laughter]. Nidhivana is one of the places where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have very intimate, confidential, pastoral loving pastimes. The tree, witnessing the whole thing, he serves. His shade is there for the pastimes. Ultimately, all the rasas served the mādhurya-rasa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, so obviously when He came to this...

And all the other rasas, they ultimately support and serve the mādhurya-rasa. And he, in the form of this kalpavṛkṣa tree, directly resided in Nidhivana together, where various loving, intimate pastimes of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa take place. Therefore, under his shade, his tree, all this happened, and he observed it all. So he knows what he's talking about. And when Advaitācārya saw Mādhavendra Purī's ecstatic love, He asked him for initiation. And he, in turn, gave initiation to Haridāsa Ṭhākura. And that's our family, that's our family tree. Yes, we have fathers and mothers, no, we have an entire family and a line of history. And He studied with Mādhavendra Purī. These are all exalted souls who set an example for us, and we need to go to school and study. And from Mādhavendra Purī He learned about prema. He learned the love of the Gopīs. And the Bhagavata Purāṇa describes how one day in Navadvīpa, Advaitācārya, He danced in the mood of the Gopīs. This is a whole separate story from the lecture. It is said that He entered this mood through chanting the holy names, although He was always a Mahā-Viṣṇu. At that time in Navadvīpa, many devotees gathered in the house of Ācārya, read the Bhagavad-gītā, the Bhāgavatam, and performed kīrtanas.

But at that time, Navadvīpa, which was the center of spiritual education, practically no one was interested in bhakti or devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. No one. They were all studying logic, karma-kāṇḍa, striving for the supreme planets, practicing yoga, mystic powers, jñāna, and merging with Brahman. But in Navadvīpa, Kṛṣṇa's name was nowhere to be heard. Ordinary people, they were only engaged in sinful activities. And so Advaitācārya thought this: "If Kṛṣṇa Himself appears to spread the teachings of devotional service, only then will liberation be possible for all people." And that's the principle He established. And also, as is known, He took a Śālagrāma-śilā and worshipped It with tulasī leaves and Ganges water. And He prayed to the Śālagrāma-śilā, prayed to the Supreme Lord that He would please appear in a suitable form in Kali-yuga and bestow mercy on the people of this age. And when we think of prayer, we think of vandana, yes, with folded palms, we murmur, pray, say something. No. And He screamed at the top of His lungs: "Hare Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa! Please, Kṛṣṇa, descend into the ocean of Kali-yuga and spread the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra!"

His compassion, His moods and His motives, they were so deep. This prayer pierced the covering of the material world, passed through the Vaikuṇṭhas, through the river Virajā, tearing into the atmosphere to Gokula, where Goloka, where the Lord heard Him. An ordinary person can shout and be heard two blocks away. But when Mahā-Viṣṇu and Sadāśiva, united in the personality of Advaitācārya, call out, these cries and these prayers pierce the coverings of the universe and reach the spiritual world. Together, and thus Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, They together manifested as united, as the Lord of Caitanya-caritāmṛta. And there were also certain associates. And the Lord Himself, He comes not only surrounded by His devotees, but also having at hand certain weapons in order to protect the devotees and punish the sinners. And in the same way, the Lord also came...

*Kali-yuga-taru kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇare rāma...* So the Lord appeared, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He also appeared with His astras, weapons, but not with the sudarśana-cakra, not with the gadā or any other weapons, but *kali-kāli-nāma-rūpa kṛṣṇa-avatāra* with the holy names of Kṛṣṇa. They should understand and know that there are several reasons for the appearance of the Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, one of which is to taste the nectar of love of Rādhā for Him, and the other is to establish yuga-dharma and respond to Advaitācārya. Therefore, we are here to acknowledge and express our gratitude and our willingness to play a certain role in promoting this. What would this world be if Lord Caitanya had not come to give us this remedy for our suffering? It is a medicine. It solves all the problems of the world. People may not notice it, but it works. And we have felt this from our own example. We understand how it affects us and how it will work on any other person in this world. That's why we have this faith.

And today we can consider ourselves followers of Advaitācārya. And this is our pride. This pride does not diminish our spiritual level. The cowherd girls, for example, are proud to be servants of Kṛṣṇa. And we are proud to be instruments in the hands of the divine. And again, we can, of course, talk for hours about the numerous games of Advaitācārya. But here we are surrounded by children, and they get tired. But there are so many games. I remember the Bible, from the Gospel of John 21:25, says the following: "Jesus did many other things. But if we were to write about them in detail, then I think even the world itself would not contain the books written." What can we say about the games of the Lord? And we need, of course, to stop here, but before we do, I would like to share with you the most interesting and wonderful story that happened here, in the Dhāma. Because it is very near and dear to us, when you hear it, it will resonate with your heart. You will feel the response and perhaps a few tears will be shed. Should I tell you this story? Okay.

And it is connected with our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. He visited this place from time to time to gather strength to go West. How do we know about this? Because in 1980, during our annual Māyāpur festival at the Māyāpur Chandrodaya Mandir temple, an elderly pūjārī of this temple, who, unfortunately, is no longer with us, he came to visit and told the story of Śrīla Prabhupāda's visit, because then there was only a temple, a long building, but he said that "I was serving as a pūjārī then and saw Śrīla Prabhupāda coming." And these events are also described in the book of our Prabhupāda, *A Friend to All*, written by my other spiritual sister, Prakṛti Devī Dāsī. This is a very interesting book, because it is a collection of interviews with people outside the primordial world who knew Śrīla Prabhupāda and came into contact with him. Interviews with those people who knew Śrīla Prabhupāda before and after he began to preach, went to the West. So, this elderly pūjārī, he told the assembled devotees that in the 1940s, the old pūjārī, the priest of this temple, he noticed that one gṛhastha, a Bengali devotee, would come to the temple.

He would come quite regularly, and he would be dressed in a white khādi dhoti and kurta. He would always come alone. And this Bengali devotee, he would sit at the back of the temple, without saying a word, and quietly, with deep absorption, chant japa in a corner. This interested, inquisitive man, he would come on weekends, usually once a month or two. And after many hours of japa, he would thank the pūjārī and leave. And since his devotion to conducting this bhajana was, one might say, solitary, he never disturbed him, did not approach, did not talk to him. But the pūjārī, he noticed that this gentleman, chanting the holy names, sometimes his eyes filled with tears, and his voice broke. And in the forties, fifties, this happened again and again. And then at one point, this person stopped coming. He noticed that although this person regularly came, chanted and cried, his voice broke. He came for almost 20 years, in the fifties, he suddenly stopped coming. But then he said that in August 1965, he saw a sannyāsī in saffron clothes sit in the same place, at the back of the mandira.

And looking closely, he recognized that this same person, who had previously been a gṛhastha, had now come as a sannyāsī. And he came and sat, chanting the mahā-mantra for even longer. Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare. And he cried even more during the chanting of the holy names. One day, he hid, and one evening after chanting the holy names, he offered this sannyāsī daṇḍavats. He fell down before the deities in this bow. And he offered them for a long, long time, and then he stood up and thanked the pūjārī for his service. And after a long time, he finally turned to him with the question: "Who are you? I remember you from long ago, when you were still a gṛhastha, and now you have come as a sannyāsī." Mahārāja replied: "My name is Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Bhaktivedanta Swami. I am an unworthy disciple of His Divine Grace Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Prabhupāda, my divine teacher. I haven't come here for so long because my spiritual master gave me an impossible mission. His wish is that I cross the ocean, go to the Western countries and spread the sublime teachings of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But I don't know how this mission will be successful.

So I came here to this special house of Śrī Advaitācārya, where He, Prabhu, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu met to plan the saṅkīrtana movement, and it was here that they started the flow of divine love that swept India and continues to this day. So I prayed sincerely here that they would all grant me their mercy, somehow empower me and guide me. I want to fulfill my spiritual master's desire, but I feel completely unqualified to do so." Pūjārī said that as Śrīla Prabhupāda spoke, tears were streaming down his cheeks. He said this: "Tomorrow I am leaving for Calcutta to board a ship and cross the ocean to America." Can you imagine how special this place is, the place where Śrīla Prabhupāda prayed for mercy. A place he last visited shortly before his trip to Calcutta, where he boarded the Jaladuta. Just imagine, here we are, sitting in the place that Śrīla Prabhupāda chose as the last place to collect these blessings, because he said that "I don’t know what awaits me next, but I pray for this mission to come true." This place is so important.

And again, for many years, this priest did not hear about the fall. But gradually, after several years, he began to notice for the first time the lives of white Vaiṣṇavas. They came dressed in dhoti and sari and chanted tulasi. And the pūjārī never spoke to them. He thought: "It's strange what these people do." And this is a real story, where actually one of the devotees gave him a magazine called *Back to Godhead* from America. And when he was leafing through the magazine, he saw a picture of Śrīla Prabhupāda with the caption: "The founder of the ācārya who brought Kṛṣṇa consciousness to the West." And he remembered and realized that he had succeeded; he was able to do it. And here are the fruits and flowers of his activity that have come here to Māyāpur.

And he remembered how Śrīla Prabhupāda spoke about it as an impossible mission, but he was able to accomplish the impossible. And in 1980, when we had a festival, a celebration, he came to our leaders and told them about this game. And I think this is the most fitting ending, but again it is not the end. We know these games are ongoing, so don't think this is the end. Some desire, God's desire, that instead of having 500 people here hearing these glories, we can have a whole area here [applause] filled. And thus we follow in the footsteps of Śrīla Prabhupāda. We also come here, to this place. We pray for a mission, for mercy, so that, like him, some of you will then go to the West, some of you will go to China and Japan in order to share, and so that not 400-500, but more devotees will be able to come here. And such was his wish, to fulfill the wishes of his spiritual teacher Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and the wish of his spiritual teacher Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. And so that over time we can also bring even more devotees, and they, like a tsunami, can close, completely cover this place, satisfying the desire of the spiritual teachers. So the children are here not by chance; today you joined us because we actually chose this particular day by chance. And it so happened that Advaitācārya Himself chose you to come here, to His house, because you will be entrusted with the fulfillment of His mission.

*Jaya Śrī Advaita-acārya!* Thanks a lot. Here.""