"*00121*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone. Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is what we expect from this temple. I am visiting numerous temples here in Delhi, and I consider this the "flagship" temple. You know that term: a business will have different outlets around the city, but they have their main branch, and it is called the flagship. So, this is the flagship of ISKCON Delhi. All by the mercy of Gopāl Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja.

So, this morning we are continuing with your study of the *Bhāgavatam*, the *Grantha-rāja*. *Grantha* means "book," and *rāja* means "king" in Sanskrit, so *Grantha-rāja* means the king of all scriptures, because it deals only with the topmost, blissful pastimes of Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Vraja. So, let us begin.

This is the Seventh Canto, a very significant canto. Actually, if you list all of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s lectures, most of them came from the Seventh Canto. There are so many relevant instructions for us as aspiring devotees. Many of them come from Prahlāda Mahārāja, whom we will be discussing today. So, Seventh Canto, Seventh Chapter, beginning with verse 21, I think. Because we do not have so much time, I will just recite the verse myself: *ātmā medham...*

The translation: *Ātmā* refers to the Supreme Lord or the living entities. Both of them are spiritual, freed from birth and death, freed from deterioration, and freed from material contamination. They are individual, they are the knowers of the external body, and they are the foundation or shelter of everything. They are free from material change, they are self-illuminated, they are the cause of all causes, and they are all-pervading. They have nothing to do with the material body, and therefore they are always uncovered. With these transcendental qualities, one who is actually learned must give up the illusory concept of life in which one thinks, "I am the material body, and everything in relationship with this body is mine."

Regarding Śrīla Prabhupāda’s purport: it is a long purport, so I will just take a couple of paragraphs, and maybe tomorrow the next speaker can continue, because without the purports, what can we understand? Prabhupāda is—we often say—the "revealer of the dhāma." So, to begin with, he writes in *Bhagavad-gītā* 15.7, Kṛṣṇa clearly says: "All the living entities are part of Me." Therefore, the living entities are qualitatively the same as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Who is the leader? He is our leader, the Supreme amongst all living entities. In the Vedas, it is said that the Lord is the chief individual living entity and the leader of the subordinate living entities. 

So, what is very significant today in this verse—or actually, better yet, a number of verses that you are studying—is what we are hearing from the great devotee, Prahlāda Mahārāja. *Prahlāda Mahārāja kī jaya!* And who is Prahlāda Mahārāja? We could go on for days, months, or years. But there is a saying: "Elegance is truth spoken concisely." Instead of going on a long-winded lecture, you summarize. Who is Prahlāda? He is one of the twelve *mahājanas*. That says a lot; you do not have to say anything else. Just like one time they asked Prabhupāda, "Can you tell us something about your spiritual master?" He could have gone on for days, but he said, "Ah, my spiritual master is a Vaikuṇṭha-mān." It says it all. Sometimes you think of someone like Gopāl Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja; he was a "Prabhupāda-mān."

So, Prahlāda Mahārāja—who are the twelve *mahājanas*? They are the authorities on the science of devotional service. Prabhupāda would often say this: "This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is authoritative; it has authority. It is not something whimsical." We have our authorities, the *mahājanas*, and *mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ*—we are meant to follow in their footsteps. So here we are today, following in the footsteps of a five-year-old boy. Is that his credit? He is five years old! I mean, generally, we want to hear from the wise sages, someone who is very elderly, who has experienced this world, who knows it is a temporary place full of miseries, and who knows the positive alternative—back home, back to Godhead. He has a little glimmer in his eye, his hair is already gray, he has been through everything; here is a little five-year-old boy speaking to us. But he is not just any five-year-old boy. He is a pure devotee of the Lord, and thus he is very dear to the Lord.

Such a verse: the pure devotee—Kṛṣṇa says, "The pure devotee is always within the core of My heart, and I am always in the heart of the pure devotee. My devotees do not know anything else but Me, and I do not know anyone else but them." He is speaking about unlimited pure devotees, but he is including Prahlāda Mahārāja. Just how dear is Prahlāda Mahārāja to the Lord? He is so dear that the Lord reserved one incarnation just for him. Remember Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva? He appeared from the pillar, right? The Lord appeared from the pillar, He fought and killed Hiraṇyakaśipu, killed the army of Hiraṇyakaśipu, spoke some words to Prahlāda, and then he went back to Vaikuṇṭha. He came for one devotee in that incarnation. A whole incarnation for one devotee, Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja.

Generally, when Kṛṣṇa comes to this world, He spends some time here. Why does He come? He comes to deliver devotees. The word "pious" is there, but pious in the sense that devotees are most pious, and they have Kṛṣṇa's interest at heart, so He comes to rescue not one, two, or three, but as many as possible. Lord Caitanya, actually, according to Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, during the time of Lord Caitanya, the whole universe was liberated back home, back to Godhead, and it filled up again with you and me. So, the Lord comes, and He spends some time here. He not only delivers devotees, He makes it easier for devotees, He annihilates the *asuras*, and because in this world everything deteriorates, unfortunately, religious principles also deteriorate, as we see now very quickly in Kali-yuga. So, He comes to reestablish *dharma*. How does He do it? He speaks *Bhagavad-gītā*. The *Gītā* describes the essence of *dharma*.

Kṛṣṇa is saying: "You have many *dharmas*. Take care of your body, take care of your family, take care of your village, take care of your country." We are not irresponsible. But what is the supreme *dharma*? To understand who you are, to remember who you are, who is Bhagavān, who is Kṛṣṇa, and what is your intimate loving relationship with Him. That is our ultimate responsibility. If we do everything else and we do not do that, our human life is not successful. But if you do nothing else and you do that, your life is perfect. To reconnect with Kṛṣṇa, that is the goal of life. 

So, Kṛṣṇa makes it very easy. He speaks to Arjuna. It took about 45 minutes, and He reestablished *dharma*. But to do that, Kṛṣṇa spent about 125 years on this planet. A little of that time was in Vraja, but then He was called to Mathurā by Kaṁsa to fight the wrestlers, and He killed Kaṁsa. Then He went to Dvārakā, and actually, Kṛṣṇa spent most of His time in Dvārakā. Did you know that? He was on this planet 125 years and He spent 100 years in Dvārakā. I just visited New Dvārakā, but it is as good as Dvārakā, just like Prabhupāda established New Vṛndāvana in West Virginia, United States of America. He considered it non-different than Vṛndāvana. Why? Because the *mūrti* is there. My dear Lord, You are not a statue. You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda. Wherever there is Kṛṣṇa, there is Kṛṣṇa’s abode, His *parikara*, His devotees, the different moods, the mellows of serving Kṛṣṇa—it is all there because Kṛṣṇa is present. So we have our New Dvārakā, and I spoke there last night, and I felt I was in Dvārakā. Very nice.

So when Kṛṣṇa comes, He comes for some time. But Nṛsiṁhadeva, He is here and He is gone. On His way back to Vaikuṇṭha, He was flying over a lake near Māyāpur, and He looked down. He thought, "Oh, this is Satya-yuga, but in Kali-yuga, I am going to come here in another incarnation, a very special incarnation: Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So, let me go down to this spot and just absorb the mood of this dhāma, Navadvīpa-Māyāpur." So He took a little break; He didn't go back immediately. Nṛsiṁhadeva rested in Māyāpur Dhāma, and the demigods saw that He was coming down, so they built a lake where Nṛsiṁhadeva could wash His hands of the blood of Hiraṇyakaśipu and become refreshed and then go back. But my point is, He is there, He is here, He is back there—for what? For one devotee. So that shows how special Prahlāda Mahārāja is. Okay, he is five years old, but do not get distracted by that. He is as pure as they can come. 

So it is important to discuss this special personality, one of the *mahājanas*. In fact, Nārada Muni, at the end of the Seventh Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, gives us an idea of the benefit of hearing this pastime about Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva delivering His devotee, Prahlāda Mahārāja. We are sitting here discussing—what is the benefit? It is Sunday morning. I was driving from where I am staying to here. There is no one on the street. They are all sleeping because they were partying on Saturday night; many of them, right? It is the holiday season. Here you are. You have come, you have made the trouble to get up early and come here and sit and participate. What benefit do you get? So Nārada Muni says, towards the end of the Seventh Canto, about those who hear the pastimes of Prahlāda Mahārāja and Nṛsiṁha: "One who hears and chants this narration about the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, Lord Nṛsiṁha, is certainly liberated from material bondage without fail."

Of course, by hearing such exalted verses about such an exalted person and the *Puruṣottama*—the best of all male individuals—Kṛṣṇa, and His various incarnations, and how these great devotees are way above what we are right now, an aspiring devotee might get a little discouraged. Because Kṛṣṇa is speaking about His relationship with pure, unalloyed devotees. What does that have to do with us? We are in kindergarten, right? Preschool? Let us be honest, we are a work in progress. We have just—after millions and millions and millions of lifetimes of forgetting Kṛṣṇa—we have woken up and we have agreed, "Yes, this is very nice. Let me chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa..." I am so far from the goal of Kṛṣṇa; I hope I will probably never make it. 

But actually, this pastime of how Prahlāda Mahārāja himself became a devotee—a pure devotee of the Lord—it is very interesting, it is very instructive, and it is very encouraging for all of us. We do not think of Prahlāda Mahārāja, you know, like becoming a new devotee and going to the *bhakta* program. No, he is *nitya-siddha*. *Nitya-siddha* means those personalities, unlimited in Vaikuṇṭha and Goloka, who never fall down. They never come to this nasty world. Like Prabhupāda said to one of my godbrothers one time, "I never wanted to come to this nasty place, but Kṛṣṇa sent me here to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Actually, Gaur-Govinda Mahārāja, my illustrious godbrother who has since departed back home, back to Godhead, he said one time in a class, "Two types of *nitya-siddhas* come." *Vaikuṇṭha* means a place of anxiety—no, that is this world; *Vaikuṇṭha* means where there is no anxiety. Two souls leave that domain to come to this domain; it is quite amazing. One, he said, is the *vaikuṇṭhavāsī* who understands what is happening down here in the 14 planetary systems, and out of his own goodwill, he comes. Such compassion! He comes. And the other type of nitya-liberated soul is the one that Kṛṣṇa chooses to come here. We have a saying in English: "Many are called, but few are chosen." So Prabhupāda is the chosen son, chosen by Kṛṣṇa to fulfill the desires of Kṛṣṇa as He came as Caitanya Mahāprabhu to spread the glories of the Lord all over this planet. 

Prabhupāda, my godbrother told me, said that when Prabhupāda was speaking, he said Kṛṣṇa asked him to... well, Prabhupāda said, "I told the Lord, 'I am not so much inclined to austerity.'" It is one of those intimate moments. "I am not so much inclined to austerity," and Kṛṣṇa said, "That is all right, Prabhupāda. In Goloka, you just go down and write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and I will take care of everything else for you. I will give you all facility." 

Prabhupāda came, and he said in the beginning, "Kṛṣṇa sent me a few good men," like Gopāl Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja, right? First one to go to Russia. I was just in Russia; they threw me in prison, yeah, for the crime of speaking *Bhagavad-gītā*. "How has this foreigner come here? He wants to change our religion!" The KGB came and arrested me; a week in the prison. Oh, I won't tell you what a Russian prison is like. They were going to give me two years, but somehow Nṛsiṁhadeva protected me, and they kicked me out of the country and said, "You can never come back." We have our ways of sneaking around as *sankīrtana* devotees, Kṛṣṇa! So, but Prabhupāda came. 

So we are talking about Prahlāda Mahārāja. He is a *nitya-siddha*. He is one of the 12 *mahājanas*. He never fell down. But for instructive purposes, sometimes devotees of that caliber, they take on a position—a certain position like a conditioned soul—to show us how to not become a conditioned soul and elevate ourselves. So in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* by Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, and commented on by... well, I will catch the name later... he describes how Prahlāda Mahārāja himself became a devotee from a "fallen" condition. But do not think he was fallen; it is something like Arjuna's position 5,000 years ago. Arjuna is also *nitya-siddha*. He is also an eternally liberated soul. Arjuna, he is a friend of Kṛṣṇa. But in order to speak *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa put him into illusion so He could speak the *Gītā*. He is not going to—you know, he is a friend! He wanted to speak. So, it took on a confidential associate. Arjuna is lamenting: "Oh, but what about my family? I can't fight this battle. You know, all my family members are on the other side, too. I can't do this." And Kṛṣṇa says, "You are a great soul. How have these impurities come upon you, Arjuna?" Then He spoke the *Gītā* to enlighten Arjuna. But actually, He was speaking to us. You understand? Sometimes, you can just imagine, He put him into illusion so He could speak about it. Just see to what extreme a devotee will go to please the Lord! You know, "Go sweep the temple." Oh, gosh. "Go out on *sankīrtana*." I'm scared. But we do it. So just see how far a devotee will agree to be put into illusion so the Lord can make an example of him, how to progress and come to perfection. Interesting process, Kṛṣṇa.

So what exactly happened here? How did—what example do we have from Prahlāda Mahārāja to show how we can come from a conditioned state to a liberated state? Well, we will discuss what is there in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* by Sanātana Gosvāmī and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. The pastime of the deliverance—"quote-unquote" deliverance—of Prahlāda Mahārāja will give us great hope and faith that all of us who are imperfect can become perfect. And this pastime is authorized; I am not making it up because it is in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*. Prabhupāda gave great importance to this book, *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*. He probably would have translated it had he lived longer. But in the purport to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 1.135, Prabhupāda writes: "Listen, the subject matter of the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* by Sanātana Gosvāmī was collected by Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī and is known as *Vaiṣṇava-smṛti*." There you go! It is an authorized book. And Prabhupāda went on to give a detailed description of each chapter. 

And then in a letter on January 9th, 1976, Prabhupāda wrote, he wrote to a disciple: "Now, beginning from this year's Māyāpur festival, the devotees will begin preparing for Bhakti-śāstrī examination. Therefore, we require a guidebook for deity worship, *arcana*, based on *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*." So, in learned circles, when you are speaking spiritual knowledge, you have to be able to refer to the *śāstra* to make it authoritative. You cannot make something go, "I think..." No! Every *Bhāgavatam* speaker, whatever he says, he should be able to back it up. "Oh, it is said in the *Bhagavad-gītā*. It is said in the *Bhāgavatam*. It is said in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*." And you see how expert Prabhupāda was at that. You know, I quote maybe three or four verses in my classes. If you listen to a Prabhupāda class, 15, 20 Sanskrit verses—it is just flowing, just substantiating that the authority is Guru, Śāstra... he was so expert. 

So, I am going to share a pastime with you which you are going to find quite amazing—how Prahlāda "quote-unquote" became a devotee, but it is in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*. So, therein in the 14th *vilāsa*—*vilāsa* means chapter—so, *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, the glories of Hare Kṛṣṇa, this is the 14th chapter, and it begins with verses 418 and 419. Would you like to hear how Prahlāda became delivered? Because we are very far from the goal, so we need examples. Follow the leader. Prahlāda is one of our leaders. We are all—I am in my 70s, you are in your 60s, I am in my 50s—we are following a five-year-old boy back home, back to Godhead. 

So, he demonstrated... Kṛṣṇa made him an example. And here it is. Prahlāda Mahārāja, in the 14th of *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, he is talking to Nṛsiṁhadeva at some point. He says, "Namaste... Supreme Lord. Oh Viṣṇu, I bow down to You. Oh Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, I offer my obeisances to You. I am Your devotee. Oh Lord of lords, I now express to You my heartfelt inquiry." It is a wonderful way to ask, not just "Uh, how do you do?" No, you glorify the personality. "Thank you, Prabhu, for, you know, giving this seminar here in New York for one month. We would like to welcome you with a garland and this and that, and now please speak." Etiquette. So he is glorifying the Lord, and he says—this is so significant—"Oh Lord, how did I develop such intense devotion for You?" Wow. We need examples. So here, he is asking, "How did I develop such intense devotion?" "Oh my Lord, kindly tell me, how did I become Your devotee?" Who would like to be a devotee of Nṛsiṁhadeva? So Prahlāda is inquiring, "How do you do it?" 

So, the Lord replied: "Oh, gently, a gently learned one. Oh my son," the Lord calls Prahlāda His son. Would you like that day when the Lord calls you His son? "Oh my dear son. Oh wow, I made it." "Oh greatly learned one. Oh my son, listen carefully as I explain to you the reason for your devotion to Me that has made you very dear to Me." So, the Lord went on to say—and this is quite amazing—"Prahlāda, in ancient times, you were born as a *brāhmaṇa*, but you did not study the scriptures." Ladies and gentlemen, Prabhupāda said, "My only criticism of my devotees is they don't read my books." Who reads Prabhupāda's books? Raise your hands. Okay, everyone should read Prabhupāda's books. So he said, "You were born as a *brāhmaṇa*, a *vipra*, but you didn't study. Your name was Vāsudeva, and unfortunately, later in life, you became attached to a prostitute." This is just a pastime; it is not that Prahlāda Mahārāja ever became attracted—just like Arjuna was never in illusion—but to speak the *Gītā*, this had to happen. So Nṛsiṁhadeva says, "Unfortunately, although you were born in a *brāhmaṇa* family, you became attached to a prostitute, and as a result, you became addicted to drinking wine and other sinful activities." 

Then the Lord said, "You spent most of your time in the house of the prostitute. One day, however, you and her quarreled. There was some quarrel going on that day." They quarreled—actually, I was studying—was it on Nṛsiṁhadeva-dāsī? They quarreled on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day. Of course, he wasn't observing it; he wasn't at the temple, you know, having *kīrtana* and glorifying. He just was in the house of the prostitute, and they quarreled on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva's appearance day. So the Lord continued, "Because of that quarrel, you missed your meal that day. Oh, it was a long fight and nobody ate." And as a result, you unknowingly fasted, unknowingly fasted on that sacred day. And because you were quarreling, you also did not sleep that entire night. The prostitute also did not eat anything, nor did she sleep that night in your association. In other words, for the whole day of Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī, neither of them ate and neither of them slept. 

So the Lord goes on: "So, because of fasting and not sleeping on the day others celebrated My appearance, both of you became purified and accumulated heaps of pious merit." That is called *ajñāta-sukṛti*. You do some devotional service, but you know... you are not knowing you are doing it, but you still get the benefit. Like you go on the street and somebody buys a book; he said, if they just hold the book in their hands, they make so much advancement. They do not know. Or if they just read one line, their life is perfect. Or you are distributing *simply wonderfuls* on the street. Someone takes it. "That was good, thank you." The seed is planted, and it will bear fruit in time. Whatever progress you make in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you start where you left off in your next lifetime. So, next lifetime you get a second *simply wonderful*, and it purifies you, and then, "Who are these Hare Kṛṣṇas? Let me go to the temple." This is how it works. *Ajñāta-sukṛti* means you are doing devotional service, but you are not aware of it, but still the benefit is there. Just like a mother: the child doesn't want to take the bitter medicine, so Mommy puts it in a sugar cube, and the baby takes it; he gets the medicine. So Kṛṣṇa arranges so many ways that we start the process of devotional service. 

So, Nṛsiṁhadeva said, "You should know, my dear Prahlāda, that on the strength of observing a vow on My appearance day, the demigods are able to enjoy their lives in the heavenly planets." This Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī is coming in May, correct? Get prepared. Take advantage. If you can fast and not sleep on that day—just imagine, Prahlāda was doing it not knowing what is happening. He got so much benefit. Imagine if you fast and you do not sleep, how much benefit you will get! This is just to instruct us, actually. And because the demigods do it, they know Nṛsiṁhadeva. He is a very popular deity in ISKCON. You have Nṛsiṁhadeva here, very popular deity. I remember when the first time He appeared in this movement as a deity. It was my godbrother, Gurukṛpā at the time, Mahārāja. He got a deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁhadeva at some antique shop. He came to Prabhupāda in South India; Prabhupāda was traveling. He said, "Can I worship this deity?" Prabhupāda said, "Nṛsiṁha is very, very angry. So, if you make an offense in the *pūjā*, there is a severe reaction." He said like that. So Gurukṛpā thought, "I better put Him away." But Prabhupāda said, "Worship of Nṛsiṁhadeva is very important because He cleanses the heart of *anarthas*. He is within, and He was out so that we can eventually advance to pure devotional service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This is the real reason we worship Nṛsiṁhadeva. He can remove the *anarthas* so that we can develop our love for Rādhā-Śyāma, and also He gives protection." And so Prabhupāda said, "You can worship Nṛsiṁhadeva, but only along with Gaur-Nitāi, because Gaur-Nitāi do not accept any offenses; they only accept service, and whatever reactions may be, they are being nullified by the mercy of Gaur-Nitāi." 

So Gurukṛpā, he had this beautiful deity, and he also had two little deities of Gaur-Nitāi. So you also have Nṛsiṁhadeva and Gaur-Nitāi—you are covered, don't worry about it! So, it looks like the demigods on Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī, they are all focused on Nṛsiṁhadeva. They are devotees, and devotees are aware of the *daśāvatāras*, the ten incarnations, so they observe the appearances of these incarnations as we do in our calendar. So it looks like they are able to enjoy their lives on the heavenly planets because of this one day they observe the vow. Also, it is described in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* that Brahmā also fasts, and he also does not sleep on Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī. And the *śāstra* says that, being empowered due to observing this vow, he is able to create all moving and non-moving living entities and place them in their respective places within the 14 worlds. Hey prabhus, this is a value you may want to consider! Yeah, but, "You know, I do it once a year on... I don't know if I can do it two times." You have to keep, you know, you have to keep seeing how you can step up—the step up, the step up, like that—you want to keep making advancement. So consider like that. 

And Nṛsiṁhadeva says to Prahlāda Mahārāja here, "Many other demigods, ancient sages, and learned and pious kings have previously followed this great vow in relationship to Me, and by the influence of this vow, all of them came to Goloka." Wow! Now, this is the Lord speaking. He never speaks anything frivolous. It is absolute truth. And to think what He is saying here is an exaggeration is an offense, isn't it? The first offense against chanting the Holy Name is... well, it is to criticize devotees who have given their lives for service to Kṛṣṇa. But one of the offenses is to think that the glories of the Lord is an exaggeration. 

To consider that what we hear in scripture, "Oh, that is just an exaggeration to get me to become a devotee," no, no. Everything we hear in scripture is absolute truth. Brahmā has four heads. God is a little boy. He is blue. He plays a flute. He wrestles with His devotees in the sandbox. This is God. It is all absolute. It is not an exaggeration. We are privileged to hear this knowledge. So that the demigods can do what they do because they observe the vow. The Brahmā can do all his work in this universe because he observes this vow. *Bhakti*... it is not an exaggeration. So, what if you follow this vow? Whoa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

So then, Nṛsiṁhadeva says to Prahlāda, "This is the past time. By the strength of that vow, you started to render devotional service to Me. And in your next life, that prostitute was born in heaven as an *apsarā*. And after enjoying there immensely, she also attained Vaikuṇṭha, My supreme abode." Wow. *Nṛsiṁhadeva kī jaya!* The appearance day of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva *kī jaya!* Who is going to fast and not sleep? Me, a few of you, okay. We will wait for you in Vaikuṇṭha. The rest of you... now, Mahāprabhu is very kind. So, then the Lord said, "Those who observe this vow on My appearance day will never return to this material existence, even in hundreds and millions of *kalpas*." So with such boons rewarded to this specific vow on the auspicious day of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, one might want to consider... Prahlāda did it, although it was *ajñāta-sukṛti*, he at least began the process of devotional service, and that says something. Confucius says, "The longest journey begins with the first step." So much later, Prahlāda became eager to hear more: "How did I become a devotee?" Nṛsiṁhadeva explained it to him. And then later—here we go again, part two—Prahlāda said to Nṛsiṁhadeva, "Oh Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, oh greatly powerful one, please display compassion toward me today. Today I will observe this vow perhaps more fully. So, kindly help me to complete it without impediment." In other words, he wanted to go the full mile, not just, "Okay, I somewhat got you and I started my devotional service," but "If I want to just become Your pure devotee—unalloyed, pure devotee—is there anything else I can do?" 

So Nṛsiṁhadeva said, "Yes, it is not just by that particular vow. Of course, there is so much to be gained, but devotees are always thinking, 'What more can I do to become... I am such a slow poke. I have been chanting for so many years. I am not crying yet. What can I do? What more can I do to become a devotee? I am tired of being on this neophyte platform.'" So Nṛsiṁhadeva said, "Yes, I will tell you what more you can do on My appearance day." Prabhus, would you like to hear what more you can do? You are not hungry? It is already 9:15. You don't have to fast today, maybe wait a little bit longer. What more you can do? Okay, my dear Prahlāda, on this auspicious day, one should rise early in the morning, brush his teeth, okay? Then make a resolution to observe the following vows strictly while constantly remembering Me. Then later in the morning, or towards the end of the morning, you should take a bath in either a river or at home, or in a sacred *kuṇḍa* or a lake filled with lotus flowers. H—where are you going today? Well, Mahārāja, I entered into the temple and he was reading from *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* about the special day in the Nṛsiṁhadeva, and he said that to begin with, I should go to a lake full of lotus flowers. Okay, son. Come back soon. Don't take too long. Do you have any lakes here in the concrete jungle? Huh? They are making... Oh, you have one lake here. Hope it is big enough for all of you. Make sure there is lotus flowers there. 

And then he said, while taking this bath, a devotee should rub his body either with cow dung, clay, *āmalakī* fruit, or sesame seeds. I think I will take clay. I am not cow dung... Anyway, go, wait. And this will... this will purify you of sins. Then the devotee should put on fresh *dhotī* and *cādara* and carry on with his daily rituals. Then, uh-oh, one should smear cow dung on the altar for worship and prepare a drawing of a lotus flower with eight petals on top of the altar. This is quite detailed, but love is in the details. In the middle of the lotus, one should install a copper pitcher decorated with jewels and place a container filled with rice paddy on top of it. On top of that container, one should establish the deities of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁhadeva and the Nṛsiṁhadeva made of pure gold. Maybe we can do *mānasa-pūjā* on that day. 

And then Nṛsiṁhadeva says, for those who want to take more vows, the deity should then be bathed with five substances, and then one should first offer worship before worshiping Lord Hari. Then one should offer 16 ingredients for worship while chanting My holy names. *Jaya Nṛsiṁha, jaya Nṛsiṁha...* No, *Nṛsiṁhadeva...* And then, one should offer a *pūjā* to that deity that you established in your home, or with your group, or whatever, with the following prayers. And hopefully this is being taped, and you can write down the prayers later. I found this so interesting because it is in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*. It hasn't been incorporated... Prabhupāda gave us a very simple process, but sometimes it is nice to hear how the *ācāryas* used to do. 

So you offer *pūjā* to the deities with the following prayers: "Oh Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Nṛsiṁha, for Your satisfaction, I now offer You divine, cool sandalwood paste mixed with amber. Oh Supreme Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, I worship You along with Lakṣmī-devī with offerings of flowers that bloom in spring and Tulasī leaves. My obeisances to You, oh Mahā-Viṣṇu, just to fulfill all my desires, I will worship You with an offering of black *aguru*." It is oil perfume, which is rarely available even for demigods. It costs a lot, actually. "Oh Nṛsiṁhadeva, by offering this ghee lamp, which destroys the darkness of ignorance as well as all sinful reactions, one obtains a special power. Therefore, I offer this ghee lamp to You. Oh beloved Lord of Lakṣmī, I place before You these offerings of food. May You be pleased with this offering and kindly remove my sins." One should remain awake then throughout the night while dancing, singing, playing musical instruments, reciting the *Purāṇas*, and listening to discourses—like we are now—discourses of My transcendental glory. So beautiful prayers, aren't they? As I was reading, I think that I would... because in the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, the Sanskrit is there. I didn't have time to learn it or print it. But you know, you could use these prayers even in your daily worship of Nṛsiṁhadeva because we are offering these items, you know, the ghee lamp, the flowers, the oil—we are doing that. Just a suggestion there. 

And finally, he says one should chant: "Nṛsiṁha-bhaktān... Oh Lord who lies on the bed of Ananta. Oh Lord of the universe. Oh Nṛsiṁha. Oh husband of Lakṣmī. Oh destroyer of devotee's fear. Thank you, Nṛsiṁha. I am suffering from great distress, drowning in the ocean of sinful activities and disease. So, kindly lend me Your fearless hand and give me protection." He is asking for the hand of the Lord. There is a prayer in *Padyāvalī* by Rūpa Gosvāmī: "My dear Lord, I am drowning in the whirlpool of material existence. Oh You who give shelter to the shelterless, please, Lord, just this one time extend Your hand to save me." I love that verse. "I am drowning in the fathomless whirlpool of material existence. So, You who give shelter to those who have no shelter, Kṛṣṇa, just this one time extend Your hand to save me." Kṛṣṇa doesn't mean this long hand comes in... no, He sends His representative. And Prabhupāda told one of my godbrothers, "When you get back home, back to Godhead, your spiritual master is waiting for you, and he takes you by the hand and he leads you into the Kuñja and puts your hand in Kṛṣṇa's hand and leaves you together alone for some time." Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

So, I have told this pastime just to give us faith that, of course, Prahlāda—again and again and again, I am saying he is *nitya-siddha*—but he accepted the service. Arjuna accepted that service. Like, I don't know if I could accept that service. I hope I get to the point where I can say I can. That is my... but I shared this with you so that you can see how Prahlāda "quote-unquote" became perfected. And these are not difficult steps for us. And if, somehow or other, you can't do that, then just chant: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa...* 

*Haribole!* In the age of Kali, the most simple and sublime message: becoming purely Kṛṣṇa conscious. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. So don't think that these pastimes of the Nṛsiṁhadeva and Prahlāda that we shared with you today, they took place billions of years ago. How can they possibly relate to modern times? I would like to conclude with a lecture quote from a lecture Prabhupāda gave about Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to inspire you that Nṛsiṁhadeva is very present in this ISKCON movement and He is there to facilitate our progress and to protect us from illusion on the way back home, back to... He is very much part of our lives. Here is my final quote. Prabhupāda said, "Nṛsiṁhadeva may save you. Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva—Prahlāda was a devotee, and to Hiraṇyakaśipu, Śilā-Nṛsiṁha, all... both ways—Kṛṣṇa is protecting." "Viṣṇu, you can see, He has got four hands. In two hands He is carrying *śaṅkha* and *cakra*, and the other two hands, *gadā* and *padma*. This *śaṅkha* and *padma* is for devotees, and the *gadā* and *cakra* for the demons. Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā* He has two businesses: to give protection to devotees and to kill demons. But the result is one. He does good to the demons by killing them. He does good to the devotees by giving them protection." 

And at this very lecture—this was in Los Angeles in 1971—Prabhupāda was ill, and he was going back to India, to Vṛndāvana, to take some Ayurvedic treatment, hopefully to come back. But you can sense Prabhupāda is thinking he may not come back. In fact, he says, "I may not come back, but in my absence," he said, "Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva will protect all of you." This is modern history. He said, "In my absence, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva will give you protection." Those are the words from the lotus mouth of... he did come back, fortunately, but it is a very important instruction. He is very much part of our lives. We can pray to Him. If you don't know what to say to Nṛsiṁhadeva, memorize the prayers of Prahlāda Mahārāja, because Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva was very pleased with those prayers. But feel protected. Okay, I get sick, I had an accident—real protection is to never forget Kṛṣṇa and always remember Him. That is the greatest danger. After a lifetime of devotional service, you know, you deviate, you forget. No, we always want to remember, keep him. So, He will protect us from dangers, yes, but the greatest danger is forgetting Him. So, pray to Him and get ready for the *sankīrtana*. You have got some good points here to work on for that great day which is coming in May. Thank you so much, Prabhu. Oh, glorious Prabhupāda, glorious Gopāl Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja. Thank you for having me here. Please invite me back again.""