"*00427*.*
"I am very happy to see so many effulgent faces today. Of course, this isn't the first Vyāsa-pūjā ceremony we’ve done this year. It has become—would you say it’s just the way we’re doing it, different parts of the world, different groups of devotees—but it’s turned out to be very nice. Because *vānī* means instruction and *vapu* means personal physical association, I would like to be with everyone today, but of course, we know why we’re not able to do that. There’s a big *asura* that was to attack the earth planet; they’ve given him the name COVID-19. He’s not mentioned in the *Bhāgavatam*, but he is an *asura* if only because he is inhibiting these *saṅkīrtana* movements of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

At the same time, it is, you could say, fortune in misfortune because I’m seeing that devotees are spending more time with each other through social media, which in many ways is sufficient. Because, at least in the guru-disciple relationship, the main connection with the guru is through *śabda-brahma*. Whether we’re with our guru or not with our guru, we can always be present in the form of his lectures, videos, diary chapters, etc., so we all feel very connected. So, I think that this has given all of us an opportunity to spend more time with each other. I know a lot of you are watching the lectures online, and hopefully, you’re getting inspired. As an entrepreneur who was mentioning, we’re spending a lot of time preparing, but it’s all for you, really. And I know that it’s giving us a time to come closer. When you really need something, it means more to you. So this pandemic has put everybody in distress for a variety of reasons, because we’re social animals, human beings, and now that’s limited. But I think it’s brought all of us closer together as guru and disciple, because you feel more dependent on your spiritual master and Prabhupāda. In a time of need, these types of programs mean more to us; we find shelter in our hearing and our chanting and being with each other like this.

So yeah, I know here in Vṛndāvana, this is a different life for me. Prabhupāda said there’s *deśa-kāla-pātra* when we’re traveling and preaching, and there’s *bhajana-kuṭīra* when we’re sitting in one place, and we’re watering our devotional creeper more intently through *śravaṇa-kīrtanam* and *viṣṇu-smaraṇam*. Everyone was always telling me, "Gurudeva, slow down, you’re traveling too much, you don’t spend time for yourself, you’re not eating properly, you’re not resting, and you’re not getting exercise." And I thought, "Nah, never, I’m supposed to rest." I said, "How do you spell rest?"

I didn’t see that like Prabhupāda said: "Kṛṣṇa, you have your plan, I have my planning, and Kṛṣṇa has His plan." So I’m very grateful to Kṛṣṇa, to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, to my spiritual master for locking me down in this little house in Ramaṇa Reti, *bhakti-yoga*, which means the neighborhood—I mean, I hardly ever go out. Of course, sometimes I go out and take a few photos, I guess I have to do that and share the bliss of Vṛndāvana with all of you. But you should know that I am being very careful, I’m in my little room, but I’m very glad to be able to spend time with all of you today. In fact, you might even consider that if this pandemic goes on for an extended time, that we could do classes just for you, this group of devotees, because you are special to me. I haven’t been there in a long time, that part of the world, but there’s one benefit from being there: no translation. Now I can just speak in English, my native tongue, and we don’t have to wait for the translation. So we can think about that, we can discuss that with Śītā-Gaurāṅga, maybe once a month you just have a private program. I could give a little class, you can give your questions, you can answer questions like that.

Because as I told other devotees during these Vyāsa-pūjās, actually, you’re my most important service. I’ve been given credit, rightly or wrongly, for many things that we’ve done through the years—big festivals, big programs for devotees and for the public, etc.—but I really consider that my disciples are my most important service, because that’s eternal. And my responsibility, with Prabhupāda’s mercy on me, is to bring you to his lotus feet—because he is Prabhupāda; it means the master at whose feet all masters sit—and to ensure that you get back to Godhead. 

We have a golden opportunity because it’s Kali-yuga. How’s that a golden opportunity? Because in Kali-yuga, we have the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And how did Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describe Caitanya Mahāprabhu upon their first meeting? His first glance at Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when he first saw him, verse manifested his heart, came out of his lotus mouth: *namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te / kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmnē gaura-tviṣē namaḥ*. It’s pregnant with meaning, but one of the beautiful meanings of that verse is that Caitanya Mahāprabhu was the most munificent incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Why? Because he’s freely distributing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, actually *rādhā-bhakti*, which is very rare, but he’s freely distributing it to the most fallen people, whoever in Kali-yuga. So this is a blessing, it’s a benediction that we have. We can become Kṛṣṇa conscious, and we want to perfect that by not taking birth again. 

We think it’s bad now with coronavirus and all the politics and all the cruelty and harshness and so many sinful activities expanding every day exponentially—you think it’s bad, but it’s going to get worse. One disciple, you know, I’ve said it many times, when a disciple said to Śrīla Prabhupāda, "Prabhupāda, I want to come back birth after birth and distribute your books." It’s a nice sentiment, but in that particular moment, Prabhupāda said, "No, don’t come back," because Kali-yuga is going to get worse and worse. So although people are trying to squeeze out some illusory happiness here, at least we should be convinced there’s nothing here for us as devotees, because our hearts are with Prabhupāda, our hearts are with Kṛṣṇa. So even though there’s some remnants of attraction here, you have to cut those attachments very quickly so that we’re free to embrace the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

We want to go back home, back to Godhead. If we don’t have that burning desire, our spiritual masters are saying that’s what we really want. So we should have good initiative, we should have faith in our guru, what he’s telling us is right. He’s passing on what he has learned from Śrīla Prabhupāda. We’re meant to hear it from our spiritual master, because we chose him as our spiritual preceptor, we chose him as our teacher because somehow, what he said—all the spiritual masters are saying the same thing with different stories and different analogies, but it’s essentially the same thing. But we chose someone as our guru because by Kṛṣṇa’s grace, when he speaks, it resonates with the heart. Like when he says, "It’s like—oh, now I understand." 

So if we don’t take the time and the effort to hear from our spiritual master, we’re actually cutting ourself off from the transcendental umbilical cord which keeps us nourished. Just like those of you who are mothers, you’ll know how important that umbilical cord was for your baby; you were giving all sustenance, you were giving all nourishment to your child, and only when the child came out of the womb did the doctor cut the umbilical cord. But the transcendental umbilical cord is always there once we take *dīkṣā*. Initiation is set up, and we get nourished by hearing, hearing, hearing, hearing, hearing, hearing from guru and Prabhupāda and *śāstra*. But even in the spiritual world, we are always the servant of the servant of the servant of the servants, which is good because we get the mercy of so many *nitya-siddha* devotees. In the spiritual world, one *sakhī*, one *mañjarī* is handing the flower to another *mañjarī*, to another *mañjarī*, then to the *sakhī*, and then to Rādhārāṇī. This is our connection. So we’re always connected through the mercy of our spiritual masters. 

In that verse in *Bhagavad-gītā* (4.34), *tad viddhi praṇipātēna paripraśnēna sēvayā*, we have one *dīkṣā*-guru, but we can have many *śikṣā*-gurus who confirm or elaborate on what our guru has told us. And like this, we have many people to help us, so we have to extend our hands and ask for mercy: "Please, I’m simply running behind you, chanting Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." There’s many hands that are extended to help us, in the form of our parents, sometimes in the form of our friends, in the form of our seniors, in the form of the Vaiṣṇava community, sometimes even our own children. They’ll say something like Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and we’re amazed—at such a young age, a child is saying something that touches our heart. Because all these children are not ordinary children. Sometimes the parents become a little familiar, you’re changing the diapers, you’re hearing them scream, and you’re correcting them, and you know they have little tantrums—but wait and see. That’s babyhood; wait till they become adults or youth, and you’ll see what these children are going to do for this movement. You’re serving *sādhus*. And *sādhus*—we don’t know who they were in their previous life; they weren't babies, they were old men with long beards, and they just took their last breath and fell into the Ganges, and then they appeared as that guru or in Serbia, Montenegro. 

So like this, we have so much inspiration. We have to absorb it like a sponge, so that in the short duration of our life—most of you are over 25, who knows how much time we have?—we have to be very hungry for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Make time for Kṛṣṇa consciousness; not that it becomes a burden, "Oh, I have to chant, I have to do the pūjā," and all that—no. We should think that our material desires are the burden that keep us weighed down in material life. Like if you’re carrying a big bag of rocks, you can only go so slow, so fast. So those desires that we somehow foolishly hold on to, they’re like big boulders that we’re holding on to, but they’re slowing down our progress. You have to kick them out to a far distance and embrace all these: *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sēvanam / arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivēdanam*. We engage these things, which are part of our heritage, part of our tradition, part of who we really are as devotees of Kṛṣṇa, and be determined that this will be my last birth. 

We give the example of a sailor on the ocean; he’s very attentive to the boat because without it, he would drown. So he’s fixing the sail when it rips, he’s varnishing the deck, he’s repairing little things here and there; he’s very attentive to the boat when he’s on the ocean. But he never thinks for a moment that he’s a creature of the sea; he’s a creature of the land. So although he’s very attentive to his immediate *dharma*, his immediate duties, in the back of his mind he’s thinking, "When am I going to get home? When can I put my two feet solidly on the ground?" And then he gives this example in public lectures—exactly, Dēvamati will tell you, she’s been to many public lectures—he sees the land, he goes, "Land ho! Land ho!" 

So we have our home, we have our work, our family, we have our society, we have our planet; we want to leave it in a better condition for the next generation. We should be attentive to our duties, we shouldn’t be irresponsible, but in the back of our mind, "Am I going to go home?" Because this reality is full of birth, disease, old age, and death, and you realize that more as you get older. All the securities you held on to in youth—your beauty, your good health, your charisma—as you get older, they just drop away. "Where did they all go? Where have all the flowers gone? Long time passing." And then you become more serious about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But why not become more serious when you’re 25, when you’re 35, when you’re 40, when you’re 50? You can see the writing on the wall; if not you, you can see others. 

So what’s "back home, back to Godhead" mean? It means Vaikuṇṭha, it means the eternal realm of Vṛndāvana. And Vṛndāvana shouldn't just be, you know, like, "Oh yeah, I’ve been to Vṛndāvana, I read about Vṛndāvana in the Kṛṣṇa book." Like if you want to take a vacation and you look at the brochure, there’s ten places, you’ve read it very carefully, "Oh yeah, I want to go to Thailand, I’m not saying go to Thailand, let’s go to Thailand," you don’t have a ticket. So if you want to go to Vṛndāvana, you have to hear a lot about Vṛndāvana, you have to read *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* of Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, you have to read about the mood of living in Vṛndāvana like a gopī, as instructed by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī as he sat on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Yes, it’s very high, it’s very elevated—that’s okay. But before you start a trip, you want to know where the heck you’re going. If you’re in Zagreb and your destination is London, you better know, okay, you’ve got a route to get there. It’s *sādhana-siddhānta*. We know the goal and we know the process. 

So that’s why we’ve been giving so many lectures about *dhāma*. Maybe that’s why—I mean, I’m nobody—but maybe Kṛṣṇa put me here for all of you, so that I can inspire you to surpass Svargaloka, with all its heavenly enjoyments. When you perspire, it smells like roses there, and you never age beyond a young boy or young girl, everyone knows to sing nicely, everyone can play the flute nicely, everyone can dance, everyone’s love—love is in the air, it’s always springtime. Then your good *karma* ends, and you take birth in Tokyo. So we want to go beyond Svargaloka, we want to go beyond even the official kingdom of God, Vaikuṇṭha, where Kṛṣṇa’s the king and we’re the servants; we want to go to Vraja-dhāma, with Kṛṣṇa and the sands of Ramaṇa Reti, to hear His flute in the middle of the night as He calls the young Vraja-gopīs to come to the forest to meet Him, and then He teases them, "Why did you come here?" "But Lord, we’ve already sacrificed everything, even our reputation, just go home." All the līlās that Kṛṣṇa performs, which increases our attachment—this should be our thought, not whose—what politician is in power, what Trump’s doing in the USA, how many people have died in the pandemic. Of course we should be informed, but it’s not our goal. I’m going to be absorbed in Vṛndāvana, so that when we chant our rounds, Kṛṣṇa comes to the forefront of our mind. 

So I’m here to help you. I’ll admit I’m just an inch ahead of you. It’s a long road back to Vraja. I’m still an aspiring devotee, but like, probably not the best analogy, but like a big brother can help the younger brother come forward. So as your spiritual master, the very least I can do is connect you to Śrīla Prabhupāda. And for that, you can be grateful, and I’ll do that as best I can. I will not rest until all of you are back in Goloka. I can promise you that. I will be the last man standing. We were taught that in the military: that if there’s a firefight with the Viet Cong, no one should run away; everyone should stay, and even if you’re losing the battle, they told us you’d be the last man standing. 

So I don’t mind, I don’t mind staying here as long as I have this nice service to Prabhupāda, to preach to the masses. Well, let us say, number one, to inspire you to go back to Godhead, and number two, to keep preaching to the masses. I’m perfectly happy here. I don’t know what *prema* is; I saw it in my spiritual master. I saw Prabhupāda cry on three occasions, so I determined that I would like to have that blessing from him. But even though I don’t have *prema*, I am very happy doing what my guru asked me to do: to preach boldly and have faith in the holy names. I can say that with all conviction. I’m very happy. I could come back to Croatia and Serbia and all those countries a thousand births and keep preaching to your descendants; I don’t mind. Because I know that my spiritual master, Prabhupāda, he’s always in Vraja consciousness, serving the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So yeah, I don’t want to go back to Godhead without him. So if he’s here, I’ll stay here. 

Of course, the pure devotee is such that he can be—Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says he can be in Goloka and he can be in the material at the same time. You shouldn’t think that Prabhupāda can’t be—isn't it just *nitya-siddha* serving his eternal service in the spiritual world? He can also be traveling in different universes here. So yeah, I’ll stay until all of you are there. Some have left, and if they’re determined to leave and not come back, what can guru do? But if there’s just a slight, just the smallest remembrance, "Yes, it was so nice when I was a devotee," but then I’m going to catch you. I’m going to run after you and I’m going to catch you and I’ll drag you back by your hair. And even if you don’t say something, we’ll find you and try to beat you. Because there’s nothing like the exhilaration of coming back—"Oh my god, the relief! What a fool I was! How did I forget?" And you come back now even more grateful, and you have that really strong grit: "Let me serve you, let me serve, let me serve Kṛṣṇa, and I now really want to go home." You can make more advancement with that mentality in one year than you had in 20 years as a devotee. 

So there’s no handicap, there’s no disqualification. Everyone, even if we start late, if you’ve joined Kṛṣṇa consciousness at 82 years of age—hey, you can still make it! *Jagāi-Mādhāi* made it. So I’m here to serve you. It sounds a little strange, "My guru’s here to serve me." By that, I mean I’m serving the order of my spiritual master to become guru and to serve you; I see it as a service. There are some perks, you get some garlands once in a while, there you go. The guru gets garlands, he gets *mahā*, he gets fancy pens—this is a month-long, white, someone gave—so those things are there, but you know, we just use them for you. This is a three-hour program, this garland will keep me awake, and I have my pen to write down my notes and remembrances of this wonderful occasion. And I’ll stop speaking, because you’re supposed to speak today. And I know how much, when it’s my spiritual master’s appearance day, I always want to make sure that I get to speak, because sometimes there’s lots of sannyāsīs there and I’m thinking, "Will I get to speak? I want to say something to Prabhupāda." So I know how important this is, to make a report: "Your Grace, this is where I’m at, thank you, and I’m going to try harder," and I realized this in the last year or so, and I promise this, and I promise that, and thank you. And it’s just we all relish it, because we can see how the process works. 

That’s why I’ve agreed to 12 Vyāsa-pūjās, always. So arrogant, no—I’m seeing how the process works. I’m seeing how, while you’re practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness nicely under the guidance of your teacher, you become a poet, you’ve given up these attachments, you’re more attached to doing your rounds, to your *gāyatrī*—jīv, wow, it works! So these ceremonies increase my faith in my spiritual master, in Lord Caitanya, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and our beloved Vraja-bhūmi, in love and Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Prabhupāda kī jaya!* So thank you for giving me this opportunity. I was so excited today that I haven’t eaten yet. I was too excited. I said, "No, no, later, later, later." 

So it’s 2:30 in the afternoon, I’m not hungry. I’m hungry to express my love and receive your love on this day of Vyāsa-pūjā. From that very beautiful part of the world, I remember all the kīrtanas there. I remember Sarajevo, I remember that was a tough one, but we all survived, we came out alive. So I remember all those things, part of this history of the saṅkīrtana movement. And I do have a hankering to come back, and if this *asura*, Kṛṣṇa can kick him out of the universe, then I’ll run to Sarajevo, run back onto the plaza, and I’ll take the drum and we’ll sing Hare Kṛṣṇa and we’ll help the unfortunate people of this world become fortunate. Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda’s appearance day kī jaya! Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya! *Prema-dhvani* ki jaya!""