"*00231*.*
"Later during that visit to London, before the Bhāgavata night, we went on to Paris. Śrīla Prabhupāda called us into his room to give us some more instructions and inspiration. I was very much hoping at that time to receive a personal instruction from Śrīla Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda gave many general instructions, but of course, a disciple always yearns to have some personal interrelationship with his spiritual master and receive some special instructions. I was a little shy to ask, but at one point, I spoke up and said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, could you give me some instruction?" Śrīla Prabhupāda leaned over the desk at that time, looked me in my eyes, and said very boldly, "Have faith in the holy names." I have always tried to follow that instruction of Śrīla Prabhupāda as a guideline for the rest of my life. I was so nervous at the time; I don't remember how I felt, but I just felt blessed that Prabhupāda would see me, notice me, and give some instruction that I could build the rest of my devotional career upon. 

And Prabhupāda further encouraged both of us; he reached over into his drawer and he gave me one of his dhotīs, and he gave Bhagavān dāsa one of his undershirts. He just smiled, and then after a little more conversation, we left for our service in Paris, France. I did wear that dhoti—actually, it was bright saffron, of course; I was a brahmacārī at that time—but it was that idea: it was the paraphernalia of the spiritual master and therefore divine. I mean, we know that Mahāprabhu himself, in order to encourage his own followers, his own disciples, would sometimes give them pieces of cloth. This cloth was sacred; the spiritual master is not different than the Lord. A piece of his cloth was sent to Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī in Vṛndāvana. So this idea, this nectar, this mercy of my spiritual master, I took that very seriously. I used to wear that as a cādar; actually, and sometimes when the sannyāsīs would come through, they would try to chastise me: "You're a brahmacārī and you're wearing saffron?" I said, "Yes, this is no ordinary cloth, but this is the dhotī of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. I am not taking it off for anything."""