Hare Krishna, very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vrndāvana.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-prema-maya-vigrahāya Śrīmatī... As you know, we just finished a short mini-series on the aṣṭa-sakhīs of Vrndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's eight confidential maidservants. So I thought we would, um, change the mood a little today, perhaps, uh, the word rasa is a better word, and share some, um, cowherd boy pastimes, some cowherd boy pastimes.

It's certainly appropriate for us as members of ISKCON, for our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda established his Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir temple here in Vrndāvana, in the soft sands of Rādhā Raṭī, where Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and the cowherd boys would often wrestle, he said.

And for those devotees who may one day, may one day aspire to worship Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in sakya-rasa, or friendship. Śrī Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura writes in his famous prayer, Bhakti-rasa-ārṇava. Here's his book. He writes, "Living in Braja in the company of one's spiritual master, worship Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma at all times in the mood of friendship.

Giving up material desires, rejecting artha, dharma, kāma, and mokṣa, worship the two boys of kaiśora age, aspiring for the feet of Śrī Caitanya, Nityānanda, and Sundarānanda." Narottama dāsa has spoken. Obviously, he wrote this book, you know, around the time of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

And therein, the author is encouraging the followers of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who appeared 500 years ago, to awaken their love for Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in this mood of sakya-rasa, or friendship. Now, in, in that book, in that scripture, he, uh, also mentions one devotee who achieved that goal during that period of history.

He gives his name as, uh, Paṇu Gopala, or sometimes he refers to him as Parṇī Gopāla. And and in that book, he writes, it's very nice, describing this devotee who achieved this mood of sakya-rasa. He writes, "Paṇī Gopāla was an associate of the Lord.

His greatness was known to all followers of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In a forest, he gave the Mahā-mantra to a tiger. He turned impure food cooked by sinful persons into flowers. Thieves on the road became blind by touching him. How can I describe the greatness of Paṇī Gopāla?" Now, our Śrīla Prabhupāda, as we know, he also showed appreciation for this mood of friendship with Kṛṣṇa.

When, on the Jaladūta, coming from India to America on September 13, 1965, he famously wrote, "Oh Lord Kṛṣṇa, You are my eternal companion. Forgetting You, I have suffered the kicking of Māyā birth after birth. If today the chance to meet You occurs again, then surely I will be able to rejoin You.

Oh, my dear brother, in Your company, I will experience great joy once again. Wandering about the fields and pastures, I will pass the entire day with You. Tending the cows, joking with You, and frolicking through so many forests of Braja, I will enjoy pastimes of stealing and eating one another's lunch.

When, when will that day be mine?

Today, that remembrance of being with You came to me in a very nice way. Feeling great longing, I called out for You. Oh, Lord Kṛṣṇa, only because I am Your eternal servant do I desire Your association so much. Except for You, I have no other refuge." So, in that mood of devotion, today we'll speak about one cowherd boy whose name is Sudāmā.

Sudāmā in Kṛṣṇa-līlā, Sudāmā Gopa appeared in the village of Gohana. Gohana, in, in the greater Vrndāvana-mandala region. And I was reading that in childhood, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would herd their cows near to this Gohana, and Sudāmā would happily join the two brothers, who, it's described, were his very life and soul.

Now, Sudāmā and his family later moved to, uh, to Vaiśravaṇa, actually, where I read that Sudāmā, he kept a pet cow whom he named Śāmalikā. And amongst, um, Kṛṣṇa's many confidential friends who are the same age as Him, they're called, um, prīti-sakhās.

Four are most prominent, and they are Śrīdhāma, Sudāmā, our hero today, Vasudāma, and Kiṅkiṇī. And Sudāmā is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's and Her brother Śrīdhāma's cousin. And his mother is Suśīlā, and his father is Ratna Manu. Sudāmā's mother is Suśīlā, and his father's Ratna Bhanu.

And I was reading that Ratna Bhanu is the younger brother of Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu. And Sudāmā also has a younger brother whose name is Vega. So there's some family history there. The śāstras relate that Sudāmā has fair skin, a moonlight face, and large lotus eyes.

His limbs are large, round, and very strong. And he, he dresses in blue garments, and he wears, uh, golden ornaments, a pearl necklace, and a jasmine garland. Cowherd boys, they dress up very nicely. He wears golden ornaments, a pearl necklace, and a jasmine garland.

And the Āchāryas say that Sudāmā is an intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa, whose affection for the Lord is devoid of the slightest taint of awe and reverence. And one of his main services is to collect and prepare forest flowers for making garlands and ornaments.

Now, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī describes Sudāmā as very playful and expert at a variety of games. He says, literally, "His deep faith in Kṛṣṇa is such that in their pastimes, he thinks of himself as Kṛṣṇa's equal, or even his superior." And we read in the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, we read in Prabhupāda's Nectar of Devotion, which summarizes Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, that while Kṛṣṇa held up Govardhana Hill, Sudāmā's friends said to Kṛṣṇa, "Dear friend, you have been standing for the last seven days and nights without any rest.

This distresses us terribly. Why put yourself through so much trouble standing and holding this hill?

Just give it to Sudāmā!

Just give it to Sudāmā, he will hold it. Or if you doubt, he can at least shift hands, so we can give your left hand a massage." Sakhas, the sakhās, they write that Sudāmā's heart is one with Kṛṣṇa's, and so he knows every single one of Kṛṣṇa's thoughts and desires. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, he also says that Sudāmā's nature is very heroic, and his dealings are simple and straightforward.

It's also mentioned that when he's overwhelmed with ecstasy, he can be seen dancing in a wild, unrestrained way, while the hair on his body stands on end. Now, in my research, I found that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has written that when gopas like Sudāmā appear on earth, demigods appear within their bodies to serve the Supreme Lord, just as the limbs of the body serve the body as a whole.

A note here is that Sudāmā Gopa appeared in Lord Caitanya's pastimes as the devotee Sundara Ṭhākura. Sundara Ṭhākura. Now, like all the other cowherd boys, Sudāmā Gopa spends the better part of his days with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, herding cows in the pasture grounds of Braja.

And very often, as the cows graze, as we read in Kṛṣṇa Book, we know the boys play games. The boys play lots of games, cowherd boys. So one day, Balarāma encouraged the boys to, um, imitate the movements and sounds of animals.

So one gopa, one gopa acted like a maddened elephant, well, another acted like a wild lion, and yet another acted like a proud swan. And one boy slithered on the ground like a snake, while a group of boys hopped about like frogs.

And one, how could we say, athletic boy, even perched upon a tree branch, and he flapped his arms and chirped like a bird. The games they play. Now, the boys were so absorbed in imitating animals that the real animals, the real animals that they were imitating in the area, were watching from behind bushes or on treetops, and they were asking one another, "What are these boys doing?

What's going on?" So, śāstra says that the gopis' roaring, croaking, chirping, and barking, roaring, croaking, chirping, and barking became so loud that these sounds echoed through the nearby forest, forcing very shy and timid animals to flee elsewhere.

So, finally, Lord Balarāma wanted to dance for Kṛṣṇa. I thought that was interesting. Finally, Lord Balarāma wanting to to dance to entertain Kṛṣṇa, he halted this whole wild scene, if you know, the boys imitating the various animals and birds of Braja, in order to organize what's described as a rasa dance of sorts.

This will be the cowherd boys. Now, a rasa dance of sorts, for which the, uh, the enthusiastic boys decorated one another with garlands of red lotuses, and directed by Balarāma, for the sole pleasure of Kṛṣṇa, who would sit alone as the only person in the audience.

The boys held hands and they formed a circle. All the cowherd boys held hands and they formed a circle, and in the center of the circle, Balarāma danced to the sound of the cowherd boys' bracelets, bangles, and ankle bells.

Apparently, they were shaking them, the bracelets, the bangles, and the ankle bells. Balarāma danced to that sound. And then, uh, Śrīdhāma, Sudāmā, our hero today, Subhadra Gopa, and Arjuna Gopa, as a cowherd boy, also called Arjuna, they made a smaller circle around Balarāma.

And now, just try to imagine, as these two circles turned around Lord Balarāma, Viśālā cheered Balarāma on because he's dancing there alone for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa. They shouted, "Bravo, brother!

Bravo, brother!

Bravo, brother!" Cowherd boy pastimes.

And Kṛṣṇa, who's the only person watching this performance, he's sitting there, he's the sole audience. He clapped to the beat. It's described as his eyes followed Balarāma's enchanting movements. As his eyes followed Balarāma's enchanting movements, it's written that the peacocks, while also watching Balarāma, almost fell from their perches, at their perches in the trees.

The peacocks are there, they almost fell from their perches in the trees. And, um, even the bees could not restrain themselves, because, you know, again, all the animals, everyone's watching. So even the bees could not restrain themselves, and they made special humming sounds, like the drone of a tāmpurā.

The bees, they made special humming sounds. This was their contribution, like the drone of a tāmpurā, and they swarmed around Lord Balarāma's head like a gold and black halo. And our Āchāryas, our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavāchāryas, they pray to see Balarāma dancing like that, with his beautiful, whitish form, his curly, scattered hair, his glistening limbs, his reddish lotus eyes, and his bimbo lips.

It's described, bimbo lips, calling out mantras at every step, calling out mantras at every step. Our Āchāryas' desire to see Kṛṣṇa or Balarāma in that form. So, um, I also read that one time, in Kalyāṇa, Kalyāṇa's a particular pasture, pasturing ground in Vrndāvana, with very sweet grasses, and this particular pasturing ground, Kalyāṇa, is favored by Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma's cows.

So one day, while they were herding the cows there, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, they took rest. When suddenly, in a, in a funny, a good-natured way, all their friendly cowherd boys, they came forward, and they offered Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma daṇḍavats, you know, like in great, on, veneration.

If they're playing here and laughing, they said, "Oh, Supreme Lord!" They never address Him like that, but, "Oh, Supreme Lord, bless us with auspiciousness." So Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, you know, catching this fun mood of their friends, their friends are addressing them as God.

Take catching that mood, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, they both raised their right hands and they said, "Kalyāṇa, kalyāṇa," which means "Let there be auspiciousness." So then the cows, seeing the cowherd boys offer respects to the, uh, the divine brothers, they followed suit.

And all the cows came and they bowed down to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. It's described creating a unique scene. Unique in the sense that in Braja, rarely, if ever, does one see or hear about a mood of awe and reverence for Kṛṣṇa.

No, here in Vrndāvana, there exists, there always exists a spontaneous mood of loving devotion, where everyone sees Kṛṣṇa as the object of their deep loving devotion. Now, one may doubt whether cows can offer obeisances, but we should remember that these are not ordinary cows.

They're Surabhi cows, they're Kṛṣṇa's, they're Kṛṣṇa's cows. And scripture says that these cows are capable of yielding oceans of milk and fulfilling all of one's spiritual desires. So they're not, they can certainly come and offer obeisances, because they're capable of yielding oceans of milk and fulfilling all of one's spiritual desires.

Therefore, the Āchāryas say, what difficulty could there be for these Surabhi cows to fulfill their desires to please Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma by bowing down before them and praying to the divine brothers for the well-being of their families?

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So, these are, um, today, these are some of the descriptions of, of the cowherd boy Sudāmā, and the pastimes, well, some of the pastimes he and his friends had with, um, with Kṛṣṇa. Kind of a short class today because, um, well, today here in Braja, it's the, um, it's the second day of Kartik.

And, um, this morning I'm going to take a small group of devotees to the Pink City, the City of Victory, Jaipur, to see our beloved Govindājī, the Śirota Govinda, and Gopināth, and Dāmodara, and other deities there in Jaipur. Because as you know, we spoke extensively about Śrī Govinda, Govindājī, and a very strong desire to go there and see Him.

So we're taking a couple of days in this auspicious month of Kartik to go there. It's about a four-hour drive. So we will finish here, and of course, we'll be back, uh, in a couple of days with, um, our next lecture on the glories of Śrī Vrndāvana.

So let us finish with one more quote from Preyo Bhakti-rasa-ārṇava by Narottama dāsa, glorifying Sudāmā, the cowherd boy, and the, the gopīs of Vrndāvana, are Kṛṣṇa. Quote, "He writes, 'I will now speak the conclusion, please be attentive. When Sudāmā is in his house without Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, he sees them in his dream.

When he is sleeping at night, whatever pastimes he performed with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in the house, in the fields, while herding cows, when going to Vrndāvana, he sees in his dreams. He never knows himself to be separated from Kṛṣṇa in his dreams.

He speaks audibly, 'Hi, hi!

O my brothers Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, where are the cows?'" And he concludes, "If one so desires, he too may aspire to one day achieve the same and be happy in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Sudāmā gopa, the cowherd boy, is.

Joy.