"*00387*.*
"Hari Kṛṣṇa, Hari Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hari Hari. Welcome to the Rishikesh Kīrtan Fest 2025. I think this is our fourth year, isn't it? Our fourth year. Yeah, the other day when I arrived here—I think two days ago—we were very nicely received by the sādhu who lived here and the mahant who lived here, which is a very good sign. In his talk, I gave a talk and the mahant gave a talk, and he was saying how pleased they were to have us here. Overjoyed, actually; I think it’s the highlight of their year as far as functions are concerned. And he said that he was inviting us back year after year after year after year. So, I thought that was very auspicious.

In the short talk I gave, I mentioned our good fortune, extremely good fortune, in having the opportunity to perform saṅkīrtana here in Rishikesh. Saṅkīrtana means the complete glorification of the Lord through chanting His holy names: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Generally, when I think of saṅkīrtana, I think of Warsaw, London, New York, Moscow, Kiev, Adelaide, Cape Town. I think of these towns because that’s where the people are. So, we go to where the people are, and certainly we’re happy to go to heaven or hell to share the holy names. But here, we’re sharing the holy names with the people from those towns and villages on the sacred banks of the Ganges. It’s just some ironic, special twist in history that we get to preach here.

I was thinking, Śrīla Prabhupāda sometimes used the term that when we’re practicing devotional service, we’re in the lap of Kṛṣṇa. When I first heard that—I was listening to a lecture in 1972 or '73—wow, "on the lap of God," that’s pretty intimate. But that’s the purpose of this movement: to take us home, back to the playground of God, Śrī Śrī Vṛndāvana. And we really are in the lap of Kṛṣṇa there. And here, we’re also in the lap of Kṛṣṇa. I explained the other day that on one side we have the Himalayan mountains, on the other side we have the Ganges river, and there’s a wind that flows down—it actually blows down. It’s like, for a couple of hours, it’s like a small hurricane, right? If you get up early in the morning and you walk out. So how are we in the lap of Kṛṣṇa? Because Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that of mountains, He is the Himalayas; and of rivers, He is the flowing Ganges; and of purifiers, I missed this the other day, He is the wind. So, in three ways, we’re being literally embraced by Kṛṣṇa. We could even say that we’re being embraced by the Lord by coming here. You get the embrace of Kṛṣṇa: "Of mountains, I am the Himalayas; of rivers, I am the flowing Ganges; and of purifiers, I am the wind." We’re so blessed. You don’t get that in New York, Rio de Janeiro, or Sydney. So we get to preach to the same people, amongst all those people. It’s like this, you know, man-mana bhava mad-bhakto.

We have thousands or millions of people; perhaps a few will be interested in spiritual life, and those few are coming to these doors. This is a blessing; this is a unique opportunity. I actually see it as one of the big yajñas of the year for ISKCON. That ISKCON means to share our good fortune with the public. So we’re getting—we say in French, *crème de la crème*—we’re getting the cream of the people coming here. So we’re blessed. And if we look at the history of the world through the eyes of śāstra, we see that devotees of the Lord, through Purāṇa, through the history of the cosmos, they often choose holy places to begin or perform an auspicious function. Any type of auspicious function, it’s just because it helps to have the support of the dhāma. The dhāma is the place where either Kṛṣṇa appears or His representative, the ācārya, appears. So, there’s some special potency when we come to Uttar Pradesh. We go to Mathurā; the janmabhūmi, Kṛṣṇa appeared in Mathurā. We know by going there, there’s some special energy. And Vṛndāvana, it’s the playground of God. We go to Ayodhyā because Rāma appeared there. We go to Bengal because so to get the strength and inspiration, the purity to do what we do, we often start off in a holy place.

There are many examples. When that day came, the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, Kṛṣṇa went back to the spiritual world. He wound up His pastimes on this planet, and He went back to the spiritual world. That’s the moment that Kali-yuga began. It’s like night, you know? We’re enjoying the daytime, the evening comes, and then it becomes dark. Everyone goes into their homes; you don’t stay out in the dark, it’s dangerous. So as soon as Kṛṣṇa left, the darkness—you could say the ignorance—of Kali-yuga became manifest. Mahārāja Parīkṣit saw it; he was touring his kingdom, and he saw people beating a cow. These things didn’t happen in Dvapara or Satya-yuga. So, seeing that, the compassionate sages—because sages, real sages, are not only concerned about their own deliverance; they’re actually concerned about the deliverance of everyone, whom they see as brother and sister. How did they see everyone as brother and sister? Because Kṛṣṇa says He is the seed-giving father of all created beings. So if we all have the same father, that means we’re brothers and sisters. So this is the vision of a sage. So they were concerned—who was concerned? The sages of Naimiṣāraṇya. As soon as the darkness started to come, they went to a holy place to discuss what to do, how to resolve the evils of this age, so people could take advantage of the human form of life even though it’s called a yuga. They went to the forest, this the forest of Naimiṣāraṇya, which since time immemorial has been a holy place. And there they discussed; they were different sages, they had different ideas, they couldn’t agree on one point. And then Sūta Gosvāmī came and started giving the process of devotional service, which in the age of Kali means the yuga-dharma: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

And when that historic moment came when the Pāṇḍavas were to uphold dharma because adharma was happening in the world—adharma—so to establish dharma, to do away with the Kurus who were adharmic, the Pāṇḍavas chose the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. It wasn’t always a battlefield, actually. When we went there, what was it, last two years ago? We explained that Kurukṣetra has been a holy place since time immemorial. So many pastimes have taken place there. So, because of that sanctity of that place, the Pāṇḍavas thought they had an edge over the Kauravas. That’s why, and the Kauravas were a little bit uneasy because they knew this is a sacred place; it will benefit the Pāṇḍavas, as it did. So there’s another example: going to a holy place to do the yuga-yajña. You get a benefit from the dhāma.

Another example is Mahārāja Parīkṣit. You know, what is greater challenge than to leave this body? What’s your next destination? So he chose to go to the banks of the Ganges because the Ganges is the water of the spiritual world; it flows down into this material creation for the purification of all those who live on the banks. "If I’m going to leave my body, let me leave it in a sacred place." Śrīla Prabhupāda was another example. When it came time for him to leave this world, he went back to Vṛndāvana. It’s interesting, he took a little break—or the disciples encouraged him, hoping that Prabhupāda would get better. Prabhupāda came here to Rishikesh; there are those videos you see, Prabhupāda cruising down very slowly the Ganges River in Rishikesh. For us, that’s the real glory of this place. This is a glorious place. Ṛṣis did yoga here. Rāma, he came here and lived in one cave for some time; he gave his mercy to this dhāma. But for us, the crowning glory of Rishikesh is that our Guru Mahārāja, the Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, who spread saṅkīrtana all over the world, he came here. And when we go on harināma, on the other side, maybe you saw already, we can point it out later, there’s the house which Prabhupāda lived in. So we feel very comfortable coming here. Although it’s the abode of the yogis, the topmost bhakti-yogi came here, Śrīla Prabhupāda, because he could understand this place is a sacred dhāma.

Not only that, when before Prabhupāda began his yajña, his life was a lifetime in preparation for serving the order of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: what to do? To spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the English-speaking language. He didn’t just immediately fly or take a boat, or he went to Vṛndāvana and for six years he prepared himself for the yajña. Where? In Vṛndāvana. This is what sādhus do. Kurukṣetra, the bank of the Ganges, Naimiṣāraṇya; they feel the mercy of these places, so they come to prepare the self or to serve in the dhāma. So many examples are there.

To begin his mission, he went to Kolkata. Kolkata, you know, Māyāpur, we know Māyāpur, Navadvīpa, the nine islands, Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared there. That’s a holy dhāma. Why didn't Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta just stay in the dhāma? Actually, he took a vow to chant—what was it? A billion, one billion, one million, one million billion, one billion holy names of Kṛṣṇa before he started his preaching. But he did it in the dhāma, the holy dhāma. That’s where he did it, in the dhāma. And he was fulfilling that vow; he was living in a thatched hut that had holes in it. And when it was raining, he had an umbrella inside the hut, but that’s how renounced he was. He didn’t have time to make it easier. He had just vowed one billion. And one day he was walking, chanting his rounds in the countryside. There, a piece of paper flew and landed at his feet, and that piece of paper was a torn page from the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* or *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, where Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that His mission is that one day His holy name will be sung in every town and village of the world. That piece of paper, *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, he found that. So he picked it up, stopped chanting, went straight to Kolkata. "I should be preaching." He just set an example how our sādhu is essential for our preaching. Enough of that; he went to Kolkata.

We have the example of the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya, the Pāṇḍavas, Mahārāja Parīkṣit. What’s he going to Kolkata for? Kolkata was a name given to that place by the British, right? Or they changed the name. But originally, actually, I was reading in Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he had one publication that was called *Sajjana-toṣaṇī*, like his son Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī had *The Harmonist*, and Prabhupāda had *Back to Godhead* magazine. So these great generals, they were starting up the machine. By the *Bṛhad-mṛdaṅga*, the chanting can be heard on one block, but *Bṛhad-mṛdaṅga* can be heard. So it all started with Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, *Sajjana-toṣaṇī*, many issues that came out, I think thrice or four times a year. And I’m actually studying those *Sajjana-toṣaṇī* now; they’re hard to find. Our, uh, what is it called, Bhaktivedanta Central Repository? Yes, in Kolkata they have some; there’s some in the library there, spread around the world. I’m trying to find them and, you know, mine the jewels, the nectar that’s in that book. And I was reading in Volume 9, Issue 12, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura described—he said 500 years ago, Kolkata as it’s known now was a village. It was just a village. It was called Varahanagara. I never heard that before. Varahanagara. And it was famous because one sādhu lived there. You know, people go to New York because it’s New York, New York; they go to Paris. But this village was famous because what? A close associate of Lord Caitanya, his name was Bhāgavata Ācārya, he did his bhajana there. He was a close associate of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And I was reading that, we know that when the Lord comes, He comes with His associates. So this Bhāgavata Ācārya was one intimate associate of Kṛṣṇa who became an intimate associate of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In the spiritual world, this Bhāgavata Ācārya is a Mañjarī; he has a special kuñja in the spiritual world where, you know, as a gopī he serves Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So that when he came here, this village was his kuñja, where he was in as a male figure but serving Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who’s the Divine who’s the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So he was having his pastimes there, and he wrote a book—I’m trying to find it—it’s called *Śrī Kṛṣṇa-premāmṛta*, which Bhaktivinoda said was an authorized book. So Mahāprabhu used to come from Navadvīpa just to meet His this associate, the gopī in the spiritual world; come regularly. And they would have discussions on Vraja and Vraja-bhakti. They’d dance in kīrtan for many hours. So Bhaktivinoda, he said because Śrī Varahanagara—because it’s a place of the pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Gauḍa-līlā where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, had pastimes—he said that village is non-different than Vṛndāvana. And he concluded, because that village is now Kolkata, he said, "Kolkata is non-different than Vṛndāvana." I read it in *Sajjana-toṣaṇī*. *Sajjana-toṣaṇī*—he sees like that. I couldn’t believe it. "It’s a sacred place. Kolkata is a sacred place." Yeah, but when I go there, what does it look like? Well, what does Vṛndāvana look like today with all these high-rise buildings and this and that? But we see through the śāstra. A sādhu, he sees not with his eyes but through his ears. So Bhaktivinoda—this village became a city, but because it’s a place where Mahāprabhu danced in ecstasy with a great devotee of His, he went regularly, he considered it non-different than Vṛndāvana. So Vṛndāvana and Māyāpur are non-different, so it’s part of Gauḍīya-līlā. That’s how he concluded: it’s part of the pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the nine islands, it’s an extension of Navadvīpa. Actually, Kolkata, it’s right there in black and white in the pages. Therefore, we can conclude that Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī obviously read *Sajjana-toṣaṇī* and he could see these things.

Anyway, he chose to do his mission in that holy place where Mahāprabhu danced in ecstasy. So, following in the footsteps of the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya, who came together to figure out how to counteract the evils of this age, in the mood of the Pāṇḍavas—they chose Kurukṣetra to establish dharma—Mahārāja Parīkṣit went to the bank of the Ganges, Prabhupāda went to Vṛndāvana to prepare himself, we’ve come to Rishikesh to prepare ourselves for the yajña. But the special blessing is the yajña is also here. Prabhupāda went to America, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, he sent his preachers all over India, but we have the blessing to be here preparing all for ourselves and doing the yajña here.

I mentioned in conclusion the other day that Prahlāda Mahārāja—and we are followers of Prahlāda Mahārāja, he’s one of the 12 Mahājanas, the authorities in devotional service—that famous verse in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 7th Canto, he said, "I’m not interested in going to the Himalayas and becoming a yogi," which includes Rishikesh, "and become self-realized. I prefer to stay in the towns and the villages and the cities where the people are and preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So we have that mood as well. We want to be in the big cities. Why? Because that’s where the people are. We can preach to them. That’s our life and that’s our soul. We also hanker to come to Vṛndāvana and Māyāpur and Rishikesh and Ayodhyā because we know that in that atmosphere we can become surcharged—ISKCON’s terminologies—we can, our batteries can be just recharged. But we have the best of both worlds now. We get to live in a holy place and we just wait for the people to come through those doors. We’re actually blessed. We don’t have to go back to see the people; we just sit here, Hare Kṛṣṇa, worship our Deities, take bath in the Ganges, and in the evening they come, they’re pouring in. So we are supremely blessed. And despite whatever austerities we have to perform here—this is not five-star accommodation, it’s not four-star accommodation, it’s not three-star, it’s minus three—you look at some of the bathrooms, oh my God, and only half the time my hot water works, and you get up in the morning freezing cold. We don’t care. Austerities are the wealth of the bhakti. Because we have so much good fortune, that sun comes up, it’s nice and warm, go bathe in Mother Ganges every day. You know, in the old days, we would come to India once a year maybe. I remember in the 70s, once every three years we’d come. We’d bathe in Māyāpur a few days, and we bathe in here five weeks if you want; you can go bathe every day. Look at the Himalayas. If that’s all you do, that’s devotional service; you’re looking at Kṛṣṇa. If nothing else, just get up when that wind, it starts around what, 4:00 in the morning something like that, till 5:30 this morning, I just stood like this: a purifier. Said, "The wind," come on, dark, the morning, get rid of the lust, the anger, the greed, this is easy. I was breathing in the purification, looking at the Ganges, like looking at Himalayas. Plus, I was doing the yajña, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

And starting tomorrow, we’re going to preach the glories of the Holy Name. We say *prabhu* means a person, *vrajendra* means form—there’s no difference between Kṛṣṇa, Bhagavān, and His holy name. And another issue of *Sajjana-toṣaṇī* says within the Mahā-mantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa, are all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vṛndāvana, all the moods of Vṛndāvana, all the rasas of Vṛndāvana, all the personalities in Vṛndāvana. It’s all there in those three names composed as Hare, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare. So when you’re chanting, as you know, you’re getting that personal association with Kṛṣṇa. He’s so kind. One time, Prabhupāda, in a lecture, "Here’s Kṛṣṇa. Take Him." It takes lives, takes many lifetimes to have that darśana of Kṛṣṇa, but Caitanya Mahāprabhu is more merciful, and Prabhupāda more merciful than Caitanya Mahāprabhu, because Mahāprabhu spread the movement in India, but His desire was a Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, Śrīla Prabhupāda, would go to the West. They gave that service. So Prabhupāda, when you’re chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is dancing on the tip of your tongue. You get mercy.

And when we come together in kīrtan, because it’s the loud chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, we benefit. Your mind doesn’t wander—I hope in kīrtan your mind’s not wandering, you’re hearing, hearing—so you get more. Because every kīrtan there’s young devotees, intermediate, there’s always advanced devotees, so you’re hearing the chanting of all these Vaiṣṇavas. Prabhupāda said the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa is especially potent when it’s heard from advanced devotees. So we have advanced, so many advanced devotees are coming this year to chant for all of us. We just have to sit and listen. In that little seed of bhakti, it’s just coming right out of the earth, just barely a little creeper like that. So Śrī Kṛṣṇa is merciful. When you’re doing japa, you could say a little more merciful when you chant in congregation because that’s the actual formula that Mahāprabhu brought. There were sages chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, doing bhajans, but He brought the saṅkīrtana movement, which means many people come together at one time and chant very loudly, easier for Kṛṣṇa to hear, very loud chanting, many devotees. But when those devotees take the chanting to the non-devotees, because Kṛṣṇa wants to rescue all His sons and daughters, when the Vaiṣṇavas take the chanting to the streets with a non-devotee, then Nityānanda Prabhu is very merciful; that’s His most merciful form of Śrī Nāma. So that’s what we’re doing. People are coming in; we are here for the people. This is the mood always. I like to perform for, I love the kīrtan moves where all the devotees come together, but this is my favorite type of kīrtan, like we have on the Polish tour for so many years: we’re chanting for the people. We go on the streets of the big cities, somehow there’s a special flavor because Śrīla Prabhupāda is very merciful.

So we’re just supremely blessed. And what will we do with that mercy? We’ll give it back out again. $1 - 1 = 1,000,000$ in spiritual mathematics. So by giving our hearts and souls, working very hard—it’s a lot of hard work on this tour, you know, you’re going to be tired after two weeks and there’s still three weeks more to go—you know what it’s like. We work hard, our bodies get tired, but that little bhakti-latā-bīja, it’s growing and growing and growing. So saṅkīrtana devotees, they love the festivals where we go to the people and we give it to the people, and they take it as it comes. Some of them, it will blossom next lifetime; some of them will remember us with fondness, remembering a Vaiṣṇava, remembering the Holy Name, remembering, and some of them will become devotees just like you remember Anna, that, um, that black-bodied girl who was here a few years ago, tall girl, she used to be a model. She was chanting with us and coming. Now she joined the movement in New York City. I saw a photo; she’s chanting 16 rounds, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. So, um, Devāmṛta Mahārāja saw that; he was asking if she could come and join us because she doesn’t have any money, so we arranged a ticket for her. So she’ll be joining us in a week or two. But many of you, many of you have had the experience of people who came in contact with us, they can’t forget us. So they’re also going to come. I don’t know how we’re going to, this hall is going to be too small, I think. The first couple days, you know, it’s just starting, people are just starting to come. So we might have a big crowd the first few days, but quality, always, quality and quantity. That’s the kīrtan, the Rishikesh Kīrtan Fest. Quality and quantity.

So savor every moment. This is like gold for devotees. We all like to practice and we all like to preach. So you get good practice, get up early, look at the mountains, look at the river, breathe in the wind, enjoy the advanced association, so many elders and so forth and so on. But when you see the people walking through that gate, that’s perfection. That’s another flood. There’s two rivers flowing here, I said the other day: there’s the Ganges, and there’s the river of Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mercy and spreading all His people. So we have two rivers, purifying wind, the Ganges. We are blessed, and we’ll use those blessings as best we can to give that taste, which comes from chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, to the people: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. We’re already liberated; it’s only a question of time. We live for the people; that’s their existence. We live for the purpose of sharing. That was Prabhupāda, that was Bhaktivinoda, that was Bhaktisiddhānta; they lived only to give. So if we serve their mission in this world, we qualify ourselves to serve them one day in the spiritual world. We are blessed. So enjoy your blessings and share it as much as you can. Dance, chant. If you’re a preacher, take people aside. Um, we’ve got special programs this year, Devāmṛta Mahārāja will explain everything. I went way over my time, I only had 15 minutes, I took 32 minutes, but I’ll turn the microphone over to Devāmṛta. Big round of applause for him.

And, and, even before we begin, a big round of applause for Rasika Govinda, who collected every single rupee, pound, dollar to put this festival on. She’s coming in five days. Big round of applause for all yourselves, who sacrificed to come here. And a big round of applause for all the people who are going to come. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Saṅkīrtana kī jaya! Himalayan Mountains kī jaya! Purifying wind kī jaya! Rishikesh Kīrtan Fest 2025 kī jaya!""