"*00502*.*
"If you are both sleeping, and it is so incredible, God has already very figuratively and attractively described the park. As he mentioned, the mood of these special, so-called *parakiya-bhāva* games—beyond ordinary relations—are such special games that they draw a river so that they can be heard. Unpleasantly, this may not be done right away. I’m afraid on this channel they smoke distances to a small extent. On the concern, I read historical descriptions of what would happen; people recognize British rule was very struck by the fact that the British particularly suppressed this country literally. Instead, they inspired the worship of porcelain dolls and burnt houses, needing to get to the masters intact. I want to be quite more precise; of course, the most important thing is their goal: to promote their political culture and present a religion of a lower type, Christianity, and ultimately they wanted to completely destroy the entire spiritual culture here. When they heard about the worship of Kṛṣṇa, they came to the conclusion that Kṛṣṇa is a deceiver, and therefore worshiping Him is unfavorable; it does not fit at all with the idea of the great gods.

But Lord Rāma, as in accordance with the description, lived this way of life; he had one wife. For some time, they promoted the worship of Rāma and tried to worship [Him], but we know from the scriptures that Kṛṣṇa, even as a thief, does not bring anyone any trouble; on the contrary, one feels pleasant. Most of these games of Kṛṣṇa are created to defend themselves. It’s important not to forget about *dharma*; He was created by no one. He is a skilled person; He dumped Himself. I will be normal and old to do on; so, we can accept such places as I discuss with you, having studied games, which He tried, it seems, to violate the principles of worldly morality and laugh back.

From the point of view of a guru—and one wrote a lot about this place—scholars of the scriptures are talking to finally resolve the dispute mentioned about one of his books. Such [a person] who described four lines of what happened here and put it nearby; if you look through all the Vedic works, there is not a single one on such courts. He himself will say it; therefore, some thinkers and followers of the Vedas do not accept these games as not described in a charming way. But everything about the hill passed that, according to the words, and He himself is devoted to Himself—no worse than physical exercise—and because devotees like this, the so-called "inventors" just invent for 5 minutes. They are the reason for the participants of these pastimes. The pros know the important things; for example, those of you who participated in the program last night can very vividly describe what happened there because there was a "strip" throughout the forest. I will write again.

Place them in a warehouse, look, sit there, and what qualifications... She is charming, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and why do they describe all these in such detail? They pour out personally because the Lord is present. They say they are men; how do they know such details of how the Lord will give birth with His female companions? We all know perfectly well that the Lord would live; He really wanted to participate, read from dancing once, and Kṛṣṇa succeeded simply because... but here is such a test. Gentlemen, all these details—I describe them, but they are all men—want to know the answer to the question: Can you cope with the murder of the staff? They are highly, senilely, but strongly [motivated]. The literature describes that all these personalities in the spiritual world appear as females. Jāras, in principle, in theology—for example, a lesson with you is described in the mountains of Canada, itself a peak, as Rūpa Mañjarī... even the *mañjarīs* were famous for themselves. These females corner here, mountain all codes, Milan mountains, girlfriend of Rādhārāṇī, and after dinner, we laughed right away.

We felt it now. Tell me, the headlights are with this way, when I'll count for a long time, of course, great—I apologize—and you start calling, they will achieve success. I took off only the beginning, and the recipe, and wiped myself; it’s unlikely you lost. We talk about these, they always participate in Kṛṣṇa’s games, but when they come here, they spend time in the games of Lord Caitanya. They manifest themselves in masculine forms, for which purpose? In order to explain to us how we can take part in the seminar. And therefore, what they know, you can do. But with all due respect to the Vedas, what is described there, Kṛṣṇa explains suspiciously the three *guṇas* of nature and how to find your own, without promising. There was none in *ānanda*, they are swarming with something; an anniversary, that you made an idiot out of me? It corresponds to yours; mostly Vedas talk about three already lost natural *varṇas* from small ones. Arjuna, elevate on an elastic band, and baked for [everyone]; he changed his mind from *bhakti*. He and the spectator effects are freed from duality, from worries caused by the desire to acquire knowledge, losses, and assert one's own.

Then we cannot see these games, much less take part in them. But how can we learn about them? We can see them through *bhakti*, not these transcendental signs that know about them in all the details. That is, these are the same ones. And thanks to listening to these games, we cleanse our hearts. With a swab of answers, we gradually develop the qualifications to participate in the number and took up this amazing thing. You will agree on which elder, but not right. Each photo is only eternally *pāñcajanya*, filling everything with itself. My work is not just as the fruit Śrīla Sarasvatī said: the taste of heights about giving *caraṇa* a drink. The future harsh one wants to recommend initiation to him because he is wonderful to listen to, and we understand that completely unqualified people not only enter but also see them, but if we simply humbly listen, gradually trying to understand the essence of these games, I do not fall asleep. I agree by the grace of the guru. Qualification for work, it’s about the same, the energy to the North Pole, or 100 students, or the period looked after us, all the additions.

And I was bad, but as we mentioned, there are only four of us who are described in connection with this place, and every year coming here, we can say the same. Are we, and for example, if I live another twenty years by the grace of the Lord, this means that eighty-two of the story are the same? Will you tell? That is, many times, if at the end of all these descriptions, one tear hangs from the eye of the *bhakta* from these stories, then this will completely improve all these years of listening. But of course, the best storyteller in Kṛṣṇa's games... I’ll leave him and I’ll tell the simplest: Lord, cows, desire. The principle of spiritual life is not to try to look more advanced; we take a *grāsa*, the Lord in His hand, the most simply wags the dog... once, just a long time ago.

We are on the edge, it is 5 or 6 kilometers from here, we will then go on foot so that He will show the banks. Māyā Yaśodā once took the court, clothing decorations, perfume, rolled up ones, and a slogan. It would only be recently that I got up, took ablution, and started asking Mom about this box, and Mom Yaśodā, she was very busy. She came again, "Not distracting me. What's the difference? Go play with friends." But of course, I began to insist and tug, and Mom should explain the blockage, otherwise, I won't leave. I put the cleanest sticks in this chest. I created floors here, and the author's valuable precious pollen, comfortable logos, very clean, and wax, oral oil, purest powder, red sums, colored ones, given very expensive clothes, if and jewelry decorated with no one. Earrings and bracelets on pieces, a chance, overgrown and rolls, shocking emeralds, pearls, creature, Mama—dispersion knows how to shape—and you got on them, very much, said, and these are gifts for me or for the city itself? The address is high and rubbing at once, *harā*, Kṛṣṇa. And Mama Yaśodā said about the *ural aṅkara* jeep, what a wonderful thing, precisely for the sake of freelancers, aesthetics, the level of the enemy, the *ural aṅkara* denotes above, and jewelry from the remaining.

So Mama Yaśodā turned to her reflection, that is, just as fate gave not you, thanks to the asceticism that she performed, just like a beautiful girl appeared, who is like a medicine that supports, remember, from among her, she is like computers that cools mine. And I take the invitation and clothes for this is not an ordinary thing; when a girl develops feminine qualities, [she] becomes very much like those who slept, this sounds, I can feel. And when there were girls, these sublime feminine qualities manifest themselves, they achieve former ones in their glory. And this girl is very strong, natural love, and when you decide to spend such a thing, she describes that when Kṛṣṇa heard the name of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, His whole body was covered with goosebumps. He kissed the Ukrainian status, or have you had a few days of delight? Of course, you will already have time to get clean water. Is it a few days after the wig work? Most of the time, most of the goosebumps will be pepper simply because it will start to get cold in a few days.

Pawnshops, but we are waiting. But when I have goosebumps, I will run when the train will listen to everyone. The tourist game, look, I got exactly a stolen apartment, garden, and half Kṛṣṇa. Goosebumps ran all over my body for whatever happened and so that He wouldn't notice anything strange. He covered His hands. Craving and writers. And because the appeal of these games lies in the mystery. Remember and keep your love a secret before anyone. They don't tell anyone about the court. My friend, you want to do everything. I'm not given the word; coffee comes from the word cube. Yes, what does hidden love mean? They hide in the crisis, or the love of Kṛṣṇa, and elevated devotees also don't advertise their love. They hide it in the depths of their own hearts—the heart contracts, stretches. But Kṛṣṇa, during the pause, does not know anything. Where does she live and how did it happen that you have such strong love and affection? Market days from the office and the orchid, we are resolved. She said she appeared from the sphere of my friend, Sofia Kirte. You, just like she appears here, are beautiful. The ocean is the personification of the king's asceticism. They breathe.

She lives in a palace that was built for her. Pour shops to sleep with her husband. Attention, poor, honestly, gentlemen, and put together. And the duck drove her husband. Hugging. Just came here from his. So much gave him rivers. Write down yours. Any squeezed out. Get to you. And when he comes here, I do this to say goodbye. I will give him this to the court. Update this very bad. Max on corrugated games. Add keys. And when she closed the chest, at that moment, one of the throats and a jazz model made of peanuts entered the room and she turned to Mother Yaśodā. About the queen here with tanks. Test for a long time. It has only been known at work for 24 days. She said that only it is worthwhile. Come your Miller rank on from the tank and wonderful. The great Mother of God even draws this means, in short, such a maid answered the house. I left long ago and you will see a cart and a creamy decline, and she ordered something. He said to bring it to watch this chest so that no one opens it, no one takes anything out of it. She found it on the edge, which is a special general S90, but it is not and consists in providing everything necessary for Rādhā's games, and if she is not in order to stop, I simply closed my eyes. You saw nothing from above, and Kṛṣṇa gathered His cowherd boys, Subal and the others, then said, "Get together with him, I want to discuss something with you." He went downstairs—urine and under supervision, brought it. They took this chest, carried it to a huge place. She was not there in the spring.

But also the Russian Foundation and other teams. The shepherdesses pulled out all the contents of the chest, all the jewelry, all the decorations, all the clothes, and everything. I believe more and more, and they gave everything to bring. Then, critically, he climbed into the chest. The shepherdesses closed it, sealed it, took this dream, transferred it back to the oven, where she packed it. I can still, and left it in the very place. The Yaśodā was part of themselves, and even the moment of capture went wrong. Your fire, which is represented by preparations for the launch of Kārttikamāsa, he went into the room to say goodbye to the matrix of exchanges. If he became, in addition, he did not offer his respects. Māyā Yaśodā asked, "And I am goodness, well-being, it means there is magic, he loses," and she said, "Attention, I collected this chest of wonderful gifts personally at home for the stream. I did not trust Liku's mail, therefore, in fact, yours," and handed her this chest of secluded 200 personally from me to go. They said, "Here are the fruits that bring pleasure to the review, bestowing glory on your mother's bones, she is also always in the locomotive. In truth, I send you an unclean one. Amazingly, this decoration fits perfectly. I'm sure that what's in the chest will bring you above." They saved it, the song says, they cast it, "I want you to decorate your body with the contents of the honeycomb chest every day, 30 bucks, what's in this chest, we will congratulate you, you will breathe in accordance with your instructions." I was definitely before the court, it was heavy, but his supplies, a draft, therapy, and I walked 1 gram, go there, and pick-up artists, I want if all Stupino and gangs the whole way I thought about how rich I became today, successfully clarified, I slept under the weight of the chest, I thought about how much gold there should be.

For all this gold, I will buy millions of cows, and just like my friend, like a flounder, I will get a fall in prosperity forever. And when he dragged the chest of the court of leeches, an unusual social action occurred, here we have one vapecom, we will encroach, equal to true bypass, what needs to be written and drawn never happened here. He noticed that goosebumps were running all over his body, he thought the process was interesting, you can't get dressed, and when he finally dragged the chest, then the beard of this house 38 endowed, shouted, "My run or waved with my mother!" She came out of the top today in a very favorable and seemed such a trick, frankly saved the most in me, so lucky I got this chest with various expensive jewelry clothes on my wife.

Heard this then told very well and felt happy and bypass end of the body 2014, he put *adab* chest on the ground by the body, tried to lift but the promise of peace in vain, very heavy others on from *patuṣan* real led home seals *irma* essentially fix Mitino, and she said, "Son, this chest is so heavy that even the three of us, Taṭyā, my daughter, is cast from labors, and it can sometimes on everyone, so please be yourself. I will drag this chest." This *orkov batyr* anti leave it there on the table and hug the old house by lifted the chest, piled it up by himself head, dragged it to Rādhārāṇī's room, and put it on a wonderful teak table to begin. Only with we set off into a normal place, water from the garden is poured in, Velsoft Rick and Michonne are very beds; such describes that like mountains in advance, Lalitā, Viśākhā, *kara-mañjarī* saw this chest, they also have goosebumps on their bodies, burst on and left bitters Korān began to twitch.

And also began to threaten the left hand, left breast, and hips, and she turned to catch, asks how, why, interestingly, on the left side of my body I have a tremor running, something favorable must be happening, according to aesthetic culture, is it pleasant? She said, "My dear country, I will only assume that about this chest there is an amazing decoration, decoy, there are two ways of interpreting the word, one explanation is imagination, made of the most beautiful jewels, but for means Max Mara said in advance, catch, just contemplate this chest of mine, it is filled unusually, like an extra, the road is." All for hi everyone, this is only she began the project, open the hidden chest number 8 of 8 and talk from the bottom, this is eat fight by thrust you do not enter, say goodbye, hacks Vlad Devine, including 1039, no, and when Andrey, what's the same here, from the box a year before, you were completely unprepared for this from the chest because the girls were in their quarters, there were no men, they were resting and describe that they weren't even properly dressed. I'm a new glaze and talking about my God, looking at everything, and after that, Lalitā must submit to composing herself when Lalitā said this theme for the sake of embarrassment, she felt embarrassed, blushed, and the mole, earlier embarrassment, said they broke, then the one who is inside this box is this and that's why you need to go to then you complain to mobile, I'll commit this scammer personally stole everything, nothing was given, no gifts.

Lalitā, isn't it the hair on her hands that she agreed to drive the operator for psychologists? Vladyka Valya, she said, "Here you are, a shameless lover, throwing a car whose head you rode on and my in order to become rolling, got a job as his wife and pile, what is an offer or did you stay on, but what to do, what's done is done, but now urgently return all the clothes and jewelry that was crown If for now there and strength then Kṛṣṇa answered *golooustnoe* with a sly smile, darkness, smart Yamal, what doesn't know that your peak they are very cunning? She wants and for the width of the spine the goal is Eureka because in fact I just climbed in when we were playing at home your flare-up sent her courage by he forcibly carried me out of the house after all the sea that disappear they are all honest and showed on which instead she bullet all then 300 played with a wide smile and with should damage successful and said to the girl, "You think well you decide find out who is right here and who is wrong on the disk and should his retinue of inaccessibility uncle."

Government website guests decide who I am, I am another one from mohair in advance guilty, I will punish her Pucci powerful 5, I will show at the same time in arms everyone agrees, but if I am guilty I have a plan Yulaevtsy what punishment will come, cold weather Masalta people, although I will allow all of you to scare me; I am generally obedient boys, that's why I arrived on the channel not I will be imprisoned here throughout the day.""