"*00527*.*
"Hare Krishna everyone. I hope you had a wonderful lunch and it was tasty and satisfying, and because it is Kṛṣṇa prasādam, that it helped you on the path of devotion to the Lord. We are going to continue with that. We have a little group here—that quality is more than quantity, is it not? Thank you. And yes, over the last few days, we have been remembering loved ones who are no longer present with us but were instrumental in inspiring all of us on the path of devotional service: Madhubala devī dāsī, Vaikuṇṭha Gopāl Prabhu. We actually dedicated this festival to them, although I consider that they are actually in a place where they can bless us. They, by dint of their devotional service, are there with the devotees, with Śrīla Prabhupāda, they are there with Kṛṣṇa. So, although we are dedicating the festival in their memory, they are capable now of showering us with their blessings.

We have also mentioned devotees who were instrumental in putting together this particular event for 2018. There was a crew—actually, for the most part, when Vaikuṇṭha-balā devī passed away, then as a way of keeping in touch, so to speak, her family took up her responsibilities for organizing this event, with others of course, but I thought that was very nice. Sukṛtī, Rāma, and Rājalakṣmī, Kiśorī—you know, in the old days Kiśorī was like shy and in the back, and she is up here making all these announcements and everything, so that is so nice. And other teams of devotees; it is, you know, we could spend the whole hour just mentioning those devotees who are cooking, cutting up and cooking the prasādam. It is so delicious that we do not even have a VIP tent. And yeah, devotees who were maintaining the strength of this community, which is the deity worship.

There are five principal aṅgas or practices in Kṛṣṇa consciousness: chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, associating with devotees, living in a holy place, and worshiping the deity. So your deities here, Govardhana, are so nicely worshipped, and I think that is one reason for the prosperity of this community. It has grown in leaps and bounds. But it is no secret in Kṛṣṇa consciousness; Kṛṣṇa says *yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham*—that for My devotees, I protect what they have and I provide what they lack. So because you are taking such good care of Gaur-Nitāi, you are taking good care of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, your massive Govardhana-śilā, and your most, most beautiful Rādhā Govardhana-dhārī, because of that nice pūjā and the mood of that pūjā, then everything is prosperous here. It is no secret. Kṛṣṇa talks about economics in Bhagavad-gītā. He does. As a transcendental book, He thinks about economics. He said in the beginning of creation, "I sent forth generations of men and demigods and blessed them that by the performance of sacrifice"—by the performance of *yajña*, *yajña-vai-viṣṇu*, offering back to the Lord in gratitude—Kṛṣṇa says, "I will bestow all prosperity, material and spiritual, upon you." They should teach this in the economics courses in the university; that is no secret.

So yes, this festival is successful by the grace of your worshipable deities. They are an integral part of our lives, and they are encouraging and inspiring us. I have also mentioned His Grace Ajit Prabhu. Sometimes I wonder if he is appreciated enough. There is a saying that you are a saint everywhere but your own village—if someone becomes a famous saint all over India, when he goes home it is like, "Hey, welcome back." But I can tell you that I travel the world far and wide, the four corners, and it is really hard to find a man like Ajit—very expert manager. And you know, just look around; he is expert at making money, and Prabhupāda said for a movement like this you need men, money, and capital to spread it around the world. And I have noticed that besides Ajit’s managerial skills with his team, he is also a very good sādhaka. He is a good devotee; he gets up early every morning, chants his rounds, and at his house they have deities and pūjā and so forth and so on.

So another open secret to success in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is good sādhana. Good sādhana keeps us free from the influence of the material energy, the three modes of material nature, and it inspires us, continues to inspire us unlimitedly in the different activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We never get bored. People get really bored in this world. I mentioned it the other day; there was a survey done in America that 5 percent of the people are happy 5 percent of the time, 5 percent of the time they are miserable, but 90 percent of the time they are bored. That is material life. What pleasure can you squeeze—how much water can you squeeze out of a rock? You do not have to be a rocket scientist to understand that. How much pleasure can you squeeze out of this material world which is provided by birth, disease, old age, and death? The answer is zero. But when you come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, everything you do, because it is devoted to the Lord, everything—Kṛṣṇa says, "All that you eat, all that you sacrifice, and all that you give away should be done as an offering to Me." So if we are Kṛṣṇa conscious, aware of God, then everything we do is an offering to Him, and as a result of that we become happy. That is why devotees are happy, because our lives are dedicated to our *iṣṭa-deva*, our worshipable Lord. So that takes practice; disciple means discipline. So Ajit is a really good manager and he is a good sādhaka. 

Another reason why this festival is a success, and last but not least, we owe all of our gratitude and awe and reverence and devotion to the Founder-Ācārya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, His Divine Grace Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda. We would not be sitting here today as we are, dressed in these beautiful clothes and ornaments, with so many loving relationships, with the real treasures of life—the Holy Name, the deities, prasādam, our philosophy, our community, our restaurants—none of this would be manifest had not Śrīla Prabhupāda gotten on that... that steamship. It was not a passenger ship; it was a cargo ship, let us say. He went on a cargo ship from India to America, and when he arrived he had a pair of kartālas and about seven dollars in the form of rupees, which we can’t even exchange in America—who is going to exchange seven dollars of rupees? And he got off the boat and he walked onto the pier, and he said one time, "I did not know whether to go left or right. I did not know whether to go left or right."

But how did he do it? His Godbrothers once said to us that he did it because he had full faith in two things: he had full faith in the chanting of the Holy Names—*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*—and he had full faith in the instructions of his spiritual master. I once asked Tamal Krishna Goswami, "What is the most important quality for a disciple to have in the service to their spiritual master?" He immediately replied, "The most important quality of a disciple is guru-niṣṭhā." *Guru-niṣṭhā* means faith—faith in the spiritual master that he can take me from darkness to light, from ignorance to knowledge, from sorrow to happiness, from this material world to the spiritual world.

And although Prabhupāda had received such a challenge to spread a foreign culture—it really is a foreign culture because it comes from the spiritual sky—in a material world, what are your chances of doing that? But also Prabhupāda said one time that along with the instruction of the spiritual master comes the ability to fulfill it. Our spiritual master will never give us an instruction—chant sixteen rounds, follow the principles, try to share our good fortune with others, study my books, maybe take up some management if you can, and have children—he will never give us an instruction that is too difficult to perform and succeed. Because all our good fortune comes from his most important instruction, which is to chant sixteen rounds a day. Those who chant sixteen rounds a day have nothing to fear; they will be protected from the influence of the material energy. And the Lord from within their heart as *caitya-guru*, the spiritual master, their śikṣā-gurus, their friends and devotees, will guide that person back to the spiritual world.

But it was not so easy for Prabhupāda when he arrived in New York for the first year. He told us one time, he said, "I cannot even tell you what I went through, how much austerity I had to undergo the first year when I was all alone in New York City." One thing was that it was the first time he saw snow; when he woke up one morning and it had snowed, he looked out the window and he thought someone had whitewashed the building next to where he was staying. So so many trials and tribulations. But this wonderful chanting that we are all relishing in each other's association all began in Tompkins Square Park, where Prabhupāda sat down with no support, no money, no one knew him, but he sat down with a small pair of kartālas. He inaugurated the Śrī Kṛṣṇa Saṅkīrtana movement in the world for the next 10,000 years. And as those hapless souls and those foreign people and those drug addicts and beatniks and so forth came along, somehow they were captured by Śrīla Prabhupāda's devotion.

Prabhupāda says elsewhere that we should always try to hear the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa. Fortunately, we have such wonderful kīrtaniyas in our movement who are—you know, they have their tapes and their audio recordings like that—but Prabhupāda has said that it is especially beneficial when you hear the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa from the lips of the pure devotee. And what is the proof? Prabhupāda turned the hippies into "happies." They weren't happy taking drugs and having unlimited sex and speculating and not bathing and whatever. The only real happiness is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And somehow, it is said that an advanced devotee is understood by the fact that when you see him, you immediately want to start chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. So that was Prabhupāda.

So it all started there, and the rest is history—how the saṅkīrtana movement has spread all over the world. And now internally we have our Kīrtana Melas, and externally we take the chanting to the streets like this. So really, our whole life revolves around the *yuga-dharma* that Prabhupāda introduced. Our whole life revolves around chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. It is the *yuga-dharma*: chant, chant, chant. We have to chant; we have to make time to chant as much as we can. Prabhupāda actually expected us to chant 64 rounds a day when he came to America, but he could see we could not do it, so he said, "All right, 32." Couldn't do that, he said, "At least 16." But we shouldn't limit it to 16. In *kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ*—this is the Lord's instruction to people in this age: *kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ*, always chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

So we are fulfilling the desire of the Lord here, we are fulfilling the desire of His pure devotee, we are fulfilling your desires. Everyone's desires are fulfilled when we embrace this most worshipable process of chanting the Holy Names. And as Mādhava says, therefore, you know, chant from your heart. My mom used to say, "Son, if you are going to do something, do it right." So we should come to the point of not just experimenting with the chanting and trying a little bit and doing it from time to time; we should give our heart and soul to the chanting of the Holy Names. One time my godbrother Viśvambhara Swami, he asked Prabhupāda, he said, "Prabhupāda, we are very exuberant on the streets of Los Angeles and we are dancing very wildly, and the public is staring. Is this okay?" Prabhupāda said, "When you are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa on the street, chant with abandon. Don't worry what the public is thinking, just chant and dance in ecstasy." Because Prabhupāda knew that when people saw real happiness in the faces of the devotees and the hearts of the devotees, they would want to follow suit.

So we are meant to chant like that; we are meant to just give our whole being to the glorification of our *iṣṭa-deva*, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, their *iṣṭa-deva* with their eternal servants. Somehow we have forgotten, and we have fallen into this world of birth and death, and by chanting we are asking Kṛṣṇa to pick us up and take us home, back to the spiritual world. So you have to chant from the heart. Just like sometimes a mother duck, she has got 12 ducklings, and she finds a little piece of bread, you know, softened by some milk or something, and she picks it up and all the ducklings—"quack-quack-quack"—they all want it. Who does she give it to? That duck who is quacking the loudest—"quack quack quack quack quack!" Okay, you did it! So it is not that we want to do kīrtana necessarily loudly, but we want to do it from the heart. We understand it is not just a mechanical process. How could you not know? The Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is more like a prayer: "My dear Lord, my dear consort of the Lord, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please take me back to Vraja, please take me home, because there is no place like home." 

We can't see it, we can't taste it, we can't touch it, but we have been blessed to see someone who has come from there who is an extraordinary personality, Śrīla Prabhupāda. And Prabhupāda has given us the opportunity to get a little idea what it is like to be back home and at the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord and His devotees. How much happiness comes from that! How does he allow us to experience that? *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare...* The other day we mentioned when you want to understand what is the nature of the ocean, you don't have to drink the whole ocean; you take a drop and you taste it—"Oh, that's what the ocean is like." So these Kīrtana Melas are meant to give us an idea, a taste for what is pure devotion to the Lord. We surrender our hearts to the Lord, and it is meant to give us a taste. The atmosphere that is created here is just what it is like in Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha means "no anxiety," and Vaikuṇṭha means that place where there is no anxiety. So when we are chanting in Bhakti Raghava Prabhu’s kīrtanas, when we are chanting in B.B. Govinda Mahārāja’s kīrtanas, when we are chanting in Jñānadāna Prabhu’s kīrtanas... what is it like? It is just like Vaikuṇṭha, it is just like the spiritual world. And that is all by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and therefore we have his picture watching over us and blessing us.

So we thank our dear disciple Madhubala devī dāsī for her service to this community and helping to really put this festival together. We remember our dear Godbrother Vaikuṇṭha Gopāl, who was so instrumental in so many ways in this community. Our thanks goes to Ajit Prabhu in particular and his team of devotees, and all the cooks and the helpers and the whatever’s, and all of you, because if you weren't here, what would the festival be? Therefore, *vancha-kalpatarubhyas ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca...* All glories to the assembled devotees! All glories to the assembled devotees! All glories to the assembled devotees! And the *prema-dhvani* prayers—isn't it so? So thank you for coming and making the festival what it is. Let us remember those who are the source of good fortune, because if you get a gift from someone and you can't say thank you, you can't expect to get another gift. So our life is a gift from God. Our life is a gift from God's representative, Śrīla Prabhupāda. We have no problems—a few, but we are getting over that by chanting. Our life is by their grace.

So let us remember all these people—Madhubala, Vaikuṇṭha Gopāl. Let us work hard to cooperate with the management, Ajit here. Let us respect and love all the devotees. Let us offer full *daṇḍavats* to Śrī Śrī Rādhā Govardhana-dhārī, our worshipable Lord. And let us never, ever forget that all our fortune for now and evermore is by the grace of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

*Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya!* *Nāma-haṭṭa harināma-saṅkīrtana kī jaya!* *Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra kī jaya!* *Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya!* *Śrī Śrī Rādhā Govardhana-dhārī kī jaya!* *Sacred Sounds 2019 kī jaya!* 

[Kīrtana performance continues]""