This is the whole world for watching us on Facebook right now. Your good fortune is that you are seeing Govardhan Hill. This is where Śrīla Prabhupāda wanted to make his eternal residence.

We are trying to follow in his footsteps in a very humble way. So we come together as we are down and we see the beautiful form of the Lord as Govardhan Hill. Remember His wonderful pastimes here in Vrndavan. Lord Kṛṣṇa, when the residents of Vrndavan were in danger, and Indra was flooding Vrndavan with torrents and water, he misunderstood who Kṛṣṇa was.

Flooding, flooding, little Kṛṣṇa, seven years old, takes that hill on his little finger like a frog's umbrella, protects his devotees. If Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you, and if Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you.

So here on Govardhan Hill, we come and we take shelter of Kṛṣṇa. This very beautiful form of Govardhan Hill is one of the favorite places of Kṛṣṇa's *līlās*, His pastimes. When the Lord appears in this world, He shows us His original form.

He has many incarnations. There are numerous waves on the ocean. Most people know the ten incarnations of the Lord. But the original form of the Lord, so that He can reciprocate in a very loving way with His devotees, not just on one level, which of course is important, but in a very pure loving way.

He appears as a cowherd boy, with a peacock feather in His hair, His ears extending to His eyes, His lips red like bimba fruits, His teeth like pearls, wearing a Vaijayanta garland. The Vaijayanta garland is a garland made of five kinds of flowers that go down to the ankles.

The Kṛṣṇa garland is never fresh. Like everything in Vrndavan, in Vrndavan, life is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. And each word is a song, and every step is a dance, and there's a festival every day. Who would not yearn for that?

Why should we be attached to this world, as pleasing as it may appear to be, when there is birth, disease, old age, and death?

These things are not present in the spiritual world. This is where we want to be. We want to be with our Creator, with our Father, with the Lord. We can even see Him as a friend or a lover. In Vrndavan, we want to be there.

So we come to Vrndavan to imbibe that spirit of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, taking this wonderful atmosphere of Vrndavan, the most holy of all holy places on the earth planet. There are many holy places because the Lord comes in different incarnations, but this is the playground of God.

So we are very fortunate. I don't know how we are here, actually. I know because of coronavirus, I got locked down in India. That's my great fortune. I've been here a year and a half, and traveling to these holy places, becoming enriched so that in the future I can take...

I can go out and bring Vrndavan into. But that's not happening now. So we have brought a little piece of Vrndavan to all of you today to this wonderful singing of Hare Kṛṣṇa.

This is Baba. This is Baba. He's my new friend. My new friend. I just love his hair. You can see he's so cool. He never cut his hair since he was born. So he's Baba. He's renowned. He's born in Vrndavan.

And you can see that although he has nothing, just the beads here, some *shiva mala* here like that, he has nothing, but look how his face is shining. This is just spiritual mathematics. We just take what is necessary for to keep our body and soul together.

Don't take according to our greed, take according to our need, and spend the balance of our time awakening our daughter's love for God. So here's a song. Someone could think, "Oh, he's poor, he has nothing." He has Kṛṣṇa in his heart.

He is awakening love for Kṛṣṇa. So we come here to see these souls, because to see the *dhama* means to see it with the eyes of love. So we are very fortunate. Our spiritual master, Om Viṣṇupada Paramahaṁsa Parivrājakācārya Aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad A.C.

Bhaktivedanta Swami, He has invited us here. We have accepted an invitation and we will have to continue. Now we have to say goodbye, but we really enjoyed spending a few moments with you today. We hope that everyone on Facebook can absorb a little bit of this Vrndavan, this love for Kṛṣṇa.

And uh, yeah, we will be doing some programs in the next few days. We will keep in touch with you and if we see it fit, we will share our good fortune with you.