I feel extremely honored to be here today in this most sacred of all places, at the very feet of Giriraja and Sri Radha-Vrindavanath, in the presence of my beloved spiritual Master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, at the sacred Pushya Abhishek of my dear Godbrother Tamal Krishna Goswami Maharaj, who was actually the one who encouraged me to take sannyasa and blessed me to approach the GBC for their permission.

I'm honored to be in the presence of so many elevated Godbrothers and Godsisters. I also imagine in the audience, it's just nectar sitting here and seeing one amazing personality after another just coming and appearing and sitting here, and I'm so much looking forward to their discussions.

That I'm going to keep my presentation very, very brief, which is something unusual, as my disciples will well know. I was actually very glad when I saw Śivaram Maharaj, he took out some notes to give his talk. I'm a scripted devotee.

I also brought, I prepared last night, some a little talk. So when I saw Maharaj had his notes, I felt comfortable, this is okay, but I just handed my notes back when Bhakti Sastri Maharaj arrived, because I want to hear him speak.

And Giriraja Maharaj is another example of a very, very humble personality. When we were discussing in the room, you know, who would speak, Bhakti Sastri Maharaj said, "Just keep it very short, it's already 12:30 or something." But Maharaj declined.

But I felt that Giriraja Maharaj, in particular, is in a position now to speak to us, and we should hear from him. So I wrote him a note and asked him to speak. And then Dinabandhu Prabhu shows up, and Bhakti Vijnana Maharaj, you know, whose lectures I listen to often, and on and on and on.

So I'm going to keep it very brief, but with a very suspenseful ending to my presentation here. I wanted Acyuta Krishna Prabhu to know that I'm very happy this ceremony is taking place.

We're going to be Godbrothers of sorts now because Śivaram Maharaj is also my sannyasa guru. Yes, I retook initiation from Maharaj. I was glad Krishna made that arrangement.

So I see Krishna, but we're Godbrothers of sorts now.

It's just Krishna consciousness, just gets better and better and better.

Yes, you're already a sannyasi. This is a formality since the day I met you, I was impressed with your Krishna consciousness.

You've lived the natural life of a sannyasi again since you were five years of age and had that experience and that dream. This is just the formality. So you will be a great asset to this International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

Although generally, a sannyasi travels and preaches, that's his dharma, that's his duty. He travels and reminds people about the purpose of life and how to achieve it. But we also have in Krishna consciousness, kshetra sannyasa.

Kshetra sannyasa means a sannyasi who stays in one place and develops that project for the purpose of preaching Krishna consciousness.

One time here in Vrindavan at the Krishna-Balaram Mandir, Śrīla Prabhupāda asked to see two sannyasis.

So they came in the room, into Prabhupāda's room, and he began to instruct them.

He said to one sannyasi, "So you travel now?

You've been given your danda, you travel and you preach the glories of Harinam all over the world." And the other sannyasi turned to him, he said, "You stay here in Vrindavan and you manage this Vrindavan project." So the second sannyasi was a little bewildered.

I thought I was going to travel and preach. No, this is preaching. Maintaining projects like this, where people who hear about the message of Krishna consciousness, they have to come and see how it's practiced.

So what better place to practice Krishna consciousness than in Vrindavan?

And what a better place to come to the foot of Giriraja Govinda, where Giriraja has given this palace to the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

And what better devotee is there to manage this site than this renunciate, Acyuta Krishna Prabhu?

So we look forward to your continued management of this place. All of us, when we do go to Vrindavan, without exception, we always wander in here and take advantage of this transcendental atmosphere. This is Giriraja, as we like to think of Giriraja, not all this big construction.

I heard there's a Rummy Golf Course coming up and all this. No, this is how the Giriraja atmosphere should look, simple and sublime. And the main activity is Nama-sankirtana. And he's the perfect devotee to represent that, because he's so attached to hearing and chanting and remembering Krishna.

So when we come to a holy place like this, Govardhan Hill, the best way to take advantage of coming to a holy place is to hear from the holy men who live there. And that way, the Dom is revealed.

When we hear such wonderful discourses about sannyasa from His Holiness Śivaram Maharaj, and the glories of a devotee from the mouth of Maharaj, then we really understand the importance of and the value of what we can obtain from coming to such a place as Govardhan Hill.

So when you come here, this is ISKCON's property. Prabhupāda said ISKCON is non-different than his body.

This is Prabhupāda's desire, that's why it manifested.

And when you come here, you should associate with the devotees like... well, he's going to be traveling soon. But here's a sannyasi who's taking a vow to stay here, and that is to our advantage that he's staying here. He's going to travel also, but his heart is here.

So when you come here, you can ask... Maharaj, soon to be Maharaj, is here, and take full advantage. I'll conclude there because I'm so much looking forward to hearing from Partha Sarathi Maharaj. I haven't seen him in a long time.

He's also a resident of Govardhan. He's like he hides somewhere. I haven't even found out where he lives, I've tried to find that, but he's a real renunciate or recluse, and he dies deeply. So, so many illustrious personalities to hear from.

But I wanted, out of my appreciation for Acyuta Krishna Prabhu, for who he is, and what he's done, and what he will do in the future for this International Society for Krishna Consciousness, I wanted to give him a gift.

Exchanging gifts is one of the ways in which we reciprocate and associate with each other. It's one of the loving exchanges mentioned in our scripture. And when you give a gift, Nectar Devotion says, you should give a gift that it hurts a little bit when you give it because you're so attached to it.

In other words, it's translated as you have to give something very valuable, something you're very attached to, because that shows your love for the person you're giving something to that person, which is extremely valuable. And it's an offering of love, and then they'll cherish that.

So I was given a gift of love by a devotee named Fakir Mohan Prabhu. He was a well-wisher of ISKCON. He loved Śrīla Prabhupāda, and he preached according to our philosophy, word for word.

He was a member of Gaudiya Math and he used to spend his... the holy month of Kartik in Vrindavan and lecturing on the Holy Name. There was a time when he was, I think he lectured for five or seven years on the same verse glorifying the Holy Name, every day for five or seven years, he would lecture on the same verse.

He never repeated himself twice. He was so deep in understanding that Śrīla Prabhupāda, and he was a friend of mine.

He left this world. He's back home, back to Godhead, I'm sure. But he had a very important project which he wanted to be completed, which was to reestablish the ancestral home of... Jagannatha Misra as a village in Orissa. What is it called?

Chatrabhoga. Chatrabhoga. Yes. And the deities of Chatur, the family deities of...?

Little deities which you've seen because Fakir Mohan obtained those deities from that place before it just became what the village that it is now. He obtained those deities and he was worshiping them very nicely, as would be desired by Jagannatha Misra.

And he would bring those deities every Kartik and put them on our altar, Krishna-Balaram Mandir.

So many of you have seen the beautiful Ratha, and that is where the song comes from, "Radhe Braja-jana-mana-mohana..." So very historical. So before Maharaj passed away, he said, "Indra Maharaj, you please make sure that worship is going on nicely." It is going on nicely in Orissa, but reestablish, you know, a temple there and have those deities there so devotees can come and take advantage of their presence and the ancestral home.

So I'm working on that. But before he left, he entrusted something very dear to him to me. And that was, because he was in the Gaudiya Math, and his Guru Maharaj was a disciple of Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, he entrusted to me this cloth, which was the original sannyasa cloth worn by Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur when he took sannyasa in the early 1930s.

You can see it's inscribed here on the cloth, because it was part of a museum for Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur. The sannyasa original sannyasa cloth of Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhanta, this was his dhoti when he took sannyasa.

So I have cut a piece of a nice piece of that cloth. I've cut that cloth. I know Acyuta Krishna is so humble, he doesn't wear jewelry, but this is not jewelry, this is mercy.

This is mercy. I put that cloth in that cover there, the original sannyasa cloth of... I put it in this cloth here. I asked Acyuta Krishna Maharaj, would he wear this?

He said, "I don't know if he'll wear it, but he'll put it on his altar at least and worship it." But I would hope, at least for this ceremony and for however long is possible, he would wear this mercy around him.

Because Bhaktisiddhanta was the perfect sannyasi, as was Śrīla Prabhupāda.

And this cloth will give him spiritual strength and whatever is necessary to maintain his ashram, perfect that ashram, and spread the mercy of Krishna consciousness all over India and the world.

So I'm going to ask Maharaj to hold on to this cloth and don't take any... No, no problem. I have to pass to... So I'm going to present the original sannyasa cloth of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhanta. What a valuable jewel!

How this came into my hands, I don't know, but I'm very glad to share it with Acyuta Krishna Prabhu.