"*00460*.*
"Śrīla Prabhupāda visited us in France several times. During one of his visits in 1973–74, he came to install the Rādhā-Pariśvara deities. It was a very simple ceremony. We had two buckets like this, and we performed the ceremony. I was standing near the deities when, before the installation, the color of the marble on Rādhārāṇī’s face was a little pinkish. On her cheek, I thought that this was leftover; perhaps it was some kind of paint mixed with turmeric or something like that. 

I watched the installation ceremony. Śrīla Prabhupāda stood up with his own hands. He walked with such care toward the Rādhārāṇī deity with love. He came very close to Her, folded his hands in respect, and began to wipe Her face. He thought that the mark could be wiped off, but it was the actual color of the marble. I watched and thought about Śrīla Prabhupāda: he doesn't see the deity as some kind of piece of marble. He actually sees that it is Rādhārāṇī, and he treats Her with such love and devotion. Very attentively, very caring—for me, this one small incident convinced me very much in the worship of deities. It was like *japa* during worship: "My dear Lord, You are not a statue." Although I did not know the quote before, seeing how he treated the deity secretly is what convinced me that the deity is actually Kṛṣṇa. When he installed the deities in Los Angeles, he said, "If you consider that these deities are just brass, then they will remain brass for you forever. But if you follow the injunctions of *śāstra* and worship them with love and devotion, one day these deities will speak to you." 

In this way, Śrīla Prabhupāda did many great things and achieved great accomplishments. But since he was a pure devotee, the little things he did were also amazing—like Kṛṣṇa, who is greater than the greatest and less than the smallest. His pure devotee, by the grace of the Lord, can do great things, but even the little things he does are saturated with the pure devotion of the Lord; therefore, they are very important and charming. Like when Śrīla Prabhupāda played karatālas, how he moved his fingers—I couldn't take my eyes off this. He did it with pure devotion for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

The next year, Śrīla Prabhupāda returned, and we were happy to receive him because we had been worshiping Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for a whole year. We made new clothes; we actually held a whole marathon, and as part of our marathon, we raised funds to repair everything for the arrival of Śrīla Prabhupāda. We went down to the subway and distributed booklets with the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and we organized a whole competition. Bhagavān organized this competition: the first and second place winners would wash the feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda. I thought, we actually left in the morning when it was dark and returned from the subway at 11:00 p.m. I didn't see the sun for a whole month. If we were tired, we slept on the subway chairs for an hour a day for a whole month. I really wanted to wash the feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda because I heard that the dust from the lotus feet that washes those feet—the remains of the *prasāda*—is very beneficial for advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I thought I needed to borrow, decorate, or buy this mercy. Me and Garbha, we won this marathon. We had a few days left, we distributed a lot of different booklets and small books, and we got a huge basin for washing the feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and we had a huge teapot. 

When Śrīla Prabhupāda arrived that year, there was such a huge kīrtana, a reception at the airport. I went to the temple; Bhagavān and I brought this huge silver teapot with rose water and rose petals. Śrīla Prabhupāda looked at the deities, and he sat down to accept guru-pūjā from the disciples. I put this basin down, and Garbha began to pour. I washed the feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda. I thought, "This is the perfection of my life; I touch the feet of a pure devotee." We collected all this water—there were many liters of *caraṇāmṛta*—this was our plan. The kīrtana was growing. I said, "Everything, to the tea!" We ran; we took this basin and ran with three heads upstairs. I had a key to the office of the president of the temple in my pocket. Some of the brahmacārīs didn't realize what we were doing, and a group of brahmacārīs ran after us. Usually, this water is just sprinkled on the heads of everyone gathered, but we wanted to get every last drop. We ran upstairs to the first floor. I ran into the office and closed the door just in time; you could hear the brahmacārīs fighting, rushing into this room. "We want nectar! We want nectar!" they said. Well, we had new glasses in our pockets; we took them out, sat down, and you could hear how the door flies off just from the knock of a brahmacārī. I asked, "What do you feel?" "No, there is nothing. What kind of honor?" I took out a glass, scooped up, and gave it to Garbha. I took out my glass, we clinked glasses, and started drinking very slowly. I cherished every drop. I remembered that the water that washes the feet of a pure devotee spiritual master has so much mercy in it. I drank slowly. Kīrtana was still passing below, and we continued drinking. I don't know how two young guys can drink so much water. There was so much *caraṇāmṛta*—there was a lot—we just kept drinking, and there were only a couple of drops left. Then at the end, I took the last drop, he took the last drop, and we said, "I thought that's why I probably still remained in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness."

Then I took the key, opened the door, and about two brahmacārīs were falling—falling into the door because they didn't expect the door to open. "Where is mercy? Where is mercy? Where is the *caraṇāmṛta*?" I said, "Garbha said mercy." He said, "What are they talking about?" "I don't know," I said. We had glasses in our hands. The guys said, "Rinatha! You drank all the *caraṇāmṛta*!" "Sorry guys, borrow, steal, buy!" Then Bhagavān came in: "What are you doing here?" "Everything? Nothing, nothing, we're going down." I said, "I'll go down now, I need to go somewhere," and we went down. There was a lecture and... he sat there, took his karatālas, and started singing. I heard Śrīla Prabhupāda singing about the spiritual world of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. The sun around us stopped; the sound froze with this trance sound. Śrīla Prabhupāda looked at Rādhā-Pariśvara, and suddenly Śrīla Prabhupāda trembled. I thought, "God, Śrīla Prabhupāda got sick, what's going on?" And he stopped. I was sitting at such a distance, Śrīla Prabhupāda right in front. I noticed that Śrīla Prabhupāda's eyes were filled with tears. Tears flowed from his eyes as we hear, *govinda-viraḍa-nira-kṣaṇam-yuga-yitam*—feeling separation from You, I think that a second for me flows like 12 years. It was not a tear; it was a stream of tears. I sat looking at the abyss. I thought, "Here I live in the material world, disappearing from the spiritual Vṛndāvana, and by his causeless mercy, I get a drop. What does it mean to be in Vṛndāvana, the feeling of love for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa?" This is another impression that will forever remain in my heart, as if carved in stone. I remember this, and it convinces me very strongly. This is what very strongly convinces me of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I just saw these signs of love. I could not yet understand; it was beyond my abilities, but I am convinced simply thanks to this incident when Śrīla Prabhupāda shed tears of love. And then he stopped, he opened his eyes, and said, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa," and we started chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Chant! 

Śrīla Prabhupāda then gave a very short lecture. We were in Geneva. Śrīla Prabhupāda arrived, and after the reception, we went upstairs, and Guru Gaurāṅga bought two bars of chocolate, white and red. He gave them to me and said, "When Śrīla Prabhupāda rises, see if Śrīla Prabhupāda would like some chocolate, because Swiss chocolate is the best." I said okay, and Śrīla Prabhupāda went to his room. We bowed to him there; he joked about some rumors. I said, "We have chocolate for you." "Oh, chocolate! Let us see. Try it." I opened the white chocolate, unsealed it, broke off a piece. Śrīla Prabhupāda tried it and said, "Good, very good." And then he said, "And what is this?" I said, "This is different, this is black, it may be bitter." "No, no, I will try," and he tried, said, "Hare Kṛṣṇa."

Another time, Śrīla Prabhupāda came to Paris. My group, Śaṅkara traveling group—we were traveling in Corsica distributing books on the island. Śrīla Prabhupāda suddenly arrived unexpectedly; I think he was sick in England, and Bhagavān begged Śrīla Prabhupāda to come. He talked about how we had successes in France, how many books we distributed, how many books we printed, that we worshiped the deities very well. He did not want to put pressure on Śrīla Prabhupāda; he just wanted Śrīla Prabhupāda to know how many devotees there were, how they served with all their might, how they love him. Śrīla Prabhupāda left the room, turned to the secretary and said, "Okay, we will go." He says Bhagavān is the Supreme Lord. It was such an unexpected arrival. We were in Corsica and they called us and said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda just arrived in Paris, we must go there immediately." I was just giving a lecture at that time in a yoga club; someone came to me and said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda just arrived in Paris. You must go there right now. You must finish the lecture, we must go right now." "Śrīla Prabhupāda? Yes, he wants us to finish the lecture; it is our duty." I finished the lecture in 10 minutes. I told the audience, "My spiritual teacher, a pure devotee of the Lord, just arrived in Paris, in the capital of your country. If any one of you wants to go, you can come with us; meet a pure devotee." And in the back of the hall—I had not seen him before—there was some man in a military uniform. "Dagger—this is the island where the French naval forces are based." He raised his hand and said, "Yes, I will go with my family. We came to this yoga center for the first time, but what you said is very interesting. I would like to meet the one who explains all this, your Guru." I said, "And who are you, sir?" "I am an Admiral of the French Navy." "Admiral of the French Navy? Well, okay." He said, "Don't worry, I am free now." I said, "We will leave in an hour and a half." He said, "No problem." He made several calls; he was right in his military uniform, he apparently just came from work. His wife took several things from their car; they had several children. After a while, they returned, and we jumped in their minibus and went together with this Admiral.

We drove 12 or 14 hours to Paris, arrived there, and Śrīla Prabhupāda was just about to give *darśana*. We were unshaven, unwashed. We drove all night; we didn't want to lose a second of communication with the ācārya. We went into the temple. I told the devotees, "I said we have a big bird here. The Admiral is with him." He was wearing orders and awards. We went out. The *darśana* had just started. I was very happy. We went in there. I brought something; usually, you should bring some flowers and fruits to your spiritual teacher. Here we brought an Admiral of the French Army and Navy. I was very proud—in the sense that I was proud as a disciple of my Guru—this is my alms, these are my donations to my spiritual teacher at his feet. The ācārya saw this Admiral. I said, "Admiral, you sit right here in front of the ācārya." He was very respectful. He held himself very respectfully. When he saw the ācārya, he sat down. I asked his wife to sit next to him too. I sat down next to him and said, "About the ācārya: Here we conduct programs in the south of France in Corsica. We heard about your arrival, and I asked my people if anyone wants to, and this Admiral agreed." Śrīla Prabhupāda began to talk about Bhagavad-gītā, about how the Gītā was told to Arjuna, who was a warrior, and said that although he was a warrior, he spoke a little about *varṇa*, about their duties, about how everyone should focus on Kṛṣṇa. Despite the fact that you are a warrior, he said, "You are a soldier, you can also be a devotee of God. You can use your craft to serve God." The Admiral listened to him very attentively, and Śrīla Prabhupāda also began to talk about reincarnation, about karma—this was all new to the Admiral. He preached for 45 minutes.

At the end, the Admiral said, "What should I call you?" I said, "Call him Śrīla Prabhupāda." He popped up, and Śrīla Prabhupāda smiled. "This is very interesting. For me, it’s very, very interesting. I don't know what's going on. I just came to the yoga club. My wife wanted to go, but now I’m sitting in front of you, a very special person." He said, "If I want to understand this philosophy, I should read it." Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "Bhagavad-gītā." One servant brought Bhagavad-gītā in French. "You should read it." He looked at such a big book, he said, "Oh, maybe I won't have enough time to read the whole book." He looked at that there were different chapters and said, "Out of all these chapters in this book, which chapter should I focus on?" And Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "Chapter nine. Read chapter nine; then you will understand everything about Kṛṣṇa." And this man, he did so. He took Bhagavad-gītā from Śrīla Prabhupāda, he received instruction on which chapter to read, he received a blessing and left. Everything happened very quickly; we were very young then. I thought, "We didn't take his address or phone number, nothing." We brought him to Paris, Śrīla Prabhupāda disappeared, and now he left. I thought, "Oh my God, I should have taken some address from him." Many years later, I was in Paris distributing books near the mayor's office. I came there, some very big event was taking place there, everything was covered with police, police cars were parked. I thought, "Great, I'll get in there, this must be some big event. There are many important people there, I will get in there, it is distributed, maybe I will even give a book to the mayor." I climbed in there, but the police threw me out: "Just get out of here," they said. Then I looked and saw that there was a group of sailors standing there; perhaps they had somehow participated in this event, and they saw how rudely this police officer threw me out. And I looked and saw this Admiral there, he was standing there in his uniform. He approached the policeman and said, "Let him, let him pass, leave him." I thought, "What a good opportunity! I am very glad to see you, Admiral." I immediately distributed books to the people around him. I said, "It is very nice to see you again." He said, "Yes, not a day goes by that I do not remember your spiritual teacher, not a week goes by that I do not read the ninth chapter of the Bhagavad-gītā." I said, "Thank you very much," and then the policeman said, "That's enough," and they took me away from there. I thought, "My address again! I did not take from him." But by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, this man met with pure devotion for the first time, then the second time—this will again give him the opportunity, he rendered some kind of devotional service, this will give him the opportunity for another meeting.

I'll tell you the last story. One morning on a morning walk, I came to Paris again; we were getting ready for Prabhupāda's arrival and preparations were in full swing. Someone knocked on the door about 3 days before Prabhupāda's arrival. We opened the door, and there stood what we call in French a *clochard*—a homeless person—so dirty, all disheveled. Maybe he hadn't washed for weeks, his hair was all tangled up, dirty, so greasy. His eyes were drunk. Yes, he wasn't old, he was young actually, 18 or 19 years old. I said, "Well, now I'll bring the *prasāda*, can you come in? No, wash first, you're dirty." Yes, then he ran away. And then later in the day, I went to read, I was walking along the Champs-Élysées—our center was in a very good area in Paris, a very nice, such a prestigious boulevard—I'm walking and I hear some noise in the bushes. I looked in the bushes, and there was this guy. He had a place for himself there, I made a dwelling. I heard from devotees later that he had been living there for several days; he had made some kind of nest for himself from some newspapers and was making noise there. And then the next day, he ran out of the bushes to me and shouted there. I said, "Go to the temple, there they will give you *prasāda*." Other devotees heard about him too, and we called him "Pigpen." He really was like that; flies were constantly flying around him. I forgot about him later. 

And Śrīla Prabhupāda came, and one morning Prabhupāda was on his morning walk and suddenly this guy runs out of the bushes—they gave him *prasāda*—we were trying to feed everyone those days, they maybe preached to him—and he ran out of the bushes and rushed to the ācārya to grab his feet. I don't remember who was there, the guy shouted, someone pulled him away, threw him back into the bushes. We continued walking. I thought, "Oh my God, this Pigpen almost touched the feet of the Prabhupāda." We continued walking; we then returned. For a long time walked; everyone went out for a morning walk. Only the *pūjārī* remained on the altar, they dressed the deities, Prabhupāda had to return to the greeting of the deities. We returned. I noticed the door—we didn't want anyone to enter the temple—the door was open. When I returned, someone entered while we were gone; it was wide open. We went into the hall with Prabhupāda, we went into the altar, I was next to Prabhupāda. We went into the altar, and there was this Pigpen, and he rushed to Prabhupāda and grabbed his feet. Someone said, "Take him!" Prabhupāda said, "No," and Prabhupāda allowed him to hold his feet, and Prabhupāda put his hand on his head and said, "Everything is fine, boy, fine." He ruffled his head: "Everything is fine." And you could hear a pin fall; no one moved, everyone seemed to freeze and looked at it. He said, "Okay, boy, okay." Then Prabhupāda said, "Well, everything is fine, Hare Kṛṣṇa." Pigpen pulled back, and then there was the greeting, the temple was crowded, Pigpen was sitting on the floor in the middle. And then Prabhupāda sat down; no one dared to throw him out of the temple because we saw how Śrīla Prabhupāda treated him with love. Śrīla Prabhupāda sat, started giving a lecture, then the lecture ended, everyone left. Then someone said, "Pigpen must leave." One of the devotees said, "No, no, gave him mercy, do you want to stay?" He had drugs, something—someone wanted to throw him out, but the Prabhupāda did not give them. They lifted him up, cleaned him in the shower, put clothes on him—at least he could not yet speak properly—and he stayed in the temple. He stayed. That day he spent the night; he really could not do anything. He started cleaning the temple; he fell in love with it. He started cleaning every time. When we left, we said, "What are you doing?" He says, "Prabhupāda saved me. Prabhupāda saved me." "Well okay, Prabhupāda saved you." And he stayed, started repeating. A couple of weeks later, I needed to go on Sankirtan's minibus and we started packing things. The door was open; we were packing things, packing the car, and Pigpen was sitting in the passenger seat. I said to Pigpen in a chair, "What are you doing here?" "I want to clean the temple. I want to go to *saṅkīrtana*." "Pigpen, why?" He said, "Prabhupāda saved me, I'm on it." "Well, Pigpen, okay, let's give you the opportunity. Come on, clean up here in this minibus." We were still collecting something there, and he stayed there on the chair, sitting, repeating a mantra, and we drove off with Pigpen in the front seat. I was driving, looking at him; he was repeating japa, and he somehow got a bag, put books in there, and at that time, we were distributing books in parking lots, and he was the first to run out of the minibus in a *dhoti*. I thought, "What is this guy doing? Because of him, he'll arrest us all here," and he ran. I said, "Someone should catch him, what is he doing?" And they told me, "And he'll get scared, and after a while he'll come back." And we had a big breakfast there, unpacked everything, and started talking to each other. And we saw that Pigpen was already distributing a book to someone near the store. His bag was full of books. Later we'll lie down there—how do we get out of the minibus? An hour later, Pigpen came back and he didn't have the books in his bag. I said, "What happened? You probably scared people," but we saw him distributing the book. We asked, "How do you do it? What do you tell people?" "I tell people that Prabhupāda saved me." It was his mantra. 

That is, he changed. He changed. He corrected himself. As he says, how can a base alloy be turned into gold with the help of alchemy? The one who received the upbringing of Kṛṣṇa from a pure devotee, he can become Brahma, he can even become more than Brahma. The transformation was so fast; in that consciousness, he was greatly strengthened. Kṛṣṇa's mercy, Prabhupāda—Prabhupāda just changed him. He just patted him on the head: "Well, okay, my boy, everything is fine." What Śrīla Prabhupāda gave this guy in those 20 seconds, who can understand? He grabbed his feet, Śrīla Prabhupāda held his feet. That's it. So in the temple then, Pigpen became a big distributor of books, his speech became clearer, and he began to speak well, he began to give lectures. Eventually, he received initiation, they began to call him Śraddhā-dāsa, and for many years he was with us in France. And then after a few years, the French yātrā changed. I left from there, he left too. I have not seen him since then. Some news that he was distributing books in America, in New York—it was 20 years ago. But glory to Śrīla Prabhupāda, his mercy that changed jagat—he is changing the jagat of the modern century. 

Once Śrīla Prabhupāda came to New Mayapur. We also came there because we were distributing books on the road until the last minute. We were distributing, we arrived a little late—*darśana* in the hall—and at the end Śrīla Prabhupāda asked if there were questions. I said—I thought if I ask a question Śrīla Prabhupāda will see me, he will know that I am his disciple, because there were many devotees there and we did not receive so much personal communication. I raised my hand. "Yes, Prabhupāda, I have a question on your lecture. You said that a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere, he sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead everywhere, but in the *Śikṣāṣṭaka* prayers, Lord Caitanya is in the mood of separation from Kṛṣṇa, and He feels that a second seems like years to Him in separation. How can we understand that on the one hand, a devotee sees the Lord everywhere, on the other hand, he also feels separation?" Prabhupāda closed his eyes—I was sitting very close to Prabhupāda—he closed his eyes, it was a deep *helā-bhāva*, a feeling of separation from the Lord. Prabhupāda opened his eyes and said, "This is a very difficult question." He said, "For advanced devotees, even..." he said, "One day, when you grow in spiritual life, you will understand the answer to this question." That's all he said, but I felt, there is a story about one devotee, but he was dissatisfied with him, because Kunda was walking around with some personalities in ecstasy. "Mahārāja will see me," he said, "One day, when you advance by mercy, Śrīla Prabhupāda will see." One day, I reached some level of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I received the answer to this question. A devotee is a perfect gentleman. And I saw that Śrīla Prabhupāda, he was ready to preach to everyone, he always had time for everyone, he was a perfect listener, he was always able to give excellent advice depending on the level of a person. And he was such a skillful person in this sense that he could touch the strings of everyone's heart, even if a person was very antagonistic in life. Śrīla Prabhupāda ignored his question and then she asked Swāmījī another question. I wanted to know who I was in my past life and Prabhupāda ignored again. Then for the third time she asked, Prabhupāda said, "This is not a relevant question. We should ask relevant questions about how to progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, how to serve Kṛṣṇa." He said, "It's not so important who you were in your past life, who you will be in your next life." And then she understood, "Who I will be in my next life? You can be a devotee of Kṛṣṇa if you repeat..." That is when I communicated with Prabhupāda, I saw whether it was an Admiral, or this guy, or it was anyone, or some mother of a devotee, Prabhupāda always very skillfully interested them in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They left with a good impression of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He was a perfect gentleman in this sense; he knew how to act. Although Prabhupāda could get angry. Like on the Big Program in Pandal, I wasn't there in Bombay, but I heard a guy say that he is God, that Kṛṣṇa is not God, but he is God. In front of thousands of people, Prabhupāda exploded. He simply said, "You are a dog!" He got angry, defending his Kṛṣṇa, and many left this Pandal because they thought, "What kind of sādhu is this?" But this sādhu is... if a person truly loves Kṛṣṇa, if Kṛṣṇa is insulted, then the devotee will defend his beloved. He knew how to react to this person in every situation.""