"*00293*.*
"Many years ago, about 40 years ago, he was grazing cows here at the foot of Govardhana, and when he looked, he found a very beautiful one on the ground. Govardhana worshiped this śilā most of his life, and he showed me on the śilā an image of Kṛṣṇa playing the flute next to Rādhārāṇī.

And he treats me very friendly. Although, of course, he is much older; I cannot call him a friend. But over the course of several years, he gave me this śilā, and today, with tears in his eyes, he gave me his favorite deity. Once, Śrīla Prabhupāda told me that a gift from a Vaiṣṇava is a very special thing; what can we say about when a Vaiṣṇava gives away his own deity? And this is actually the traditional way that Govardhana-śilās come. We do not go in search of Govardhana; we just wait patiently for Govardhana to come to us through Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Therefore, in a certain sense, this is a very important, monumental event, although outwardly it all looks quite simple. He left with tears in his eyes, and by the grace of Prabhupāda, we have the opportunity to enter into such close relationships, although we really do not have the qualifications for this. And therefore, in no case should we take it so frivolously. If a śilā has come, then we must worship her with the same seriousness, with the same love. Premānanda Prabhu conveyed this śilā, and he said that the standards of worship are very simple, but if you worship this Govardhana with faith and devotion, then one day he will be able to see in him the son of Mahārāja Nanda. For many years of my devoted service, I was given many śilās, but I can say that this is a very special case when he gives up his deity whom he worshiped all his life.

Today we have planned the parikramā. We started the program here because there is more space for everyone to sit down and listen about the sacred glory of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa to prepare their consciousness for this special moment. And we can say for sure that this is the most sacred place; this is our beloved Rūpa Goswāmī speaking, that Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the most sacred place in all creation. This is the place of the most sacred pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, we must approach such a place very humbly. Rādhā-kuṇḍa is nothing but liquid prema, love of God—a personal, personal pool. Well, in the scriptures it is said that even the greatest saints like Nārada Muni hardly get the opportunity to see Rādhā-kuṇḍa. If even such great saintly personalities cannot attain Rādhā-kuṇḍa, what can we say? We are just striving to become devotees. If we are honest with ourselves, we can admit that we are practicing sādhaka rules and regulations without much understanding. And certainly, the only qualification by which we are here at the foot of Govardhana Hill, about to go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, is the causeless mercy of our Lord. By His mercy, we can physically be here, and by His mercy, we can stay here forever and attain the qualification to return home, back to Godhead, to Vṛndāvana.

We want to devote a few minutes to describing how Rādhā-kuṇḍa appeared, because it contains a very important instruction for practicing devotees like us. We will begin by remembering how Kaṁsa heard a prophetic voice from the sky saying that the eighth son of Devakī would be the cause of his death. Everyone who has read the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or the book *Kṛṣṇa*, or listened to lectures on this topic, knows how Vasudeva and Devakī rode to the wedding ceremony and Kaṁsa drove the chariot. A voice from the sky was heard predicting that Kaṁsa was a fool; your sister’s eighth son will be the cause of your death. Kaṁsa drew his sword and was ready to cut down Devakī, and it took the intervention of Vasudeva to prevent this event. And so on. We know how Kaṁsa sent many demons from Mathurā to Vṛndāvana to kill Kṛṣṇa. But as they say, only the main demons are described. In principle, Kaṁsa sent demons to Vṛndāvana every day, and these demons were personal friends, ministers, and companions of Kaṁsa. They possessed mystical powers. Demons worship deities like Śiva, and as a result, they achieve certain mystical perfections. And because they had developed mystical powers, they could take any form, be it a donkey, a heron, a bull, or anyone. And he sent his demon advisors one after another to try to kill Kṛṣṇa, but none of them were successful. We know that Pūtanā was killed, Tṛṇāvarta, and many others. And eventually, Kaṁsa said something must be done about it, and he gathered his most important companions. He said, "What’s going on? We’re sending our best people to Vṛndāvana and losing them one by one. Things are getting serious; we need to find someone who can do the job." And he asked who the best demons were, and everyone voted that Keśī and Ariṣṭāsura were the best of all.

And instead of risking the lives of these demons again, Kaṁsa decided to do something different. He said that the two of you go, Keśī and Ariṣṭāsura, and secretly watch what’s happening—what Kṛṣṇa’s activities are from morning to evening, who He meets—in order to understand how He can be destroyed. And therefore, Keśī and Asura disguised themselves as ordinary shepherds and entered Vṛndāvana, began to study what Kṛṣṇa does; it was such a secret mission. And while on this secret mission, the demon Keśī saw the eternal spouse of the Lord. How could the demon Keśī see her? Because she is always next to Kṛṣṇa. And when he saw her, he was completely enchanted; the demon Keśī’s jaw dropped, and he thought that Rādhārāṇī is so beautiful and attractive that it is incredible. And when they returned, Keśī said to Kaṁsa that this young man has such a girlfriend, you just can’t imagine. And they say that Keśī began to describe to Kaṁsa 25 special qualities of Rādhārāṇī, which we learn from the nectar of devotion.

Keśī by one hand and Ariṣṭa by the other pulled her to him and said to kidnap her. Can you imagine? The demons were going to kidnap her. But there was a problem; they hesitated because they noticed that Rādhārāṇī is not a simple girl. Besides being so beautiful, she seemed to be very powerful because everyone, including Kṛṣṇa, listened to what she said. And how does Rādhārāṇī subjugate Kṛṣṇa, the most powerful of all? This happens thanks to her pure love for Kṛṣṇa. She even subjugates her love, which is called *mahābhāva*, the highest manifestation of Kṛṣṇa. We do not call Kṛṣṇa Vṛndāvana-īśvara, but only Rādhārāṇī. We call her Vṛndāvana-īśvarī. They noticed that her power increased her control over everyone around her. And when Kaṁsa ordered the kidnapping of Keśī, they looked down and Kaṁsa got angry and said, "Okay, you worthless demons, I’ll call Śaṅkhacūḍa; let him deal with it."

Each person has a distinctive quality. For example, he is an amazing *kīrtanīya*, and his preaching is no less powerful than his chanting. Someone can preach very powerfully, wear big kaṇṭhī-mālās. How can you come up with something? It is unknown that Śaṅkhacūḍa had such a quality because he was a very proud demon. Especially since he was a demonic personality, the more pride this personality exhibits... and therefore, because of his pride, he thought that I could easily steal Rādhārāṇī. And we know that in this attempt to steal her, he ran into Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, who killed him. And since Śaṅkhacūḍa was so self-confident, Kaṁsa also had no doubt that he would succeed, and he sat on his throne. Kaṁsa looked at the sundial and waited for him to start worrying. Suddenly, a servant came and said, "Sir, I have bad news for you, Śaṅkhacūḍa is gone." Kaṁsa was very powerful and very calmly and judiciously perceived everything, and when Kaṁsa reported this news that Śaṅkhacūḍa was no more, Kaṁsa shook with fear and began to sweat, and all his subjects thought, "Wow, we’ve never seen him like this before. It seems that he is really worried; then he sweats, sits."

And he muttered to himself, "Lord, what should I do now?" Although, "Lord," he certainly did not say, because he was an asura. He didn’t believe in God. That’s why he didn’t say, "Oh my God," he said something like, "Oh my God, what are you doing?" But in reality, everyone in this world needs shelter. Even the most atheistic, materialistic individuals, when they face a hopeless situation—usually at the moment of death, this happens—they still say, "Oh, Lord, what should I do?" And in despair, he shouted, "Ariṣṭāsura, come back." He grabbed him by the chest, pulled him to his own face, and said, "Now all hope is on you. You must justify your name." What does the name Ariṣṭa mean? Asura is clear, he is a demon. What does Ariṣṭa mean? Ariṣṭa means misfortune. He says, "You were called the demon of absolute misfortune." And Kaṁsa grabbed him, spun him around, and threw him toward Vṛndāvana. He didn’t go half the way, but flew and landed there somewhere in the dust. He stood up, shook himself off, and said, "Yes, I am a demon who brings misfortune. So, something must be done about this." The scriptures say that not only people but even demigods were afraid of Ariṣṭāsura, and that’s one thing: to scare some people or the king of some neighboring state. But if someone becomes so powerful that even the demigods from the higher planets are afraid of him, then such a person truly deserves to be called Ariṣṭāsura, the demon of absolute misfortune. And last night I was preparing for midnight and what I was doing was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa; no, I was studying the *Kṛṣṇa* book, which was connected with the demon of absolute misfortune, Ariṣṭāsura. That’s the kind of demonic night I had. And once this demon of absolute misfortune scared even Lord Śiva. And once Śiva was riding his bull Nandi, and Ariṣṭāsura appeared before him in the form of a bull and challenged him, saying, "Let’s fight." And when Śiva saw that Ariṣṭāsura was a bull 10 times bigger than Nandi, he decided not to get involved and, to be on the safe side, hid Nandi in a cave on Mount Mandara. And in the *Kṛṣṇa* book, the following quote is described. It’s very interesting that when Ariṣṭāsura stood up, everyone else fell, and when he moved somewhere, even the wind was afraid to blow like that. It was said it was an absolute misfortune to destroy Kṛṣṇa. But it seems that Ariṣṭāsura either didn’t read the scriptures, or even if he did, he still didn’t believe what was written there: that Kṛṣṇa is one, there is no one equal to Kṛṣṇa or even superior to Him. Even the most powerful demon is no stronger than an ant compared to Kṛṣṇa. And since Keśī and Ariṣṭāsura had already conducted a very thorough study of everything that happened in Vṛndāvana, they knew where Kṛṣṇa lived, and they went to the suburb of Nandagrāma. And Ariṣṭāsura began to make very loud sounds, as befits a bull. Rādhā-kuṇḍa-rasika-ramaṇī... here the workers can... you know, just like before a battle, then you know each side blows their trumpets, makes noise, screams—all the rugby teams, you know—and just like at the beginning of a battle the conches of the opposite sides blow, or before the start of a sporting competition these athletes warm up and so on, like before a game of rugby, in the same way, Ariṣṭāsura roared, and he dug the earth with his hooves and the whole planet shook from this and was ready to leave the orbit. And at the same time when this was happening, Rādhārāṇī was scolding Kṛṣṇa, and it was already time for rāsa-līlā and Kṛṣṇa was late because He was there with another cow. And when Kṛṣṇa came to scold, she says, "Why are you late for the meeting? You should not allow yourself to do this." Did Kṛṣṇa understand or not? And Kṛṣṇa trembled from the fact that Rādhārāṇī scolded, and suddenly there was a sound of a donkey. Trembling with fear, she hid behind a tree, and all the other Gopīs ran up and hid behind Kṛṣṇa, for which she scolded and somehow it was not very convenient to hide behind him, so she decided to hide behind a tree. The rest of the Gopīs nevertheless hid behind Kṛṣṇa and shouted, "Kṛṣṇa, help!"

And Kṛṣṇa thought that something was strange; some sounds in Vṛndāvana are usually not heard, and the whole earth was shaking and flying off orbit as if the devil is trying to throw her off again. I wonder what’s there. You need to go and see. And in the book *Kṛṣṇa*, Prabhupāda describes that this Ariṣṭāsura was so terrible that pregnant women and cows began to have fits of fear. And when Kṛṣṇa walked a few hundred meters, He saw this huge, scary, black bull with flames coming from his nostrils. And when he walked, he destroyed the fences that they put up everywhere, and urine flowed out of it, and excrement fell out. And all the Gopas and Gopīs who saw the Ariṣṭāsura were afraid, and therefore Kṛṣṇa thought, "I need to save the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana from this misfortune." And the rest of the cowherd boys, when they saw that they were shaking with fear, they came up to them and showed their sticks and said, "Don’t worry, it’s just a small bull, we’ll deal with it quickly." And these cowherd boys came up to this one, it was bigger than this building in front of which we are sitting, looked up at it and said, "Well, you ladybug, come on, get out of here!" And Ariṣṭāsura then swelled up to such a size that he became higher than the clouds. He had such eyes shining with a red light, and flames burst from his nostrils so strongly that it scorched at least the cowherd boys. They threw down their sticks from fear and hid behind Kṛṣṇa, and all the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana took shelter in Kṛṣṇa, chanting His names. When materialists are in danger, they take shelter of sense pleasures or they try to take shelter of the same doomed personalities like themselves, but as for the devotees of Vṛndāvana, they take shelter only in Kṛṣṇa. And He decided to make an announcement. He saw a small hillock, He stood on it, folded His hands like a megaphone. We were initially going to conduct the program over there to the side, sitting on a mat, but someone told me that it is better to conduct the program from an elevated place so that everyone could see better. And Kṛṣṇa climbed the hillock, folded His hands like a megaphone, and said, "Don't be afraid." And all at once they relaxed, got rid of all fear just by hearing about how, having heard how the Lord said, "Don't be afraid." And Kṛṣṇa addresses us with the same words in the Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa says, "Throw away all the diversity of religion. Just surrender to Me, don't be afraid, I will protect you from the consequences of your sins." Do we have fearlessness? Will we surrender to Kṛṣṇa as we do? And He tells us no, because we don’t have enough faith in Kṛṣṇa’s words. Kṛṣṇa says, "I will protect you from all the consequences of sins, don't be afraid."

And Kṛṣṇa delivered everyone from fear by simply crying out and fearing nothing. Although Asura was above the clouds, his eyes glowed red, fire burst from his nostrils, and then Kṛṣṇa turned to the demon, and all the cowherds gathered and sat comfortably, as if they had gathered for some kind of sporting competition to watch, waiting for Kṛṣṇa to deal with this absolute misfortune. And Kṛṣṇa rocks, "Ariṣṭa, you’re a crook, why are you scaring the shepherds and animals? Can someone come down and sort out this situation?" Because the geese and the children can’t find a common language. The goose wants to lay eggs down there, and the geese are guarding her, and they’re afraid of the children. That’s why they make such sounds now; as soon as the boys leave, it will calm down. One day, Prabhupāda was giving a lecture; as he told me during the lecture about Prabhupāda, the cow began to moo outside the window. "This cow is mooing because she doesn’t have a bull; give her a bull, she’ll stop mooing." Kṛṣṇa said to Ariṣṭāsura that He would punish him. And as soon as Kṛṣṇa challenged Ariṣṭāsura, he rushed at Him, and they describe in detail how Ariṣṭāsura rushed at Him. He rushed at Him so much that we won’t tell all the details now. We’ll probably put them off until the next year. Who wants to hear the details of Ariṣṭāsura? They say that Ariṣṭāsura rushed at Kṛṣṇa with the same speed with which Indra’s thrown lightning flies. Sometimes Indra breaks mountains with a lightning strike, and when such lightning hits up the mountain, the mountain breaks into dust. And Ariṣṭāsura rushed at Kṛṣṇa with the speed of Indra’s lightning. And what did Kṛṣṇa do? Kṛṣṇa calmly waited until before Him... He grabbed the bull by the horns and walked with him back 18 steps. He pushed Ariṣṭāsura back 18 steps so that it would diminish, and Ariṣṭāsura was completely demoralized. On Kṛṣṇa he again took him by the horns and began to knock them on the ground and then kicked him in the soft spot, and then you know what? Kṛṣṇa took this Ariṣṭāsura like wet clothes—beating on the ground—and hitting Asura on the ground, He threw him. But Asura did not die; in fact, he was in the form of a bull, he did not do this. It was Kṛṣṇa who approached and finished off Saṁhāra. And after Ariṣṭāsura was finished, Kṛṣṇa, accompanied by Balarāma and other cowherd boys, went to Nandagrāma, and they all rejoiced and shouted around Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa killed Ariṣṭa!" Although He did not kill him, but they thought so.

And when all the inhabitants of Nandagrāma rejoiced, some boys said, "We also helped, we actually were the first to rush at Ariṣṭāsura, but Kṛṣṇa pulled us away and hid us behind His back." The līlā of the murder of Ariṣṭāsura began in the evening and continued all night, but the Gopīs were very upset because this meant that Kṛṣṇa was not just late for the rāsa-līlā, but He missed it altogether. And after that, in the morning, the Gopīs came to Him, and they said, "Did you even realize that you missed līlā? Of course, you can have fun killing demons with your friends. But since you missed līlā, don’t you dare." The next day, Kṛṣṇa was nervous, 2 hours early. He ran to līlā, He was wearing new clothes, a very bright color, very well-dressed, and He personally polished His flute. If you want something done well, do it personally; He personally polished the flute, stood there, played the flute, when the Gopīs gathered, they were amazed at how handsome He was, and they expressed their admiration for Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa thought, "Yes, smart girls. I charmed them so much that they showered me with flowers." And He came out in front of the Gopīs and said, "So, let’s begin the rāsa-līlā." Everyone smiled, but suddenly Rādhārāṇī came forward and put her hands on her sides. Kṛṣṇa became nervous. He went up to hug her, she stepped back: "You are a sinner, bull-killer, don’t touch me." Kṛṣṇa was shocked, and He said, "Why are you blaming Me? It wasn’t Me who killed Ariṣṭāsura with a knife." They didn’t see this, so it was assumed that Kṛṣṇa killed him. But even if you think that I killed this bull, it wasn’t actually a bull, but a demon in the form of a bull. It was a minister of Kaṁsa who reincarnated as a demon. He simply dressed in a bull’s skin. It was a demon in a bull’s skin. Surprisingly, Kṛṣṇa stated, reaching out to Rādhārāṇī’s hand. Rādhārāṇī threw His hand away, piercing Him with an angry look. Sometimes, if someone is angry with you, he can pierce you with a look, but you can break a person’s heart with words or even a look. Rādhārāṇī looked at Kṛṣṇa and threw His hand away. It became clear that Kṛṣṇa did not agree with Rādhārāṇī’s statements.

In the attitude of the divine couple, the last word is always behind Rādhārāṇī, and she said, "Even if it is true that it was not just a bull but a demon in the form of a bull, still you killed the bull, and you must go through the procedure of repentance." And she quoted the śāstras. Prabhupāda said that when communicating with knowledgeable people, one should always quote the śāstra or some kind of evidence from the scripture. She said, "Indra had to go through repentance after he killed the brahmin in the form of the Vṛtrāsura; you must also go through repentance." Amazing that even the girls from the village of Vṛndāvana have such knowledge. And what did Kṛṣṇa do? He did not continue the argument; He just submitted. He said, "Okay, dear, what should I do?" Rādhārāṇī smiled, looked at Lalitā and Viśākhā, and said the following; she thought that she had driven Kṛṣṇa into a corner. She said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, cleanse by taking ablution in all the holy places—not only in this country, on this planet, in this universe, but in all creation." There are only 60 billion holy places, at least in Vṛndāvana; sometimes they say...

The finger smiled and said, "Look, girls," and in the place where Śyāma-kuṇḍa is now, He hit the ground with His heel and looked up at the sky as if contemplating all the abodes of the saints and said two words: "Come on!" And at that very moment, different waters from the holy places began to fill up this huge mess on earth and spill over into the beds. Śāstras describe that even the only holy river in hell, called Godāvarī, also arrived there and added its water. I thought that even I have a chance if I get there, I’ll take a bath. Kṛṣṇa prepared to take a bath there, but they doubted that these are holy. Rādhārāṇī said that "You’re saying that this is holy water. In fact, you just punched a spring with your heel and the water came out of there. It’s not holy." Lalitā said that if this is really holy water, then let the ruling deities of these holy places appear here. And what will Kṛṣṇa do? He smiled again, raised His index finger again and said, "Well, look, come on." And to everyone’s surprise, divine personalities appeared everywhere, the whole area was filled with luminaries; no one understood what was happening, just like we did. The Vṛndāvana-parikramā was empty, and suddenly they turned and we were flooded, soaring—we barely made our way through this crowd—and in the same way, this whole area was filled with such shining personalities. And Kṛṣṇa said, "Introduce yourself." One divine person came out and said, "I am the deity of the ocean of milk," and divine women began to approach, "I would later move from my place." All the holy waters gathered in this place. And in the *Kṛṣṇa* book, it is said there was a river called Sona, Sindhu, and the confluence of these three places was called Prāg-kuṇḍa. And what did the Gopīs do in Vṛndāvana? Miracles happen every day because Kṛṣṇa is here, especially with the Gopīs, and they saw that all these holy personalities were filling the kuṇḍa with water. Kṛṣṇa took a bath in the kuṇḍa, and while Kṛṣṇa was taking a bath in the kuṇḍa, all these divine personalities stood around and they repeated prayers to Kṛṣṇa. And when He came out of the water, a flower garland was hanging on a tree, which, for some unknown reason... how it ended up there, and since Kṛṣṇa had cleansed Himself of all sins, He approached and put the garland on Himself. Rādhārāṇī gathered a gathering, all the Gopīs gathered together, and He said to the assembled devotees, "I created this sacred lake from the holy waters of all three worlds, I washed Myself in it and became free from sins." And He addressed Rādhārāṇī directly, and He challenged her. He said, "Dear Rādhārāṇī, have you ever performed such a pious act? An ocean with such holy waters?" Rādhārāṇī accepted the challenge. Sometimes, in our relationships, for example, in marital relationships, husband and wife also challenge each other. "Can you do this? Try doing this." Kṛṣṇa challenged Rādhārāṇī, and she answered. She turned around and she said, "My friends, Sakhīs and I, can create an even more beautiful lake. Isn’t that so?" And everyone shouted, "Yes!" And then she gave divine instruction, "Immediately build a divine lake." They asked Him where, because the battle was moved.

The city, and we mentioned that before the earth was very soft, such soft sand, the whole Vṛndāvana was covered. And he began to dig a pit with his own hands, and when they dug down to the layer, they began to loosen the earth with bracelets. And Vṛndāvana, he said that it took them only one hour to do this; they dug a large pit in an hour. But when Kṛṣṇa saw that His Gopīs were working so hard, He did not like it, and He turned to Rādhārāṇī and said, "Dear Lalitā’s friend, if you want, you can fill your kuṇḍa with water from mine." The kuṇḍa was stubborn; it is equipped with the consequences of the sin of killing a bull. My friends and I went there to take water from the middle of the city, and tens of thousands of Gopīs lined up in a chain from Rādhā-kuṇḍa with jugs on their heads, and they began to fill the jugs with water from Śyāma-kuṇḍa, passing it along the chain and pouring it out. They sweated, it was too much for Kṛṣṇa, and He came out and made such a mystical gesture as described. We will probably never know, because the Veda does not say what kind of mystical gesture it was. Kṛṣṇa made a mystical gesture and a divine personality came out of the kuṇḍa. He looked at everyone, and the Gopīs asked, "Who is this?" What did He do? But from the middle of the kuṇḍa a divine personality emerged; it was a very powerful, shining personality like the sun. All the Gopīs asked, "Who are you?" We can all repeat together, "Who are you?" And this divine personality floated over the waters. Śyāma-kuṇḍa said, "I am the only representation of all the holy waters in the entire creation. I am the main representative of all the divine kuṇḍas that exist everywhere." What did this personality do, the only representative of all the saints? He fell to Rādhārāṇī’s feet, shedding tears like streams of rain. The most important thing is that he said, "Rādhārāṇī, not a goddess, not Brahmā, an expert in all scriptures, nor Śiva, nor Lakṣmī, can fully comprehend your glory. Only the Supreme Lord, the chief best of people, can fully comprehend your glory and appreciate it. This Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, puts pressure on us all in different places, so please..." Let us perform service at your lotus feet, make it so that we achieve success, allow us to enter your lake as well. And what Rādhārāṇī did was she closed her eyes, smiled, kicked her head, consent, and the waters of the kuṇḍa flooded. Rādhā-kuṇḍa—this is what we can hope for, that after many years of chanting service, Rādhārāṇī will accept us, give us her consent, nods her head. On the western bank of the kuṇḍa, the dam broke, and its waters, its waters gushed out, and thus it became her place of washing. And the cowherd girls said, "These two lakes are like the shining eyes of a peacock." And if you look at Govardhana from a height of flight on an airplane or a drone, you can see that Govardhana looks like a peacock, Rādhā-kuṇḍa is like the eyes of a peacock. And Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa gave everyone the blessing of Rādhārāṇī. She said, "Anyone who takes a bath in my lake will have devotion to Kṛṣṇa, just like me." And Kṛṣṇa said that anyone who has them in their hearts, just like me. And all the inhabitants, having been enchanted by the beauty of the Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and mystically on the surface of the Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, multi-colored lotuses began to appear, just like...

Someone painted a picture on the waters, multi-colored rainbow lotuses began to appear, trees grew, flowers bloomed, different animals, deer, birds, and so on, right before the eyes of the onlookers. And when all this appeared, a spectacle before the eyes of the observer, Kṛṣṇa gave another boon, a blessing. He turned to Rādhārāṇī and said, "My dear, since your kuṇḍa is as dear to me as mine, I will be in it too, every day." And He said more: He said, "Let there be more banners in this world than mine." Kṛṣṇa made such a statement. He said, "Let your kuṇḍa be more famous than mine." And we can see that due to Kṛṣṇa’s blessings, we don’t even mention it; we just say, "Let’s go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa," everyone understands about it. It belongs to the very disobedient Gopī, but at that moment she became submissive and said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear, you can one day kill even a hundred bulls, but I will take a bath in your kuṇḍa every day, I promise." She really said not just bulls, but demon bulls, "But I promise to take them every day." And she said something that should inspire all of us, knowing how everyone strives to take a bath. Prabhupāda told me about this, said that for the blessing that Rādhārāṇī gave to those who wash in her kuṇḍa, she said, "My dear Lord, from this day on, anyone who has strong devotion to your lake or to the one who will wash there will live on the shore of the ocean, pray for me, and come to me in Goloka." And in conclusion, we will quote one prayer that many devotees repeat before bathing: "You humiliate all the sins in the heart and fill it with concentrated love from the depths of the heart. I offer you my humble obeisances again and again." In case you forget this prayer, we will repeat it all together.

My... Radha-kuṇḍa by Kṛṣṇa... after Kṛṣṇa, you... you are destroyed by all the sins, all the sins of the heart, of hearts, and then, then fill it with concentrated love, concentrated love from the depths of the heart, of hearts. I offer, I offer my respectful obeisances, my prayers for you again, and my humble request or supplication to all after you have heard.

Mañjarīs and all the glorious inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, that you may approach Rādhā-kuṇḍa very humbly, begging for mercy, and with the knowledge that you have gained through listening, that you may come into contact with these sacred waters of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa with great reverence and humility, since it is only by the grace of Prabhupāda that we can take ablution there.""