"*00116*.*
"### Initiation Ceremony by Indradyumna Swami at Irkutsk

There's no change. Rūpa Gosvāmī has a prayer where he says: "As young boys are attracted to young girls, and young girls are attracted to young boys with the same intensity, but in a transcendental way, that's why we're always thinking about them. And if you love them, you can't forget." And every year she became pregnant, and finally the eighth child was born; that was—there He was.

There's another kind of Kṛṣṇa consciousness we're being trained in: to hate God. *...pūm̐śo...* So how are we supposed to think of Kṛṣṇa? He quotes a verse from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: "By which one can attain the unalloyed pure devotional service of Kṛṣṇa." I need spiritual authority. The most astonishing [thing]—typically, to appear to such devotional service, it must be unmotivated and uninterrupted in order to completely satisfy the Lord, Śrīla Prabhupāda. You must do it with love. He said this is the definition of devotional service, which is everything. I've been in illusion—yeah, yeah. So we want to come to the stage of loving Kṛṣṇa fully, 100%, and that will give pleasure to Kṛṣṇa. That's real Kṛṣṇa consciousness. *...asmin...* And we can measure our progress by how much affection [we have]. Of course, we don't have love right now, but we have appreciation. Everyone is appreciative that Prabhupāda saved us by starting this movement. That appreciation turns into affection, something closer to love, and then at the final stages, that affection turns into real love. *...janardana...* Just like when you first met—when you first met your husband, there was no love; you didn't love him. Rather, you appreciated [him]. Oh no, God, no. More: when you first met your wife, you appreciated her. And after a few months, affection came—our children escaped the mists of personal interest—and after years, some—quote unquote—some love came. So you proposed: "Will you be my wife?" I chose, "Mr. Clerk, Mr. Diamond, does..." Is there any pleasure in there? So it's the same with Kṛṣṇa consciousness. First, we appreciate everything: "It's so wonderful, this movement! I love the colors, I love the lights, I love the singing, I love the food, I love..." *...Kṛṣṇa...* He said after... *...prasāda...* So then you take up the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and then that turns to some genuine affection, and then hopefully within this lifetime, when we chant, some tears will come from our eyes. *...nuta...* So what part does this ceremony today play in that gradual process to come to the stage of pure devotional service? *...prema...* First of all, you need a guide. You have to—someone has to teach you how to practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness; someone has to show you the example. *...Kṛṣṇa...* I was speaking with the Gurukula children. They're in school, they're learning arithmetic, mathematics. I told them, "Two plus two is five." They said, "No, two plus two is four." I said, "How do you know this?" They said, "Because our teacher told us." So that's the point. Any field of knowledge requires a teacher. *...Rāja-vidyā Rāja-guhyam...* The highest knowledge especially requires a teacher, and that's why we have to accept a spiritual master. *...Brahma-jijñāsā...* We need someone to guide us from darkness to light. The darkness is... we need someone to guide us from ignorance to knowledge; we need someone to take our hand and guide us from the material world to the spiritual world. *...Bhagavad-gītā...* It's essential to have a spiritual master to guide us on this path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the path to perfection. Kṛṣṇa makes it one of the 700 verses of the Bhagavad-gītā. *...Kṛṣṇa...* Spiritual knowledge is unlimited. There's 18,000 ślokas in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, there's millions of verses in the Upaniṣads—you can't read all that. So Kṛṣṇa summarized all that wisdom in the 700 verses of the Bhagavad-gītā.

Concentrate on a few... just like "English in 10 Easy Lessons." So, Kṛṣṇa consciousness in 700 easy instructions. *...Kṛṣṇa...* Because there's a text equivalent—it's essential to the chemistry of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious: *Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā...* It appears in the beginning of the fourth chapter of Bhagavad-gītā. Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master, inquire from him submissively, and render service unto him. The self-realized souls can give you knowledge because they have seen the truth. And it's not that just some people should have a spiritual master and other people shouldn't. In Vaisnavism, everybody should have a spiritual master. *...Vaiṣṇava...* Because the goal of life is the same for everyone. We may be Russian, we may be English, we may be American, we may be from Mars—*...Brahma-jijñāsā...* The same rule holds true: now that we've come to the human form of life, now is the time for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So everybody needs a guru. I heard Prabhupāda say one time, "Every intelligent man and woman should have a spiritual master." The people are ignorant of this fact in Kali-yuga. In previous ages, people went looking for a guru when they were young. Everybody went looking for a guru, and that was just part of life. You get education, you get married, you get a career, and you have a guru. But Kali-yuga is so full of ignorance that the Guru has to come looking for you. Prabhupāda, he came to America and told the American boys and girls, "You need a guru." He didn't say that out of pride, but out of necessity of understanding that everyone requires a spiritual master. Fortunate were those who took that instruction to heart.

So that process of coming to the point of crying for Kṛṣṇa—genuine crying for Kṛṣṇa—it begins when one accepts the spiritual master and begins the training process. The spiritual master, being Kṛṣṇa's representative, he gives unlimited opportunities for his disciples to advance. He bestows unlimited mercy upon his disciples in the form of mantras, in the form of foodstuffs, in the form of good association, in the form of the Deities, in the form of songs, and in the form of knowledge. He's like a rain cloud of mercy. We get so much mercy we don't even understand it; we don't know how to deal with it. We just get this flood, a tsunami of mercy. Like neophytes, like little babies, we don't know how to deal with it yet. It's almost as if the spiritual master gives us so much mercy that it's hard to recognize it. But he makes it very clear: his most important gift—Prabhupāda says in a purport in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, "Without that, the ladder of karma is in mind." The most important instruction of the spiritual master is to chant sixteen rounds a day. That's in accordance with the understanding that the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, the yuga-dharma, is the process for becoming God-conscious in this age. We chant that mantra in different ways—japa, kīrtana—and all other instructions of receiving Kṛṣṇa consciousness are meant to strengthen and make our chanting pure. And when you chant "Hare Kṛṣṇa," you are directly connecting with Kṛṣṇa. Our lives revolve around chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. It's the most important thing we do. And with that understanding, if a day comes when we sit down to chant japa, we should resolve, "I will chant my rounds today better than I chanted them yesterday," and then you're guaranteed to make little increments of advancement day by day, week by week, month by month, year by year, until you die. Actually, to realize the importance of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, what one can benefit from it, is a deep realization. That's why I'm so surprised when I see these young girls and young boys, they're so serious about chanting. Realization about the benefits and the importance of chanting sometimes doesn't come for many years. But I asked this young lady here in the blue—"What is your name?" "Viśākhā." I saw Viśākhā chanting so nicely yesterday—just going back and forth, dancing, and not getting distracted, raising her hands, chanting with such sincerity. I said, "How old is this kid?" And later she told me she's only 11. And I inquired further, and I found out she already has... she's going to get the mantra. So this is the *sādhu-saṅga* retreat, this *sādhu-saṅga* festival. And who is she? Bhakta-dani.

So here she is, only 11, and she knows what she wants to do in life. And I'm sure that my dear friend Bhakti Caitanya Swami will give you the *hari-nāma*. In fact, I'm going to tell him that I met you. By your seriousness in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he should definitely give you the *hari-nāma*. This is the point at the stage where the disciple realizes the value of the gift that Guru is giving—the mahā-mantra—that's when the disciple can take initiation. You don't give jewels to a baby; you give jewels to an adult who knows the value of that jewel. So the mahā-mantra is given at the moment of initiation. One is blessed to chant, one is initiated in the chanting because at least one has some appreciation of the chanting, because they've been chanting for a year, or two, or three. And then one can proceed through the chanting very easily. There's the offensive stage, but there's the clearing stage, and then there's the pure stage. So that can all be achieved when one is initiated into the mantra. Everyone can benefit from chanting, but if you want the goal of chanting, *prema*, you have to get it in the *guru-paramparā*. So our sincere prayer and our hope and our best wishes are there today for these three candidates, that they can take this mantra—the most important, most powerful gift of the spiritual master—recognize its value, what one can achieve from it: freedom from karma, freedom from material desires, *kṛṣṇa-prema*. Chant it with faith every day. One time, a disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I just love distributing your books; I just want to distribute books life after life." And Prabhupāda was impressed, but he said, "No, no. He said, 'You don't want to take birth again. I'm teaching you to go back home, back to Godhead.' He said, 'This is Kali-yuga, things are only going to get worse. Try to conquer birth and death in this lifetime and go back to the spiritual world.'" So that is the message to these three devotees: that they're getting the mahā-mantra. Chant attentively, chant purely, chant from the heart, and purify ourselves, awaken your love of God, and go back home, back to Godhead. And as I opened the talk this evening, I mentioned that fortunately, you're not alone. You have the Lord presiding over this event, you have the Founder-Ācārya, Śrīla Prabhupāda, presiding over this event, your spiritual master, and the assembled devotees. You have the mercy of so many Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs. Take that mercy and go back home, back to Godhead.

Hari Kṛṣṇa.

*Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Hari Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Back to Godhead kī jaya!*

So now we're going to request our illustrious priest, His Grace Catura Prabhu, to perform the *yajña* ceremony for purification. He'll chant the purification mantras, the devotees will put on their new neck beads—I hope there's some garlands for them—and when that's finished, then we'll call them to take their vows to receive their beads and their new names. That's a favorite part of the festival. And then Catura Prabhu will perform the *agnihotra* fire sacrifice. So let's show our appreciation that we have two *brahmacārīs* with us this evening to perform that.

Okay, the new initiates, all three of you, take your spoon in the left hand. Place one spoon of water into the palm of your right hand. Repeat after me: *Oṁ Keśavāya namaḥ. Oṁ Nārāyaṇāya namaḥ.* Drink that from the palm of your hand, just like that. Okay, second time: *Oṁ Nārāyaṇāya namaḥ.* Third time: *Oṁ Mādhavāya namaḥ.* Okay. Now, repeat after me: *A pavitraḥ pavitro vā...*

We do the second time and third time again.

*Viṣṇu...* Left hand. *Oṁ Keśavāya namaḥ.* Rinse. Second time: *Oṁ Nārāyaṇāya namaḥ.* Rinse. Third time: *Oṁ Mādhavāya namaḥ.* And repeat again: *A pavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṁ gato 'pi vā...*

Now take—have someone behind you change your neck beads. Take the old neck beads off, put new neck beads on. That same person, they can give those beads that you had to that person to hold. That same person will put a garland on you.

Now you're ready. So now we're going to call the initiates forward one by one. I think it's very crowded here, so it's understood: when you come forward, you're offering obeisances to the Deities, you're offering obeisances to Śrīla Prabhupāda, and you're offering obeisances to your spiritual master at the same time. We'd like that when the devotees, after making their vows and when they are given their beads and their new names, there's a tumultuous roar of joy coming from the entire community. I can imagine when I went to see Caitanaya Mahārāja—his initiation—all of the devotees...

You have your *mṛdaṅgas*, your *karatālas*, your bugles, your violins, your flutes... *...Kṛṣṇa...* In complete astonishment, let our... This young girl with the lime green scarf, she's a very good player. Even at my age... she's only been playing for a little under a year now, and I was so impressed with her skills in flute playing. So I think, Rādhā-Rādhā, you can come with your flute and sit here, and when we give the names, you can play your flute.

So first, we'll call for Natalia. Natalia, *Jaya* Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Natalia, what are these four rules and regulations that you promise to follow in your life, and how many rounds of this very sweet mantra each and every day? She said she was going to chant the mantra, she didn't say Hare Kṛṣṇa, so we're very happy to accept you as our duly initiated disciple. We will do everything in our power to bring you to our spiritual master, the Founder-Ācārya of this movement, Śrīla Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda means the master whose feet all the masters serve. By his grace, we will attain... So I don't need to introduce you; everyone knows who you are. You've been waiting five years. So when I came, I said, "It's time for this lady to get initiated." So this was more of my wish, my desire than anything else. It's a very beautiful name for you. *Su-lakṣmī*... living in your house is like living with the Goddess of Fortune because... it's a very opulent, but at the same time, very simple [home]. It's wonderfully clean, just like here in the spiritual world—the Goddesses of Fortune, they're cleaning the dust in the palaces, but there's no dust. So I thought I'd give you a name connected to Mother Lakṣmī, who is the eternal consort of Lord Viṣṇu. And there's no doubt that your business is... So your name is Servant of Lakṣmī Devī, who was a queen and is highly auspicious. From this day forth, you shall be known as *Su-lakṣmī Rānī Devīdāsī*. *Su* means auspicious, *lakṣmī* means Lakṣmī is very auspicious, and *rānī* is Queen. Beautiful name, Su-lakṣmī Rānī.

Now, what are the rules and regulations that you promise to follow for the rest of your life? How many rounds of the mahā-mantra? She said that she's not going to have any sex. So we're very happy to accept you as our duly initiated disciple. You've been waiting for this day a long time. We'll take you to the lotus feet of our Guru Mahārāja, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and whatever I've learned from him, I will share with you. And whatever success I may have by his grace in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I'll also share with you. And I heard you were a little nervous about getting a new name. I'm not going to tell Prabhupāda... so should we keep your old name? Well, knowing that you were a little nervous, I spent some extra time going through my notes and I think I found a name that you'll be very happy with. Your name means "Servant of one who takes pleasure in glorifying the Lord through transcendental song." Very beautiful name. From this day forth, you shall be known as *Saṅgīta-priyā Devīdāsī*. *Saṅgīta* means beautiful songs, *priyā* means dear.

Elena, Elena, what are the four rules and regulations you promised to follow? How many rounds of the mahā-mantra? She said that she's not going to have any sex. So we're very happy to accept you as our duly initiated disciple. This is the most important moment for you since you left the spiritual world, because this is the turning point where you go back to the spiritual world. Before coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it's all down—I'm a famous athlete, a businessman—we close that door. It's like this: you're going down, down, down. Somehow or other, Guru and Kṛṣṇa, they intervene. They say, "Stop this nonsense and go back home," and you say, "Yes, sir, I'll follow you." So then that's the turning point. So it looks like this: you meet the devotees, take initiation, and you're going back to the spiritual world. This is the happiest day of your life since I don't know when. Don't worry about the past, just look forward to the future. Your name is a wonderful name: *Su-mukha-kṛṣṇa-priyā*. *Su-mukha* means servant of youthful... beautiful maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Vṛndāvana. From this day forth, you shall be known as *Su-mukha-kṛṣṇa-priyā Devīdāsī*.

Now, the grain—put it into the fire, not onto the floor. All right, so we'll do it word by word; you can repeat after me. Each word... *Oṁ*... each time we say *svāhā*, that's when you throw your grains.

*Oṁ svāhā. Oṁ śrī-caitanya... svāhā. Oṁ... svāhā. Oṁ... svāhā.*

(Chanting continues with various mantras)

*Oṁ svāhā. Oṁ...*

This is the final offering you're going to make into the fire. Now, this is the time at which you place your request before Agni-Viṣṇu to grant you a benediction. That benediction is to be a worthy disciple of His Holiness Indradyumna Swami. We brought a little something extra to help you with that: the *Śālagrāma-śilā* worshipped by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, whose particular blessing is to help one keep up their vows. So you have this additional mercy in addition to your spiritual master and all the assembled Vaiṣṇavas being present here. On this final offering, instead of grains, you place your banana into the fire. Try to place it in such a way it actually goes into the fire. Everyone can stand, and you'll take the banana between your folded palms. Okay, let everyone stand.

*Oṁ...*

*Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya!*

*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Jaya Vaiṣṇavī.*""