This then, I refresh a very efficient location. Oh, so when I call the initiates, the team can come forward and offer obeisances. Well, actually, what we'll do is they can offer obeisances to Śrīla Prabhupāda, and then they can come out for the blessings to their spiritual master, and then the four principles.

Sometimes devotees get nervous. I've had PhD students, have a degree and master's or PhD, and they come and they forget the four. Well, but that's because they're a little nervous in front of the spiritual master. But that's actually good that we see that our spiritual masters, our Gurus, are superior.

So that mood of reverence is actually good. But, um, yeah, so we'll begin by asking Marianne to come forward. You can make a little path there, so the initiates, oh, and meanwhile, we'll take advantage of every moment. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Rādhē Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare.

Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare.

Marianne, what are the four rules and regulations that you promise to follow for the rest of your life, and how many rounds of this all-merciful Mahā-mantra will you chant every day?

You missed one. Okay, you got it. Okay, good. Hey, I told you you'd be nervous. It's good. I was always nervous in Prabhupāda's association.

One time I was walking with Prabhupāda, he was speaking about an incident we'd gone through where some officials had been a little rough with Kṛṣṇa.

So he was saying to me, "So, Jñāneśvara, in this material world, these, those who are in the association with the modes of nature, they don't develop any good qualities, only bad qualities. What do you think?" It's like, I was so nervous.

Yes. We walked a little further, and Prabhupāda said again, he said, "You see how they were?" So this is because they're associating with the modes of nature.

Do you understand?" I froze.

Yes. Prabhupāda looked at me.

Away, then we got to the airplane. Or was it?

But when one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and takes up the process, those bad qualities go, and all good qualities come. And it just clicked. You know, when you hear it from your spiritual master, it all makes sense. I said, "Yes, Śrīla Prabhupāda." You smile.

So, man, we're very happy, overjoyed, actually, to take you on board and accept you as a duly initiated disciple. And we'll do everything in our power to bring you to the lotus feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

And by connecting with Prabhupāda, of course, we receive the mercy of his guru mahārāja and his guru mahārāja, and his guru mahārāja.

Actually, just like you, there's a wire going from one end of the wall to the other. Wherever you plug into that wire, you get the full energy. It's not that latecomers to Kṛṣṇa consciousness get any less mercy than Prabhupāda's initiated disciples through the Guru-paramparā, we receive the full mercy of all previous acharyas.

So that is our promise to you. You'll get a lot of mercy. We'll see how you can handle all that mercy and take advantage of that. So we're giving you a beautiful name, actually. It's a name for Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, who's the queen, actually, of Lord Nārāyaṇa, the wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa.

But she's the queen. So from this day forth, your name, you shall be known as Madhavī Rānī Devī Dāsī. Madhavī Rānī. I stayed up all night before to find the names. Bhakti Nīlī. This is also a pretty name. Repeat: "Devī Dāsī." How do you know?

You can frame that paper and put it on your wall. So, luckily, I've been seeing it for many years here. Finally, your authorities have granted you this privilege of Hari-nāma dīkṣā. What are the four rules and regulations that you promise to follow for the rest of your life, and how many rounds of this divine mantra, which brings so many auspicious benefits, will you chant every day?

Okay. Thank you. Where, where is your family from?

From Malaysia. Chinese ancestry, living in Malaysia. Yes. And how long have you been living in England?

Ten, more than ten years, let's say. And are you studying or working?

Working. Oh, so you're coming on the pilgrimage tour?

Hari Kṛṣṇa. The devotees are very direct. What will you be doing, actually?

What are your plans?

I say, "In Malaysia." I say, "And you'll be coming back to England?" I say, "Okay." We're very happy to accept you as a duly initiated disciple, and we'll do everything in our power to bring you to Prabhupāda's lotus feet.

What we all will achieve our supreme good fortune. This is a missionary movement. Otherwise, none of us would be here. If it wasn't a missionary movement, we wouldn't be here. Prabhupāda left Vṛndāvana, and, and such a nice place.

Prabhupāda left Vṛndāvana to share his good fortune, his unlimited good fortune, with all of us.

So we have to follow in his footsteps. So whenever you have the opportunity, you share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with others. We all have our different prabhupāda-like duties where we're living, and we have our different services. Some of us are full-time preachers, some of us are businessmen, some of us are managers, some of us are mothers.

It's all part of Lord Caitanya's saṅkīrtana movement. It's all important, but keep that spirit in you. Just like I was in an elevator, and I had a, I gave a 20-second lecture. Right?

The man wanted to know, "Can you summarize?

What is this ancient philosophy?" Which is, you know, you could study the Vedas for many lifetimes and go through all the literature to understand.

He said, "Explain it in 20 seconds." So I did my best, and he was impressed. So whatever we're just passing through this world, and whatever good fortune we can share with others, we should do. And that will please the acharyas, and our advancement really comes from blessings.

We're trying to make our efforts. What I think Mahārāja is probably laughing at all of us, but we're sincere. But if we can help others, then we get higher blessings. So our goal, of course, is Vṛndāvana.

And I often give names to disciples. So they've been remembered by the devotees. So as I'm thinking, I think it's just the demigods playing musical instruments. We're going to give you a beautiful name of Rādhā. Fortunately, have about 5000 disciples, but fortunately, Rādhārāṇī has millions of names.

So your name translated means "overcome by the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa's beauty." Rādhā Rānī sometimes faints, and her bodily complexion turns blackish-blue like His. Then she appears like a dark creeper. From this day forth, you should be known as Śāradā Devī Dāsī.

It's very sweet names. Śāradā Devī Dāsī. Hare Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Dāsī.

Hey, all of us who are excited, Mom, Dad, me, you, everyone. Powerful. So, what are the four rules and regulations that you promise to follow for the rest of your life, and how many rounds of this glorious mantra will you chant every day?

You don't even know what those things are. Kṛṣṇa said that one time, he said, "In my lifetime, I never knew it was sinful activity." Such an advantage to others who come, and surely can get mercy, but you've got a little bit of a head start.

So please take advantage of that head start. I think the biggest head start was that, you know, you took birth in the family of your father, Pītāmbara Prabhu, and mother, Cakra-vartinī. That was your good fortune. I often say that in these ceremonies, that, um, really, you're the product of their Kṛṣṇa consciousness, their training, and their inspiration, and they're pushing you forward.

And everything they've done for you, your mother and your father, and really, what I'm doing is just adding the finishing touches to the painting. That's like, there are some beautiful paintings here. So maybe somebody sees it all, and we did a flower here with a little color there.

So really, I'm, I often feel that when I'm initiating the second generation, I'm just adding a little touch there. And I kind of become part of the family, actually. What a glorious family you have. Your parents are noble examples in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, in their sādhana.

All the devotees love them, and they're stalwart preachers. The Ratha-yātrā. Right?

When you think about the yātrā, you think of, you know, Jagannātha, Baladeva, the chariot, the cart, the festival square. Your mom, your dad. You think like that, right?

So you've, from now, you're a very fortunate young lady. And we, I think we should give a big round of applause for her parents. And I'm sure that they're very, I mean, this is the perfection of householder life, that, you know, you deliver your children from the repetition of birth and death to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.

This is a big step forward. It's kind of like a guarantee, because they often say to my disciples, as you're vowing at the moment of initiation, so the spiritual master is also vowing. It's a contract, a transcendental contract. So just as the disciple vows to serve the spiritual master by observing all the rules and regulations and assisting him in his service, the spiritual master takes the contract very seriously, and he vows that he won't go back to Godhead without his disciples.

So I can also promise that to you, that I won't go back to Govinda Vṛndāvana without you.

Okay. And whether it was this whole thing about names, but you know, and I heard the whole history of how you received the name Caitanya Dāsī. It was very quite miraculous, but I did want to change it. Just because it's, well, we don't want to break from the past, which your past is glorious, but it's just like acknowledging this great step forward, and that you're that you're the vows you're taking, and the enthusiasm with which you're taking now the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and you'll be carrying on this tradition of Ratha-yātrā also for many years to come.

So I, I wanted to give you a name that's connected to Ratha-yātrā, and to Jagannātha, Subhadrā, Baladeva. If you know. Caitanya Mahāprabhu introduced the Ratha-yātrā. So that was your name in childhood, but I think it would be appropriate that you take the service of your parents, you make it one with your heart.

So I'm going to give you a name that's connected like that. And it's a little hard, you know, we forget, don't like to get used to the new name, but it'll click. Such a beautiful name. Yeah. Your name means, well, I'll give you the name first, and then I'll explain.

So from this day forth, your name shall be Nīlādrī Devī Dāsī. Listen to this. Nīlādrī is another name for Jagannātha Purī, the sacred abode where Lord Jagannātha resides. It refers to the fact that purity resides on the beautiful blue mountain.

Actually, when you go to Purī, you see it is flat, but if you had eyes to see, prīma-maya-caitanya, developed, if you can see, Śāstra describes the abode of Nanda, and much different than we see it, or Māyāpura, whatever. So Jagannātha Purī, the transcendental abode.

And it's just so beautiful in so many ways, because Jagannātha is actually Vṛndāvana-Kṛṣṇa.

He has his flute. When we sing the Jagannātha aṣṭaka, we hear about Kṛṣṇa, Govinda Vṛndāvana.

So it's a very beautiful abode. And the, the temple and the grounds where Jagannātha is residing is on the Blue Mountain. Nīlādrī, such a sweet. So I thought of your sadhana. So Nīlādrī Devī Dāsī. Śrīla Prabhupāda kī Jaya!

Gaura-Nitai kī Jaya!

Hare Kṛṣṇa Nama Saṅkīrtana kī Jaya!

Mahāprabhura kī Jaya!

Back to Godhead kī Jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī Jaya!

London Ratha-yātrā kī Jaya!

Jagannātha, Baladeva, Subhadrā kī Jaya!

Gaura-Nitai kī Jaya! Śrī Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga kī Jaya!

Once again, I want to thank all of you for coming. You made the ceremony. It's always the glorious devotees. It's always the devotees that bring out all the truths of Kṛṣṇa consciousness because you're aspiring to be devotees, you're practicing so nicely.

Your enthusiasm is overwhelming. And I'm sure that's why that gentleman in the elevator, he said, "Yeah, Hare Kṛṣṇas are everywhere." We said, "Especially in London." So that's you.

So you're doing a glorious service. Please continue. We're happy that we can come once a year and participate in all these various activities. I think our next program is Sunday here. Oh, what am I doing?

Oh, oh, the Pañca-dravya. Everybody can come. Okay. Oh. Can I give a lecture, too?

It's not just a Sunday feast, all right?

Okay. All right. Thank you once more. So let's give our blessings to to all the disciples by saying three times Haribol!

Oh, I don't know. So, devotees. Hey Kṛṣṇa. So if you'll excuse me, I have to chant my rounds.