So your name means servant of the brilliantly golden hued color. She's a very beautiful golden color. Servant of. From this day forth, you should be known as Shashwat Narayan from Vṛndāvana.

Next is Sāre, are you in the GOIV?

To CH. Good 16 rounds. And for the four regulated principles, that is: no meat-eating, no intoxication, no gambling, and no illicit sex. And how old are you now?

I'm 19. 19. And what, what service are you doing?

I'm studying. What are you studying?

Management. Management. We need good managers. You can just don't go to school, just learn from her. Very, very nice name. It means servant of Kṛṣṇa, the most beautiful one. I love this name. Your name is Sūksāka from Delhi, India.

Next is Home. Congratulations. Thank you very much for accepting me, and I promise to do all good. 60. Now the rest of my life, and I'm promised to calling for regular principles. Uh, no meat, and no. Okay, thank you very much.

Today's Go-pash to me. So, you know, it's the day Kṛṣṇa with his friends started taking care of the cows. So we had to give one cow. From this day forth, you should be known as Sukha Das Omara from Moscow.

Next is Anish. Such a nice. Any. Anya is a lovely devotee. She loves to serve um, Shat, and his humble servant, me. She has a special affection for Śrīla. And this is what we want our disciples to have deep love for.

I consider my, this is service as a spiritual master. I consider this a service to my. And, uh, she really makes wonderful sweets, not not only taste good, but they look so good, you don't want to eat them. And every time I arrive at the Moscow airport, inevitably, she's out there with this big box of all different types of sweets, painted different colors.

It's almost like a painting. You don't just want to frame it and put it in your house. And, um, she also preaches by making and distributing sweets, and lots of books as well. She really caught the mood of Prabhupada's mission.

It was just amazing, such a young devotee, you know, with so many exchanges of love between founder-acharya, spiritual master, the devotees, and the public. So we came up with a very beautiful name for her, which means, uh, servant of the pastimes of love.

From this day forth, you should be known as Prema Kanti Devi. The perfect name. Prema and Kanti means joyful, loving, joyful, playful pastimes. The playful pastimes of love. Just keep inundating the world with sweets, and you go back to Godhead.

Anish from Pune, India. And next is Anil. Your name means one who relishes Rasa. To get everything correct. I'm taking over that. I will chant quality, good quality, 16 rounds every day, and I will follow all regulative principles which are like: no meditating, no gambling, no illicit sex, no intoxication.

Where do you live?

In Pune. Oh, Pune. And what is your service?

I'm I'm working as a software, software engineer. I often wonder how I get these disciples because I still think 2 + 2 is 5. The preaching in Pune is wonderful. Who is the temple president?

Such a wonderful leader. Ni. So when you go back, they'll love your name, "One Who Relishes Rasa." From this day forth, you should be known as Rasa Anil. Tapas from Nepal. This next is Natalia. Makshara. Haribol. I promise to follow four regulative principles, that are: no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no intoxication, and no gambling.

And I also promise to, uh, chant 16 rounds, 16 good rounds, daily throughout my life. Thank you. Your name means servant of the Lord whose eyes are beautiful like lotuses. From this day forth, you should be known as Ananda.

In Nepal, they always have the eyes of the Lord. Yes, they put on the t-shirts and the temple con. Five more Natalia trophy, Mo from Chelyabinsk, Russia. Five more, and then we'll have the fire. To keep warm. The mood of this is a long list.

She said. Now she's saying about the, uh, rounds. Rounds, so 16 good rounds. Yes. Just play. So we're giving you a very beautiful name. Um, your servant of the brilliant moonlight. Sūya. With the older girls. In from this day forth, you should be known as Chandra Sakhi.

Next is Natalia Makshara from Moscow, Russia. But she's not here. So Nadia Mani will be collecting her beads. You collect your beads. Okay, you can sit. And she, she has set the vows. You can say on her behalf. We will follow the four regulative principles, uh, no meat-eating, no gambling, no illicit sex, and no intoxication.

And she will chant a minimum of 16 rounds. Very good friend for her. Thank you. Please inform her that her name means servant of the eternal nectar of devotional service. From this day forth, shall she be, she shall be known as, very nice name, Amrita Sakhi.

Tapas from Vṛndāvana.

Next is Shim. And only driver. I will follow for no intoxication, no meat, no sex, and no gambling. And I will follow very sweet, 16 rounds, good sweet 16 rounds, good sweet rounds, that's 16 rounds. I thought it was a very nice instruction by Mahārāja.

He was saying that we shouldn't just chant from our lips, but we should chant from the heart. This is this is real chanting. This is chant that is accepted by the Lord. From from the heart. This is one of the more important things I remember from his life.

This is very auspicious. So many Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs are are coming into this assembly. It's very auspicious. My dear Tapas, you must always be my driver. Even if you go on to be a software engineer and, uh, inherit millions by marrying a wonderful Indian family, whatever, just be my humble driver wherever I go.

That will ensure my long life. Yes, forever. Till die. Can you live a long life?

So your name came up, uh, several times during the years. Remember last year, you know, you didn't get initiated, and you were in tears. So those tears, uh, melted my heart, and I prayed to Kṛṣṇa that this year you would be qualified and recommended for initiation, and it has come to pass.

And I've been saving this name for you for four years. I didn't give it to anyone else. Any Bhakta would love to have this name, especially taking this name here in front of Govardhan Hill. So your name means servant of the lotus feet of Govardhan Hill.

From this day forth, you should be known as Driver. Forever. Shim from London. Next is Sataka Devi. I promise to chant a minimum of 16 good rounds every day for the rest of my life, and I will follow the four regulative principles, which are: no eating of meat, fish, eggs, no intoxication, no gambling, and no illicit sex.

There's some noise in the background. This is just the chat, the chatter of Bhaktas. It doesn't bother us at all. Where's Maṟari?

You're filming. Look up. At his husband, Jāgara has been initiated for several years now. And, um, they came together. They're hard workers. They have reputable, wonderful jobs in London. They work from morning till night, but they chant their rounds, they follow the principles, and they do sādhan.

And was very humble. Every year I asked him, when are you going to get initiated?

He said, it's up to my authorities. Prabhupāda told us one time, you can give money to the beggars, not the ones who come and ask you and pull on your shirt, but the ones who are simply sitting there very humbly.

You can give whatever to those, those types of beggars. I always thinking like they never demanding initiation, just patiently chanting and following his authorities, etc., etc. So, I said, we met a couple of days ago. He's only here for five or six days.

I said, so you can take initiation?

No. Good. My authorities haven't consented yet. Maybe next year. What?

So, as he was walking away, I said, and London's a great place, what's the name of that temple president?

And in my own initiative, I wrote his temple president a letter at 6 o'clock yesterday evening. I said, dear illustrious, great, wonderful temple president. He has a very amazing, devoted disciple, Swami. I said, Johnny, I said, please accept my humble plea.

You know, if you could please, please, I'm just, my personal request, please consider this man is qualified to take initiation. You know, I, I know him pretty well, and, you know, he's a good devotee, and his wife's initiated. He's not, you know, what I can be like.

So, I said, personally for me, the most important quality of a disciple is Guru-nishtha, faith in the spiritual master. So please just consider my request. I wasn't expecting him to even write back, you know. He, I made this request five times for other devotees, and he said no.

And all night I was looking on my computer, you know, 10:00, 11:00, 12:00, 1:00. No reply. Okay, just getting ready to come here. I open up my computer, and there's a letter from Johnny. Okay. Open up. I give my full blessings.

He's a wonderful devotee. What everything you said is true. It's, we're making an exception. Go ahead and initiate him. So it was something like, you know, the other day, we left here, Kṛṣṇa is over, and I wanted to go to the car, but the Bābājī Mahārāja here, the the Mahun here, he grabbed me and said, you're not going anywhere.

You're going to come see my temple. I said, I'm hungry, I'm tired. He dragged me here. Thank the Lord he did drag me here. May have taken you years to get initiated. Intervening. Dragging you back to your duty. And I have a really nice name, but it's not a Bhakta name.

One of my devotees was very dear to me, as Lord. So I've been saving this thing a long time. I want to give it to you. Your wife has a very rasika name, name as the protector of the household, and the doing the duty and providing and so forth and so on.

But with a little touch of Kṛṣṇa. No one has this name, but it's a bonafide name. I found it in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Your name means servant of He who loves. From this day forth, you should be known as Vatsala. No one has that name.

Bonafide name, right out of the Mahābhārata. Brother has to protect the. You've accepted me as your disciple, and I take following four regulations, principles was no intoxication, no meat, no gambling, no illicit sex. Plus, uh, I also do promise of chanting daily good 16 rounds.

You're very much like your brother, and he has the instruction to protect you and take care of you. But he recommended a very good devotee. So thank you. Very nice Bhakta name. In the name of, from this day forth, you should be known as Śarana. 2016.

We turn the program over to our illustrious and very qualified priest.