I didn't sleep all night picking out names. We're in our sixteenth year. Right now, it's still going great that we have the opportunity to get together again. Of course, for those of us who are involved in game management, instead of resting, we work even harder.

But for us, separation from all of you is very painful. Of course, it would be nice to walk around the temple alone and receive the gift of a tire. But for myself, I can't imagine this because the Lord gave us the process of joint chanting of saints.

Before the Lord, of course, there were also some sadhus living in the forests of Vrindavana. But there were very few of them. And only after the Lord sent everything began to change. All the sadhus began to gather together and, according to tradition, follow the process that is attributed to this age.

Saṅkīrtana is the process that the Lord introduced. The joint form of Kṛṣṇa's saṅkīrtana is the joint chanting of the Holy Name, and this is the mood of our 2016 parikrama. We visit all these places of transcendental pastimes. Sometimes these are transcendental places of transcendental pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, and sometimes transcendental places of transcendental pastimes of his devotees, and they are no less important.

For us, like where Kṛṣṇa performed his līlā, for the simple reason that such devotees are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Lord Kṛṣṇa explains that one who claims to be a devotee is not a real devotee. Therefore, we receive the mercy of Kṛṣṇa by the mercy of his devotees, and one of such devotees is very dear to the Lord.

This Uddhava can be said to have a mood of relationships, because, although he is a resident of Dvārakā, devotees are constantly immersed in thinking about the name, form, pastimes, and the entourage of the Lord. The most important instruction is to always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him, and the easiest way to remember and not forget a person is to love that person.

He was so immersed in Kṛṣṇa that he even looked like Kṛṣṇa in appearance, and Kṛṣṇa decided at one point to show special mercy to Uddhava, and therefore He sent him to the doctor so that Uddhava could see the special love of the residents of Vrindavana for him.

And when Uddhava arrived, even the Gopis thought that Kṛṣṇa had returned to Vraja. And if you look at the Uddhava deity, which is in this temple, He is the same blue color as Kṛṣṇa, and He is immersed in the study of Bhagavatam.

We will not delve into history because today is the day of initiation, but at least you should know the historical importance of this place where you are. And Uddhava, after he completed his mission, conveyed Kṛṣṇa's message to his parents, the Gopis, and the rest of the inhabitants of Vrindavana.

He did not even want to leave Vrindavana, just like we do not want to leave Vrindavana after parikrama. If I say that like my son when he left and he communicated with the program and told him, "Enjoy while you have the opportunity, because then you will get to a completely different world." And in the same way, Uddhava, who of course had a much deeper understanding of what Vrindavana is than all of us, he had absolutely no intention of leaving Vrindavana after he completed his task.

He came here and sat in this place where we are now at Baitak – this is the place where Uddhava sat feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. And many different games happened here. We will not talk about them. One of them is that the boa constrictor took bathing with the taste of sorrow and took the form of a god, and the prayer spread that something very special had been discovered, and it reached Dvārakā that the elder had discovered something very special.

It is said that in the material world, bad news spreads faster than good, because the whole world is a world... the material world is a world of suffering. But in the present Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we hope that from the beginning it will also become like this, news spreads faster than bad news.

When Kṛṣṇa left, all the inhabitants of the spiritual world not only lamented with Kṛṣṇa, as much as we feel the affection of some person, we feel the pain of separation from her. Therefore, Gaurāṅga Mahaprabhu says that the essence of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is to cry, cry, and cry.

You don't have to worry about the fact that these are material emotions; in fact, it is a spiritual feeling of separation which at some point we must develop. And the inhabitants of Dvārakā heard what Uddhava was saying about Kṛṣṇa.

They gathered here, all the wives of Kṛṣṇa. He read to them. You are here. Therefore, this is a very special place. This is an ideal place to discuss the glories of Kṛṣṇa and his devotees. And someone may ask why they changed the place during Gopāṣṭamī from Kula to this place.

But this is an ideal place to discuss topics related to Kṛṣṇa. And we will hear a lecture by Mahatma Prabhu today about the importance of initiation. And we are very lucky that Mahatma Prabhu, who is a famous preacher and spiritual teacher leading Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is with us, and today he enlightened us in this very sublime place.

For us, this is a new place, and I didn’t even know about this place. But yesterday we discovered that in fact, our friend Babaji is also engaged in service in this place. It is very clean, very organized, everything is very friendly.

This is such a secret place, at least for me, this is such a secret place. It’s because it’s on Vrindavan. And how many devotees don’t bypass Vrindavan?

Have you ever seen anyone come here?

And this is the mood of the pastimes. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa choose such secret places for themselves, and we will conduct initiation in one of these places. And therefore, those who receive initiation are the first and second. They can remember this day during the Kartik Dava on Gopāṣṭamī in this holy place how they received initiation.

The only warning is: be vigilant in relation to the boys chasing monkeys, but keep in mind that monkeys can still leak out, especially initiates with very tasty bananas on a plate, should be careful. Yes. I would recommend covering your bananas with plates so as not to tempt the monkeys.

Now we will have a kīrtana for about 20 minutes, and during the kīrtana, our brilliant Pūjāri will organize everything for the yajña, and then we will have a purification ceremony, 10-15 minutes. Then we will hear a lecture by Mahatma Prabhupāda, which will last 45 minutes or an hour, and then we will call the initiates one by one so that they bring their answers, receive rosaries, new names, and I did not sleep all night, as usual, choosing good names so that you like this name.

At least you can understand that it is from the heart of your spiritual father. And all this happens by the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

We are all blessed by the grace of the Lord in 2016. I wanted to say that we are all very lucky that we are in such a wonderful place, at such a wonderful time. We don’t need anything else. Of course, according to tradition, during initiation, they wear only a dhoti and a chador.

But since it’s cold this morning, at least until the initiation begins, you can at least cover yourself with a shawl so as not to freeze. And those who will receive initiations, their new kanthi are small. Please put it on a plate so that you don’t have to worry about it later.

Those who are receiving their first initiation, raise your hands. If you don’t have SBO, but please raise your hands. Everyone has them. Good.