"*00301*.*
"You would like to thank that hurry, that very beautiful lecturer, for the very valuable insight. He was a kind of hesitant; he said, "Well, do you remember there were so many wonderful assumptions about chanting the holy names?" We said, "That is going to be a hard act to follow." You can tell Papa Raziya—Chinami—that Mr. Kucinich had many thoughts on Miss Wilkinson, divorce, about Mr. Preston, Gado-Gado, the hot water bottles, which I generally avoid. But the very purpose—cause Dr. Moses from Nitza stomata, sorry, Mrs. Thorley exam—but there is different varieties of devotional service. No, madam, genesis, as native of Britain as Virginia. We gave the example: when you put a light into a crystal, then from that crystal comes a beautiful purple, or green, or blue, or yellow. They are all different, but they are all very beautiful. Yes, even a variety—Sydenham, DiSanto, crystal, Buddha, tons issue in Iran, American Tobacco, blue gentlemen, Rosenbaum in Sanik receiver.

So, as he was speaking, Martha Thunder go by, my dear friend in the back, he said, "Well, this is a great luxury. He is sharing all those realizations from his part." Yasmani, inaudible, Hugo Mario, Madhavan and the provocatively America Brogan’s, a mental doctor, Atlantic's up on uncertainty, listen, same assignment is not sentimental. I was saying, "That lecture is as good as the lecture last year." And just some time or Calvert away came back, euthanize the bogeyman. Actually, how much of it is—it’s skittishly—sometimes I don't know where he is. It just leaves; it starts wandering. But I always know sort of where he is; he is somewhere in the region of Govardhan. Yeah, I know that his dog did it. My chief, Mr. Oberoi, did on Thursday. She asked about or not, we have Sigma V, Aaron Stone, understand, a hoodie to identify uniform and overcome. So without our priest, this function could not happen. This is Shan Okashi bird ceremony yesterday. Allison, he seems to always be the priest whatever I do an initiation. Yeah, cook that man, you put my dealing with us home. Sit down, it's fishing your comments. Let's get a big round of applause, please.

And the idea is part of an under purple than the Marceline is one of Atlanta trouble in Tibet example quality. He is the perfect disciple of his given new kind premium. I'd say busted, I must don't know things. I know she looks a little hot. I don't say that lightly; to me that is a great honor to be known as a perfect example that is wholly and solely sold out to this spiritual master. Anton Gorev in tomorrow’s the new brass day is not the most honest and alienate, the Yakama premier emotion. You can yeah, the stone, the Moche new car will get into Simon, a good example for all of you. Today, we're taking initiation, Atlanta. If your heart is salted to your spiritual master, which really means essentially the mission of your spiritual master, asthma TechNet Lazio past coincidences avoided at the premier Dave Chowie competitiveness on the all those just in two shots. And what about Muchas Bonitas, Machado, stone, really serve the college. It is long as we sing every morning to make one's heart, one heart of God, my young coach, the other stubborn. Not she's deaf, sibling, indeed himself, some muscles of the college success of his spiritual master. Gorga the tomorrow is give up his earthly pastimes into nitya-līlā without a doubt, went back to the spiritual world when one of the women is quite young. But immediately he kept a message going, especially since this magazine is called Krishna contemplative image on even approaches, reported in the slam and Saladin, near Yashna Michelle, ET le Olam, may be a showstopper, me encanta, a madman on terrible position, you never know premium wishes on the corner cheetah and if position, so she is there. Bhalla, he keeps the heartbeat of the message of his garage beating for the monthly or bimonthly publication of this magazine, which often—every issue—there is some article by tomorrow's post in a sense, important Algebra God sent about journalist Antonio Jimmy’s message to at night in his first attempt before the common, which is not good live in the sign of quarantine. This way, cobra venom, our suspect was still present within our society. Thank you mama, resemble a designer Maharaja of social presence to hood of nationalist intercessor first by Dr. Tucker, any place on the Samadhi.

Europe, I don't know, there's no semantically that's a corner. He reasons, you know, who says, "Invited us, died in the after college, too much time to divide," when such things are still living inside Donna. Stop, indecent angel twice as Luke, a sudden lives, guys to live in Australia, quite living, tries to spend any asado linear, I'd no president of Butea academic, shield on Terrance's destiny to swallow. They are still living in Saman. Actually, the universe is living in the same vibration in the sound vibration of the spiritual master, which is essentially our connection to them, which is a lot of pressure on it. That was working in ashes, s stock of the Moche to them as the three chants of their brands, a boat accident on Bass Vanya. Whatever we hear in Krishna consciousness, we hear to hear the same thing from our guru because then it has a special effect on our, you stop Amon, your solution to something evolution. Modesto is listed at Nashua Laura, in fact that that was immediate news now of lasagna, nom ashes and Tonya. I always encourage my disciples here from this is what this Godwin did, that because it was so important. But theoretically, our philosophy is that we should hear the same thing from our spiritual master because, by Krishna’s arrangement, that's when the change of heart, he finds a new call for such as my Anaconda Bratton, in this solution forgive my stuff. Now Terry dishes can systematically chatter, stop, stop, third position also about Okinawa, Chaitanas, imminent attempt, immersion is mini international, Sheraton, and most of you never have the good fortune to hear from or to stay to make or relay tomorrow. He was definitely a pure devotee.

The efficiency Villas, Koh solution, people visible in the son of Maharaja, it was national, Butch is the preeminent, in typical something. He was the Saint who walked amongst us. It was, you do I cut or reduced is enough, but you can have this association through Krishna consciousness. May I have been, do know the degradation of atomic and in Dozier Holloman, most authoritative option. Yeah, I think it was sometimes like, you know, the army, they go over the territory of the enemy and they shower the enemy with his reapers, never give up, gonna lose, ever been aware, surrender in a message to the parent against Abu Rahul is in the territory of I'm inside this garage. Olivia, don't understand your shears, WATC, mr., when you thought that it would be treatable to be gravity master to Nepal illusion, so this Krishna conservative induces falling down from the sky. I must do better, surrender server that, mythologies, ventilation area, national Krishna category dipinto on Padova net, the mall on the sky service materially, merely provides every kuchibiru deities. Forget about promotion—nobility Krishna—this is a constant endeavor, constant effort on the part of Indonesia to in the stay on them, who see their mother, my mother, because I remember my God, and we must appreciate you telling us an answer. Madanpal identity was a master at the distant, the one guy now, not just educational opportunities with us today in my shelter, was don't own status avoided, honor of his service of chase evolutionary remembers and glorification and his spiritual master. That was a big time as lava, you go to college. It is the pure devotee, Gordon tomorrow, but the Bible is just a bit, and I am going on in desire I have all of you to stand up and give and give them a resounding...

John, I say, you say it makes it better. They were sitting for a long time. That was a very good excuse to spend every watching though that the Polish polish and polish domestic financing. I know it's hot, nice job, yes austerities into the present. And you remember, right, I did invite to the very beginning to buy umbrellas in your policy of silk, must of known each other. Gravel is doomed, Asante kam, yellows, greens, and we were walking around; it looks like a rainbow going around in Baku. Periodical appearance in that no edible part of neurotic of the magazine iguana, and if you had followed my instruction, you would not know mom is judge Donovan here, beloved homage to him. But yes, just wishes, potential, listen carefully in this version elasticity, eight bars also, you can imagine a solution to touched a lot glided. Look, okay, here we go, one of the favorite parts of the ceremony, it debatable is the bomb. Someone I shouldn't be majestic, said Ammonia, where the addition to comfortably take their vows and they get their beautiful new spiritual names. Contain acceleration, supported sadhana, you tonight the other in your pool chance. I normally the whole name enough, and you know, I worked—I tried very hard to give nice names, I did not sleep last night, I exercise about 35 minutes in Panama system against established brands name enough. That was two million dollars that I serve 90 in El Segundo. Yeah, but I don't Bastogne, not not responsible, sort of a little just to ensure that what I say. Do you like your name? Yes, culantro, yes you procrastinate me, not the never stay posted man. That there was Russia Obama, revolution, Mr. Bahuguna polish to this very name.

Mitchell here, and this headlong ever early before he closes the fire, there's a procedure. If you got some point, I can't put anything more than the fire, you close it. I never heard of that. I used to ship the pioneer, taught us now from those men torture or use the group of position exact rule, I'll go into devotion wisely to another space until people—that is, you know who they are—still over there, divided state, attendant identity, Toronto Revolution, anybody can have a representative.

All right, so seriously, that's a part of the function. Actually, the first person we've got different temples where Leslie based on these threads, which are offering to the deities in the chest and Obama. You know, the scientists of antennas of recursive dramatization, you can answer as well. Now suggestibility need skill that they said the particular template an appreciation where the motivational, yes this is significant. The Crimea on the dissolve a later by the throat, oh Vanessa to the dominie anthem oh God, that's a linear aggression sir. So the portability principles are as follows: a judicial lien suppose I promise while looking at your spiritual master because you're harvesting your guru, Mother Tina. So no home, no teach them, we might be shy about dismantling your, that much talk about guru, even by the shelter, don't be eating necessarily item, no intoxication in oxidizing books. You can say, "Oh, this is sex," which means sex outside of marriage, amusing you might say example that some stars my chance of so nitrogen is a curriculum abraca, no gambling and that includes mental speculation as to cool answer to service house in the city wasn't it a professional, will give you the space in your Krishna das from zoos negligent. By doing so you're not influenced by the material energy that much. There was neither together, which means that you're free to share it with a peaceful mind. The demands on our voice, I would never survive our going up a warmer Canadian province of tender minimum 16 rounds over. I besides Audrina, no poster—it's not as good for the reason I say so—said many times in Cyprus this issue. Some of them the closest they come to the spiritual master, they're nervous. Yeah, yeah, but there there's not a most unlikely isn't zero issues and that the booth there, when asked about that, please come here. But I do, and in young mentioned at a PhD student, missed in the two years he came for him, she couldn't remember 2000 election, council reunion, don't persist opinion on this matter. And I had a Cabana potage to convey anything about good spawning, dragon attack, of course it's good to have that loaded on veneration before twenty hundred dollars. The rock store, are you saying you're purchasing your Virginia pretender watch incidence your name? It's just Isaac Rasmussen, question you know, the name of the president, because maybe show or synagogue available additional chances.

Shubin come on from endowment Victoria, can be anything these devotees enter into the new spiritual family. Yeah, hotel personal area, but mother in a sense their presence with my inspector, I knew of stupid Moustakas is not what it appears. You think you've bought up all the experimental silver, no more than why not that extreme material, it doesn't. I see the power of emotion regulation comes before though, no need eating egg and fish, not skating, no gamble no, and I you mustn't even supposed to see them. In this day forth, you should be known as Dallas with its bus.

Victoria, you should stay off from Chile Evans, surgery community, the depletion layer, which is valuable encourage thinking for the future. This idiot it needs and steadily, I said to get in touch you got Sydnee going to exactly Inglot instruct Mr. Condon, come over here, shows the average technical University, Hare Krishna, a month later, City happy to accept your artistic image, effluent Athabasca, cancerous organism, your alumni only 17. Yeah, of a modem, a disadvantage, it just go slowly. It's a fresh look at that avianna incidences or earlier, you start to better your chances are finishing the race. Icha match to the national team, high moisture shots of Stoli vagrancy, everyone go away, the remaining servant of one who plays pleasure to Fisher as news anchor Doha Qatar, and I do with our oddest suitable step reach them. From this day forth, you to be known as sentiment, avid student of US-China Nandini.

Jamming on the circuit, carbonyl dish from Versa Picassa with Santana Denny, llama.

So then you also look better, discussions are bang on the glass on you, Primula, guiding them, another July vehicle of the four regulated principles. Into this, I promise, the next. I promised in the beginning of initiation, I promise, you don't engage any illicit sexual theories urge, no thanks, I promise for many including.

So, in a maidservant to the lotus feet of emotion, as Michelle Obama, this next occasion, you should be known as a Chairman, in our ski, Simon told me go well from Sharapova’s Zama, can be John is back when I pushed him a little bit. If you provoke an elite one who touched up to my decision, if a thorny issue by the shelter with a benefactor ability, should never evaluation. If you went to chest and the local heater, if you want to pick an answer, we can imagine the motivation based on attention to Venice to earth with a coin in publishing. I wish I am confident, the choker Kirk in English.

Your name is self-explanatory, I'm not sure about committing someone to sit down a lot about that. You may remember a moment on Google Marina, I'm sorry, Ramona. So one who serves those who loved you at the dock, does attempt to negate the other William on them. This day forth, you should be known as sentiment, now is Buddha's vast, your net payment.

Susannah, Chicago de la semana, because when you get the yellow bomb, detection is Krishna maha-mantra gosh, they did the Pennsylvania attacks on your replies, official NASA. We danced, new plate, intoxicants, a mystified, you need a smaller name, is the shiny in you. Gradual something, he wanted the short man, vivid elements of our entire human preaching purpose with each other. So your name is service of those who love to serve, you know then she had not considered it is legit. This day forth, you should be known as third one down, a good assistant on, say that pretty lady knows.

And I am amazed, no John Kasich, ROH, yeah Anita knows. Without you please sit down to watch, when you want something terrible, it is a program. From this day forth, you should know that said, whenever it is mystical, a Shula Priya digitally, Mr. White national table as a little guy, I know Jonathan. I'm John, the material balance, it's a virtual camera or a deal on the table, insanity, Raj TV, other troubles from Baroda.

Thank you. Your name means one serve, that one, the servant of Krishna, who enjoys pastimes of rasa. Yes, among these, the concern is large, that tons of Awesome. From this day forth, your name is Russa the hearty - Russia.

Elena community, I don't know.

Happy to accept to a certain sample, ocean temperatures are changing him. A name is a name, disturbance, name of Krishna, meaning that you are surface, you know, I've actually met my chance to go through God will be no cooler. And this day forth, you should be known as you think right now, as would incite Goku Chandra Das, Google China Daisuke, I laid out for the pillow from Moscow, my favorite car top layer.

That's what Sheila really did, you guys know, it isn't physically initially attacked in this restaurant. That was a beautiful man, it's a very severe in the wood. It's a name for our adamant that me, actually has the topmost love, the crescent oscillatory internal Correa with this was Uncle Vanya table, dad Sam, I did senator Polio clear steamship, possesses the crest jewel alone, unemployed and are exempt from condom interview Kristin. This day forth, you should be known as Synthoid, not the bushes, vis macaque three months Iranian keys.

Thank you, spicy Parmesan, a toast over Estella - Haru Schnabel, is an otaku stone, a spotless that readily perfected your motherland at the RNA are supposed to be born inside material style. You prefer to live as a disciple by living primarily our very latest version, no Janine seriously, destiny supreme average, raise them. So we've been talking a lot about, in today, emotional Iris, concert a problem today, servant inventors, as a young girl, eurosocial, complete the cateura.

Sometimes compared to the videos, yeah, I am one, does involve email authority, maniacally sh t, but I knock that, but the pinnacle of all Molotov. So much from this day forth, you should be known as Sit Do It, now as with its vibe, come on.

What if? No, no, could you explain this? Okay. Your name is Shridhama, sake, dusty, Mr. Thomas, IQ lesson, on the publish as I was mentioning at the opinion, very good name today for Copashtami. It doesn't entitle, a Miss Avoid, now until achievement, the passenger when she might be rather anywhere, subha. They should dress to the cowherd boys apron, to dementia, to karana, divides the Subala events. We think of Sridama, who is right around his older brother in your eyes, didn't abolition, long, should a Democrat thorium, Lances, that some stars been automatically names. Not Sridham, sake, Sritamam, yeah, you know is that you better sit down. I shouldn't doubt mom, because right around you two governors Brad, I'm your dad and your sister, let's feed on pedometers time thought, I need some blushes, his throat, it shouldn't down longer to cool.

Damien had become a common sense. This day forth, you should be known as settling Yahoo, as good as that, she come up tomorrow gosh.

In Prabhupada, Sadhana's the cloud regarded it with a monster data. Please knock, brahmana, take good care of the square, if I justify Russians are boys habitations, disciples are not as my kuchi kuchi news, okay? The kundalini heavy dust, you king. So no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no gambling, no intoxication, and I promise our chance alone, viewing a very beautiful name of Krishna. Krishna wears beautiful garlands, Yama led him to the emails. Name is Krishna, Krishna, the total noise, it's lyrical evening, yet landed. He wears all the way down to his pain, he said, Nagaland the Keturah, the who did you know, you got your servant is question, where's beautiful girl is no god, but you cannot know, the catalyst is killing. This day forth is bathroom, it's very brush, Shanna vanamali, and Katie Couric in Malaya, thousand enormous, it stands at you about price of the home menu.

Angelo Alexander from Ekaterinburg Tatyana, kept meeting.

Boy.

I'm very happy to accept it as our disciple, like Hyo-jin, shelepin, yet to double-check in there, is 38 Devonian, oh listen, I wasn't abandoning you. Name is servant of the beautiful pastimes of a time, he pushes my booth of my channel Gaza me gently, it was, but it's Tanya, every man would love this man, you got the machine which talk about the communion. This day forth, you should be known as definitely, now those buttons what brung the villas Santayana. Come on over from Sydney and my best 16 good rounds every day, happy to accept as a disciple yourself opinions done, what she needs them, and we do special thanks to Tom and Jerry, the perfect couple in Sydney who just dedicated their lives to preaching in so many varieties and innovative ways, seeing so many Australians off the beach into the temple.

Prabhu Ashley, mother's design division, approach with of Australia, Katara, Palma in a box, Innova Crysta Brittini, no gold, Rohini provide, partial polishes Australia, Australia Britain ignition, giving the name of a screen name is what everyone is lunch, is Yomijima vodka, in Makaras my child at Louisville, cherished romantic Iranian. By this name, we understand, why don't you know anything that oh my God, our financed on, how about you Linda, okay, from this day forth, look now, you should be known as Hobart is this the cook family, Kumari David. The karyesh Emily and then they'll say shotgun, because in Australia they always the name my given name, Emily, Kumari, Australia history now Karachi, which is no activist booth, was about prostitution, medieval Islamic orogeny, Dr. Boyish America, by Eagle naturally. Next is Margarita.

I promise, Jan 16, 2016, 10 rounds, however awarding the 10 offenses, chant 25 good rounds on the condition bill and racial properties every day. Servant, Krishna enjoys pastimes of you know, yoga, she has matured, Booga Krishna catarina, dad said, you'll never fear is dominant. This paper, three, should be known as do it now, the boot is mystical, but in Darwin Bihari dogs.

Marguerita, gyroscope from Vladivostok.

Yeah.

This game doesn't, yeah, this is not suitable for a month, remember this name doesn't fit you, you know the monkey wanted like the boots pants doesn't oppose a union, I'm Tom Brokaw email, your name means servant of the laws of one of one, is dear most of us remembers, notch head sashenka, Rebecca Torres booth, or Donna is modulated myself Iranian, I'm just a fourth, we should be known as said to it now it's exist, Magog Manju, lolly baby, does. I've lost leaving you two cards even on holidays, I see a common card key, you synopsis or to talk where teams prepared, you have a large game such as another to the did you notice our turkey is my father's, he came.

Thank you guys. Go down, Alphonse, another king going on particular tomorrow, turned on me a yogi in the hot Sun, next to the fire, change the world under the yoke of attention, saw the financials of.

The class now, the girls are dressing as boys today, in them, and one boy is dressing like a girl.

See I don't consume an idea, there's booze, go Scoob, I didn't ask, I didn't damage that boy is our priest is wearing it but I sleep there. Can we see your ankle bells, this man doesn't, but I so all the initiatives in cocksman spoons and rinse your hands again. A lot has transpired since you said you've seen solutions to fascist elements, they are all very much, yeah, it's a very early characters, I'm quite sure you all know how this works. Every person, I think I provide attention, on I say a word, you say it after me to the morning, when the light overflowing the Lucas very exact at the conclusion of that mantra and we say, "Svaahaa," three times, you throw grains three times of conservatism, some three roses, the Hyatt, there are produced regional. My suggestion is to mix the three piles on your plate together with your finger, your banana, either way my authority has Machado, said three but is anthikad are used of us that L could miss them. If you want to have enough grease to make it all the way through, I suggest you still look like this, yondu storage to provide Buddhist Tantra is another concept to that is there, no I still think you know make everyone look here. Miss Margaret Lee, Minyoung, little bird has wings on the side, and in the middle just going like that at the bottom. America teach collateral Korea, our schema, they make every effort in that she brings into the fire. Neither is it a priest in status, provides abortions, you know on our near solution, you come, you can no benefit throwing rains on me, only food rings on your fire, you carpool blah got those too...

Nina spine aha, jatin young.

Krishna padam sanga ghana lalita vishaka victims cha why Wow.

Jagannatha aha yeah stupid.

I'd be shot by Tae Kyung somebody aha but I the day spa Wow ha go to here Baba suction on new deception uppy hubba hubba sarvabhauma speech are gonna die Wow aha and I Krishna the Shakti come.

Ha ha materiality a much of a shampoo Wow yum yum food he might be that negara Hassan Hassan a storm Freeman me rod huh she's like open medieval we started in.

Wow sois my fish three years Wow why topped Wow why sois Krishna.

Bananas between your palms any participant you means is banana business owner, okay? When we recite the final monster you'll come in under the rather than a mother for any decision place to put them into the fire, you put it legend to my mother. I'll try to make it to the fire not away from the fire, iam out of the president's ma going on another school. This is your offering or requesting and addictions from this fire. I've been aetherium, this is your offering for requesting benediction from the fire international. The message is the before the scenes at all with our mania upon young. So when you please step banana and you request the ability to continue to follow your vows and for the strength to always take shelter the Holy Name, you know Silvana tomorrow University are comfortable as ridiculous as I play, I didn't eat.

It's Ayodhya Sahin up center town and everyone circumambulate the fire.

But.

The CC Magister mind games it's gone fans of Shia shrila AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada ki jai o Michigan pod Paramahansa Prairie Village area Pateros accessories Ahmad Killa bhaktisiddhanta sarasvati Tekoa da da da da Amish Nevada Paramahansa pretty but Katara of catalysis Assisi might go kishora dasa babaji maharaja crouch neva front of a hunt suffered even to the terra cotta set the city's he mad Sheila suction at understand about David knotek or other 230 vice governor King Charles loaded a snuggler key principle hoshi krishna chaitanya predictin and Asha don't you take a dog harsh if I study go looking in the key no sheshe radha krishna cooper coconut shampoo not open did you go Veronica don't you boo me she Brindavanam yeah not my pedometer don't be a Buddha my Ikki but DeeDee Vicky it's Khan founder charter of a water key.

Kobus to me Kiki.

Glory to the sanctity Florence innocent of all glories she could have all going to seek what I need so those who are taking seconds initiation they can meet me behind the temple over here Duke the Bulge aspirin in San Sebastopol entity Sudan South Sudan yet evoke Rama okay it's also taking second they can maybe just behind the other shake it was Newton says this does I do mean asking you how did this them kami right.""