"*00520*.*
"Before speaking on the subject matter today, I would like to quote a very beautiful verse about Vṛndāvana from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 21, text 45. This is a verse glorifying Vṛndāvana, and we are repeating it so we can get in the mood of Vṛndāvana. It is not enough just to be here; we have to be in the mood of Vṛndāvana. This verse is very special because it is spoken by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself. He said Vṛndāvana is very soft due to the mercy of the Supreme Lord, and it is especially opulent because of the mood of conjugal love that pervades every speck of dust. Śrī Vṛndāvana is glorious because the transcendental glories of the son of Mahārāja Nanda are fully exhibited here. The last line is particularly nice: Mahāprabhu says, "Under the circumstances, not the least anxiety ever arises in the heart of a true Vrajavāsī." Under the circumstances, not the least anxiety ever arises in the heart of a true Vrajavāsī. I have one more verse I would like to teach you because I think while we are going on *parikramā* for one month, we can all eventually memorize this verse, which really helps us understand Vṛndāvana in essence.

You can repeat after me now. It is Kṛṣṇa speaking about Vṛndāvana. First, we heard from Mahāprabhu, and now we are hearing from Kṛṣṇa. It is a very short verse, but we have heard before that elegance is truth spoken concisely. Vṛndāvana is Kṛṣṇa's home; this is how He describes it: 10.2.24. "My dear father, our home is not in the cities, towns, or villages. Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills." It is a little bit of a different Vṛndāvana than we see today. You can repeat after me, first in English and then in Russian: "My dear father, our home is not in the cities, towns, or villages." Our home is not in the cities, towns, and villages. "Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills." Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills. My dear father, our home is not in the cities, towns, and villages; being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills. So that is the Vṛndāvana we try to see by coming on *parikramā*. Of course, with our naked eye, you can look outside; all you see is buildings and honking horns. But the purpose of these wonderful *kīrtanas*, as Śrīla Prabhupāda led in the various classes we will have for the next month, is to help us see Vṛndāvana as it is. It is said that a saintly person sees through his ears, not through his eyes. He brings Kṛṣṇa by hearing and chanting about the Lord; that brings remembrance of Kṛṣṇa. So that is the purpose of our *parikramā*. Although we will be traveling to different places, mainly we are simply sitting as we are here, sometimes dancing and chanting, but basically we are just sitting and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and having *hari-kathā*. That is what we do.

The reason that we are doing this *parikramā* is very nicely explained by Kṛṣṇa's father, Nanda Mahārāja, who says in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.46.22: "When we see the places where Mukunda enjoyed His sporting pastimes—the rivers, hills, and forests that He decorated with His feet—our minds become totally absorbed in Him." The whole purpose of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is always to remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him, or as Nanda Mahārāja says, "Our minds become totally absorbed in Him." So, how do we totally absorb our minds in Kṛṣṇa? Nanda Mahārāja advises: when we go and see the places where Mukunda enjoyed His sporting pastimes, the rivers, the hills, and the forests that He decorated with His lotus feet, our minds become absorbed in Him. This is the definition of *parikramā*. We are going to take you to lots of places where Kṛṣṇa sported with His friends—His cowherd friends and His girlfriends—in the rivers and the hills and the forests. By chanting His glories there and hearing what He did in all these 30 places we are going to visit, we hope that your minds will become totally absorbed in Him. That is the purpose of *parikramā*, and the proof will be that when this *parikramā* party is over in 30 days and you will be going back home to your countries, all you can think is, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa."

So today, the first day of our program, we find ourselves at Varāha-ghāṭa. As we explained in *Bhāgavatam* class yesterday, this was previously a *ghāṭa* on the Yamunā River. A *ghāṭa* is a place where boats land to let people off from the river to the land; it is a place where devotees come to bathe. So, where is the river? If you look outside, do you see a river? You see a moving river of cars. So how is this a *ghāṭa*? Well, 5,000 years ago, the Yamunā River ran right where the *parikramā* route is. Actually, in those days, you could say Vṛndāvana was like an island—at least this part of Vṛndāvana, not Braja-maṇḍala, but the village of Vṛndāvana was surrounded by the Yamunā River. And the *parikramā* mark, you know, you walk around Vṛndāvana, it takes about two hours or so; you walk around on the *parikramā* mark, that used to be where the Yamunā River was. She has shifted in time by her own desire, but the *ghāṭa* remains here. So we say in English, in your mind's eye, you can just imagine you are sitting in Vṛndāvana proper, and you can imagine the Yamunā River running by here. Instead of hearing cars, you can hear the gentle waves of the river. And our *ācāryas* have described this was the first *ghāṭa* in Vṛndāvana, so it is called Varāha-ghāṭa. It may sound a little strange, Varāha-ghāṭa in Vṛndāvana, it is a different mood, but we will hear in this lecture how Lord Varāha had a very beautiful pastime here with Kṛṣṇa's *gopīs*. Everything is possible in Vṛndāvana.

So Lord Varāha is quite popular in the greater, you could say, Vṛndāvana or Mathurā-Vṛndāvana-maṇḍala, this whole transcendental area where Kṛṣṇa appeared. He came to Gokula and He had His pastimes; it is called Mathurā-Vṛndāvana-maṇḍala, this greater area. He had a number of pastimes here. Varāha—I mentioned yesterday in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* class that He had a very nice pastime at Viśrāma-sthāna, not Viśrāma-sthāna, Viśrāma-ghāṭa, which is a little closer to Mathurā. So today we are going to have *ghāṭa-kathā*. I never gave a *ghāṭa-kathā* before, but we will have *ghāṭa-kathā* because both of these *ghāṭas* are in Vṛndāvana. Viśrāma is actually in the middle of the Vṛndāvana forest. We will discuss about Varāha's pastimes in both of these places. You may have been in class yesterday; I mentioned when actually devotees start their *parikramā* in Vṛndāvana, there are so many different *parikramā* groups, different *gauḍīyas*, and different *sampradāyas*; they generally start not here, but they go to Viśrāma-ghāṭa in the middle of the Vṛndāvana forest. But I thought, why don't we come here? Because there will be so many *parikramā* parties at Viśrāma-ghāṭa today that it will be difficult. But maybe one year we will start there as well. Actually, I think I will ask Rasamani, who is our manager, tour manager here, that we can start next year at Viśrāma-ghāṭa; that would be wise. Because the *Mathurā-māhātmya*, verse 2.28, it glorifies that Viśrāma-ghāṭa. The verse says, "The *tīrtha* named Viśrānti or Viśrāma-ghāṭa destroys all sins. It is the eternal resting place for those conditioned souls who are painfully traveling in the desert of material existence." Makes sense to go there, very spiritually potent place.

And the history of Viśrāma-ghāṭa goes back to very ancient times, when, you could say, Satya-yuga, when Lord Varāha, which means the Boar incarnation, after lifting the Earth, Bhūmi, from the Garbhodaka Ocean—where the Earth had been thrown by Hiraṇyākṣa—and after slaying the first demon in the universe, Hiraṇyākṣa, Lord Varāha wanted to rest. So where did He go? He came to Vṛndāvana; Varāha came to Vṛndāvana, and He rested at Viśrāma-ghāṭa. It is very interesting because we know we have heard that when, after Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva killed Hiraṇyakaśipu, He was flying immediately back to Vaikuṇṭha, but He also wanted to rest. And where did He rest? He was flying over Navadvīpa, and He saw Navadvīpa, and He realized that is also one of His spiritual abodes, and in the Age of Kali, He will appear there as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva came down and He rested at Nṛsiṁhapālī—it is called now, actually, anticipating that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva would take a break before going back to Vaikuṇṭha. The 33 million demigods, they built a beautiful lake there at Nṛsiṁhapālī near to our Māyāpur community so that when the Lord came, He could wash His hands of the blood of Hiraṇyakaśipu.

So what did Varāha do at Viśrāma here in Vṛndāvana when He came to take a little break before going back to Vaikuṇṭha? Well, He was with His eternal consort; the Lord always has His eternal consort with Him in any of His incarnations. Like Kṛṣṇa-avatāra, the source of all incarnations, He has Rādhārāṇī, and Nārāyaṇa has Lakṣmī, and Rāma has Sītā. Of course, ultimately they are all expansions of those ladies of the original Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So who is Varāha's eternal consort? He does not—you do not have to guess very long. He rescued her from the Garbhodaka Ocean after Hiraṇyākṣa had thrown her there. He went and rescued her on the tip of His nose, picked her up, Bhūmi-devī, Mother Earth, put her back in orbit. Therefore, whenever you see a *mūrti*, a deity, Varāha is like this, and Mother Earth is on His nose. You look very closely later at this deity of Varāha on our right; He has the Earth on His nose, Bhūmi-devī. So when they got there, Bhūmi-devī, she realized this was Vṛndāvana, and Vṛndāvana is resting upon her, so to speak, because Vṛndāvana on this Earth planet—Goloka Vṛndāvana, the spiritual world—has come to this part of the universe, the Earth planet, to where the continent of Bhārata, where in Bhārata Vṛndāvana. So she is looking around, "Wow, I am in Vṛndāvana. Tell me something about this place."

So Varāha began speaking the glories of Vṛndāvana. Of course, He knows, because He is an expansion of His very self, Kṛṣṇa, so He knows everything about Vṛndāvana. He spoke the first glories of Vṛndāvana to Bhūmi millions and billions of years ago. So because it is the first place that Vṛndāvana's glories were spoken, when devotees come for *parikramā* in Vṛndāvana, the first place they go to speak the glories of Vṛndāvana is Viśrāma-ghāṭa. It is very logical. Now, talk about taking rest. Viśrāma is also famous as the place where Kṛṣṇa came to take rest after killing Kaṁsa. It was a big fight, you know. The fight, Kṛṣṇa is a young boy; Balarāma had to wrestle the two wrestlers, and then the king comes down to fight with Him. Kṛṣṇa is only, you know, seven or seven or eight years old; it was a big fight. So Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that after Kṛṣṇa killed Kaṁsa, there is that BBT painting where He is like this, and Kaṁsa is like, "Ah," and then boom, then He dragged the king's body through Mathurā just so all the residents of Mathurā could understand the tyrant is dead. He is dead; you can see Kṛṣṇa is pulling him, and He dragged him to Viśrāma-ghāṭa.

Now, we know from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* that when the Lord left Vṛndāvana and went to Mathurā, Nanda Mahārāja and some of the cowherd men, they came along as well, and some of the cowherd boys, ladies, stayed behind. So it is described that as Kṛṣṇa was dragging the body of Kaṁsa through Mathurā to Viśrāma, He sent a message to Vṛndāvana with the good news: "The evil king is dead." So hearing this, it is nicely described, hearing this, the Vrajavāsīs, they rejoiced with what? Kīrtana. That is how we rejoice; we, when we want to enjoy, we glorify Kṛṣṇa. So when the Vrajavāsīs heard this, they started chanting Kṛṣṇa's holy names, and that kīrtana was so intense it could be heard even in Mathurā, which, you know, is some distance. It takes like 45 minutes to drive there, but the Mathurā-vāsīs, they could hear the Vrajavāsīs singing, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." You are not—you are not chanting as loud as the Vrajavāsīs. If you chant like they did in celebration, "Kaṁsa is dead," oh, thank you. So once, you know, we know Kaṁsa was dedicated to killing Kṛṣṇa, but once the demon was punished for his sins, Kṛṣṇa, who actually had family ties to Kaṁsa as a nephew, actually, He arranged—this is amazing—He arranged for Kaṁsa to have a funeral that was fit for a warrior or a king. So that is Viśrāma. Having heard the glories of Viśrāma, your mind is now absorbed in Kṛṣṇa, and *smarana* means to remember these pastimes, not that they go in one ear and out the other ear, but, you know, going in our daily activities, we are hearing so much *kathā*, so much *kathā*, chanting Mahā-mantra, naturally one begins to spontaneously remember Kṛṣṇa because of all the *kathā*. And it is especially potent to hear these pastimes in Vṛndāvana.

Actually, I was thinking this morning, there is a very, very beautiful pastime that illustrates how this area of Mathurā-Vṛndāvana is the best of all holy places. It is described that sometime near the beginning of creation, during the night of Brahmā—Brahmā has a day and has a night—during the night of Brahmā, as he was sleeping, a demon named Śaṅkhāsura, he defeated the demigods in heaven and he stole the Vedas. That is a big thing for the demigods. If the Vedas are stolen, they take shelter in that knowledge. Like, like if you have a gold watch and somebody steals your gold watch, "Hey!" So the demigods, when this demon stole the Vedas, they said, "We want our Vedas back." Actually, I read last night that the demigods who depend on those *śāstras*, when they were stolen, they lost their spiritual strength. Just like when you eat food, you nourish your body; when you hear *kathā*, Kṛṣṇa or Varāha or whatever, it nourishes your soul. If you don't eat, you get weak; if you don't hear *kathā*, you become spiritually weak. Is that verse, "By regular attendance in the Bhāgavatam class and by rendering service to the pure devotees, all that is inauspicious becomes destroyed and one becomes fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness"? Therefore, Prabhupāda stated we should have *Bhāgavatam* class every morning, and if possible, *Bhāgavatam* class every evening. And devotees can experience, if you don't have time to read or to hear, if you don't complete your rounds, you feel yourself becoming gradually spiritually weak and open to Māyā's tricks.

So in desperation, the demigods, they approached, as they often do, they approach the Ocean of Milk and they pray to Viṣṇu/Kṛṣṇa to intervene, save the situation, get our Vedas back, we want our nectar of devotion, we want them back. Just like Śrīla Prabhupāda, when he came to America, he started writing his commentaries on *Bhagavad-gītā*. Previously, he had done *Bhāgavatam*, but in New York, he started writing—maybe a little before—started writing his commentary on *Bhagavad-gītā*. I think he was up to the seventh chapter. Many of you probably don't know this, but one afternoon, Prabhupāda went for a walk in Tompkins Square Park, which was nearby. When he came back, he saw someone had broken into the apartment that he was living in and stolen the manuscript. Prabhupāda was so disturbed; of course, he went back and translated again, but how wonderful it would have been, or it would be, if we had that transcript today. Such a loss, the greatest loss that one can imagine. So Kṛṣṇa appreciated the appeal of the demigods, so what did He do? He assumed the form of a fish, Matsya, and He killed Śaṅkhāsura in a big battle. There are actually different descriptions of this pastime, but this is one that *ācāryas* have explained.

So Lord Brahmā, the chief of the demigods, he considered this to be a great victory. *Jayatī* means he raised the victory flag that the Vedas had been rescued. And the demigods, they had a *kīrtana*—we call that *saṅkīrtana*. *Saṅkīrtana* means the complete glorification. All 33 million demigods, they started chanting, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." And like the *kīrtana* that the Mathurā-vāsīs, or rather the Vrajavāsīs, had celebrating Kaṁsa was dead could be heard in Mathurā, the *kīrtana* of the demigods could be heard in the 14 worlds, even down in Pātālaloka; it was reverberating, and some of the residents of hell were elevated to Vaikuṇṭha. All glories to the holy names of Kṛṣṇa. So Brahmā said, "Look, the *kīrtana* is not enough. Let's have a big celebration." *Mahotsava* means a celebration, so let's have a *Mahotsava*, *Mahotsava*, *Mahotsava*, and let's do it at Prayāga, because Prayāga is a very auspicious place. Three sacred rivers meet there: the Ganges, the Yamunā, and the Sarasvatī. He said, "Let's go to Prayāga and have a big *Mahotsava*." Oh, demigods, yeah, let's have a Hare Kṛṣṇa festival, not a Sunday feast, but a *Mahotsava*. So 33 million demigods, they came to Prayāga—you know, it is mysterious, but it is true—and many saintly persons from all over the universe, they came to Prayāga for this big *Mahotsava*.

While this was all going on, you know, *kīrtana*, *prasādam*, dramas, etc., Lord Brahmā was looking around, and he was thinking, "All these demigods and *sādhus* have come to this very holy place because the three rivers are here: Yamunā, Sarasvatī, and Ganges are here at that time." So he said, "Wow, this is so amazing, everybody is here at Prayāga. So today, I will declare that Prayāga is *Tīrtha-rāja*, the king of all holy places. I mean, look, everybody is here, all these saints, and the rivers are here; this is *Tīrtha-rāja*. Prayāga is *Tīrtha-rāja*, the king of all holy places." So then Brahmā, he ordered all the holy places, personified—because I mentioned everybody, anyone who was anyone, they came—so the all the holy places in creation, they were also there in their personified form. So he said to them, "All of you, bow down to Prayāga." Which they did. But now enter Nārada Muni, who always has a little spice to these pastimes. He is such an amazing person. After the sacrifice was over, Nārada Muni was looking at Prayāga, personified, and he could see that because of this new honor bestowed upon him—it is a pastime, it is a *līlā*, it is instructive—Prayāga was a little, like, proud. "No, I am number one holy place." We don't want to speak ill of Prayāga because it is a very auspicious place, but we have discussed many times why these pastimes take place; they are instructive for us. Now, how many times have we heard that when Kṛṣṇa sees a little pride in the heart of His devotee, He arranges for that devotee to become humble again?

So Nārada Muni, he approached Prayāga, you know, the personified, and he said, "That was a big *yajña*. Now you have the prestigious title of *Tīrtha-rāja*." So, pride became a little puffed up—it is a term that I think Prabhupāda coined—he became puffed like a frog. He said, "Yes, um, you can see everyone is bowing down to me." So the Guru, He blesses, but He also has the position of curbing our lust, our anger, our greed, our pride. So we have to expect sometimes Guru Mahārāja may chastise us. I told you one time, I was sleeping in Prabhupāda's class. We had a long journey on the train from Kolkata to Hyderabad, got out, and went to the village, started preaching in the village, and I was sitting there, he was speaking in Hindi, I fell asleep. Suddenly, I heard, "Why are you sleeping when the spiritual master is speaking?" That was Prabhupāda. I woke up; Prabhupāda stopped the class. "Why are you sleeping?" And I, I did not answer, right? So I froze. Prabhupāda wanted a reply. He said, "Why?" Everyone was looking at me. He said, "Why?" "Um, um, um, um, because I don't speak Hindi. All I knew was to to a little chhoo-chhoo, little..." So Prabhupāda said, to instruct all of us, it is said that does not matter. It does not matter if you don't speak Hindi. He said, "This is transcendental sound vibration. You stay awake; it will purify your heart."

So you know, here is this proud Prayāga, so he is going to be chastised by Nārada. A *sādhu* means one who cuts our material attachments. "Oh, *sādhu*, *sādhu*, give me your blessings, you are in—you are in Māyā, stop your Māyā immediately, you rascal, you fool!" "No, I want a blessing, I get freed from disease, I meet a beautiful wife." "No, you rascal, that is *sādhu*." Prabhupāda said sometimes Prabhupāda was so heavy with his disciples that some disciples would refer to that heaviness as, "Chop, chop, chop. Guru Mahārāja gave me chop, chop, chop today." So Nārada Muni, he is very expert at this. Everyone is bowing down; you see, everyone said, "Prayāga, not everyone is bowing down." In case you didn't notice, there are two holy places who did not come to the ceremony and offer you tribute. So Prayāga said, "Wait a minute, what holy places did not come and honor me as *Tīrtha-rāja*?" So Nārada said, "Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, they did not come." Kaṁsa was like, "What? Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, personified, did not come to honor me as *Tīrtha-rāja*? I am going to go complain to Lord Kṛṣṇa."

So he went straight to Vaikuṇṭha, Viṣṇu-Kṛṣṇa. He met Kṛṣṇa/Viṣṇu in Vaikuṇṭha and said, "Mathurā and Vṛndāvana didn't come to honor me. I am known as the best of all holy places. Who is this Vṛndāvana and Mathurā? I am Prayāga; they should come and bow down to me." He said, "Dear Lord, you witnessed my coronation as king of all holy places. Did you see that Mathurā/Vṛndāvana, they chose to stay away from the ceremony? In this way, they have ignored yours and Lord Brahmā's order to worship me. Obviously, this is a great *aparādha*; this is a great offense. You should do something about it, Kṛṣṇa, right now." Talk like that to the Lord, to your deity. So Kṛṣṇa was silent for a while. He was—Kṛṣṇa was silent, and Prayāga was getting a little nervous. But then Kṛṣṇa smiled, and He said to Prayāga, "My dear Prayāga, I agree with Lord Brahmā that we could make you king of the holy places, but not king of My home." What is Vṛndāvana? It is the playground of God. "Home, He appeared here, this is Kṛṣṇa's home. More than His home, it is His playground, playground of God. I agree, you can be *Tīrtha-rāja*, but you can't be—you can't be the king of My home."

"Do not try to rule over My personal residences of Mathurā and Vṛndāvana." Prayāga was shocked. He said, "They are your personal residences?" So Kṛṣṇa said, "I always reside in Mathurā and Vṛndāvana. They are My very own residences." He said, "Prayāga, just try to comprehend the glories of this Mathurā-Vṛndāvana, this sacred area." And then one very nice verse came from the lotus mouth of the Lord: "Mathurā-maṇḍala is My home, is My transcendental abode above the three worlds. It is not destroyed even at the time of cosmic manifestation. Like Me, Mathurā is eternal." Now, when a disciple is chastised, does he—does he talk back? Does he try to defend himself or herself? The disciple always thinks, he may be PhD, MD, this, whatever, he always considers himself or herself as a fool before the spiritual master. A disciple becomes humble, and by becoming humble, we can absorb all the nice instructions of Guru and Gaurāṅga and benefit from them. Humility is one of the most important qualities a devotee can possess. It opens the heart to all transcendental knowledge. And that we can see and the way that Prayāga received this—we could say hot sauce, they gave him the sauce, we used to say in ISKCON, "He gave me the sauce," like chili sauce or whatever. He took the sauce, but how did he respond? It is very instructive for us.

Taking the Lord's permission, Prayāga, personified, immediately came to Mathurā-Vṛndāvana. When he arrived, he saw Vṛndāvana and Mathurā, personified, some distance away, and he ran towards those personalities, rolled in the dust at the lotus feet, and begged for forgiveness. So devotees, even the Lord, they don't take offense, you know? "No, that I understand, you had a moment, you had a moment." So Mathurā-Vṛndāvana forgave Prayāga, but pride was feeling very low in his heart. So he said, "Lords Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, because of my offense, I feel some contamination in my heart. Please tell me what I can do that I can become free from any residue of contamination in my heart for not respecting both of you. I made a big offense to Mathurā, to Vṛndāvana. I made a big offense, that means everything within Mathurā, everything within Vṛndāvana. I am an *aparādhi*, I am the most sinful person. What can I do to rectify myself with this great *aparādha*? Please tell me, Mathurā, tell me, Vṛndāvana, what can I do to rectify my impure heart?" And the answer is most wonderful; you can't imagine the reply that Mathurā-Vṛndāvana gave. It is so wonderful, so relevant today. But because it is getting late, I will tell you their reply tomorrow. No, you are not getting tired, you are not falling asleep? Who wants to hear their reply? So sit properly, take a big breath, hands in the air like this, okay? I want you to be all ears. That is an English thing, "all ears." Here is the reply that the Mathurā-Vṛndāvana gave to Prayāga. You know, to say, "It's okay, this is what you have to do to become purified."

Now, for us, if we are honest with ourselves, we also feel that we have some—we are still contaminated in our heart by desires, right? We are not pure yet, we don't cry when we chant. So we—we also feel some contamination, yes? Let's be honest, who is not a pure devotee yet? So there is some residue, right? The reply that Mathurā-Vṛndāvana gave is also good for us, right? Who wants to hear the reply? So Mathurā-Vṛndāvana said to Prayāga, "Dear Prayāga, you can become free from contamination by going on Braja-maṇḍala parikramā and visit all the holy places in Braja-maṇḍala. By going on *parikramā*, all inauspiciousness within your heart will go away, and *prema*, love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, will awaken." Isn't that wonderful? That is what we are here for; that is what we are going to do. Because in our humility, we realize our fallen position, but we have faith in the words of Mathurā-Vṛndāvana. By going on *parikramā*, all inauspiciousness will go, and what will come? *Prema*, feeling your separation: "I am considering a moment to be like 12 years or more; tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain; I am feeling all vacant in the world in your absence."

So I have a little more to say. Should I continue, or do you want to... [laughs] He is hungry, I know him. Don't say that. You are so happy he is back with us this year. We have a wonderful team this year. Don, where is my dear Godbrother from America? He is going back to America this afternoon. His feet are a little swollen; you know, the *parikramā* was very hot and very humid, and he got a little sick. But I think you can get better in Vṛndāvana. No, you—what is the cure for all illness? Kṛṣṇa. And we have good Ayurvedic doctors. Who thinks he should stay with us for this month? He is going back to preach, but he doesn't know enough about Vṛndāvana, so I don't think you should go back and preach. By staying with us for one month, this is a wonderful association; he will learn so much about Vṛndāvana. When he goes back to America, it will be just Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, and everyone will surrender to his lotus feet. He is the one that shaved me up when I became a new devotee. The thing is, I had very long hair, like down my back, and I was thinking, "I am going to have a really nice long *śikhā*, it is going to be so cool." I sat in the chair, he started, you know, clip, clip, clip, might, he left my *śikhā* only this long, and he made it—he thinned it out. I said, "Hey, what about my hair?" He said, "I am just dealing with your false ego." He chastised me the first thing I come to the temple. "What is the false ego?" You will learn very quickly. You are welcome back anytime.

So just a few words about this particular place where we finish. As Prabhupāda mentioned, Varāha-muni, he once had his *āśrama* here. And also one day, the cowherd boys were tending their cows near here, because this is Ramaṇa-retī with the soft sands. So because the water was nearby, etc., they came here, they were herding their cows. So at one point, Madhumaṅgala, who has a very close relationship with Kṛṣṇa, he told Kṛṣṇa that Rādhārāṇī and her *gopī* friends were just over here at the Yamunā River collecting water for cooking. So when Kṛṣṇa heard that Rādhārāṇī was nearby, He wanted to find an excuse to leave the boys and go to see Rādhārāṇī. So Kṛṣṇa told His friends, "Hey, you guys, I heard there is some stray cows that went away, so I am going to go look for some stray cows and I will be right back." So Kṛṣṇa left, and He went down by the Yamunā River there, and He found Rādhārāṇī, the *gopīs*. They were dipping their water pitchers into the Yamunā. So as Kṛṣṇa was approaching, you know, the girls are thinking, "Oh, this *dheṭa* is coming again; He is going to make jokes about us, He is going to try to, you know, play with us or kiss us, we just ignore Him." So Kṛṣṇa says, "Hey, girls, I am here." Go off, remember *rāsa-līlā* dances, but just kind of for fun, they ignored Him, and they actually said, "Oh, son of Mahārāja Nanda, what are you doing in this part of Braja? You are supposed to be herding your cows." So Kṛṣṇa, you know, used the same excuse: "My cows are grazing nearby, but some of them strayed away, so I came looking for them." So when *gopīs* said, "Well, you can see there is no stray cows here; you can go away." Lifting their pitchers of water on their head, the *gopīs* got up, and they started to leave.

So Kṛṣṇa did not want to lose their attention, so He said, "You girls carry those pitchers on your head so elegantly." So He kind of said it in a sarcastic way, you know. So Rādhārāṇī turned back and looked at Kṛṣṇa and said, "Unlike you, we are accustomed to this menial service." So Kṛṣṇa did not appreciate their sarcasm, so He said, "Rādhārāṇī, you are not the only one who carries pitchers of water on their head." So all the *gopīs*, they turned toward Kṛṣṇa, they said in unison, "Śyāmasundara, when have you ever lifted a water pot on your head? You have everyone do everything for you. We have never seen you put a water pot on your head." Kṛṣṇa stood like, He put His hands on His hips, and He replied, He said, "Water pot? A water pot is nothing. I have lifted the whole planet on My head." They don't see Kṛṣṇa as God; it is just their favorite cowherd boy. So when they heard that, you know, this little boy said that He once lifted the whole planet on His head, they started laughing so hard, the water pots on their head, that water started falling out. So Rādhārāṇī said, "When have you ever lifted the planet on your head?" So Kṛṣṇa said, "Long ago, when I appeared as a boar to raise the Earth out of the Garbhodaka Ocean."

So that was such an outrageous statement that the *gopīs* just—they went silent, and they said, "How can we believe such an outrageous statement?" So Kṛṣṇa replied, He said, "Well, the sage Garga-muni said at My birth that in the past I appeared with a red complexion." Then one of the *gopīs*, she spoke up, "Just because you had a red complexion doesn't mean that you are the red-haired Varāha expansion of Lord Nārāyaṇa. But if you show us, we will believe you." So then—so then Kṛṣṇa immediately replied, He said, "All right, if seeing is believing, then behold My *varāha-rūpa*." And then He suddenly disappeared, and in His place there stood a small boar, the size of a thumb, on the ground. There is this little boar, red. So the girls were like, "What?" So they came forward to take a better look, and they started to make fun of the size of this little boar. "He is only this big." Remember, Kṛṣṇa is the master of all mystics; the boar started to grow and get bigger, and their heads—like this—and He is going to be getting bigger, bigger, they are about to fall over. His head was touching the clouds, and He started roaring these thunderous roar, and all the *gopīs* had to cover their ears. And He had this big white tusks, four white tusks, and described—I was reading—they glowed like the *Brahma-jyoti*. His lotus eyes glowed red with anger. Then He stood up on His rear legs and displayed His divine body, thick with red, quivering hair, brilliant with arrow-sharp hooves, and fragrant with a garland of forest flowers—not an ordinary boar.

And then that boar bent down and He rammed His tusks into the ground. Then He lifted His head, and by His mystic powers, the girls saw the Earth was resting on the tusks of that red boar. They are in awe; they are looking at this boar, and they could see all the continents, all the oceans, all the mountain ranges on the Earth in—on the tusks, the nose of this boar. And suddenly, all these angelic voices started coming down from the higher planets, like Vedic *mantras* and different prayers, like the *Varāha-stuti*, glorifying Lord Varāha with His—He also displayed one Sudarśana-cakra. So the demigods are glorifying this appearance. Described, He extended His right hoof and called for Sudarśana-cakra. So it is very famous, the *ācāryas* say at that moment, one of the *gopīs* managed to whisper, "Is He really our Kṛṣṇa?" You know, because they don't know Kṛṣṇa, He is a cowherd boy, naughty cowherd boy, you know? "Is—is that really—is that—is that Kṛṣṇa? Hey guys, hey girls?" So to prove that Varāha was no different than Kṛṣṇa, or you could say an expansion of Kṛṣṇa, Varāha changed the color of His body from red to blue, from red to blue, from red to blue. So the *gopīs* could understand He was their Kṛṣṇa. And then as suddenly as He appeared, He disappeared. And the *gopīs* were silent, they looked around, "Where, where's Kṛṣṇa?" And while speaking, they walked over to where that little boar had appeared as a thumb-size; they saw His giant hoofprints in the dust, and right beside them they saw the familiar footprints of Kṛṣṇa. That was proof enough for them that Kṛṣṇa had become Varāha, or Varāha comes from Kṛṣṇa. To see Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet and Varāha's lotus feet together, they concluded, "That was our Kṛṣṇa."

They had seen this magnificent form of Varāha and all His opulence with a Sudarśana-cakra, but the *ācāryas* say they were infinitely more interested in that cowherd boy at that moment than any of His incarnations that are worshiped in awe and reverence. They just forgot about Varāha; where did Kṛṣṇa go? And where did that pastime take place? Right where you are sitting now. That is why this temple is here; that is why it is called Varāha-ghāṭa. You are sitting in this *līlā-sthāna*, this place where this pastime actually took place, right in the middle of—He was a little Varāha and all you *gopīs* were there, or you want to go there. So in conclusion, on the way back to their homes, the *gopīs* passed Kṛṣṇa herding His cows. As was the custom, they covered their faces with their veils—there is a little—they could see a little bit through—and they from the distance, they saw a smile on Kṛṣṇa's lips, which they acknowledge, the *ācāryas* say, as loving glances. So therefore, Varāha-ghāṭa. One last note: this is again to go to the *ṛṣis*. Practice *hari-kathā* here. Garga Muni was present when Śukadeva Gosvāmī spoke *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, so he and Kṛṣṇa are contemporaries. One last interesting fact: Prabhupāda said one time his family genealogical line actually comes from the disciples of Garga Muni, who is recognized as one of the seven great sages of the universe. Okay, Kṛṣṇa. 2023. Jay Jay, Jaya Śrī-kṛṣṇa. Right here. Hey, hey, Śrīla Prabhupāda. I apologize.""