"*00448*.*
"Welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. I am happy to be with you again. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale...* All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Today, I would like to speak about a very special place situated on the far western corner of Vṛndāvana, between the areas of Nandagrama and Sātavāsa. You will understand its special feature just by its name. In the old Vṛndāvana maps, it is called Nāgala Sītārāma. The Sanskrit word *nāgala* refers to "a small settlement of people," and this particular settlement came about as a result of a very unique pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that took place thousands of years ago when They played *keli* (playful) pastimes as Sītā and Rāma in the Vṛndāvana forest. Some old *sādhus* actually refer to that place as the Sītārāma garden, or sometimes, I have read, even as the Pañcavaṭī forest of Vṛndāvana.

As we all know, Lord Rāmacandra and Sītā Devī appeared millions of years ago in the Tretā-yuga, and through the ages, people in India have listened to and even today discuss Their exploits as described in the epic *Rāmāyaṇa*. They often reenact Their pastimes in drama and theater; I know on our Polish festival tour, the *Rāmāyaṇa* theater is one of the most popular amongst our guests. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* and *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, we hear that Lord Caitanya, Lord Nityānanda, and Their associates also reenacted Lord Rāma's pastimes. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā* chapter 15, verse 32, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes: *vijayādaśamī-laṅkā-vijaya-yātrā-dine, vānara-sainya kaila*. "On the day celebrating the conquest of Laṅkā, a day known as Vijayā-daśamī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu dressed up all His devotees as monkey soldiers." And in *Caitanya-bhāgavata, Ādi-khaṇḍa*, part 2, text 45, we hear *ko-dina nityānanda*: one day, Lord Nityānanda enacted the pastime of building a bridge across the ocean, with the boys playing the role of monkeys. 

Śāstras also say that 5,000 years ago, such theatrical performances were common. I found one very ancient *śāstra* called the *Viṣṇu-dharmottara*, wherein it is stated that Kṛṣṇa Himself reenacted the *Rāmāyaṇa* with His cowherd friends. It is a particular *śloka* that begins by stating Kṛṣṇa manifested all 24 principal forms of Viṣṇu at Apsarā-kuṇḍa in Vṛndāvana just for the pleasure of the cowherd boys. Once, He also manifested the form of the twelve-armed Govindadeva, and one of the cowherd boys became Garuḍa. And then, what is relevant to us today, another time Kṛṣṇa manifested the form of Rāma, and the cowherd boys became monkeys and bears. So, even Kṛṣṇa was reenacting His pastimes in ancient times as Rāma. Actually, even as a small child, Kṛṣṇa was enamored by Rāma-līlā, which we know from Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. There is a beautiful verse in his *Vidagdha-mādhava*, verse number 151, where we hear how Kṛṣṇa was enamored by Rāma-līlā. Rūpa Gosvāmī writes as follows:

"One evening, as Yaśodā Devī was putting Him to sleep, Kṛṣṇa asked, 'Mātā, will you tell me an adventure story?' Mother Yaśodā stroked her son’s head and began, 'There was once a king named Rāma.' A smile appeared on Kṛṣṇa’s lips as He nodded and said, 'And then?' Mother Yaśodā continued, 'He had a beautiful wife whose name was Sītā.' Kṛṣṇa’s eyelids were getting heavy. Sleepily, He said, 'And then?' Gently stroking her son’s face, Yaśodā went on, 'On the order of His father, Rāma went into exile with Sītā and lived happily in the Pañcavaṭī forest until a demon called Rāvaṇa kidnapped Sītā.' Hearing the narration of His own pastimes from ancient times, Kṛṣṇa startled His mother by suddenly sitting up from bed and calling out, 'Lakṣmaṇa! Lakṣmaṇa! Where is My bow? Hurry, where is My bow? We must rescue Her!'"

So, my point was that even little Kṛṣṇa was enamored by the pastimes of Rāma. Now, as we mentioned earlier, in the Sītārāma garden in the Vṛndāvana forest, the Gopīs once asked Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to show Them Their forms as Sītā and Rāma. This pastime is very nicely recounted by my godbrother, His Holiness Śivarāma Swami, in one of his publications. He writes that one time, as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were strolling with the Gopīs through this charming part of the forest, one Gopī spoke up and exclaimed that she felt the atmosphere was just like the forest of Pañcavaṭī, where Sītā and Rāma happily lived together in exile. She said, "This forest is blossoming with flowers, birds sing everywhere, the waterways are filled with pure nectar, and just see, wild animals move peacefully amongst each other just like in the Pañcavaṭī forest."

So, at one point, another Gopī pointed out a small grove that she said resembled a *sādhu’s bhajan-kuṭīr* near a small hill. So, another Gopī said, "Yes, it looks just like the cottage that Lakṣmaṇa built for Sītā and Rāma. Let’s go inside." So they went inside this little grove which resembled the cottage that Lakṣmaṇa built for Sītā and Rāma. Once inside, the Gopīs asked Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa if They could decorate Them like Sītā and Rāma because everything appeared very much like that particular forest and the cottage as described in the *Rāmāyaṇa*. The divine couple agreed in a playful mood. The Gopīs sat Them down on a flower couch and dressed Them in very simple outfits like the clothes that ascetics would wear. Then they tied Kṛṣṇa’s hair into a top-knot just like a sage. After making flower ornaments, the Gopīs brought all these flower ornaments to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and smiling, they said, "It is very interesting; Sītā and Rāma had no maidservants—They ornamented each other. So, we think You should do the same."

As Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa faced each other, the Gopīs handed Them these flower ornaments one after another while the divine couple took pleasure in Their artistic skills of ornamenting each other. As They did this—ornamenting each other with these beautiful flower ornaments as Sītā and Rāma—the Gopīs began singing songs glorifying Sītā and Rāma’s happier pastimes in the forest of Pañcavaṭī. The interesting thing is that when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa heard the singing of the Gopīs describing the transcendental pastimes of Sītā and Rāma, They forgot They were play-acting. By the potency of *yogamāyā*, They forgot They were play-acting and suddenly thought of Themselves as actually being Sītā Devī and Lord Rāmacandra. 

Seeing the divine couple transformed in this way, the Gopīs placed a large bow and a quiver of arrows made from flowers beside Kṛṣṇa. As the Gopīs kept singing the pastimes of Sītā and Rāma from the *Rāmāyaṇa*, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa became more and more absorbed in these previous pastimes in the Pañcavaṭī forest. Then, to the amazement of all the Gopīs, suddenly Kṛṣṇa’s cloud-blue complexion turned grass-green like Rāma’s. Mesmerized by seeing the divine couple in this *bhāva* of Rāma-līlā, the Gopīs continued singing verses from the *Rāmāyaṇa*, specifically from the *Araṇya-kāṇḍa* section, chapters 12 to 15. In this particular part of the *Rāmāyaṇa*, they were singing how Sītā, Rāma, and Lakṣmaṇa once visited the sage Agastya Muni in his āśrama. Therein, it is described how at one point, Agastya Muni brought a number of weapons forward and was giving them to Rāmacandra. It is described that these weapons blazed with divine splendor. One Gopī closed her eyes as she sang from the *Rāmāyaṇa* in Agastya Muni’s voice: "Here is Viṣṇu’s bow, made by Viśvakarmā, studded with gold and diamonds; here is Brahmā’s arrow, which never misses its mark; and here are Śiva’s two inexhaustible quivers, and here is Lord Viṣṇu’s sword." She was singing in the voice of Agastya Muni, "Please accept these weapons. In your fight against evil, employ them as Indra uses his thunderbolts."

Then another Gopī, this time with tears in her eyes, sang how Agastya Muni expressed such deep affection for Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa. "O Rāma, O Lakṣmaṇa," she sang as Agastya Muni, "You have taken so much trouble to visit me. I see that You are perspiring, and the daughter of Janaka, being young and unaccustomed to the trials of jungle life, is clearly tired. Some distance from here is the beautiful forest of Pañcavaṭī, full of roots, fruits, water, and abundant with deer. Build Your cottage there and live peacefully." This was putting Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa more and more in the mood of Sītā and Rāma. Finally, the Gopīs all sang together, "After leaving Agastya Muni’s āśrama, Rāma wandered the forest and selected a beautiful level place surrounded by flowering trees not far from the Godāvarī River. There, He requested Lakṣmaṇa to build a cottage."

There is more, but time is of the essence; they go on for quite a long time. After hearing the *Rāmāyaṇa* in the sweet singing of the Gopīs, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were now more in the mood of Sītā and Rāma than ever. At one point, in this divine trance organized by Pourṇamāsī, Kṛṣṇa took Rādhā’s hand, and They walked out of that cottage and began to stroll through the forest again. There, Kṛṣṇa, in the mood of Rāma, pointed out to Rādhā, who was in the mood of Sītā, the beauty of the Pañcavaṭī forest. As the Gopīs followed Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they were amazed that just as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had transformed into Sītā and Rāma, even Vṛndāvana appeared to have become the Pañcavaṭī forest. Everything was there to facilitate these pastimes, so Vṛndāvana forest looked like the Pañcavaṭī forest. Of course, this was all *kelī-līlā*, all playful pastimes planned and organized by *yogamāyā*. 

After some time, by *yogamāyā*’s arrangement, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s Rāma-līlā trance was broken. It is also described that the Pañcavaṭī forest took back the sweet mood of the Vṛndāvana forest. It is said that because the Gopīs rarely saw the divine couple so absorbed in an identity other than Their own, as these Gopīs all headed home, they were silent, being absorbed in the wonderful memory of the glorious pastimes of Sītā and Rāma in the beautiful Pañcavaṭī forest. It is stated that some days later, when the Gopīs were discussing what they had seen and heard, they concluded amongst themselves that the place where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa became Sītā and Rāma was actually the Pañcavaṭī forest. So, the place where the divine couple had decorated each other and heard the *Rāmāyaṇa* became known as Nāgala Sītārāma. You can visit Nāgala Sītārāma; it is described as a place devotees may visit to deeply enter into the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa as He was in the Tretā-yuga as Lord Rāmacandra. It is a wonderful pastime; we have to go there to that Nāgala Sītārāma or that Sītārāma garden in the Pañcavaṭī forest. 

Now, I was reading that just south of Nāgala Sītārāma, there is a garden. Actually, every step in Vṛndāvana, there is something amazing that has happened. So, just south of this Sītārāma garden, there is another garden called Vana-cariyā, where once, in Kṛṣṇa’s absence, the cowherd boys discussed whether Kṛṣṇa was a cowherd boy or a forest dweller. There is a difference. They were discussing, "Is Kṛṣṇa a cowherd boy or is He a dweller of the forest?" Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys had brought their cows to this particular place, Vana-cariyā, specifically because of the sweet grass that grows there. We know the boys like to do the best for their cows, so they take them to where the grasses are particularly sweet. On this particular day, at one point, Kṛṣṇa left the cows and the boys along with Madhumaṅgala on the plea of "seeing the rest of the forest." Kṛṣṇa wanted to see the rest of the forest—a plea that some of the gopas knew to simply be an excuse to meet some Gopīs. There are different types of cowherd boys, and some are quite close to Kṛṣṇa, so they know of His amorous pastimes with the Gopīs, and as we have discussed on many occasions, they facilitate that meeting. These are special friends of Kṛṣṇa.

While Kṛṣṇa was away seeing the forest with Madhumaṅgala, a big group of the cowherd boys gathered together and, while resting comfortably under a banyan tree, began talking about their favorite subject. What is their favorite subject? Kṛṣṇa. No doubt. In the course of the conversation, one boy asked, half-jokingly, "My dear friends, I have a doubt. The duty of our caste is to protect cows; for this, we are known as gopas. Is Kṛṣṇa also a gopa like us, or is He a forest dweller who happens to take care of cows as well? I am not sure." This is how he brought up the subject. So, another boy said, "What makes you think that Gopāla, with whom we herd cows every day, could be anything other than a gopa?"

"Dear friends," the first boy replied, "consider this: we live in villages where we house our cows, tend our gardens and orchards, and come to the pastures during the day, then we go home. But you see, Kṛṣṇa’s life is a little different. Yes, He comes cow-herding with us every morning. Then, during the day, just like now, He goes off to see the beauty of the forest, which we know includes seeing the beauty of our sisters, who are always loitering somewhere nearby to catch His attention. And what does Kṛṣṇa do with our sisters? He wears garlands of forest flowers, strolls with them in the forest beside the Yamunā, and rests with them in the forest groves on flower cots. Finally, when Kṛṣṇa returns to us, my friends, what does He look like?"

The other boys blurted out, "A forest dweller!"

The first boy said, "Exactly! That’s my point. He is covered head to toe in flower decorations, and He is usually dressed in new clothes from one of Vṛndā Devī’s storehouses." I thought that was really cute—He is usually dressed in new clothes from one of Vṛndā Devī’s storehouses. "So, not only does He prefer to look like a forest dweller, His wardrobe is also in the forest in Vṛndā Devī’s storehouse."

"But Kṛṣṇa doesn't live in the forest," another boy interrupted. "He lives in Nandagrāma."

Taking the side of Kṛṣṇa being a cowherd, not a forest dweller, that boy said, "Kṛṣṇa doesn't live in the forest; He lives in Nandagrāma."

The first boy who started this whole conversation says, "For some time, yes, but not long enough for one to call it His home."

The boys said, "What do you mean?"

The first boy continued, "Dear friends, just consider Kṛṣṇa’s daily schedule. He returns to Nandagrāma with us, yes. He milks the cows, He bathes, He enjoys His supper and evening entertainment, and then He goes to sleep like all of us—we go to sleep for the whole night. But then, what does Kṛṣṇa do? He wakes up, climbs out of His window, and runs off again to the Vṛndāvana forest perpetually, the whole night. Only in the wee hours of the morning does He return, pretending that He has been sleeping in His bed all night long. We know this!"

"So my point is: does Kṛṣṇa really reside in Nandagrāma? No, He spends His days and nights in the forest and only comes home to bathe, to have a couple of cooked meals, and to collect and drop off His father’s cows. Kṛṣṇa uses Nandagrāma like an actor uses a dressing room. Kṛṣṇa lives in the forest; He just visits His family and kinsmen. That’s why I say He is actually a forest dweller that happens to take care of cows—a Gopāla—not a gopa like us who lives in villages, herds cows in the forest, and comes home to sleep at night. This is my conclusion."

The cowherd boys went silent for a moment, meditating on their friend’s words. A couple of boys had spoken, proposing different views, and then they started arguing amongst themselves, taking sides—some saying Kṛṣṇa is a cowherd, others insisting no, He is a forest dweller. Back and forth. It is described that just as things looked as if they might get out of hand, the sound of a flute wavered through the air, announcing that Kṛṣṇa was arriving. So, all of a sudden, the boys became dead silent. Then Kṛṣṇa arrived on the scene, and as He looked around, He became a little suspicious—He could pick up on the mood. He asked, "My dear friends, exactly what is it that you were all talking about?" The boys remained silent and slightly embarrassed until one boy blurted out, "What were we talking about? You!" I thought that was sweet. One boy blurted out, "What were we talking about? You!"

Then all the other boys raced to surround Kṛṣṇa and began calling out in unison, "Kṛṣṇa, what were you discussing?" Which is true, but Kṛṣṇa was still a little suspicious until all the boys came forward, and one by one, with deep, loving affection, they embraced Him. "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" One by one they embraced Him. "It was You, it was You, it was You! How could it be anything other than Kṛṣṇa?" Finally, Kṛṣṇa became pacified, no longer suspicious, and He smiled. All right, and as for their heated discussions as to whether Kṛṣṇa was a gopa or a forest dweller, that all just evaporated into the air. Ultimately, whatever Kṛṣṇa was or is, He is the only beloved of the cowherd boys' hearts. Their love for Him is so intense, so unconditional, that it is said it can accommodate His being as a cowherd boy, a forest dweller, or on some occasions, even as God. Sometimes, the cowherd boys realize Kṛṣṇa is God—oh, that’s cool—but what’s really important is that He is their friend, *sakhā*. He is their friend.

So that’s how it all happened; this discussion, "Gopa or forest dweller," it doesn't really make any difference. For all of them, He is the love of their life, whether He is a cowherd boy, a forest dweller, or even God. It is said, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī nicely glorifies and worships these cowherd boys, these friends of Kṛṣṇa, famously in his *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, text 42. A nice conclusion to this pastime, he writes:

"Affectionately protected by Kṛṣṇa, and their hearts wrapped in meditation on the particles of dust falling from the tip of His handsome lotus toenails, the Gopas experience a happiness greater than the happiness of many millions of universes. I worship these exalted Gopas."

Let’s recite that again: "Affectionately protected by Kṛṣṇa, and their hearts wrapped in meditation on the particles of dust falling from the tip of His handsome lotus toenails, the Gopas experience a happiness greater than the happiness of many millions of universes. I worship these exalted Gopas. They are wrapped in meditation just on the particles of dust falling from the tip of His handsome lotus toenails." Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.

So, we will move on. There is a lot of nectar in Vṛndāvana, our home—our original home—to where we aspire to go and live forever. Kṛṣṇa says in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, "Having once returned there, one never comes back to this material world." What better goal could one have in life? What more would one want to achieve in this life? But we have to keep our mind fixed on the goal because there are a lot of ways we can be diverted. Māyā-devī, she is very powerful, but Kṛṣṇa is more powerful. Let us remember—we can always remain connected to Kṛṣṇa through the simple process introduced by Caitanya Mahāprabhu: *kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa...*

So, now, further south according to the map from Vana-cariyā is a beautiful grove named Pārehi. There is a very sweet pastime that took place here where Kṛṣṇa once told the Gopīs that He was fed up with their teasing Him. We know from many of the pastimes this last year that sometimes the Gopīs, they tease Kṛṣṇa. These Gopīs are quite strong personalities; even today, I see in Vṛndāvana the girls are quite strong. So, Kṛṣṇa was fed up with their teasing. One day, the Gopīs and Kṛṣṇa had agreed to meet at Pārehi, and upon Kṛṣṇa’s arrival—or preparing for Kṛṣṇa’s arrival—it is described the Gopīs had made everything very nice with floral decorations, aromatic incense; they had prepared a nice sitting place for Kṛṣṇa and they prepared all types of nectarian fruit juices. It was a very nice mood; Kṛṣṇa is coming, Rādhā is going to meet Kṛṣṇa here, so let’s arrange everything very nicely: decorations, incense, a soft sitting place, fruit juices. But on His way to this particular rendezvous through the forest, Kṛṣṇa was thinking of ways to increase the Gopīs' love for Him. "How can I get them to love Me more?" So, He came up with a really interesting plan. 

What was that? Well, upon arriving at this particular spot, the rendezvous, He began by ignoring the girls' greetings. They had very cheerfully greeted Him; He ignored that. So, needless to say, the Gopīs were confused. Next, Kṛṣṇa didn't accept their invitation to even enter this particular grove; instead, He stood outside the entrance and said—it is quite famous, what He said. He said, "Young ladies, listen to Me. When I arrived here, I could tell from the smiles on your faces that you plan to yet again ridicule Me or perhaps set Me up for one of your tired village jokes. But I won't have any more of that behavior." This was all part of His plan to get them to love Him more. Hearing these words, the Gopīs stood stunned and speechless. So, Kṛṣṇa continued, "You may play innocent now," He said, "but how can that be? Time and time again, you all steal My flute and hide it in your braids, or accuse Me of being dull-witted for spending too much time with the cows. You may appear to welcome Me now, but where is that hospitality when I have walked through a thorn-filled jungle in the dead of night? And after My long sacrifice, you turn Me away at the door to some grove. You just turn Me away like you're not interested."

"And this silence! Where is your silence when, after dressing and ornamenting yourselves in ways that make the demigods fall from the sky, I express some appreciation for your beauty only to be called a fool? Some may think you are kind, but that kindness is a joke. You challenge Me—a prince who is duty-bound to accept any challenge—to a game of dice, and then gang up on Me and call Me a cheat when you lose! You call the prince the cheat when you lose! I can see My words have had a sobering effect on you, but how sober can you be when you forest maids tempt Me with honey-wine so that you can later accuse Me of being a drunkard?" 

These are strong words; that is all part of Kṛṣṇa’s plan. So, although reeling from Kṛṣṇa’s words, some Gopīs wanted to speak up, but Kṛṣṇa said, "Before you say anything, girls, listen to this: if you play any more of your tricks, if you belittle Me in any way, then... then you won't see Me anymore. Is that clear? Then you won't see Me anymore. Is that clear?" Now, with that, Kṛṣṇa stopped speaking and He stared at the Gopīs. It is also said that with the words, "You won't see Me," the whole forest became deathly quiet. And even then, the more contrary Gopīs who were about to argue with Kṛṣṇa, they held their breath. The ācāryas say, "What did Kṛṣṇa mean, 'You won't see Me anymore'?" The ācāryas reply: the Gopīs did not want to know, "What does it mean, 'You won't see Me anymore'?" They didn't even want to contemplate that. The ācāryas say, "Such a threat was not to be questioned and certainly not challenged."

So, after several long moments, the wind moved the leaves of the trees, breaking the silence. Then it is written that birds chirped, streams bubbled, and the other forest sounds resumed as soft background music to the Gopīs' unified voice. With that background music of the forest, the Gopīs said in a unified voice, "Śyāmasundara, it will always be as You wish."

"Śyāmasundara, it will always be as You wish." This is the heart of the Vrajavāsīs. This was Kṛṣṇa’s plan; He had spoken that way to get them to love Him more. That is certainly apparent when He said that, "You won't see Me anymore if you continue like this." The Gopīs didn't want to have anything to do with that statement. "Such a threat was not to be questioned and certainly not challenged." So, they said famously, "Śyāmasundara, it will always be as You wish." This is the surrendered mood of the Gopīs. "I know no one but Kṛṣṇa as my Lord. He shall always remain such, even if He handles Me roughly or makes Me broken-hearted by not embracing Me. He will always be my worshipable Lord, unconditionally." This is the mood of the Gopīs that Caitanya Mahāprabhu explains. We can see this mood of the Gopīs, and here we see it again: "Śyāmasundara, it will always be as You wish." So, pleased by the Gopīs' submissive attitude, Kṛṣṇa entered the grove, and there the Gopīs, it is described, waited on Him hand and foot as maidservants would wait on a king.

Now, because Kṛṣṇa had threatened the Gopīs that if they joked with Him or made fun of Him again, they would not see Him, afterwards—as we say in Sanskrit, *pāre* (afterwards)—the Gopīs called this grove Pārehi. They called it that because Kṛṣṇa had threatened the Gopīs that if they joked with Him again, He would not see them afterwards. But the Gopīs always referred to that grove as Pārehi. An interesting note: although it is a very beautiful place, the Gopīs never returned to Pārehi again. They never went back there. And the local custom is that once a pilgrim visits Pārehi, they never return as well. So, dear devotees, when we go on our Kārttika parikrama that we always talk about, we will go there one time, and like the Gopīs, we will never return. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So much nectar today. As we have mentioned many times, these pastimes we are discussing, this is the highest absolute truth. Never Vṛndāvana; never attained even by the greatest yogīs, the greatest mystics, the greatest scholars, ascetics—even for *bhaktas*, devotees of the Lord—rare to attain pure devotion and be qualified to go back home, back to Godhead. But it’s something that has been introduced to us by Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas for the express purpose of going there one day. Otherwise, what is the meaning of the saṅkīrtana movement if it is not meant to deliver anything mundane and material? It is not meant to just liberate us from the repetition of birth and death; it is not even meant to take us to Vaikuṇṭha. The saṅkīrtana movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is meant to take us to the topmost planet in the spiritual sky, Goloka Vṛndāvana. It is possible, and we can hope and pray very intensely. Like that, unless you want a great goal—a very high goal—unless you want it very intensely, chances are you won't make it. Like when you go to college or university, you’ve chosen some particular subject—doctor, lawyer, let us say, for example—it is a high goal; you have to be very determined. In medical school, a lot of students drop out; in law school, a lot drop out. The Bible says, "Many are called, but few are chosen." So, we have to be very determined to go back home. We can't spend time just procrastinating. "Yes, I am a little older, I will be more serious." For now, we have to constantly have this *lobha*—this greed—for Vraja, for service to the divine couple in Vṛndāvana. So, we have to hope against hope, like we talked about in another lecture, that we will make it.

Interestingly enough, this feeling of disqualification that we have, that can be an incentive. Feeling oneself unqualified can be an incentive because that makes us fully dependent on Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. We try our best, but we know that it is only with Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Therefore, when we chant, we chant from the heart: "My dear Lord, my dear energy of the Lord, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please, please, please pick me up from this ocean of death. Fix me as an atom at Your lotus feet, take me home to Vraja; that is where I want to be." This attitude of, you could say, extreme humility—"I am not qualified, I am not qualified, I depend on Your mercy"—this attitude of extreme humility is nicely described in a beautiful poem by a medieval poet named Vaiṣṇava Dāsa.

I would like to finish today with his poem because this feeling of inadequacy brings about a mood of humility and, therefore, a full dependence on the mercy of the Lord. It is a good combination. This is a beautiful prayer by this great medieval Vaiṣṇava poet, Vaiṣṇava Dāsa. He entitles his poem "The Dreams of a Pauper." "Pauper" means a poor man. He called it "The Dreams of a Pauper," and this is his poem:

"Hari! Hari! What nonsense do you say? On one hand is Kṛṣṇa-prema, the essence of all good fortune, and on the other hand is a useless waste of a person like me. O my mad mind, how can these two ever come together? There is a place in the spiritual world called Vṛndāvana, which is the essence of unlimited Vaikuṇṭha planets. In that Vṛndāvana stays the complete manifestation of Godhead named Kṛṣṇa-candra, along with the greatest of His lovers named Śrī Rādhikā-ṭhākurāṇī. Both of Them enjoy pastimes along with Their sakhīs. To be engaged in arranging for such loving pastimes in the association of the sakhīs is not possible even for Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, or Lord Śeṣa. How then can a wretched person as myself, who is the personified abode of all sins, ever think to attain such a position? A dwarf may touch the moon, a lame person may cross the ocean, a mute person may recite the Vedas, the sun may even rise in the west, camphor may start giving off a bad odor, and stones lying on the street may one day turn into touchstones—all these things may happen one day, but I will never be able to receive the darśana of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava."

Vaiṣṇava Dāsa thinks that his hopes are as useless as those of a poor man who has taken intoxication; such a poor person can only dream of such things while lying down semi-conscious. There is extreme humility. Such humility is helpful on the path back home to our beloved, and when Kṛṣṇa sees this combination of extreme humility plus an intense desire to achieve Goloka, no doubt He makes arrangements to bring that devotee home. I would like to finish with a verse from our beloved Gosvāmī that puts that into proper perspective—that Kṛṣṇa will make an arrangement for such a sincere devotee to make it back home. Again, I quote from *Padāvalī*, this is verse 102, and again, I conclude:

"A dark-complexioned thief has stolen my heart. Look, He has already stolen the sins of surrendered devotees, the life breath of Pūtanā, the bracelets and garments of the young Gopīs, and the eyes and hearts of the saintly devotees. Once more, a dark-complexioned thief has stolen my heart. Look, He has already stolen the sins of surrendered devotees, the life breath of Pūtanā, the bracelets and garments of the young Gopīs, and the eyes and hearts of the saintly devotees."

We can make it with Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. We just have to be humble and serve Śrīla Prabhupāda to the best of our ability and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But thank you; I hope you enjoyed our travels today through the Vṛndāvana forest. With the greatest pleasure, I will return in a couple of days, and I will share with you more of the unlimited glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana, the very goal of our lives. Thank you, thank you, thank you. 

*Śrī Śrī Gaurāṅga-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvana-īśvarī kī jaya!*""