"*00449*.*
"So we're gathered here today, we're assembled to prepare ourselves for the appearance day of one of ISKCON's most favorite deities or favorite Lordships. That is the best way to prepare for such important days: to hear and chant about the glories of any particular Incarnation, or the appearance day of a devotee, that awakens our *bhāva*, that awakens our love for their personality. So this is, you could say, our third class in the series. We started off at Narasiṁhapālī, and we spoke yesterday and are speaking again today.

Yes, because like when you go to the market and you're shopping for mangoes—now it's mango season—you're shopping for mangoes, then you pick up two mangoes and you compare them, "Which one is better? Which is superior? I'll buy that mango." Now, the mangoes are a little green, but you might already find a mango that's yellow with some black spots on it; that means it's ripe. Of course, mango is the king of fruits. You can take a green mango and make *ācāra*—means like, not pickle; *ācāra* is like—India is so long I forget the equivalent English. But you can take so much, you know, to make your meal a little spicy, a little hot for digestion, when you can eat mangoes all day long. That's the fruit that we don't want to taste.

Here is a few verses from—this is—yeah, of course, I believe this is Canto 7, Chapter 7, text 2. May have to be corrected on that. *Uni* said, "My dear King Yudhiṣṭhira, when Lord Viṣṇu in the form of Varāha, the boar, killed Hiraṇyākṣa, Hiraṇyākṣa's brother Hiraṇyakaśipu was extremely angry and began to lament. Filled with rage and biting his lips, he gazed at the sky with eyes that blazed in anger, making the whole sky smoky. Thus he began to talk, exhibiting his terrible teeth, fierce glance, and frowning eyebrows. Terrible to see, he took up his weapon, a trident, and thus began speaking to his associates, the assembled demons, Śakuni and other demons: 'All of you kindly hear me attentively and then act according to my words without delay. Although the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu was always equal to both of us, namely the demigods and the demons, this time, being devoutly worshiped by the demigods, he has taken their side and helped them kill Him.'

"The Supreme Personality of Godhead has given up his natural tendency of equality towards the demons and demigods. Although He is the Supreme Person, now influenced by *māyā*, He has assumed the form of a boar to please His devotees, the demigods, just as a restless child leans towards someone. I shall therefore sever Lord Viṣṇu's head from His body by my trident, and with the profuse blood from His body, I shall please my brother Hiraṇyākṣa, who was so fond of sucking blood. Thus shall I become peaceful."

Oh wow. So here in this verse we hear about the demoniac mentality. It is again, why are we interested in hearing so much about the activities? Because by hearing about Hiraṇyakaśipu, at least we'll understand that we don't want to be like him. There's actually a school of philosophy which employs this technique of elimination in understanding God; that the Absolute Truth is *not* this, it's *not* this, it's *not* that, it's *not* this, it's *not* that. Like this, and by eliminating everything that isn't God, we hope to one day understand God. That's a very complex process. It's better just to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa; Kṛṣṇa will reveal Himself to us. But there exists this school of philosophy.

So hearing about a demon like Hiraṇyakaśipu, we understand, "I don't want to be like that." And conversely, later in the chapter, by hearing about Prahlāda Mahārāja, the great devotee of the Lord, we realize what we would like to be. Yeah, there's really only two choices. Śāstra states that there are two classes of men and women in this world: the divine and the demoniac. *Sūtras*, very nice verse: "Within this world, there are two classes of men: divine and demoniac."

But the media is, the demons and devotees, they lived in different universes. That made it easy, right? The universe is quite big; therefore, every universe has its own Brahmā. A little universe, Brahmā has one head; and if it's a little bit bigger, he has four heads; but the big, big universe, Brahmā has 64 heads, and it's a gigantic universe—he has 64 million heads. Yes, the devotees lived in one universe, and the demons, they lived in another universe. So, oh, that's great! They lived on different planets within the universe. They lived in different cities. 

They live in the same body. I was saying in English, when somebody is really bad, he'll say, "The devil made me do it." You know, we have the good and we have the bad, don't we? We have the bad—we think bad thoughts sometimes, and we get, we turn red, we get embarrassed. *Sūtra* describes that sometimes at the bottom of the river there's some silt, there's some mud, and when that mud gets moved, the little bubbles come up to the surface of the lake. Found in our hearts, there's this mud, this contamination, and sometimes it gets moved, and materialistic thoughts—lusty thoughts, or greedy thoughts, or angry—they come to our mind just like that. Usually, if you don't entertain someone—someone comes to your house as a guest—do you ignore them? You don't feed them, you don't entertain them, the guest leaves. So, how to get rid of these bad thoughts which embarrass us, because we're trying to become pure devotees? Just don't entertain them. Don't think about them. Just ignore them, and they'll go away.

The divine and the demoniac are in the heart of everyone, and in this world we see there are still these classes. There's, you know, ladies and gentlemen, and there's ruffians and dacoits, like that. So, when the pious and the impious live together, there's bound to be friction. We see so much friction in the world today, especially different forces throughout this planet—there's divine and demoniac—and it's causing friction. And this includes the devotees. This includes devotees; this includes devotees and demoniacs. Sometimes there's friction between the Hare Krishna movement and people who try to stop it.

Let us just say that devotees are going back to Godhead. *Oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam*—my favorite verses—learning devotees are always looking towards the lotus feet of the Lord. Devotees are always looking, trying to see the lotus feet of the Lord. They're going upwards. By the end of their devotional service, their desire to see the lotus feet of the Lord—high, the devotees are going upwards, and demoniac people, they're going downwards. Kṛṣṇa says, "Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest amongst men, I perpetually cast into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life." Down, down, down.

What does that make? Friction. In America, we have the—it's called the Boy Scouts. I think in other countries they had scouts also, and you know, it's part to get our badge, to be a good scout, we had to start a fire with a little rope and two sticks, and a spark would come. Wow. It would put the leaves on fire. Friction causes fire. So when this friction takes place between the demons and the devotees, like this, you know, we're going up, they're going down, like this—it creates some friction. Sometimes there's big opposition to our movement. When there's friction like this, fire comes. They say poetically that fire that comes from the friction between demons and devotees, that fire is Nṛsiṁhadeva.

So fire has two potencies: fire can destroy and fire can purify. They burn garbage; sometimes we throw the paper and the fire destroys the paper. But fire also cooks our offering to the Lord, so fire can also purify. Nṛsiṁhadeva appears as fire; He destroys the demons by killing them, and He purifies the devotees of any last tinge of material desire. Yeah, you understand? Fire can do two things: it can purify or destroy. If you want to purify a knife before doing an operation, you put it under fire; kills all the germs, yes. Nṛsiṁhadeva's fiery appearance—he kills the demons, but by his appearance, he purifies the devotees of any last tinge of material desires. There's no doubt that Hiraṇyakaśipu was destroyed. Sometimes in big battles, people go missing—you know, they call that "missing in action" in the military—you know, we don't find the body, the person's not here, so we say, "missing in action." So Hiraṇyakaśipu is not missing in action. He was laying there with no intestines and no heart. We mentioned yesterday that along with his intestines, a flower garland and a garland of intestines came out. His false ego came out, his material desires. He was purified. And he was liberated. So the Lord destroyed more than his body; He destroyed his material desires.

Now, what's interesting is Prahlāda was also purified by the appearance of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. Ninth Canto, Chapter 7, verse number 6—it's really interesting. By the touch of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva's hand on Prahlāda Mahārāja's head, Prahlāda was completely freed of all material contamination and desires, as if he had been thoroughly cleansed. Therefore, he became at once transcendentally situated, and all the symptoms of ecstasy became manifest in his body. His heart was filled with love and his eyes with tears, and thus he was able to completely capture the lotus feet of the Lord within the core of his heart. That's really interesting. Prahlāda was completely free of all material contamination and desires. How can we, how can the Bhāgavatam say he has material desires? He was born in a demoniac family, and as a result, demoniac blood flowed throughout his body. By association, something rubbed off. It means that a soul who never falls down, who never becomes contaminated—he's one of the twelve *mahājanas*—but out of his kindness, he came to this material world and accepted a so-called material body and showed us how to act, especially during times of danger, how to depend upon the Lord.

Another *ācārya* comments on this particular sentence in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that he was freed from more material contamination and desires as a child, says if there was any contamination in the heart of Prahlāda Mahārāja, it's the sinful reactions of the followers that he accepted. Just like one of the responsibilities of the spiritual master is that at the moment of initiation, he accepts the *karma* of the disciple. He's accepting the sinful reactions of the disciple. We must always remember that our spiritual master is so kind, that alone, that debt we cannot repay, what to speak of the knowledge he gives us to free us from material existence. We can never pay the debt to our spiritual master.

Sometimes when the spiritual master gets sick, then the disciples, they have tried to improve their devotional service, thinking, "Maybe I've made some mistake in my spiritual master's—he's accepting this sinful reaction." He actually says—he writes that after initiation, sometimes the spiritual master has to see a bad dream. Even in ordinary life, we work off our *karma* in various ways, but you can also work off your *karma* in your dreams. Like you have a nightmare, that's one way that we work off our *karma*. So anyone in this world, you know, to deal with your own karmic reactions is one thing; to accept the *karma* of someone else and someone else and someone else—to accept 50,000 disciples—he deals with that if he has very firm faith and *nāma-ruci*, taste in the holy name. Because no sin can stand very long in the presence of the sound vibration. 

The two instructions Śrīla Prabhupāda gave to me as a young boy, he said, "You preach boldly and you have faith in the holy name." That faith, the result of that faith is very variegated, many, many things that you can, you know, destroy sinful reactions, you know, you can destroy negativity, you can destroy evil. But the sound of Kṛṣṇa's name, fear personified is afraid of Kṛṣṇa's holy name. So the guru has to—one of his main calls—he has the faith, he has to relish chanting. And then he can accept so many disciples. Yes, a warning: it is that one should not accept more disciples than he can actually handle. Now, that faith in our spiritual master, that faith in the holy name, we should also aspire to have the same faith. Immediate, father like son.

Hiraṇyakaśipu was not really materially contaminated, but like Arjuna, he accepted a position of a so-called—I wouldn't say Arjuna was fallen, Prahlāda was fallen—but they compromised the situation on our behalf to show us how to have faith, especially in this age, chanting God's name. He thought his son was very contaminated because he was a devotee of Viṣṇu. "He had to be contaminated, devotee of Viṣṇu, you got brainwashed." There's a point where he took Prahlāda on his lap and he inquired, "My dear Prahlāda, my little son of five years old, what is the best thing you've learned in school today?" It's very nice, you're eager to chant my glories. So when we're young, we learn from our teachers. "Where has he learned this nonsense, Viṣṇu?" They replied, "From the publication of *vaiṣṇavas*."

Can begin when on the path of perfection, but sometimes like Hiraṇyakaśipu, the parents of devotees are unfortunately not knowing the glories of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they consider that it's a great sin to associate with *vaiṣṇavas*. I don't know if any of you experienced this, your parents were a little upset, or maybe really upset, that you joined the Hare Krishna movement. My mom was a scientist, she graduated Phi Beta Kappa, a very prestigious position from the Stanford University in California in America. So when I joined the movement, ooh, my mom became mad. "Foolish boy, I told you to always cut your hair, please grow your hair back and stop this nonsense about God as a person."

Of course, after some time, many parents become favorable, and especially are seen in some countries, the parents, they end up becoming devotees and accepting the same gurus as their children. Even my mom, bless her soul, her last six months of her life, when she had cancer, she just couldn't accept that life was just chemicals and when she died she ceased to exist. She was an intelligent woman. So she asked my brother at that time to go out into the garage—I'd sent a lot of books home over the years—she said, "Get that bag of Bhagavad-gītā from your brother, I want to read the Bhagavad-gītā." And she inquired from my brother that, "I've heard that your big brother (me) has a tape ministry in London, so order all the tapes and mail them here to me." So my brother ordered them, my mom would sit on the porch—I didn't know this, he didn't want to disturb me—she'd read Bhagavad-gītā and, you know, underline it with magic marker, yellow, green, blue with arrows, "Ask Brian about this and that," and she'd listen all day to my lectures on her headphones, like this, for hours and hours a day.

At that time my brother didn't know anything about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So to make a long story short, when she died, she was on her bed in her bedroom, she died. My brother was crying, and with her last breath, my mother looked up at my brother and said, "Do not lament, I am not this body, I am a spirit soul, I am going to Kṛṣṇa." She died. This is the power of Śrīla Prabhupāda's purports in his books, "Whatever one thinks of at the moment of death, one will attain that." So my mother was thinking of Kṛṣṇa. So here I am, 52 years, that's right, to practice, I don't know what my hopes are, I haven't even realized Him, "I'm not this body," and where's my mother? She chanted Kṛṣṇa's name, "Kṛṣṇa, yes, I'm coming."

The power of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is beyond even our imagination. But that's not always the case; some parents think, "Oh, this is a great sin." There was a cartoon in the 1970s in the newspaper, and it was about a young girl, she met devotees and she was associating with devotees, going to the temple, etc. So one day she came home from school dressed in a *sārī*. She said, "Mom, Dad, look, I've given up meat-eating, fish, and eggs." And their parents said, "Whoa, that's terrible! The Hare Krishnas are making you vegetarian, that's terrible." The next day she came home dressing, or *sārī*, she came home from the temple and she said to her parents, "Mom and Dad, I've given up all kinds of mental speculation and gambling." And they went, "Oh, that's terrible!" Next day she came home, "Mom, I've given up all kinds of drugs and intoxication and alcohol and all these things." "Oh, that's terrible!" How does it end? It's been a long day, and she came home one day and she said, "Mom, Dad, I'm pregnant." "Oh, that's wonderful, honey, that's wonderful! Very nice."

Is that how it goes? How does it go? You don't remember, let's cut this out of the video. I don't remember how it goes. Yes, we'll use the example of how parents can be inimical, with the example of Girirāja Swami. Oh, I know how the story goes! I'll retail it. She comes home and she tells her parents—I don't actually remember—it was a cartoon like 40 years ago. Anyway, tomorrow I'll tell it right. Girirāja Mahārāja, when he joined the Hare Krishna movement, his father was very angry. He was a wealthy judge in a court in Boston. 

Oh, I remember the story now. Okay, here it goes, rewind. One day the girl comes home and says—the parents are so engrossed in watching television, they're hardly hearing what she's saying. She says, "Mom, Dad, I'm so sorry, I've started taking intoxication and drugs." And they say, "That's okay, honey, we're watching TV." It actually comes home, she says, "Mom and Dad, I've got this bad habit of gambling now." "That's okay, honey, we're watching TV still." The next day she comes home, "Mom and Dad, I'm very promiscuous in my sex life, I'm pregnant." "It's okay, honey, we're watching TV." "Mom, I joined the Hare Krishna movement." "What?! What'd you do?!" "I tried to hurt you." Yeah, thank you, Krishna, I got the intelligence.

Girirāja Mahārāja, when he joined, his father was also very angry. One day his father came to the temple and he wrote a check for one million dollars—that's like 10 million dollars in today's money—"But you have to leave that spiritual master, Prabhupāda, and leave the Hare Krishna movement. Here's the pen." He put it on the table and he, you know, like the movies, he moves the pen, "You take that pen and sign the check, that million dollars is yours." A lot of money. Girirāja just smiled. He pushed the pen back. He said, "Father, all glorious." 

So materialistic people, they consider Kṛṣṇa consciousness is contamination, whereas devotees consider material life is a contamination. One man's food is another man's poison. It says that whatever contamination may have been there in the heart of Prahlāda was purified by the touch of the Lord's hand, His paw. On both sides, seven lanes. You have to go from the slow lane to the middle lane to the fast lane to the very fast lane. This is how we can't just stop here, we can't go backwards, we have to move forward, move forward to the fast lane and never look back. Prabhupāda told one of my godbrothers, he said—I won't mention his name—he said, "The problem with you, my dear disciple, is you're not afraid of *māyā*." Yeah, and can fall down. Who comes from the spiritual world, who became a pure devotee in his lifetime, they'll never fall down. 

Bharata Mahārāja, when he was chanting, he would cry. He was at the stage of *bhāva*, which is just before *prema*. Many lectures have been given on that subject, but what happened? There were some remnants, just like maybe you know, you have camphor, and it's in the room, and you take the camphor out of the room, you can still smell the camphor in the room. There's some remnants, very subtle, isn't it? Like *pūjārīs* know, you have a big camphor, but you take it to the next room, close the door, you still smell the camphor, it's still present in a very subtle way. So we may not have very gross desires, very, very subtle, but even the smallest desire can make us take birth again. He was crying because of chanting, there was something there like camphor, like that, and he got attached to a deer. Just like I was thinking the other day, this little dog is coming to my apartment every day, and she's so cute, little puppy. So I've been feeding her and I'm thinking, "She likes to come to my apartment." Lo and behold, the next afternoon, am I walking around, rushing me to Kunja, I see she's going to every door! Everyone's feeding her, she makes everyone love her. I'm thinking, "Whoa, I thought she was my doggy!" Whoa, wait a minute, Bharata Mahārāja. Remember he was playing, previously. 

So hearing these things, we become a little afraid. He has one hand like this, you see many of his poses, he's like this, this is called *abhaya-mudrā*. It means the blessing of fearlessness. This is the mudrā, the hand mudra: "Don't be afraid, take shelter of Me." If you're very small, the secret to success is to take shelter of something very great. One time Prabhupāda was walking on the beach in Juhu, in Mumbai, 20 yards ahead there were some crabs on the beach. As the devotees approach, the crabs, they went in the water. Have you ever seen that? They always go sideways, it's a funny creature, *karkata*. They walk sideways, they don't go frontwards. Don't become a crab, it's embarrassing, "Where are you going?" It's a crab. So Prabhupāda asked the devotees, they were all scientists, you know, the scientists, the scientists. So Prabhupāda said, "Why have the crabs gone like that into the water?" "When we step on the ground, it makes an electrical current that goes to the sand, and it goes into the brain of the C-fibers in the brain of the crab, and tells it to go left." Prabhupāda said, "What is it?" Prabhupāda said, "No, they're very small, and we are very big. They can understand there's danger, so they're very small, so they take in shelter of something very great, the ocean, so that they won't be harmed. They know where to take shelter." Very small, empty, susceptible to some great danger, but if you know where to take shelter in something great, you can be saved. So what's the greatest of the great? Kṛṣṇa. And where is He present? In the sound of His name. So if there's danger, I'll take the low road, you'll go to heaven, and I'll go to hell. There's two choices in this world, divinity and demoniac. You have to make a choice, and you have to make a full choice, not one foot in there and one foot here, no, fully surrendered.

Emerson said, "You can judge a letter, judge a lecture, how good a lecture is by how many times the speaker said Kṛṣṇa." He was the perfect materialist. You can get that credit in the, what's it called? All right, yeah, Guinness Book of World Records. He's the, he was the perfect materialist, we can take an educated guess, he achieved all his material desires, Hiraṇyakaśipu. He conquered the subterranean planets, the middle planetary, and he conquered the demigods. The demigods were all his servants. It's described in the Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa that Nārada Muni was the foot-servant for some time of Hiraṇyakaśipu, being given massage, "Here, my god." But he wasn't happy, and what's worse is as a result of his material desires, he became increasingly inimical towards God. 

This is an interesting subject, we'll discuss a little bit, that as a result of, you know, being a great materialist, he became inimical towards God. How so? Because materialism gives one a sense of false security, and what's more, pride. "I don't need anyone's help, everyone needs my help, and I'm safe and secure, I have so much money in the bank." Net, *pralambha*—need, problems. Some materialistic people, they become very puffed up with their material prestige. Sometimes such materialists even challenge God. Yes, in all these demons, they try to kill the Lord with swords and clubs, right? We read it throughout the Bhāgavatam. Nowadays, we try to kill God with words—atheistic philosophers that try to decry the existence of God by speaking, and they convince a lot of the people who believe, "God? With words, there is no God, God is dead." Really? Yes, okay, thank you. Belief is destroyed in the Western countries, impersonalism and voidness. And Prabhupāda was fighting this Māyāvāda philosophy, which takes place nowadays in the West in the form of science—there's no soul, there's no God, there's no life after death, atheism. Prabhupāda came specifically, and he prepared his own, um, *praṇāma* mantra, that second *praṇāma* mantra. He who came to the West to destroy this atheistic concept of life—"There's no God." Prabhupāda one time, "Here's God! Take Him!" unto his disciples in a lecture, "Here's God, take Him!" All glorious. He took on the whole Western world. 

How can a living entity challenge the Supreme Personality of Godhead? It's crazy. We were driving from Kolkata here to Māyāpur, we went through a little village, and the car slowed down a little bit, and one little tiny dog—must be about this big—tiny little dog came running out of the store and started chasing the car, trying to bite the wheels of our car, you know. I said, "Watch out, watch out, little dog!" This little dog thought he could bring down this big automobile. It's insanity! You've seen how the dogs chase cars sometimes. So the atheists, they try to decry the existence of God, same thing, little tiny, "There is no God! There is no God!"

Um, it's interesting that when Hiraṇyakaśipu was fighting with Nṛsiṁhadeva, and you know, he's thinking he could kill Him, the Lord grabbed him very playfully and then let him go, and he grabbed him again playfully and let him go, like a cat when it catches a mouse, it kind of plays with it, then it lets it go. So that's what happened, that Nṛsiṁhadeva was, you know, just showing how powerful He is, catching when it comes—you pop, go away. In the same way, the Lord is allowing this present materialistic civilization to play around for some time, but it's short, uncertain. He said that when their sinful reactions become activated by material nature, it'll be a big reaction. Yeah, "Letting them play, okay, you having these, you know, nonsense diplomacy and politics and quarrels, you're letting them play." But eventually, just like Nṛsiṁhadeva took him, so eventually, this materialistic civilization will come to an end. It, it *will* occur, it has to.

So we should follow the footsteps of Prahlāda. He can also appear before us and deliver us if necessary. As we mentioned before, that was one incarnation for one devotee. So, like, there's lots of devotees now, is the Lord going to incarnate for each and every one of us? One incarnation for one devotee. So how many incarnations are needed now? There's so many, tens of hundreds of thousands, millions of devotees on the earth now. By Prabhupāda's mercy, they have to wait for the Nṛsiṁha to come. Yeah, that was a special pastime, incredible pastime. But what's more incredible is the appearance of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He appears in this planet, even if you don't want to be a devotee, He makes you a devotee. He's a very interesting Incarnation because He goes first for the lowest, and then the highest. Actually, Prabhupāda, He spoke to the intelligentsia of society, practitioners, all these educated, Nitāi, with Hōlī. He went to find the most fallen, the worst cases—the Jagāi-Mādhāis—to prove the power of chanting. Better to be born in Kali-yuga; you get such a yuga, such a yuga for life. God-delivered. Kali-yuga, everyone's fallen, but Mahāprabhu comes and He gives mercy to everyone. And you're living in His *dhāma*, Māyāpur-dhāma. You're so blessed.

Verse 75, very relevant verse. He's appealing to Lord Caitanya. It's such a beautiful verse: "Oh my master, you are the protector of hundreds and hundreds of fallen souls. Somehow or other, having been tricked by you, I, who was once a sinner, am now a surrendered soul. Kindly protect me, who am frightened by this dangerous age of Kali, for it is known that you shelter those who take shelter of you. What more can I say, oh Gorācandra?" Wow, that would make a good tattoo, but what? We have tattoos in the heart. You have these verses. What a verse: "Oh my master, you are the protector of hundreds and hundreds of fallen souls. Somehow or other, having been tricked by you, I, who was once a sinner, am now a surrendered soul. Kindly protect me, who am frightened by this dangerous age of Kali, for it is known that you shelter those who take shelter of you. What more can I say, oh Gaurācandra?" 

Do once it comes in contact with this liberating movement, which gives *prema*—what is here she do, once having been saved? That's made very clear by Śrīla Prabhupāda, "What is our responsibility after being saved? What are we supposed to do?" Verse 76: "Incessantly they discussed the narrations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's pastimes with one another and recite the names of Kṛṣṇa which bestow pure devotion. Then, overwhelmed with ecstasy, they preached the mahā-mantra throughout the earth, when Śrī Gaura descends to destroy the sins of the age of Kali." It's very clear what we do. In this regard, Prabhupāda once said that our temples are bases for going out and preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and that's especially true here in our ISKCON Māyāpur project. This is our most important project. This is our world headquarters for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It's a flagship temple. It's a flag. We have this saying in English that you know, some store chain, they have lots of stores, but they have their best store called their "flagship store." So in ISKCON, this is our flagship temple, our Māyāpur temple. 

It is not just a place to live—this is a good place to live, yes, it's a good place to live—but ultimately, it's also meant to be a base where we train future preachers to go out and preach all over the world. Here you get the best impression of Caitanya Mahāprabhu's movement. In the *gurukula*, um, mainly this is a community of householders, like babies everywhere. They're like falling from the trees like mangoes, they're like everywhere, but they're all the same age and they're all blonde, I don't know what it is, I'm walking around like, "Yeah." This should be the mentality of all the householders: to train and inspire their children to one day grow up and leave the base, go to China, go to Paraguay, go to New Zealand, go to the Antarctic, and share what they've learned in this flagship temple in the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. This is how the parents are thinking. All the parents, they want their kids to go back to Godhead. It's the natural thought of a parent, "My child will make it back to Godhead." 

The path back to Godhead is by serving the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Lord Caitanya. He also says that by serving the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Lord Caitanya, one gains the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. This is the most important project. Of course, everything's important. I'm so impressed with the deity worship here today. Kṛṣṇa was blue—how do they put that sandalwood paste and make Him blue? The deity worship is just astounding here, the architecture of the temple and the organ and everything's astounding. But really, we're training preachers here. Gṛhasthas live to make their children devotees of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and in small ways and big ways contribute to the spreading of Kṛṣṇa consciousness around the world. Youth is meant for acquiring knowledge, material knowledge, but mostly spiritual knowledge. So these young boys and young girls, they're absorbing, they're chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, and they're absorbing this knowledge. One day they will be the representatives who go out and preach all over the world.

And again, we'll conclude with the verse by Śrīla Prabhupāda, "The kids will go back to Godhead, their parents, if you don't make it, if your kids make it, then you go, you also get to go." Yeah, yes, going back to Godhead. And he said, "Wait a minute, stop the plane! Why you're going back to Godhead? Where's my mom?" "But your mom's not qualified." "Take me back, she's my mom!" All right, they took her mom and they all went back to Godhead. This is parenthood. You make a big sacrifice and you're blessed.

He's eleven. What are most eleven-year-old boys doing in America, Australia, and, you know, England? What are they doing? He's at every one of my classes, listening attentively to every one of my characters. Whenever I walk out of the house, he's there to walk with me. That'll give him a big round of applause. You're chanting 16 rounds. Those who chant the names of Hari while learning knowledge and following the practices taught by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the worshiping *vaiṣṇavas* all certainly go to the abode of Śrī Hari. Appearance day in a few days. All the kids, all their parents, again.""