"*00413*.*
"# A Transcendental Tie! - Kartik Parikrama 2024

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Dear devotees, we are now with you in the forest of Vṛndāvana, and here we can understand what Vṛndāvana was like 500 or 5,000 years ago.

The other day, I found a beautiful scripture that helps us understand how dear Vṛndāvana is to Kṛṣṇa. In this place, Kṛṣṇa addresses Uddhava, saying (as found in *Uddhava-sandēśa*): "Of course, there are a large number of cities on this earth, and all of them are blessed by my presence in the form of a deity that satisfies the minds of devotees like you. But my dear friend, I sincerely swear to you again and again that nothing gives me more joy than the simple village of Vraja." Just look at how dear this forest is to Kṛṣṇa; because it is dear to Him, it is dear to us. We read the prayer of Rūpa Gosvāmī, who continues to pray for the forest of Vṛndāvana: "Is there anyone who has not very quickly attained supreme transcendental bliss by serving you? That is why I surrender to you and very humbly appeal and pray: please be kind to me and personally take care that I understand how to receive the gift of your worship."

Then he repeats this in the third text: "Everyone says that the Lord is playing with His dear Rādhā; knowing this, I want to take shelter of your feet. Please make it so that the tree of my desires to love Them bears fruit." These are beautiful verses glorifying Vṛndāvana as the heart of a pure devotee. Thus, we can see that Vṛndāvana is technically transcendental, but it consists of twelve forests. Usually, when we say "Vṛndāvana," we think of one forest; in fact, there are twelve of them together. The *śāstra* describes seven forests on the western part of the Yamunā and five forests on the eastern side. Today, we are in one of the twelve forests: Bāndīr-vana. The surprising thing is that we, from the parikramā group, have not come here for quite a long time. I cannot answer why we haven't been here before, because this place is perfect for us. We know that Kṛṣṇa has a huge number of names.

One of His names is Bāndī-bihārī, which means "Lord of Bāndī-vana," and sometimes devotees address Him as the Lord of this forest. When we have initiation, I will certainly use this name, and someone will get this name and say, "Yes, I was just hugging a tree, praying to get this." Another beautiful name of Kṛṣṇa is Bāndī-bihārī-ṭan, translated as "the one who dances in the forest of Bāndī." Maybe someone else will get such a beautiful name. Sometimes a name is Bāndī-tāṭa-māna—repeat after me: *Bāndī-tāṭa-māna*. Some of the girls want such a name, and they will come to know the meaning: it refers to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the one who decorates the forest of Bāndī with Her sakhīs. Vṛndāvana is very unique; all the forests of Vṛndāvana are very important, and in *Mathurā Māhātmya*, it is said that it took some time, but we found those *ślokas* which glorify this forest, starting from verse 354.

In the *Mathurā Māhātmya*, it is described that one forest is called Bāndī-vana, and it is very dear to all yogīs. If you ever see it, you will not have to be born from the womb of a woman again. When I came here, I thought, "Well, where are these yogīs?" The person who visits Bāndī-vana—the best of all forests—and sees the deity of the Lord, is never born again. Verse 356 of this work is very interesting:

"The person who fasts here and controls his senses, and is washed in Bāndī-vana, is freed from all sins and goes to Indraloka."

We may ask, "Why go to Indraloka?" And we will ask him to come back and tell us where it is and how it is. But the ācāryas comment and say that "Indra" in this case does not mean the abode of the demigod Indra; in fact, it means the Supreme Abode of the wealth of the Lord. The word *Indra* consists of the initial *id* (or *iḍā*), which in Sanskrit translates to "great wealth," and Kṛṣṇa is the one who owns all wealth. Therefore, understanding this, we can perceive this *śloka* differently: the person who fasts, controls his senses, and is washed in Bāndī-vana, is freed from all sins and goes to the one who has the highest wealth—Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His abode of Goloka Vṛndāvana. This is a technical detail, but it is very interesting how our ācāryas connect any *śloka* with Kṛṣṇa.

We will not cancel the move to Indraloka; let him go to Goloka now, but he will certainly return to tell us how it is. Actually, we will not do that, because if he goes there, he will definitely not return, as Lord Kṛṣṇa says in the *Bhagavad-gītā* that whoever has reached that abode will never return. So, try to stay. Who wants to stay? Maybe everyone. In any case, we will all end up there someday. One day, during a conversation with my spiritual brother, he said that one day we will return there and recognize each other. We will definitely recognize him by his famous fashionable kurta, and we will recognize others by their style. In fact, no one here wears anything else! 

Kṛṣṇa performs a lot of wonderful pastimes here. The most famous place is Bāndī-vaṭa, the famous banyan tree. When the Lord was here on Earth showing His games, this banyan tree was so massive that its branches covered everything. How can a tree spread for thousands of kilometers? The peculiarity of the banyan tree is that its roots hang down, touch the ground, and spread further. I remember how one day Śrīla Prabhupāda mentioned that between Māyāpur and Calcutta, there is a banyan tree that reaches 50 miles in width—it is so massive. I always think about this when I am traveling from Calcutta to Māyāpur. That banyan tree was so big and attractive that from afar it resembled a beautiful cloud. Its branches were so long and wide that the cowherd boys, together with Kṛṣṇa, could cross the Yamunā along them. Imagine the size of this banyan tree! The cowherd boys could not swim to it, but simply walk along its branches to the other side. To some extent, this tree still exists, and we, of course, will need spiritual vision to see how it spreads and crosses the Yamunā, but it is still here. 

Also, next to this unique tree, there is an equally famous well. This story is very interesting. Right here in Bāndī-vaṭa, Kṛṣṇa once killed Vatsāsura. This demon tried to deceive Kṛṣṇa; he came in the form of a calf, crept into His herd, and tried to get closer to kill Him. You can read in the *Bhāgavatam*, or the *Source of Eternal Pleasure*, how Kṛṣṇa killed this demon. But the gopīs, commanding transcendental humor, decided to say that it was a great sin to kill the calf. Similar to the story when Kṛṣṇa killed Ariṣṭāsura, these demons were originally neither a bull nor a calf; they used mystical perfection to take any form. This form was not natural. Thus, when Kṛṣṇa killed Ariṣṭāsura, He did not kill a bull, but only an illusory form. But the gopīs wanted to make fun of Kṛṣṇa, so they said, "Since you killed the calf, we will not communicate with you until you perform repentance." 

Surely you know that in Vedic culture, as in other traditions, there is a rule that if you have sinned, repentance can consist of washing in holy waters. Similarly, Mother Yamunā is so sweet; if you regularly wash in her, all bad deeds are washed away. This also applies to the Yamunā River, and if you wash in the Yamunā, all karmic reactions are destroyed. In addition, you can get *prema*. How can this be? Because little Kṛṣṇa, when He slipped out from Kaṁsa's court, touched these waters with His feet. Therefore, *prema* penetrated there. This also applies to the mystery of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. The holy names are very merciful; even if you are an atheist, if you walk the streets of Detroit or London and hear the chanting, it purifies your heart automatically. But the devotees chant not just to cleanse their hearts from material desires or sins, but to gain *prema-bhakti*. The reason we take initiation is to gain the holy names from our spiritual master, and then he blesses us on this path of *prema*.

They began to talk to Kṛṣṇa: "You killed the calf, you are guilty." Kṛṣṇa said, "No, I did not kill the calf; he was a demon." They replied, "No, because you killed the calf, you must wash in the holy rivers. Go around the whole world and wash in every holy place, in all the lakes and rivers, and only after that come back to us." You might think He went there and washed, but no, Kṛṣṇa did otherwise. He took His flute, touched the ground with it, and made a well with the tip of the flute, and He called all the holy rivers of the universe to fill this well. They were impressed! They said, "Wow, maybe Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord." Then Kṛṣṇa washed Himself in this well, where all the holy rivers of the universe gathered, and after that, He was accepted. He created this well with His flute, and this place is now known as the Kūpa-veṇu. It is nearby, and there is a Bāndī-vaṭa tree under it. Now you understand why this place is unique. I think we will not be able to take an ablution today because we have almost 400 people, and the well is small. We will have other opportunities. Take a bucket of water from this well—don't miss this chance, because all the waters of the sacred places of the universe are collected in this well. It takes a huge amount of time to travel to the Ganges, Sarasvatī, Kāverī, and other holy rivers, but here it happens quickly for you. Just sprinkle it on your head.

A lot of interesting games happened here. One day, the shepherd boys formed two teams and agreed that whoever loses carries the other team on their shoulders. When one team lost, they carried the winners. The leader of one team was Kṛṣṇa, and imagine, Kṛṣṇa’s team lost, and therefore His team had to carry the winners on their shoulders. Some boys loved Kṛṣṇa so much that they became indignant and said, "He should not!" But others instructed: "No, no, we won, therefore you must carry Kṛṣṇa." Another boy said, "Come on, Kṛṣṇa is weak by nature, He will not carry you. Kṛṣṇa is too weak to carry you." Another said, "Well, actually, He is the son of King Mahārāja Nanda. Śrīdāma, do you think He will carry you on His shoulders?" But Rādhā protested. She said, "No, Kṛṣṇa must follow the rules like everyone else. Of course, He is a little weak, but He is the son of the king, and therefore He is equal in the field. He herds the cows, He takes care of them, and carries a large amount of milk on His head—what is the difference?" Then another boy said, "Rādhā, if you make Kṛṣṇa carry you on His shoulders, we will not be friends anymore." 

Śrīdāma said, "What makes you think that I want to play with you anyway? And all this time, Kṛṣṇa was silent." Śrīdāma made Kṛṣṇa carry him through this forest. Śrīdāma is a little bigger than Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa carried him on His shoulders to where all the remaining boys were waiting. Then Rādhā got down from Śrī Kṛṣṇa's shoulders, raised His hands in the air, and shouted, "I won!" Unfortunately, after that, the boys did not want to become friends with him. They all began to play with each other, and Śrīdāma was left alone. He went off to the side, looking very sad, thinking, "Nobody loves me anymore." Suddenly, unexpectedly, he felt someone touch his shoulder, and he heard a voice: "Friend, I am your property. My friend, I am your property." 

Śrīdāma turned around, and who did he see? It was Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was smiling; He was very compassionate. Kṛṣṇa said, "Raise your hand who wants to hear: Śrīdāma, it doesn't matter what anyone says about you; in fact, I am always pleased with you. I will always be for you so that you are pleased, and even if you were as heavy as Mount Meru, or even if my father was the emperor of the whole world and I was none other than Nārāyaṇa, I would still think that it was a great privilege to carry you on my shoulders." 

Śrīdāma’s eyes filled with tears. He turned to Kṛṣṇa and said, "I really am not a burden for you? I am not an excessive burden like others say?" Kṛṣṇa took Śrīdāma’s hand in His and said, "My dear friend, in fact, I carry you not with the strength of my muscles; I carry you with the strength of my love. My love for you is such that when you are on my shoulders, I feel as if a beautiful flower touched me." Kṛṣṇa and Śrīdāma hugged and began to cry. All the boys were shocked by the fact that Kṛṣṇa showed His ecstasy; they surrounded them and, of course, began to play together. Such is the sweet relationship in Vṛndāvana. 

Also, I learned that wrestling games took place here. We know that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma usually have wrestling matches in the soft sands of Ramaṇa-retī. But if you look where you are sitting, you are also on soft sand. 5,000 years ago, Vraja-raja (the dust of Vraja) was everywhere in Vṛndāvana, and Vraja-raja is the basis of Vṛndāvana. This is one of those personalities who grant entrance to Vṛndāvana. Here in Bāndī-vana, they also held wrestling games. One of the reasons why Śrīla Prabhupāda installed the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma deities on Ramaṇa-retī is because of these matches. There was even a wrestling match between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as you learned. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī describes this, so we should read the literature of the Gosvāmīs because there is a lot of nectar.

"My beautiful, proud Śrī Rādhā announced the beginning of the wrestling match along with Her closest friends. She fought very happily with Lord Kṛṣṇa, thus bringing great joy to the God of Love. Let me worship this forest, Bāndī-vana."

When I asked, "What to tell the lecture?", I didn't even have to speculate because Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī tells us everything. In conclusion, he writes: "Let me worship this forest of Bāndī-vana." Let’s repeat this again and open your hearts: "In the forest of Bāndī-vana, my beautiful queen, the proud Śrī Rādhā, began a fighting match. She fought with Lord Kṛṣṇa and gave great pleasure to the Lord of Love. Let me worship the forest of Bāndī-vana."

In *Bhakti-ratnākara*, there are more details. One day, Kṛṣṇa came here to Bāndī-vana and played His flute. The sound of the flute is unique; it penetrates not just 100 meters, but envelops the entire area. Kṛṣṇa’s girlfriends, having heard this, strove to come here. Rādhikā asked Him a question: "Kṛṣṇa, when do you come here? I heard that you are usually here with your friends. What are you playing?" Kṛṣṇa straightened up and said, "My friends and I wrestle, and I always win." He lied a little, but He said, "No one in this world can wrestle as well as I do, and I will easily defeat everyone who competes with me." Hearing Kṛṣṇa's words, Lalitā-sakhī said, "Well, okay then, today we want to see you in a wrestler's outfit and see your strength." Kṛṣṇa replied, "Well, okay, I'm ready to wrestle. And who should I wrestle with? I can't wrestle with myself, and there are no boys today." He smiled and said, "Whoever I wrestle with, I should also change my clothes, and they should also put on a wrestler's outfit." 

This applied to the girls, and Rādhārāṇī replied, "Okay, today my friends and I will wrestle with you." Surely you know the story of Gopāṣṭamī? On this day, the girls want to come to the ceremony too, so they dress up as cowherd boys. In this game, the girls dressed up as wrestlers—they transformed, tied their skirts and sarīs like wrestlers wear, and put on turbans. Kṛṣṇa was very delighted because He had never seen Rādhārāṇī in a fighting outfit in Vṛndāvana. Everything here is an incentive for Kṛṣṇa's ecstatic love, and everything is created for Him. In Vṛndāvana, it is constantly raining love.

When Kṛṣṇa first saw them, He was trembling. The girls decided to play a joke: "Kṛṣṇa, of course, you can win in this world, but at the sight of our Rādhā, you were already trembling. What was wrong with you?" They made fun of Him, saying, "We heard that you are invincible because you are supreme, but at the sight of Rādhā, you suddenly became afraid and began to shake with fear." They took His ecstatic symptoms for a sign of fear because His body was trembling, but these were ecstatic symptoms. When He heard these words, Kṛṣṇa blushed and immediately controlled His feelings. Then Kṛṣṇa decided to call for help—He called the cowherd boys. Some boys on Kṛṣṇa's side blew their horns and played the flute. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa began to play here in the sands. They fought and fought, but none of them won. Usually, there is a winner, but here no one won. The elders watching this match realized that it was a draw, and they all experienced transcendental bliss because none of them could imagine that such a game could appear before them. We hope to one day be able to see this particular game. This is called *lobha* or greed. It's not that you become greedy for something material; it's greed to find something spiritual. And there is a prayer: "Just as girls are attracted to young men, and young men are attracted to girls with the same intensity, allow me, Lord, to be attracted by you." 

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī ends this *līlā* with the words: "I worship this forest Bāndī-vana, and one day when the Bāndī-vana forest will show me special mercy, I will be able to see with my own eyes how Rādhā-mādhavī-vihāra fights, who is dressed as a wrestler who tests the strength of Her beloved Kṛṣṇa." He says that this forest will show it, because this forest itself has consciousness. 

Does anyone else want to hear? Maybe you want to go home and sleep, but one *līlā* happened between this that actually melts our heart. Let's get all the napkins ready; now there will be a river of tears. At one moment, Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana because Kaṁsa called Him under the pretext that He needed to fight with the wrestlers in Mathurā. At that moment, when Akrūra took Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma on his chariot, a huge crowd of cowherds followed them. They rejoiced that Kṛṣṇa would kill the demons. Then Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma killed the wrestlers, Kṛṣṇa killed Kaṁsa, and Balarāma returned back to Vṛndāvana along with the shepherds. Śrīdāma returned here in order to try to continue his life without Kṛṣṇa. He could not just continue to live. When we lose someone, we experience pain; if we love them like two lovers or a husband and wife, when someone leaves the body before the other, sometimes it doesn't cope. There was even such a custom in India, *satī*, where a wife, after the death of her husband, left because the pain of separation was too great. 

Śrīdāma tried to continue his life without Kṛṣṇa, but the ācāryas say it was impossible because the body cannot continue to live if the soul has left it. He could not cope with this separation, so he came here to Bāndī-vana because he remembered how it was here that he and the shepherd boys, together with Kṛṣṇa, played their games. It is said that he came here and simply lived under a tree. How did he support himself? In fact, he supported himself simply by chanting, because chanting is also food—not for the body, but for our soul. Day after day, year after year, he sat here under a tree and waited for Kṛṣṇa to return. Because you remember that Kṛṣṇa promised the Vraja-vāsīs that He would return, and He personally promised Śrīdāma that He would definitely return to Vṛndāvana. 

After the wrestling match in Mathurā ended, he parted with Kṛṣṇa, looked up at Him, and asked, "How long will it take before you return from Mathurā?" Kṛṣṇa said, "Well, just a couple of days. It will take me a few days; I will kill a few demons and return." At that moment, Śrīdāma very clearly looked Kṛṣṇa in the eyes, and Kṛṣṇa looked away, because when you are not entirely honest, you try to lower your eyes. We know very well that Kṛṣṇa did not return, because separation always makes the heart beat faster. Śrīdāma tried to look into Kṛṣṇa's eyes, but Kṛṣṇa turned away. Śrīdāma took Kṛṣṇa's hand and said, "Brother, until you return, I will neither eat nor drink." Kṛṣṇa said, "Well, don't make me suffer," but Śrīdāma replied, "Well, since you will only be gone for a few days, it will be useful for me to fast a little. And when you return, we will throw a huge feast for all of us." 

After that, Śrīdāma went towards Vṛndāvana. He walked 40-50 meters and then turned and again called, "Kṛṣṇa, friend, I will wait for you in Bāndī-vana. When you return, don't forget me. I will not eat until I see your lotus face." Kṛṣṇa returned to Vṛndāvana; we have already read that in a whole lecture. It is said that Kṛṣṇa was gone for only three months. When He returned, the first thing He did was go to Bāndī-vana to find Śrīdāma. When He reached the place, He got off the chariot and began to look for Śrīdāma sitting under a tree—perhaps even under this tree. His eyes were closed like a yogī in meditation; he held his head, eyes closed, and chanted the holy names. He looked like a shepherd boy, but his body was completely emaciated from fasting, and his hair had grown long and was unkempt. Kṛṣṇa almost fainted at the sight of the ascetic position his friend was in. He softly said, "My friend, I have returned." But Śrīdāma was so deeply immersed in his meditation that he thought it was just a voice from his meditation. Kṛṣṇa repeated, "Śrīdāma, my friend, open your eyes, I have already come." 

At that moment, Śrīdāma opened his eyes. He saw his Kṛṣṇa standing in front of him. Kṛṣṇa said, "See, I told you that I'll be back in a few days." He slowly stood up and carefully examined Kṛṣṇa, and then hugged Him with great warmth. He stroked Kṛṣṇa, touched His shoulders, His hands, to make sure that He was real. After that, Śrīdāma burst into tears. The ācāryas describe that at the moment when Kṛṣṇa was not in Vṛndāvana, all the trees withered, but at the moment when the two friends hugged each other, they were immediately covered with beautiful flowers and blossomed. This is all imbued with enormous *bhāva* and *rasa*. 

Śrīdāma is the most intelligent of the shepherds. He is a refuge of the most intense love for Kṛṣṇa. He is black, and he is proud of his qualities, his age, his clothes, and his attractive features. He is Kṛṣṇa's best friend. If even for a moment Śrīdāma cannot see Kṛṣṇa, whom he considers the dearest in his life, he begins to tremble with anxiety. I completely take refuge in Śrīdāma, who is the eternal companion of the Lord. Thanks to the fact that we listen to these stories in these unique places, at some point, we will surely also experience the feeling of *prema*. We should not think that this is impossible; these sacred places in which we are now are here on Earth to help us with this. 

I would like to conclude today's lecture with a beautiful prayer to Nanda Mahārāja. If we cannot pray, or our prayers are empty, we can learn the prayer of someone from the *dhāma*, following their mood. This prayer was written by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, who once received a blessing:

"O noble one, this is my divine form; it is very difficult to see, but the one who has seen it, for him, there is nothing impossible. Now, ask me for a blessing." 

Śrīdāma answered, and this is the blessing he asked for: "Century after century, may I have firm devotion to you and Kṛṣṇa. May I always live in the society of pure devotees; their devotion towards them will be the same as my devotion towards you. Both, century after century, may I be devoted to you and Kṛṣṇa. May I always live in the society of pure devotees, and may my devotion to them be devotion to you."""