"*00386*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Dear devotees, I’d like to say that I am simply overwhelmed by this most magnificent project that you have here in the outskirts of Mumbai.

Under the direction of your sannyāsīs, you are the best of the best. For the last 53 years, I’ve traveled the world far and wide. I’ve been here, there, and everywhere. I’ve seen most of ISKCON’s glorious projects, but I’ve never, never seen anything like this project. It’s kind of like ISKCON Dvärakā—everything is just first-class. So, I thank Sāndīpani Muni Dāsa and the other visionaries and managers of this project, and I hope that I can come back in a few months or next year when it’s complete and spend some time here with all of you. When I come back, we’ll have kīrtana like that every night because this is Lord Caitanya’s movement, and it means chanting, dancing, and feasting—all of which you are very expert at here.

Actually, I feel very privileged to be here. So, dear devotees, today throughout this great country of India, blessed devotees of the Supreme Lord are celebrating the opening of a beautiful temple in Ayodhyā, on the very ground where Śrī Rāmacandra walked as a boy. That was back in Tretā-yuga, many millions and millions of years ago. Now, it should be noted that generally, after even a famous person departs this world, his fame and name fade away in time; he is forgotten for the most part. But not so for the Lord and His pure devotees, for their glorious deeds continue to inspire us even down to the present day. That is enshrined in one particular verse of *Bhagavad-gītā*:

> "Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow in his footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues."

So, the glorious deeds of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Rāmacandra, are enshrined in the epic *Rāmāyaṇa*, which is as popular today as it was millions of years ago. Lord Rāmacandra is as popular today as He was in Tretā-yuga. He is a very special personality; He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, this is a very historic day that we are all acknowledging: His place of birth and His pastimes of youth in Ayodhyā. They built a wonderful temple to mark that historic occasion—a beautiful temple. I watched the inauguration on TV today.

Of course, all of Śrī Rāma’s heroic deeds are again enshrined in the *Rāmāyaṇa* by Vālmīki. The *Rāmāyaṇa* consists of 24,000 verses; it has six kāṇḍas and comprises 500 chapters. So, I thought to speak on *Rāmāyaṇa* today, but where do I start? It’s just this vast ocean of nectar. So, I opened up the *Rāmāyaṇa*—my eyes were closed, I had a big *Rāmāyaṇa*—I opened it up like this, I put my finger down, and I looked. I said, "Okay, that’s what I’ll speak about today."

It is said that by tasting one drop of the ocean, one can understand what the whole ocean is like. When I put my finger down, I was maybe 50% through the *Rāmāyaṇa*, and the setting of where I was was Rāmeśvaram, or Setu. It’s the most famous place where Lord Rāma crossed from Bhārata to Sri Lanka over a bridge that was assembled by Hanumān and the other monkeys and bears so that Rāma could cross over the ocean and rescue Sītā Devī.

It’s actually one of the most exciting parts of the *Rāmāyaṇa* where Sītā is finally rescued—rescued from who? No, I don’t want to hear his name. "Rāvaṇa" means in Sanskrit, "he who makes the universe scream." He captured Her; he thought by going all the way to Sri Lanka and hiding in the Aśoka garden, no one could find Her and he could enjoy Her. But fortunately, Hanumān, who has so much śraddhā, so much faith in Rāma, he leaped—he’s a monkey, he leaped all over the ocean to Sri Lanka—and he found Her in the Aśoka garden. He told Her, "Sītā, Rāma is coming." So he flew all the way back to the tip of India, and he told Rāma, "I know where Sītā is; she’s in Sri Lanka. Let’s go and get her." So, Lord Rāma and His army of monkeys and bears, they marched to the very tip of India and came to the ocean.

Now, *Rāmāyaṇa* describes that when Lord Rāma arrived on the shores of the ocean, the pastime is: He thought, "How are we all going to cross this vast ocean?" Of course, He’s the beginning; God is all-knowing, because He’s present everywhere, so He could easily make the arrangement to cross over the ocean, no problem. But because His devotees are always begging Him for service—we’re always begging God for service—He gave the service to the monkeys and bears. God is very great and we’re very small; He’s the master and we’re the servant. It’s very nice to be the servant of a glorious master who takes care of you in every way. We’re always begging for service, aren’t we? To Kṛṣṇa, what does it mean in the mahā-mantra? "My dear Lord, my dear energy of the Lord, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please give me service at Your lotus feet." We don’t chant mechanically; we chant with feeling: "Oh my Lord, I’m drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence. Oh, You who give shelter to the shelterless, please, dear Kṛṣṇa, just this one time extend Your hand and save me." That’s how we chant with feeling: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

One time, a disciple asked Prabhupāda that question that always comes up: "Prabhupāda, what does the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra mean?" So on that occasion, Prabhupāda kind of paused; he closed his eyes and he thought for a moment. Then he opened his eyes, he looked at that disciple, and he said, "My dear son, what does this mantra mean? It means 'My friend, my friend, my friend.'" So Prabhupāda stated that. So when we chant, it’s not mechanical; no, we chant with feeling—that we’re fallen and we need mercy. And mercy means service, because by service you’re recognized by Kṛṣṇa. Just like if you have some children, they want to play all day, but you ask them to do some household chores: "Help with the dishes, help clean the house, please help wash the clothes." And if they do that service, you feel endeared to your children: "Oh, you’re a good boy, you’re a good girl, here’s some ice cream." It’s a simple analogy, but actually, that’s how Kṛṣṇa becomes endeared to those who serve Him with love and devotion.

So, Rāma pretended, "How are we going to cross over the ocean?" He knew one of His servants would take up the service. So the first person to speak up was Vibhīṣaṇa. He advised Him, "You should perform some tapasya and ask the ocean to help." Who is this Vibhīṣaṇa? Vibhīṣaṇa was the younger brother of Rāvaṇa. He was a rākṣasa; he was a demon like Rāvaṇa. But Vālmīki said he was of noble character, and when Rāvaṇa kidnapped Sītā in the Daṇḍakāraṇya forest, Vibhīṣaṇa insisted to his brother Rāvaṇa, "You give that girl, you give that princess, you give that Queen back to Rāma; you are doing nonsense." And when Rāvaṇa refused and was going to slap Vibhīṣaṇa, he left, and he went to join Śrī Rāmacandra. And when he showed up in the camp of Rāmacandra, everybody went, "Whoa, that’s the brother of Rāvaṇa! Get him out of here!" You know, the demons have their little horns, you know, and these fiery eyes. He came, "I want to be a Rāma-bhakta." "Yeah, right! You want to be a Rāma-bhakta? Go back to Rāvaṇa!" No one trusted him. However, Lord Rāma is very compassionate, and after hearing different opinions, He gave His verdict, which gives hope to all aspiring devotees of the Lord who come from the kingdom of māyā to join ISKCON. Rāma could see the heart of Vibhīṣaṇa—He could see the heart. So He had a little bit of trust in him. He said something very, very famous in *Rāmāyaṇa*. It gives us so much hope. Listen to what Rāma said to all the assembled monkeys and bears. He said:

> "It is My vow that if one only once seriously surrenders unto Me, saying, 'My dear Lord, from this day on I am Yours,' and prays to Me for courage, I shall immediately award courage to that person, and he will always remain safe from that time on."

So like that asura who had a change of heart, let’s all take the same vow today. Imagine you’re before that beautiful deity of Rāmacandra that’s just been installed by your Prime Minister Modi in Ayodhyā. You’re sitting in front of that beautiful deity. Okay, just close your eyes and imagine you’re in front of Rāma, and you’re speaking to Him directly. Repeat after me: "My dear Lord, from this day on I am Yours." Now in Hindi: *Rāma, main āpka hūn*. Now you’re safe from that time on, no more problems. Jai!

So that asura of sorts, he’d given advice; he said to Rāma, "Do some tapasya and call upon the ocean to help You." So it’s amazing—Rāma followed Vibhīṣaṇa’s advice and He sat down for days fasting to get the blessings of the ocean. The *Rāmāyaṇa*, Kāṇḍa 6, Chapter 21, it’s called *Yuddha-kāṇḍa*, describes the penance that Lord Rāma did to get the mercy of the ocean to pass over. Do you want to hear the penance that Lord Rāma did? I’m quoting the scripture:

> "Thereafter, Rāma, the annihilator of enemies, spreading sacred grass on the seashore, making a respectful salutation by joining His palms to the great ocean, with His face turned eastward, lied down in the sand with His arm resembling the body of a snake as His pillow. Remaining there for three nights, Rāma, who is skilled in policy and fond of piety, waited upon the mercy of the ocean, the Lord of rivers."

But nothing happened. The ocean didn’t reciprocate; the ocean just said, "Not interested." Varuṇa, you’re the demigod of the ocean, the Supreme Lord is calling upon you, and you’re ignoring Him? What?! Sometimes the demigods get a little bit deviated, you know? Indra, he became a little angry at Kṛṣṇa, inundated Vṛndāvana with torrents of rain. So Rāma got really frustrated with the ocean; He stood up, took one of His arrows, shot it into the ocean. So the *Rāmāyaṇa* Vālmīki puts it very poetically, the *Rāmāyaṇa*—because poetry has a way of melting our hearts and awakening devotion. Poetry awakens bhakti within our hearts. There’s a saying: "What is the use of a bowman’s arrow unless it pierces his enemy’s heart? In the same way, what is the use of devotional poetry unless it melts the hearts of the devotees?"

So, Vālmīki, he described this shooting the arrow into the ocean—exquisitely, beautifully. Swaying His terrific bow, *Sārṅga*, and making the Earth tremble by the violence of Rāma’s releasing His arrow, He made a sound like the thunderbolt of Indra: *Kaboom!* As the arrow entered into the ocean like a tsunami, the ocean started boiling over, and when all the fish and all the aquatics started screaming, the ocean personified came out with folded palms and surrendered to Śrī Rāma. There’s nothing better than seeing someone surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Now, the *Skanda Purāṇa* describes the scene when Varuṇa came and surrendered to Rāma. It’s so heart-touching. When I read the verse, my hair stood on end. Would you like me to share with you that verse from *Skanda Purāṇa*? It’s a little long, so sit up straight, take a deep breath, and fix your attention. This is describing the ocean surrendering to Rāma:

> "The valiant ocean, the Lord of rivers, wearing a wreath of pearls, His eyes resembling lotus leaves, bearing a beautiful garland made of all kinds of flowers on His head, adorned with ornaments of refined gold, adorned with excellent jewels made of pearls from His own domain, decorated with different kinds of gems and metals resembling the Himavat Mountain, wearing on His broad chest a locket made of white luster which resembled a *kaustubha* gem, with a multitude of waves whirling around Him, encircled by the clouds and the winds, here escorted by rivers, mainly the Gaṅgā and Sindhu, endowed with diverse forms resembling various deities, approached Rāma with joined palms, who stood with arrows in hand, addressing Him first as Lord."

Rāma spoke the following words. That’s the introduction, describing how Varuṇa dressed beautifully, came before Lord Rāma, and now He’s going to speak some words to Rāma. The *Rāmāyaṇa* is so beautiful. So this is what Varuṇa has said to Rāma: "Oh beloved Rāma, Earth, Wind, Water, and Light remain fixed in their own nature; therefore, I am fathomless and my nature is that it is impossible to swim across my waters. I am telling you now how to cross over me, oh excellent man, Rāma. You have one vānara, monkey named Nala, the son of Viśvakarmā. Let this greatly energetic monkey build a bridge over me, and over that bridge You can go, and You can conquer Rāvaṇa and rescue Sītā Devī." Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. It’s getting late; should I stop? No? Sure, you don’t want to go home and go to sleep?

So under this monkey Nala’s guidance, the monkeys and bears in Rāma’s army began building a bridge over the Indian Ocean. And I read that the distance is about 800 kilometers. So what they did, they gathered trees and shrubs and rocks and boulders and began throwing them into the ocean to build a bridge. Now, the *Skanda Purāṇa* gives a detailed report on how the construction—how far they got every day. So I studied that and meticulously wrote down, because love is in the details, how far the bridge was built every day.

*   On the first day, they built the bridge 180 km.
*   On the second day, they covered 256 km.
*   On the third day, they covered 270 km.
*   On the fourth day, they covered 283 km.
*   On the fifth day, 294 km of the bridge were constructed.

294! So if you’re into statistics—some people are, their businesses, statistics—just memorize that, that’s all you need to know. So during that marathon, a number of very significant things happened. As the monkeys and bears worked with all that material, it was sinking to the bottom of the ocean, especially the rocks and boulders. They’d just go down to the bottom of the ocean; it was a problem. So the monkeys who had great faith in Rāma, they came up with this idea: they took the bricks, the stones, and they wrote on the stones "Rāma." And by writing "Rāma" on the stones, the stones started floating!

In the *Gītā*, Kṛṣṇa says that He’s the source of mystic powers, He’s the master of all mystics present, and the sound of His name—so therefore, the stones they mystically floated and didn’t sink to the bottom. One time, I met a Rāma-bhakta, he said, "Mahārāja, I’d like to tell you something as a slogan. We, as devotees, amongst Rāma-bhaktas—I say, 'Yeah, what is it?'" He said, "Rocks with Rāma’s name will float, but a heart deprived of Rāma’s name will surely sink."

Now, famously, during the construction of the bridge, Hanumān learned a lesson of humility. Of course, he didn’t need to learn a lesson of humility, he’s a pure devotee, but sometimes devotees put themselves in these situations to teach us. So, as Hanumān was taking these big boulders, running there, there was a little squirrel, a little squirrel who was a great devotee of Rāma. And with a little paw, she was putting in little grains of sand into the ocean to help make the bridge. So the pastime is, Hanumān came and said, "You little squirrel, what are you doing? I’m throwing in big boulders; you’re just putting in these little grains of sand. What difference does it make?" And Rāma came along; He saw what was going on. He said, "Hanumān, that’s not the proper way to think. She’s doing as much devotional service as she can. I take her service as important as yours. It’s not so much what service we do, big or small, but it’s the consciousness in which we do it."

*Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ*—to offer Me with love a fruit, a flower, a leaf; they’re very insignificant, but offer it with love, then I’ll accept. But best is to do big things for Kṛṣṇa with devotion—that’s the best. Like one time, Prabhupāda, in his humility, said, "My only fault was I always thought big for Kṛṣṇa." So Rāma appreciated that little squirrel. So He petted the squirrel: "It’s okay, little squirrel, it’s okay, I really appreciate your service." With three fingers, He did like that. And that’s why, if you see the squirrels in India, little squirrels have three stripes down their back, because Rāma appreciated the service of that squirrel; His lotus hand, He marked the squirrel’s back with His fingers. So, oh glory, a little squirrel!

So the *Skanda Purāṇa* describes what that bridge was like when it was finished. It says: "This beautiful and lovely bridge constructed across the ocean, which was the abode of alligators—there were alligators in the ocean—this bridge shone brightly like the Milky Way of stars in the sky."

So finally, the scene is set. Rāma and the monkeys and bears, they’re going to cross over the ocean. And we know that they’re going to be successful. Prabhupāda noted one time, he said, "Just as Lord Rāma conquered Rāvaṇa in Lanka, so I, with monkeys and bears, I’m conquering the world with my disciples." We’re like, you know, monkeys and bears and little squirrels. What is your name? Little squirrel? Big round of applause for little squirrel! She’s a little girl, but she’s listening to the *Rāmāyaṇa* so attentively. This is a good sign.

So the monkeys, they were just scampering—all the monkeys, *vānaras*—the monkeys were so eager to serve Rāma, they started scampering over the bridge before the bears. The bears are the bears, but the monkeys... so *Skanda Purāṇa*, Kāṇḍa 6, Chapter 22, from verses 83 to 84, it discusses how the monkeys crossed the bridge. It’s so cute. Would you like to hear how the monkeys crossed the bridge? "Some monkeys went along the middle of the bridge, some others crossed along the sides, some other monkeys jumped into the water, some of them marched forward like military on the path of the bridge, some monkeys flew in the sky like Garuḍa the eagle, and the highly terrific sound of the ocean, you know, was covered up by the great, great sounds of the terrific monkeys who were crossing over the sea, headed by Hanumān." Jai! No cheers for Rāma?

So, because of these amazing—you know what happened? It’s 9:30. You know how Rāma went and fought and His final arrow into the heart of Rāvaṇa, and Rāvaṇa fell, and they got Sītā and went back to Ayodhyā. But as a final note, the *Skanda Purāṇa* glorifies this particular place where this pastime took place, where the bridge was constructed and the army crossed over. That place is considered very sacred. Rāma glorifies that sacred place; it’s also known as Setu.

> "The dust particles on the Earth can be counted, the stars in the sky can be estimated, but the merit resulting from a visit to Rāmeśvaram, to Setu, cannot be known even by anyone. Tells someone else: 'Go to Setu,' he also attains the same benefit, oh brāhmaṇas, this is certain. If a person lies on the sand of Setu, and the particles of sand stick to his body, as many sins of killing brāhmaṇas as there are in sand particles on his body are destroyed. There’s no doubt about it. If a person thinks about someone who is taking a holy bath in Setu, the sin of associating with sinful people is dissolved from his heart."

So these are just—this is just a drop in the ocean of the pastimes of Lord Rāmacandra. People have been reciting this *Rāmāyaṇa* for millions of years, actually, and each and every drop is relishable. And I could go on for many hours because there’s many drops, but it’s getting a little bit late. Let’s just let these pastimes that we’ve shared this evening, capture them, keep them in your heart like you would put a precious jewel in a treasure chest, and lock it so they never go away. And I thank you for this privilege to speak some words from *Rāmāyaṇa*. It is said both the speaker and the audience are purified by Kṛṣṇa-kathā.

It’s almost like today is Rāmanavamī or something, I don’t know, but it’s all glorious because finally a beautiful temple has been built at Ayodhyā where Lord Rāma appeared. That beautiful temple there is actually for all of you to go and see, this beautiful form of Rāmacandra. So I just have one request: I’m a parivrājakācārya, and every day I have to do *bhikṣu*—I have to go and beg for my maintenance. So I’m begging you to please allow me to come back and be with all of you again. Please give me the savor of sharing the nectarian pastimes of the Lord with you again, and please give me the nectarian privilege of chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare* with all of you.

And just one last thing before I go, it’s a little embarrassing for me because typically sannyāsīs, they shouldn’t speak about themselves, but I’d like to leave you with a sort of a gift. It costs a little bit, but it’s more of a gift than anything else. This is a book, which—one of my books—which we recently produced. It’s called *The Sacred Forests of Vraja*. It’s a parikramā guidebook. When I was locked down during the pandemic, I was locked down in Vṛndāvana. It wasn’t easy, because I’ve been a traveling sannyāsī for 50 years, and traditionally sannyāsīs have to keep moving; they can’t stay more than three days in one place. But here I am in my apartment in Vṛndāvana, I can’t go outside because of COVID. So I looked at my library; my dear Godbrother Bhānu Swami, he’s translated 161 scriptures, Gauḍīya tradition, traditional scriptures—they’re all in front of me, and many of them describe the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. And we all know that Śrī Vṛndāvana is our ultimate destination, am I correct? We want to fall out of love with this material world and into love with the spiritual world, which is Goloka Vṛndāvana. But how can you love someone you don’t even know? So as a service to the Vaiṣṇava community, I wrote this book, and there’ll be 25 more in the series just about Vraja—the holy places of Vṛndāvana, the pastimes that take place in those holy dhāmas, the personalities of Vraja, the mood of Vraja. As much of Vraja as I could grasp in four years is here in this book. So you can take it to Vṛndāvana; it’s like a guidebook around Vṛndāvana, and there’s many beautiful photos as well to help you understand. So you can take it with you and perform parikramā, go around. And if you can’t go to Vṛndāvana, you can fall in love with Vṛndāvana in your own apartment just by reading the book.

So enough said. We’re selling the book; it’s a little expensive because it’s a very high-class book, like you do everything high-class here. Sāndīpani’s love for Prabhupāda has manifested in a very high-class way with this beautiful project. He knows how to do things first-class! Sāndīpani-kī jaya! All his helpers, kī jaya! All of you, kī jaya! Hare Kṛṣṇa!""