"*00297*.*
"### The Jharikhaṇḍa Forest: Lessons in Faith and Mercy

Dear devotees, welcome back to our ongoing lecture series. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve...* Once again, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

In our previous lecture, I mentioned how I wanted to share with you several holy places that I recently visited with a group of devotees in India that are intimately connected to the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There are many such places, for as a typical sannyāsī, He traveled widely throughout India spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness 500 years ago. In fact, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* chapter 9, verses 5 and 6, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja writes:

> "I cannot chronologically record all the places of pilgrimage visited by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. I can only summarize everything by saying that the Lord visited all holy places, right and left, coming and going... because it is impossible for me to record all these places in chronological order, I will simply make a token gesture of recording them."

Mahāprabhu went to many places. One of my favorite purports in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* perfectly conveys the mood of Lord Caitanya’s travels. This purport has been a mission statement for myself for the last 50 years. We find it in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.6.14, and I will happily quote it:

> "It is the duty of a mendicant to experience all varieties of God’s creation by traveling alone through all forests, hills, towns, villages, etc., to gain faith in God and strength of mind, as well as to enlighten the inhabitants with the message of God. A sannyāsī is duty-bound to take all these risks without fear. And the most typical sannyāsī of the present age is Lord Caitanya, who traveled in the same manner through the central Indian jungles, enlightening even the tigers, bears, snakes, deer, elephants, and many other jungle animals."

As important to me as that purport is a letter that Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote to one of my godbrothers in 1973. I read it regularly, as it is one of the closest things to my heart:

> "My dear Prabhu Viṣṇu, please accept my blessings. I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated January 1st, 1973, and I am very glad to hear from you the wonderful news of a traveling party in England. I think the people of that place are becoming more and more inclined for this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. They are inviting you to stay in their houses, they are taking books, becoming sometimes devotees... all of these things are very encouraging signs to me. So go on in this way, stopping in every village and city of England, Scotland, or if there are other places like Ireland, simply stop for some time, distribute books and hold saṅkīrtana procession. Answer their questions, give some leaflets or small information, freely distribute prasādam wherever possible or at least some small thing. And if there is genuine interest being shown, then request the townspeople to arrange some engagements for speaking in their schools or in someone’s home or a hall like that. In this way, remain always without anxiety for destination and comfortable situations, always relying only on the mercy of Kṛṣṇa for your plan. Just go on preaching His message and selling His books wherever there is interest. We shall not waste time if there is no interest or if the people are unfriendly; there are so many places to go. But I understand from your letter that practically everyone is taking some interest."

Now, the next part just resonates with my heart. Prabhupāda writes:

> "I can understand that it is not an easy matter to travel extensively over long periods of time without proper food, rest, and sometimes it must be very cold there also. And still, because you are getting so much enjoyment—spiritual enjoyment—from it, it seems like play to you. Oh, how true that is, it seems like play to you. That is the advanced stage of spiritual life, never attained by even the greatest yogīs or so-called jñānīs. Let any man see our devotees working so hard for Kṛṣṇa; then let anyone say that they are not better than any millions of so-called yogīs and transcendentalists. That is my challenge because you are rightly understanding through your personal realization this philosophy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness; therefore, in such a short time you have surpassed all the stages of yoga processes to come to the highest point of surrendering to Kṛṣṇa. I can very much appreciate. Thank you very much for helping me in this way. Hoping this meets you and the other men in your party in the best of health and spirits. Your ever well-wisher."

Thank you, Prabhupāda, for that letter. When the spiritual master gives an instruction to one disciple, it very often can be for all of his disciples. I take those words of Prabhupāda very close to my heart and dedicate whatever years I have left and many lifetimes in the future to his saṅkīrtana movement, because I know it pleases him very much.

We were speaking about the many places that Mahāprabhu would visit. One of the places that Lord Caitanya visited in His journey from Jagannātha Purī to Vṛndāvana in the year 1515 was the famous Jharikhaṇḍa Forest. Every ISKCON devotee knows about that forest, and as such, we recently made it one of our destinations with a group of devotees after visiting Gayā in eastern India.

Śrīla Prabhupāda describes that jungle area several times in his purports. Actually, it is a very beautiful forest or jungle—it is very unique. It is not very dense, at least at this time of year; it is kind of dry, but very beautiful in a unique way. This Jharikhaṇḍa Forest is actually in the state of Jharkhand. Śrīla Prabhupāda gives some details about this forest in a purport in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* chapter 17:

> "The great forest of Jharikhaṇḍa is a great attractive land including Aṭagāra, Ḍenkanāla, Aṅgula, Lāhāra, Keonjhara, Bāmaḍā, Bonāi... all these places which are covered with mountains and jungles are known as Jharikhaṇḍa."

Now, Mahāprabhu’s journey through the forest was of great historical importance for all of us. It was witnessed by His assistant, Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, and chronicled by Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī in *Madhya-līlā* chapter 17. As most of us have heard, this Jharikhaṇḍa forest was and still is a very wild and dangerous place. When we visited, we went somewhat into the jungle, and at one point our guide said, "That's it, we can't go any further because of the wild animals." But although Lord Caitanya spent approximately two months walking 300 kilometers through the forest, He was never for one moment anxious or afraid.

Because of His divine consciousness, He simply saw that wild abode as Vraja, as Vṛndāvana. Those who have written about His journey say He saw the places as Vṛndāvana. For example, in describing how the tigers and deer followed Him through the forest, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī says this caused Mahāprabhu to remember Vraja—you know, Vṛndāvana has so many animals. This is described in a verse in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*:

> *dekhi' mahāprabhu vṛndāvana-smṛti haila, vṛndāvana-guṇa*
>
> "Seeing the tigers and deer following Him, Śrī Caitanya immediately remembered the land of Vṛndāvana."

He then began to recite a verse describing the transcendental quality of Vṛndāvana:

> "Vṛndāvana is the transcendental abode of the Lord; there is no hunger, anger, or thirst there. Though naturally inimical, human beings and fierce animals live together there in transcendental friendship."

Further on in that same chapter, Prabhupāda writes in a purport:

> "When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu passed through the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, He took it for granted that it was Vṛndāvana. When He passed over the hills, He took it for granted that they were Govardhana. Similarly, whenever Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu saw a river, He immediately accepted it as the river Yamunā. Thus, while in the forest, He was filled with great ecstatic love, and He danced and fell down, often crying."

When I read that, I was thinking: this is truly seeing Kṛṣṇa everywhere. As Kṛṣṇa states in *Bhagavad-gītā*: *yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra, sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati*—"For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never lost, and he is never lost to Me."

However, this was not the case for Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, who was accompanying the Lord; he was afraid that he would be eaten by the animals. An ācārya writes as follows:

> "Leaving behind Utkala-deśa (present-day Orissa), Lord Caitanya and Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya entered the multitude of *jhari*—*jhari* is translated there as bushes—this multitude of *jhari*-land of bushes, which is known as Jharikhaṇḍa, which is a dense forest filled with different types of beautiful creepers, sweet-smelling wild kadamba trees, thousands-of-years-old banyan trees expanding for kilometers, and trees that have never been seen before."

As soon as Mahāprabhu and Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya entered this unexplored land, Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya started becoming afraid, knowing that the animals in that forest had never smelled the scent of any humans. In fact, the air of that dense forest had never even touched a human being before. Mahāprabhu, who is the knower of past, present, and future, understood the mind of His servant and tried to put him at ease. They were going to be there for two and a half months and travel 300 kilometers. I was reading that Mahāprabhu bathed three times a day because they were going through the forest in the month of January; they would bathe in hot springs, take wild fruits and vegetables, and cook them—especially the *śāka* (spinach).

Mahāprabhu said to him, "My dear servant, the biggest test of one's faith is when you are in the mouth of death, but you still have faith in the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa." He continued:

> "Bāla, don't forget about the pastimes of the cowherd boys, that whenever the demons attacked, they first attacked those cowherd boys, Kṛṣṇa's friends. But although all those boys were very small, they didn't cry; they just called out Kṛṣṇa's names with faith and confidence: Hare Kṛṣṇa."

He continued:

> "Bāla, don't forget that when Hiraṇyakaśipu was throwing Prahlāda off a high cliff, Prahlāda was chanting Kṛṣṇa's holy names without any fear. And when his father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, put him into a huge pot of boiling oil, Prahlāda continued chanting, and the oil turned into cool flowers. So do not fear, Bāla. Just think about Kṛṣṇa and Vṛndāvana, and consider what could be more fearful than to get separated from our lover, Kṛṣṇa."

At that point, Lord Caitanya started chanting loudly, and miracles started happening. We have seen with our own eyes in modern times how this *saṅkīrtana* movement is spreading against all odds. To demonstrate the power of the holy names and to give us faith, Mahāprabhu started chanting. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī describes what took place in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* chapter 17, verses 26–32:

> "When the Lord passed through the jungle in great ecstasy, packs of tigers, elephants, rhinoceroses, and boars came, and the Lord passed right through them. Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya was very much afraid to see them, but by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s influence, all the animals stood to one side."

One day, a tiger was lying on the path, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, walking along in ecstatic love, touched the tiger with His feet and said, "Chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa." The tiger immediately got up and began to dance and chant, "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" Another day, while Mahāprabhu was bathing in a river, a herd of maddened elephants came there to drink. The Lord splashed some water on the elephants and asked them to chant the name of Kṛṣṇa. The elephants, whose bodies were touched by the water splashed by the Lord, then began to chant and dance.

Kavirāja Gosvāmī mentions that even immobile plants and trees became ecstatic:

> "Thus all living entities in the forest of Jharikhaṇḍa, some moving and some standing still, became mad by hearing the holy name of Kṛṣṇa vibrated from the mouth of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu."

It is mentioned that even the stone ground melted in ecstasy, leaving the footprints of Lord Caitanya and all the animals visible for all future generations. The stone melted, and therefore you can go there. We were there, and we saw very clearly the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya—they are quite big, as I heard He was over seven feet tall. You can see the footprints of rhinoceroses, elephants, deer, and tigers, all mixed together. By the mercy of the holy names, they became freed from envy and fear. Seeing is believing; I saw it with my own eyes. We fell down, embraced them, and prayed to them to free our hearts of all selfishness, lust, anger, and greed, and to awaken a strong determination to serve Śrīla Prabhupāda.

I was reading that the deer and the lions started embracing each other; snakes and mongooses started eating together; swans and fish started swimming happily together. They were displaying *viruddha-dharma*—symptoms of an opposite nature. For example:
*   Snakes, which usually crawl, were flying in *veśa* (ecstasy).
*   Tigers, which usually prowl, were dancing in *utsāha* (joy).
*   Birds were crawling in *bhāva* (a devotional mood).
*   Trees, which are immobile, started moving in *anurāga* (love).
*   Rivers became stone in *āścarya* (amazement).

Watching from above, the demigods were stunned. Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya was also captivated. One of our favorite Vaiṣṇava poets, Lalita Kiśora, writes about what Bālābhadra felt: he saw the frogs playing *mṛdaṅgas*, the cuckoo birds playing *tampūrās*, and the elephants playing *dundubhī* instruments.

Now, as a conclusion, let us reflect on why Mahāprabhu empowered these animals. One of the principal reasons was to give us human beings faith that we too can achieve perfection by the potency of the holy names received from our spiritual masters. If the chanting of the *yuga-dharma* can deliver all entities in a jungle, those same holy names can certainly deliver the inhabitants of the "concrete jungles" of Kali-yuga—New York, London, Paris, Moscow, and so on.

As Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes:

> "In all the villages through which the Lord passed and in all the places He rested on this journey, everyone was purified and awakened to ecstatic love of God. When someone heard the chanting of the holy name from the mouth of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and someone else heard this chanting from that second person, and someone again heard this chanting from the third person, everyone in all countries became Vaiṣṇavas through such disciplic succession."

And finally, Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya said:

> *yad-avadhi harināma-prādurāsīt tad-avadhi...*
> "From the time that the name of Hari became manifest on the earth, Vaiṣṇava-folk were seen everywhere, adorned with faultless *tulasī* neckbeads and equipped with the mahā-mantra. In the midst of the age of Kali, they purified the atmosphere, chanting, 'Hari! Hari!'"

So indeed, it came to pass. I hope that you have enjoyed and relished this discussion on Mahāprabhu’s pastimes. I very much enjoyed giving this lecture—maybe it is my favorite. We will be back; we have one more place to talk about in our recent journey in eastern India, and that is Māyāpura. We will talk about our entrance into Māyāpura in a couple of days. Thank you so much.""