Hare Krishna, and welcome to Jaipur, the city of Jaipur in the state of Rajasthan, India.

It is one of the most popular tourist destinations in India, known as the Pink City for its centuries-old saffron pink walls that extend around much of the city. It is rich in the cultural heritage of India. Most important for devotees of the Lord is the presence of a number of original Vrindavan deities, including Radha Govinda, Radha Gopinath, Radha Vinod, and Radha and what it be.

Hundreds of years ago, the sacred village of Vrindavan was attacked during a foreign invasion, and devotees hid these and other deities from the invaders in the forests and lakes around Vrindavan. In time, the precarious situation of the deities came to the attention of a powerful and pious Rajput king, Jai Singh the Second, who eventually built the city of Jaipur as a haven to protect the deities.

In fact, he designed the city in such a way that Radha Govinda's temple is situated in the exact center of the city. He further designed his own nearby residence in such a way as to be able to directly see the Lord from his palace rooms each day.

Morning and evening, thousands of devotees come for *darshan* of Radha and Govinda, their devoted singing and prayers to these deities of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī create a spiritual atmosphere that overwhelms the hearts of anyone and everyone present. Our procurement party visited the Radha Govinda temple on several occasions.

We also had *darshan* of Radha Gopinath, who were discovered by Madhu Pandit, a close associate of Lord Caitanya, 500 years ago in Vrindavan. The unique feature of the Radha Gopinath temple is the beautiful *bhajans* sung by an enthusiastic group of ladies each morning.

The girls in our procurement party enjoyed singing along with them, as well as dancing in the traditional way the local ladies do. During our visit, we also visited the deities of Lokanath Goswami, Radha Vinod, as well as Jiva Goswami's famous Radha Damodar deities.

I used to wonder how it was that all these deities were not returned to Vrindavan, but on this visit, I finally understood why they remain in Jaipur to this very day. The answer is that although Krishna is all-powerful, He is controlled by the love of His devotees.

The devotees of Govinda Ji, Gopinath, and Damodar and Radha Vinod show so much love and affection with these deities that it's impossible for the deities to ever leave. It is something that must be witnessed to believe. I pray this video will reveal to the viewers not only the beautiful historical culture of Jaipur but the deep devotion of its citizens for their beloved Lordships as well, because devotion for Krishna is the essence of Krishna consciousness.

We can learn much from the Lord's devotees. Enjoy.