"*00426*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, and good morning to all. Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone. I want to welcome you to our *parikramā* in Yāvat. This is a very sacred place; this is one of the places where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī lived in Vṛndāvana. She lived here in a palace nearby, but it is very small, so all of us definitely cannot fit there, and it was located on the road a little further from the place where the buses dropped us off. But this is a beautiful *kuṇḍa* where you and I are located; this is the place of her morning ablution.

While she was in Yāvat, she lived with her husband, Abhimanyu. This is just general information about where we are, and we can say that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was not born—or rather, appeared—in Yāvat. At the moment when Kṛṣṇa moved with his parents from Gokula to Nanda-grāma because Kaṁsa was constantly sending demons to kill Him, at the same time, Rādhārāṇī moved to Yāvat. Kṛṣṇa moved once; He moved from Gokula to Nandagrām and stayed there, but Rādhārāṇī actually moved twice. She moved to Yāvat when she was a little girl.

There is a tradition that after marriage, a girl moves to the parents of the groom or future husband. When she got married, she moved to this area, to this part of the village, and at the same time, all her *sakhīs*, who were about the same age, also got married and settled nearby. Bhāvarī Prabhu asked me a question about how it all happened. I looked into it, and now I can definitely answer him: you and I have already been to Varṣāṇā. I told you about the fact that the Aṣṭa-sakhīs, all her closest girlfriends, lived nearby around Varṣāṇā. Then, when Rādhārāṇī and her husband moved here to Yāvat, all her girlfriends also got married and moved to Yāvat with their husbands and settled not far from this place.

Imagine all the shepherds—they were very happy because Abhimanyu married Rādhārāṇī, other shepherds married Lalitā, Viśākhā, and so on. But in fact, Yogamāyā arranged it in such a way that everyone, including Abhimanyu, did not actually see their wives. They saw only the shadows of their wives because Śrī Rādhā and all the *gopīs* are an expansion of Kṛṣṇa’s internal pleasure, and no man except Kṛṣṇa can touch them. Similarly, Sītā was never touched by Rāvaṇa because she was the eternal wife of Rāma and was thereby protected. In fact, they were all married to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was their eternal husband, but Yogamāyā had so arranged that, from the point of view of illusion, they married others. All this was created in order to enhance the taste of these relationships. Of course, there is a taste of the relationship between husband and wife, but between lovers, there are even more interesting and exciting relationships. But remember that all this is available only on a transcendental platform. Similarly, for example, Rādhārāṇī is outwardly married to Abhimanyu, but her heart strives for Kṛṣṇa; therefore, Kṛṣṇa is always looking for an excuse to penetrate there and meet her.

There is nothing immoral here because, in fact, everyone belongs to Kṛṣṇa; everything is a part of Kṛṣṇa. It is said that Abhimanyu is the husband of Rādhārāṇī, but he is the shadow of Kṛṣṇa. I found a very beautiful description about Abhimanyu in *Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi*: the thick-headed Abhimanyu counts his wealth by counting his cows and spends most of his time in his barns. Well, Rādhārāṇī's mother-in-law, Jaṭilā, and her daughter, Kuṭilā, are always busy with household duties. We know this reason: Rādhārāṇī married Abhimanyu, so they moved here to Yāvat. But there is also another reason for their move, and it is very interesting. Why did she move to Yāvat? In fact, this is not connected at all with Abhimanyu. There are a large number of stories describing those moments when Kṛṣṇa wants to enter the palace in Yāvat and Rādhārāṇī wants to escape from this palace, but today I will tell you about other stories that also happened here. 

You will be very surprised to know the answer to the question of why she moved here: it is because Kaṁsa experienced lust for Rādhārāṇī. You might say, "What are you talking about? What lust has Kaṁsa for Rādhārāṇī? We know that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the most famous among all here, more popular than even Kṛṣṇa for the locals." When you travel around Vṛndāvana and meet the locals, tell them "Hare Kṛṣṇa," and they always answer you; they are happy. She is very famous, and she was like that from birth. We all love to hear about the 25 transcendental qualities of Rādhārāṇī which Rūpa Gosvāmī once wrote about, and everyone wanted to see her, everyone wanted to be with her. In fact, it was extremely difficult because she was distinguished by a very shy, modest, pious nature. She rarely left the house, and every time she left the house, she only wanted to meet Kṛṣṇa. Everyone wanted to meet Rādhārāṇī, and when Śalva conveyed this to Madhu, King Kaṁsa thought, "Oh, what an attractive girl. I need her to become my wife."

You won’t believe it, but in fact, Kaṁsa tried to steal Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and make her his queen. How dare he come up with such a thing? He dared to steal Sītā at one time, and because he dared to steal Sītā, he was completely destroyed, his entire kingdom. The demons, their nature is such that they are very much mistaken. I will tell you about two cases when Kaṁsa tried to steal Rādhārāṇī. People love to watch all sorts of stories and series about love, war, and suffering, and that is why I always think that this kind of story about Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa would be a good series for a large audience. People are naturally attracted, and you can imagine what it will be like in the cinema where this series will be broadcast. People will come there with popcorn and lemonade, and naturally, their hearts will be purified. They will find love for God because even popcorn will be offered.

You can choose. We can talk about how we are not these bodies, or we can talk about how Kaṁsa stole Rādhārāṇī. There is a mention of this in the *Mādhavī-mahodaya*, and *Valli* also talks about this. You can find this in 2.295. More often we read the story that is described in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and less often we know the story that was described in *Lalita-mādhava*. Rūpa Gosvāmī describes that every day, one of the demons was constantly haunted by the voice that foreshadowed to him: "The eighth child of the girl will kill you." He woke up every day with this thought. He sent demon after demon, but the demons ran out—not that all of them ran out, but the strongest ones he saved to protect himself if suddenly something did not go according to plan.

Then he turned to a new strategy. He thought, "I need to know more about this Kṛṣṇa. What are His weaknesses? What does He do? Where does He go? With whom does He meet?" For this, he sent his spies so that they could get him this information. Having learned this, he could attack Kṛṣṇa. He wanted to choose the right time, so he called the Keśī demon and Ariṣṭāsura. These demons were in the form of a horse and a bull. In fact, these demons had human forms because they were all ministers of Kaṁsa, but because they were engaged in black magic, they had the ability to transform into animals. In the forms of animals, they had come to Vṛndāvana to attack Kṛṣṇa.

Keśī did not just go in the form of a horse; they were attractive ministers of Kaṁsa, and they went in these forms to follow Him. It was as if they were working undercover, watching Kṛṣṇa. They had a little notebook; they wrote down, "Yeah, at 12 noon, He is already on the road," and every day, you and I know that every time at noon, Kṛṣṇa meets with Śrī Rādhā on the *kuṇḍa*. We know that every time Kṛṣṇa comes on one side, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī comes to the same place on the other side. They meet at the *kuṇḍa*, and when the demon Keśī saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he was completely spellbound and couldn't take his eyes off her. Ariṣṭāsura got nervous and said, "What are you staring at? We should be looking at something else." But Keśī couldn't help himself; he simply couldn't take his eyes off her. They watched them throughout the day and followed them everywhere. In the evening, they went back to Mathurā to report to Kaṁsa what had happened.

Ariṣṭāsura reached Kaṁsa and began to eloquently describe it to him. At that moment, Keśī went there and did this, then followed there. Kaṁsa listened to everything, and then he turned to Keśī and said, "What are you going to tell me?" Ariṣṭāsura said, "Yes," but he couldn't say anything at all anymore. His mind was clouded; he got very distracted in Vṛndāvana. Then Kaṁsa said, "Well, tell me what you saw." Then, when they turned to Keśī, he was still very impressed. He began to describe the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He said, "You know, Kṛṣṇa has a girlfriend," and then his description poured out. He listed all her 25 transcendental qualities—they are described in the *Nectar of Devotion*—and while he was saying them, he began to tremble and sweat appeared. He began to experience symptoms. Ariṣṭāsura could no longer stand it and said, "Well, enough is enough already." Kaṁsa was a full-fledged demon; something transcendental did not touch him, but the thought occurred to him, "This girl should become mine." Then Kaṁsa asked, "Who of you is ready to go to Vṛndāvana to steal her and bring her to me?" 

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was unusual; she was not like everyone else. Rādhārāṇī was very beautiful, but at the same time, she was also powerful because all the *brajavasīs* worshipped her, and even Kṛṣṇa Himself worshipped her. She was the most powerful. Kaṁsa was very angry; what should he do now? There is a description in *Rūpa-mādhavī* that at that moment in the room, he again joined his minister, Śaṅkha-cūḍa. He had just joined, and he heard what was being talked about. He was very proud by nature; he stepped forward and said, "Kaṁsa, I am ready to steal Rādhārāṇī for you." Kaṁsa was very pleased with this answer and said, "Go, I will thank you for this." 

So, there is a chapter in the *Bhāgavatam* and it is also summarized in *Kṛṣṇa Book* where he kidnaps all the *gopīs*, and then Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma come, free the *gopīs*, and kill him. But in Rūpa Gosvāmī’s description, just Kṛṣṇa goes, Kṛṣṇa chases him, takes Rādhārāṇī—not all the *gopīs*, just Rādhārāṇī—and Kṛṣṇa runs after him, grabs him by the neck, and boom! In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, there is a description of this story; it says that Śaṅkha-cūḍa came to Vṛndāvana and stole all the *gopīs*, and then Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma came and dealt with him. And about *Lalita-mādhava* by Rūpa Gosvāmī, I really like this version: it says that Śaṅkha-cūḍa came and grabbed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and began to steal her, and at that time Kṛṣṇa came. He was alone, grabbed him by the neck, and gave him some blows.

But this desire, like a fire, was blazing in Kaṁsa's heart. This is a fire that cannot be extinguished because the scorching fire of material existence can only be extinguished by the practice of devotional service. Otherwise, it will burn and burn, life after life. Some time passed, but Kaṁsa could not help but think about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and was looking for a plan. "One way or another, I must steal this girl." We will quote the book by Rūpa Gosvāmī, *Vidagdha-mādhava*. There are two main descriptions: *Lalita-mādhava* and *Vidagdha-mādhava*. The next kidnapping or attempted kidnapping was described in *Vidagdha-mādhava*. It is very important to read the books by Rūpa Gosvāmī. In *Vidagdha-mādhava*, it is described that news that Kaṁsa wants to kidnap Rādhārāṇī reached Vṛndāvana because he loudly told everyone about it, and the residents of Vṛndāvana found out. At that time, she still lived in Varṣāṇā. Rumors reached them that he would again make a second attempt to steal her and would send his demons.

Mukhara, who is Rādhārāṇī's grandmother, heard such gossip. She decided to hide her granddaughter, and she hid her in the forest which is called Saṅketa. She said, "Rādhā, now it is dangerous for you to live here in Varṣāṇā because Kaṁsa will try to steal you again, and I will put you in a wonderful forest called Saṅketa. I know where it is; it is very beautiful, it is part of the Vṛndāvana forest, and there is Rādhārāṇī in a very beautiful cottage next to a lake called Saṅketa-kuṇḍa." Thus, she lived in all these places: Varṣāṇā, Rāval, Yāvat, and this is Saṅketa-kuṇḍa. This place is pristine, as it was 5,000 years ago. Just like Sītā, she lived in the forest for some time; also, Rādhārāṇī lived for some time in this cottage in the forest because this rumor was very common in the Vraja that Kaṁsa will soon come and steal her. If you want to go to Saṅketa to see that small place, the palace in which Rādhārāṇī lived, if you behave well, I'll take you there.

Of course, Mukhara, her grandmother, was still worried. She thought, "He will get through and find out where she is in this forest, and it would be better if I put her on some hill." You know that in military strategy, it is very important to take a higher position—for example, somewhere on a hill—because if you can clearly see your enemy on the top of a hill, it will take him time to approach and also time to climb. So Mukhara was looking for some suitable place to move Rādhārāṇī there. Of course, she was a young girl, so she needed a young man to take care of and protect her. In fact, it was Mukhara's idea that Rādhārāṇī would get married and move here to the hill. Now you know the second true reason why she moved here to Yāvat. I first told you that she moved because she married Abhimanyu, and the main reason is that she was forced to get married in order to gain protection and settle here on the hill in Yāvat so that Kaṁsa would not get her. You understand everything. Mukhara wanted Rādhārāṇī to marry Abhimanyu, and they moved here to the hill in Yāvat so that Kaṁsa would never get them. Thus, Kaṁsa influenced the development of this whole story and played his role. Now Rādhā is fine; she married a man who supposedly protects her, and she settled here on the hill in Yāvat.

Rumors spread very quickly, and according to the words, soon Kaṁsa heard where exactly Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī lived, and of course, he sent his many spies to keep an eye on her. Now their task was not to follow Kṛṣṇa, but Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He was reported that every morning at dawn, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī comes here to wash. That’s why this *kuṇḍa* is called Śoṇī-kuṇḍa (or Kiśorī-kuṇḍa). Now you understand why we are sitting here on the shore of Lake Kiśorī-kuṇḍa. You can compare this sacred place with Rādhā-kuṇḍa itself because Rādhārāṇī also washes there. The locals say that if you wash, you find the love that she has for Kṛṣṇa. If you are both in the *kuṇḍa*, then you will find love. All those lakes that we see in Vraja—these are not just lakes of water; in fact, this is liquid love or liquid *iṣṭa*. You warm your head with a few drops of this *kuṇḍa*, and billions of unnecessary material desires disappear. The spies brought the news that, yes, this is how she lives in Yāvat; she is on a hill, it is difficult to get there, but every morning she, unaccompanied by men, without security, comes here to Kiśorī-kuṇḍa. She washes here, so the best place to steal her will be this place. These are all the details from *Vidagdha-mādhava*. How would we have heard about this if we had not had Rūpa Gosvāmī?

His thought was that "Now I will make her the queen of Mathurā." She was actually the queen of Vraja; it was a completely different mixture of tastes. *Aiśvarya* should not happen in Vraja, and in *Mathurā-mādhava*, there is the presence of *aiśvarya*, so this could not happen. One morning, he found such a reason: he announced to everyone that today he would go to inspect his property in Vṛndāvana. He considered that it all belonged to him; Mathurā was nearby, he considered it all his. He had a large number of escorts, guards, carts, and property, and they came here to Yāvat. Imagine this place, where a lot happened during the time when Rādhārāṇī was taking her bath. He told his soldiers to stay nearby, and he himself went here alone. There is even a description of himself at the moment when he goes to this lake in the hope of meeting with Rādhā. It is described that his strength could be compared with thousands of elephants, and he was armed with earthly and divine weapons. He was tall, well-built, and shone like some kind of personality, adorned with expensive jewelry, necklaces, and earrings. But despite all this radiance, how is *Vidagdha-mādhava* written? This could not hide his quality because he was an *asura*. There is an expression that clothes will not fix anything in a person; he was dressed up and beautifully decorated, but everyone saw that he was like Rāvaṇa; this was the greatest demon of this universe.

There is a description that at the moment when he walked, out of fear of him, the *kuṇḍa* even decreased in size, and the fragrant breeze that always blew on this *kuṇḍa* suddenly stopped, and the birds stopped singing, and the lotus flowers closed. You know when they describe Kṛṣṇa, they always say that in His presence a pleasant breeze begins to blow and all the lotuses open. But at the moment when the Kaṁsa-demon comes, the birds curl up, stop singing, and close. Of course, we have already seen enough of Vṛndāvana and the sewers and garbage of fighting demons, but all this has nothing to do with Vṛndāvana because Vṛndāvana is transcendental in nature. And we will understand this thanks to the fact that we learn what happened next with Kaṁsa.

He wanted to drink; he was thirsty, just like you and I will now want to drink because the sun rises. He found himself near this lake and he thought, "Well, before I find my future wife, this beautiful girl, why don't I drink some water?" That day the weather was like this, and the *kuṇḍa* was very calm; if you look into this *kuṇḍa*, you can see your reflection. Kaṁsa bent down to drink some water, and as soon as this water touched his lips, he saw his reflection in the water and was very surprised. He thought, "What is happening? In this reflection, I look like some kind of *gopī* of Vṛndāvana." He jumped back and thought, "Yes, no, it seemed like some kind of reflection." Then he looked at his hand; it was very gentle, graceful, decorated with bracelets, beautiful rings, and he also had red polish on his nails. It seemed very feminine to him. He looked at his reflection again; he saw such beautiful lotus eyes and dimples on his cheeks. He jumped back in horror, looked down again, saw that he was already wearing a skirt, and was very beautiful, adorned like the women of Vraja. He was horrified, stepped back, wanted to run, and suddenly he discovered that he was running very gracefully and tenderly. He began to examine his reflection again and discovered that his eyelashes were painted with black mascara, his lips were painted with lipstick, and on his chin there was a dot of black musk.

Imagine his condition! Just a few minutes ago, he was such a powerful *asura* with a mustache, such a good-looking man, and now he finds himself in a female form, and he is horrified by this. Imagine when in such a hopeless, shocking situation—what do you do? You look for help, you start screaming, "Someone help! Someone help!" A woman who was approaching the lake—in fact, it was Lalitā—and he turned for help, waving his arms, and discovered that he had bracelets there; he had already started shaking the bracelets to attract attention to himself. "What happened? Oh girls, please help me get my real form back!" He joked, and she showed, "Your true form, here is your true form." Kaṁsa was flooded with fear. Can you explain to me what is the magic of this place? Lalitā is known as *rūpa*; everyone spoke, and she said, "We know who you are; you are Kaṁsa, and the water of this lake, Kiśorī-kuṇḍa, is known for fulfilling all spiritual desires." She said, "How did it happen that such a wish came true from your heart? Maybe when you approached you were thinking about a *gopī*, or maybe about some one *gopī*. Well, now wherever you are, you will be in this form. You got what you deserved."

His life was horrified. "I can't go to Mathurā! I can't in this form return on my chariot to Mathurā! Get off it and in a female voice say hello friends, this is me! Now I will sing you a song!" He fell on his knees in front of Lalitā, the strong, mighty emperor of Mathurā, and he had already thrown away some diplomatic tricks and was very honest in his prayers. He folded his hands like this: "Everything you say is true! I came to this place to see, but believe me, I didn't even have the thought of harming anyone. Please help me." But Lalitā knew perfectly well that he was lying because the true purpose of his coming was to destroy Kṛṣṇa. Lalitā is very fiery by nature, especially at that moment when it is necessary to protect Rādhā from Kṛṣṇa. She had already risen and was ready to scold this Kaṁsa, but the *śāstra* describes that at that very moment, Rādhārāṇī appeared in her mind. She appeared in the mind of Lalitā, and she said, "Bring me this rascal. He is already so humiliated and so discouraged that maybe he can now do at least some service for Kṛṣṇa."

Imagine how much mercy Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had; she was ready to forgive Kaṁsa! We can think that for sure she will forgive all of us, despite what we did before we came to devotional service. I noticed that at that moment when the *brajavasīs* chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, they do not understand that you need to turn to the internal energy of pleasure, Kṛṣṇa, and receive her mercy. Without the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, we will not be able to continue. This is confirmed by the fact that in the next moment, Lalitā said, "Listen carefully." It is said that Lalitā is a co-owner, and she said, "King Kaṁsa, I cannot help you in any way, but if you turn to the queen of this village, Rādhārāṇī, and receive her mercy, then the Supreme Lord..." She is the most tenderly gentle inner part of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, she is *hlādinī-śakti*, she is the energy of pleasure of the Lord. We often say that Kṛṣṇa can be strict and strong like lightning and can also be gentle like a rose; that’s gentle like this is His form of Rādhārāṇī. We walk through the local villages and all the children shout, "Rādhe! Rādhe!" and now we understand exactly why.

Kaṁsa said, "Yes, okay. How can I meet Rādhā?" and Lalitā said very important words. She said, "Follow me, but get ready, you will have to perform some service if you want to gain the mercy of Śrī Rādhā." And what service can we do for Śrī Rādhā? We know that in this age of Kali, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa came in the united form of Lord Caitanya, and He is the Prince here with the *saṅkīrtana* mission. Therefore, as Prabhupāda writes, if we serve the *saṅkīrtana* mission, then in this way we attract blessings. There is a description that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa come in the form of Mahāprabhu because with His body He resembles Rādhārāṇī, and also by the level of His mercy, He also resembles hers. Therefore, by serving Him, you gain her mercy. I heard such a beautiful description that if you dive into the deep ocean of Śrī Kṛṣṇa *saṅkīrtana*, distribute books, or go on a *parikramā* tour, then you emerge on *goloka*.

Lalitā asked what service you will perform for Śrī Rādhā, and he said, "Well, when I was Kaṁsa in Mathurā, I could really do something. What can I do now?" He thought and remembered what the *gopīs* do—they bring water—so he took a bucket of water, filled it from this lake, and remember that this is not just water, this is liquid *prema*. It was then as it is now. Kaṁsa took a bucket, went to the lake, filled it with water, and Lalitā joked, saying, "Oh, what a good *gopī* we have here." In order to gain the mercy of Rādhārāṇī, of course, this was not pure devotional service; he actually just wanted to get his form back. But anyway, on the way back to the hill, Kaṁsa began to very sincerely shout at everyone he met, "Brajavāsī!" and then Lalitā brought this new *gopī* to the Rādhārāṇī palace in Yāvat and made her wait in the reception room and said that when Rādhā is ready, she will come out here to receive you.

Lalitā came to the screen of Rādhārāṇī and told her, "Śrī Rādhā, there is a very unusual *gopī* waiting for you in your reception room." She said, "Oh, what’s so unique about this *gopī*?" Lalitā says, "I don’t even know how to explain it, but he claims that he is Kaṁsa and he came here just to check out his kingdom and then drank some water from Kiśorī-kuṇḍa, and his male body turned into the body of a *gopī*. He wants your mercy, Śrī Rādhā, and he wants that through some magic he again acquires a male form." For a moment, Rādhā thought, then decisively raised her head, and when she entered the reception room, there is a beautiful description that it was like the eternally young spring came in, in which all the best from other seasons is present.

Imagine the young spring itself came in, and was decorated with all the qualities of other seasons. Of course, Kaṁsa had never seen such incomparable beauty. "Oh wow, I heard some strange story about you. Come on, you better tell me everything yourself." Then Kaṁsa folded his female hands and turned to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī: "Oh Goddess, I have heard that you have infinite mystic perfections. I have come only to take shelter of you. I am Kaṁsa, I am the king and the owner of all these lands, but being Kaṁsa, I came and drank water from your lake, and some curse has fallen on me. I became a woman. For the benefit of all the inhabitants of my palace, please give me back my body. I cannot appear before my subjects in this form. Free me from this curse." 

The curse is on everyone's mind. I would like to receive such curses because this is a material body, and to gain a truly spiritual form is the goal, but he confused everything, just as materialists usually confuse everything. "I don’t want to be a *gopī*, I want to be a king. I enslaved everyone, my king, imprisoned many, conquered many. This body doesn't suit me at all. I want back the body of a *kṣatriya*, a real man and ruler." Rādhārāṇī had a plan. She winked at Lalitā, and then, turning to Kaṁsa, she said in a sweet voice, "Okay, Kaṁsa, we will consider your request. But what will you do for me in exchange? I can change this for you, but how will you repay me in return?" 

Kaṁsa very quickly agreed. He said, "Everything, everything! I will do everything! Just say it directly." And Rādhārāṇī clarified, "I am ready to do it," and he confirmed, "Everything, everything, everything!" Then Rādhārāṇī got angry; she raised her right hand up and her voice became loud, and she said, "Kaṁsa, since Kṛṣṇa was born, every day you are trying to kill Him. Is it true?" He said, "Yes," and everyone knows that you send your demonic friends every day to kill my Kṛṣṇa. Of course, all the demons were defeated and killed, but at the same time, they interfered with the play of my beloved Kṛṣṇa. You can repay me by not sending any more demons to Vṛndāvana! You want your form back, Kaṁsa? Promise: no more demons in Vṛndāvana!" As soon as she finished her speech, he very quickly answered, "Yes, I promise!" And Rādhārāṇī said, "And what exactly do you promise?" 

Then the *gopī*-Kaṁsa raised his right hand up and said, "I promise that I will never come here, send demons to harm Kṛṣṇa! I promise! I promise! I promise!" But Rādhārāṇī was not sure because it is impossible to trust demonic politicians. To make sure, she came closer to him, looked straight into his eyes, and said, "If you break your promise, then I promise you that immediately you will take the form of a *gopī*." She fell silent; this time she already said, "I promise, I promise, and next time it will be forever." Kaṁsa thought, "I don’t want to be a *gopī* now, what to say... forever?" What a fool he is! He was such a stupid materialist because this is the true purpose of life, and he was so stupid that he did not understand it and wanted to be just a king. 

Then Rādhārāṇī gave instructions to Lalitā and Viśākhā so that they would accompany him back to this *kuṇḍa*. She said, "Go to the southern part of this *kuṇḍa* and Lalitā will be a witness. Give your pledge before the sun, and after that, drink again water from this *kuṇḍa*. You will never be a *gopī*." In Kali-yuga, many will want to find *gopī-prema* and will dress up in clothes to imitate it, but in fact, those who will serve the Lord in the form of Mahāprabhu and His mission will find Kṛṣṇa. There is no other way, there is no other way. Of course, just chanting will not help; you must chant with feeling. If this feeling is not there, then at least feel gratitude for the fact that you are part of the prediction that over time this mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu will spread throughout the world. This guarantees it. This dream of Kaṁsa about stealing Rādhā, of course, did not come true. Our *kṛpā* between the Lord and us, by the grace of the Lord through Caitanya, we will be able at some point to find our spiritual forms to serve Śrī Rādhā. 

We must chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*, we must at least complete our 16 rounds, our vows. This will help us. Remember how Haridāsa Ṭhākura did it; he chanted in general 300,000 holy names. He repeated 100,000 softly and 100,000 holy names he repeated loudly so that everyone who could hear would also gain benefit. There are a huge number of stories here higher on the hill, but I thought that this is what I would tell you about while in this unique place. I fit into the time that Rasika-śiromaṇi gave me; I was only 4 minutes late. Now we have 20 minutes to eat millet. Then we will go on foot to the place of the *svāmī*, and today we received a huge amount of mercy from him. Remember the two books that he wrote. 

You and I will walk past this palace where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī once lived. Further, very beautiful fields will be waiting for us on the way to the *dhāma*, and we will see how much time we have there. If there is time, we will sing *kīrtana*, and maybe we will even tell a little about some *līlā*. I really hope that you liked the lecture. Tomorrow is our departure day, and tomorrow is a very important day for all of us; it is the day of Śrīla Prabhupāda's disappearance. He is wrong who says that a Vaiṣṇava dies, because he continues to live in his sound, to live in the sound of the Holy Name. He dies in order to live eternally, and he lives in order to spread the glory of the Holy Name. Tomorrow we will have a lecture in honor of Prabhupāda's Disappearance Day; the program will be where the birth program is. You all know where it is, right? This is also the place where Govardhana-pūjā was. At 7:30, come there; at 11:30, the program will end; at 12:00, you can get to ISKCON, and there will be a wonderful feast. Then our Kārtika of the year will continue by the mercy of Śrī Rādhā.""