"*00556*.*
"### Kamyavan - Vṛndāvana Kārtika Parikramā 2021

What to do? There’s so much to be said about this particular place that we are visiting now in our lecture series on the 12th forest. 

But by the grace of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, we have the opportunity to come here even in Kali-yuga and purify our dirty hearts very quickly by performing devotional service in this particular abode, this forest. So, I don’t know where to start, because we gave, you know, like 10 or 12 hours. Well, actually, it’s like—which part of the sweet ball do you want to bite into? North, south, east, west, or break it open and eat the center? I don’t know.

Because she’s one of the five who grants this mysterious entrance into Vṛndāvana.

As the King and Queen—but if you want to meet the King and Queen, that’s not a very easy thing. Even if you’re an important person, you may not get an appointment with the King or the Queen. 

But if you meet someone who’s very close to the King or the Queen, you don’t have to go through all those rules and regulations and rituals. By their favor, you can come into the Queen’s chamber or the King’s chamber, and they will say, "Here is such-and-such." 

We need someone to introduce us, who mystically can introduce you to the dust that you’re sitting on today. Vṛndā-devī is one of the personalities who can introduce you to the Divine Couple, allow you to enter into the playground of God. So here we are sitting. I don’t know how—what is our good fortune? It is only Prabhupāda’s grace that we’re sitting before the original Vṛndā-devī deity here. This is one of the deities that was established by the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa after Kṛṣṇa left this world.

They loved more than anyone has ever been loved before, because love is a two-way street, and as much as you’re attached to something, when you lose it, you feel that degree of pain. Like, if you have a cheap Casio watch and you leave it in the bathroom and somebody steals it—okay, it’s 50 rupees. If you leave it in the bathroom and come back, it’s not here, it pinches, it hurts.

That’s for us. It’s the same for Kṛṣṇa. I’m coming back in a few days, and there, he’s off to Dvārakā. 

The fire of separation in the heart of Rādhārāṇī when Kṛṣṇa had left.

It was a river—a river of tears. 

Most of the water—you take a bath, you put the soap on, you don’t even see the salt, like, because it can’t soak up in salty water. Of all places, everything’s pristine pure. Could you take a salty shower? You kind of come out, "Oh, yeah." And the cows and the deers and the trees—every living being cried so much that the water table under Vṛndāvana is their tears. So when you take a shower, don’t moan, "Oh, it’s salty." Hey, it’s the tears of the Gopīs! Even taking a shower in Braja, we become purified.

They’re just sitting in their homes. They can’t move; they’re so struck with *vipralambha-bhāva*, separation. Nothing’s happening; people are just crying and crying all day long. 

Just like we were in Jaipur, we met one elderly lady. Her husband passed away ten months ago. I met her; she’s still crying. It’s been 10 months. She—what to speak of transcendental love. So he came up with a good idea; he said, "Let’s install arc-vigrahas, let’s install murtis, let’s install deities of Kṛṣṇa around Vṛndāvana in different holy places."

Yesterday, I wandered into a village with Narottama and Viṣṇutaka. We came into a temple, a home temple, where there’s a deity of Dāujī that’s 5,000 years old, hidden away in a little street in someone’s little house. And all the people of the house do, they just take care of Him. That’s all it is, *pūjārī*. It’s amazing, a 5,000-year-old deity of Kṛṣṇa’s older brother in some isolated village. This is Vṛndāvana.

The mercy incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, because the deity doesn’t leave. I’ve seen deities that are from Satya-yuga—you know how far back that is? Satya-yuga, way, way back.

Also carved a deity of one of the five persons who grant entrance into Vṛndāvana. This deity, Vṛndā-devī, was carved 5,000 years ago—50 centuries. At my mouth, 50 centuries.

But then there were foreign invasions; India’s attractive invaders came, and these principal deities were hidden in ponds, in lakes, in the forest. So, to make a long story short—because 5,000 years is a long time ago—this deity was found by Rūpa Gosvāmī. Who else would?

She’s a counterpart; you could say almost like a sister or something. So originally—this is a little technical—but originally there was no Rādhārāṇī. Rādhārāṇī came some years later when Jonathan brought Rādhārāṇī deities.

Three deities on the altar, not like we see today, Rādhā-Vṛndāvana-candra. It was... we don’t know these things, but "seek and you shall find." By research, we have found these things. It’s so interesting; it makes you as satisfied as if you ate one big gulab jamun, you hear this information, "Oh!"

But then, you know, the foreign invasions, they increased, and at one point, the foreign invaders attacked Vṛndāvana, and many of the Vṛndāvana deities had to leave to be protected. 

They came here for safety. 

You could come here and see all those deities now. We have to go to Karoli to... (inaudible) ...everything was very quiet. The secret—the devotees didn’t want the invaders to find out the deities’ whereabouts.

And devotees kept it secret. Can you imagine? They kept it secret for 25 years. How do you keep a secret for 25 years? There’s a common saying: "Three people have a secret; it only remains a secret if two of them are dead." There’s only one person left; that’s the only way you can keep a secret. 

...was so strong amongst the Vrajavāsīs; nobody said anything. 25 years! How far away from Vṛndāvana? An hour, 20 minutes. This is bhakti. This is...

Let’s go. We’re out of here.

They got one huge bullock cart. You know how big Govindajī is? You’ve seen pictures, you’ve been there in Jaipur; He’s a huge deity, Rādhā is a huge deity—huge bullock cart. 

In the royal palace of the kings.

I was just hoping by touching, I’d get a splinter in my finger, and I’d take it out and put it in a golden cup and wear a piece. 

Of Rajasthan. This is UP, and that’s Rajasthan, a couple kilometers away. The bullock cart of Vṛndā-devī got to the border—stopped. Shhh. Like you go see a diorama of something, you know?

Giant forest. So they called some strong men, some wrestlers. Yesterday with some wrestlers, and the wrestlers, they were turned red-faced, embarrassed; they had to run away because they couldn’t push the cart. So they got some horses, 25 horses, lots of elephants in those days. Like the English have a song: "All the king’s horses and all the king’s men couldn’t put Humpty Dumpty... what’s his name? Humpty Dumpty together again." They couldn’t move the cart.

So what’s going on? "My dear Lord, You are not a statue; You are directly the son of Mahārāja. The deity is a full-fledged person, Supreme Personality of Godhead, or, like Vṛndā-devī, a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Because it’s a person, she didn’t want to..." 84 crores of demigods of this planet, and all of them pulling their cart, it wouldn’t move, because Vṛndā-devī did not want to leave.

Thinking, and she’s not moving—what is she thinking? Only by the mercy of pure devotees can we see the transcendental nature of these events, otherwise it will be blocked to our vision. Now sit carefully, because you’re going to fall off the edge of your seats. "If I were to leave, then what would the devotees think? How could the devotees have faith in Vṛndāvana if I were not present here?" Then she said something just like—it’s going to melt your heart. Are you ready? "But I make a solemn promise: I shall never leave." How much can we thank her for staying here and opening the doors to this mystical playground?

So here’s something a little esoteric now: the origin of Vṛndā-devī. Like, where did she come from? That’s important. Where does she come from? Like you meet somebody for the first time, and what is your natural question? "What’s your name? Where do you come from?" You figure somebody out, kind of put them in a box when you first meet them. "What is your name and where do you come from? I’m French, I live in Paris," or "I’m American, I live in New York City," or like that. Oh, so you know, American, French, Spanish.

You can see them on our beautiful Māyāpur altar; there’s four on one side, one that is... (inaudible) ...aside. So these are... 

Two plus two is four; you put the math together. Vṛndāvana, yeah, this... she’s named after Vṛndā-devī, this forest of Vṛndāvana. She must be a very special person. Yes, it is.

Actually, if you research the śāstras very carefully, you’ll understand that Vṛndā-devī once performed penances and austerities in this forested area for 60,000 years. That’s a long time. Because she stayed there for so long, people just thought, you know, that... enter a place—"possession of something is nine-tenths of the law." If you’re, like in India, if you move into a place, it may be somebody else’s; if you’re there long enough, the government says it’s yours. So possession is nine-tenths of the law. So she stayed here for 60,000 years. "Oh, this is Vṛndā’s forest, Vṛndāvana."

So pleased by her austerities, Lord Viṣṇu appeared and granted her a boon that: "Any penances performed here in this forest will quickly fructify and bear excellent spiritual results." Listen to that again: any penance that’s performed in this forest will quickly fructify and bear excellent spiritual results. Hey, what are we doing here in the month of Kārtika? You’re making a quantum leap in spiritual progress today, here in front of you. Can you feel it in your heart?

...became Vṛndā-devī’s, and Viṣṇu blessed this place because of her penance and austerity.

Please accept this gift. 

And she has a golden complexion; of course, here we see her as red, but she has a very golden complexion, and her dress is of a blue color. So, you know, nice color contrast, gold and blue.

Now, as we know, she has a very nice function; she’s in charge of the pastimes. Along with Paurṇamāsī, she’s in charge of organizing all the pastimes that happen. There’s a lot of organization in this place. So she’s in charge—Paurṇamāsī’s like organizing all the pastimes.

The parrots, they take messages—none of this internet stuff, you know. It’s much more cool to give a message to a parrot and then, you know, it... I mean, you send it to your beloved and the parrot lands in your arm and goes, "Radha, I would like to meet you in 20 minutes." Oh, thank you! Please, say that! Better than clicking you a buoyant email; it’s so artificial.

So she has a parrot named Dakṣa who, with his 300,000 parrot disciples, fly around Vṛndāvana taking messages between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and many thousands of different Gopīs. Yes, the presiding deity of the internal energy.

So they arranged everything, and Vṛndā-devī, one of her special services is to make sure that the pastimes are very exciting. If you’re with somebody every day, 355 days of the year, 10 years, it’s not that every day is exciting, you know? It’s just human nature; some days are boring, some days you fight. I don’t know—this is, you know, how many days are exciting? But in Braja, every moment’s exciting, and Vṛndā-devī’s in charge of making sure the different schemes and arrangements... every meeting of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is like the first meeting. The first meeting, you meet your lover—remember you met your husband that first day? You met your wife, your girlfriend—something special about the first. So every time Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa meet, it’s like the first time they ever met. It’s just their hearts are beating. This is the internal... you know, the internal energy of Vṛndāvana, of which Vṛndā-devī is in charge.

What type of trees will be there.

Which type of birds will be there, what songs they’ll sing, in which octave—I can’t go higher than that, I can’t break glass, but she... she makes that octave. What chords, major-minor chords, it’s all so when Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa walk in, it’s all... the atmosphere is conducive to love.

What... how many peacocks will come and how they’ll dance, how many bumblebees will come and how much they’ll...

Which breezes will blow in which direction, at which moments. All these things were arranged, and Kṛṣṇa, oh, He’s so pleased with the sevā of the Vrajavāsīs to facilitate His love with Rādhā. In Kṛṣṇa, I’ve had masters in this world—I don’t want to serve anybody, trying to be myself.

But if you serve a benevolent master, it’s very... no, no. God, a little difficult to preach there. He mentioned, "You, I don’t want to buy your book." There’s no master, there’s no God. Where do you see Yamarāja at the time of death? Prabhupāda said one time: "If you take one step towards Kṛṣṇa, He takes a hundred steps towards you." This is a benevolent master; we should surrender to such a master. Prabhupāda, "We were created to serve, not be served; it’s our integral nature."

You know his personal verse book, how benevolent is Kṛṣṇa is.

He writes, "Because He is very affectionate, He promises to give fearlessness to His devotees. He removes His devotees’ sufferings; He is generous; He takes away His devotee’s sins and He bestows limitless auspiciousness. Because Prahlāda, Vibhīṣaṇa, Gajendra, Draupadī, and Dhruva testify to these virtues, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the husband of the Goddess of Fortune, should be served by all the worlds." What a verse. Oh my God, OMG.

Is... it’s very hard to change English poetry into rasas.

So these... this is some of Vṛndā-devī’s services. We’ll wind down now because we have a lot of places to see here, and come along. But I just wanted to impress upon you the nature of this divine personality at whose feet we’re sitting, and we’re begging for... we want to be part of those pastimes she organizes. "Hey, Vṛndā-devī, don’t forget me. I want to be—I don’t care if I’m just a buzzing bee or a little insect or a butterfly—I want to be there with all of you. I’m sick of this world."

How are your rounds today? Most of what they say, "They’re okay." Very rare someone says, "My rounds are really good, I focus, I give it my heart." Most of what I say, "I’m trying." Hello, is that the mood? *Lobham*, greed, as Rūpa Gosvāmī says, "As young boys are attracted to young girls and young girls are attracted to young boys with the same intensity, but in the pure motivation: Kṛṣṇa, let me love You." This is bhakti.

Now is your chance. Here’s Vṛndā-devī granting entrance to the Braja, here’s Rādhā-Govinda, here’s the Mathurā-mandala. What are they here for? To hear your prayers.

Because much of our progress, most of our progress, is imitating our predecessors. Most of our progress comes like—lessons: pray very intensely, pray very intensely to Us, within Us, very intensely, and see what happens. Yes.

How do we even know about these personalities without the mercy of Prabhupāda? We would know nothing about Vṛndāvana, about these personalities. So our first thing is, we must take permission from Prabhupāda. Pray for his blessings, that they bless us, really. Our success in Kṛṣṇa consciousness rests wholly and solely on the blessings of the Guru.

He’s everything to us, because he alone will take us back to this wonderful abode of Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world. Well, he said we will have hours, so we’ll finish here. I’d like to go on forever, but you come now and take darśana, and then we’ll walk to the next place.

Jaya!""