
"### Kartik Parikrama Last Day Introduction 2015

This is our final program of the Kartik parikrama for this year. There are mixed emotions today. There is the joy that we have another day together to have this transcendental experience, and there is the deep sadness of impending separation. But after all, that is part of the transcendental experience, isn't it? By experiencing some separation, we devotees can begin to understand, maybe a little bit, what it would be like to experience separation from Kṛṣṇa. So, it is all part of the transcendental formula.

I think we will make it through the year to next year because we are very rich in all these valuable experiences, memories, and realizations that we will carry with us. So, we will begin the final program as we have started every program these last four weeks. I must say that these four weeks have gone by very quickly. We have a saying in English—in the blink of an eye—that when you are doing something you like, time passes very quickly, and when you are doing something you don't like (which means material existence), time drags very slowly.

So, what could be more enjoyable than the Vṛndāvana experience? You are duty-bound to share this experience with others when you go back. Because Śrīla Prabhupāda one time told us—I was present here in his quarters—he said, "Vṛndāvana is for inspiration. A few fortunate souls can stay on, and many fortunate souls can move on back to their respective countries and share the Vṛndāvana experience with those who, for whatever reason, are not so fortunate to be able to come here."

How is it possible to share Vṛndāvana in Kiev, Moscow, Singapore, or New York? To begin with, Rūpa Gosvāmī describes in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* that if you can't live in Vṛndāvana, you can remember all the places of pastimes, the holy persons, the Lord’s pastimes—whatever—in your mind. In that way, you can also be in Vṛndāvana. That is another secret to having a Vṛndāvana experience wherever you are in this world.

We find this in the words of Advaita Ācārya, who once said to Lord Caitanya, who was attempting to go to Vṛndāvana but His disciples stopped Him because they didn't want Him to leave, "Mahāprabhu, wherever You are, that is Vṛndāvana." So, whoever is preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness is following in the footsteps of our Founder-Ācārya, Śrīla Prabhupāda, who took Vṛndāvana in his heart to the West and created that Vṛndāvana atmosphere wherever he went. If we can simply follow in his footsteps and present Kṛṣṇa consciousness to fallen conditioned souls, we will continue to have this experience.

These two things, although they appear to be diametrically opposed—being here in this transcendental atmosphere of Vṛndāvana and preaching in the West—they actually feed off each other. When we come here and we experience Vṛndāvana, we develop a very intense desire to share Vṛndāvana with others. And when we are in the West preaching on the streets of New York, Paris, or Moscow throughout the year, that develops a strong desire to come and visit Vṛndāvana. So, the two feed off of each other. This is the perfect formula: you come here, you experience the Dhāma, and you go back and preach to come back to the Dhāma. 

Actually, Prabhupāda wanted us to come here as often as possible. Now, by modern science and technology—airplanes and such—we can do what people even fifty or a hundred years ago couldn't do. We are most blessed.

Yes, we are a little sad, but we are also excited. Like when you have a book and you finish the end of the chapter, you are excited to go on to the next chapter. So, one chapter is the Vṛndāvana experience, the next chapter is the saṅkīrtana experience, the next chapter is the Vṛndāvana experience, the next chapter is the saṅkīrtana experience, and the end of the book is *back home, back to Godhead*.

So, we begin the program as we always do with a memorable *kīrtana*. I so much appreciate his participation despite his busy schedule this year. I would like to invite Gosvāmī Mahārāja to lead us in our final *kīrtana*. Please give Gosvāmī a big round of applause. We consider Gosvāmī part of our family, or perhaps more properly, we are part of his family. He is a descendant of Nityānanda Prabhu; we are part of this group of preachers. So, either way, we are one big family in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

This is a true sign of humility: he dressed, decorated Rādhā with jewelry, and he stayed here on his first visit to Vṛndāvana. We will have our program. *Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya!*"