They're going to take a Paul Hey of a model, these are each other. Hey, calm down. They go in. Hey. In. My Kṛṣṇa, during this auspicious month of Kāṛttik, our Kāṛttik-līlā has come to Kāmvan. Kāmvan is one of the twelve main forests in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Actually, the scriptures say that of all the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana, Kāmvan is actually the largest.

That's the perimeter of twenty kilometers, and from time immemorial, it's been a holy place. We could go on for hours about all the transcendental activities and pastimes that have taken place here. Of course, this is a place where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had many of their transcendental pastimes.

Devotees come here because Kāmvan is that forest which fulfills all of one's spiritual desires. Kāma can be translated as lust, but it can also be taken as transcendental love. Just like Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī says, "Young boys were attracted to young girls, and young girls are attracted to young boys with the same intensity, but in a transcendental way.

May I be attracted to Your lotus feet, My dear Lord." So lust is supposed to turn into transcendental love. So then we say Kāmvan, it means that forest where one can come and fulfill all of one's spiritual desires. At this point in our lives, as aspiring devotees, we're still conquering our material desires.

But by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our ācāryas, we know what these spiritual desires are deep in our hearts: first of all, to become a good disciple of our spiritual master, to serve the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and one day to awaken that prema, that love of God, that is deep within our hearts, that love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So devotees come here and in a variety of ways, they pray to fulfill those spiritual desires that we hear about in śāstra from guru, śāstra, and sādhu. It's a very nice place to come because this is a very historical place for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, particularly because when there were foreign invasions in India, well, from millennia actually, but specifically 500 years ago, the deities in Vṛndāvana were in peril.

So the Gosvāmīs and their followers removed those deities during one particular attack, when there was a very vicious attack where the invaders wanted to break the temples and destroy the deities. And the beloved deities of the ācārya, specifically Govinda-jī, Madana Mohana, and Gopinātha, they were brought here to Kāmvan.

Actually, first they went to Radhakunda, and they stayed seven years hidden there. And after some time, they came here to Kāmvan. And along with Govinda-jī came Vṛndā Devī. As we know, Vṛndā Devī is one of the five personalities who grants entrance into and residents in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

She's very important to all the Vṛndāvanavāsīs.

She also is an assistant, a sakhī, and Yogamāyā. She organizes all the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in great detail. So Vṛndā Devī helped. And we know that we pray to Vṛndā Devī regularly or daily, in her form of Tulasi Devī, in this material world, to become an eternal servant of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So that original deity, the original deity of Vṛndā Devī was established by Rudra, the great-great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa left and devotees were feeling separation, he installed a number of deities, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, different deities around Vṛndāvana, and he established the deity of Vṛndā Devī.

Again, the invasions came, so the deity was placed in a kund in Brahmāṇḍa. And 500 years ago, Rūpa Gosvāmī, when he was in Vṛndāvana, he found Vṛndā Devī.

And again, the invaders came, so she was moved out to Kāmvan. At some point, Govinda-jī, Madana Mohana, and Gopīnātha, they were to be taken to Jaipur for further protection. The city of Jaipur was actually built for Govinda-jī and the other deities as well.

But when the devotees tried to move Vṛndā Devī from Kāmvan, she wouldn't go. She wouldn't cross the frontier. She so much wanted to stay here. As she said, "Mother, did the jīvas..." The quotations say that she is always increasing the devotees' faith in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

She took the vow, "I will never leave." She said, "Kṛṣṇa may come, Kṛṣṇa may go, but I will always remain here for the devotees to help them increase their love and devotion for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." So that's a high point in visiting Kāmvan.

Many other pastimes as well. This was where Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers came, and the brothers drank the poisonous water from one lake. And Dharmarāja, he, Yamarāja, he asked Yudhiṣṭhira to sit here to answer a number of questions. If he answered them quickly, correctly, his brothers would be revived.

He answered them correctly, brothers were revived. That pastime, Dharma-kīrtana, can also happen here. Again, we could go on and on. But yes, we come here to fulfill our spiritual desires and to take shelter of particularly of Vṛndā Devī. And we pray that by now we're on our way out, that our hearts then somewhat purified, our material desires have been kept at bay, and our spiritual desires are much more prominent, more important to us.

And we will try to fulfill them and fulfill the desires of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas to share the glories of Kāmvan all over the world.

Hey. Śrīla.