"*00307*.*
"## Kārttika in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura

Today, on the second leg of our Kārttika parikramā which has taken place in Navadvīpa-Māyāpura, we have had the good fortune to visit two very special holy places. First of all, our group of about 400 devotees—many devotees from our Māyāpura community joined us—we visited Devapalli, or perhaps it is more famous as Narasiṁhapalli, a place where the presiding deity is Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. Actually, the devotees say that the deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva in Nṛsiṁhapalli is from Satya-yuga, and the history of that place goes back that far, if not further. We hear from śāstra that in that particular area, the Mandākinī River used to flow, and as a result, because it was so auspicious, many of the demigods had residences there; they built their palaces there. But in time, the influence of time over many yugas, everything disappeared, including the temple to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. In his writings, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, glorifying that place, Devapalli or Narasiṁhapalli, said, "One day a bhakta will appear, a Nṛsiṁha-bhakta will appear, who will raise the funds and bring and build a massive temple in glorification of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva." So perhaps that is one of our viewers; you can have the honor of fulfilling that prediction of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. 

We go to that place to get the mercy of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. Actually, we hear that just after killing Hiraṇyakaśipu, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva went immediately back to Vaikuṇṭha. It is a very interesting incarnation of the Lord. Because of His love for His devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja, He appeared, He protected him, He killed the asura Hiraṇyakaśipu, and immediately He went back to the spiritual world. It shows how much love the Lord has just for one devotee; that love is so deep between the Lord and His devotee. On His way back to Vaikuṇṭha, He was passing over this area of Narasiṁhapalli, Devapalli, and He knew that in the future He would appear in Navadvīpa-Māyāpura as the Yuga-avatāra, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the most merciful of all incarnations of the Lord. So out of curiosity, Nṛsiṁhadeva stopped there, and the devatās who were in that region, they built a beautiful lake so the Lord could take His bath. So we go there, and we pray to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to protect us so that we can have time to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. It takes time to become a pure devotee of the Lord, so there are many dangers in this world. We ask Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to watch over and protect us so we can use our time wisely and become pure devotees. We ask Him to remove those most difficult things to remove from our hearts, the anarthas like lust, anger, and greed. Śrīla Prabhupāda, when he gave us the Nṛsiṁha prayers in the 1970s, he said our worship of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, in particular, is we pray to Him to protect our spiritual master and protect the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.

So, we traveled about 45 minutes from here to Hari-hara-kṣetra. Hari-hara-kṣetra is where there is an amazing deity, a combined deity of Lord Viṣṇu and Lord Śiva. The demigods were here on this very spot millions of years ago, and they were engaged in kīrtana, glorifying Lord Viṣṇu. And so pure was the chanting from the heart—and we have our Mādhava Prabhu also always saying during his kīrtanas, "Chant from the heart, chant from the heart"—so they were chanting so purely that Lord Viṣṇu actually appeared in the midst of that kīrtana. And the host of that multitude of demigods at that kīrtana was Lord Śiva. And when Lord Śiva saw that Viṣṇu had appeared, he became ecstatic, and he began dancing, and Viṣṇu began dancing alongside him. The two of them came together in intimacy of love, and they were dancing in that form of Hari-hara, Śiva and Viṣṇu, and that became the deity that is worshiped here, the servant and the master together in a relationship of intimate love. 

When Lord Nityānanda took Jīva Gosvāmī on parikramā around this Navadvīpa-Māyāpura area, He brought him here, and He explained the glories of that pastime, and He explained that Lord Śiva is the presiding deity here; therefore, this place is known as Vārāṇasī, the Mahā-vārāṇasī of the original Vārāṇasī, in the sense that all holy places in India and in the universe, in the creation, are actually expansions from the original holy places in Vṛndāvana or Māyāpura. So devotees come here to get the blessings of Lord Śiva. Generally, people approach Lord Śiva for some material benediction, or impersonalists, they approach him to become one with the Supreme. But when you come here to Hari-hara-kṣetra, this holy place, you get the benediction from Lord Śiva of Gaurāṅga-prema. And even if you don't come asking for that, it is said in the śāstra, Lord Śiva begs the pilgrims here, "Please take Gaurāṅga-prema, please take Gaurāṅga-prema." And actually, Lord Nityānanda said that to Jīva Gosvāmī; He said, "I have a question, will you take Gaurāṅga-prema here in this abode of Lord Śiva, in the Mahā-vārāṇasī?" And hearing that, Jīva Gosvāmī began dancing in ecstasy. 

So many pastimes took place here, so we feel very fortunate that so many illustrious souls have come here, and the Personality of Godhead has come here in many different ways. So we come just to roll in the dust and beg for mercy that our hearts can become purified, that we can become better sādhakas, better devotees in the path of devotional service. And somehow, by the mercy of these great souls, maybe one day when we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, tears will fall from our eyes, and that is actually the perfection of devotional service, that one comes to the stage of unalloyed love for the Lord. And we are taking a vow that we will go back to the West, to the Far East, whatever directions, and we will share whatever good fortune we have gained here with the people of the world, all by the mercy of our beloved spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""