This year, our pilgrimage in 2019 is taking us to many beautiful places in Shrivan, and of course, off and on in Vrindavan. Everything is beautiful because it's transcendental, even the flies. But this year, we've chosen to go to some very brand-new places.

We did some research and found a very beautiful spot in Shrivan, Arvind Dham, about an hour-and-a-half drive from Vrindavan town. This is called the forest of Bihar Vana. It's not one of the main twelve forests of Vrindavan, but it's a very important forest.

Bihar Vana means the forest of enjoyment, and this is a very secluded place where Radha and Krishna come and have very confidential pastimes in the groves and bowers.

Vishwanatha Chakravarti Thakura describes that Krishna's Rasa Lila pastimes take place all over in Vana.

If you travel around Vrindavan, you'll see these Rati-sthalis, these little platforms that the inhabitants of Vrindavan make for Radha and Krishna and the Gopis to dance on.

You see those everywhere. But Vishwanatha Chakravarti Thakura says here in Bihar Vana, you don't see many of those Rati-sthalis because this is a place where Radha and Krishna come and engage in very confidential pastimes in the bowers of Vraja, and by the Lord's grace, that transcendental beauty has been maintained here by the residents, the inhabitants of this area.

If there's any place I've been in Vrindavan which you can see, even with our naked eyes, with our conditioned eyes, that looks like Vrindavan must have looked 5,000 years ago, it's Bihar Vana. It's just amazing, it's breathtaking. When you walk in, you see the foliage, the trees, and the bushes, and squirrels, and rabbits, and peacocks, and parrots, and the blue deer, the blue cows.

You see all that here, and it's just so captivating to the heart. And this Bihar Vana is known also as a place where the cows are nicely protected. Here are the cowherd men, and you can see this calf just being born like a day or two ago, two days ago, brand new, and already she's so peaceful and she's so happy because here they treat the cows as they are meant to be treated, as our mothers, actually.

We have a special affection for the mother, so the cowherd boys have a special affection for the cow, so the cows feel very loved, and therefore they give love. When we walked into the forest of Bihar Vana, the cows came up to us, almost as if to greet us, seriously, and they were smelling us and rubbing up against us and wanting us to nudge them and pet them.

So, yes, that's Vrindavan. And we know that cows are very, very dear to Lord Krishna.

So many paintings and pictures we see Krishna with His cows, and the Vishnu Purana explains how dear cows are to Krishna. "Na dhanam na janam na sundarim, kavitam va jagad-isha, mama janam yadi vidyate, tava pada-ambhoja-dvaya-madhuvratam." Two things are especially dear to Krishna: the brahmanas and the cows.

And the brahmanas, obviously, because they are acting as spiritual preceptors, spiritual teachers in society. Their sole profession, you could say, is one of compassion, that they are always giving spiritual discourses day and night. They don't move around very much; that's why the brahmanas always have a big belly; they don't exercise a lot.

They're just always preaching, preaching, preaching Krishna consciousness, so important to have that spiritual message permeating through human society, especially in Kali Yuga, when people are very forgetful of the importance of spiritual life.

To have brahmanas doing that, therefore, they are very dear to Krishna, because Krishna Himself, from the spiritual world, has a spiritual message encapsulated in His 700 verses of the Bhagavad-gita.

So those who continue that message are very dear to the Lord. And as dear are the cows, because, just for example, for material maintenance, we need to have some material maintenance so that we can practice our spiritual lives. Srila Prabhupada said, "If you have an acre of land and a cow, all your economic problems are solved." If you're into simple living and high thinking, the cow, the bull can plow the fields, and we get the grains and the vegetables and ultimately the fruits.

And mother cow, she gives milk. And Prabhupada describes that milk is a miracle food in the sense that by drinking hot milk in the evening, the cells in the brain which have died because as we grow older, the brain cells die, but they are replenished by drinking hot milk.

And that's important because we need a good brain to understand Krishna consciousness.

Our whole movement is based on a very solid foundation of philosophy. Prabhupada doesn't say this, although we're singing and dancing; this is not a sentimental movement. It's based on a very sound philosophy from the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Puranas, Itihasas, etc.

So to understand that, you need some intelligence, and that intelligence is sharpened and maintained and nourished by the milk from Go Mata. Therefore, we say, "Holy cow." People ask, "Why do you call the cow holy?" Because she's making our lives holy.

She's helping us to understand philosophy by which we can go deeper and deeper and deeper into the wonderful science of Krishna consciousness and the pastimes of Krishna here in Shrivan and Vrindavan.

So cows are very, very dear to Krishna.

This one's getting a little restless. Hold on. We hear when Krishna was present here 5,000 years ago, His father Nanda Maharaja had a herd of 900,000 cows, and they're all different shapes and different colors, combinations of colors, different moods, etc., like that.

And Krishna Himself, He had a pet bull.

Children like to have pets. So Krishna's cowherd boy, so He had a little pet.

The bull was called Padma. Gargacharya subscribed in scripture that this little pet bull was very handsome; he had expensive gold-plated horns, his hoods were studded with gems, and he always wore a permanent, ever-fresh necklace of garland of red flowers, a very beautiful description.

And Krishna, when He got up in the morning, one of the first things He did, of course, was go to milk the cows.

And He would greet the cows with the following words: "Well, mother, have you rested well?

Well, father bull, are you happy?" Then He'd call out the names of the cows: "Oh Ganga, Godavari, Kalindi." He knew the names of all the cows.

And the cows, they could smell the fragrance of Krishna, and their hearts would just melt with that, and they would drink His beauty through their eyes.

So these cows are described in a very beautiful way. And Krishna would milk the cows, but Vishwanatha Chakravarti Thakura said that really, there was no need to milk the cows because the cows, upon gazing upon the beautiful face of Krishna, their beloved Lord, the milk would automatically flow from their teats.

See the loving exchange. All these cows in the spiritual world, we shouldn't think of them just as animals. Actually, they are liberated souls; they are eternal Vraja bodies, and they are rendering a particular flavor of service to Krishna, a type of love that Krishna enjoys very much.

Everything in Vrindavan is permeated with transcendental love. So these are great, self-realized souls whose Rati is with Krishna, as cows.

So Krishna is reciprocating loving dealings with all these different cows.

Vishwanatha Chakravarti Thakura, he says there are two types of cows in the spiritual world. Some of them are Nitya-siddha, eternally liberated, and others are Sadhana-siddha, their devotees who came in with Krishna consciousness on this earthly planet, revived their Krishna consciousness, and went back to the spiritual world.

But whether one's a Nitya-siddha or a Sadhana-siddha in the spiritual world, both are considered eternally liberated. Vishwanatha Chakravarti Thakura, he describes the cows in a very poetic way. One of my favorite readings, he said, "These Surabhi cows, they are like Chintamani jewels that fulfill any desire.

Their mooing is the most beautiful poetry. These happy cows are like a pleasant summer, and they always lift their ears when they hear Krishna's flute, and they wander the earth and go to pastimes as they wander the earth and go to pastimes.

They resemble the bubbles of the milk ocean, the chuckles of Lord Shiva, and the infant children of moonlight." So our understanding comes from the acharyas. We understand things through guru, shastra, and sadhu. So this understanding, we are beginning to realize it in our hearts.

And like Krishna loves the cows, we also love the cows, not only for our material maintenance but because they are such loving animals, they are so beautiful.

I heard Prabhupada say one time, "Just to look at a cow makes the mind peaceful." So here at Bihar Vana, besides all the nikunjas of pastimes of Radha and Krishna, they are maintaining a beautiful goshala.

And they say that these cows here at Bihar Vana in this goshala are a strain of the original cows of Nanda Baba's goshala; they haven't been mixed with other cows in different parts of India. So if you want to see what the original cows were like, what they looked like, the mood of love, how beautiful or how pleasing they are to Krishna, come here to Bihar Vana.

Walk through the forest as it has been for 5,000 years, peacocks, birds, and come in just as Krishna would do.

I read when Krishna gets up in the morning, the first thing He gives a loving embrace to the cows.

So comfortably at Bihar Vana, and see this beautiful kunja of Radha and Krishna's pastimes, and see the beautiful cows, make your mind peaceful.

And do some kalsilika; by doing some kalsilika, He will be very pleased, and one day He will bless you with His ultimate benediction of Krishna prema.

Bihar Vana ki, Go Mata ki, Shrivatsa Pol Pot ki ho!

Premanande Hari Haribol!