Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu Nityananda, Śrī Advaita Gadādhara Śivānanda Gaura bhakta-vṛnda. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

Thank you to everyone who gathered tonight. Everyone, because he lives as a rule in America, in Florida, in the city of Alachua. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

I wanted to travel and see how mercy is spread by devotees in different countries, with us in the holy names. We went to Russia and drove through Russia. We had to choose where to go because now in Russia there are so many temples.

For example, in Moscow, they already have 100 in the city itself. And therefore, we had to carefully look at the map of the Motherland, choosing where we would go. My eyes fell on Moscow, Petersburg, Rostov, Sochi, and moving from there to the east, you can see Yekaterinburg, Ufa, Vladivostok.

The advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is that we develop a taste for praise. In order to develop a taste for learning, we must free ourselves from material desires. And then we will be able to realize how Kṛṣṇa is present from His own, and there is no difference between the name of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa Himself.

And the *prema*, thanks to their spiritual advancement, attach themselves to Kṛṣṇa in the form of the Holy Name. Which appeared more than 5,000 years ago in a beautiful form of bluish color, He also appeared 500 years ago as the spiritual Lord Caitanya of golden color.

He can be recognized because He chants His own names, and He is surrounded by the devotees who also chant the names of the Lord. The Lord appears in order to give a process with which they can awaken the believer's love for God.

He says that religion is characterized by purity, mercy, asceticism, and truthfulness. By developing these principles, any society can advance spiritually and develop a relationship with God. Therefore, God in each age will acquaint people with the principles of religion, and in accordance with the qualities of people in each age, He gives them a process for developing consciousness.

We travel and visit different countries. We see how much people differ from each other. In Russia, Australia, because of the nature of goodness or the combination of qualities that influence people. Over the past six months, we have been to India, Nepal, America, Australia, Macedonia, Belarus, and Russia, and you can see how much people differ from each other because in each country there are different combinations of natural forces.

That is why the four *yugas* through which degradation takes place are very different from each other, as well as in a year. To return to the spiritual world, souls are so pure, they need very little to return home to God.

And in the next *yuga*, this spirit decreases, only 75% remains. Therefore, a little more effort is needed to help people return to the spiritual world. And since in the material world, everything is prone to degradation, when it comes to spiritual life, only 50% of the interest remains in spiritual life.

And as for *Kali-yuga*, only 25% of the population remains which is seriously spiritually developing. Well, this is at best 25% who still try. Therefore, in 2014, there is already 5% interest in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And the Lord must come up with some kind of process of spiritual development for people in *Kali-yuga* because He wants not just 5%, but all His spiritual children to return to the spiritual world.

Come. And therefore, He needs to come up with something very attractive and effective. In the *yuga*, the easiest and most sublime process of reviving our consciousness is Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

There is a sublime and effective method of spiritual development in our country, which is chanting of the Holy Name. And even in this case, some people refuse to participate. Once he came to France, to our Paris temple. At that time, I was the leader of the temple.

He was a little disappointed. He said that there is only one French person here. Where are the guests?

Where are the Parisians?

Of course, he was glad to see us too, but nevertheless, he had a desire to preach to new people as quickly as possible. This is an opportunity to share it with completely new people who know nothing. And he spoke with several leaders after the program.

He said that in France, people are prone to philosophy. "Go, find me inclined philosophers. I will preach to them. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is blissful when it expands. When we see how lost souls return to the Kṛṣṇa family again." He said, "Bring me the philosophers, the academics, the politicians, the students, so that I can preach to them." And the next day, some went to a foreign university to invite some professors, academics, students.

Some of the priests went to invite some movie stars, musicians, and so on. And they came and met them, and he was very pleased. And I left Hari's group for this. The main thing we did was something that we experienced in the personal presence of the Lord.

So even after going outside with *kīrtana*, they mostly sang not Hare Kṛṣṇa, but *Jaya Prabhupāda*.

And even the local residents stopped. They were not thinking. They were talking about who is writing some new song. Oh, when it was my turn, I sang with enthusiasm a song that one of my spiritual brothers composed, glorifying the Lord. "Oh, Prabhupāda, my spiritual master, my Kṛṣṇa, you have descended to this material world out of your own love for us.

Your fresh form is so attractive. Come, give me your helping hand. In this material world, I am perplexed. Please let me know if you have come to take me home." Jaya Prabhupāda!

Jaya Prabhupāda!

Jaya Prabhupāda!

Jaya Prabhupāda!

O the lake of nectar, did you love for me act in a rush of love?

You left the abode of the Lord in order to come to this place of birth and death, and you stretch out your arms, helping everyone to overcome the influence of matter. And I want to know if you can really take me home like this.

And then we began to sing Hare Kṛṣṇa with great enthusiasm.

Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of people were passing by. One man said, "Today you sang something very beautifully." But one woman who was passing by, she stopped right next to me. Opposite me, she played me sobbing, and she looked very shaken.

She didn't like it. And then she closed her eyes, plugged her ears with her fingers, and stuck out her tongue. She showed us how it would look. I can't show it because I teach you to be humble. That is, a woman from the soul.

That's how she showed it because there was so much poison in her. So much to write to God. Some French people have a very strong spirit of protest. And that's why they say there are no masters, there is no God.

And then we came to the temple, and the *guru* called us to his room. And he asked me, "Well, what and how was today?" And on this day, in addition to the incidents, it also rained, and the people there were throwing apples at us.

And that's why I sat, everything was difficult. And the *guru* wanted to teach me a lesson. So he hit the table with his fist and leaned towards me and said, "And what?

Did I say that it would be easy to preach?" "Let's continue," I told Prabhupāda. "Here, there was one woman with ears, she stuck her tongue out with her fingers and showed us her tongue.

I didn't want to." And Prabhupāda said, "What did you do?

What did I do?" "Well, what did you do to her once she scolded us?" I said, "What her?" Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

A lost soul, he said, "And I had to run to this woman and pull my fingers out of her ears and into her ears." Sing. Because it is said that the most gracious form of Kṛṣṇa is the Holy Name.

This process is so powerful that even if we sing or listen to this chant unconsciously, very strongly, it saves us. The scriptures say that even if a person sings unconsciously, he can get liberation from all the consequences of sins and *moksha*.

What he says about conscious awakening?

You can get the feeling of love. Because, can it be any other way?

The process of devotional service, so that in us the Holy Name awakens. At the beginning, it should purify us. And this happens when Prabhupāda came to the West and began to give initiation to the Western devotees.

His spiritual brothers said, "Why do you give the pure name of Kṛṣṇa to these sinners?

This is a sin. The West is full of young sinners. It will be of no use. It will be the same as pouring oil on the water; there will still be no fire." He first came to India. The Sanskrit syllables also mean the most attractive person, Kṛṣṇa.

It also means the one who frees from repeated births. And said that I can do more karma. Or that my brother was the first to be forced to admit that the Lord is Almighty. And he was forced to admit that the name of Kṛṣṇa is more powerful than any other punishment.

So I give it, and they change. All with devotion, smiling, they look like residents of the spiritual world. Such is the power of the Holy Name. And you have this name at the moment of initiation. Received an eternal blessing.

And the greater you are, you understand, the more you take advantage. If you give a child a diamond ring, what will he do with it?

He will not really understand the value. You can ask the mother. Children are everything. It's the same place. My Holy Name is like a diamond. But we are so ignorant that we do not use the benefits of the Holy Name.

Therefore, we need to discuss these topics. And again, in order for us to truly appreciate Him and take advantage of all His benefits, we praise Him. But we want to speed up the process. For example, in my opinion, it was late yesterday or the day before yesterday.

The steering wheel looks out. We will probably need a lot of time to get home. She drove to the highway. And when she started the car, she slowly drove onto the highway. And then she drove in the slowest lane, looked at me with such a smile, turned on the engine, and began to overtake everyone, even the police, in five seconds.

We were already at home, in a state of shock. She went to the car. The gold of the world that passed the attack says that if you learn to chant the Holy Name of Kṛṣṇa cleanly, all the signs of a pure devotee will manifest in you, and your love for God will manifest.

But if you do not properly follow the process, it can take up a lot of your life. And therefore, as the Lord sings, the reading calls on all conditioned souls to wake up. And He says, "Enough sleep on the knees of the witches." Devotees who preserve their materialistic desires.

He turns to us because we chant the Holy Name because it is full of love. As Jesus said, "My cup is full of love." It should be reflected in us as Divine love. But we do not cry with tears of love.

And thanks to the discussion of topics related to the Holy Name, we develop the joy of faith because the Holy Name can save you and set you free. Once upon a time there was a bandit, a robber, a hooligan, whatever you want to call it.

But he was an unusual thief or criminal. And because he was together with his gang, he watched over the pilgrims who were going to the holy places. They robbed the pilgrims who were going to the Sufis, because they knew that the pilgrims were going and bringing offerings to the deities.

It is said that the Lord should give the most valuable thing that you have. This is a manifestation of love. When a businessman brought and gave a donation of $100, he left. And therefore, if you want something for the deities, it is necessary to give or donate so that it is something very valuable.

And this bandit and robber, together with his gang, hid in the branches of trees. When the pilgrims passed by, they jumped on them from the tree and cut them. Sometimes, even the skin of living pilgrims. And sometimes they mocked people so much that they tied someone up and hung him on a tree and put a cauldron of boiling oil, and gradually poured hot oil on the person and enjoyed watching him writhe in pain.

Sometimes, tied with ropes. To each of them. Sometimes they tied a man with four ropes to his hands and feet, and tied these ropes to elephants, and then they drove these elephants in different directions, and the man was torn into four parts.

And at one fine moment, the people of Narada Muni, who traveled all over the universe, passed by the forest path, by this place. And when he saw what they were doing, he felt suffering not only for the pilgrims but also for the devotee bandits.

He sees everyone as a candidate for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And in order to demonstrate the power of the Holy Name to them, he turned to the leader of this band of robbers and preached. This robber thought, "Maybe he is right.

Who can contradict the statement that they are perfect because they come from the perfect Lord?" This person said, "What should I do?

I have committed as many sinful acts as I can. Cleanse?" Narada said, "Repeat the name of God, and your sins will fly away." Different.

He said, "What is the name of God?" Told him, "Rāma." He said that you must repeat the name of Rāma.

But this time he was so sinful that he could not even recite it. I meet people who are not even able to repeat it. I said to one person, "You can pronounce Hare Kṛṣṇa once." He said, "Never, never, never, never will I pronounce it." He was so sinful that he was not able to pronounce it. "Repeat the word 'Māra' again and again." And again the thief said, "And why?" People said, "Just repeat." And the meaning was that by repeating the word Māra, Māra, Māra, Māra, Māra, O in the end he began to repeat the name of Rāma and became so purified and developed such love for God that he repeated himself with tears in his eyes.

Rāma, Rāma, Rāma. And many years later, he came to us again in this place. He still repeated it. Narada was very impressed. He asked, "What is your name?" And the former said, "People call me Vālmīki." Narada Muni, because he knew that Vālmīki I have to write a *Purāṇa* like this.

The glory of the worldly name that raises people from the lowest level to the highest. And if such an elevation is possible even for Vālmīki, what does he say about you?

Because with such sinful actions, no one from someone from living people tore the skin of a neighbor to pieces with the help of a horse, boiling oil, people-torture. Therefore, you have a great advantage despite the fact that you live in a village.

If you chant the Holy Name, you can do it very quickly. Develop a pure consciousness. We will talk tomorrow evening. Tomorrow is also a day off. Everyone can gather because his lectures are as good as his. As far as I heard, tomorrow is still planned.

We will talk to him. He said that tomorrow it will not rain and it will be warmer. Try to participate. It should be around 11, as far as I remember. Do you want to eat or drink?