Hare Krishna, we are standing before the Kedarnath temple, the third stop on our Char Dham parikrama.

This is a very, very famous temple. It's actually the, the highest elevation of the four dhams that we are visiting. It's about 3800 meters. And despite that altitude, which can cause some altitude sickness, hundreds of thousands of people come here every year, and rightfully so, because it's here that one can get the blessings of Lord Shiva.

Lord Shiva is dear to all classes of transcendentalists, including Gaudiya Vaishnavas, particularly in his form as Gopeshwar Mahadev. He guards Vrindavan, our most beloved Vrindavan, in four corners, is in Shiva lingams, and he is one of the five personalities who grant entrance into and eternal residence into Vrindavan.

So Kedarnath is not an easy journey here for those who walk or even take a car, because the roads here are very narrow and very, very, very windy. This temple was actually established by the Pandavas 5,000 years ago. We hear that just after the Battle of Kurukshetra, Maharaja Yudhisthira and his brothers wanted to approach Lord Shiva to become freed from the sin of killing so many soldiers.

We can't even imagine how many soldiers were killed. So their duty, their Dharma, as kshatriyas to protect the innocence, nonetheless many men were killed, and there was a great reaction for that. So they desired to approach Lord Shiva. And when they approached Lord Shiva, he, he was fearful of taking on the reaction of so many sins like that.

So he, he assumed the form of a bull and he ran away. And the five Pandavas, they ran after him all the way here to the Himalayas. And at this point, Bhima caught up with Lord Shiva, who was in the form of a bull, and he grabbed him at this very spot behind me here, he grabbed him.

And of course, again, he was in the form of a bull, Lord Shiva. So he went into the earth, and only his hump was showing. His head showed at Muktinath, looking out, another holy place, exit in Nepal. So that hump has been taken as the Shiva Lingam.

Generally, Shiva Lingams, everyone's seen a Shiva Lingam is an erect cylinder like this, but this is in the form of a hump. And Lord Shiva personally manifested that hump. So people who come here, they come to pray to Lord Shiva for, for, for his mercy.

So the Pandavas, to honor Lord Shiva, they built this temple 5,000 years ago. And Adi Shankaracharya, the acharya of the Mayavadis, the monists, he came here and he actually at the end of his life, he stayed here. He reconstructed the temple a bit, because by that time, thousands of years had gone by and it had become a little deteriorated.

So he renovated that temple, and he passed away here. Adi Shankara passed away here, and his samadhi was just over on your left and my right, beautiful samadhi of Adi Shankara. But unfortunately, in, in the year 2013, there was a tumultuous storm.

Actually, the storm went on for many weeks, actually for months, and unfortunately, there was a flood of water that came down from the mountains. Nothing could stop it, and it came down over the temple and through the town. And unfortunately, thousands and thousands and thousands of people were killed.

And more or less, almost every building in Kedarnath was destroyed. This is in 2013, and the samadhi of Adi Shankara was also destroyed. And right now, no one knows where his sacred form is. Since then, they've reconstructed the town as best they can.

But one might wonder why the temple is still standing. A flood which destroyed, you know, buildings as strong as that, how is it that the temple wasn't destroyed?

What happened is, during the flood, the beginning of the flood, a gigantic boulder just came rolling down, rolling down the mountain, rolling down and it stopped at the back of the temple. So all the water that was coming down, it was diverted to the sides, like this, diverted to the sides, and the sacred Lingam of Lord Shiva was protected.

So why have we come here?

We're Gaudiya Vaishnavas, we're not Shiva bhaktas. But we know that the Bhagavata Purana, the Srimad Bhagavatam, describes that Lord Shiva is the greatest Vaishnava. Why is he the greatest Vaishnava?

Because well, he's in charge of the mode of ignorance. We know there are three modes of nature and there's a corresponding personality in charge of that. Vishnu is in charge of the mode of goodness, Brahman is in charge of the mode of passion, and Lord Shiva is in charge of the mode of ignorance.

But dressing like that, and being in the form is looking like the mode of ignorance, but not in the mode of ignorance, he's Shiva Tattva. So many fallen people are attracted to him, like ghosts and witches and hobgoblins and rakshasas, they're attracted to him.

But by his association, they also become Vaishnavas. This is Vaishnava bhakti. Motilal Nehru said one time that the duty of a first-class man is to make a fifth-class man also a first-class man. The duty, the Brahmanas, actually, Brahmanas were meant to elevate people up to the mode of goodness, which is a stepping stone toward transcendence.

So these are some of the glories. We could stand here for a thousand years and tell pastimes of Lord Shiva. There's a Shiva Purana for that matter. But for us, we take, we adore him, we love him, we pray to him because he gives shelter to the fallen and he uplifts them to the highest standard of devotion to Krishna.

And again, he's protecting the holy dham of Vrindavan. And only by his mercy, as one of the five personalities, can one get entrance into Vrindavan and stay there and achieve the most cherished goal of all Gaudiya Vaishnavas, which is Preman Bhakti, our love of the Divine Couple, Radha and Krishna.

So we're making a very quick trip here because this is very high in the mountains. Actually, this site will be closed in a couple of weeks because the heavy winter is going to come, and with it the snow, and they're not able to continue the worship here.

The deities will be moved down a little bit lower into the valley. But even now, the clouds were coming, the fog is here. So again, we came by helicopter. I explained to some of the devotees, because of the lack of time, generous sponsor, we came here by helicopter.

The helicopter pilot, he landed not far from there. He said, "You've got 45 minutes to take that darshan. You must have been waiting to take, waiting to take for your whole life. You better run up that mountain." And it was 3800 meters.

You have to catch your breath every two meters. But we made it here by the mercy of our glorious spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Not out of this fathomless mercy, Śrīla Prabhupāda introduces to all these transcendental personalities and spoke about these holy places.

Actually, here they say that Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu came, that's what the locals say. And there was actually a temple of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, and some of his artifacts. Actually, we hear from the local pandits, and that was all washed away in the flood.

So who knows why the flood came, but the temple remains, the deities remain, and the beautiful Lingam, the hump, the hump of the bull, that's the Lingam, it remains, and people will continue coming here, I believe, for thousands and thousands and thousands of years to get the mercy of Lord Shiva.

Hare Krishna.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

All glories to Lord Shiva. All glories to all the devotees of the Lord.