Holidays. Heart attacks. We find ourselves today where our heart is. It's saying, "Home is where your heart is." And because we know that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu so much enjoyed going out in the villages and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, we know that our previous acharyas did the same.

We know that our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda enjoyed seeing his disciples and followers go out on harināma saṅkīrtana.

That's where their heart was—with the people, actually sharing Kṛṣṇa consciousness with the people. We have many various activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but devotees just love to go out and share the good fortune with others, especially in this particular form of chanting and dancing on the streets.

It is very, very powerful in many ways. We hear how it cleanses the heart of all impurities like lust and anger and greed and uproots the material desires, throws them to a distant place, and eventually it will give us the goal of chanting, which is love.

The Divine Couple brought in Kṛṣṇa. But we see that power also in the way that it changes the hearts of the people on the street. There are people from all over the world here in London, and Oxford Street is very famous.

There are people from all over the world, and we see when we go down chanting the holy names, we see an immediate effect. Immediately people smile, they laugh, they wave, they come forward. Sometimes they dance with us. And I've seen here in London, the people take our literature very, very easily.

They give donations, and if we're distributing prasādam, they take it very easily. This is the miracle of the holy names. Therefore, it's our main activity. One time, a distinguished person came to Śrīla Prabhupāda for darśana, and he didn't appear to be very interested.

So Prabhupāda took the harmonium and just started singing for about 40 minutes in front of this gentleman.

Then Prabhupāda stopped to push the harmonium their way, and he said, "This is what we do.

We chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." So he gave that gentleman the essence of that process.

And we can see how much we're enjoying it, and we can see how much the people enjoy it. This is the formula for the age of Kali. Kali-kali nāma rūpaṁ kṛṣṇa avatāra. Kṛṣṇa has come as the avatāra in the form of His holy name to awaken people to their dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And whereas, you know, religions or spiritual traditions, they tend to take a long time to fructify, to purify people's hearts, it's just the nature because we're so conditioned. We've been in this material world since time immemorial, but life is short and then you die.

So Caitanya Mahaprabhu has brought a process that has almost immediate effect. People's hearts become cleansed, they become attracted to the spiritual party, they become attracted to the holy names, which means what?

They become attractive to Kṛṣṇa. And that's the goal of all spiritual traditions, to become attracted to God. And God's original name is Kṛṣṇa. In Vrindavan, in the spiritual world, in Goloka Vrindavan, that's what everyone calls Him. It's His original name.

So we're blessed to know that original name. We're blessed to chant the holy name and become purified. And we are extremely blessed to chant in public, come out in public, where our heart is, seeing the people become awakened. Because Vaisnavas' nature is that they're sad when they see their brothers and sisters, which means every created living being, the scriptures, the father of all living beings.

We're sad when we see people be bereft of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And our greatest joy, as exhibited by Mahaprabhu and His associates, should be to take the chanting to the people and see their eyes light up and see them dance a little bit and laugh and smile.

I had one garland they gave me today. We were chanting along, and there was one businessman. He was sitting there quite sternly looking at the kirtan party, trying to figure out what was going on. Took my garland, and I flung it to him like that, and it landed right around his neck.

He went, "Whoa!" And then a big smile.

He got Kṛṣṇa's mercy in the form of a garland that was originally worn by London Ishvara. So it's just overwhelming to come out and see how people in Kali Yuga can be transformed very quickly by chanting the holy names.

This is the way which Mahaprabhu started the movement. He would go out every day in the villages at some point in His youth, and He would take the chanting to the people. Our acharyas would follow suit. Śrīla Prabhupāda, when he came to America, he took the little drum, the bongo drum.

One of the first things he did was go to Washington Square Park in New York City and sit down and play. He had no amplification, he had no sound system, but he told us one time that the chanting from the lips of a pure devotee has a special effect.

And Prabhupāda made so many devotees.

They were hippies. We know what hippies were. He made them happy. He made them civilized. He made them brāhmaṇas. He made them Vaisnavas, primarily to this process of kirtan. So we should keep this original means of spreading the saṅkīrtana movement alive in Kṛṣṇa consciousness for the next 10,000 years.

We hear that in Kali Yuga, the Golden Age of Lord Caitanya, the saṅkīrtana movement lasts 10,000 years. So, although there will be many innovative ways to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and that is required, Prabhupāda himself was very innovative, you know, translating and giving purports to so many books, doing television shows, radio shows, writing letters, etc., etc.

He was innovative in his particular time on this planet. So we also have to be innovative without compromising our tradition. This is an art. Senior devotees know how to do that. Just like we see devotees are using the internet now in so many ways.

We're spreading the saṅkīrtana movement, but this original process of going out on the streets, having personal contact with the people. I always tell devotees in classes that it's the personal touch which really is a way to spread the movement.

They say that the best advertising is by word of mouth. So let's, let's keep that principle. Let's, let's keep the harināma. Let's go out on the streets like this. We're dressed in dhotis and kurtas. People are fascinated. They're complimenting us for our dress, and we're singing and dancing with musical instruments, waving, being very naturally very happy.

It's infectious, and people become, and they want to come to the temples, they want to come to our farm communities, they want to come to our restaurants and learn more, more about this movement, just because the spark was planted by this kirtan.

So keep the harinam going on the streets. Many times, devotees ask me what's my favorite temple. So I just say all of them. But then I explain, really, I feel my temple is here on the street. On the street corner, this is where I joined the movement.

This is where I began experiencing the bliss with Kṛṣṇa gajan, by chanting very loudly, playing the drums till my hands became sore, and distributing books and meeting people and giving them invitations and talking to them and bringing them to the temples.

So this is where my heart is. So my temple is the street. So, you know, I've come home today. I don't come to London very much, but I feel very comfortable. I feel very much at home here, coming out to see this video.

How blissful the kirtan is. Immediately one is elevated beyond the mode of ignorance, beyond the mode of passion, even beyond the mode of goodness, to śuddha-sattva, to pure goodness, that one can begin to experience spiritual joy within by glorifying our beloved Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

So, you know, we've been out here for many, many hours. Time has passed very quickly. I feel like it was only five minutes. Let's keep this process of going out on the streets with kirtan, with drums and symbols. Don't let it fade away in time.

Let it be a main force in the Kṛṣṇa conscious movement, where people see our happiness as something genuine. And what are they doing on the streets?

They're looking for happiness in the stores here, in the restaurants, there's lots of theaters here in London, okay, a little spark of happiness. But you can experience happiness all the time by chanting, and especially when you're giving the chanting and seeing that people become alive.

For me, this is the perfection of life. And you see it in this video. Photos heard a thousand words. A video is worth a million words. So relish this video and become inspired to go out into your town, in your city, even if it's just a small kirtan party, keep the tradition going for 10,000 years or more.

Street saṅkīrtana, congregational chanting of the holy name. This is the process which Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced, and which He loved, and which Prabhupāda loved, and therefore we love it as well.

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtana. Back home, back to Godhead. Keep taking all the people with us. Why not?

They're all our brothers. And take them back by just chanting of the holy names. Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa. All glories.