"*00501*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa,  we are coming to the conclusion of our 21-day Hṛṣīkeśa Kīrtan Fest. So, I have got a cold tear here and I have got a warm tear here, because in medical science they say when you cry because you are happy, the tears are cold, and when you are a little sad, the tears are warm. So, I am happy because we have been able to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with so many beautiful people—beautiful in the sense that they are coming here for a particular purpose. They are coming for self-realization; that is why they come by the thousands and from all countries of the world. It is like they kind of get pulled into here. As preachers, we try our best to find people in our particular locations, you know, our cities, our countries; we try to seek out people that we hope would be interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Here, we just sit in the āśrama and they flood in day by day, by the hundreds, by the hundreds. So, I am just—you know, cold tear, I am so happy, but it is almost over, so it is a little sad because this is the heart of a Vaiṣṇava. He or she wants to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with others. If you have a lot of something nice, really nice, like Kṛṣṇa consciousness, naturally you want to share it with others, like Jesus Christ said, "My cup runneth over with love." And where are we? We are in Hṛṣīkeśa, which is one of the principal spiritual centers here in India for thousands and thousands of years. Hṛṣīkeśa, we all know that spiritual activity performed in a dhāma like this, the resultant effect is magnified a thousand times, both for us but for the people who come. When we see their faces light up when they are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, it is just so satisfying. I often think of that phrase, "perfect, more perfect, and most perfect." It applies here. It is Jīva Gosvāmī from his *Sarva-saṁvādinī*; he is talking about *dora-darśana*, then *darśana*, then Vaiṣṇava being most perfect. But I was thinking that it is perfect what we are doing here because we are on the bank of the Gaṅgā, the celestial Gaṅgā flowing from the spiritual world. You have to walk down to the Gaṅgā, take a bath, chant to marginal, so much contamination of the heart goes away. So then, when you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, you get even more benefit. She is so merciful, she is so kind. So that is perfect. And then more perfect—look at our audience. You can see in this video, you look at that audience, they are here to know what is spiritual life, they want to know about Kṛṣṇa. Ultimately, yes, many of them say, "I have come to Hṛṣīkeśa, I don't know exactly what I was looking for, but I found it here with all of you." So satisfying. So perfect in the sense we are on the bank of the Gaṅgā; more perfect because we have the right audience; and most perfect because what are we doing? We are chanting the yuga-dharma: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

It is perfect. I am here at the 21-day Kīrtan Festival and the experience has been really beautiful for numerous different reasons. One of them is that it has helped me so much connect to bhakti-yoga, which is actually one of my intentions of coming to India, and the other, it has helped me to connect to music and to my voice, and this is another intention of coming to India. And what is really magical about this is I arrived without any idea that this was happening, and these were my two main intentions, and I found out the day I arrived that it was the start of this experience. And every single musician that you see here is super unique, super authentic on their own, and just has something really beautiful to offer the space. And yeah, I am super grateful for what has been created here and I am definitely going to come back in future years. So thank you so much, everybody, for what you have done and what you have contributed to this experience: the participants, the musicians, the coordinators, everybody. Yeah, thanks a lot and big love.

This Kīrtan Festival is one of the most amazing experiences I have ever had. People from all over the globe coming here into this tiny little hall in the middle of Hṛṣīkeśa, chanting as loud and as proudly as possible. You can actually see their hearts coming out when they sing, tears flowing from their eyes. It is so difficult to be on stage and not cry with these people. It is such an amazing experience. I feel very grateful and very honored to have been given the opportunity to serve here in the Hṛṣīkeśa Kīrtan Festival as a kīrtanīya. This is the most incredible place to share kīrtan and I think I speak on behalf of all the others here; it is just amazing. I have shared kīrtan across the globe in all types of environments and there is nothing like Hṛṣīkeśa Kīrtan Fest because the people, they are just so open, so responsive, so eager, and it really is the fulfillment of Caitanya’s prophecy as well because the people are from all across the globe—from South America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, UK, the United States, and the other South American countries. It is just incredible, and the thing that strikes all of us is just how open people are. There doesn't appear to be any resistance; they just embrace what we have to offer. And that open-heartedness on their side really enables them to access and experience what it is that we have to share. And so when we share the kīrtan, there is such a response from people; they go very deep, they become very meditational, and then as the kīrtan builds, you see tears, you see smiles, you see elation, and then at some point the whole room erupts into ecstatic dancing as well. We have very talented musicians from across the globe: saxophone, horn, trumpet, bass, violinist; these people are at the top of their game. Beautiful vocalists as well, and all of that really adds to the magic that is being created in the room night after night. And the people will become more and more open, more and more responsive. The word gets out—people share, word of mouth is the best form of advertising—and people come with an expectation to really immerse themselves and to be changed and transformed through this kīrtan, and it is just amazing.

I am just getting started in my spiritual journey, I can say, and I have been told about this festival since the beginning and I keep postponing, "Oh, I will go at some point, I will go at some point," and I came for the first time three days ago and I just can't leave. I have even been considering moving to this part of the city just so I can be close to the festival because the energy is another level, is something else. It doesn't matter where you come from, if you are already like super advanced in your knowledge about the spiritual world or if you are just getting started like me, it is very, very special. I think the power of everyone united, singing together the same mantra for four hours, five hours, and you never get tired, because it is very energizing, it is very special. I am super happy to be here. Yesterday, I was talking to a monk and I told him a little bit of this story and he said, "Yeah, yeah, this is how you feel, welcome to the spiritual world," and this is how I am feeling right now. I am very happy and grateful to be here and to share this experience with these beautiful people.

My name is Prema, and Hṛṣīkeśa Kīrtan Festival is definitely a highlight in my year. I know that for me, many of the musicians and the other kīrtanīyas that are facilitating the festival, we travel the world, you know, looking for people and connecting with people to sing and dance with us, and it is such a privilege to have them all together every day, night after night for three weeks in this sacred and spiritually infused atmosphere here in Hṛṣīkeśa. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that out of thousands of human beings, hardly one will endeavor for spiritual life, and even of those that have endeavored, hardly one comes to know Him in truth. And so to be here with those people, those ones in thousands of thousands, is really very, very special. And I feel that there is no other place that I would rather be, and this is definitely one of my favorite festivals in the world.

Kṛṣṇa, I am Kaye and this is my first time helping with Hṛṣīkeśa Kīrtan Festival. It has been the most magical, amazing experience. I have met so many people from like all over the world, and I have gotten a chance to practice my Spanish and hear so many amazing stories at the merch table and painting faces and putting on sāṛīs, and being here has really let me like relive my first time hearing the Mahā-mantra because I hear all of these people feeling so excited and touched by the kīrtan for the first time. And it reaffirms my faith in the holy name; it reaffirms to me how powerful and magical and beautiful the mantra that we have is, and how precious it is, what a gift it is that we have grown up with it and that we get to give it to other people. The first time was just last year, and I grew up in ISKCON and I have always, you know, been surrounded by kīrtan my whole life, but I never sat and listened to a kīrtan that had—oh God, you know—eight or nine instruments playing all together. And that to me was such a special experience, and obviously combined with such excellent kīrtanīyas, it is just really spectacular. But I can say, you know, maybe it is coincidence, but I have gotten more passionate about kīrtan in the last year than I have, you know, ever in my life, and it just happily coincides with attending the Kīrtan Festival here for the first time.

For me, this chanting of this Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahā-mantra is so deep and so important, you know, especially chanting this mantra with like-minded people, with seekers coming here and looking for something deeper. This chanting—I was trained up in Vṛndāvana by my kīrtan guru, Aindra Dāsa, and I have a very simple style of chanting this mantra, which is trying to go deep into the mantra, trying to connect, trying to pray, trying to sincerely chant this mantra and fall in love with this mantra. And with the help of these wonderful people chanting so loudly, this really was the best experience for me.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. So what strikes me the most here is really that all these musicians and kīrtanīyas, they create this space for Kṛṣṇa. It is not about them, even if we are all thinking it is about them because they are creating the mood and the bhāva, the energy. But actually, we are kind of circling around Kṛṣṇa, and this is so interesting and beautiful to perceive. And I think not so many people know about it; it is just that we are feeling it, we are kind of expressing it with words. It is really that we are dancing—I really just, when I came out, I felt like dancing around Kṛṣṇa, the Divinity, Rādhārāṇī. We are all like, you know, it is not about us in the middle of this picture, it is really about Kṛṣṇa, and this is something I have never experienced.

"Let me make the songs of a nation, and I care not who makes its laws," appropriate words by Andrew Fletcher, a 17th-century Scottish writer. Indeed, music is the undeniable suitor and companion to each and every heart. I confidently take a chance and say that there isn't a single human soul that isn't moved by some form of music, and all of our major religions and world traditions know this: that music stirs the soul, that it calls the being to activity, that it focuses the mind for a moment on a single point and harmonizes all of our organism. From Christian canticles and psalms to the dancing dervishes of Sufism, to the shakuhachi music of the Japanese Zen Buddhists, to kīrtans of the Vedic tradition, and many more, all agree on the powerful utility of music, song, and dance. Music also carries the stories of a people and sets it to rhythm and melody—our histories of triumph and tribulation, our feelings of love and loss, our celebrations and hopes—and we are convinced by the sense this makes. And so, as has been clear these past three weeks at our festival in Hṛṣīkeśa, we can also be convinced by kīrtan, this communal chanting of the names of the Lord.

For this is Rasika-śiromaṇi Dāsī. I have been in this festival since the last two years. I am part of the team that helps put up this festival, and I am one of the fundraisers for this event. Me and my husband, we live in California, so we try to raise funds with the friends and family and other devotees in America and also in other places. And as you all can see, this is such a wonderful event where we have so many people coming every night to our festival, enjoying the music, the kīrtans, and the wonderful prasādam. So when I see this, it makes it more fulfilling for me for whatever work or service that you do. It is so fulfilling to see how people are being benefited, and our Guru, Indradyumna Swami, is so pleased when he sees all these people coming through to our gate. So that is the one that drives me to want to come here every year and serve at this festival. Thank you.

It is very much in the mood of Prahlāda Mahārāja because—I am not judging—but you know, yogīs come here. Of course, it is practical from previous ages; yogīs come here to meditate in the caves. There are caves here, I visited the higher regions of this area, there are caves, and there is evidence that yogīs actually live there. So for the purpose of solitude and not getting distracted, etc., the yogīs would come here and they perform yoga as described in the Bhagavad-gītā: not eat too much, not eat too little, not sleep too much, not sleep too little, focusing on the tip of the nose, mantra, celibacy, solitude, etc. So this is that particular area, so it is nice to come here and see it historically. But we are here, it is interesting in the mountains, only because the people are coming here, and that is the mood of Prahlāda Mahārāja; he said he would rather stay in the cities where the people are so he could share Kṛṣṇa consciousness than come in solitude and meditate for his own salvation. You could say we have the best of both worlds; we are in the Himālayas—Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, "Of mountains, I am the Himālayas." So by Prabhupāda’s mercy, the arrangement of ācāryas is we have this opportunity to be in the Himālayas but in the mood of Prahlāda Mahārāja, sharing Kṛṣṇa consciousness with foreigners. I would say, you know, so many countries come here, people from all over the world come here with the same intent. But we don't see them as foreigners; Kṛṣṇa said in the Bhagavad-gītā, He is the seed-giving father of all created beings, and I have said this many times: if you have the same father, then you are brothers and sisters. So we see the people like that; we actually love them. Just like they say, "Blood is thicker than water," your family is the most important thing in the material concept of life, but this is the real family, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s family, ISKCON. And we are inviting people, they are coming through the doors, we don't have to look for them, they are coming. And the kīrtans, I must say, these are some of the most special kīrtans that I have experienced in 52 years of devotional service. There is something special this year; I think that Kṛṣṇa is just giving us this taste so that we can go on and on and on and on, carry the same mood all over the world. We have plans now for doing something similar in Thailand and Goa and places where people go for material enjoyment, but I have heard that there is spiritually-minded people there as well. And ultimately, everyone is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa; like George Harrison said, "Everyone is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa; some know it and some don't." So these people have an inclination: "I am something spiritual, I am looking for something spiritual." But this process is so potent that even if one doesn't know he is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, the Mahā-mantra is so powerful that it can give them a taste. Just like Prabhupāda mentions in the *Nectar of Devotion*—he mentions, paraphrases, that if someone like that comes to Mathurā and spends a fortnight there, two weeks, he will understand this place is something special. That is the effect of the dhāma, that is the effect of the holy name, that is the effect of sevā, that is the effect of prasādam. So we have the right formula. There is again that saying, "It doesn't get better than this." Absolutely, that is true here in Hṛṣīkeśa at the Hṛṣīkeśa Kīrtan Fest 2024. It is an absolute fact, it is a fact that it doesn't get better than this. Because we have the basic formula: chanting, dancing, some philosophy—I speak after most kīrtans a little bit to explain philosophy from Bhagavad-gītā to the people—and then prasādam. So here we have some of the best kīrtanīyas in ISKCON. The people are dancing better than we are; it is just like they fall in love, they are open-minded, they fall in love immediately with the kīrtan. Then there is prasādam, and we have amazing cooks cooking in austere conditions, but it is all magical. They are producing the best prasādam that we have ever tasted. There is something special about this place, about these people, about the mantra, about what we are doing, sharing our good fortune with others. As Jesus said, "My cup runneth over." We are so happy and they come back for more and more. The amazing thing is that after they eat a ten-course feast every night, generally I have seen, you know, in preaching people go home, what do they do? They come back in the kīrtan hall, they want more. There is that common—there is that song from the 90s, "I want it all and I want it now." That is about people wanting sense gratification, enjoyment. Here, the people want Kṛṣṇa consciousness now and they want more. That is the perfection of preaching. So we thank Śrīla Prabhupāda from the depths of our heart for giving us this wonderful opportunity to share whatever little we have learned, at whatever stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness we are in. We are just like instruments, sharing with them the absolute truth and the perfect mantra, the perfect food, the perfect lifestyle. We set up a program, it is very interesting from a practical point of view; we are taking the contact information for every single person who walks through the gate here, every single one, and they give it gladly. They don't ask questions, they are so innocent. They get to wear a little band that they have come, you know, they cherish that little band. So we have a program where after all is said and done—and I can't even say it, the program is over—we are going to keep in contact with them, we are going to build a website and we are going to give seminars and, you know, they want it. They are asking, "How can I keep in touch with you? How can I continue chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa? Are you going to be back again next year? I am going to bring many of the lead people who bring groups here, I am going to bring a yoga group back next year, all we are going to do is come to your festival." So this is Hṛṣīkeśa Kīrtan Fest 2024. Everything is by the mercy of Prabhupāda. We are so grateful, Prabhupāda, thank you for giving us this opportunity and we pray that we can do this year after year to please your Divine Grace, because I know when you see people chanting like this, you see them taking prasādam with a gusto, you see them returning back into the kīrtan hall until 10:00 or 11:00 at night, then many of them come back in the morning for the morning sessions, I know you must be pleased. Śrīla Prabhupāda, please continue to engage us; we are your humble servants, life after life after life. Gaṅgā-māyī kī jaya! Hṛṣīkeśa Kīrtan Fest 2024 kī jaya! All the wonderful devotees who have cooperated in so many ways to put this on, and a special, special heartfelt thanks to all the people who joined us, one and all. Thank you all of you for coming; we love you, and we invite you back to our festival again next year. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hey.

Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.""