After spending almost three years in Vrindavan, India, due to the infamous pandemic, things have somewhat opened up around the world, and I've taken up my service again of traveling and preaching. It was really difficult after spending so much time in Vrindavan, reading and chanting and researching our Bhakti-shastras and going to all the holy places of pilgrimage in Vrindavan and other parts of India as well.

It's really hard to leave, but as Śrīla Prabhupāda left Vrindavan to come to the West and preach, we are duty-bound to follow in his footsteps as his sons and daughters.

So, I've begun my journey here in Hungary at our new Bratadom community in the southern part of the country, near a very beautiful region of lakes. And here in 1993, way back in 1993, the devotees purchased a large piece of land with the idea of developing a farm community, eventually reaching self-sufficiency, as well as a very beautiful tourist attraction, so people of this country could come and learn about Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

I've come here because it's a good place to start. When I left Vrindavan and came to the West, landing in Europe in Warsaw, Poland, it was like a culture shock for me. Usually, people from the West, they go to India, they experience a culture shock.

But my culture shock was leaving India and coming to the West. But it's made much easier because this is as close to Vrindavan as one can get outside of Vrindavan. I feel this community here, New Budapest, is really a manifestation of the heart of my dear God-brother, Śrī Śrīla Swami.

It's an offering to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

I remember back in the 1970s when Prabhupāda came to our New Māyāpur community.

We had just purchased that property with the beautiful chateau and land, etc. We already had some cows, and Prabhupāda said at one time during his visit, "If we had five places like this in Europe, we could conquer the continent." We all know how Prabhupāda also preached about Varṇāśrama-dharma, about having self-sufficient communities.

He went so far as to say that if ever there was a world war, people would come and find refuge there, both materially and especially spiritually. So that was in Prabhupāda's long-term vision.

So I think Śrīla Prabhupāda, understanding that way back in 1993, he purchased this property, and to make a long story short, because now it's 2002, this project has just developed in leaps and bounds in a spiritual way.

They have a master plan that they've been following from the beginning. In 1996, they established their beautiful deities under a famous installation. I was also there. But after coming here, you know, I think the last time I was here was five years ago.

It's just amazing how it's developed here. I think Prabhupāda would be very, very, very pleased with that.

They have a goal of 40 children. They have 70 cows. I think the barn, if you want to call it the goshālā, it's as beautiful as the temple. They have a beautiful temple on a little rise on the hill, but understand the importance of cow protection, which is an essential part of our communities like this farming communities.

I guess you could say cow protection is so important, and cows are so important to Kṛṣṇa. So they've developed, they've built a beautiful goshālā. It looks like you're walking into a temple. I thought that was wonderful. And they have Food for Life going out in the areas here of local people in local villages.

They come and they work here. We have a wonderful reputation. Everything's very clean, and there are beautiful gardens everywhere. And in different ways, you go around and they have different parts of the community that are dedicated to a particular pastime of Kṛṣṇa, a particular personality, an Ācārya in our history.

So everywhere you walk, you can't help but remember. If you're a guest, because they have many, many guests coming here, if you're a guest, you're immediately introduced to Kṛṣṇa consciousness in a most perfect way, the most perfect way. And of course, two and a half hours from here, there's the capital, there's Budapest.

We also have a temple there, and devotees are very enthusiastic about distributing Śrīla Prabhupāda's books.

So you have the perfect combination of preaching, and after people learn about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they can come to New Budapest and get an idea of what it's like to live in a Kṛṣṇa conscious environment. It's a perfect combination. So I always like to come here.

It was my first choice on the European tour to come to New Budapest. I haven't seen my European disciples for years now. So many have come, 200 have come, and of course, the Hungarian disciples as well. So we're just doing what devotees do: śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ Kṛṣṇa.

We're having classes about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we're having big kīrtans, and delicious prasādam. The deity worship here is, I would just say one word. It's just, it's marvelous. They've perfected the deity worship here. Everything is so nice. So if ever you get a chance and you want to see, if you can't make it all the way to India, you can come as close to India as possible by coming here to New Budapest in Hungary.

My first stop on my European tour, from here I'm going to England, to London. Many preaching engagements have been established there for myself. And then I'm going to Cyprus, my dear friend Śrī Pālād's good wife, Śrī Kantā Ravi, who's getting her medical degree there, so she's graduating.

So I'm going for that. And then up to the Baltic Sea coast in Poland once again for our 31st, I'm going to say annual now, I hope there's no more, we don't have to miss any more years, our annual Festival of India along the Baltic Sea coast.

And I've heard that the people are waiting for us. As we know, there are many difficulties in the world right now, so the only silver lining I can see in all of that, those great difficulties in the world, is that the silver lining is that people are more interested now, desperate for spiritual knowledge.

So that's the whole purpose of that tour, to introduce people to the knowledge and the lifestyle of Kṛṣṇa consciousness as well. It's kind of like a traveling temple. So it's good to be back on the road again. I do miss Vrindavan, but I also relish this preaching in the Western world.

These two things are like, you could say my life and soul, preaching in the West and going to Vrindavan for doing bhajana. Couldn't have a better life. Very grateful to share with all of us. So back on the road and hope to be back in India around Kārtika time.

This is all the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you. We'll have some more interviews along the road. Bye.