We've been participating in this festival, this Woodstock Festival, now called Poland Rock, for 24 years, and we've had this village at every time, at every event. And there's a lot happening here at Krishna's Village of Peace.

It's kind of like, if you ask the kids at this festival, and there's over a million of them, "Where's the place to be?" Many of them will say, "It's Krishna's Village of Peace." The atmosphere, they say, the atmosphere is special.

We know why it's special, because, well, it's like, like *kuntī*, because the nine processes of devotional service are taking place here in a very wonderful way. And, yeah, it's a place where there's no anxiety. We're just stepping out of Krishna's Village of Peace, knowing you can feel the whole atmosphere is changing, quite tense out here at this rock and roll festival.

But, yes, our village is the place to be, because, well, there's a lot of transcendental entertainment going on, a large variety of transcendental entertainment. *Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī* decided he was going to print a newspaper every day about the activities and the *Vaishnava* community, and he was going to print it every day.

He was serious about it. And a local newspaper reporter came to see him, and he said, "How can you print something every day about, you know, Krishna consciousness, about activities and devotional service?

You have such a small community." And *Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī* replied, he said, "Actually, we have much more news than you do, because our news is news of the spiritual world. And he said, this material world is only one-quarter of God's creation; three-quarters exists in the spiritual world." And so, like that, when the kids come to our event, there are just so many different activities that they can engage in.

And the nature of those activities, like any activity in Krishna consciousness, is one never gets satiated.

Material life, whatever you do, you know, you start out enjoying it, but very quickly you get bored, you start looking for something else. Not so with Krishna conscious activity.

So, the kids come back to our festival every year. I mean, some people then come back every year, and a lot of them just stay in our village the whole three or four days of the Poland Rock Festival, the Woodstock Festival.

It's next... ah, now my time it's... We're getting close to market, 150,000 plates, 42 tons of *prasādam*. Then we have a questions and answers tent as well with many senior preachers, Polish and international, answering questions on the philosophy of Krishna consciousness.

And our experience over the years is that, well, the questions get deeper and deeper. The people really know us, they spend time with us. You know, this is an intense experience here at this festival, so they spend time with us and they get to know the devotees.

Many of them keep contact with the devotees as friends through the year, or they write, or they visit some of our centers here in Poland. They start chanting. And so when they come to hear that any question they have about Krishna consciousness can be answered, and as we followers of this *Vaishnava* tradition know, there is no question that cannot be answered about spiritual life.

That's the beauty of our philosophy. The 700 concise verses of *Bhagavad-gītā*, any question you have can be answered. One time *Śrīla Prabhupāda* asked one of my godbrothers, Bhagavān-dāsa, to write a book, "Spiritual Solutions to Material Problems," and *Śrīla Prabhupāda* promised that book, "It will last endless," because this material world is problematic, but there's an answer for your question.

So, the kids come, they inquire about the purpose of life, you know, what is the soul, what happens after death, what is God, why is there such a struggle?

And there's serious, actually sit there, and they're serious about the questions. And some of them sit there for many, many hours. And we have a yoga tent for they can start to learn yoga. Of course, yoga is very popular.

But just being with devotees again is such a pleasant experience. It's a living experience that although there are many yoga schools throughout Poland, somehow our yoga tent is just full to the maximum. We have to have four or five different yoga teachers over these four or five days to keep up with the demand.

But it's not... it's not... The whole purpose of our village is just to engage people's senses in Krishna consciousness.

Here, when they come to our village, Krishna's Village of Peace, the second immediate transformation, because what we're doing is, we could say, we're awakening their spiritual senses.

Within this material body, there is a spirit soul, and that spirit soul, as a person, we have a spiritual body. Ultimately, we are the spiritual body in the spiritual world and a loving relationship with Krishna.

So, Krishna's Village of Peace, we begin to awaken those spiritual senses.

They see all the beautiful devotees, they see the different exhibits, they see the curtains, they see all the activities going on. They smell the incense, smell the cooking. They hear the *kīrtana*, they take the *prasādam*. Their minds are engaged, their intelligence is engaged in asking questions, and so forth, and so on.

So, the whole idea of the village is just to awaken their transcendental senses. And for the *Vaishnavas*, this is the most satisfying experience. Krishna consciousness is very, very potent.

It works, works very quickly. One doesn't have to wait a thousand lifetimes for the yoga process to get a glimmer of the Supersoul within the heart. One doesn't have to take many births and study the different Vedic scriptures to come to the understanding that the absolute truth is Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Those processes are there, but by the mercy of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His emissary, Śrīla Prabhupāda, this process has an immediate effect.

Many, many people here, they become so deeply touched by the activities going on in Krishna's Village of Peace that, again, they take up the process all year.

And many of them tell me that they wait all year long for Krishna's Village of Peace.

One boy said, "I wait all year long to taste this *halavā*." Ha... Oh. The most popular tent of all is the mantra yoga tent, where the kids come and they chant. Now, many, many years ago, say 10 or 15 years ago, the kids would come in three, four, five hundred, a thousand kids, and they would, they would chant, and they'd just be into the music of the drumbeat.

But I'm noticing now the intensity with which they chant, you could even say the devotion, the surrender, the feeling of dependence on Krishna.

Somehow they catch that mood. But the, the, uh, coercion of ultimate, uh, to, uh, course, Krishna consciousness is something that's imbibed from other devotees.

So, I could catch that good disease of Krishna consciousness, especially when there are many devotees chanting together, because that is the process for the sage Lord Caitanya.

The *Bhāgavata*, He descended to introduce congregational chanting, many devotees chanting together, and just that mercy flowing, it's just an abode of mercy that the mantra yoga tent, people get that sense of Krishna consciousness and they chant.

We often say, "Chant from the heart." Sometimes I, I'm watching those kids chanting and I'm thinking, "I wish I could chant like that. I wish I could call out to Krishna without any reservation, without any hesitation, just *ātma-nivēdanam*, now, fully surrender." So, once, since I'm learning from the kids who come here how to chant, at least I'm inspired by them.

Hi. Indebted to the organizers for having us come every year. They are good friends, and they're doing this festival as an appreciation for the youth of this country. We'll help them raise money for the disabled children in hospitals. And yet, we love these kids.

We love, we love the youth here, because they're reciprocating with us. And they flash us the peace sign all the time. They smile at us, and so forth. So, we see them like part of our family. It wasn't so many years ago that people like myself were in tents like this.

Yeah, I remember in the 1960s in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco. Sometimes I just see myself in the faces of the devotees. It wasn't long ago that we were also in such a condition. Somehow or other, *Śrīla Prabhupāda* came, and his representatives, his disciples came, and they saved us.

So, we're doing the same business. This gives us such pleasure. It gives us such satisfaction to share this good fortune with the people here at Woodstock, and we hope that this event will go on for another twenty-four years. And our disciples and our followers, in the years to come, will carry on with this great tradition of Krishna's Village of Peace at Woodstock, at Poland Rock, for as many years as can. *Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda* ki! *Jaya Caitanya Mahaprabhu* ki! *Jaya Śrī Śrīmad-bhāgavatam* ki! *Jaya Jagannātha* ki!

Jaya!