"*00516*.*
"So, welcome! A warm welcome to all of you who have assembled for the performance of this—we can say *mahā-mahotsava*, because it’s more than just a *yajña*; it’s a *mahotsav*, it’s a great festival of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. And I hope I’m not exaggerating, but for me, it’s something like the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya at the beginning of Kali-yuga. They were all assembled together in the forest of Naimiṣāraṇya for the purpose of coming up with a *yajña*, or a spiritual process, that would counteract the influence of the age of Kali, which was just about to begin as soon as Kṛṣṇa left this world. That was the end of Dvāpara-yuga and Kali-yuga rushed in.

And the sages, who are naturally compassionate—sages are naturally compassionate, they care about the suffering of others in this material world, and they have the key to stopping that suffering—these sages all assembled there in Naimiṣāraṇya, and they were thinking, "What would be the best means to counteract the influence of Kali, and what’s more, how could people become delivered from the wheel of *saṁsāra* and go back home, back to Godhead?" So, there were different *munis*. *Munis* mean one who has a particular viewpoint on spiritual life, and there are *munis* who have the answer. So they were all discussing, "We’ll do this, we’ll do this *yajña*, we’ll do it like this," and then Sūta Gosvāmī appeared on the scene. Just to paraphrase, he said, "No."

And that one *yajña*—with, you know, we see the picture, the painting—it’s not thousands and thousands of sages, it’s just a few prominent sages with the real interest of the world at heart. Together they came up with a solution, and it’s reverberated throughout Kali-yuga to the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who, of course, gave them the inspiration, who started the *saṅkīrtana* movement to flood the world with that remedy of the Holy Names. So that was a significant moment. 

So for me, this festival is also a very significant moment in the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Lord Caitanya. The scene is set: we have the best of ISKCON’s character, we have Dvija-vara and his good wife, who are expert at setting everything up. You just look here at this beautiful painting, and what we have, we have so many talented devotees. We have devotees who have been here before, who have the experience. We have the proper formula of so many wonderful Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs who are very eager, like the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya, to share in delivering these people. We have the best place, of course—you know, there are many best places: there’s Purī, there’s Māyāpur, there’s Vṛndāvana—but for *saṅkīrtana* devotees, any place is a good place if there are people to preach to.

Sometimes people ask me, "What’s your favorite temple in the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness?" Because I’ve pretty much been everywhere—many wonderful temples with various programs—I always say my favorite temple is the street corner in any downtown city of the world, because there I feel closeness to Lord Caitanya and Śrīla Prabhupāda and the *saṅkīrtana* movement. So we’re at the best place. I mean, this is Ṛṣikeśa; this is a very holy time mentioned in our Vedic scriptures. It’s a place where saintly persons would come and do the *aṣṭāṅga-yoga*, the *haṭha-yoga*, for the purpose of realizing the Supersoul within the heart. These hills are decorated with their pastimes. They would live in caves, performing great austerities to the point where they would do their *snānas* and their meditation to the point where they wouldn’t even move. You see the picture in the Bhagavad-gītā: their fingernails, they didn’t even bother to cut their fingernails; they had no time. Fingernails grew in a curl like that, their toes, their hair—they had dreadlocks. Not eating too much, not eating too little; not sleeping too much, not sleeping too little. Their bodies appeared a little emaciated. This is the *aṣṭāṅga-yoga*, very determined. We’re inspired by these *ṛṣis* and these yogis’ determination in their particular path to spiritual life. 

Here, on the banks of the Ganges—the Ganges flows from the spiritual world down to the heavenly planets, it passes through the hair of Śiva, and it comes down to this Earth planet—and just a few hundred kilometers away, it spills out of the Himalayas and comes down here, still very pure. We’re sitting on the banks of the Ganges River, in a boat where the *ṛṣis* for millions of years performed penance and austerity. What better place could you find? But it’s made even more special for us because so many westerners, and easterners, and northerners, and southerners from the four corners of the earth, they’re attracted by that romantic vision of yoga. No one can imitate the *ṛṣis* of yore, but we can become inspired by them. So yoga has become something quite popular, so they’re coming here to practice, to understand, and learn and practice yoga. 

Now, that’s a gift for a *saṅkīrtana* devotee. Believe me, those of you—and many of you have done book distribution—you know what it’s like. You go out on the streets, and either you’re alone doing books, or with your friends, or if there’s a *harināma* party, it’s difficult to find someone who’s really interested. We use our little *ślokas* and slogans to stop people: "Oh, are you from here? Oh, you’re from out of town? Oh, that’s great. How’s your life going? It has some problems? Here’s a book." These are our mantras. And you know, my average collection for 15 years of book distribution was around $250 a day; this is going back to the 70s. We’d go out like this, and $250 a day was, you know, the top distributor did $500 a day. So how many people? Thousands and thousands were walking by. Were they really interested? Even Kṛṣṇa says, *manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu*. This is in Dvāpara-yuga: out of thousands and thousands of men, perhaps one will show an interest in spiritual life, and of those who are showing an interest, He says hardly one understands Me in truth. It’s so rare. It’s not surprising. 

Prabhupāda told me—I’ve told you the stories many times—we went on *harināma*, we were doing books, we came back to the temple. Prabhupāda was there that week. He asked me—he asked Indradyumna—"So, how was the *saṅkīrtana*?" It was tough that day. So I said to Prabhupāda—I should have just said, "It was all wonderful," but I said, "Oh, it’s difficult." And Prabhupāda slams his fist on the table. He said, "When did I ever say preaching is easy?" No, you never said. You never said. It’s a good lesson for me. But you know, we savored it. It’s like, it was like drinking hot sugar juice—burning our lips, but it was so sweet to serve Prabhupāda, to serve Caitanya Mahāprabhu, to be part of that legacy, which we see here. Here’s our legacy, this is where we come from. All these great *ācāryas*, they prepared for that moment that the *saṅkīrtana* movement could come to the West in 1965. And we’re part, in our humble way, we’re part of that legacy. So I was always happy on *saṅkīrtana*, even if it was raining, cold, too hot—I did two books, *santushti*—I was very happy.

Now for a *saṅkīrtana* devotee, this is a dream come true. We don’t have to go out and find people; they’re coming to us. Of course, we’re going to go out today, we’re going to start with *harināma*, you know, beautiful *harināma*. That’s just our pleasure, that’s what we do. We’re just happy to do that, give out the invitations. But here is a person, here is a person, it’s just—you know, for *saṅkīrtana* devotees, I have to pinch myself: "Is this really happening? Am I back in Ṛṣikeśa?" Māyā, she cheated us of one week three years ago when we did the Ṛṣikeśa Kirtan Fest. We still had one week to go, the pandemic started, the government had freaked out, "All foreigners leave the country." The people were crying, "No more festivals." Sorry, we got cheated. We’ve come back for our revenge, Māyā! We’ve come back for our revenge—three more weeks here!

So there’s that kind of corny saying, you know, "We’re in the right place, at the right time, doing the right thing." That can only be a formula in spiritual life, not material life, because material life is full of so many flaws. But we are in the right place—Ṛṣikeśa—at the right time, because all the Western yogis are coming now for these different events, and we’re doing the right thing: we’re introducing them to the topmost yoga system. Within our hearts, we have the highest appreciation for the yogis who were here for thousands of years. Who could show more determination than they did? More sacrifice, more penance, more spirituality? But at best, a few of them were able to realize the Supersoul within the heart. That’s fine, but Supersoul is an expansion of the original Personality of Godhead. 

There are three phases to the Absolute Truth: there’s the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there’s His effulgence—it’s so bright, it’s so attractive, it’s so, you know, you want to experience that bliss—that sometimes, because it’s so bright, you can’t see what’s behind it. Just like someone with a flashlight in your face, you can’t see the person who’s putting on the flashlight. So the impersonalists, they make that little mistake. They don’t know that beyond that effulgence is Govindājī, Bhuṅga Sundara, on the bank of the Ganges playing His flute, calling the Gopīs. They can’t see. You have to see through the eyes of the Vaiṣṇava *ācāryas*. But be that as it may, it’s transcendence. Nothing ordinary, it’s nothing extraordinary. We bow down to those impersonalists; they’re not like ordinary people. What to speak of the other expansion of the Lord, the Paramātmā, who’s there in the heart of every living entity. We’ve seen the painting: He’s standing on the lotus flower as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the lotus of the heart, directing the wanderings of all living entities. Very special. So the yogis, that was their realization. 

The problem is—Prabhupāda said one time, we were in, I think it was Geneva; he was speaking about how glorious that is, he was praising those yogis that they could see Bhagavān within the heart, but he said the problem is that sometimes when they see that Paramātmā within the heart, they think, "There I am." There are obstacles in every path of spiritual life, and that is one of the obstacles, to think so. So at best, if anyone comes here and perfects the yoga system, that’s what they’ll see. But we’ve come to give them the topmost yoga system, whereby one can see the source of the Paramātmā, one can see beyond the Brahman effulgence; we can see Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sitting with the eternal consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, on the throne in Vṛndāvana. 

It’s so nice to give someone the best thing. If you love someone, Prabhupāda said, you want to give them a gift; you give something very precious to show your real love for them. So we love all living entities because we see them as all parts and parcels of the Supreme. We don’t judge by their body, by their country, by their language. We have that vision of equality, and we want to give them the very best thing: love for Rādhe-Śyām, at least the means to develop it. And what is that? We’re blessed, they’re blessed; this whole area is blessed, because it will reverberate with the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*. Ṛṣikeśa itself is feeling, I feel, blessed that the holy names of Kṛṣṇa will resound throughout this area. 

And it goes a long way. In the yoga lectures, they often talk about the *cakra*, of the spinning *cakra*. "This holy place is a *cakra*, that holy place is a *cakra*." This is because the spiritual energy is more powerful than the material energy. So if you’re having a *yajña*, it can go beyond the limits of the town, beyond the limits of the state, beyond the country, it can go everywhere. So this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, it’s very, very powerful, and I’m convinced that the *cakra* that we create by this *kīrtana* is going to go far, far beyond. That’s what the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya concluded: chanting would go and purify the whole world. So we’re so blessed. 

And I often think—I’m sure I’ve educated guests—that these are the modern-day pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. How can you say such a thing? Because Mahāprabhu Himself said that this chanting will go to every town and village of the world. That was His prediction, and it’s happening because it’s His desire, and it’s happening and it’s, in various ways, it’s changing the world. It’s the modern-day pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Which, I haven’t seen the quote yet, but it is said that the *saṅkīrtana* movement will go on for ten thousand years. Now, when we read about Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes, you can imagine: He lived 48 years—not a long time, 48 years—and just imagine how many activities He had as a small child, how many activities He had as Nimāi Paṇḍita, how many glorious activities He had as a *sannyāsī*, and how many deep, rustic, esoteric pastimes He had those last years in Jagannātha Purī in the Gambhīrā room. So much could be written. Someone of that nature, the Personality of Godhead, you know, you could record every second of His life and expound upon that activity for volumes and volumes of books. But what do we have? We have *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, we have *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, and a few other books about Caitanya Mahāprabhu—maybe recording this much of that much of His life. 

And what does it record? What’s recorded are the most significant moments in His life. The most significant. You could list the pastimes on a page, you know, it’s just the high points. Actually, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, he says that, "I have to stop here, because it’ll become too voluminous; most people won’t have the time to read." So one sense, you think, "Ah, why didn’t they record more?" Whatever they recorded is enough for us to become inspired to practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness and share Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But I often think, you know, that trip to South India was six years—six years—how much is recorded? But what is recorded is the most significant moment in His life. 

Now, we were speaking how these are the modern-day pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. You could go to every temple in ISKCON; there’s something glorious going on. The temple worship in L.A., the book distribution in San Jose, ISV, the farm projects, the TOVP, Australia—they have these amazing restaurants, people come and just devour Kṛṣṇa *prasādam*, South America—they have beautiful farms—something significant is happening. And I’m sure that historians, when they write about the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement in the future, they’ll just take those significant moments and make a book out of them, like Prabhupāda predicted. One day he said, "Historians will mark how this *saṅkīrtana* movement saved the world in its most difficult point." Who knows when that is, but prophets, historians will write. So I’m convinced, please forgive me if I’m exaggerating, but I don’t think I’m exaggerating. I think in the annals of time, when the historians write about the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement and the significant moments in this movement, they’ll write about this Kirtan Festival. 

Come on, Mahārāja, no, we’re in the right place at the right time, doing the right thing. And how is it so? Because of *kṛpā*, it’s because of blessings. We may have an idea, "Let’s do a festival there," but you look at this hall, you look at this town, you see all those people walking down the street, not at all satisfied. They’ve come to India, they’ve come to look for yoga, but they’re not finding what they’re looking for. They’re getting a little taste, not getting the whole picture. Consciousness—it’s the topmost yoga system. Yoga is like a ladder; you go through different yoga systems, and you come to *bhakti*, and you chant and dance and feast in ecstasy. It’s supported by *prasādam*—simple as that. So we are what they’re looking for, not we, but Prabhupāda’s way of presenting Mahāprabhu’s movement: the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, the delicious *prasādam*. It’s already been proven. Everyone’s saying today the breakfast was excellent. It’s all happening, it’s all coming together, despite our inadequacies and our level of advancement. Whatever, this whole show, it’s like it just came together so smoothly. Am I right? We have the best cooks, we have the best *kīrtaniyas*, we have the best deities, we have the best Holy Name—the best, the best, the best, the best, the best! Not us, but we’re presenting this, in our humble way, the best process. It’s amazing how it’s just come together. 

And I’m just like so excited, like Christmas Eve. You know, in the West, we have Christmas, 25th of December. I don’t know, I think, you know, when you’re a kid, you sleep soundly from, you know, the moment you go to sleep till you wake up. On Christmas Eve, I could never sleep because I could hear my parents preparing the packages and wrapping, like that. And then they would go to sleep around three or four in the morning, and I’d sneak out and with my flashlight, I’d go under the tree, and I see, "Oh, that’s from my brother, that’s for... oh, that one’s for me!" And I wanted to open it, but I couldn’t. And just before they woke up, I’d sneak back in my room, pretend I was asleep, because that package, you know, is a package of love from my parents. 

So here we have a package. It’s not open yet. We have the most valuable thing. You’re going to see that these westerners, they chant and chant and chant until they get exhausted. It’s not over. You take some *prasādam*, and if you’re interested, you come back the next morning, and there’ll be more *kīrtana*, and there’ll be workshops, and then maybe you go on *harināma* with us, and there’ll be another night—20 days of this. It’s like the package is bound now; it’s got a beautiful wrap around it. This morning we’re going *harināma*; we’re going to unwrap the package. So this is like a transcendental Christmas, or your birthday, or whatever. This is the most exciting moment. And because the formula is perfect, and the means of delivering the formula are perfect, and the audience is perfect—the audience is perfect, yes, they’re perfectly receptive—and I’m sure we’re going to touch the hearts of so many fallen souls. 

And that is the greatest pleasure of a Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava is sad—we become sad seeing people bereft of the nectar that we’ve tasted—and we become supremely happy, more than any other happiness, we become happy when we see them getting that mercy. This is, you know, we’re aspiring for divine love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but at least at my level of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, for me, the highest taste I’ve experienced in this lifetime is *saṅkīrtana*. And I’m confident in that pleasure, in that process, because that’s what my Guru did. Is, whoever he is in the spiritual world—one time a disciple said to him, "Prabhupāda, who are you in the spiritual world?" Prabhupāda said, "If I told you, you would faint." 

If I told you who I was, you would faint. Who that is, came to this world, a lifetime of preparation, came to the West in 1965, and did exactly what we were doing. He just went to Thompson Square Park with a bongo drum and chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa, and planting that seed of the *saṅkīrtana* movement. This huge trunk of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, it’s grown with different branches growing and different leaves and different fruits and flowers, which are all the people who take up the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It’s the most, it’s the biggest news in creation. People are interested in the news—it’s all bad news, it’s scary news. Now, this is the good news! The world needs this good message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness to give them hope, to give them happiness, to give them reason for living. We’re giving the most important thing, and here they’re going to come to us. 

I just remember how many days I spent on this, "Please, no, please, no." Sometimes people would spit on us in France. We would go to the markets, they would throw slabs of meat at us. In 1972, remember one time, a big piece of meat slapped me here, and I had a red mark for many days, big piece of meat. Now we’re going to go, "Oh, look, what is this? Wonder who are these people chanting? Let’s go see, let’s see." It’s just being given to us. They’re just coming into our hands. You could take a little bug you find on the ground—don’t go away. We are blessed. It’s beautiful weather, you can take a bath anytime you want in the Gaṅgā, you can walk through the sacred forest here, you can remember these great *ṛṣis* and the penances they did. It’s just a setup in a transcendental way. So we’re feeling very blessed and we’re very, very thankful. 

I mean, you know, there’s so many services we could be doing in different parts of the world, but you are the envy of every devotee in ISKCON. You’re the envy. So many devotees are writing me, "I wish I could be there, I wish I could..." We’ve already sent out the first photo album, big round of applause, run down to Vṛndāvana. Thank you, go on Facebook. It’s like, you know, already people are writing me, "Can I come?" You talk to Dvija-vara, we’ve filled up. So this is like, you know, SEAL Team Six—I don’t know if you know anything about American military, the best fighting unit in America, SEAL Team Six—this is SEAL Team Six, ISKCON. 

So just, you know, don’t become proud, but feel privileged. And yes, there are some austerities, but it looks a little better this year: the rooms are painted, and the floors... It’s just that, be assured that all the demigods are watching this year. By Viṣṇu, demigods like to see a *yajña* for Viṣṇu. They sometimes do interplanetary travel, they sometimes do intergalactic travel to go to a *yajña* somewhere within the universe. We many times discussed, Prabhupāda would sometimes say that Nārada Muni and Brahmā would come to the *kīrtanas*. He saw them. He said, "Did you see them?" "See who?" "Brahmā was here, Viṣṇu, Nārada Muni was here." "What were they doing, Prabhupāda?" "They were laughing at you for your Kali-yuga dancing and singing, but they love you." Demigods will also come to this *yajña*, this specific *yajña* in Ṛṣikeśa. I can just imagine, sitting on the tops of the mountains around here, certainly Vāyu is already here. You know, I walked out this morning, they almost blew me off the roof, but I was thinking, "Thank you, Vāyu," because the purifier... Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the wind," so Vāyu is already here. Bhagavān is also here. 

Around 11 o’clock, so it’s cold and it’s hot and whatever, but don’t even consider the austerities, just consider your good fortune to be serving Śrīla Prabhupāda. Such an auspicious element, with the most wonderful recipients. The people are coming here, I, you know, I’m not—they’re not ordinary in the sense that at least they’ve seen the light. It’s seen the light, they’ve seen the the futility to various degrees of material existence. They’re interested in the East. Go East, young man, for your spiritual liberation. Go West, young man, for spiritual prosperity. Go East to India. India has so much to offer. This is the quintessence of India in Kali-yuga: the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement in Ṛṣikeśa. So don’t, you know, think of these people as a little special and ready. And we’re going to present it in such an attractive way, we’re just going to let them decide. We’re not going to preach to them to convince them; let the *mahā-mantra* do its work. Have full faith in the holy names. There’s no difference between Kṛṣṇa and His name. Let the holy name do—we’re the servants of the servants of the servants, we’re the servant of the holy name. We’ll just chant here, the vibration will go out, let it do its work. It happens very quickly. The *mahā-mantra*, there’s, you know, time is of essence, you know, you never know when you’re going to die, so the holy name knows that. So purification comes very quickly. 

We’ll give some talks. We have the best *kīrtana* lecturer in ISKCON, Gaur Vāṇī Prabhu. I am so pleased that he is here. It’s another one in my dreams, to have him present at our functions, because you’ll see, he knows how to do the magic. He’s gifted, he’s blessed, *sarasvatī*—what he’s on his tongue. He does the *kīrtana*, then a few words, so charming, like, you know, it can’t be imitated. A little more *kīrtana* than he charms the audience in this way—*kīrtana*, *kathā*, *kīrtana*, *kathā*, *cetodarpaṇa-mārjanam*—then a little, that seed grows very quickly. And people think, "These Hare Kṛṣṇa people are so nice, I’m going to come tomorrow for the workshops," go a little deeper. And we develop relationships with the people; we develop relationships, you’ll find people that want to talk to you or, you know, want to hear more. We’ll have facilities they can hear more, and *prasādam*, and people will walk away from Ṛṣikeśa, they won’t be the same. That’s real *dharma*, that’s real religion. When you go into the church on Sunday, you shouldn’t come out the same person again. When you go into the house of God, when you go into the mosque, or into the synagogue, or into the Lotus Buddha Temple, the point is you should come out a different person. It’s like when you take a shower, you should come out a different person, you shed some of the dirt. So the dirt in the heart, the subtle body, by going through these processes, we should see a change in ourselves, and we see this. We should see a change in the people—seeing that change in the people, seeing their eyes light up when they hear the *kīrtana*, when they hear the *kathā*, and when they start dancing in ecstasy. 

My greatest pleasure is to sit on the stage and see that change take place, very quickly. I just sit there, *śrī-guroḥ karuṇā-sindhu*, it’s all possible by their mercy, by the Pañca-tattva. For me, that is the highest pleasure in life. Sometimes at the Polish festivals, I’ll sit at the entrance in a chair, and hundreds, thousands of people are coming in, like, "What are we getting into here? We got the invitation, this is a little strange, but they look like they’re having fun." And then I walk around the event, the same people, gorging themselves with *prasādam*, laughing and applauding and crying at the theaters. The highest moment through all my 30 years of the Polish tour was when we concluded one play, *Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana*, you know, the Aghāsura, Pūtanā, and we had a little doll that looked like Kṛṣṇa. So the play was over, Kṛṣṇa was victorious as the baby, and the audience was just stunned. They were silent. "What was that?" And in the silence, one little girl, six years old maybe, five, she stood up on her mother’s lap, and in a voice heard throughout the whole crowd, she said, "Mommy, I want Kṛṣṇa." 

That—my life was perfect. Whatever happened after that was just, you know, after that little girl, she said it like, with such a "I want Kṛṣṇa." So then and then, so when people leave the festival, oh, I sit in a chair and I watch them go, they’ve all changed. Of course, they’re not shaved up, they’re not, you know, in *dhotīs*, but I mean, you know, we’re all works in progress and they’ve got a lot of purification to go, but it started in earnest. And you see they’re all clutching *Bhagavad-gītā*, this, you hear "Hare Kṛṣṇa," you know, and they’ve got their little plates and *prasādam*, and they’re taking home big bags of *prasādam*, and everything—nice comments, smiling, laughing, *santushti*. That’s the perfection of life. 

And by doing this, working very hard because it is hard work—I’m not, you know, minimizing how much austerity, how much hard work it is—but for that you get the *kṛpā* of Mahāprabhu. It’s like if you dive into this turbulent ocean of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-*saṅkīrtana*—watch out for the sharks, the Māyāvādīs, watch out for the sense enjoyers—you know, you’re diving in this ocean of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-*saṅkīrtana*, when you come up, you’re surfacing in local Vṛndāvana. It’s an allegory, but it’s actually true. This is, this is our ticket, this is how we give back to the spiritual world. It’s just Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. What took the yogis hundreds or thousands of births, by the mercy of Gaur-Nitāi, Pañca-tattva, and our guru-*paramparā*, all those illustrious souls who are looking down upon us here, you know, there’s a good chance we’ll make it back to Godhead. If not, we’ll take birth and we’ll do, you know, Ṛṣikeśa Fest the year 3020, if it still exists in the world. But this is all we want—service. We don’t look beyond that. We’re happy serving here, life after life, but we, this is the perfect life, perfect place, and perfect audience. Perfect audience, you know, we, you know, it’s almost we could bow down to these people who are coming because, you know, without them what would this festival be? This isn’t, you know, like a Janmāṣṭamī or Rādhāṣṭamī, or you know, a festival like that in our temple—those are wonderful—but for me, the festival where we serve the people, like in England, the English Air Force, "To fly to serve," that’s their motto. To fly to serve, they’re also flying high, but we want to share that with others. 

So Prabhus, we are blessed and our hair is standing on end, and we can’t wait for the *yajña* to begin. Actually, it’s going to begin in 14 minutes. It’s like, you know, before a race, you know, like athletes—I was always nervous, you know, but you’ve been preparing for months, for years, but I’m nervous. I’m actually nervous, I’m so excited, you know. The *saṅkīrtana* is going to go out. You look at the face of the people, and you think of what we’re going to invite. We’ve got a loud competition, a lot of yoga schools. There’s some big events happening, two big international yoga festivals, big competition. We don’t think of it like that, they’re bringing in the people, we’re going to catch them. It’s like, you know, the mouse has this little hole and the snake goes in and eats the mouse and stays in the hole. So let them invite all these thousands of people from all over the world, and we respect them, you know—I’ve met these persons, they’re nice people—but we’re going to take advantage, you know. We’re going to go past their programs: "What’s the food like you’re eating there? Are you dancing in ecstasy? What’s the *tattva*, what’s the philosophy? Come on, oh, come on, come on, follow us." 

And there’s many prominent yoga practitioners, teachers who will be around as well, they’ll also come. My good friend, Śrīdhara Bābā, he knows them all, Śrīla David, just one that one—he’s going to invite all of them to come to our hall. We’re not going to debate with them. Giri, Yogi, well, glories to you, but chant and dance in [inaudible] his *kīrtana*, and [inaudible] *kīrtana*, and everyone—all the *kīrtana* leaders—get the best of the best. What more can I say? Let’s just—let the *yajña* begin, and we’ll meet in 11 minutes outside. I hope you put those Gopi dots on pretty quick. Okay, we’ve got balloons, our traditional, you know, balloons and dancing, and whatever. We’ve got Śyāma-rasa and Maṅgalāvatī, our *kīrtana* leaders, we’ve got everything. Let’s just relish and work as hard as we can to give this message to all these wonderful yoga people coming from all over the world. All by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda.""