"*00560*.*
"# Let’s Play Catch!

Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda, who is the revealer of the Dhāma. So, the other day, we discussed the pastimes of the cowherd boys—you remember, in particular, Sudāmā Gopā—and I thought, at least for now, we would continue with that theme. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.12.11, Śukadeva Gosvāmī voices his astonishment at the good fortune of these cowherd boys. He writes:

> "In this way, all the cowherd boys used to play with Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of the Brahman effulgence for jñānīs desiring to merge into that effulgence, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead for devotees who have accepted eternal servitorship, and who for ordinary persons is but another ordinary child. The cowherd boys, having accumulated the results of pious activities for many lives, were able to associate in this way with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How can one explain their great fortune?"

It’s a famous line: "How can one explain their great fortune?"

Now, Śrīla Prabhupāda himself sometimes recalled such cowherd boy pastimes. My dear godbrother, Śrutakīrti Prabhu, who was, as you know, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s secretary for some time, remembers a time when he was massaging Prabhupāda in his room—I think it was in Atlanta, March 1975. He said that as Prabhupāda was being massaged, he gazed at a picture of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma with their friends in the forest and he said:

> "I like the cowherd boys very much. Every day Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would go to the forest in Vṛndāvana. They would play all day; the calves were with them. Finally, they would stop for lunch. Sometimes one of the cowherd boys would steal Kṛṣṇa's lunch and begin throwing it around, and they would play keep-away from Kṛṣṇa. Finally, the cowherd boys would throw their lunch to Kṛṣṇa, and they would sit down with His lunch."

And Prabhupāda concluded, "I just want to go back to the spiritual world and eat kachorī and laḍu with Kṛṣṇa." Another famous line we’ve heard before: "Prabhupāda said, 'I just want to go back to the spiritual world and eat kachorī and laḍu with Kṛṣṇa.'"

So, with all that, we could easily conclude that Śrīla Prabhupāda is a cowherd boy in the spiritual world. However, Śrīla Prabhupāda also cautioned us on many occasions not to speculate about the identity of the spiritual master in the spiritual world.

Firstly, we should not speculate about our own identity in the spiritual world, which is called *siddha-deha*. That’s confirmed in Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's works; he writes, "If one thinks of their *siddha-deha* without achieving the *adhikāra*—which means the necessary realization—their intelligence gets bewildered." And the same holds true for speculating on the spiritual master's liberated form. We may think in terms of, you know, that the spiritual master has a particular identity; we don't know what it is. One day it will be revealed to us, I'm sure. 

But actually, I was reading that a pure devotee can even serve Kṛṣṇa in two or even three *rasas*, or relationships. I think this is not very well understood in our ISKCON society, but it’s there in *śāstra*. And Prabhupāda said when speaking in learned circles, "If you say something, you have to be able to follow it up with a quote to make it authorized." So, I was reading the other day the *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, and in verse 123—you may remember, it’s a verse we quoted last year—it confirms this point that a devotee can have different *rasas*.

The verse: "The most intelligent say that the son of Pāṇḍu named Arjuna and the gopī Arjuṇī have come together as Rāya Rāmānanda." The ācāryas say that this verse clearly states that Rāya Rāmānanda is present as Arjuna in *sakhya-rasa* and as Arjuṇī-gopī in *mādhurya-rasa* in the spiritual world. So, certainly, it's possible for our Śrīla Prabhupāda to have the same ability. We all know—I mean, I personally witnessed on two occasions—how Śrīla Prabhupāda broke down crying in ecstasy while chanting *Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava* before *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* class. I saw it in Paris and I also saw it in Māyāpura.

It's also important to note that although we say the gopīs are the greatest lovers of Kṛṣṇa, that's not to say the love of the cowherd boys or Mother Yaśodā is in any way inferior. No. One time, Prabhupāda said—I heard a lecture tape—"Anyone who thinks that the love of Mother Yaśodā is inferior to the love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is an aparādhī; he's an offender." Why? Because Kṛṣṇa loves all of His devotees equally, and the many varieties of love that the Vrajabāsīs, in particular, have for Him is what makes Vṛndāvana so special. Just like in our lives—this mundane example—but we have different relationships, different types of loving relationships with different people: mom and dad, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles, friends, associates at work, like that. And all those loving relationships satisfy our loving propensity. In this material world, variety is the spice of life, so that holds supremely true in the spiritual world.

Of course, we all know that Śrī Rādhā is the topmost lover of Kṛṣṇa, but I was reading, sometimes She Herself becomes a little, let us say, transcendentally jealous of the cowherd boys' love for Kṛṣṇa. Yes, it’s right there in *Nectar of Devotion*, Chapter 41. Prabhupāda said *Nectar of Devotion* is the handbook for the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, so we should be familiar with it. So in Chapter 41, Śrīla Prabhupāda says that—or let us say, he writes—that one time, seeing Kṛṣṇa and Subala embracing one another, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī became a little envious. It's the word he uses, but more like jealous; it's not so heavy. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī became a little envious, and hiding Her hot temperament, She said—and here I am going to quote Śrīla Prabhupāda—"My dear Subala, you are very fortunate because even in the presence of superiors, you and Kṛṣṇa have no hesitation in putting your arms on each other's shoulders. I think it must be admitted that in your previous lives you have succeeded in many kinds of austerities." 

So Prabhupāda continues: "The idea [is] that although Rādhārāṇī was accustomed to putting Her arms on Kṛṣṇa's shoulders, it was not possible for Her to do such a thing in the presence of Her superiors, whereas Subala could do so freely." And then Prabhupāda concludes, "Rādhārāṇī therefore praised his good fortune." She's actually praising his good fortune.

We should also note that the intense love that the cowherd boys have for Kṛṣṇa causes them the exact same pain that the gopīs felt when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā and Dvārakā. Only Rādhārāṇī's love and feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa were higher, but otherwise, everyone felt the same intensity of love and separation from Kṛṣṇa: cowherd boys, cowherd girls, trees, mothers, and fathers. Everyone felt the same. So we should not think that one *rasa* is inferior to another; they're all important in making Vṛndāvana complete in an offering of love to the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And this is very apparent in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.10.9, and I quote the verse:

> "After Kṛṣṇa's separation from Vṛndāvana, the innocent rural cowherd boys, girls, ladies, and others—all of them—felt shock throughout their lives, and the separation of Rādhārāṇī, the most beloved cowherd girl, is beyond expression."

Everyone felt the shock because as much as you're attached to something, when you lose it, you feel the separation. We've all experienced that in this world in mundane ways. Just imagine the deep love, pure love, of the Vrajabāsīs; the selfless love they have for Kṛṣṇa, they're so attached to Him. So when He goes, we can hardly imagine how painful is that separation for them. But equally throughout Vraja, except for Rādhārāṇī, as She has the *mahā-bhāva*, so Prabhupāda said that the separation that She feels is beyond expression. That's a nice way to put it: beyond expression.

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So now we'll share a couple of "good fortune" cowherd boy pastimes—*sakhyas*—that took place. To begin with, at Pakhārapura in Vṛndāvana, there's a place called Pakhārapura. It's famous as the place where Kṛṣṇa, simply by playing His flute, made a small lake in order to quench the thirst of His cowherd boyfriends. Now, the cowherd boys would often play there, and on one occasion, they just lost track of time and forgot their bodily demands, like eating and drinking, until at one moment, a cowherd boy finally said, "Hey, I'm thirsty! Hey boys, I'm thirsty!" And the ācāryas say that that boy's comment acted like "sparks on dry tinder." Everything's so poetic—acted like sparks on dry tinder.

And within moments, all the gopas, all the cowherd boys, were complaining about being thirsty. Some boys opened their eyes very wide, and others, they held their throats in distress: "Kṛṣṇa, we're so thirsty!" Then, as they do in all circumstances, trivial or grave, the boys—it's so sweet—they all turned to Kṛṣṇa for shelter. They were saying: "O Gopāla, we know You have many powers. Please find some cool, clear water for us to drink!" 

So Kṛṣṇa would never let His friends suffer, not even for a moment. So what did He do? He placed His Veṇu, His flute, to His lips, and He played—it's described, a very special melody, a special melody—and suddenly, to all the cowherd boys' surprise, water bubbled out of the ground. Another poetic expression: the water bubbled out of the ground and formed a small lake. And the cowherd boys, they cheered, and while clapping their hands, they said, "Kṛṣṇa has done it again! Kṛṣṇa has done it again!" We also experience that, don't we, in our lives? Kṛṣṇa has done it again! So ācāryas say that, "In the bliss of embracing and applauding their mystical friend, the boys forgot all about being thirsty."

And actually, Kṛṣṇa had to remind them, saying, "Friends, test the water to see if you like it." So all the cowherd boys—just try to envision this—all the cowherd boys crowded around the lake and either drank from their cupped hands, or it's described, directly from the water as cows do. Some boys would cup the water; others are just like cows, just go down and drink. Some boys drink like that. Now, because the gopas quenched their thirst—*pakhāra*—they quenched their thirst, *pakhāra*, from the kuṇḍa created by Kṛṣṇa, the place is known as Pakhārapura. Let's go there on our next Kārttika parikrama and drink the water from that sacred lake by our hands or like the cows, as you like.

Now, there's another place called Geri-ocara, where I was reading the cowherd boys would sometimes play ball. They'd play ball, and there's two lakes there where, in these games, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma stood, one to the north and one to the south respectively. And it's written that Kṛṣṇa often becomes so absorbed in these games that He forgets to eat, rest, or go home. I remember when I was young, I'm sure you remember also, playing outside—you know, it starts getting dark, I didn't want to go home. So in this transcendental world, in Vṛndāvana, that's there, but in His pure way, this one to stay as cowherd boys and play games. 

And the ācāryas write that there's another nice quote: "There's a special charm in Kṛṣṇa's ball games that, like the rasa dance, elevates them into a category of beautiful pastimes as differentiated from pastimes like flute playing or milking cows." Let's hear that one again: "There's a special charm in Kṛṣṇa's ball games that, like the rasa dance, elevates them into a category of blissful pastimes as differentiated from pastimes like flute playing or milking cows." They really like games! So sometimes the boys would play football with round fruits like *bela* or *āmalakī*, and sometimes they would play catch—"Let's play catch"—the title of the lecture, "Let's play catch," by throwing unripe fruits back and forth to one another. But even while just walking through the forest, for throwing like that, and these gopas, these cowherd boys, they play different games with balls made of wood or stuffed and stitched hide—using wooden bats. So we're talking about hide here, so you know, it's allowed that when the cows pass away naturally, then their skin can be turned into leather. Prabhupāda said one time—I heard him say in Rome—that "leather is a first-class product, but it should not be got by sinful means." Just like he said one time, "An elephant, alive or dead, is valuable." They are very good working animals in Vedic culture and in war, and by nature's way when they pass away, then their tusks can be used to make ivory. And Prabhupāda said in his books that ivory is a first-class product in Deity worship, but nothing should be—none of this should be achieved by violence, but by nature's way. So they have balls made of wood or stuffed and stitched hide. Of course, everything's eternal there; the cows never pass away, but anyway, somehow they have their stuffed and stitched hide balls, mysterious for loving. 

Now, the ācāryas mentioned that if His bat is broken—right, if Kṛṣṇa's bat is broken—He requests His father to have a new one made. Now, in another game, the boys, they roll clusters of *kunda* flowers into balls. They roll clusters of *kunda* flowers—*kunda* means the lake—so I suppose the flowers growing in the lake, they roll them into balls, and then they throw them at one another. Like if you throw a flower, it doesn't hurt, right? So flower balls. And the ācāryas write that this sport makes the boys so excited that their laughter can be heard all over Vraja. Can you imagine? You're walking through the Vṛndāvana forest, sometimes you hear Kṛṣṇa's flute, sometimes you hear the parrots carrying messages, sometimes you hear the deer—like—and sometimes you can hear the laughter of the cowherd boys, so excited in their sport.

Now, at Gato, the boys would make a wide circle and throw a ball back and forth to one another, and whoever dropped the ball had to leave the game. And intent on intercepting a ball thrown over his head, sometimes Kṛṣṇa holds His turban in place with His left hand, and while looking up, deftly—it's described, deftly—catches the ball with His right hand, calling out, "I got it! I got it!" And when He wants to throw the ball so fast that it cannot be caught, He gracefully bends His arm, drawing His fist behind His ear, and then throws the ball with lightning speed. And some boys are unable to field Kṛṣṇa's, I guess you could say, fastballs, but expert players like Devaprastha can easily catch them while making fun of Kṛṣṇa by saying things like, "Hey Gopāla, is that the best You can do? Is that the best You can do?" So these games of ball go on continuously at Gato, Kārdik-kṣetra. Let's go there and play catch! And it's written that as Kṛṣṇa plays catch, His curly hair flies everywhere until His body is completely covered with Vṛndāvana's dust and His own perspiration, and He only stops when He's very exhausted. How can He become exhausted? He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But He feigns exhaustion; it's part of the *līlā*. And He then rests in the shelter of a tree, lying upon a friend's shawl, as another boy fans Him with leaves and yet another massages His calves and feet—*sakhya-rasa*.

And in my reading, I came across another game the cowherd boys play; it takes place specifically at the base of Govardhana Hill. It's described as a very fast-paced sport called Haḍu-guḍu. Haḍu-guḍu, h-a-d-u-g-u-d-u. Haḍu-guḍu. "Let's play Haḍu-guḍu." And in this game, someone has to touch his opponent by extending their foot, and someone else has to grab hold of that opponent—that opponent's foot, I guess somebody trips them, and then somebody catches them, something like that. Not simple games, but full of *bhāva*. And finally, I read how our great hero Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, he prays to enter Vṛndāvana in order to watch these sports of Kṛṣṇa and His friends. And he also prays that when the cowherd boys return home in the evenings, he desires to smear the dust of their feet all over his body. Kṛṣṇa.

So we will finish today with a beautiful verse, very beautiful, short but very beautiful verse from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, his *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 3.3.86-87, summarizing what we spoke about today:

> "Pleasing Kṛṣṇa by hand-to-hand combat, playing ball and dice, riding on each other's shoulders, stick fighting, sleeping and sitting with Kṛṣṇa on a bed, seat, or swing, telling pleasing jokes, playing in the water, and singing and dancing with Kṛṣṇa—these are the activities common to all types of Kṛṣṇa's friends."

All right, Kṛṣṇa boys, thank you so much. Yes, we'll finish here, and we'll be back in a couple of days, I think. We'll find some more of these *sakhya* cowherd boy pastimes to share with all of you in this very, very auspicious month of Kārttika. By hearing them in the month of Kārttika, they're even more purifying. 

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvana-īśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya!

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Thank you.""