"*00465*.*
"### 00465_Let’s Play Ball - Kartik Parikrama 2023

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Part of the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is to reveal one's heart and then to listen to someone who is revealing their heart on the Kṛṣṇa conscious platform. I am going to reveal my heart to you; my heart is in a turbulence right now. Sometimes you go to the beach, you see the waves come in, and as the waves are coming in, those that just came in are receding back out into the ocean, so there is a kind of a mixture there. There is sort of a turbulence in my heart, and I’m sure that all of you are experiencing the same thing—that we are so much enjoying or relishing this *parikramā*, but it’s almost over. I know we’re supposed to share our realizations a couple of days from now, but I just thought I’d put that out. We’ve been doing this for, I don’t know, many, many years, 20 years or something, but I think this was the best Kārtik *parikramā* we ever had. It’s always the best, especially best because of all of you. You were so enthusiastic, and you were tolerant of any inconveniences, and you just really relished every moment of *śravaṇam*, *kīrtanam*. It was so nicely organized by Śatarāṇī Devī Dāsī and her husband Govinda.

We had the best translators, we had... we had the best translators this year. And what would it be without our stalwarts, Śatarāṇī, Dād, and that *mṛdaṅga* player Govinda? We say in America, "super-duper, super-duper," huh? Super-duper, yeah, special guest appearance. We’re still coming down from a very high from *govardhana-pūjā* yesterday, and the *prasādam* must have been pretty good, right? I don’t know, I’ve just been eating quinoa and avocados, for once I thought they’d give me... Many high points; we’ll discuss it in a couple of days. Many high points in the program. It’s all Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy; He invited us here, and He’s maintaining us here, and He’ll deliver us from Gokula to Goloka one day. And I think the Dhāma, Vṛndāvana, has been very merciful to all of us to reveal herself to all of us, because you’re dancing on her soil and you’re raising your hands to the air, so she’s very pleased with your enthusiasm to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. She herself has revealed so much to us this last month. It’s not over yet.

So, today we find ourselves in Sādhu-grāma, and my good friend V— he gave a nice introduction of the particular pastime that happens here. I was shocked, for once I heard the cowherd boys and the cowherd girls cooperating together. Usually, there’s these fights and arguments and teasing, and here the cowherd girls are serving the boys *pānam* in the leaves made from the *kadamba* trees. Is that sweet? There is actually proof, because you see this on your left over there, there’s a little shrine over there with a big, massive Govardhana-śilā, you can see it there, and the shrine. So before we leave today, wander over there and you look just on the back of the śilā there, you’ll see there’s these fingerprints. Kṛṣṇa, after taking *bhoganam*, He wiped His hand on that Govardhana-śilā, and you can see His finger streaks there in the śilā; it’s a very rare opportunity to see. So this particular place is famous for cowherd boy pastimes. The pastimes of the different devotees and their different *rasas*, they all take place in different places; it’s not very often that they’re mixed. Usually, the boys are in one place, the girls another place, the elders over here, like cows. Here, it’s everything is kind of... it doesn’t mix very much. Of course, everyone is on the same platform of love for Kṛṣṇa, so in that sense, there is a oneness, but there’s also a difference. One of the few times that everyone comes together, all the *rasas* come together, is when the lifting of Govardhana Hill. Indra was showering the, you know, the thunderstorm, all the rain, and Vraja Vṛndāvana starting to flood, so whoever they were and wherever they were, everyone ran under the shelter of Girirāja. So there is a time when everyone was together, very close. Gopīs especially like that pastime because usually they’re looking at Kṛṣṇa from a distance, but here they’re right next to Kṛṣṇa looking up like that, special pastime.

So this is cowherd boy land. Here, actually, there’s five different types of *rasas*. *Rasa* means love, different types of way you can love Kṛṣṇa. There’s one we don’t discuss so much, but it’s called *śānta-rasa*; it’s more like neutrality, like the trees, the bushes, and things—they also have their service, they produce nice fruits and flowers for Kṛṣṇa. Then there’s *dāsya*, which means servant. *Sakhya*: you can become the best friend of Kṛṣṇa. All the cowherd boys think that, "I’m the best friend of Kṛṣṇa," and Kṛṣṇa’s love is reciprocal—Kṛṣṇa is thinking, "This is my best friend, this is my best friend, this is my best friend." This is the beauty of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, love is all-pervading. Then there’s *vātsalya*: you can have a parental mood, like Kṛṣṇa is your darling little child. And that, what most people in the world don’t understand, God can become your lover, you can love God and God can love you, and this amorous mood is really interesting. But because we’re here today, and this is a boy-place, let’s discuss a little bit about that *sakhya-rasa*. Who knows, perhaps someday when you reach your elevated stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, some of you will want to be cowherd boys, then you can live here in Vṛndāvana and cultivate that mood. 

This *sakhya-rasa* friendship is very nicely described by a great devotee, his name was Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, in his book *Prema-bhakti-candrikā*. How do you say it? Thank you, it’s a tongue twister! Oh, you did it, good; that helps when the translator can say the Sanskrit better than the speaker. So he writes in that book: "Living in Braja in the company of one's spiritual master, worship Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma at all times in the mood of friendship, giving up material desires, rejecting *artha, dharma, kāma,* and *mokṣa*, worship the two boys of Kṛṣṇa's age, aspiring for the feet of Śrī Nanda and Sunanda." Narottama has spoken. 

Actually, we all know that Śrīla Prabhupāda also shows some appreciation for friendship with Kṛṣṇa; it can’t be denied. For when he was on the *Jaladūta* on September 13, 1965, he famously wrote the following: "O Kṛṣṇa, You are my eternal companion; I haven't forgotten You. I have suffered the kick of Māyā lifetime after lifetime. Now I have the opportunity to serve You once more. If I can revive a connection with You, then I will be able to actually meet with You. In Your company, dear friend, I will experience that same joy once again. I will wander all day long tending the cows, I will run throughout the many forests and roll in the ground. Oh, when will that day be mine?" Today, that remembrance of You came to me spontaneously, feeling great hope, I called out to You. Only because I am Your eternal servant do I have so much longing; I have no refuge other than You. There is Śrīla Prabhupāda revealing his heart. 

And Śrutakīrti, whom probably you all know, who was Prabhupāda’s secretary for some time, he remembers a time when he was massaging Prabhupāda in his room in Atlanta in March 1975. He said that while Prabhupāda was being massaged, he gazed at a picture of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma with their friends in the forest and said the following: "I like the cowherd boys very much. Every day Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would go into the forest in Vṛndāvana. They would play all day. The calves were with them. Finally, they would stop for lunch. Sometimes one of the cowherd boys would steal Kṛṣṇa’s lunch and begin throwing it around. They would play 'keep-away' with Kṛṣṇa." I never heard that; they would play "keep-away." "Finally, the cowherd boys would throw their lunch to Kṛṣṇa, and they would sit down with His lunch." And Prabhupāda concluded, "I just want to go back to the spiritual world and eat *kaḍhī* and *laḍḍu* with Kṛṣṇa." 

Now with that, we can easily conclude that Prabhupāda is a cowherd boy in the spiritual world, but on numerous occasions, Prabhupāda cautioned us not to speculate about the identity of one's spiritual master in the spiritual world. We’re not allowed to come to any conclusion because spiritual life is very deep, and we’re just beginning to understand; we’re like the tip of the iceberg. So we’re not allowed to speculate on what is the Guru’s liberated form; to begin with, we shouldn’t even speculate about our own identity, which is called *siddha-deha*. We’re just [in] devotional service and practice; we’re trying to follow the rules and regulations and finish our 16 rounds. These are very high subject matters; we’re just... we’re just servants. We shouldn’t... we can maybe muse, "Sometimes I wonder, I wonder," but we shouldn’t speculate. And this instruction is actually confirmed in *śāstra*: if one thinks of their *siddha-deha*, meaning their eternal spiritual form, without achieving the *adhikāra*, which means necessary realization, their intelligence will become bewildered. That doesn’t mean we have no identity—we’re not like the Māyāvādīs—but we can proudly say, "Yes, I know my identity: I am the humble servant of my spiritual master." That’s... and I’m... "Who are you?" "I’m the servant of my spiritual master." 

In Prabhupāda’s original passport, which he came to America [with], it’s very nice what he wrote in there, because in the old passport you had to write your name, your place of residence, and you know, etc. So it said "Name," and he wrote, "A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami." "Address," "Vṛndāvana, India." That’s all. "Occupation," you know, we have many occupations, he wrote, "Occupation: servant of Oṁ Viṣṇupāda." We’re simply running behind him shouting, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." And one time in an instructive way, Prabhupāda said... how did they put it, I forget? "Oh, I do not know who is Kṛṣṇa; I only know my Guru Mahārāja." And thinking like that, one day one will come in contact with Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda told another one of his secretaries, who told me, that when we get back to the spiritual world, the spiritual master is waiting for us, and this is what Prabhupāda said: then he takes our hand and he leads us into the *kuñja*, into the forest where Kṛṣṇa is, and he puts our hand into the hand of Kṛṣṇa, and then he leaves us alone for some time. 

Actually, we can expand upon being the servant—*dāsa-dāsa-dāsānudāsa*—we’re the servant of the servant of the servant. We’re happy doing that, because when you’re the servant of all these illustrious persons, you don’t want to be on top, you want to be on the bottom, because all their lotus feet [are] on top of your head and you’re getting so much... I want to be the lowest of the lowest, and you get all the dust of the feet of those devotees. We’re perfectly situated simply as *dāsa*, and one day our identity, it will be revealed to us at the proper time. 

So although we’ve heard, you know, Prabhupāda revealed his heart on the *Jaladūta* coming across the ocean, and you can see there’s a fraternal mood there, we shouldn’t come to any conclusion only because this is quite deep. *Śāstra* says a pure devotee can serve Kṛṣṇa in two or even three *rasas*. What? Yeah, whenever we speak in learned circles, because you’re all learned people, learned devotees, one has to confirm what they say with *śāstra*. So we know it’s not speculation. Where does it say that a pure devotee can have more than one relationship with Kṛṣṇa or three identities? In *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, verse 123, there’s a hint there:

$$yadyapi \ pāṇḍava \ arjuno \ yām \ rāmanand \ yāh \ ut...$$

The most intelligent say that the son of Pāṇḍu, Arjuna, and the Gopi Arjuna have come together as Rāya Rāmānanda. We all know Arjuna from the *Bhagavad-gītā*, but somewhere in the series of talks they gave about Vṛndāvana, it was two or three years ago, we spoke about how Arjuna was very curious about Vṛndāvana, and by the mercy of the Vrajavāsīs, he attained a form of a *gopī*, and he was known as Arjunī because he had that strong desire. That pastime is there, and those two, quote-unquote, personalities combined together as Rāya Rāmānanda. And his pastimes, it’s quite deep, but I’m just saying that a pure devotee can have different *rasas*. If that’s what it is, the most intelligent say that the son of Pāṇḍu named Arjuna and the Gopi Arjuna have come together as Rāya Rāmānanda. So the ācāryas, they clearly say that Rāmānanda Rāya is present as Arjuna in *sakhya-rasa* and as [a gopī] in the spiritual world. 

What about Nārada Muni? He’s, you know, in colloquial English now, he’s the "eternal spaceman"—he can go to [Vaikuṇṭha] and come back, report to the Lord and come back, and deliver different devotees and then go back. But he also came to Vṛndāvana, didn’t he? And he became a *gopī* by the mercy of the Vrajavāsīs, and he wrote about that pure devotional service in the *Nārada-bhakti-sūtras*, somewhere near here, a stone’s throw from here. So I’m not speculating, because I saw Prabhupāda one time, he was chanting on the veranda in Paris, and then he went into ecstasy. He started shaking, and the tears were coming out like this—not down his cheeks, they were coming out like that—and they landed on his *uttarīya*, on his top piece here. He was chanting about the gopīs. So I’m not speculating when I say I saw a sentiment of Prabhupāda in *madhura-rasa*, so I’m not going to say which one or combination he was. But there’s another example: Prabhupāda’s talking about the cowherd boys, and then when he’s chanting, he’s out of it, he’s crying. There’s a possibility there. And Prabhupāda was so kind to share his mercy with all of us; his tears were... they made wet this part of his top piece. And then later in the day, one of the matajis who were supposed to wash Prabhupāda’s clothes, she had to do something, so she asked for volunteers to wash Prabhupāda’s clothes. So I raised my hand and she gave me the clothes. I saw how the tears were coming there, so I took the clothes into my room, I locked the door, and I sucked on that wet part where Prabhupāda’s tears were. And I’m hoping by that act that in this lifetime, at least, I’ll come to the point where I can understand I’m not the body. 

That’s a big realization: to understand I’m not the body. How can the devotee understand that he’s still attached to the body? We may think, "I’m so advanced now, I know I’m not the body, I want to know what is my..." But from deep within the heart, if some material desire comes to your mind and you meditate on it for even two seconds, you’re still in the bodily concept of life. To be honest, something comes, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no," but you thought about it, so you’re still in the bodily concept of life. I told you many times that when Prabhupāda first came to our city, where I was in the beginning, in Detroit, he arrived at the airport, we had a big *vyāsāsana* in the hall, and Prabhupāda sat on the *vyāsāsana* and gave a class in the airport, yeah. So at one point, I was sitting there with many godbrothers, and sometimes we recount together. I remember at one point, Prabhupāda paused, and he leaned over on the *vyāsāsana*—I was sitting like right there—and he said to us, "My dear boys and girls, please, I beg you, believe me when I say you’re not these material bodies." Because he knew how hard it was to overcome that concept. He was begging us, "Please believe me, you’re not the body." We went, "Yes, yes, we’re not the body!" Like you see those little doggies they put in the back of a car, the back seat of the car, and when the car moves, the head of the dog goes like this, that little toy? We were like that—yes, still like that. 

For I know one time a devotee actually asked Prabhupāda who he was in the spiritual world; you know what his reply was? "If I told you, you would faint. If I told you, you would faint." So that’s... but it’s nice to hear Prabhupāda reveal his heart, or to show himself, really reveal, feeling his heart, because we know for certain he came from Goloka Vṛndāvana into this world to deliver us. And it’s important to say that we shouldn’t think that one relationship is better than another. We have to be very careful, for all the five *rasas* I mentioned, they exist because of Kṛṣṇa’s desire—varieties, the spice of life. So He’s the Lord, He desires these different relationships, so we can’t think one is better than the other. They’re all perfect and complete in their own way. Only a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava can understand the following statement: although we say the gopīs are the greatest lovers of Kṛṣṇa, it’s not to say that the love of the cowherd boys or Māyā-Yaśodā is in any way inferior. It’s not like that. 

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, by definition, we understand she has the *mahābhāva*, she’s the greatest lover of Kṛṣṇa, but sometimes she herself praises the love of the cowherd boys for Kṛṣṇa, showing that there’s no envy in the spiritual world. All the other emotions are there in the spiritual [world], but the one thing that’s absent is envy. And if envy enters your heart, you come down into the material world—this is the place where envy reigns supreme. So Rādhārāṇī is the topmost lover, but sometimes she praises the love of those in other *rasas*. Last night I found a very wonderful example in *Nectar of Devotion*, chapter 41—just happened, I just found it, it’s so perfect. Śrīla Prabhupāda relates that one time, seeing Kṛṣṇa and Subala embracing one another, Rādhārāṇī said the following; she spoke to Subala: "Sakhya, friend, you’re my friend, you’re my friend, I love you, I love you more," you know, they’re like that. Rādhārāṇī, who has the topmost *bhāva*, we say, she praised Subala’s love for Kṛṣṇa: "My dear Subala, you are very fortunate, because even in the presence of superiors, you and Kṛṣṇa have no hesitation in putting your arms on each other’s shoulders. I think it must be admitted that in your previous lives, you have succeeded in many kinds of austerities." 

Then Prabhupāda comments, he brings out the real essence of Rādhārāṇī’s words; this is what the ācārya does, he reveals, goes deeper and makes it clear for us. Prabhupāda writes: "The idea here is that although Rādhārāṇī was accustomed to putting her arms on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders, it was not possible for her to do such a thing in the presence of her superiors, whereas Subala could do it very freely. Rādhārāṇī therefore praised Subala’s good fortune." We’re following in her footsteps in the sense: if we see someone more advanced, we glorify them and ask for their mercy so we can come eventually to the same stage. And if we find someone who’s equal with us, on the same level of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we want to work together to advance as a team, like in *gṛhastha* life. And if we meet a devotee less fortunate than us, we extend our hand and help them come to the same level of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is how we can see this in the personality of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in this particular part of *Nectar of Devotion*. Same sentiment in the material world: if you meet someone more successful than you, you want to pull them down. If you see someone on your same level, you see them as competition. If someone’s less fortunate, you want to exploit them. This is the envy that’s here in the material, "me and mine." It’s all about me. Who wants to live in such a society? We prefer to live in the society of loving devotees with loving relationships. 

So, we shouldn’t think that one *rasa* in the spiritual world is better; they’re all perfect. And even Rādhārāṇī glorified Subala’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Now, I was reading also that we should note that the intense love the cowherd boys have for Kṛṣṇa caused them similar pain that the gopīs felt when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana. This is another sign that all *rasas* are perfect. "Oh, the gopīs' relationship is better, not as good as the cowherd boys'..." No, we see that when Kṛṣṇa left, all the residents of Vṛndāvana equally felt the same intense mood of separation, which shows the high quality of their love. While Kṛṣṇa was here, of course, we know that Rādhārāṇī’s pain was the highest, because Prabhupāda underlines both these points in his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.10.9: "After his separation from Vṛndāvana, the innocent rural cowherd boys, girls, ladies, and others all felt shock throughout their lives. And the separation of Rādhārāṇī, the most beloved cowherd girl, that’s beyond expression." So there, Prabhupāda is saying they all felt shock when Kṛṣṇa left, and Rādhārāṇī, most beloved, Prabhupāda said it’s beyond expression to try to describe Rādhārāṇī’s feelings of separation. We’ll never know; we can only worship it from afar. 

So those are some reflections on *sakhya-rasa* and *mādhurya-rasa*, all the different *rasas*. One ācārya says that all the *rasas* combined together to give pleasure to Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa’s *mādhurya-rasa*. That’s the sum and substance of different *rasas*, but somehow or other it all works to increase Rādhārāṇī’s love for Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s love for Rādhārāṇī. It’s mostly about *mādhurya-rasa* pleasing Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa. So we’re here today, you know, relishing hearing about this *sakhya-rasa*, because if it gets too deep, we can’t comprehend and we go to sleep. So we’ll tell some stories, we’ll tell some pastimes. 

There’s a nice cowherd boy pastime that happened in a place called Pārā-kūpa—it’s not here, it’s another place. Cowherd boys, they have the different places they like to go. One place was called Pārā-kūpa, not *pakora* but Pārā-kūpa. Yesterday, Prabhupāda in his wonderful address to all of us was speaking about how Arjuna could shoot an arrow into the ground and then water would come, so Kṛṣṇa is the origin of everything. So there’s also a pastime where Kṛṣṇa brought water up from the ground for His friends. But in Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa doesn’t have the paraphernalia—you know, bows and arrows and Sudarśana-cakras and clubs and things like that—His paraphernalia is *veṇu*, His flute. He can accomplish everything by playing His flute. So there’s a pastime at that place, Pārā-kūpa, where Kṛṣṇa played the flute and made water come from the ground. Would you like to hear that pastime? 

So at that place, one time, the boys were having fun and they lost track of time. You remember when you were young, you know, you’d be out playing, and then it starts getting evening and you’re playing with your friends, your mother, "It’s time to come home, you’ve been out for hours!" "We just got here, Mom!" You didn’t want to come home, right? You lost track of time. So Pārā-kūpa, the boys, they play a lot, that’s what boys do. So they’re playing and they forgot about eating or drinking, like we’re all so busy sometimes, right? We forget, we forget to eat. Well, maybe you don’t, but I think some... Have you ever experienced you’re so busy you forgot to eat? The only person that probably never happened to is Śyāmasundara. If *prasādam* is not ready at 1:30, watch out! I think he must be a cowherd boy. 

So finally, you know, it got to the point where one cowherd boy, he said, "Hey guys, I’m thirsty." So the ācārya said that boy’s comment acted like sparks on dry tinder—you know, there’s like shavings of wood and a spark comes, it immediately catches fire. So within a moment, all the boys: "I’m thirsty, Kṛṣṇa, I’m thirsty!" And they all turned to Kṛṣṇa at the same time and they said, "Oh Gopāla, we’ve seen You have many powers, so please find some cool, clear water for us to drink." So one ācārya says Kṛṣṇa would never let His friends suffer, not even for a moment. So He put His flute to His lips and He played a special melody. I don’t know what that melody was—Prabhupāda’s good with coming up with new melodies; through the years, he’s developed tunes that have become standard in ISKCON. So we’ll leave it to Prabhupāda to someday discover that melody which Kṛṣṇa played and caused water to gush from the ground. "Hold on, I’m thirsty," and Kṛṣṇa did that, and water started bubbling out of the ground and it made a lake. You know, the boys are covered by Yoga-māyā; they see these things like, "Just Kṛṣṇa is amazing!" They don’t think like, "Only God could do this," because that would impede their relationship. They say, "Kṛṣṇa, You’re really amazing! You played Your flute and made a lake!" And they started cheering and clapping their hands, "Kṛṣṇa has done it again! Yeah, did you know? Yeah, Kṛṣṇa did it! It’s all about Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa did it!" It’s amazing. And they’re embracing each other and they forgot about being thirsty because they’re so busy glorifying Kṛṣṇa. 

So one point Kṛṣṇa said, "Calm down, you guys! Hey, test the water and see if you like it." See, the cowherd boys were laughing. So the boys all crowded around the lake, and it’s described they drank the water in two ways. Remember, they’re cowherd boys, they’re devoted to the calves—the cowherd boys are totally dedicated—because their Kṛṣṇa loves cows, Kṛṣṇa loves... so whatever Kṛṣṇa loves, we love. We... we love rice, dāl, and *capātī* more than pizza, right? I’m speculating here, sorry. So the boys, they went to drink the water in two ways: half the boys went down and they cupped the water in their hands and they drank like this, and the other 50% of the boys, they got on all fours and they went down with their mouth and they drank water like cows do. I don’t know, can someone show us how cows drink? Wow. So because the *gopas* were, you know, so thirsty, that cool taste of the water quenched their thirst. That’s called *pān-kūpa*, not *pakora* but *pān-kūpa*. So the way which they relieved their thirst is called *pān-kūpa*. Maybe we can go there one day, and we’ll drink water from the lake like Śyāmasundara did. Who wants to go to Pān-kūpa? So Rādhikā, write it down: 2024, we’ll go there. 

Now, there’s another place where the cowherd boys would sometimes play ball. We read that in *Kṛṣṇa Book*, you know, I read out, okay, just, you know, like take a ball, throw it back and forth. But if this... you know, these are deep pastimes again, the ācāryas explained that the boys become so absorbed in playing ball that they forget to drink, they forget to rest, or even return home. One ācārya has written, "There’s a special charm in Kṛṣṇa’s ball games that, like the *rāsa* dance, elevates them into a category of blissful pastimes as differentiated from pastimes like flute playing or milking cows." Let’s analyze that a little bit. The boys like to play flutes, they all have buffalo horns, they have... they all have sticks, they have little ropes for tying up the calves. So they also play flute sometimes, and they love to milk cows, but that doesn’t bring the same ecstasy as it does playing with balls. Talk about analyzing, you know, *sakhya-rasa*? Enough, you know that Kṛṣṇa, He has friends and those friends see Kṛṣṇa as a friend, leave it at that. No, what is the nature of their friendship? They get more bliss, like the bliss that comes from the *rāsa* dance, by playing ball, more than they do like flute playing or milking cows. Just throwing the ball, they get the ecstasy of that’s there in the *rāsa* dance. This is a nice analysis of *sakhya-rasa*, yeah. Playing ball elevates them to beautiful pastimes. So let’s read it again: "There is a special charm in Kṛṣṇa’s ball games that, like the *rāsa* dance, elevates them into the category of beautiful pastimes as opposed [to] just as playing flute and milking cows." Let’s play ball with Kṛṣṇa! Catch! Oh, *rāsa-līlā*! 

Now, someone may think, "I’m going to go back to the spiritual world and be a cowherd boy, and I’m going to milk cows, play a flute, and throw balls." I mean, how’s that so simple? I mean, get up in the morning, I drive the car with my friends, I go to the movie, I, you know, I’m engaged... back, I want to go back to the spiritual world and throw a ball around. But as I’ve said several times, it’s not so much *what* you do, but the consciousness in which you do it. Kṛṣṇa speaks about the simplicity of love in one of the 700 verses of *Bhagavad-gītā*. This verse explains it all: "Offer Me with love a fruit, a flower, or a leaf with devotion, and I will accept it." And if Kṛṣṇa is pleased, we’re automatically pleased because we’re His parts and parcels. That’s the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Our happiness depends upon the happiness of Kṛṣṇa’s representative and satisfying him, Śrīla Prabhupāda and Kṛṣṇa. So a little leaf, but with love, you’re... Kṛṣṇa is satisfied, and you’re satisfied, and that’s the perfection of life. It’s all about love. What did he say? "Kṛṣṇa consciousness is love masquerading as a philosophy." A really gross example, you can say to, you know, your girlfriend, "I love you," or you can say, "I love you!" What’s the difference? The *bhakti*—well, perverted *bhakti*, but the *bhakti*. So you can offer Kṛṣṇa a nice plate of *prasādam*, you know, and you’re chanting Gāyatrī and thinking about, you know, dinner and where you’re going to go, or you can chant your Gāyatrī thinking, "Kṛṣṇa, please accept this offering which we’ve prepared for Your pleasure." *Bhakti*! We want to do things with love. Oh, you’re doing really good, yeah. So throw the ball, oh, easy, throw it back. Kṛṣṇa... we’ll understand someday. We’re beginning to understand because we that we’re experiencing that love amongst each other as Vaisnavas, and out of gratitude to our spiritual teachers, gratitude turns into affection, turns into love. You’re doing the right thing, never leave. 

So, move into the science of ball playing. Do it with love. But here’s how you play ball with Kṛṣṇa; it’s a good title for this lecture: "Play Ball with Kṛṣṇa." So when you play ball with Kṛṣṇa, you try to find a nice round fruit like a *bael* or *āmalakī* ripe... because hard part, the unripe fruits are too hard, so little soft fruit. And it can be *bael* or *āmalakī*, but it is mentioned that the boys, the boys who are actually good at this particular game of catch, they sometimes also throw ripe fruit, I mean unripe fruit, green, like green mangoes. And sometimes the boys, they make balls out of wood, and they use wooden... they make bats. They have wooden bats. Like I hate to say it, cricket. Oh my God, cricket originated in Vṛndāvana! Oh my God, I thought it was a British... and I was reading that Kṛṣṇa often breaks His bat, and when He breaks His bat, He goes home and asks His father, Mahārāja Nanda, for a new bat. 

Now, there’s other kinds of balls that you can use, this *sakhya-rasa*, you know, some of you may, you know... So take it in... Another type of ball you can make is from a cluster of flowers. The boys take the flowers—I don’t know how they put them all together like that—from the from the *kunja* like that, and then they hit it with the wooden bat and it goes, and the flowers go everywhere. And one ācārya says that when the boys become so excited at the moment, their laughter can be heard all over Vṛndāvana, and they laugh so hard—boys' laughter—everyone in Vṛndāvana hears the boys laughing. There’s a place called Ghaṭa-kūṭa, it’s a place where the boys, they formed a wide circle, and they were throwing balls back and forth to each other. You can also play, we you know, it’s like... no children, yeah... will maybe you know, we’ll all be young in the spiritual world forever, so we can play games of the young. We’re eternally youthful, it’s okay, we’ll never grow up, like Peter Pan in Disneyland. "I’ll never grow up, I’ll never grow up, not me!" You know, Disneyland in *rasa*. Disneyland, Peter Pan, he’s like, "I’ll never grow up, I’ll never grow up, not me, never grow up." Because the soul is eternally youthful, so we can learn these games. Śrīla Prabhupāda can get some of the boys together and play this particular game they played at Ghaṭa-kūṭa. You throw the *āmalakī* fruit, you throw the, you know, the *bael* fruit, and whoever drops the ball has to leave the game. Quite complex! Now, in that game, Kṛṣṇa was is really good at that game. Whenever some went through the ball too high, Kṛṣṇa could jump up, holding His turban on His head, jump up and very definitely catch the ball while calling out to His friends, "I got it, got it!" And as soon as He came back to... we call that in America, "fastball." No one could catch Kṛṣṇa’s fastballs. Whoa! Where did it go? The ācāryas right like this, this is this is the play ball, let’s play ball, another title: "Let’s play ball, Kṛṣṇa, You’re amazing!" 

But there’s one cowherd boy, his name is Dāmodara, he could catch a fastball: "Got it!" They have... *Prabhu*, *Govinda*! Is that the best you can do? Yeah! So this is Braja. These simple pastimes, imbued with *bhāva*, with love, fully satisfying Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and the devotee and Kṛṣṇa, and they just go on eternally, eternally doing these simple activities, full with *bhakti*, in the beautiful surrounding of lakes and and Govardhana Hill and lush scenery and birds. And this is not Utopia, this is the absolute truth! So remember Vṛndāvana like that. You’re all going to be leaving very soon, you’re going to go back to your your cities, and you’re going to get off the airplane, you’re going to go, "Nah, Vṛndāvana’s perfect, my town [is not]..." But I’ll stay here and I’ll preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness and bring everybody back home to our real home, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, on the Kārtik *parikramā* 2024. 

And the ācāryas say that at the end of the day of Kṛṣṇa’s playing all day with His friends, His body is completely covered with Vṛndāvana’s dust, and He only stops when He’s completely exhausted. Then He rests under a tree, lying on a friend’s shawl as another boy fans Him with leaves and another boy massages His lotus feet. Who wants to go back home, back to Godhead? Okay, we’ll finish today with a beautiful verse from Rūpa Goswāmī’s illustrious *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 3.3, verse 86 and 87: "Pleasing Kṛṣṇa by hand-to-hand combat, playing ball and dice, riding each other’s shoulders, stick fighting, sleeping and sitting with Kṛṣṇa on a bed, seat, or swing, telling pleasing jokes, playing in the water, and singing and dancing with Kṛṣṇa are the activities of *bhāvas* common to all types of Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd friends." 

Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd boyfriends, *Sakhya-ananda Bābā kī, Nandagrām kī, Gokula kī, Paramārtha kī...* Jai, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, back home, back to Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, take everybody with... 

Śrīla Prabhupāda!""