Go apologize. No apologize, go apologize. Let our hearts so, today on our curricula, during this auspicious month of Karthik, we brought the devotees to a very special forest. It's the forest of Śrī Devī and Raṅgā Devī. Of course, there are two of the aṣṭa-sakhīs, the eight very close girlfriends of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

And each of those aṣṭa-sakhīs, in their service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they're in charge of a particular forest. Vṛndāvana is the main forest, but within Vṛndāvana, there are many sub-forests.

So these two aṣṭa-sakhīs, Raṅgā and Śrī Devī, these twins actually, they um take care of the forest very nicely for what reason?

With the hopes that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa will visit their forest and have their very sweet transcendental pastimes there. So in that transcendental atmosphere, we came today with a group of about 400 different devotees, and we had kīrtana, and we had kathā.

This is Braja. Actually, I was thinking, you know, Vṛndāvana is Vṛndāvana proper, you know, the the town with all the buildings now, etc., etc.

It's always been Divya, but out here, this is Vṛndāvana, um, like it was 5,000 years ago when Kṛṣṇa was here, the countryside, and even when Mahaprabhu was here 500 years ago.

So in our curriculum, we have a choice of 60 billion holy places, the 60 billion holy places in Vṛndāvana according to śāstra.

So we're taken to, devotees, this year we're taking devotees to places that they've never been before, never been before, different holy places where different pastimes take place. And I know a little bit about these pastimes because during the pandemic, Rādhārāṇī slammed the door on my travels, and I had to sit and study all day long, and as usual, share that knowledge with others.

So we came to know about these very beautiful different places in Vṛndāvana.

And um, on their way back, we met two cowherd men. Their cows are at the top of this, this hill here, and we were talking with them. And I noticed that they had these beautiful peacock feathers. You don't see peacocks so much in Vṛndāvana proper, in the village anymore, because of all the development.

And I really miss that because the peacocks are very dear to Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is very dear to the peacocks. They're an integral part of, of Braja, but um, they pretty much have disappeared now with all of the construction that's going on in Vṛndāvana.

So if you want to see peacocks, you have to come out in the countryside. Countryside. And I've learned it, if you really want to understand what is Vṛndāvana, you have to associate with the Brajabāsīs, especially those Brajabāsīs who live this simple life with high thinking, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

To come out here and associate with them. And they have very big hearts. They're very beautiful people for many reasons, because they're just intoxicated in love with Kṛṣṇa. Even in modern times, if you say Rādhē Rādhē, anyone will reply, "Rādhē Rādhē," more than happy.

Kṛṣṇa, let's say Rādhē Rādhē. So we met these um, two cowherd men, and they were carrying these peacock feathers. And in the West, you know, this is something that, I don't know, you'd pay a big price for. But um, they collect them as they tend their cows in the forests here.

And I, I asked them if I, you know, could purchase a couple of peacock feathers. And I said, "How much?" They said, "Two rupees each." So, you know, they came up to about 50 rupees.

But out of, you know, appreciation for these Brajabāsīs, I gave him 500 rupees, which was probably too much, you know. So like that. So we're, you know, walking down, you know, you walk down Fifth Avenue in New York, or you walk down Oxford Street in London, you know, there's so many things you can buy and can do.

But the real purpose of life is to fall in love with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. What better place to do that than Vṛndāvana, which is the playground of God, and where everything here reminds you of Kṛṣṇa.

And just walking back to our car during this um, you know, after our prayer, come out, what do we meet?

Two cowherd boys greet us. And I say, "Who are you?" "We're gowalas, we're cowherd boys." They're older members, they said, "We're cowherd boys," and they had these peacock feathers.

So I gave her the donation. So, you know, what can you, you can't get anything like this on Oxford Street or, you know, in, uh, in Fifth Avenue. You can purchase some material things. But here's some peacocks, devotees of Kṛṣṇa, and we have their feathers and we'll use this in our pūjā when we get back home.

So, yeah, I like to walk in Braja and discover all these wonderful things that that are here to remind us of Kṛṣṇa, because as we know, Kṛṣṇa has the peacock feather in his hair. So a wonderful day out here, concealed.

The goats are coming here. Come the goats. And here's my, my friend in the background. He has a herd of goats, and he has a herd of cows up on the hill there. So he's the one that gave me this, uh, these beautiful peacock feathers.

And um, we embraced as well. All glories to Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma, where, you know, thinking of Kṛṣṇa, remembering Kṛṣṇa, hopefully one day, loving Kṛṣṇa comes very easy.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

He invited us to come here. And I was reading the other day, he even encouraged us to come and live here. So perhaps when I go very, very old, I'll come and retire here and just wander my last days in Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

All glories.