"### Live from the Magical Forest in Vṛndāvana - Kārtika 2021

What is described as Gokula—which is Vṛndāvana here on the earth—is a replica, but it is not just a replica; it is actually non-different. We have been discussing the last few days how those with the proper vision, who have their eyes smeared with the salve of love or devotion, can see things as they are and they can report just what is actually happening. According to them, there is no difference between the loka and Gokula. So we hear in that famous *Brahma-saṃhitā*. You hear about how the earth is made of *cintāmaṇi*, which means transcendental touchstones. Therefore, the scriptures describe that one grain of dust of Vṛndāvana is more opulent or more valuable as compared to the whole Vaikuṇṭha, the kingdom of God. Because here, by taking shelter of this dust—particularly by rolling in the dust—I don't know about now because the dust is a little bit muddy, but if somebody really has *lobha*, a lot of greed, they will roll in the mud. But you know, when we come to Vraja and we do Vṛndāvana parikramā, you see devotees like—bless his soul, wish he were here—there’s no hesitation. They just go down like a bundle, like a rod on the ground; they’re rolling because it is one of the five personalities who grants us entrance into Vṛndāvana physically here.

But are our hearts really here? Have we surrendered fully to the divine couple, and are we wishing to do selfless service without any personal motivation, just to see the divine couple happy in their meetings? Because quite often, the nature of Vṛndāvana is separation, but all the gopīs of Vṛndāvana, they want to see Kṛṣṇa. Anyone who has that mentality, he approaches these five personalities and Vṛndā-devī for *namaste*, and they beg. To live in Vṛndāvana, you have to be disgusted with material life—really disgusting, that's it. Like when he became a pure devotee, he was thinking, "When I think about what I did before I was a devotee, I spit at the thought." It is a very strong statement, but actually, you have to become disgusted with material nature. It takes time, but then you can fully embrace *śrī-vṛndāvana-dhāma*, service to the sādhus, to the living entities here, to the trees. To such a devotee, when he approaches these guardians of the dhāma, it comes from the heart. The prayers come from the heart and they resonate with the heart parts of those divine personalities, and they recommend you. Just like Prabhupāda would often say, we first approach Kṛṣṇa through His eternal consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She is very compassionate, so therefore in the mahā-mantra, we are first addressing, "Hare."

When Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sees even just an aspiring devotee—let’s say even just a *bhakta*—if that is a big step to want to become a Vaiṣṇava, and Kṛṣṇa recognizes that, He directs you to a spiritual organization like ISKCON, to a bona fide spiritual master who connects with the paramparā succession. So it is not something small to walk into the doors of the temple and say, "I want to be a devotee." You may not understand everything it means yet, but that sentiment is appreciated. So then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she says to Kṛṣṇa, "There is a nice young soul here." So He takes charge. Our *karma* kind of disappears, and *yogakṣemaṃ vahāmy aham*—Kṛṣṇa says, "For My devotee, I protect what they have and I provide what they lack." We may think that refers to pure devotees, and of course it does in the ultimate sense, but just like a mother has special love for her little helpless child, so Kṛṣṇa says, "I will protect you."

People use that verse all the time here in India: "We should surrender to God." What is the meaning there? Kṛṣṇa is saying, "I will protect you from all sinful reactions." He is not speaking to a *madhyama-adhikārī*; He is not speaking to an *uttama-adhikārī*. They are free from sin; they gave up that life a long time ago in preference to the higher goal of life. He is speaking to those who ask, "Should I take up this Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" Kṛṣṇa says, "Yes, and whatever sins you have, I’ll take care of that. Don’t worry about the sinful reactions. Don’t do *prāyaścitta*, all these different things to get rid of sin. Just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Your sins fly away like the birds, and you clap, all the birds go away." The material desires, they are thrown to a twelfth dimension, and you’re left with the choice of just pure love of God. So Kṛṣṇa is concerned about the little guys, too, like you and me. Therefore, when we pray to these five protectors of the dhāma, they also hear, and they encourage us to come to Vṛndāvana.

When we wander through the forest, our feet are touching the vraja-reṇu. We’re hearing the holy names, we’re hearing the kathā, we’re seeing all this amazing beauty of Vṛndāvana, and then we come to a place like this where these living entities are here to bless you. These are not trees; these are *jīvan-muktas*. They are eternally liberated souls. And more than just liberated—I mean from the material world—they are *mahā-puruṣas*, great devotees of the Lord who have descended into this world to set the backdrop for Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Five thousand years ago, you need a nice backdrop, so this forest is the backdrop. The dhāma is a manifestation of Balarāma. The dhāma is an expansion of Balarāma; it is one of His services to Kṛṣṇa, His younger brother. So these trees, they also come from the spiritual world, these *kalpa-vṛkṣa* trees, especially this grove here. What we hear from the sādhus is that Rādhārāṇī would sometimes become a little fatigued from all the pastimes with Kṛṣṇa, so Her sakhīs planted this forest five thousand years ago, a secret place where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī could come and rest for the next pastime.

It is special because it is connected to Vṛndāvaneśvarī. It is Her bathing tank or bathing place. We actually should approach Rādhā-kuṇḍa on all fours; we walk in, but actually, if we had the true spirit, we would do the *daṇḍavat*, we would roll into Rādhā-kuṇḍa and just take one drop on our head and feel that our life is perfect now; it is liquid. So places associated with Her are extra special. So this is one of Her resting places, so these trees were planted by the sakhīs, and they are still here. And they are called perfection trees. Any tree in Vṛndāvana is called a perfection tree, but this is like all perfection. When you come here, you’re supposed to hug the trees. When there was the hippie generation and they liked to hug trees—which is some kind of sentimental thing, "Oh, you tree, you’re so beautiful, you’re so wonderful"—the tree is there in the material world, ordinary trees, because they’re lusty fellows and gals. They’re lusty; they like to be naked. Prabhupāda said, "Then stand naked for a hundred years. If you want to be naked, stand naked as a tree in Vṛndāvana." But the trees in the material world, they’re just standing there naked; it is punishment for a lusty life, nature became a tree. So you’re hugging that tree and you’re absorbing the mood of that lusty tree.

Not that we shouldn’t effectively practice conservation and protect our trees—we want to do that because trees are the nature that Kṛṣṇa created. "Lord, I have no desires for material wealth. I’m not interested in illicit relationships with women or men. I’m not interested in a subtle desire to be honored, to be somebody special." Anyone in this world is not special because they fell from grace. Of course, their sādhus walk amongst us; they are special, and we want to embrace their lotus feet. But that prayer is saying that this is how we approach the Lord. We’re not like approaching the demigods for "give me some wealth, give me a good husband, a good wife, free me from disease." Those benedictions, okay, but they’re temporary because everything in this world has a beginning and an end, and we become attached. So why pray to the demigods and become more attached to the material world? We respect the demigods because Kṛṣṇa has put them in an administrative position, and things are going on smoothly, not by chance but by their organization.

So these personalities, when we come to pray to these trees—one time we had a darśana in Rome and Prabhupāda said, "Show any questions," and no one had any questions. I said, "Prabhupāda, I don’t have any questions." The purpose of life is to inquire; now that you have a brain as a human, start asking: "Who am I? Why am I here? Why am I suffering? How to get out of suffering? How to go home to the spiritual world?" Perfect questions, perfect answers. We don’t know; we’re very like little toddlers. We’re just learning to walk in spiritual life. So if we can’t compose a prayer in our mind, then there are so many prayers in the *Bhāgavatam*. Then you either memorize them or you read them, and that’s how you approach the devotees of the Lord, and that’s how you approach the Lord Himself. And Kṛṣṇa will hear; He knows you’re a baby learning to talk, but He knows the heart. He knows you’re slowly becoming free from the illusion of this world and you want the shelter, so He’ll listen very carefully. But we should always say those prayers with sincerity, with enthusiasm.

Like a mother duck is walking with her little ducklings, and she comes across some bread that’s fallen into a little bowl of milk—that’s yummy for the duck—then she takes it with her beak and, being the mother, she offers it to all the little ducks. The person sitting next to you should hear it, and that way they can correct you so that you’re chanting 32 syllables, not leaving two syllables. Doesn’t matter how long it takes you to chant, because you’re with Kṛṣṇa there. So these trees—this is a kind of a secret place. I don’t think devotees know how to get here, and I’m not telling them. A few people, I guess it will get out eventually, but you won’t see this anywhere else. I mean, I do see old trees in Vṛndāvana; we call this the secret grove. So I want you to spend some time, pick a tree—any tree—and it’s a little muddy here, but that’s vraja mixed with water, so no problem. Hug the trees and just pray for pure devotion. And if you have some inconsistencies in your heart, if you have some material desires, you can also reveal those to the Lord and you can ask Him to help you and become free from those desires. Why do we want to talk to the Lord about anything material? Because those material desires, they’re like an obstacle; they’re like a hurdle we have to overcome to get back home. Just like in the Olympics, they have that race with hurdles; the sprinters have to jump over the hurdles. We would jump over so fast, we wanted the faster the hurdles are there. We’re honest; we don’t want to be *sahajiyās*. We talk about so many elevated things here in Vṛndāvana, but we should be honest where we’re at, and we know that we have to get over these hurdles. And sometimes during the Olympics, you see they’re running and they trip on the hurdle, they fall down, but do they stop the race? They get back up and they keep moving. So never stop chanting.

Out of many, many millions of men and women, perhaps one is interested in spiritual life, and out of those, with all due respect to so many religious traditions, how many have the good fortune to come to the movement? In that society of ISKCON, we are personally sitting in our company here to come to ISKCON because this dhāma means Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda said this dhāma is not different than his body. Sometimes there’s mistakes in this, but I heard Prabhupāda say in England one time, he quoted: "England, with all thy faults, I love thee." I mean, he wasn’t speaking about his love for England, but he was quoting something: "England, with all thy faults, I love thee." So there may be mistakes; we have growing pains. The discipline is Prabhupāda’s movement, and we are very fortunate to be on this transcendental journey back to the spiritual world. So when you’re in Vṛndāvana, those few days of your life—I mean, how many years, how many months or weeks and days is limited—so if you can, you spend time here and you do it very intensely. Like the last few days have been very intense. I don’t know, I woke up this morning and my legs hurt. Yeah, we’re intense here and then we carry that intensity back to the West. As a really intense person, what’s it all about? Because people don’t live lives like we do. We’re actually blessed; we should share a good portion with others. So take some time, find a tree or a branch of a tree and just hug it. If you haven’t memorized any prayers, just pray for pure devotional service, pray to serve your spiritual master, to please your spiritual master. He’s the ambassador for you, taking you by the hand and leading you to lotus feet. And pray to Guru Mahārāj and just pray for mercy, because really, our process is more than just our humble attempts to advance.

That’s what *śaraṇāgati* is; he’s praying for blessings. So pray for blessings and pray to become a pure devotee in this lifetime and drag as many conditioned souls as possible back to either here to Gokula in your lifetime or back to the dhāma. That will please the divine couple very much. So, I think these desire trees are just waiting for you to hug them. When we go before the deity, you’ll see the internal faith because they’re not just seeing the stone frame—of course, that’s an impetus towards developing their love for Kṛṣṇa—but they know the Lord is there. "My dear Lord, You are not a statue, You are directly the son of Nanda." So they’re standing before the Lord. After billions of lifetimes of turning our back on the Lord, we’re directly in front of the sunshine of Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. So, the devotee stays in the presence. Darśana doesn’t just mean you’re looking at Kṛṣṇa; darśana means Kṛṣṇa’s looking at you. Love is a two-way street, so you’re initiating a loving relationship with service to the deity. So you stay, don’t just go away. Kṛṣṇa’s there, His eyes are there, He can see in your heart, He knows what’s there, and you can just bask in the mercy of the deity. It’s the same thing with the trees. Don’t give a quick hug. You’re here after millions of lifetimes of distance. He loves you, with all the beauty of Vṛndāvana, the embodiment of compassion and reflection, Vrajavāsīs looking. So just, you know, don’t go away too quickly. We’ll continue, because today is the first day of Kārtika, so we’ll explain what is Kārtika, and then we’re going to go to the palace.

So for the next 15 or 20 minutes, tree hugging.""