"*00441*.*
"Hi, Kṛṣṇa, everyone. A warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvan-dhām. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti.* So today, we are continuing with a small mini-series on the holy place of Yāvat. We described the other day how the term *yāva* refers to the red lac dye that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī or her gopī assistants put on her feet. In Bengali literature, it is known as *altā*. We related in the previous class how, one time, Kṛṣṇa decorated Śrī Rādhā’s feet with this *yāva*, this red lac dye, under a banyan tree in the courtyard of the palace at Yāvat. However, last night, as I researched the matter more, I discovered that on that very same occasion, Kṛṣṇa took some of that *yāva*—that red lac dye that fell from the feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—and he smeared it on his chest, quite like that. As a result of all this red lac *līlā*, the place became famous as Yāva-vaṭa, and in time, people changed the name from Yāva-vaṭa to Yāva-vaṭa and, then, nowadays it is simply called Yāvat.

Now, after discovering all that nectar, to my great delight, I found out that our beloved Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī refers to this very same pastime in his *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* (5.21). He does so by quoting a scripture called *Bṛhad-Gautamīya-tantra*. It goes like this: *rādhā-pāda*. Translation: "Since *yāva* (red lac dye) fell from the feet of Śrī Rādhā at this place, it is popularly known as Yāva-vaṭa in this world." Then I was thrilled even more to find out that Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī mentions the presiding deity of Yāvat in his *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* (170), *varu yāvaṭa ādi*. He writes, "Lord Brajavāra, the best amongst the residents of Vraja, is the presiding deity of Yāvat." And then afterwards, as he often does, he gives a mantra for the presiding deity with the special *bījas*, the *bīja mantras*, *oṁ baha*. So the *bījas* are very powerful: "Obeisances to Brajavāra, the presiding deity of Yāvaṭa-ādī-vana, Yāvaṭa-ādī-vana." So therein we hear Yāvaṭa referred to as Ādi-vana. So I was wondering, what is an Ādi-vana? I didn’t have to look far; Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī answers that question in the very next verse, wherein he quotes an ancient literature called the *Śaunaka-saṁhitā*, which says (there’s only three lines there): "All around the *vaṭa*, the banyan tree, is a forest. This forest is specifically known as Ādi-vana." So there we get the answer. 

And finally, dear Prabhu, he gives us a *praṇāma-mantra*. The essence of something is the *praṇāma-mantra*. The specific characteristics for Yāvat—when I was researching, I didn’t know this—but I often go back to *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa*. There I found it. Here is the *praṇāma-mantra* for Yāvat, so important. Translation: "Obeisances to Yāva-vaṭa, whose name is derived from the red lac dye falling from the feet of Śrī Rādhā. Obeisances to the forest which increases good fortune and happiness. Obeisances to the forest that facilitates *rati-keli-sukha*, the happiness of loving sports." Haré Kṛṣṇa. That’s *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* 5.21 *praṇāma-mantra*. Thank you, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

So now we’ll share another one of the many beautiful pastimes that took place or are taking place—*aprakata-līlā*—at Yāvat. This particular pastime is fully described in Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s *Camatkāra-candrikā*. It’s a well-known pastime, but as Śrīla Prabhupāda says, "We can go on hearing these things forever." So here we go. 

Early one morning in Nandagrāma, Kṛṣṇa, instead of playing with his friends, was watching his mother, Yaśodā, pack a large box full of ornaments, clothing, and cosmetics. So Kṛṣṇa said, "Māyā, what are you doing?" And Mother Yaśodā replied, "Lālā, I’m packing this box full of very valuable things." So Kṛṣṇa inquired, "Māyā, why are you packing those things into the box?" So Mother Yaśodā said, "Lālā, this box is a gift for someone who is very, very special and very dear to me." Then Kṛṣṇa, curious, wanting to know more, said, "Māyā, what kind of gifts are you packing?" And Mother Yaśodā replied, "Lālā, within this box, I am putting the pollen of the camphor, lotus, red kuṅkuma powder, sandalwood sticks, and musk—all for making scented ointments. And for making dresses, I am packing waist ornaments made of tiny, tinkling bells, rare lapis lazuli gems—it’s a tongue twister—extremely valuable cloth, earrings, bangles, emeralds, and pearls." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Māyā, is this box for me or for my brother Balarāma?" Mother Yaśodā smiled, and she said, "Lālā, I have already packed two much larger boxes: one for you and one for your elder brother." So Kṛṣṇa was surprised; he said, "Māyā, who besides Balarāma and I could be an object of your affection? Who else could be so special? Who could this box be for?" 

So then Mother Yaśodā closed her eyes, and she said with great feeling, "My beloved son, as a result of my past pious deeds and many austerities, providence has bestowed upon me a son like you as well as a girl who sustains my life. This girl, the soothing camphor for my burning eyes, is the shelter of extraordinary feminine qualities such as good behavior, beauty, simplicity, and humility. No one in Vraja compares to her." Then she continued, "And before you ask me the name of this girl for whom I have such natural love and affection, I will tell you: it is Śrī Rādhā. And her husband, Abhimanyu, is presently meeting with your father nearby." Now, it’s described when Kṛṣṇa heard Śrī Rādhā’s name and qualities detailed by his own mother, his bodily hair stood on end—a symptom that is described—he at once hid by covering himself with his upper cloth, because this is something his mother—he doesn't want his mother to see. And at that point, Mother Yaśodā was interrupted by a gopī who told her that some jewelers were outside wanting to consult with her about a crown she had ordered for Kṛṣṇa. But before leaving to meet the jewelers, Mother Yaśodā turned to Dinīṣḍā gopī and she said, "Keep an eye on this box. Abhimanyu will come here and carry it to Śrī Rādhā as soon as he is finished speaking with our King." 

So after his mother had left, Kṛṣṇa, he reflected on her last words, and smiling to himself, he came up with a very clever plan. Removing the contents of the box and giving them to Dinīṣḍā to hide somewhere, he climbed into the box and closed the lid. And a little while later, when Mother Yaśodā came back into the house with Abhimanyu—by now, after explaining to Abhimanyu who the box was for and what it contained, meaning the clothes and the ornaments and the jewels, at least that’s what she thought—she gave Abhimanyu the following message to give to Rādhārāṇī along with the box. It read: "My dearest Śrī Rādhā, I have sent you a box full of wonders with which to daily ornament and dress your enchanting body. May you be forever radiant, fortunate, and happy with these gifts." 

So Abhimanyu thanked Mother Yaśodā over and over, and saying goodbye with some difficulty, he placed a heavy box on his head—he was kind of surprised, these clothes and ornaments are quite heavy—and then he set out on the long road back to Yāvat. Now, it’s described that along the way, he was experiencing a type of bliss that he had never experienced before, but he was thinking it was due to the precious cargo that he was carrying—those costly items that Mother Yaśodā had informed him were in the box. Little did he know that the bliss was the result of being, how could you say, in direct contact with the concentrated form of all bliss, Vṛndāvan Kṛṣṇa. I think that’s a good way to put it: the concentrated form of all bliss, Vṛndāvan Kṛṣṇa. In fact, as Abhimanyu continued to carry the box on his head, I was reading his body erupted with goosebumps, his hair stood on end, his eyes became moist with tears, and he trembled uncontrollably. At one point, he actually had to stop, saying to himself, "Never has such wealth brought me such happiness!" 

So finally, he came to Yāvat and he entered the palace and, calling his mother, Jaṭilā, he enthusiastically described the gifts that Mother Yaśodā had packed in that box, and he concluded, "Mother, I must have left our house at an auspicious moment this morning, for I have been blessed with this box of untold wealth! Yes, untold wealth!" So Jaṭilā, she thought, "Now, perhaps my daughter-in-law, Śrī Rādhā, will finally be pleased with my son." And then she said out loud, "Son, your beautiful young wife now sulks with her friends in her quarters. Take this heavy box up to her, and may its contents make her joyful once again." 

So in total bliss, Abhimanyu happily carried the box upstairs, whereupon opening the door, he found Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sulking in her room. Why was she sulking? Because Jaṭilā, fearing that Kṛṣṇa might visit her in Yāvat over the next few days, had ordered her to stay in her room for three days—confined her to a room for three days. Now, as soon as all of Śrī Rādhā’s attendants, the the milkmaids of Vraja, saw the box that Abhimanyu was carrying on his head, it’s described, "They felt an upsurge of bliss, and Rādhā’s left side began to twitch uncontrollably." That’s an omen that something very auspicious is going to happen. "And Rādhā’s left side began to twitch uncontrollably." It’s further written, "The effect of the box’s presence on the gopīs was like that of sunlight streaming into a dark room just as the shutters are opened, or like that of a tidal wave sweeping across a peaceful ocean front." 

So turning to Lalitā-sakhī, Rādhārāṇī said, "Friend, my mother-in-law’s house is a place of never-ending misery. The goddess of auspiciousness never even glances at it. Why then does my left side tremble so?" So Lalitā-sakhī replied, "Since I also feel bliss by seeing this box, I can only conclude that it contains some mind-enchanting ornaments that will bring you unparalleled good fortune." Then Śrī Rādhā said, "Seeing this box brings me great ecstasy. I cannot imagine what happiness I will enjoy when I open it and examine not to mention the clothes inside, but the jeweled ornaments as well." 

So as Śrī Rādhā and Lalitā were talking, Abhimanyu placed the box on a raised platform beside Śrī Rādhā’s bed, and then he repeated Mother Yaśodā’s message of love to Śrī Rādhā, which was again: "Dearest Śrī Rādhā, I have sent you a box full of wonders with which to daily ornament and dress your enchanting body. May you be forever radiant, fortunate, and happy with these gifts." Then, satisfied that he’d done his duty as a proper husband, he turned and he left, closing the door behind him. At that point, all the cowherd girls, just brimming with curiosity, surrounded the box, and they were urging Śrī Rādhā to open it up—quickly, quickly! 

And as Śrī Rādhā approached and placed her hand on the box, the ācāryas say a current of bliss instantly flowed through her being as if she had been struck by lightning from a cloud of loving desire. A current of bliss instantly flowed through her being as if she had been struck by lightning from a cloud of loving desire. So startled, Śrī Rādhā quickly drew her hand back, but that current of ecstasy still raced through her body, it’s described, awakening her divine senses just as the rising sun awakens songbirds in the morning. But that current of ecstasy still raced through her body, awakening her divine senses just as the rising sun awakens songbirds in the morning. 

Now at this point, Lalitā-sakhī was becoming a little suspicious, noticing all these ecstatic symptoms in Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and in herself. She was thinking, "What is the source of all these ecstatic symptoms today?" So she said, "Rādhā, my friend, please now open up this mysterious box—I’m coming to the climax here." And so, Śrī Rādhā very carefully lifted the lid of the box, and as it opened, Kṛṣṇa leapt to his feet in the box and stood there with his hands on his hips and his eyebrows dancing—I read that—and his eyebrows dancing. And as he did so, all the gopīs cried out, "Ah! Oh! What is this? My goodness!" Then Kṛṣṇa, extremely pleased with himself, quickly kissed all the gopīs surrounding him and, according to one ācārya, "Took full advantage of the rare opportunity of being in Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s private quarters to have a good look around, took full advantage of the rare opportunity of being in Śrī Rādhā’s private quarters to have a good look around." 

Then it is described that, "While Kṛṣṇa, the King of Pranksters, stood within the box flouting his majesty, the alligator of enticement, his servant, quickly scurried about the room, consuming the gopīs' bashfulness." Then Lalitā, in, I guess what you could say, a rare moment of siding with Kṛṣṇa—because she generally only sides with Rādhā—in a rare moment of siding with Kṛṣṇa, blurted out, "Rādhā, Yaśodā, Jaṭilā, and your husband have ordered you to wear the ornaments in the box. They’ve all ordered you to wear the ornaments in the box. By honoring their request, your submissive conduct will increase the glory of Vṛndāvana unlimitedly. Yaśodā, Jaṭilā, and your husband have all ordered you to wear the ornaments in the box. By honoring their request, your submissive conduct will increase the glory of Vṛndāvana unlimitedly." 

So Lalitā’s comment, I was reading, caused a round of cheers from the gopīs, and it made Śrī Rādhā blush. Then Rādhārāṇī turned towards Kṛṣṇa, and she said, "This thief stole the clothes and ornaments given to me by Mother Yaśodā, but before he could make a getaway, he was trapped in the box and brought here by my naive husband. This thief stole the clothes and ornaments given to me by Mother Yaśodā, but before he could make a getaway, he was trapped in the box and brought here by my naive husband." And then Lalitā, assuming this very interesting mood of Śrī Rādhā, she turned on Kṛṣṇa—who was now, I was reading, he was standing with his arms crossed over his chest—and she said, "Rascal Kṛṣṇa! After stealing Rādhā’s gifts, you—who are dedicated to ridding the earth of all chaste women—are right here on her husband’s head to entice her in her own apartment! Have you no shame? Now, either return the cloth and jewels and other riches you stole from inside the box, or I will bring vicious Jaṭilā here and expose the real truth of her son’s treasure chest and its so-called treasure." 

So when Lalitā finished, Kṛṣṇa—for some dramatic effect, he kicked the box, I thought that was nice—kicked the box, and he replied, "Lalitā, your friend is very clever in serving her own needs. Now hear me out: while playing at home, I’ve spotted this box, and seeing it so nicely padded, I decided to take a nap inside of it. And while I was innocently sleeping, Abhimanyu locked the top and forcibly brought me here to be so absurdly accused by his wife, absurdly accused by his wife." Then Kṛṣṇa, like a skilled lawyer, he addressed the gopīs, saying, "Dear gopīs, I place the allegation of King Vṛṣabhānu’s daughter before you for due consideration and decision. If you find Rādhā guilty of entrapment, then I will punish her accordingly. If you find me guilty of theft, bind me with the ropes of your arms and imprison me here for three nights!" 

So the gopīs, all the gopīs, they came together, but they quickly concluded that a proper decision could not be reached, it’s described, in the presence of the warring parties. So they smiled, and they left; they retired behind closed doors in another room to deliberate amongst themselves: "Who is right?" So at that point, lo and behold, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Śrī Kṛṣṇa were finally left alone in the room. There was nobody there. It’s described they happily spent three days together undisturbed, for you remember it was Jaṭilā herself who had ordered Śrī Rādhā to stay confined for that many days in her room. Of course, she didn’t know it would turn out like this, but it did. So they stayed for three days enjoying each other’s transcendental association and great happiness. 

Today, at the site of that Yāvat palace where it used to be, is a temple in which the deities of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Rādhākānta are worshiped. We will go there, Prabhus, on our grand Kārtika parikramā, sooner than later, and we’ll take you there, and you can have *darśana* of those extremely beautiful deities. And interestingly, in a room nearby, there are the forms of Jaṭilā, Kuṭilā, and Abhimanyu, because they’re also glorious; they’re instrumental in churning this ocean of the nectar of devotion, loving pastimes, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. They’re very instrumental, very, very important, worshipable persons—Jaṭilā, Kuṭilā, and Abhimanyu. So there’s these, I guess you could say, dioramas—I don’t know if we should say deities, dioramas of them there—and you can go, and... and the original tree that Kṛṣṇa climbed up, and from which he tried to catch Śrī Rādhā’s attention with the voice of a cuckoo, which we mentioned in our first lecture, that tree still stands in the temple courtyard. Where, when we go there as pilgrims, we bow down to that tree; we worship that tree—big, big tree. 

Now, in that area of Yāvat, there’s also a *kuṇḍa* named Rādhā-kuṇḍa. What’s one name? *Rādhā-kuṇḍa*. Of course, this is a different Rādhā-kuṇḍa from Rādhā-kuṇḍa at Govardhana. This *kuṇḍa* is perhaps more famous as Kiśorī-kuṇḍa, and I believe I gave a lecture on Kiśorī-kuṇḍa a year ago. The *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* describes how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī would daily bathe in Kiśorī-kuṇḍa or Rādhā-kuṇḍa with 64 of her gopī friends every day in that *kuṇḍa*. And this *kuṇḍa* contains water made yellowish by minerals. When you go there and you see it—actually, that area has been renovated now, recently, I was there, well, a year ago, a year and a half ago now—and that area has been renovated, that Kiśorī-kuṇḍa, very nicely. So you see the water is yellowish because of minerals, and it’s described by bathing there you increase your good fortune unlimitedly. And actually, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, he gives a *praṇāma-mantra* for this Yāvat Rādhā-kuṇḍa, because he refers to it as Rādhā-kuṇḍa in those days. In *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* (5.222), he writes about this Rādhā-kuṇḍa or this Kiśorī-kuṇḍa. Here it is—we are so blessed to get these *praṇāma-mantras*. 

Translation: "Constant obeisances to Rādhā and Lalitā. Obeisances to that Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Obeisances to the sporting pastimes along with Kṛṣṇa that took place here." Then he says afterwards, "Offer obeisances and *ācamana* while chanting that mantra 10 times. One who does so attains unhindered happiness in spiritual life." Now, a little bit more, because it’s all connected to Yāvat, he mentions another *tīrtha* at Yāvat: it’s named Rāsa-maṇḍala. And that is where he describes seven-year-old Kṛṣṇa performed *rāsa-līlās* along with Śrī Rādhā, and he mentions that Kṛṣṇa sported there during the bright fortnight of the month of Bhādra. Now, usually we have all these mantras in the beginning, but I decided to put them at the end here, just as a very pleasant way to finish this particular pastime we discussed today. So the *praṇāma-mantra* for Rāsa-maṇḍala is: *catu-rādhādibhyo namaḥ kṛṣṇāya ramaṇāya yāva-saptavarṣa-surūpiṇe*. Translation: "Obeisances to Rādhā, Lalitā, etc., along with their 64 sakhīs. Obeisances to delightful Kṛṣṇa, whose form is seven years old." Then Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī writes, "Offer obeisances to this Rāsa-maṇḍala while chanting the mantra nine times. One who does so attains the kingdom of the three worlds and becomes happy." 

Then finally, there is the Padmāvatī-vivāha-sthalī. We will go there when we go to Yāvat, which is the marriage place of Padmāvatī, one of the gopīs. I was reading there Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī married Padmāvatī-gopī to Kṛṣṇa—it’s *līlā*—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī married Padmāvatī-gopī to Kṛṣṇa and personally tied the knot between them during the marriage ceremony. These are all *keli* or playful pastimes. So Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī describes that on that occasion, sakhīs were singing very beautiful songs at the marriage of Kṛṣṇa and Padmāvatī, and he comments that this place is suitable for conducting marriage ceremonies. So I was thinking that if a gṛhastha couple would like to get married, that according to Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, that’s a good place to go—that particular place where Padmāvatī was married to Kṛṣṇa by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Padmāvatī-vivāha-sthalī. So he gives a *praṇāma-mantra* for Padmāvatī-vivāha. Here it is: *namaste sarva-maṅgalāya*. Translation: "Obeisances to the auspicious marriage location which bestows good fortune on everyone. Obeisances to Nanda’s son along with his wife Padmāvatī." And then Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī writes, "Offer 11 obeisances while chanting this mantra. One who does so becomes immortal and obtains the happiness of beginning a union." Haré Kṛṣṇa.

Now, Prabhu, a final comment. These pastimes where Kṛṣṇa is sporting with Śrī Rādhā and the gopīs, they’re called *parakīya-bhāva* pastimes or the unwedded pastimes. Kṛṣṇa is not married, the gopīs are supposedly married, but it’s not a real marriage as we mentioned the other day—they only see the shadows of their wives. So this unwedded love is called *parakīya-bhāva*, and when Kṛṣṇa is in Dvārakā with his duly wedded wives, the queens of Dvārakā, that’s called *svakīya-bhāva* or wedded pastimes. But no one should accuse Kṛṣṇa of being immoral because of unwedded pastimes, because of his *parakīya-bhāva* pastimes, because the truth is that each and every living entity ultimately belongs to Kṛṣṇa. We’re all eternal servants of Kṛṣṇa. That is our actual eternal identity. We belong to Kṛṣṇa, and we would like to say Kṛṣṇa belongs to us, but for now we can at least say we belong to Kṛṣṇa; that’s the truth, for He’s the creator and the maintainer of everyone. 

However, because the general public may be ignorant of this fact, Sanskrit poets—I was reading—in the past were very reluctant in presenting this *parakīya-bhāva* of Vṛndāvana in their compositions because people may misunderstand Kṛṣṇa’s dealings with the gopīs. They actually felt it might affect the moral fabric of society. So Rūpa Gosvāmī understood this, but he wanted to impress upon people that *parakīya-bhāva* or *parakīya* relationships are allowed in the transcendental realm of Vṛndāvana with Kṛṣṇa and his gopīs. And by Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement—I was reading this, it’s so wonderful—by Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement, Rūpa Gosvāmī found support for his desire to impress upon people that the *parakīya-bhāva* is okay in Vṛndāvana; he found support in an extremely rare verse written by a poet named Śūdeva. This poet Śūdeva writes in his masterpiece called *Rāsa-vilāsa*. It’s one book he wrote; he wrote a verse which Rūpa Gosvāmī very happily quoted in his own work to support *parakīya-bhāva*. His work is entitled *Nāṭaka-candrikā*. So he uses that verse of this famous poet Śūdeva there; that helps us to understand the transcendental nature of Kṛṣṇa’s loving relationships with the gopīs. And I thought that would be a good verse to finish today because it was so important to Rūpa Gosvāmī’s mission: revealing to us the transcendental nature of loving pastimes in the spiritual world for which all of us are actually hankering. And we will conclude with this all-important verse today. It’s quite long in Sanskrit, so I’ll just go slowly through the Sanskrit because it’s so important.

[Sanskrit verse quoted]

Translation: "The learned poets consider *parodā*—a lady married to someone else—as unfit for descriptions of conjugal *rasa*. However, the only exception to this rule is the lotus-eyed girls of Gokula. This is because the crest jewel of all connoisseurs and the enemy of Kaṁsa has manifested them in this world for the sole purpose of exhibiting the highest limit of conjugal or loving mellows." 

Thank you to the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, all of our ācāryas, and our deepest appreciation and gratitude and love for Śrīla Prabhupāda, who has brought all these teachings to us so we can understand these confidential secrets through the gradual process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which is based around chanting, *yuga-dharma* given by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. *Haré Kṛṣṇa, Haré Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Haré Haré, Haré Rāma, Haré Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Haré Haré.* Thank you. We have more and more lectures on Yāvat; Kṛṣṇa consciousness only gets better. So I’ll be back in a couple of days with another episode of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes at the sacred place of... Thank you so much. 

All glory to Śrīla Prabhupāda.""