Hare Krishna,

At this very moment, we're concluding our Kirtan Fest here in the holy abode of Rishikesh. We're stopping a little early because of the coronavirus spreading also here in India. We planned to go another week or so, so it's kind of mixed emotions for us right now.

It's been so blissful, and it's so wonderful to see so many Western people, seekers, yogis, who are coming to this program, this festival, every day. It's probably about two to three hundred people that come every day to taste the nectar of the holy names, eat Krishna Prasad, and now getting connected to the Bhakti Yoga lifestyle.

And it's quite an incredible experience because here we're able to preach not only in India but to English-speaking people, seekers of the truth. I think this is the best thing that happened after the Beatles. Over here, we're saying in our Krishna conscious movement, quoting Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, "Param vijayate shri Krishna sankirtana." All glories to the victorious sankirtana movement of Mahaprabhu, meaning that by spreading the sankirtana movement of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, this cultural conquest, we're conquering over illusion in its many varieties of ways that illusion is present in this world.

But by the sankirtana movement, primarily by chanting the holy names of Krishna, the Maha Mantra, that illusion is dissipated.

Here people are practicing many types of yoga, and we respect that because these yogas are described, Patanjali Yoga is described in the Vedas. But for the age of Kali, the real yoga, the real way of uniting with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is by chanting His holy name.

So that's been the focus. That's why we call this our event, the Kirtan Fest. And as you'll see in this video, people really take it to heart. So here we're able to give them that opportunity. They come in the evenings or in the mornings, they can participate in the workshops, and they're able to really have a wholesome experience of Krishna consciousness.

The people that come here are genuine seekers, and they're open to hearing philosophy, chanting, experimenting with it. And you can see the immediate effects that the chanting has on the people that come here. It's like a volcano, a volcano of love that just erupts in the heart, and they're singing their hearts out, and dancing, and twirling.

And watching them, I think, yes, but I'm. In Rishikesh, this place is filled with foreigners. In fact, when we walked down the street, we hardly see anyone except foreigners, and they're all joining our kirtan party. They come back here twice a day, we have kirtan, and in the evening, there's a wonderful kirtan with a wonderful feast.

And it's just like the old days, chanting, dancing, and feasting. And the Absolute Truth will be revealed to you when we become better people, we become more spiritual, when you come Krishna conscious, the world becomes a better place.

So there's a famous saying attributed actually to Julius Caesar after he, his armies had conquered an enemy, he said, "Veni, vidi, vici." I came, I saw, I conquered. So we would say, we came, we saw, we conquered. The holy name conquered, and the Prasad conquered, and the association of so many wonderful devotees that we brought with us.

This was kind of my crack team, you could say, from all my tours, our festival tours around the world. These devotees were free and they sacrificed so much, blood, sweat, and tears. While we were here, it's all very blissful, but it takes a lot of work. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, he once said he would consider his Gaudiya Math mission a success if he just made one person a pure devotee of Krishna.

So we feel that we've ignited that spark of Krishna consciousness in the hearts of thousands of people.

And our prayer is that they will continue to chant Hari Krishna, and they will take this Krishna conscious process, chanting the holy names, all around the world.

Just like the coronavirus is spreading all over the world, it's going to every town and village, and people are hiding in their apartments in fear. We hope to remove that fear of material existence by the spreading of the good disease of chanting Hari Krishna, because this will conquer over all inauspicious qualities and solve the problems of the world.

It is actually a fact. It's the panacea for all problems in material existence. Panacea is a strong word, it means something that solves everything, solves all the problems. So, chanting Hari Krishna may not solve the coronavirus.

We're hoping that the scientists and doctors will contribute to that. But because this mantra takes us back home, back to Godhead, back to the spiritual world, where life is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss, where every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there's a kirtan fest like we had here in Rishikesh, the festival every day, that will solve all problems.

Because by going back home, back to Godhead, all problems are solved. So the panacea, let this holy name spread here. And we're hoping again that these people will take that and tell their friends. "Yes, I went to India, the land of enlightenment, to find who I am." They often say that, "I've come here to find myself." So we pray that they have found, they've discovered their real self, is part and parcel of Krishna, eternal servant of the Lord. "Para Krishna, my name is Kennedy, I'm from Brazil." "My name is Ali, I'm from Dubai." "My friend from my yoga school brought me here.

She said, 'You have to come.' When I go home, I just find myself like singing this mantra like all the time. It's so peaceful. The hospitality is beyond anything, especially when it comes to Prasad. Um, everyone's always asking me, 'Did you eat?

Did you eat?

Have you eaten?

Take another round.' I have a reputation that I used to be a good cook, and I'm completely astounded by the fantastic job that the team from Life, they're cooking fantastic sabjis, serving coffee, there's raita, there's plenty of sabji. It's a very, very wonderful program, and it really will touch the hearts." "Young spiritual seekers." "It's my first time in Rishikesh and first time at the Kirtan Fest.

I loved it. The people are amazing, the kirtans are amazing, the food, the saris. Everything. I feel like what everybody's here giving to the people is super amazing, and it's just very special. So I'm very grateful to be here.

And for me, really, to see like the community which comes from all different beliefs, have a place where they all come together, and everybody's singing and dancing, making friends. It's been really beautiful to be a part of, but also to see the community together in that sense." "In the beginning, Swamiji was talking about how he should eat up to your neck, and I thought it was a joke.

But then I realized how the devotees are very serious about that. It's like, 'No, you have to like eat more, eat more.' Got it. That's a sign to wait." "With a lot of love, and I got a gift too.

So nice. I'm so great. So I'm gonna go read now." "The chanting has really changed my life. I feel so grateful for all these days here. Thank you so much." Leaving a little early, it kind of hurts. We would have liked to do more programs here.

But we've done "Punam battalya, Tais Krishna's Agathon." We came, saw the opportunity, and we gave the panacea for all problems in this material world, the holy names. "Klaro shadi hey Raja on the secum Hagen are here tonight Eva Krishna's You know, look this under put under check." Closing by quoting Śrīmad Bhāgavatam to Mahārāja Parīkṣit, "This material world is this age of Kali is an ocean of inauspiciousness.

We're realizing that more and more in this present time. But he said, 'Kirtan a deva Krishna's, yeah.' There's one good thing left in this age, chanting of Shri Krishna's holy names, which can, by which one can achieve perfection of Krishna prema." So we've been a little sober here, like everyone else.

We're gonna have to take a break in solitude. Little vana-bhajan might be good for us now. Go deeper into Krishna consciousness.

When we come out, we'll be more empowered by Paul's grace and our previous ācāryas, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, and continue our chanting of the holy names all over this world, and by the Lord's grace, all over the 14 worlds. Thank you for joining us through these videos and photograph albums the last few weeks.

And please bless us that we can come back to Rishikesh, the abode of the Rishis, the quiet place, and just chant very loudly. Hari Krishna, Hari Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hari Hari.

Hari Rama, Hari Rama, Rama Rama, Hari Hari. Shri Krishna Sankirtana Ki Jay!

All glories!

All glories!

All glories!