Hare Krishna, Karthik has brought us today to a very auspicious place, Kottawa, where Nimai Pandit, Lord Caitanya, took sannyasa and became known as Shri Krishna Chaitanya.

This place is about a two-hour drive from our temple in Mayapur, our Mayapur Chandradoya Mandir. It is a very, very auspicious place. There are mixed emotions here, you could say, in the sense that when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu took sannyasa, many devotees were ecstatic, and other devotees were very, very sad.

How is that?

Because when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was a young boy, he had his tola, he had his school, and he was teaching. But some of the students became a little bit disrespectful. Some people weren't appreciating his position as a teacher. Of course, they didn't understand at that time his divine personality as the Supreme Personality of Godhead or his mission.

So, he became a little upset, a little frustrated, and he thought, "How will I spend my sankirtana movement?

How will I spread the chanting of the holy names here and all over the world if less people feel a little respect?" But you don't have respect for someone, then you don't listen to them and take what they're saying to heart.

So, he decided that he would take the renounced order of life, sannyasa. He was married at the time, and by taking sannyasa, that would guarantee that people would respect and listen to him. Because Prabhupada noted, even in modern times, even today, someone who has the saffron cloth and the tri-dandi, people respect him here in India.

So, Mahaprabhu took sannyasa like this. So, this is something very glorious that he renounced his householder life, he sacrificed that for the greater good of the world, to spread the holy names all over the world. So, devotees were very happy that the mission was begun in earnest.

But those who knew the divine nature of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, that Shri Krishna Chaitanya, Radha Krishna, now, is not an ordinary person.

He is not a shika-giri; he is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the combined form of Radha and Krishna, come as a devotee, as the Yuga Avatar, to spread the chanting of Hare Krishna.

So, he is the supreme enjoyer, he is a master, and we are his servants. So, those who were confidential associates of the Lord, they knew who he actually was. Ferguson. This Nagisa, although Mahaprabhu appeared in the guise of a devotee, not directly as God himself, because many people who want to imitate him, that wouldn't be good.

He appeared as a devotee to teach us the process of devotional service. So, it was kind of a disguised form of the Lord, but he couldn't fool his confidential associates. Just like if someone, now it's, we just had Halloween in America, so some family member will dress up in some particular costume and look very much the part, but the family members know who he is.

So, the intimate associates of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, like Advaita Acharya and Haridasa Thakura, even when the Lord appeared, even when he took birth in another dvipa, Advaita Acharya and Haridasa Thakura were jumping in joy. They were chanting and dancing, knowing that the Lord has appeared.

Others didn't know. So, those who knew who Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they were very upset that he was taking sannyasa. Because why does the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme enjoyer, have to perform austerities?

It pains their heart that Mahaprabhu would have to take sannyasa and live the life of a renunciant. So, like that, at this place here in Katwa, there's, there's mixed rasa, there's mixed, mixed emotion, one of joy and one of sadness and sorrow, like that.

These are transcendental emotions. So, we've come here with our kirtan party of 500 devotees to discuss these things, and most important to have kirtan, because these places are very spiritually potent. The other day, we were mentioning how Prabhupada said that when you come to the dhama, Vrndavana, or Mayapur, whatever devotional service you do here, the result is magnified a thousand times.

So, we experience that when we do kirtan here and go to Desh here in the land of Mahaprabhu, we feel that potency of the holy names. And here, at this particular spot, we have the exact place that the barber shaved off the beautiful long hair of Nimai Pandit.

The devotees again were feeling great sorrow. This beautiful Nimai Pandit, his long hair was being shaved, he was becoming a renunciate. That spot right over there, under the tree, we have the shrine where the very hair of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is enshrined.

You can take darshan of that place. We have the, what we have the samadhi mandir of his son, Advaita Acharya. He gave Mahaprabhu his sannyasa mantra, gave him his danda, he gave him the saffron cloth. So, here is somebody who is a very, very beautiful deity of Lord Chaitanya.

Hare Krishna.

It's not usury. They are. This is so nice when you travel around Nadia, when you travel around this area of Bengal, to see so many beautiful deities of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. He was very beautiful. He was very tall, we hear seven feet tall, golden color, long arms extended down to his knees.

And when he danced and twirled through the chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra through towns and villages, people were just enchanted by his transcendental form.

So, that deity here, we have these beautiful deities with whom we are going to have kirtan, we are going to have katha, we'll take some purushottam. These are the simple activities that we do in Krishna consciousness that bring forth that Krishna prema.

By the mercy of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, it is said that no one can actually understand the transcendental Radha and Krishna without the mercy of Lord Chaitanya.

No one connects to the circuit properly without the mercy of Lord Nityananda. And if we want the mercy of Lord Nityananda, it's said we have to go out and preach the Jagai and Madhai. So, after our visit here, we will become enriched by all the nectar and mercy, and then we'll go back to our different countries around the world and share this wonderful process of Krishna consciousness with others, and hopefully invite them to this dhama here too, to Katwa, where Mahaprabhu took sannyasa.

Jai Gaura Gaura Jani. Hare Krishna.