"*00260*.*
"# Lord Nrsimha in Vṛndāvana - Part 1

Hi Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees, welcome back again to our ongoing lecture series on the glories of our beloved Vṛndāvana-dhāma. But first: 

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale…* 

Because Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day is just around the corner—May 15th here in India—I thought we could do a short series, two classes actually, about Him. Essentially, this will prepare us to properly observe and respect Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura famously writes in his *Śaraṇāgati*: 

*mārā-vāti-bhakti-jananī-jaitani-pālana-kora-kṛṣṇa-bhāṣati-bhāṣati-boili-paramā-adhirei-bori* 

Holy days, like Kṛṣṇa-janmāṣṭamī and others, are the mothers of devotion for those devotees who properly respect them. Let the holy places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes be my places of worship and bless me. Thank you, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda.

And in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, 14th Vilāsa, text 415, we hear Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva saying to Prahlāda Mahārāja, also underlying the importance of observing this upcoming day properly. Nṛsiṁhadeva says: 

*varṣa-varṣa-tu-kartavyaṁ mama-saṁtuṣṭi-kāraṇam* 

"For My pleasure, every year one should observe the vow of Caturdaśī. Those who are very fearful of material existence should certainly observe this most confidential and excellent vow." 

So, some of you may remember that two years ago in 2020, I did a three-part series on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, and the final class was about Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Caitanya-līlā. In Māyāpura, we shared many pastimes in that regard. For example, we heard from *Caitanya-maṅgala*, Madhya-khaṇḍa, that one day in Māyāpura, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita was performing the *śrāddha* ceremony for his departed father. As is customary in that ritual, he was hearing the thousand names of Lord Viṣṇu. We heard how Lord Caitanya appeared on the scene and sat down and also began listening to the same thousand names of Viṣṇu—His names. But when the reading came to the name "Nṛsiṁha," Lord Caitanya suddenly became very angry, exactly like Nṛsiṁha in His *ugra* mood. We heard how Mahāprabhu’s eyes became red, His bodily hair stood on end, all the parts of His body trembled, and He began roaring like an angry lion. So, all of a sudden, He took up a club and began running through the streets of Navadvīpa shouting, "I'm going to kill the atheist! I'll kill the atheist! I'll kill the atheist!" And the citizens of Navadvīpa, they became terrified; they were thinking, "What kind of offense have we committed?" But then, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu—it's described—He suddenly adjusted His thoughts because that wasn't His mood; that's not His mood in Kali-yuga. He has more of a mood of compassion. So, the ācāryas say He adjusted His thoughts, then He sat down on His seat.

So, Nṛsiṁha in Caitanya-līlā. Now, I was thinking that apart from taking on the lion-like mood, the *bhāva* of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, Lord Caitanya’s features are often compared to that of a lion. For example, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā, Chapter 3, there are two relevant verses. The first is *caitanya-avatāra*. Thus, the lion-like Lord Caitanya has appeared in Navadvīpa; He has the shoulders of a lion, the powers of a lion, and the loud voice of a lion. And the next verse says: 

"May that lion be seated in the core of the heart of every living being. Thus, with His resounding roar, may He drive away one’s elephantine vices," you know, purify the heart. When Mahāprabhu roars with the holy names, one’s impurities are washed away. And that He did; He wandered throughout India chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, in that last class we gave in that series about Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Caitanya-līlā, we also mentioned other pastimes, like, for example, how Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared one night to the Cānda Kazi in a very ferocious way and said, "Don't try to stop My saṅkīrtana movement, or I'll rip you to shreds." So like that, there are so many pastimes of Nṛsiṁhadeva in Caitanya-līlā in Māyāpura. So I thought, for these two lectures coming up to the appearance day of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, we can discuss Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana. First, we did Nṛsiṁhadeva in Māyāpura, and now we'll do Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana. 

One might think, "Wait a minute, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Braja?" But yes, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is very much present in Braja in His particular way. For example, if you've been to Nandagrām, you'll have seen a deity, a very beautiful deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva, which was the household deity that Nanda Mahārāja and Mother Yaśodā worshipped to "protect their baby Kṛṣṇa." I've seen that deity many times; very beautiful. In Nandagrām, there is a Nṛsiṁhadeva there. 

Also, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes about Nṛsiṁhadeva in Braja in his illustrious *Padāvalī*, verse 152. He writes how one night when Mother Yaśodā was putting baby Kṛṣṇa to sleep, she said to her little Lālā, "Oh, my rising dark moon, my child, you are not asleep." And little Kṛṣṇa replies, "No, Mother, sleep has not yet come to me." So she said, "Listen, my son, I will tell you a bedtime story that will make you fall asleep." So Kṛṣṇa replies, "What is this story? I have never heard it. Mother, please tell it." So then, Rūpa Gosvāmī describes Mother Yaśodā goes on to tell a story, a pastime. And when she came to the sentence when Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared from the pillar, He was very eager to rip the demons to shreds, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes a smile suddenly arose on child Kṛṣṇa’s lips, because Kṛṣṇa was remembering His incarnation as Nṛsiṁhadeva.

We hear about Nṛsiṁhadeva in so many instances. Also, when we do Govardhana-parikramā and we come to the southernmost portion, Puñjari, we just come around the hill, we go up the other side. As we pass that, as we turn the corner there, if you look to the left, about 50 meters away, there's a hill. On top of that hill is a temple, and that's the Nṛsiṁhadeva temple. And inside that temple is the most ferocious form of Nṛsiṁhadeva killing the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. Nṛsiṁhadeva appears in different forms; devotees worship Him in different forms as deities, but this *ugra* form is there in that Nṛsiṁhadeva temple. And I know when I go there with my parikramā party, we always take that little detour and we spend some time with that deity, and we pray to Him to safely complete our parikramā around Girirāja.

Now, there's also a very famous deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva behind Rādhā-vallabha’s temple in downtown Vṛndāvana. I know many ISKCON devotees, they go to take darśana of that Nṛsiṁhadeva deity. And, of course, we all know that Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī prayed to one of his Śālagrāma-śilās on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day to please manifest as a full-fledged deity. That was on Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day, and the next day when he woke up, there was our beloved Śrī Śrī Rādhāramaṇajī. 

And let us not forget the village of Phalain in Vṛndāvana. I lectured on that village and the pastime therein last year—long lecture. In the village of Phalain, the inhabitants celebrate Prahlāda Mahārāja’s victory over his demoniac father’s attempts to kill him by burning an effigy of Holikā. Holikā, of course, if you remember, is the sister of Hiraṇyakaśipu. So, it's a big event; the whole village comes out, "Jaya Prahlāda Mahārāja, kī jaya Nṛsiṁhadeva!" Like that. 

And I was thinking, when remembering that pastime, you know how Holikā was burned in the fire and Prahlāda survived by Nṛsiṁhadeva’s mercy. I was thinking that it was soon thereafter that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared in Hiraṇyakaśipu’s palace and killed Hiraṇyakaśipu. And I was thinking how, in doing so, just that simple act of appearing from the pillar, killing that one demon, the whole universe was overjoyed because everyone was suffering the atrocities of Hiraṇyakaśipu. The whole, the three planetary systems, the whole 14 planetary systems were suffering. So everyone was overjoyed. And I found a beautiful verse in that regard, how there was immense happiness in the universe. I found a beautiful verse spoken by Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in this connection. Now, in this verse, Nṛsiṁhadeva plays on the word *prahlāda* in two ways, because you know, in Sanskrit, we can interpret a word in a different way. So in this verse, Nṛsiṁhadeva refers to Prahlāda, His devotee, and another meaning of *prahlāda* is "immense happiness." So listen to how He plays with this word, *prahlāda*, and Nṛsiṁhadeva is speaking: 

"If this king of all demons stays alive, then My devotee, Prahlāda, will certainly manifest only at one location within this universe. However, if this demon is killed, then immense happiness (*prahlāda*) will manifest everywhere in the universe." The verse goes on: "With this thought in mind, Narahari, the Personality eager to bestow immense happiness on the entire universe, killed him using His nails." 

So, *Prahlāda* (devotee) and *prahlāda* (meaning immense happiness). Very beautiful. Now, this verse was actually composed by my dear friend Hari-pārṣada dāsa from the GBC Śāstra Committee. 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Now, it's said that this festival in Phalain in Vṛndāvana is so popular that Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself would attend it each year when He was present on this planet five thousand years ago. Even Kṛṣṇa would go to this festival.

Nṛsiṁhadeva in Braja. Now, because the month of May is always so scorching hot—and I can attest to that right now, it's May and it's about, I don't know, 48 degrees outside, 115 degrees Fahrenheit—because the month of May is always so scorching hot, some pundits, they joke that that's because of the fire that emanated from Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva when He appeared to kill Hiraṇyakaśipu. Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared in the month of May. So they say, "Well, that's why May is always so hot." And Nṛsiṁhadeva is famous in that way for the fire that emanated from His form; He's called *Jvālā-nṛsiṁha*, the fiery form of the Lord. And we hear about that fire emanating from Nṛsiṁhadeva in a number of verses, for example, the famous verse: 

*ugraṁ vīraṁ mahā-viṣṇuṁ jvalantaṁ...* 

"I bow down to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva who is ferocious and heroic like Viṣṇu. He is burning from every side. He is terrific, auspicious, and the death of death personified." 

Now, there's also another verse I found many years ago actually, which also describes this fire coming from Nṛsiṁhadeva, and particularly how it affected Hiraṇyakaśipu. This is verse 2 in the scripture called *Subhāṣita-ratna-bhaṇḍāgāra*. Now, I have to warn you, it's very graphic. Just like sometimes on a news broadcast or, you know, on television or on the internet, if they're going to show some graphic photo of a car accident or something like that, they'll warn the audience—viewer discretion is advised. So I'm warning you, please be advised, it's quite graphic. Hold on to your seats! But you know, we're all in one, chanting Nṛsiṁha-bhakti, it's very popular in ISKCON, so you may like this verse. This is how the fire of Nṛsiṁhadeva: 

"May the fire born out of the friction of the teeth of Hari’s saw-like arm against the chest of the demon purify you. On the demon's skin, this fire made a noise; his flowing blood created the noise. The fire burning his fat made a loud *dagdha-dagdha* sound, while the fire burning his bones created a loud cracking sound." 

I warned you! But Nṛsiṁhadeva kī jaya! He protects His devotees. 

Now, in my readings, I found that one ācārya has written that this is interesting: Nṛsiṁhadeva was so angry with the behavior of Hiraṇyakaśipu in every way that when they were fighting, the fire coming from His mouth evaporated the Lord’s perspiration. You know, when you're engaged in heavy activity, you perspire. So here's, you know, the Lord fighting the greatest demon the world has ever known—it's a big battle—we would expect to see both parties perspiring. But Nṛsiṁhadeva was so angry that the fire was coming from His mouth; it burned up His perspiration. So this ācārya says, "Therefore, we never see any sweat or perspiration on the body of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in paintings or drawings." Just, you know, a little observation there, but you know, it's the detail that we really relish. So, no perspiration on Nṛsiṁhadeva’s body.

Now, as we know, after Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva killed Hiraṇyakaśipu, He remained very angry. Even the demigods could not appease Him; even Lakṣmī-devī could not appease Him. Therefore, Lord Brahmā requested Prahlāda Mahārāja to approach the Lord. And when Prahlāda did so, being the pure devotee that he is—he's one of the 12 Mahājanas, authorities on the science of devotional service—when he approached Nṛsiṁhadeva, Nṛsiṁhadeva became *śānta*, meaning peaceful. Because, after all, it was—if you think about it—it was solely for the deliverance of Prahlāda Mahārāja that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared. Of course, He set an example for the demons: "Watch out, don't mess with My devotees," but literally, He came and He went. 

As soon as Prahlāda was delivered from danger, after some discussion there, Nṛsiṁhadeva returned to Vaikuṇṭha. Usually, the Lord's incarnations, they stay for some time; you know, they deliver the devotees, they annihilate the demons, and they establish *dharma*, religious principles. But not Nṛsiṁhadeva; He came solely for Prahlāda. If you think about it, one incarnation for one devotee! That's how kind the Lord is, that's how much He loves His devotees. 

However—and this is super interesting—I found an interesting quote that gives another version, you could say an opposite reason for Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearing. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 7.20, Śukadeva Gosvāmī addresses Hiraṇyakaśipu as *Śrī Hiraṇyakaśipu*. And commenting on that verse, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī says that Śukadeva Gosvāmī addressed Hiraṇyakaśipu respectfully as *Śrī*, meaning glorious or beautiful, because it was in fact Hiraṇyakaśipu who was the main cause of the appearance of Nṛsiṁha and not Prahlāda. 

So how was that? Well, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī writes that—and I quote here—"Prahlāda was already aware of the Lord's presence everywhere. Thus, the main reason for the Lord's appearance was to convince him, Hiraṇyakaśipu, of Viṣṇu's existence as the Supreme Personality of Godhead." 

Now, when we think about the pastime, we know that Hiraṇyakaśipu, he was an atheist. He knew about Viṣṇu, but he didn't accept Viṣṇu as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He didn't accept a Supreme Personality of God, and he thought he was all-powerful. So, in that final fight, that final discussion with Prahlāda, let us say in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Hiraṇyakaśipu is challenging Prahlāda: "So, you're a devotee of Viṣṇu? Let us see your God come to protect you now." Because he didn't believe He would. So he said, "Is your Lord in this flower pot, Prahlāda?" Who knows that, who's convinced that Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, he said, "Yes, He's there." So he went, *dhaś*—smashed it. "See, He's not there." Then Hiraṇyakaśipu said, "Is your Lord in this table?" "Yes, Pitṛ, He's definitely there." So he takes his sword, Hiraṇyakaśipu smashes. "There's your Viṣṇu, He's not there." "But, Pitṛ, He's everywhere, try to understand." So finally, Hiraṇyakaśipu says, "So, is He in this pillar?" "Yep, He's definitely in that pillar, Prahlāda." "All right, let Him come to protect you now!" So then Hiraṇyakaśipu smashes the pillar, and Viṣṇu appears as Bhagavān Nṛsiṁhadeva. 

So Prahlāda already was convinced about the existence of God, but Hiraṇyakaśipu was not. Therefore, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī writes, "Prahlāda was already aware of the Lord's presence everywhere. Thus, the main reason for the Lord's appearance was to convince Hiraṇyakaśipu of His, Viṣṇu's, existence as the Supreme Personality of Godhead." And the ultimate conviction was that although he thought he was all-powerful, Hiraṇyakaśipu, Viṣṇu killed him, and he was lucky to be killed by Viṣṇu because by the touch of the nails of the Lord's hands, he was purified of all contamination. He was liberated, as we hear later on in the Bhāgavatam. 

So one can take it either way, actually, that the Lord appeared for Prahlāda Mahārāja, as we were discussing, or He appeared for Hiraṇyakaśipu according to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. Thus, making that fateful day a celebration—you can either celebrate the upcoming festival as the appearance day of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva or the disappearance day of Hiraṇyakaśipu. You can wake up like that. Both are authorized! "Oh, today is the 15th of May, wow, it's the appearance day of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva," or you can wake up, "Oh, today is the disappearance day of Hiraṇyakaśipu." Both are significant events in the history of the world; both are cause for celebration. And that we see very clearly in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. You can celebrate either or, or both. For *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 7.9.13, Prahlāda praises the appearance of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, and in the very next verse, 7.9.14, he praises the disappearance of Hiraṇyakaśipu. 

Here's 7.9.13, Prahlāda praising the appearance of Nṛsiṁha, famous verse: 

"O my Lord, all the demigods headed by Lord Brahmā are sincere servants of Your Lordship who are situated in a transcendental position; they are not like us, Prahlāda and his father, the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. Your appearance in this fearsome form is Your pastime for Your own pleasure. Such an incarnation is always meant for the protection and improvement of the universe." 

It's all about Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance. Then in the next verse, 14, here's Prahlāda celebrating the disappearance of Hiraṇyakaśipu, and it's very clear. He says: 

"My dear Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, please therefore cease Your anger now that my father, the great demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, has been killed. Since even saintly persons take pleasure in the killing of a scorpion or a snake, all the worlds have achieved great satisfaction because of the death of this demon. Now they are confident of their happiness, and they will always remember Your auspicious incarnation of Nṛsiṁhadeva in order to be freed from fear." 

So the celebration is coming, you can decide! Maybe we'll just celebrate both. But a great source of celebration. Now, um, it's said that because of the devotion of Prahlāda Mahārāja, the greatest person, *Puruṣottama*, appeared, and the most demoniac person, *pūtiṣṭhān*, disappeared. *Puruṣottama* and *pūtiṣṭhān*—the greatest person appeared and the most demoniac person disappeared. Sometimes devotees ask, you know, "How did Prahlāda take birth in a family of demons?" So generally, when I lecture on that question, I say, "Just so you know, we can see which path we want to follow. When you put two things together and compare them, you can see which one is superior and which one is inferior." So these two personalities, Prahlāda and Hiraṇyakaśipu, by the Lord's arrangement, they appeared in the same family, and by hearing that līlā, you can decide: do you want to follow the path of Hiraṇyakaśipu, or do you want to follow the path of Prahlāda Mahārāja? 

But because of his devotion, Prahlāda's devotion, the greatest person *Puruṣottama* appeared and the greatest demon *pūtiṣṭhān* disappeared. 

Now, the Vaiṣṇava poet, Parman, a famous Vaiṣṇava poet who actually spent most of his life in Vṛndāvana, he contributes something really interesting in Brajabhāṣā language. I like this, and when I found it in the *śāstra*, he wrote: *Prahlāda ke ṭhāṭha bhakta hṛdaya koṭa nivāryo*. That's Brajabhāṣā meaning that when Nṛsiṁhadeva, when Prahlāda came forward and Nṛsiṁhadeva picked him up and put him on His lap, Nṛsiṁhadeva put Prahlāda in His lap. Now, according to our poet, Nṛsiṁhadeva licked Prahlāda as lions do their cubs. And because of that, he says—it's just very beautiful—he said, "The rain of the Lord’s saliva squelched the fire of separation from Viṣṇu in Prahlāda Mahārāja’s heart." He licked him! You know how poets are. "The rain of the Lord’s saliva squelched the fire of separation in Prahlāda Mahārāja’s heart." In this way, the poet says, in this pastime, the Lord performed an *abhiṣeka* of His devotee by licking him. This is the poet’s mind: "In this pastime, the Lord performed an *abhiṣeka* of His devotee." *Abhiṣeka* means bath. And he writes that when a devotee requests the Lord to manifest in His deity form, the devotee performs an *abhiṣeka* of the deity, but in this pastime, it was just the opposite! The Lord Himself did *abhiṣeka* of His devotee, because "Lord-love is reciprocal; you express your love to your beloved, the expression of love to you." So, you know, as part of an expression of our developing our love for the Lord, we have *abhiṣeka* of the deity, but in this case, the Lord, His devotee-love is reciprocal. So in this way, we can see by hearing these pastimes that the Lord is very hard on the non-devotees but very soft on His devotees. We sometimes hear He's "hard like a thunderbolt and soft like a rose." Or there's a very beautiful verse that Nṛsiṁha-bhaktas all know: 

"Although very ferocious, the lioness is very kind to her cubs. Similarly, although very ferocious to non-devotees like Hiraṇyakaśipu, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is very, very soft and kind to devotees like Prahlāda Mahārāja." 

*Evaṁ manāviṣik*... All glorious to that poet. 

Therefore, sometimes the nature of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva has been compared to sandalwood, in the sense that, you know, the Lord is hard with the non-devotees but soft with devotees. So, an analogy is given sometimes: the nature of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, this dual nature of Nṛsiṁhadeva, it's compared to sandalwood. And when I was studying that, I was thinking, "How's the nature of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva compared to sandalwood?" But as I read on, it became very interesting because, in the Himalayan mountains, yogis actually apply sandalwood ash on their bodies in the winter to keep warm. You know, we, when we think of sandalwood, we think that we make sandalwood paste and we get cooled down. But sandalwood has another aspect: that if you burn it and you put the ash on your body, the ash will heat you in the winter. Therefore, it's said that in the icy climate of the Himalayan mountains, sandalwood ash feels as warm as a hundred quilts to the yogis. 

Next time you go to the mountains, you can burn some sandalwood and try it! In the icy climate of the mountains, sandalwood ash feels as warm as a hundred quilts to the yogis. But again, on the other hand, sandalwood when ground with water becomes a paste and it has a completely opposite effect; it cools the body. Therefore, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is like sandalwood ash for the asuras because He burns them with heat (*jvālā-nṛsiṁha*), but for His devotees, He's like cooling sandalwood paste because He removes all their distress and protects His devotees from the blazing fire of material existence, *Bhagavān Narasimha-devāya*. Thus, the dual nature of sandalwood compared to Nṛsiṁhadeva. 

Now, here's something very sweet and very beautiful, *rasika*, actually. But Nṛsiṁhadeva is in this... what I'm going to recite here. Once, Kṛṣṇa compared His ten incarnations to the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Once Kṛṣṇa compared His ten incarnations to the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Now, this pastime is authorized; it's described by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda in his *Vidagdha-mādhava*, Chapter 4, verse 41. So beautiful. And in this particular verse, Kṛṣṇa, speaking, says: 

"Dearest beloved, I am not alone in being your surrendered servant; My ten incarnations are also your servants. My fish incarnation, Matsya, serves the restless fish of your eyes. My turtle incarnation, Kūrma, serves the two beautiful turtles of your breasts. My boar incarnation, Varāha, serves the line of hair between your breasts. My Nṛsiṁha incarnation, who delights Prahlāda Mahārāja, serves your delightful lips. My Vāmana incarnation, who bound Bali Mahārāja with ropes, serves your waist, which is with the folds of skin known as *trivalī*. My incarnations of Rāmacandra, Paraśurāma, and Balarāma are subdued by the beauty of your face, which also defeats the splendor of all beautiful girls. My incarnation of Buddha serves the loveliness of your body, O noble girl! My incarnation of Kalki serves the crooked anger you harbor within your heart." 

Now, if we analyze that verse carefully from *Vidagdha-mādhava* by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, we see that when Kṛṣṇa is speaking to Śrī Rādhā, the Sanskrit is *Saṁvardhana*. He says, "Your lower lip is *saṁvardhana*, the cause of increasing," *prahlāda*—like we were discussing in the other verse—"increasing great joy." *Prahlāda* for Kṛṣṇa, just as Nṛsiṁhadeva is *saṁvardhana*, the cause of protecting the devotee. Name for Lord, same... play on words. Did you catch that? Of the verse we read earlier, *prahlāda*, the person, and also meaning immense bliss. Sanskrit, such a beautiful language! So much nectar. 

How Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is present in so many varieties of ways in Vṛndāvana! So, we'll finish here for today. It's always hard to finish. But I know you have your duties and I have mine. So, we'll finish here today, and in our upcoming second class in this series, we will discuss ten famous deities of Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana, how they appeared, their pastimes with their devotees, and many more treasures. Actually, this was all preparation for May 15th. But before I go, I learned that here in Vṛndāvana, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance is celebrated as a five-day festival. I mean, we celebrate one day, but talk about the Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana, here the Vrajabāsīs, they celebrate it for five days. And I found a very beautiful song that during those five days, I'm told it's sung everywhere in Vṛndāvana, and I had it translated and here it is, we'll finish with this: 

"The people sing: O Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, all glorious to You! The sound of Your roaring aborts the pregnancy of the wives of demons. Your loud laughing brings pleasure to Prahlāda. Your heavy steps destroy the residences of the asuras. Your beautiful feet blossom the flower of the heart of Lakṣmī. The drops of blood falling from Your sharp-pointed nails on earth make Mother Earth a little lighter from the sins of the asuras, and Your soft hands are always giving blessings to Your devotees. I pray to You to always reside at the gate of my house and protect me from all evil. I pray to You to always reside at the gate of my house and protect me from all evil." 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Wow. Thank you, Prabhu, so much again. I hope this has helped you in your preparation to properly receive, as Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has instructed us to honor these days in the proper way. I hope this has inspired you, and we'll be back in a couple of days with the second part of the series. 

Vṛndāvana-ki jaya!""