"*00567*.*
"### Lord Caitanya’s Journey to Vṛndāvana – Part 7

Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees, welcome back once again. Śrīmatī Bhaktivedānta, *namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe*. 

So, today we will be concluding our series on Lord Caitanya’s journey to Vṛndāvana. This will be Part 7 and the final class in the series. In this part, we will focus on Lord Caitanya’s mood when He was in Vṛndāvana. Just why Lord Caitanya was so eager to visit Vṛndāvana as part of His pastimes 500 years ago is very evident in Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s own appreciation of Vṛndāvana, as we find in his *Gopāla-campū*, Part 1, Chapter 1, Text 6. It is a long text, but it is very deep and very relishable. Therein he writes:

> "There exists a place called Vṛndāvana. It brings great auspiciousness to the earth goddess. This forest has the power to deliver all living beings throughout the three worlds. The mere touch of its purifying breeze washes away all troubles. That touch opens the bolt on the door in the prison of the three *vargas*—economic development, sense gratification, and material piety—and it carries away the fragrance of impersonal liberation. Its glories untie the bonds of impersonal liberation. The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not easily give the gift of devotional service, but in the land of Vṛndāvana, He easily gives it, freely and easily, at all times. In His heart, the demigod Brahmā yearned to attain even a low birth in Vṛndāvana. Brahmā worshipped Vṛndāvana. He thought his contact with Vṛndāvana was the beginning of his own glorious good fortune."

The ways of Vṛndāvana are very mysterious. They are like the poetic ornament *virodhābhāsa-alaṅkāra*, where what seems a contradiction is resolved in the end. Even if authors lack poetic skill, their poems about Vṛndāvana are simply glorious. This is because in those poems is an awareness of what is truly important and glorious to help the people of this world. Blissful Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda, descends again and again into the realm of Vṛndāvana. In this way, a great festival of bliss always fills Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. 

Thank you, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, for your perfect insight. Now, as members of ISKCON, you know, following in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya and our previous *ācāryas*, we also want to attain eternal Vṛndāvana, even though we know the qualifications for doing so are very, very high. But try we must, because maybe, just maybe, we’ll make it. The other day, I was reading the 10th Canto of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Chapter 38, verse 5. This is Akrūra speaking in the same mood:

> "How can even a fallen soul like me have the chance to behold the infallible Supreme Lord? For one of the conditioned souls, being swept along in the river of time, may sometimes reach the shore."

Wow, let me repeat that again: "Even a fallen soul like me can have the chance to behold the infallible Supreme Lord, for one of the conditioned souls, being swept along in the river of time, may sometimes reach the shore." So, by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace, we can cross over this ocean of material existence and safely reach the shore of Vaikuṇṭha—what’s more, the topmost goal, Goloka. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, we know from *śāstra* that for the most part, during His stay in Vṛndāvana, Lord Caitanya would sleep each night at Akrūra-ghāṭa, and in the morning, He would walk to Imlī-talā, a very famous sacred place. Imlī-talā, where He would chant *japa* for several hours under a special tamarind tree, and then He would wander to the various forests of Vṛndāvana for His pastimes. As we’ve been discussing in previous lectures in this series, Imlī-talā is translated in English as "tamarind tree," and Imlī-talā is actually the place where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī disappeared from the Śarat Pūrṇimā *rāsa* dance. There are different *rāsa* dances at different times of the year in different places, but Imlī-talā is the place where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī disappeared from the Śarat Pūrṇimā *rāsa* dance, leaving Kṛṣṇa searching for her with intense feelings of separation. In short, you could say Imlī-talā is the place which embodies the intense love and separation between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Now, worship of the original tamarind tree at Imlī-talā was actually started by the *pūjārīs* from the nearby Rādhā-Madan-Mohan temple during the time of Lord Caitanya. But I was reading when Aurangzeb, the tyrant, attacked Vṛndāvana in the 1700s, as we know, Madan-Mohan was taken to Jaipur and then to Karauli, and as a result, the worship of Imlī-talā was neglected. But in the 1930s, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī had his followers purchase the land around Imlī-talā, and you can even see today they built a very beautiful Gauḍīya Maṭha temple there. And I was reading that our Śrīla Prabhupāda would often visit Imlī-talā. I also remember that in the 1970s, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s illustrious godbrother, the famous Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, he would come to Imlī-talā every *dvādaśī* around the time of sunset, and he would sit under that Imlī-talā, under that tamarind tree, and chant *japa* until sunrise. Just something we remember from the 70s.

Now, that tree passed away some years ago, so a new tamarind tree was planted in the remains of the original tree trunk. And actually, it’s fairly unusual to see tamarind trees in Vṛndāvana. Why? Because Rādhārāṇī cursed them. Why would Rādhārāṇī curse the tamarind trees? Because very simply, one time Kṛṣṇa hid behind a tamarind tree after leaving the *rāsa* dance. It’s another *līlā*; He leaves, and He hid behind the tamarind tree after the *rāsa* dance or during the *rāsa* dance, and Rādhārāṇī couldn't find Him, so she cursed the tamarind trees. You don’t find too many tamarind trees in Vṛndāvana. But an annual event is held at Imlī-talā, I think it’s on the full moon day of Kārttika, to commemorate Lord Caitanya’s arrival in Vṛndāvana and this daily visit to Imlī-talā, a very important place. And during that particular festival, a picture of Caitanya Mahāprabhu is brought there in a big procession from a nearby temple, and they have *kīrtana*, *kathā*, and a big feast, a big festival at Imlī-talā.

So again, Imlī-talā is where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī left one of the *rāsa* dances 5,000 years ago, and I think it would be good to discuss that pastime, because it’s intimately connected also to Lord Caitanya and His mood during His pastimes on this planet 500 years ago. But as you’ll see, it’s connected. So, one moonlit night while that *rāsa* dance was, you could say, in full swing in that area—it’s actually Seva-kuñja—Rādhārāṇī felt neglected. It seemed to her that Kṛṣṇa was giving too much attention to some other *gopīs*. So, feeling slighted, she just disappeared from the *rāsa* dance. And it’s written that almost at once, Kṛṣṇa noticed that she had gone, so He too quickly left the *rāsa* dance and He walked through the moonlit forest searching for her, but to no avail. And not knowing what else to do, He, Kṛṣṇa, came back and sat underneath that Imlī-talā, that large tamarind tree, and He just lamented her departure and their separation.

Now, that sudden disappearance created actually intense feelings of separation in Kṛṣṇa’s heart, and these feelings of separation became, how would you say, too much for Him to bear. And at one point, it caused Him to fall to the ground repeatedly, calling out Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s name. It’s written that He was chanting "Rādhe! Rādhe!" It’s also written that this inspired the animals around Him to chant Rādhārāṇī’s name as well, and soon all of Vṛndāvana resounded with the sound of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s divine names. And when Rādhārāṇī herself heard these calls, she was some distance away, and she started moving towards Imlī-talā. Then something really amazing happened. The *ācāryas* say that this constant chanting of Rādhārāṇī’s names awakened within Kṛṣṇa the sense of being Rādhā. By repeating Rādhā’s names with great yearning, it actually transformed Kṛṣṇa’s sense of identity from one as being the Prince of Vraja to that of being its Princess. In short, He thought He was Rādhā because He was chanting "Rādha, Rādha." The effect of those holy names made Him think that He was Rādhā. 

Now, along with this new sense of identity—it’s quite deep—came Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s beautiful golden complexion. Meaning that Kṛṣṇa’s body, which is normally cloud-blue, actually became the color of molten gold. What’s more, by identifying Himself with Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa now felt separated from Kṛṣṇa instead of from Rādhā, as He usually feels. He was in the mood of Rādhā, so He’s feeling very separated from Kṛṣṇa. So in this state, where Kṛṣṇa is in the mood of Rādhā hankering for Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa spoke to some *gopīs* who He imagined to be nearby. He said, "My dear friends, please listen to me. What shall I do? Where shall I go? Where can I go to find Kṛṣṇa? Please tell me how to find Him."

So, just at that moment, Rādhārāṇī, who had been coming—remember—to Imlī-talā, and her close friends arrived, and they were startled by what they saw. Viśākhā said to Lalitā, "Who’s that?" and Lalitā replied, "Well, it looks like Kṛṣṇa," although Kṛṣṇa was golden. Rādhārāṇī said, "It is Kṛṣṇa." So she and her friends, completely amazed, just stared at this unusual golden-colored Kṛṣṇa who was expressing a presence in a mood exactly like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. However, it’s described that Rādhārāṇī’s actual presence—because she came there—her actual presence quickly wielded its own divine influence on Kṛṣṇa, subduing His feelings of being Rādhā and slowly starting to bring Him back to an awareness of His real identity as Kṛṣṇa. 

But as it was a slow transformation back to being Kṛṣṇa, that golden color kind of remained there on Kṛṣṇa, causing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to say, "Kṛṣṇa, why are you sitting here, and how have you acquired this new color like mine?" So Kṛṣṇa thought for a moment and then He said, "Oh, my dear Rādhā, when you disappeared from the *rāsa* dance, I was so distraught at having offended you that I wandered around Vṛndāvana unable to find you anywhere. I came here thinking of you, and calling out your divine name made me feel as if I were you, and so your mood has become mine and your golden bodily complexion has now covered my usual cloud-blue luster." 

So then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī stepped forward to have a closer look at Kṛṣṇa’s golden form, and she said, "Kṛṣṇa, I’ve never seen you like this before. Is there some special significance behind this form?" And as Kṛṣṇa’s complexion gradually regained His usual cloud-blue luster, He actually told Rādhārāṇī how in Kali-yuga He would appear as the Yuga-avatāra, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, to start a global movement of *nāma-saṅkīrtana*. And He said that at that time, whoever chanted His names with faith would be blessed with the *gopīs'* special feelings of love and separation, the highest goal, which is the only means by which to meet Him face to face. He said. 

Now, hearing this amazing prediction, Rādhārāṇī, who herself is compassion personified, threw her arms around Kṛṣṇa, crying out, "You are so wonderful! You are so wonderful! You are so wonderful!" And it’s written that when Lalitā Devī, who was nearby, saw the divine couple embrace, it appeared to her that sometimes they were two separate forms—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—and sometimes they appeared as one united form as Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu. This is all written, and of course, this is quite an amazing pastime, and many devotees may not have heard it before and wonder, "Where in our scriptures is it described that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had information that Kṛṣṇa would appear in Kali-yuga as...?" 

So, we have to back this up with scriptural reference. As we’ve said many times, when Prabhupāda said, when speaking in spiritual circles, you always have to back up what you’re saying with some *śāstric* reference to make it authorized. So where is the *śāstric* reference that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had information that Kṛṣṇa would appear in Kali-yuga as Lord Caitanya? Of course, in this pastime we hear that, but where else is it mentioned? Well, there is a scriptural reference. Seek and ye shall find. And where is that? Our beloved Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes in his book in a passage called *Svapna-vilāsa*, which translates as "The Nectarian Pastime Dream." Therein, he writes about a dream that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had one evening when she fell asleep in a Vṛndāvana forest called Nidhivana. Now, therein Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes that when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī awoke, she told Kṛṣṇa about the dream—a dream that Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says had both enchanted her heart but left her bewildered at the same time. 

So, waking up, she said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, I just had the most unusual dream. A golden-complexioned *brāhmaṇa* was dancing and singing in the midst of a multitude of people along the bank of a river. Sometimes he called out, 'O Kṛṣṇa!' and sometimes he sighed, 'O Rādhā, where are you?' Sometimes he fell to the ground; sometimes he acted wildly, losing all composure; and sometimes he danced ecstatically with all his loving associates. He has made all the residents of this world, from the blades of grass up to Lord Brahmā, loudly call out the name of Kṛṣṇa. I saw that; I felt drawn to him. And because he sometimes cried out, 'O Rādhā, O Rādhā,' I thought he could only be you. But the next moment, he started to call out, 'O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,' just as I call out for you. I was forced to wonder if this effulgent *brāhmaṇa* could somehow be me. Now I’m confused. If that *brāhmaṇa* was you, then where was I? And if he was me, then where were you?"

So Kṛṣṇa, at that point, He took Rādhārāṇī’s hand and He started to tease her. "Oh, *kutukinī*." *Kutukinī* means—it translates as—the "curious one." "Oh, *kutukinī*, in the past you have seen so many of my incarnations—Nārāyaṇa, Varāha, Narasiṃha—without being confused. It’s puzzling that you can’t identify this *brāhmaṇa*." Then something amazing happened again. Kṛṣṇa touched the Kaustubha jewel on His chest. Now, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes in Text 5, and I quote him here: "At that moment, the Kaustubha gem, knowing the meaning behind all of this, began to shine. As soon as it did, all the details of the dream were completely revealed, and Rādhārāṇī realized that the *brāhmaṇa* in her dream was actually Kṛṣṇa and her as well." 

Viśvanātha quotes Rādhārāṇī in text number 6. She’s speaking, "My dear beloved Kṛṣṇa, I now know what is in your heart that makes you smile. You are he and I am also he." In other words, Viśvanātha writes that her realization was that they had become one person in the personality of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the golden avatar who would appear one day in Kali-yuga and flood the world with the nectar of the holy names. 

Now, we hear Kavi-karṇapūra say the same thing in one book that he wrote, *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. It’s the first chapter, it’s actually the first verse in the chapter; he writes: "Kṛṣṇa is the personification of condensed *sat* (eternality), *cit* (knowledge), and *ānanda* (bliss). Previously in the land of Śrī Vṛndāvana, He danced along with golden-hued damsels. He danced along with golden-hued damsels of Vraja. Now, did it so happen that due to tightly embracing these *gaura-aṅga* (golden-hued) *gopīs*, He Himself turned into *gaura-aṅga* and is now ever-victorious in the land of Navadvīpa?" He writes like that. 

So, our Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura goes on to say just how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī concluded that the golden-colored *brāhmaṇa* was Kṛṣṇa. It’s very interesting; he writes because Rādhārāṇī remembered Gargamuni’s statement at Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving ceremony, that baby Kṛṣṇa would appear one day as an incarnation who has a yellowish-golden complexion. Viśvanātha writes that Rādhārāṇī is speaking to Kṛṣṇa, "In the King of Vraja’s presence, the learned Vedic scholar Gargācārya said that you will appear with a yellowish complexion. He did not lie. This dream of mine that I’ve just had is true, it’s not an illusion. In this dream, I have directly seen you, Kṛṣṇa." 

There’s actually a popular song in both Hindi and Bengali—I’ve heard it sung a number of times—it’s called *Sundara-badana-śacī-dulāla*. And it goes like this: "To experience the utmost intimacy, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa united in one form within a grove of Nidhivana and played the flute. Adopting that form and mood, the Lord, Viśvarūpa, has appeared in Nadia." So, at this point, he concludes in text 9 of *Svapna-vilāsāmṛta*, this dream pastime, he writes: "If the bumblebee of the reader’s mind drinks the nectar of this *Svapna-vilāsāmṛta*, this dream that Rādhā had, then that intelligent reader will quickly awaken from the dream of materialistic doubt. Such a reader will attain Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He will sport in the ocean of pure love, and he will attain the peerless mercy of the King of Vraja." 

All right, Kṛṣṇa, such a sweet and very profound pastime. And if we think about it, all of us too have experienced the blessings of the Yuga-avatāra, Mahāprabhu. It’s mentioned that previously, as we were reading, that by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, one can understand who is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, one can attain great heights, wonderful destinations. So we too, all of us ISKCON devotees, have practical experience of the changes in our lives having come in contact with Caitanya Mahāprabhu through His representative, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and His followers. It’s all a great miracle, actually. We’re part of the miracle of Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes. 

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī writes in his *Viveka-śatakam*, "100 Verses of Wisdom," in Chapter 1, it’s text number 3, one of my favorites just showing the miracles of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He writes: "When the moonlight Lord Gaurāṅga appeared in Gauḍadeśa, glass became gold, gold became a philosopher’s stone, base-metal gems produced similar natural-styled jewels, crows became like Garuḍa, crooked ugly trees became sandalwood trees, and barren trees became wish-fulfilling trees. Is this not all wonderful?" 

And on my part, by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, it’s also wonderful that the "hippies" became "happies." That’s probably summarized one time, because in the beginning, it was the hippies that came, very degraded condition. But the great miracle is they became wonderful Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

So this concludes our series on Lord Caitanya’s journey from Jagannātha Purī to Śrī Vṛndāvana, and it’s been a wonderful journey, of course. So much more could be said, so much more could be said actually; we didn't cover every single place that Mahāprabhu visited along the way or in Vṛndāvana. But as much as I could research in this limited time, we discovered and we discussed also on Mahāprabhu’s mood, particularly today. So please carry that with you in your hearts, and by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and His representatives, we can continue our journey back home, back to Godhead, to Śrī Goloka Vṛndāvana. I think in our next lecture we’ll go back to the series of the seasons in Vṛndāvana. Thank you so much, Prabhu.""