"*00444*.*
"Everyone, welcome. Today, we are continuing with our short series on Lord Caitanya’s journey from Purī—Jagannātha Purī—to Vṛndāvana, and today is Part Three in the series. In my research, I found that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura goes into some depth discussing this pastime in his book. Therein, he writes that just after an ecstatic Ratha-yātrā festival in Jagannātha Purī, the desire to go to Vṛndāvana manifested within the heart of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes that it was only natural that Lord Caitanya would want to visit Vṛndāvana because that was His "transcendental playground" as a young boy five thousand years ago as Kṛṣṇa.

So, we finished Part Two of this series with Lord Caitanya and His dear servant Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya crossing over the boundary of Orissa and entering into the present-day state of Jharkhand. As they continued walking, they eventually came to the famous Jharikhaṇḍa forest. This is a pastime place very dear to devotees. They came to the famous Jharikhaṇḍa forest. Now, I read that it’s called Jharikhaṇḍa forest because of the multitude of *jhāḍī*, or bushes, that comprise the dense forest along with different types of beautiful creepers, and it is mentioned, sweet-smelling wild kadamba trees.

Now, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 17.46, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in the purport, and I quote: "The great forest of Jharikhaṇḍa is a great tract of land including Aṭagāra, Deoghar, and so on. All these places, which are covered with mountains and jungles, are known as Jharikhaṇḍa." 

Now, in my research, I found out that historically, at that time, the forest of Jharikhaṇḍa had never been explored; it was a very wild place. It was almost uninhabitable. It is described that no humans had ever gone there. One historian writes that the animals there had never smelled humans. You know, traveling anywhere in India in those days was fraught with danger; you had to cross through deserts or you had to cross through jungle terrains with wild animals everywhere. There were thieves and robbers. In fact, one of my disciples did his PhD thesis on Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and one day he shared a very interesting piece of information with me that he got through his research in the Jaipur museum archives. In Jaipur, he actually found a handwritten letter by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura—I would love to see that handwriting—in which he was complaining to the King of Jaipur that there were so many thieves and dacoits on the way from Vṛndāvana to Jaipur and Jaipur back to Vṛndāvana, thieves waiting along the road. They were harassing all the pilgrims who were coming back and forth from Vṛndāvana to Jaipur, etc., to take darśana of the deities. So, in the letter, Viśvanātha wrote to the King, and I’m quoting the letter: "Do something about it. Station your military along the road so that we can travel peacefully from one holy place to another." This is the duty of the government. So interesting. The conclusion is, it was not so easy to travel in India in days of yore; even now, that’s an austerity.

So, upon entering the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, and especially seeing all the wild animals that were there, Balabhadra—it’s described—became bewildered and afraid. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, it’s stated therein: *dekhi' bhaṭṭācārya bhaye*, he was very much afraid to see these animals. But by Śrī Caitanya’s influence, all the animals stood to one side. Now, one of our favorite poets that we’ve quoted before, Lalita Kiśora Dāsa, he writes that at that point, Mahāprabhu said to Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya: "Balabhadra, don’t forget about the pastimes of the cowherd boys. Whenever the demons were coming to attack Kṛṣṇa, they would first attack His cowherd boyfriends, and even though they were very small, they didn’t cry; they just called out Kṛṣṇa’s name with firm faith and confidence. Do not fear, my dear Balabhadra. The protective Kṛṣṇa is always with you, and remember that there is nothing more fearful than getting separated from our eternal lover, Kṛṣṇa. That’s the real fear—to get separated from our eternal lover, Kṛṣṇa." That’s from the mouth of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

So, after saying these things, Lord Caitanya started walking through the jungle, all the while encountering wild and savage animals. And in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Volume 4, Chapter 17, we get a very clear picture of Mahāprabhu traveling through Jharikhaṇḍa forest, and I’ll quote: "When the Lord passed through the solitary forest chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa, the tigers and elephants seeing Him gave way. When the Lord passed through the jungle in great ecstasy, packs of tigers, elephants, rhinoceroses, and boars came, and the Lord passed right through them." Kavirāja Gosvāmī is writing, "One day a tiger was lying on the path, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu, walking along the path in ecstatic love, touched the tiger with His feet. The Lord said, 'Chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.' The tiger immediately got up and began to dance and chant, 'Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!'"

He continues, "Another day, when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was bathing in a river, a herd of maddened elephants came there to drink water. While the Lord was bathing and murmuring the Gāyatrī mantra—I found that interesting, Hari Kṛṣṇa, but He also remembered the Gāyatrī mantra—the elephants came before Him. The Lord immediately splashed some water on the elephants and asked them to chant 'Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!'" So, Śrīla Prabhupāda mentioned in a purport in that chapter that when Lord Caitanya was facing these dangers, He Himself set an example and took shelter of kīrtana for protection. And there were three specific mantras that He chanted. It’s no secret; we all know them, but they’re not, I guess you could say, so popular in ISKCON at the present time. But I think they should be, because Lord Caitanya is the Yuga-avatāra, teaching us everything we need to know, including how to face imminent danger in this world. Many lessons to be learned in this pastime of going through the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. So, what exactly were those divine mantras that Mahāprabhu chanted for protection in the forest?

*Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa*
*Hey Rāma Rāghava Rāma*
*Kṛṣṇa Keśava pāhi mām*

We’ve heard them many times: "O Lord Kṛṣṇa, please protect me and maintain me. O Lord Rāma, the descendant of King Raghu, please protect me. O Kṛṣṇa, O Keśava, the killer of the Keśī demon, please maintain me." So, we may not be living in a jungle, or even passing through a jungle like the Amazon rainforest or the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, but most of us live in asphalt jungles. What do we mean by "asphalt jungles"? The cities of Kali-yuga. We live in jungles where people are inclined to live like animals. Animals live only for eating, sleeping, mating, and defending; they don’t have the intelligence to inquire into spiritual matters. So, for many people, that’s the goal of life—eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die, like the gladiators. Something like that—instead of four-legged animals, two-legged animals. It’s a strong statement, but sometimes we have to speak the truth even if it hurts a little bit. But actually, many human beings are worse than animals because animals do not kill their own children in the womb. So, we live, you could say, in asphalt jungles. You don’t have to go to the Jharikhaṇḍa forest to experience what is dangerous; you can just live in London, New York, Los Angeles, Sydney, Beijing, Moscow. So, my point is, we too can take shelter of the Lord by chanting these mantras. It would be nice if they became more prominent in ISKCON because they came from the mouth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in that particular situation. The Lord has set an example as the devotee incarnation. I remember in the beginning of the movement we would sing sometimes, *Hare Kṛṣṇa*.

Anyway, as the Lord was chanting in the forest, what happens? All the animals started chanting and dancing in love. Now, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes about this in detail as well in Madhya-līlā 17. He writes, "When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was passing through the jungle, five or seven tigers came joining the deer; the tigers began to follow the Lord. Seeing the tigers and deer following Him, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately remembered the land of Vṛndāvana and He began to recite a verse describing the transcendental qualities of Vṛndāvana." And that verse is: "Vṛndāvana is the transcendental abode of the Lord. There is no hunger, anger, or thirst there, though naturally inimical human beings and fierce animals live together there in a transcendental friendship."

Then, Kavirāja Gosvāmī gives a Bengali verse: "Chant Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" The tigers and deer began to actually chant "Kṛṣṇa"—not roaring, but "Kṛṣṇa"—and dance. Then he says, "When all the tigers and does, the deer, danced and jumped, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya saw them and was struck with wonder." We get a little bit deeper insight from one of our favorite poets again, Lalita Kiśora Dāsa; he writes, "It’s really interesting—at this point, all the deer and lions started to embrace each other; snakes and mongooses started eating together; swans and fish started swimming together. The nature of all the living entities started changing to the opposite, and they started feeling love for Mahāprabhu. There was no envy." And the poet says such was the beauty of personified love, meaning Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who, wandering in the forest of Jharikhaṇḍa, called out the names of Kṛṣṇa; even the demigods' eyes became wet with tears while witnessing this pastime from their flower airplanes above.

And in his purports, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s ecstasies in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* to this pastime, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that as a result of chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names, all the animals again became not envious. Actually, I was thinking that such an idyllic scene is also mentioned in the Holy Bible, in Isaiah 11:6; I remember this verse from my childhood: "The wolf shall live with the lamb, the leopard shall lie down with the goat, the calf, the lion, and the yearling shall be together, and a small child shall lead them." That child is Jesus Christ. So, like this, we can understand that all the animals in the Jharikhaṇḍa forest became not envious. And that’s our prayer, you could say, as members of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness: that one day the whole world, after being flooded with these holy names, will become non-envious and think of each other’s welfare. A verse I quoted the other day, one of my favorite verses from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.9), stated: "May there be good fortune throughout the universe, and may all envious persons be pacified. May all living entities become calm by practicing bhakti-yoga, for by accepting devotional service they will think of each other’s welfare. Therefore, let us all engage in the service of the supreme transcendence, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and always remain absorbed in thoughts of Him." If there ever was a sanctuary verse, that’s it; that’s one of them. And having faith, *śraddhā*, in the miracles of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because we ourselves are miracles. We’re Prabhupāda’s miracles—that he made the hippies into "happies," and people of all different ethnic groups and religions, and people who had bad habits or whatever, he made us into these beautiful Vaiṣṇavas. So, we’ve felt the change; so, we should have the faith that by Prabhupāda’s mercy, our previous ācāryas, by the mercy of Gaura-Nitāi, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, that the world can actually change by hearing this mantra: *Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa...*

Not little changes like us, but big changes can happen. I shouldn’t doubt it. Śarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, Śrīla Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, a close associate of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Purī, he had no doubt. He wrote, "From the moment that the holy name of Hari appeared on the earth, Vaiṣṇavas became manifested everywhere, adorned with faultless tilaka and neck beads, and equipped with the mahā-mantra. In the midst of the age of Kali, they purified the atmosphere chanting Hari! Hari!" So, indeed, it came to pass. Oh, that verse is very dear to my heart. So, indeed, it came to pass. So, we’re just seeing a little bit of it now. Those who will be born in future generations, although Kali-yuga is going to get worse, they’ll be privileged to see this prediction of Śrīla Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya take place.

So, as Lord Caitanya and Balabhadra passed through the Jharikhaṇḍa forest and continued their long journey to Vṛndāvana, one ācārya describes that some days were as good as walking on a bed of roses; others were as bad as walking on burning coal. And referring to Lord Caitanya, he says with the beautiful eyes of *virahiṇī-priyā*—meaning Rādhārāṇī in separation—we’re always searching for Kṛṣṇa’s abode, Vṛndāvana. With the beautiful eyes of *virahiṇī-priyā* Rādhā in separation, the mood of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we’re always searching for Kṛṣṇa’s.

Now, every night when Mahāprabhu went to sleep, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya would fan Him and wash His lotus feet with—you know, they describe—there were cuts, insect bites, and blisters on the feet of Mahāprabhu. Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya would wash those feet with what? With his tears. And while doing so, he would say to himself—this is the insight we have from the scriptures that we’re referring to; many times we’ve mentioned them in these classes—he would say to himself: "Just look at these lotus feet, which are worshiped by Indra, washed by Brahmā, decorated by Śiva, kissed by the Yamunā, served by Lakṣmī, and fanned by Garuḍa. They are the ornaments of Sītā; they are the possession of the royal ruler of Bhārata; they are the life of Lakṣmaṇa; they are the heart of Hanumān and the faith of Vibhīṣaṇa. These feet are the only savior of Prahlāda Mahārāja, the only promise of Mahārāja Bali’s forehead, the only shelter of the Vedas, by the mercy of the Matsya avatāra, the only base of Mandara Hill for churning the Milk Ocean, and the only pleasure of Govardhana Hill," because the Lord walks on Govardhana Hill, "and the only pleasure of Govardhana Hill." Wow.

Now, it’s written that through all these long months of traveling through India, the only word Mahāprabhu would utter was—what? He’s walking, you know, we described three months and 56 stops, something like that—now, it’s mentioned that there’s only one word He would utter as He went along. What was that? Vṛndāvana! Vṛndāvana! Vṛndāvana! But it’s also mentioned that sometimes He would run on the way, sometimes He would walk very slowly, sometimes He would dance, sometimes He would stop, sometimes He would laugh like a madman, sometimes He would cry like He’d lost someone, sometimes He would become angry, and sometimes He would become very serious. These were the transcendental moods of Caitanya Mahāprabhu as He went from Purī to His beloved.

Finally, after many weeks—well, many, let’s say, months and weeks—we quoted Lord Caitanya and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya reached Vārāṇasī. If you look at a map, maybe halfway—Vārāṇasī—and there, we know, all of us from studying *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Kavirāja Gosvāmī mentions there that Mahāprabhu met Tapana Miśra, who took the Lord to his house, his home, and provided Him with a comfortable residence. While there, and during that time, news reached Prakāśānanda, the leader of the Māyāvādī sannyāsīs, that Mahāprabhu was residing in Vārāṇasī. And when Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī heard this, he made various accusations against Mahāprabhu. So, Mahāprabhu, He stated that Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī and his followers were all offenders, and one should not associate with him; He actually described them as the worst offenders. But again, we know on the way back He delivered them. Such is the compassion of Mahāprabhu. So, after some time—because that’s we’re pretty familiar with the līlās there in Vārāṇasī—after some time, Lord Caitanya and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya left Vārāṇasī and continued on that long journey.

Finally, after, you know, three months and some odd days, they arrived at a village known as Garga-grāma. Garga-grāma, excuse me—that’s present-day Aligarh. It’s known also as... it was known at that time as the village of Gargamuni. That’s where he’s from. And I looked on the map, it’s about 70 kilometers from the border of Braja. And there, a brāhmaṇa named Vaijayantīmālā, as they approached this village, some distance still from Vṛndāvana, this brāhmaṇa, Vaijayantīmālā, approached Lord Caitanya and, realizing who He was and why He was coming to Vṛndāvana, this brāhmaṇa began describing, or giving very beautiful descriptions of the cowherd boys in Vṛndāvana. And I was reading that he related that on one very hot summer’s day, Kṛṣṇa was eating butter while on mother Yaśodā’s lap when suddenly His friends appeared—you know, it’s maybe it’s breakfast or something, I don’t know—and all the cowherd boys appear from some distance away, and they began calling Him to join them. And how did they do it? Not by expressing words, but by whistling. Cowherd boys are expert whistlers; they use it for calling cows and passing messages between each other, like in a voice like the whistle, and it’s so sweet. It’s described that they were whistling in different styles.

Māṭamaṅgala whistled with his forefinger inside his mouth; Subala whistled with both of his forefingers; the cowherd boy Arjuna whistled with one finger; and Śrīdāma whistled with several fingers. But the highest pitch of the whistling was played by Stoka Kṛṣṇa, who was known as the—they describe him as the "hero of loud whistling." Stoka Kṛṣṇa. If anyone asks you, "Do you know anything about Stoka Kṛṣṇa?" "Yes, he’s the hero of loud whistling." So, he made the highest pitch. Now, the various whistling sounds of the cowherd boys calling Kṛṣṇa inspire others in the area to call Him as well, because these are Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes five thousand years ago. It’s described that the demigods became inspired to call Him by chanting the Vedas; the brāhmaṇas invoked Him by chanting the Pūruṣa-sūkta; the smārtas invoked Him by making mudrās; many of His devotees called Him by chanting His holy names. But His cowherd boyfriends just continued to attract His attention through the simple process of whistling. That’s the cowherd boys! One ācārya says, "No one can understand the mood of a Vrajavāsī and the reciprocation of the Lord with such dear devotees," because once he heard the whistling, Kṛṣṇa ran from the arms of His mother to be with His friends. So, this again, this was a pastime of Kṛṣṇa related by Vaijayantīmālā, and towards the end he could hardly finish the pastime because he started crying in ecstasy.

The ācārya says that Mahāprabhu, who is *dhīra-gambhīra*—He’s *dhīra-gambhīra*—*dhīra-gambhīra* means one who is graced with the utmost patience. So, here, *dhīra-gambhīra* Mahāprabhu, what did He do? He embraced Vaijayantīmālā, and Mahāprabhu started whistling, too! Mahāprabhu started whistling, too, having heard the story of how His friends five thousand years ago called Him by whistling. So sweet! Then Mahāprabhu, entering into the mood of a cowherd boy, started playing with Vaijayantīmālā like a cowherd boy would, inspired him in the cowherd pastimes.

Now, as Lord Caitanya’s travels throughout India had been very difficult, and at that present moment the weather was very cold, this brāhmaṇa, Vaijayantīmālā, convinced Mahāprabhu to not continue any further but to spend the night in a nearby kuñja, a nearby garden grove. So, Mahāprabhu agreed. And I was reading that after waking up the next morning, He bathed, He chanted His Gāyatrī mantra, and then He chanted His sannyāsa mantra, and after that, He walked this final day to Vṛndāvana in total ecstasy, along with His very dear associate, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya.

Hari Kṛṣṇa. Maybe we’ll stop there. We came a long way today, so all this nectar that we are relishing by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda is, well, it’s just pure nectar by his grace. So, I’d like to conclude today with a prayer in glorification of our founder-ācārya, Śrīla Prabhupāda. It’s written by a Vaiṣṇava poet who lived in the early 1700s. His name was Vaiṣṇava Dāsa. He was born in the village of Teṇā, Vaidyapur; it’s a few miles north of Kāṭwā in West Bengal. And actually, he’s the author of many devotional poems and the compiler of a very famous anthology. It’s called the *Encyclopedic Anthology of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Songs*. The famous book—I saw it in one Gauḍīya Maṭha temple some years ago—the *Encyclopedic Anthology of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Songs*, it’s known as *Padakalpataru*. So, he writes—and we finish today, because only by Prabhupāda’s grace can we hear these things and imbibe them in our hearts and pray to become pure Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs:""