"*00522*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees! Welcome back once again. We are continuing with our series on Lord Caitanya’s journey from Jagannātha Purī to our beloved Vṛndāvana. Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya... So, we are continuing with our series on Lord Caitanya’s journey from Purī to Vṛndāvana. This will be part four in the series, and we ended part three with Lord Caitanya and His beloved servant, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, arriving in the village of Gāṅgoli, which I mentioned before was present-day Aligarh, where they met a Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇa named Vijayanti Mālādās. He shared with them a wonderful pastime of Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd boyfriends whistling to attract His attention. So, after that, Mahāprabhu, Lord Caitanya, took rest that evening in a small grove, and after waking up the next morning, He spent the day walking the final kilometers of a long journey to His beloved Vṛndāvana.

We can hardly imagine how happy Mahāprabhu was when He approached Vṛndāvana, for His love for Vraja had increased every step of the way from Jagannātha Purī to Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī gives us a hint of Mahāprabhu’s state of mind in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 17, verse 226. He writes:

$$Satoguna \dots$$ 
Mahāprabhu’s mind was absorbed in ecstatic love at Jagannātha Purī, but when He passed along the road on the way to Vṛndāvana, that love increased a thousand times. Hare Kṛṣṇa! So our beloved poet, whom we often quote, recounts how as Mahāprabhu was walking along the dusty road to Vṛndāvana, He encountered a brāhmaṇa named Govardhanadāsa who was singing a beautiful bhajan describing the beauty of the Gopāla deity discovered by Mādhavendra Purī—nowadays known as Śrīnāthajī. Seeing Lord Caitanya and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya approaching, Govardhanadāsa stopped singing to explain the meaning of the bhajan that was very dear to his heart. He said, "Sirs, in Gopālajī’s beautiful posture, one of His hands is turned upward, signifying that He is calling to His devotees: 'Oh my dear devotees, please come to me.'" I thought that was really sweet. And many of you know this deity called Gopāla Śrīnāthajī; His eyes are tilted down, Govardhanadāsa said, directing His devotees to take shelter of His lotus feet. He said His other hand is resting on His waist and closed as a fist, as if saying, "I possess the most confidential rasa, unknown even to many great souls."

Now, when our Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya heard this brāhmaṇa, Govardhanadāsa, speak in this way, he said, "Sir, with all due respect, your Gopāla surely has that rasa, but as you mentioned, He rarely shares it with anyone. But just look here at the posture of my beloved Mahāprabhu: with one hand turned upward, He is taking that confidential love from the fist of your Gopāla, and with the other hand turned down towards the earth, He is freely distributing the most confidential rasa to everyone without conditions. This is my Mahāprabhu; He is distributing the highest love to the most fallen, conditioned souls of Kali-yuga." 

Wow! So continuing their walk, Mahāprabhu and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya—finally, at long last, we are on the fourth part of the series here—reached the banks of the Yamunā river. It is described that at that moment, the weather was very pleasant, and there was a slight rain. From there, they began walking in the direction of Mathurā, and news of their impending arrival circulated very quickly amongst the people of that area. Thus, upon reaching Mathurā, they were greeted by a large crowd of people paying their respects by folding their palms or falling down on the ground, offering daṇḍavats. Within minutes, seven prominent brāhmaṇa families came out of their homes to greet the Lord, and as the men bathed Mahāprabhu’s feet, the women sang welcoming songs in various dialects. Afterwards, an older brāhmaṇa came forward and invited Lord Caitanya to his home to take some mahā-prasāda of a very famous deity at the time, Keśavarāya—the Keśavarāya deity in Mathurā. 

So Mahāprabhu said, "My dear brāhmaṇa, you are apparently very highly respected here. I am very fortunate to meet you. Please take me to see the deity of Keśavarāya, who is our only shelter in this world." Leading the way, the brāhmaṇa started walking towards the Keśava Mandir. It was a splendid temple, actually destroyed by Aurangzeb; anyway, that is another past story. They started walking towards the Keśava Mandir, and as Mahāprabhu and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya walked, a huge crowd formed and followed behind them. As they approached the temple, Mahāprabhu, simply upon seeing the flag at the top of the temple, paid full daṇḍavats; He fell flat on the ground and began chanting sacred mantras. Then Mahāprabhu got up and went into this magnificent temple and took darśana of the deity of Keśava. As He did so, the head priest started describing the unique beauty of this deity—this deity is actually still present in Kanpur; it was safely moved to Kanpur during Aurangzeb’s atrocities. The priest started describing the beauty of this deity, saying how His hands were decorated with beautiful ornaments and He was holding a conch and a sudarśana-cakra, and there were demigods portrayed there worshipping Him with different articles. On His back portion, He had four different symbols: a svastika, a flag, a stick, and a flower. His feet were resting on a lotus flower which was being offered by Gajendra, the elephant; also, Lakṣmī and Garuḍa were joining their palms, and Indra was paying his daṇḍavats to this deity in the form of Keśava. The pūjārī was saying that His hair was tied near His shoulders and He was decorated with a very beautiful, shining gem. 

Now, as Mahāprabhu listened very carefully to this description with His eyes beholding the beauty of the deity, Mahāprabhu started chanting the name of Keśava: "Keśava, Keśava, Keśava," and then He started dancing in ecstasy. I was reading that Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya also started dancing, as did this elder brāhmaṇa who had led them there. At that time, the brāhmaṇa exhibited such deep and uncommon devotional symptoms that he aroused the Lord's curiosity. Mahāprabhu looked at him, thinking, "Whoa, he is exhibiting such devotional symptoms! I thought he was just a humble brāhmaṇa." So Mahāprabhu asked him, "My dear brāhmaṇa, from where have you gotten this transcendental opulence of ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa?" 

The brāhmaṇa, very humbly, replied, "My dear Lord, Mādhavendra Purī once visited this holy place of Mathurā. At that time, his holiness visited my house, he took bhikṣā there, and he accepted me as his disciple." Hearing this, Lord Caitanya immediately offered obeisances to this brāhmaṇa, who then fell at the Lord’s lotus feet. But Lord Caitanya could not tolerate the brāhmaṇa’s humility; He said, "Please do not bow down to Me. You are a disciple of Mādhavendra Purī, and therefore you are on the level of My spiritual master." Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, who was watching all this, explained to the brāhmaṇa that the Lord was a disciple of Mādhavendra Purī’s disciple, Īśvara Purī. The brāhmaṇa was very pleased to hear this and said to the Lord, "Lord, when I saw You dance in ecstatic love, I knew that You must have had some connection with Mādhavendra Purī—who, remember, introduced this understanding of mādhurya-rasa, this wonderful rasa in Vṛndāvana—otherwise, such a display of transcendental emotion would be impossible."

It all makes sense; it all ties in in a transcendental way. Afterwards, Mahāprabhu began walking through the narrow lanes of Mathurā to take a bath in the Yamunā River at Viśrāma-ghāṭa. Now, there are two different versions: one is that He first takes His bath at Viśrāma-ghāṭa and then goes to the Keśava temple, but we are following the version here where He first goes to the Keśava temple and then goes to Viśrāma-ghāṭa. Both versions are accepted by ācāryas. Viśrāma-ghāṭa is where Lord Varāha had taken rest after killing Hiraṇyākṣa, and Viśrāma-ghāṭa is also where Kṛṣṇa took rest after killing Kaṁsa. After Kṛṣṇa killed Kaṁsa, He actually dragged the demon’s body through Mathurā to Viśrāma-ghāṭa just to assure the inhabitants of Mathurā that this evil tyrant was dead. The ācāryas say that the moment Kṛṣṇa killed Kaṁsa, Nanda Mahārāja sent a messenger throughout Vṛndāvana with the good news: "The evil tyrant is dead!" Hearing this, the Vrajavāsīs rejoiced with saṅkīrtana, singing and dancing so intensely it could be heard many towns and villages away. I read something really interesting: it is described that Kaṁsa had dedicated himself to killing Kṛṣṇa, but once the demon had been punished for his sins, Kṛṣṇa, who had family ties to Kaṁsa as a nephew, arranged for Kaṁsa to have a funeral fit for a warrior and a king. Just see how merciful Kṛṣṇa is!

Now, overwhelmed by the bliss of coming back to His home in Vṛndāvana, Lord Caitanya plunged into the water at Viśrāma-ghāṭa to play in the Yamunā like a child, because that is what He did 5,000 years ago. One ācārya says that: "The residents of Vṛndāvana who gathered to see Lord Caitanya’s ecstatic bathing all agreed that a person so extraordinary could only be the son of Mother Yaśodā and none other." It is said that if one sees Viśrāma-ghāṭa at sunrise, when the Lord’s splendor is especially visible there, one attains liberation. And if that person offers sesame seeds and water to his ancestors, those fortunate souls rise immediately to Vaikuṇṭha. These are strong statements, but we should take them verbatim; to think the glories of the Lord, the glories of the holy name, the glories of anything connected to Kṛṣṇa consciousness are exaggerations is an offense. This is not exaggeration; this is all causeless mercy. 

Rūpa Gosvāmī says in his *Mathurā-māhātmya*, text 2.28: "The tīrtha named Viśrānti-tīrtha, or Viśrāma-ghāṭa, destroys all sins. It is the eternal resting place for those conditioned souls who are painfully traveling in the desert of material existence." Wow, let’s go there and bathe! Ācāryas have said that in visiting Viśrāma-ghāṭa at the beginning of His Vṛndāvana-parikramā, Lord Caitanya, and then later also Raghava Paṇḍita, taught by example that Vraja-maṇḍala-parikramā—meaning going on the full parikramā of Vṛndāvana—should start at the bathing ghāṭas along the Yamunā River. That is one instruction we can learn from this pastime at Viśrāma-ghāṭa. 

Now moving on: after the Lord’s bath, a brāhmaṇa named Kṛṣṇadāsa, from the Dehātī area—this is also described in detail in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—came to see the Lord. Upon seeing him, Mahāprabhu embraced him and said, "Please take me to all the keli-sthali." Keli means "playful," sthali means "pastimes." In other words, "Take me to the places of the playful, loving pastimes of the Divine Couple in Vṛndāvana." So Kṛṣṇadāsa said, "Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa is always moving here and there in different forests throughout Vṛndāvana, so we have so much to see. And one of those places will be Govardhana Hill." So hearing these and more details from Kṛṣṇadāsa, the Lord became overwhelmed with bliss and He asked Kṛṣṇadāsa to take Him on parikramā starting the next day. 

That evening, I was reading, Mahāprabhu took rest early, and the next morning He began His visit to Vṛndāvana in earnest by beginning to pass through some of the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana, with the goal to reach, first and foremost, the village of Ariṣṭagrāma, where there is Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. As Mahāprabhu began walking through the Vṛndāvana forest, the forest cows became attracted to Him, surrounded Him, and began licking Him. These are wild cows! Think of forest cows; they just saw Mahāprabhu and they just became enchanted. Of course, they are all liberated souls. They surrounded Him and began licking Him, and it is written that He actually caressed them, and therefore they were unable to leave His association—neither did they want to leave His association. As Mahāprabhu continued to walk, it was so beautiful: all the forest birds began to sing the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and all the peacocks gathered and started dancing for the pleasure of Mahāprabhu. 

Then the ācāryas said that as if offering a gift to a friend, the trees shook, bathing the Lord in flowers as well as presenting their fruits to Him. One ācārya writes that throughout this parikramā, Lord Caitanya displayed a flood of happiness that drenched all those who came in contact with Him. I’d like to be drenched in that flood of happiness by coming in contact with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu! Now, while walking, the Lord came across two parrots who were discussing... and Mahāprabhu was very eager to hear their conversation. So, as if on cue, the parrots flew down next to Him, and Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja describes the conversation in detail in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. First, the male parrot glorified Kṛṣṇa’s beauty and the effect it had on the gopīs. The pair said that Kṛṣṇa’s company was so alluring that even Lakṣmī Devī underwent penance to take part in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with the gopīs, because Kṛṣṇa is the one who attracts everyone in the universe—Madan-mohana. He is the one who attracts everyone in the universe if they become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Then the female parrot spoke of Rādhārāṇī’s beauty, her delightful singing, and her admirable intelligence, calling her *su-śīlā*—the most excellent personality of morals—and *citta-mohini*, "Rādhārāṇī is the attractor of the mind." So then the male parrot spoke up again; he said, "Oh yes, that’s what you say about Rādhā, but Kṛṣṇa, He holds the flute and is *Citta-haraṇī*, He steals the mind, and He is Madana-mohana, the attractor of Cupid." In this way, the two parrots were debating back and forth, describing Kṛṣṇa’s glories and then describing Rādhā’s glories. In this way, Caitanya Mahāprabhu relished, He just relished, the sweet glorification of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as He went through the forests of Vṛndāvana. So beautiful!

So we are going to leave Lord Caitanya there, in His first steps into the Vṛndāvana forest, surrounded by all these wonderful animals and trees that are just bestowing their fruits and flowers on Him. We will leave Him there for now, and in a few days we will continue with His journey through Vṛndāvana. Now He has come to Vṛndāvana, so we will spend some time traveling with Him through Vṛndāvana. I’d like to finish today with a verse from a famous book, a famous śāstra accepted by ācāryas, text 49. A beautiful way to finish: 

"I worship the golden-hued Śrī Caitanya, whose beautiful hair has been bound with a string of pearls. His moonlight face bears a gentle, sweet smile, and His body is anointed with candana, aguru, and beautiful cloth. He is decorated with the transcendental garland of ornaments of the same nature. Absorbed in dancing, He is ecstatic from tasting the sweetness of rasa. He is more brilliant than the god of love, Cupid, and is always being served by His loving devotees."

Thank you, thank you Prabhu so much. This is ecstatic, following the Lord and His transcendental pastimes. We’ll do a little bit more research and we’ll be back with you, as always, in a couple of days. Oh, glorious Kṛṣṇa!"