"*00433*.*
"# Lord of the Cows — Kārttika Parikramā 2024

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. As my dear Godbrother, Śacīnandana Swami, would say: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees." We are blessed. We are presently in the sub-forest of Bahulāvana. When we speak of Vṛndāvana, we can speak of the greater Vṛndāvana, called Brajamaṇḍala, which consists of the forest of Vṛndāvana; but it is very vast, and there are different sub-forests, sub-sub-forests, and sub-sub-sub-forests, all with different pastimes and moods. So, this is Bahulāvana. I think you can appreciate the special feature of Bahulāvana is that it has been preserved much like it was hundreds, maybe even thousands, of years ago. You could appreciate that when you first walked in—the beautiful kuñjas, different flowers, and the cows peacefully munching on the grass. *Vana* means forest. Unfortunately, most of the forests of Vṛndāvana have been cut down for agricultural use or now for building big condominiums and apartments. But by the mercy of the cowherd boys who live here and the managers of Vṛndāvana, it remains similar to what it was years and years ago.

What is interesting is that Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī describes in his book, *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, in chapter 5, verse 169, that the forest of Bahulāvana was actually manifest by the gopīs exclusively for the pleasure of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He writes: *gopa-nandana-vṛndāvana-ja*. "O forest made by the gopīs, you are the king amongst all other forests. The son of Mahārāja Nanda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, has loving, festive pastimes in your kuñjas; therefore, I offer my most respectful obeisances unto you." That is the praṇāma-mantra for this forest. We are used to praṇāma-mantras in relationship to our spiritual masters, but a praṇāma encapsulates the essence of a personality, a place, or a pastime. "O forest made by the gopīs, you are the king amongst all other forests. The son of Mahārāja Nanda, Kṛṣṇa, has loving, festive pastimes in your kuñjas; therefore, I offer my most respectful obeisances unto you." Yes, externally with our eyes we can appreciate how beautiful it is, but even deeper is the beauty of the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that take place in the moods of service of the devotees to the Divine Couple and to the cows that we hear through hearing—*sādhu* hears through his ears, not feels his eyes. 

So, the Vraja-gopīs created this forest primarily just for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. And the śāstras go on to explain that they cultivated the whole area and made a wonderful forest filled especially with *pālī* trees. Why *pālī* trees? Because *pālī* trees only grow up a little like this, and then they start growing down; they go like this to create a little place for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's confidential pastimes, like a little natural apartment. These kuñjas—these little places of pastimes—have these *pālī* trees for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to take rest in after wandering around the forest to have their talks together. Śacīnandana Swami gave us that understanding, that vision, and that song we just sang. *Vihārī* means enjoyer; so, Rādhā and Mādhava, they enjoy in these kuñjas. As part of their service to the Divine Couple, the gopīs arrange for little flowering creepers to climb up and down these natural apartments. As I was reading, they make a little carpet inside the kuñja, in the *pālī* tree, made of *mālatī* flowers, *mallikā* flowers, and lotus petals—specifically those three flowers. That is the carpet.

So, that is Vṛndāvana. This is Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana is always Vṛndāvana, but this is how we like to see it. When we read Śrīla Prabhupāda's books, when we read the books of the Gosvāmīs, we hear about kadamba trees, neem trees, Arjuna trees, *mālatī* flowers, pārijāta flowers, *mallikā* flowers—no skyscraper buildings, concrete highways, buses, and trains. No, that is not Vraja. This is a little reflection of Goloka Vṛndāvana. Goloka comes to this world; it is called Gokula. To those who have spiritual vision, there is no difference, but by coming here we can see a little bit of what Goloka is like, and it makes us want to go home. I want to live there, not in London, New York, or Sydney. So we will wander around a little bit later. There is also a nice, small temple in this forest according to Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī with beautiful Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa deities named Rādhā-Bahulā-bihārī, and you can hear the peacocks. You hear peacocks and... *Bajar*, no. To go outside—my Godbrother, Bhakti-vibhava Gosvāmī, when he hears the peacocks, because we have been living in Ramaṇa-reti, Vṛndāvana, where we have our homes now since the 70s, we have been living in that area and the peacocks would, you know, like all day and all night, "Oh, please move a little bit, but don't go too far away—all the way to Bahulāvana!"

Hare Kṛṣṇa. So, another, of course, very significant feature of Bahulāvana is the presence of so many wonderful Surabhi cows. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would leave every morning to the pasturing grounds with their cows, and they would go to different places. The cows have their favorite places; they like Govardhana especially because the grass is very green and very soft—it doesn't cut their tongues. But I was reading that when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would bring the cows here, the cows would kick their hind legs—you know how they do, they jump like that—and their tails would all be erect because they were happy. They like the grass here in Bahulāvana. And Kṛṣṇa wants the very best for his cows. Actually, Kṛṣṇa wants the very best for all his devotees, just like devotees want the very best for Kṛṣṇa. There is a competition of love between the Lord and his devotees, and it is ever-fresh and it is always increasing. So, therefore, Kṛṣṇa is famous as Govinda. *Go* can mean in Sanskrit "cows," and *vinda*—*vinda* means... Govinda means *vinda* means protector, or sometimes it can mean pleasure. So, Govinda means "protector of the cows" or "he who gives pleasure to the cows."

Now, I found a relevant verse in this regard in the *Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad*. Actually, it is in the first chapter, it is text number eight. It means Govinda means "Lord of the cows of Braja" or "Lord of the Earth." In fact, the verse says he is the Lord of everything described in the Vedas. *Go-govinda* means the Lord of the cows of Braja, Lord of the Earth, or he is just Lord of everything described in the Vedas. Now, another reference to how dear the cows are to Kṛṣṇa, to Govinda, is found in the *Viṣṇu Purāṇa* (1.19.65). It is a verse we all know, but I thought some of you would be interested to know where it came from: *Viṣṇu Purāṇa* (1.19.65). "My Lord, you are the well-wisher of the cows and the brāhmaṇas, and you are the well-wisher of the entire human society and the world." Doing parikramā around me—he is a dhāma-vāsī, he needs to know where to go. "Oh, so that way you go, Hare Kṛṣṇa." He heard some of the class. Now, not far from here—because it is just forest after forest after forest in Vṛndāvana—not far from this forest, next door, is Pāvana-sarovara.

Pāvana-sarovara is another forest, and within that forest, there is a particular kuñja called Pāvana. And I was reading, it is so interesting: it is where Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma once hid from their friends only to be discovered by their cows. I will elaborate. It all started one time when the cowherd boys were totally absorbed in playing games. They take the cows out, and the cows are happy just to eat all day—that is what cows do, they eat. So the boys, we know, keep their eye on the cows, but they would play different games all day long. So, as everyone was absorbed in these different games, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma decided—they talked together—"Let's play a trick on our friends." So, without being noticed, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, they quietly slipped away and they hid themselves in a very dense forest with the idea that their friends couldn't find them. Suddenly, the boys, they noticed, "Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, where are they? They are not here. Where are they?" So one boy said, "Well, probably, you know, there are some stray cows, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma went to get the cows, maybe." So, they were very concerned, of course; they were feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, he is away. So, what the boys did is they got all the cows together and they counted them—one, two, three—and they figured out all the cows are here.

So, some of the boys, they went into shock; they couldn't move, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were gone. Other boys realized that they were separated from Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; they fainted. And a big group of boys, they called out, "Oh Kṛṣṇa! Oh Kṛṣṇa! Oh Balarāma! Oh Kṛṣṇa! Maybe they will hear us!" And they began frantically searching in the forest. And you know, sometimes a child may get separated from the parents, and the parents are like, "Oh, my child!" They began looking and asking different people, "Have you seen my child?" But the cowherd boys, they did more than that. With the understanding that everything in Kṛṣṇa, everything in Vṛndāvana, is fully conscious—the trees are desire trees, there are great sages who taken that form to serve the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa—the Braja-vāsīs, they approached the desire trees: "Please, give me some fruits and some vegetables and a brass pot to cook them in." And the tree, and the deer, and the birds are all fully enlightened sages, great devotees, are just in their own way serving the canopy of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. And it is said that Rūpa Gosvāmī says that all the different rasas serve the supreme rasa, Madhura-rasa.

So, they went to the trees: "Have you seen Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma?" The trees said, "No." They went to the deer: "Have you seen?" "No, I have not seen. Where is he? Is he missing?" And the deer started crying. And they asked the birds, and the birds were flying because birds can go, you know, like a drone, they can go here and there and in and out, and even the birds couldn't find them. This whole mood of desperation overcame Braja: "Where is Kṛṣṇa? And where is Balarāma?" So at that point, the boy panicked, thinking perhaps some demon had captured Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. So the boys are all huddled together like, "What do we do now? Even the birds can't find them, and maybe a demon has got them. What do we do now?" Of course, all their cows were nearby because they just counted them—the cows were sitting. So, when the cows overheard the boys discussing like this, all the cows rose to their feet, and, mooing for Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, they started searching for them. They weren't asking the different living entities, "Where is Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma?" They were like... [Mooing sound]. I practiced just for this class! "Oh, the cows are coming!"

So the cows frantically started searching for Kṛṣṇa, and the ācāryas put it very nicely: just as if they were searching for their own calves. But it was slow moving, because you know, cows, they are going to move like... so the ācāryas say that at that point some especially clever cows took the lead. That is the boys and the cows, right? The cows went, the older cows went right up front and took the lead, and seeing this, the boys happily began following behind the cows. "All right, let the cows find them." It is written that a small herd of cows, followed by the cheering cowherd boys, wound its way through Pāvana-sarovara, when suddenly all the cows began mooing very loudly. I was too shy, but I'll do it, try it anyway... that's pretty good. What's for lunch? Grass. The reason they were mooing so loudly is they had actually found Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in the dense forest. They came right up to them and began licking them. Hearing that, all the boys, they ran forward to find Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. And what were Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma doing? Jumping up and down in great happiness, having played a good trick on their friends. "Haha, you couldn't find us, but our cows found us!" The boys were a little embarrassed.

So, the ācāryas say the cows, *Paśu-pāvana*, had found Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma by following the two brothers' bodily aroma. The cows have very sensitive noses, so they smelled Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in the forest, and that is how they found them. That Kṛṣṇa has that beautiful scent to his body, and the cowherd boys had followed the cows' hoofprints. Pāvana, therefore, the place became known as where the cows found Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma by following the two brothers' transcendental scent. So, it is a pastime, but within each pastime there is very often very deep understandings, very deep instructions. The ācāryas conclude this pastime: Kṛṣṇa is present everywhere, even in our hearts, but we can only know him—or you could say find him—unless we follow in the footsteps of great souls who know how to find Kṛṣṇa, just like those cows who followed the scent of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma's bodies until finally reaching Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma's hideout. 

I recite that again: Kṛṣṇa is present everywhere, even in our hearts, but we cannot know him unless we follow in the footsteps of great souls who know how to find Kṛṣṇa, just like those cows who followed the scent of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma's bodies until finally reaching Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma's hideout. That is how the boys found the cows; they followed the cows. That is how the boys found Kṛṣṇa; they followed the cows. So, we have to follow in the footsteps of great devotees in order to achieve Kṛṣṇa. And when I read that, I remember that famous verse from *Mahābhārata*: "The real secret, the solid truth of religious principles, is hidden and concealed in the hearts of unadulterated, self-realized persons, saints, just as treasure is hidden in a mysterious cave. Consequently, all the śāstras confirm one should accept whatever progressive path that the Mahājanas advocate and follow in their footsteps." It was a very eloquent translation of that verse.

So, what Mahājanas are we following to find Kṛṣṇa? So, presently, there are over—well, it is said there are 1,000 cows here in the Bahulāvana forest. I hope we can meet some of them and pet them and embrace them and kiss them. Prabhupāda once said that the cows in the material world are cousins of the cows in the spiritual world. And some of you may remember, if you listen to our classes on *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, that we mentioned once that Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes that the cows in the spiritual world are like cintāmaṇi jewels that fulfill any desire. Their mooing is the most beautiful poetry. Those happy cows are like a pleasant summer; they always lift their ears when they hear Kṛṣṇa's flute. They wander the Earth in Gokula pastimes, they resemble the bubbles of the milk ocean as well as the chuckles of Lord Śiva, and they are the infant children of the moonlight. That is very elegant and very deep poetry for... Whoa! I said all that. Does it sound better in English or Russian? We try again, *Vṛndāvana*... This is for him, because he likes this: "The cows in the spiritual world are like cintāmaṇi jewels that fulfill any desire. Their mooing is the most beautiful poetry. Those happy cows are like pleasant summer; they always lift their ears when they hear Kṛṣṇa's flute. They wander the Earth in Gokula pastimes, they resemble the bubbles of the milk ocean as well as the chuckles of Lord Śiva, and they are the infant children of the moonlight." Wow!

So, our Kṛṣṇa—sometimes Prabhupāda, a few times I heard him say—our Kṛṣṇa was actually born into a family of cowherd men and cowherd women. And as we have mentioned numerous times in our lectures, Nanda Mahārāja had 900,000 cows; therefore, he was called Nanda Mahārāja. Like a king—a king is fabulously wealthy, but in Vedic culture wealth was not measured by money, but by land and cows. Now, all these cows were various sizes, various colors, they had different forms. I was reading some cows had the face up like a *mṛga*, some cows were striped, some were polka-dot—no—and they had horns in different shapes and different sizes. But the ācāryas stressed that despite the many differences, Kṛṣṇa loved them equally. However big and small we are, the color of our skin, what language, if we are devotees, Kṛṣṇa loves us equally. And this is the peace formula for the world. Now, Kṛṣṇa loves all the cows, the ones in the spiritual world and their cousins also in this world; therefore, the greatest sin is to kill the cows. One who kills a cow takes birth as many times as there are hairs on the body of that cow, and is killed in the same way. But we won't go in that direction now. Kṛṣṇa himself has a pet bull, Paṇḍa. He is described as very handsome, that's it, it says he is very handsome, and he has very large, gold-plated horns that are studded with rubies and diamonds and sapphires and pearls. But his hooves are only covered in blue sapphires, and his neck is always garlanded with flowers, because in the spiritual world the flowers never wilt; they stay fresh forever. 

As we know, Kṛṣṇa actually considers the cows and bulls of Vṛndāvana like his mothers and fathers. I was reading that after Kṛṣṇa gets up in the morning and he is bathed by Mother Yaśodā, and then Rādhārāṇī cooks at Varṣāṇā and brings the breakfast over and all the boys have a good time taking breakfast, then Kṛṣṇa goes to the *go-śālā* to greet the cows. As he enters the *go-śālā*, he says, "Oh mother, have you rested well? Oh father, are you happy?" This is Braja culture: "Mother, mother, have you rested well? Papa, are you happy?" And as he goes to the *go-śālā* getting ready to take all the cows to the forest, he calls each of them by their names—900,000 names! "Kṛṣṇa! Hey Gaṅgā! Hey Godāvarī! Hey Kāverī! Let's go!" And the cows, described, they joyfully moo back. What is a joyful moo? Moo... "Let's go to the pasturing grounds!" Then it is described, they smell Kṛṣṇa's fragrance and drink his beauty through their eyes. In a spiritual body, we hear that the senses are interchangeable, like Kṛṣṇa, you offer him some food on the altar, he can eat it through his eyes. So, we will also one day have spiritual bodies, not like Kṛṣṇa's—he is very great, we are very small—but we can understand how these cows can smell Kṛṣṇa's fragrance and drink his beauty through their eyes. And one ācārya writes that at that point Kṛṣṇa caresses each of the cows with his arms, showing the type of love only a son can have for his mother. And in reciprocation, the cows lick him with greater affection than they have for their own calves. 

So then it comes time to milk the cows, but there are so many cows, so Kṛṣṇa just takes a few cows, he places the milk bucket between his knees and he sits down and [mooing sound]... and then his friends, they attempt to milk the rest of the cows. But śāstra says actually no one needs to milk those cows, because as soon as they gaze upon Kṛṣṇa's face, milk automatically drips from their udders out of love. In the early days of the movement, I read one newspaper report; a reporter visited one of our farm communities and he wrote in there, he said, "The Hare Kṛṣṇa, on the Hare Kṛṣṇa farm, the cows give more milk than all the other farms." And the Hare Kṛṣṇa devotees say, "Because the cows are loved, therefore they give more milk." He said, "I think this must be true," he wrote that. So, love is in the details. So, in the process of milking, Kṛṣṇa first he worships Mother Earth, offers his respect to Bhūmi, then with, um, he moistens his fingers and he gets a few squirts of milk. And as Kṛṣṇa milks the cows, the milk goes into those buckets and it makes a sound like... [Squirting sound]. I am just quoting scripture like that, right? I think I moo better than I did... [Squirting sound]. And then, and then one ācārya says at that moment Kṛṣṇa sees his reflection in the face of the bucket and he says Kṛṣṇa's face resembles the moon rising from the milk ocean. It is a good tattoo, good tattoo! Kṛṣṇa's face resembles the moon rising from the milk ocean. You can get the picture, no, you do, you can do both. 

Now, whenever news spreads, right? In the spiritual world, good news spreads faster than bad news—of course, there is no bad news—but so everyone says, "What's Kṛṣṇa doing now? What's he doing now? What's he doing now?" Like that. So, when Rādhārāṇī, who is in Varṣāṇā, hears that Kṛṣṇa is milking the cows, it is described she goes to a watchtower, Pāvana-sarovara, and gazes at him with loving eyes. So one day, one of the cowherd boys, he saw Rādhārāṇī at Pāvana-sarovara like gazing from a watchtower at Kṛṣṇa milking cows. So that cowherd boy, he went to Kṛṣṇa and said that Rādhārāṇī was spying on him. The boy said, "Are you disturbed?" Kṛṣṇa said, "No," and he snuck away to meet Rādhārāṇī at Pāvana and hurried back to continue milking the cows. Now, in the morning after milking, Kṛṣṇa and his friends, they take the cows out to pasture, and anticipating that the Lord is going to leave for the day, all the residents, they follow Kṛṣṇa and the boys to the very edge of the town, but they don't go further. They stop because the mood of associating with Kṛṣṇa from that point on, it is just reserved for the cowherd boys. *Rasa-ābhāsa* means when the different moods collide or mix, it is not good. So Nanda, Yaśodā, the elder gopīs, they associate with Kṛṣṇa in Nanda-grāma, the boys in the fields, the girls in the rāsa-dance, so there is no mixture. These pastimes are so... everyone stops. Then they start crying because Kṛṣṇa is going to be gone until the evening. "I'll be back in the evening, you know, my dad goes to work, he comes back in the evening." But for those who are fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, fully in love with Kṛṣṇa, even a second's distance, separation, is like a millennium. It means like a thousand years.

Now, while herding the cows, it is described sometimes Kṛṣṇa runs in between them—he is running here and there and playing with them—and when the cows get tired or Kṛṣṇa gets tired, they lay down next to each other. The ācāryas say, to purify himself—"quote-unquote"—Kṛṣṇa enjoys smearing his divine limbs with the dust raised by the cows' hooves. So these are details, but I am just sharing them with you; this is the nectar, and it is important that we hear these things and we remember these things and we dwell on these pastimes and the details of this pastime. This is how our mind is meant to be engaged. It brings, naturally, it comes naturally, as you know, when you love someone you naturally, you don't have to force yourself to think about them, it is natural. That mood is meant to be there in Kṛṣṇa consciousness to the point you may just even dream these, these type of things, it happens. Some years ago, I met one young girl, she was seven or eight, in Vṛndāvana, devotee of an ISKCON couple, and I was talking to her and her friends. I said, "So, do you kids ever, you know, dream of Kṛṣṇa?" And one boy said, "Yeah, I had a dream the other night, and I got really scared because Aghāsura was there, and I woke up crying and, you know, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." One little girl, she said, "I only dream of Rādhārāṇī." 

"How old are you?" 
"Seven."
So I said, "So, like what do you, what do you dream? Like the demons were coming and..."
"The gopīs." 
That's for the boys. She said, "I dreamed that I am making flower garlands which I hand to my elder gopī who gives it to Lalitā, who gives it to Rādhā."
I said, "You dream that many times?"
"All right."
So I said, "Wow, I'd like to serve Rādhā like that."
She said, "You can't."
I said, "Why?"
"Because you're male."
Okay, kid! Hare Kṛṣṇa. Like, who is your mom and dad? But you see, the children are raised in that atmosphere, so you know, it is contagious. So all this cow information is important if only because Rūpa Gosvāmī advises us to remember Kṛṣṇa's transcendental cows in order to invoke their blessing and their protection. The cows can also protect us. He writes as follows: "The hooves of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's Surabhi cows are decorated with sapphires, their horns are plated with gold and set with jewels, and their white cheeks have crippled the pride of the snowcapped mountain peaks. I pray these Surabhi cows may protect us all." 

Now, for those of you who one day may be cowherd boys, I will tell another little pastime here. There is a forest in Vṛndāvana called Candana-vana, and it is full of sweet-smelling sandalwood trees and it has a beautiful lake and open pastures with sweet grasses just suitable for grazing cows. That lake is called Lālana-kuṇḍa. So one day, Kṛṣṇa and his friends, they took the cows to that forest and feeling the heat of the sun, the cows began to playfully roll—it is called *loḍhana*—in the cool sand of that forest. You know the cows are rolling; sometimes animals, you see in India, it's hot, the dogs will sit in some sand or land. So the cows, they were rolling in this cool sand, the boys were watching them. The boys said, "That looks like fun!" So the boys jumped in and they started rolling in the cool sands along with the cows. Isn't that cool? *Roll*, *loḍhana* is—they say *lola* in Sanskrit, they are *lola*-ing, they are rolling in the cool. Why, while the boys were rolling, they were mooing like the cows and the cows were mooing back, and they understood each other. 

So the ācāryas say from this we can understand that the bond between the cows of Vṛndāvana and the cowherd boys is simply one of love. The ācāryas say the cows are the Braja's very means of subsistence and the cowherd people treat them as family members. And here is a good one for *cetana*: all the cowherd boys show their cows the same affectionate respect as they show their mother. So on that particular day, the cowherd boys were rolling, *lola*, in the sand with their cows. They looked especially dusty when they returned home in the evening. So when their parents asked, "Why do you look such a mess?" the boys just laughed saying, "We rolled, *lola*, in the sand with the cows at Lālana-kuṇḍa, Mama!"

Now, another time, as the cows again were grazing in the pasture, the boys were busy with, you know, the games like leapfrog, hide-and-seek, throwing *bael* fruits like balls like that, right? So previously, we heard that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma left. In this particular occasion, the cows wandered off in search of fresh grass, and suddenly, Kṛṣṇa was like, "Where are the cows?" A reverse pastime. So unfortunately, those cows had wandered into a deep, swampy forest full of all types of weeds and bushes; they couldn't find their way out. So the boys, they were playing and like, "Oh, where is our cows?" And they immediately concluded that Kṛṣṇa's demons were responsible for the disappearance of the cows—it is like a reverse pastime. So now the boys are searching for the cows all over the forest; they came, they came across their hoofprints going here and there and everywhere; they still couldn't find them. So Kṛṣṇa walked ahead and he climbed up a cliff, and from the cliff he could see the cows. So it is described, he took—he wears a yellow, yellow clothes and yellow sash—he started waving his yellow sash like this, calling out to the, to the cows, "Here I am! Don't worry, everything is okay!" And from that, the cows started happily mooing. First he heard unhappy mooing; when he did like this, he heard happy mooing. 

So to reassure them, he called out the name of each and every cow. Like someone calls your name, it is, you know, "Hey, you!" They say, "Hey, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa!" It means more to you. So Kṛṣṇa called out to each individual cow; his voice was saturated with affection and the cows replied by calling out the Lord's name with love. That is what it says: "They called out the name of the Lord with love." That is a tough one, maybe some speculation there. So, Kṛṣṇa indicated to the cowherd boys where the cows were in this swampy area; they went to rescue them. But the plot thickens! Prabhupāda arranges all these things, "Oh no, what's going to happen?" Is Kṛṣṇa—no, it'll be okay—but to get there, a lot of turbulence in the heart, a lot of *bhaya* described. Just at that moment, a demoniac servant of Kaṃsa who had witnessed Pralambāsura's death took the opportunity to avenge his friend Pralambāsura's death. While the boys were reassuring their cows with loving embracing, this demoniac servant of Kaṃsa, he invoked a ring of fire around the boys and the cows. And it is described, within moments, the flames started shooting up into the sky, showering sparks everywhere, and with that, all the boys huddled together in fear, while the cowherd boys surrounded Kṛṣṇa to protect them. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Protector, but the mood of Braja is different. They... so all the boys, they held hands around: "Don't worry, Kṛṣṇa, you won't burn in this fire, we will protect you!" 

Then the flames were getting closer and they realized, "What, what can we do? These flames are so big, you know, we're these little guys, we're going to burn up." So, so sweet, the boys called out to Kṛṣṇa—like we should also, we're also in distress—"We're in this fire of material existence that's sometimes described burning." So, in this dangerous moment, with one voice, they called out to Kṛṣṇa. It's also mentioned they called out to Balarāma: "Oh Kṛṣṇa! Oh Kṛṣṇa, most powerful one! Oh Rāma, you whose prowess never fails, please save your devotees who are about to be burned by this forest fire and have come to take shelter of you!" Kṛṣṇa, *mahāvīra*, you can also say Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, *mahāvīra*—here he comes. You thought it was true! So, now in an angry mood, Kṛṣṇa thought, "Upon seeing this fire, my friends, who are dear to me than my own life, are frightened; therefore, I shall devour this fire that's swallowing..." He swallowed the fire—actually, he didn't swallow it, he just opened his mouth getting ready to swallow it—then thought, "The boys should not see me swallow the fire. If they do, the shock may be so great that some of them may die on the spot. What's more, my mother will chastise me for eating a little dirt when the boys tell her what they've seen. I've swallowed fire! Sugar! My mommy will be angry at me. Better no one sees what I'm about to do." 

So then Kṛṣṇa said, "All you boys, close your eyes! Don't be afraid, I have a special plan to protect you." But the boys hesitated. One boy said, "We shouldn't hesitate, friends, Kṛṣṇa is a master enchanting mantras, let's just close our eyes." And as soon as the boys closed their eyes, Kṛṣṇa opened his mouth and swallowed the forest fire. And what's more, it is described, he restored the forest to its—you know, nothing was burned—with all its trees and animals to its previous state. And he said, "Don't open your eyes yet." So he took the boys out of that dangerous part of the forest to a safe place. Then he said to the boys, "My friends, you can open your eyes now." And when the boys opened their eyes, they said, "Kṛṣṇa, what happened? Were we dreaming? Was there a forest fire? How did we get here?" And they are all scratching their heads like, "What's going on?" So at that point, the demigods started showing flowers and they started chanting prayers, and the boys, they say, "All these demigods, they looked to Kṛṣṇa, they thought, 'Wow, maybe Kṛṣṇa is also a demigod? Otherwise, how did this happen? Kṛṣṇa must be... all the demigods are here, maybe he's... maybe he's a demigod!'" Kṛṣṇa took their arms like this and... "And Kṛṣṇa is a demigod and we're his friends, we're actually on the same level as Kṛṣṇa, right? So if he's a demigod, we must be demigods too! Woo!" So the ācāryas say this realization filled them with boundless bliss. 

Now, what about the cows? This is the boy that Kṛṣṇa saved, the cows. So it is described, overwhelmed with love and affection for Kṛṣṇa, the cows came forward and they licked Kṛṣṇa's body as he caressed their heads and rubbed their ears with his soft hands. You know, cows like to be scratched behind the ears. The cows... so by this time it was time to go home. So Subala, he twirled his stick in the air and called out, "Time to go home, boys!" So all the boys cheered; they blew their buffalo horns and they moved on. And what were they singing? The names of their cows. "Hey Kṛṣṇā! Hey Devī! Hey Raṅgī! Hey... Let's go home!" Okay, the ācāryas say that herd of cows then moved like a rolling wave breaking onto the ocean shore; the white cows were its white caps, the other cows of many colors its body; their, um, mooing, it's roaring, and the excited cowherd boys, its aquatics. 

Now, we have been with the cows and the cowherd boys since early morning. I mean, we are talking like this. So, this is our consciousness: that get up in the morning and then they went out, the cows, they had all these pastimes. And now the final part of the class, it's almost over, they're going home. So the boys had such a wonderful time with Kṛṣṇa, *boom, boom, boom*; they're beating their drums, blowing on their instruments, clapping their hands and singing, "Hi! Hi! Hi! Hi!" I don't know what it means, but that's what they were singing. "Hi! Hi! Hi!" Oh, that's like, right? So, it is said these sounds, you know, the drums, the instruments, and the clapping of the hands and "Hi! Hi!"—these sounds mixed with the natural reverberations of the forest to provide a symphonic background for Kṛṣṇa's flute and created auspicious vibrations that drew the demigods back from heaven to Braja. The demigods said, "What's, what's happening? There's something down there in Vṛndāvana, forth, let's go see!" But the ācāryas say the demigods, despite the strength of the mystic powers, could only see swirling dust. They didn't... they're demigods, they still have some material desires, they're mixed devotion; so they hear all this noise, they come down, they just see the dust of Kṛṣṇa and cowherd boys and the cows are making on the way back to Braja. They only saw dust, they didn't have the eyes to see. 

So Śrīla Prabhupāda, he, he appears, he gives us a deeper understanding, particularly about this particular pastime where demigods are coming and all the Braja... they just see dust. Like, "What's the big... what's the noise about?" Listen to what he wrote: "Without devotion, how can ordinary conditioned souls, however powerful they may be, see Kṛṣṇa and his pastimes?" Then he writes something very nice: "But when such demigods sincerely pray to Kṛṣṇa and receive his mercy, they too can see the pastimes as they are." And then in the same way, fallen conditioned souls can one day see the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana by the strength of *nāma*. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Yes, in the same way, fallen conditioned souls can one day see the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana by the strength of *nāma*, in which Hare addresses dust-covered Kṛṣṇa, and Rāma addresses Balarāma by his side. All glories. 

So, in conclusion—because you want to go embrace the cows now—a prominent ācārya has left us with the following hope. He says that maintaining Kṛṣṇa's cows, especially worshiping and serving them in the month of Kārttika, brings to the worshipper the very rare result of Govinda's sidelong, loving sidelong glance. That is the final quote of the morning; summarizes everything. One should end a concert on a high note, here it is: "Maintaining Kṛṣṇa's cows, especially worshiping and serving them in the month of Kārttika, brings to the worshipper the very rare result of Govinda's loving sidelong glance." All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dhāma. Thank you very much, all glories to the... to the...""