As part of our book distribution tour, distributing our new book, *The Sacred Forest of Vṛndāvana*, in South India, we have the opportunity to visit various holy places.

At the present moment, we're just outside Hyderabad, where we have several ISKCON temples actually in the city. We've come to Yadagiri Gutta. In Treta Yuga, there was a great sage, his name was Yadṛṣi R̥ṣi, and he came to this particular place, this little mountain, Yadagiri Gutta, and in a cave, he performed penances and austerities, asking for the darśana of Lord Narasiṁha.

Lord Narasiṁha is very popular here in South India; there are many, many temples actually of Lord Narasiṁha. So, the Lord, because of his pure devotion, this sadhu, the Lord appeared to him, self-manifested form. So, from that time, these amazing deities – there's Jala Narasiṁha, there's Yoga Narasiṁha, there's Lakṣmī Narasiṁha, and two other self-manifested forms of the Lord.

So, Narasiṁha bhaktas and people in general have been coming here, you could say, from time immemorial, also to have the Lord's darśana. Actually, I came here just after taking sannyāsa in Mayapur in 1979. When I walked out of the sannyāsa ceremony, one of my dear Godbrothers, Mahābi, as I was asking for blessings to give to my sannyāsa guru, the first thing he put in my hand was a deity of Narasiṁha.

So I thought, "Okay, so my sannyāsa Narasiṁha day will be my iṣṭa day, because I'll be traveling and I'll need protection to go to the far corners of the world." So I thought to get in the proper mood, I would come to South India and visit many of the Narasiṁha temples here.

So I remember very clearly, I came here to Yadagirigutta, and at that time, you know, what was it, 40 some odd years ago?

It was basically just a cave. I mean, there were some structures here, but nothing like I'm seeing today. About six or seven years ago, the CM, we say in India, the Chief Minister of this region, he's a Narasiṁha bhakta.

So he decided to bring full glory to Lord Narasiṁha by building this beautiful architectural extravaganza in honor of Narasiṁha. It looks like a temple that was built thousands and thousands of years ago, a very massive complex, very well done, very well done, also with the modern amenities to make it easier for people to have darśana of the Lord.

So we came here, and when we came here, we were met by several of the priests, and they very quickly went and got the head priest, the mahanta, the main person in charge of this temple. And it turns out he's very favorable to ISKCON, very favorable to what Śrīla Prabhupāda has done in spreading Vedic culture and Kṛṣṇa consciousness around the world.

In fact, he shared with me that he went with some of the priests to America, to the United States, to visit some of their expanded temples there. There are many Narasiṁha Deva temples now in America. And while he was there, he visited our Seattle temple, Seattle, Washington, and he was nicely received.

The devotees took very good care of him and the other priests. He loved the darśana. He heard about what ISKCON is doing. He heard about Śrīla Prabhupāda, and developed a nice appreciation for our movement.

So when he came back, and ISKCON devotees would come here, he was accommodating them very nicely. In fact, he invited the devotees to come and distribute books here. So, as part of that book distribution, the devotees gave 500 sets of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* to the priests and the servants and the helpers and the cooks, etc., etc., here.

And this is South India, people are quite smart, these Brahmins are reading Śrīla Prabhupāda's books, and they're very much appreciating what Prabhupāda is saying and what he's doing.

So we have a very close relationship with this ancient Narasiṁha Deva temple, much to my great happiness. So when we came here, the main priest, he took us everywhere. In fact, there were thousands of people coming here today. He ordered the main temple doors closed, you know, outside the general path coming into the temple complex, he ordered it closed.

And in that private setting, he walked us around the temple. We were able to see all this beautiful architecture. We went into the inner sanctum, beautifully done. The Chief Minister did everything possible to make it a glorious sanctum and temple.

And we came right in front of the cave. There's the cave, we could see the cave, and we had darśana. They gave us like a 45-minute darśana, which is quite unusual, only for VIPs actually in India. Darśana of the Lord.

They gave me this garland, they gave me Tulasī leaves, this shawl, etc. It was amazing. We could reveal our hearts there to Lord Narasiṁha to protect us within from our material desires, which are an obstacle to pure devotion and service to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

And we prayed for the protection for the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

When Prabhupāda introduced the Narasiṁha prayers in Los Angeles in the early 1970s, this is when he introduced the worship of Narasiṁha.

He said that these prayers are specifically for protecting the spiritual master and the worldwide organization of ISKCON. He said that. So I prayed like that, in the mood of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

I prayed. But of course, Narasiṁha loves all of his devotees, and He reciprocates with their love by protecting them. There's a beautiful prayer that I found in the *Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya*, 14.29. Lord Narasiṁha says to Prahlāda Mahārāja: "My devotees, although I am eternally liberated, I am bound by My devotees' ropes of love.

In this way, although I am aśakti, unconquerable, I become śakti, conquered by them. And although I cannot be controlled by anyone, I become fully controlled by them by the love of My devotees." It was a very nice darśana. And we had some very... you know, they were talking how much they appreciated their visit to America.

And they asked me to come back and do a what we call a *Bhāgavata Sapta*, it means a seven-day recitation from the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. And I accepted the invitation. So they're going to build a big pandal, and I'll come and I'll speak from the Seventh Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*.

Actually, many of Prabhupāda's lectures came from the Seventh Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*.

We'll speak about the glories of the Lord for seven days. It will be wonderful. I'll love to do that. So then after that, they still hadn't opened the main doors; there were thousands of people waiting outside. This is, you know, love is reciprocal.

So then they asked us to do a kīrtana in the temple grounds. So we had a big Narasiṁha Deva kīrtana, and all the priests were, you know, waving like this. And then they fed us *prasādam*. They fed us *prasādam*.

My experience nowadays in India is that our International Society for Krishna Consciousness has made a deep impression on the population because the devotees in the numerous temples here in India, there are so many large temples all throughout India, they're doing fantastic preaching to the youth in the universities, on the streets, distributing books, harināma.

And of course, people are inclined towards spiritual life. This is Bhārata, it's stated in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, "The most pious people in the universe take birth here." So although India has an inclination to imbibe Western traditions, I think ISKCON is doing a lot, along with other sadhus and other spiritual movements, but we're having a powerful effect in this country, reminding people, *jīva-svarūpa*, Kṛṣṇa-dāsa, that we're all eternal servants of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

So it was reflected in our visit here today that we were so nicely received. When I made my trip throughout South India in 1979, there was a bit of a struggle. A white sannyāsī traveling barefoot with a danda. They were questioning, "Who are you?

What are you doing?" But now we're known.

In fact, the head priest, I'm a little embarrassed to say this, but the head priest told me that he regularly visits my Facebook page, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and he regularly watches the videos that Antarvṛndāvana so nicely produces.

He said that, "I know you, I know what you're doing. You're spreading the glories of Narasiṁha around the world. We're very grateful. Please come and do a *Bhāgavata Sapta*. Come anytime, stay in this complex." So that's a success. That's a success story.

And it's good to have success stories in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

Very happy to share this with you. And now, they've opened the doors, and the people are coming. And you know, people, this is their recreation, the mass of people in South India, their recreation is to come to a temple and take *prasādam* and have darśana.

So we feel very comfortable here, and we feel very confident we can go back to the West, protected by Lord Narasiṁha, and continue spreading this Krishna conscious movement all over the world, which these priests in this holy place very much appreciate.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Sometimes I say, "All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Deities." All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, who's revealing this ancient Vedic culture, this Krishna consciousness in particular, revealing it to the whole world.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

Hare Kṛṣṇa.