"*00404*.*
"So.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone. A very warm welcome back again.

*Vande ’haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca*
*śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvam*
*sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ*
*śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca*

So, we are continuing with our series on Lord Caitanya’s journey to Vṛndāvana, and this is part five. At the end of part four, we heard how Lord Caitanya was just beginning his visit to the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī actually reveals Mahāprabhu’s mood as he traversed through these forests. He writes in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*:

*vṛndāvane svabhāva-lokanai ātmanaṁ gaurāṅga-parita-bhramata*

He writes: "The Lord traveled all over Vṛndāvana, pleasing all living entities, moving and non-moving, by His glances, and taking personal pleasure in seeing everyone. In this way, Gaurāṅga traveled in Braja."

Nice insight. Fortunately, our śāstras give us the exact itinerary of Lord Caitanya’s visit to Vṛndāvana—in other words, a step-by-step list of the places He visited and, for the most part, what He did in those places. Perhaps in part because there were two definite witnesses, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya and the brāhmaṇa Kṛṣṇadāsa, whom we heard about in our last lecture; he was requested by Lord Caitanya to show Him the sacred forests of Vṛndāvana.

Now, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Madhya-līlā 17.93), he refers to this brāhmaṇa, actually Kṛṣṇadāsa; he writes, *prabhu saṅge cali...* He wanted to see the various forests of Vṛndāvana, so he took the brāhmaṇa with him. So, this brāhmaṇa is Kṛṣṇadāsa, a witness to the various places that the three of them went. So here is a list, here is the itinerary of the places that Lord Caitanya visited in the order in which He visited them: Mathurā, Madhuvana. That was a special visit; we’ll be speaking about that, and Vṛndāvana. That is the list, the itinerary.

So, now we will go through the list and discuss whatever information is available—some of it a lot, some of it less, but all relishable. And as we do so, we’ll learn to appreciate Vṛndāvana more and more in hearing about Lord Caitanya’s love. Kavirāja Gosvāmī gives us a hint again of Mahāprabhu’s love for Vṛndāvana in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Madhya-līlā 17.228 and 229). He writes: "When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was elsewhere, the very name of Vṛndāvana was sufficient to increase His ecstatic love. Now, when He was actually traveling in the Vṛndāvana forest, His mind was absorbed in great ecstatic love day and night; He ate and bathed simply out of habit."

So, one of the first places that Mahāprabhu visited, as we mentioned, was the forest of Madhuvana. Now, this forest of Madhuvana is glorified in Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s *Bhakti-ratnākara* (Chapter 10, verse 17), where he glorifies this forest: "O forest of Madhuvana, you appeared by the desire of the demon Madhu. You are able to bestow all good qualities on those who visit you. O Madhuvana, O Lord Mādhava, O beautiful one, I offer my respects to you." Now, this forest is famous for several reasons. One is because Kṛṣṇa, who is famous as Madhusūdana, the killer of the Madhu demon, killed the Madhu demon in the Madhuvana forest; it has His name. This demon lived there, so it was known as Madhuvana forest, and Kṛṣṇa killed this Madhu demon in that forest, so it is famous for that.

Secondly, Madhuvana is famous because it is where Dhruva Mahārāja meditated and performed austerities, and we discussed that, I think, last year in our series on *Bhāgavatam*. And actually, I was reading recently that the pastime of Dhruva Mahārāja’s austerities in Madhuvana forest was one of Lord Caitanya’s favorites. He just really liked to hear that pastime; He would hear it, I was reading, and recite it again and again. In fact, I read that Caitanya Mahāprabhu told this pastime of Dhruva Mahārāja in the Madhuvana forest to His aggrieved mother on the evening before He departed Navadvīpa to accept the renounced order of life. It was one of His favorite pastimes, actually, hearing about Dhruva in the forest.

Now, the third reason that the Madhuvana forest is so famous is because the moment after Lord Caitanya took initiation from Īśvara Purī, His spiritual master, He was in so much ecstasy that He wanted to leave the world behind and simply retire to the Madhuvana forest. That was one of His sentiments; immediately after getting the mantra from Īśvara Purī, He wanted to go to Vṛndāvana and retire in the Madhuvana forest. But actually, as He set out for Vṛndāvana to do that, to retire in the Madhuvana forest, it is written He heard a celestial voice say, "Dear Lord, for now, please return to your home in Navadvīpa. In the future, you shall certainly visit Mathurā and enjoy many pastimes there." And many years later, when Lord Caitanya did go to Vṛndāvana, as we are discussing, that was the first place He visited, Madhuvana. It all ties in in a transcendental way.

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Now, as we saw on the list, the next place He visited described was the forest of Tālavana. Tālavana, where He worshipped with great respect a deity of Lord Balarāma, the killer of the Dhenukāsura, and He bathed in a body of water called Vāyutīrtha. The Tālavana forest, of course, is where Dhenukāsura was killed by Balarāma, and there is a deity there—there was a deity when Mahāprabhu went there—so He worshipped that deity in the forest there with great respect, and then He bathed in this body of water called Vāyutīrtha. Nice details.

Now, from Tālavana, Lord Caitanya proceeded to Kumudavana. Kumudavana, which, if I remember correctly, is a very small forest with a circumference of only one kilometer. We discussed that forest two years ago. And as Lord Caitanya entered this very small but quaint Kumudavana, Kṛṣṇadāsa took Mahāprabhu to a kuṇḍa there; it is called Kumuda-kuṇḍa, where he related the pastime of a transcendental quarrel. It is called *kandala*—a transcendental quarrel—that took place in Kṛṣṇa’s time, 5,000 years ago, there. And he said to Mahāprabhu, "That is why this place is also named Kandalī-kuṇḍa, a place of quarrel." Actually, it is a really wonderful pastime, and I think I’ll just take a minute and share it with you because Mahāprabhu heard it from Kṛṣṇadāsa.

That pastime is as follows: That one time, Lord Balarāma asked the cowherd boys to pair off for stick fighting and arm wrestling. Tend to split into two teams, essentially. And while Madhumangala and Subhadra, one of the cowherd boys, sided with Kṛṣṇa and fought with Balarāma, Śrīdāmā and Subala sided with Balarāma and their side fought with Kṛṣṇa’s side. So, we have two teams here. However, a dispute soon broke out over the rules of the game, the fighting, and ultimately who the winner was. And so, the ācāryas describe there was this huge quarrel between Kṛṣṇa’s side with all His cowherd boys and Balarāma’s side with all His cowherd boys, and it took place, this quarrel took place in the fields and gardens around Kumuda-kuṇḍa.

So, as they argued and yelled, the noise filled the forest. Just made this huge ruckus, lots of noise, and attracted all sorts of creatures to see what the commotion was all about. And one ācārya comments here that it is interesting: unlike arguments amongst conditioned souls, which are based on frustrated desires and thus repulse the heart, the arguments amongst the cowherd boys arise from love, transcendental love, and attract everyone. The love underlying the gopīs’ quarrel inspired the same love within the forest creatures who were watching. And before long, the insects, the birds, and animals had grouped off into different sides to also argue. And the ācārya says, though unsure what they should be arguing about, these are kind of taking the same mood as Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, the cowherd boys arguing, but they weren't sure about what to argue about. So, this is transcendental; somehow or other, it increases the love for Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and all the cowherd boys together and all the animals. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So, next, Kṛṣṇadāsa took Mahāprabhu to the forest of Bahulāvana, another forest that we lectured extensively on before. And while Caitanya Mahāprabhu was there, He recalled how the cowherd boys brought their cows to that forest with Kṛṣṇa, because He was Kṛṣṇa, He is Kṛṣṇa, and rested while the animals drank from Bahulāvana’s clear lakes with its very sweet waters. And as Mahāprabhu was sitting there in that forest, He was thinking how, 5,000 years ago, the cows grazing in Bahulāvana were spontaneously attracted to Him. So, in the same way, at this particular moment, the cows in the Bahulāvana forest saw Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and they surrounded Him and they licked His body and gazed at Him with great affection.

So, similar pastime, 5,000 years ago and 500 years ago. And the ācāryas write that absorbed in ecstatic love, Mahāprabhu hugged these forest cows who were coming around Him, and as He did so, they pressed closer and closer and closer to Him, just as Nanda Mahārāja’s cows had pressed around Kṛṣṇa thousands of years ago. And as Lord Caitanya walked through the groves of Bahulāvana forest, other forest animals like deers and rabbits approached Him without fear, and birds like doves and cuckoos circled overhead. And as Lord Caitanya walked past the trees in this forest, they just spontaneously—boom—they burst into bloom, showering Him with all sorts of beautiful flower petals. And one ācārya writes that the entire forest echoed with cries of "Jaya! Jaya! Jaya!" The whole forest came alive because the Lord was passing through, the Lord of their hearts. And it is described that the fortunate people who were present, who witnessed this, who witnessed Mahāprabhu’s pastimes in Bahulāvana, concluded as follows: "This sannyāsī must be a fair-complexioned Śrī Kṛṣṇa." And so it was—this sannyāsī must be a fair-complexioned Śrī Kṛṣṇa, because I remember the pastime of Kṛṣṇa there 5,000 years ago, and seeing Mahāprabhu go through the forest and getting the same reaction from the animals, "Oh, this sannyāsī must be a fair-complexioned Śrī Kṛṣṇa."

So, we’ll move on. Next, Kṛṣṇadāsa took Mahāprabhu to the forest of Khaḍiravana, where Kṛṣṇadāsa narrated a wonderful pastime that took place there, again when Kṛṣṇa was present in Vṛndāvana. And that pastime is as follows: One day, Kṛṣṇadāsa said, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Her friends were passing through Khaḍiravana on their way to sell yogurt in a market near Nandagrāma, but in reality, the ācāryas say they were actually hoping to meet Kṛṣṇa somewhere along the way. That’s just an excuse, they’re going to sell their milk products, but really in their heart of hearts, they’re just hoping Kṛṣṇa will stop and even tax them—they don’t care, as long as they can get His association.

Now, that day, Kṛṣṇa was tending His cows in the Khaḍiravana forest with His friends, and when He got the news that Rādhārāṇī and Her milkmaids were passing by, He decided to play a joke on them. So, He called all the boys and He said, "Look, all you boys hide in the forest here while I stand on the path, and when the gopīs arrive, you can make a tumultuous sound like a monster approaching, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī will get the surprise of Her life." So, the boys loved the idea; they like to tease the girls. So, they all at once just disappeared into the surrounding woods. And just then, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Her girlfriends came walking down the path. By the arrangement of Yogamāyā Pourṇamāsī, it is described that Kṛṣṇa stood there nonchalantly in the middle of the walkway, you know, pretending not to see the gopīs. But just as the girls passed by Kṛṣṇa, as per the plan, the cowherd boys who were hiding suddenly made terrible wailing sounds like hobgoblins or ghosts. So, Śrī Rādhā was so startled by this noise that She threw Herself on Kṛṣṇa, burying Her lotus face in His chest and begging Him for protection. At the same time, the other gopīs just turned around and ran away, while Kṛṣṇa pretended to be surprised and tried to comfort Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with sweet words.

But suddenly, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, you know, She started, She became confused, like, "How can Kṛṣṇa act like this in the midst of danger? This is not like Him. If there is a demon, He’s a demon-killer; why isn't He killing the demon?" And She put two and two together, and She realized this was all a ruse. It was all a trick, a play of Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys. And instead of getting angry, Her loving mood emerged in this pastime, and She smiled and forgot all other things, it is described, besides Kṛṣṇa’s company. She forgot everything else besides Kṛṣṇa’s company. Now, when Caitanya Mahāprabhu heard from Kṛṣṇadāsa that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had enjoyed this loving pastime at Khaḍiravana, He exclaimed, "Excellent! Most excellent!" The biographer is right—Mahāprabhu was just in ecstasy; He said, "Excellent! Most excellent!"

So, after taking Mahāprabhu through a few other forests, Kṛṣṇadāsa brought Him to Kāmyavana. I think we had four lectures on Kāmyavana, wasn't it? And there, Lord Caitanya smiled as Kṛṣṇadāsa related a pastime of Durvāsā Muni that took place in Kāmyavana in Satya-yuga, but which concluded with the mercy of Lord Caitanya in Kali-yuga. So, how’s that? He related a pastime of Durvāsā Muni that took place in Kāmyavana in Satya-yuga, but the pastime concluded with the mercy of Lord Caitanya in Kali-yuga. So, what’s going on here? Well, listen carefully.

To begin with, in *Prema-vivarta* (Chapter 15) by Jagadānanda Paṇḍita, it’s mentioned that Kāmyavana was the favorite place of Durvāsā Muni, that illustrious Vaiṣṇava author. He writes: "In ages long past, the great Durvāsā Muni would come to Kāmyavana to reflect on the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa that He had performed in a previous day of Brahmā, as well as those He would perform in the present times." So, there is reference there to Durvāsā Muni going to Kāmyavana. In one of Durvāsā Muni’s visits to Kāmyavana in Satya-yuga, He was taking a nap one afternoon while some boys played nearby. And you know, boys will be boys; when they saw Durvāsā Muni’s matted locks, these unfortunate boys decided to play a joke on Him. Be careful. One boy took a knife and he cut off some of the locks of Durvāsā Muni’s hair. This was particularly offensive because yogīs, they keep *tejasa*, they keep their spiritual power in their hair—that’s why you see so many yogīs here in India, very long hair; they’ll tie it on top of their head, and when they let it out or let it down to bathe, it goes many meters. They keep their *tejasa* in their hair. So, when Durvāsā Muni woke up and saw those boys playing with a strand of His hair, He became very angry, and He cursed the boy who had cut His locks, saying, "You little rascal, since you like to crawl around and cause mischief"—because he crawled up and cut His hair—"since you like to crawl around and cause mischief, then you become a crocodile and crawl around on the ground for one kalpa," meaning Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali—a kalpa.

So, He cursed him he’d become a crocodile, crawl around for a kalpa. So, with that, the boy became terrified, and he also expressed remorse, and he begged for mercy. So, taking compassion on him, Durvāsā Muni said, "All right, I can’t retract the curse. Once a brāhmaṇa utters the curse, he can’t retract it, but he can make it a little easier." So, Durvāsā Muni said, "All right, this is Satya-yuga, but when the Lord of this forest, Kṛṣṇa, appears in Navadvīpa-māyāpura in Bengal in Kali-yuga as the son of Mother Śacī, He will deliver you, how? By *nāma-saṅkīrtana*: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." Now, that’s a long time! He’s saying this in Satya-yuga and saying, "You’ll get delivered in Kali-yuga by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu." The boy had to wait till Kali-yuga to get the blessings of Kṛṣṇa in His form as Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Just consider how fortunate we are to get the same mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu now in one lifetime; we don’t have to wait a kalpa. We’re just so fortunate by Prabhupāda’s mercy.

So, the boy immediately assumed the form of a crocodile, and he took up residence in a lake in Godrumadvīpa in Māyāpura, and he waited for yugas. And what did he do all that time? What do crocodiles do? They, well, they sometimes terrorize people and animals, so everyone was afraid of this crocodile through all that time. But then, when Mahāprabhu finally appeared as a little boy, Nimāi, in His youth, understanding the situation—because He is the *Bhagavān*, He is all-pervading and He is all-knowing—one day He took His friends down to Godrumadvīpa and purposely played near that lake where this big crocodile was. And seeing this, some older men who were nearby herding cows, they said to Nimāi, "Hey, young man, you go away, there’s a big crocodile in this lake; it’s a very dangerous place, you go home." But Nimāi, understanding how He had to fulfill the words of His devotee Durvāsā Muni, He just smiled and said, "Watch this." And going down to the shore of the lake, He cupped His hands to His mouth and He chanted very loudly: "Hare Kṛṣṇa! Hare Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare! Hare Rāma! Hare Rāma! Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare!"

Now, we all know when a pure devotee chants, something miraculous happens. All of us, members of ISKCON, we’ve been delivered by Prabhupāda’s chanting, by his instructions to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa; it’s miraculous. But when the Lord Himself chants, we can hardly imagine what happens. So then, right there before everyone’s eyes, this ferocious crocodile crawled out of the water and put his nose on the feet of little Nimāi, soon to be Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Within moments, that crocodile assumed his original spiritual form and ascended to Goloka Vṛndāvana. The crocodile came out, put his nose on the feet of Nimāi, and he was liberated from that horrible condition. Satya-yuga, he was a little boy who cut the locks of Durvāsā Muni, great offense, was cursed, but now, just in the form of the crocodile, putting his nose in the feet of Nimāi, he assumed his original spiritual form and before everyone present, ascended to Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual sky.

So, it seems incredible, but no less incredible is Lord Caitanya’s mercy on us through His most merciful emissary, Śrīla Prabhupāda. We can receive the same grace, the same mercy of going back home, back to Godhead, through Mahāprabhu’s emissary, Śrīla Prabhupāda, the Founder-Ācārya of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. So we owe everything to Śrīla Prabhupāda. And there’s one beautiful poem, which is very dear to my heart, which was composed by my dear godmother, Patitapāvanī, in the very beginning of the movement in 1969, I believe, which glorifies Śrīla Prabhupāda as our deliverer from our crocodile-like existence in this material world. She wrote:

"O paramahaṁsa of the nectar lake,
Did you your own to love forsake?
Leaving His sweet and fragrant lotus breast
To come to this world of birth and death.
And is this a helping hand you land,
While in this world of matter you transcend?
I am perplexed, please let it be known,
Have you come to take me home?
My feeble memory cannot recall,
Did I once in anger slip and fall?
If there is truth then tell me where,
From this I'll turn and go with you there.
Tell me please of life's true goal,
So I may cleanse dust from my soul,
And from this humbly let me start
To nourish the spark of life within my heart.
Your blessings I crave as now I see,
Your love can teach infinity,
And of the mercy that therein lies,
For this my twice-born soul does cry.
So tell me please of Vṛndāvana and the blue boy,
Yes, the gentle one known as Kṛṣṇa, Devakī-suta.
I long to run, Kṛṣṇa, yes that is the name,
And the reason why to your feet I came.
I pray I'll hear Kṛṣṇa wherever I go,
With sound of cymbals and Haribol.
Now tell me please of His jewel throne,
And how He dances with His gopīs alone,
Oh, and how His flute notes fill the air,
Tell me this in loving prayer.
I see a nectar that you swim,
While herding surabhi cows along with Him.
Please tell the beauty of His lotus flowers,
And His strength and fame and mystic powers,
And of devotees whom He holds near,
In Vaikuṇṭha, His abode where there is no fear.
Do tell, are His features like the moon?
Tell it sweetly, lest I swoon.
Now unto your lotus feet I will cling,
Lest I be whipped by my sin.
Even the dust of your grace’s feet,
As I bow down, taste nectar sweet.
O paramahaṁsa of our land,
I see in glory you do stand,
Ten thousand times the day I beg,
Let me thank you for..."

Very, very beautiful poem composed by Patitapāvanī, helping us understand where the mercy comes from, where we’re getting the mercy of our previous ācāryas. We’re getting the mercy of the Pañca-tattva and Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, all by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace. Thank you.

So, we haven't visited all of Vṛndāvana where Mahāprabhu visited, but we’ll continue in our next lecture. I think maybe two more lectures in this series of Lord Caitanya’s journey from Purī to Śrī Vṛndāvanadhāma. Thank you, everybody.

*Śrī Śrī Gaurā-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya!*

Kṛṣṇa. You.""