"*00155*.*
"### Lord Jagannātha’s Birthday! – Johannesburg, South Africa

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

So today, we are observing the bathing ceremony of Lord Jagannātha, along with His sister Subhadrā and brother Balarāma. As many of you know, traditionally this particular ritual takes place just before Their Ratha-yātrā, and there are ample instructions on how to perform this ceremony—particularly in the Purāṇas, which we will touch on a little bit later. But I think first and foremost, let us hear from Śrīla Prabhupāda on how to perform this ceremony at this particular time, place, and circumstance in history. We can find this in a letter that Prabhupāda wrote to my dear God-sister, Yamunā Devī, dated June 4th, 1970. Regarding Prabhupāda's instructions on how to perform Snāna-yātrā, he wrote:

> "Regarding your first question, the bathing ceremony of Lord Jagannātha is observed by His Lordship standing in a bathing tank."

In those days, we didn't know anything, so he is giving basic instructions. While each of the devotees in the assembly in turn offers prayers and obeisances, they pour water to bathe the Lord. It appears all devotees were participating in those days. Then that devotee offers obeisances, and the next devotee follows the same procedure. All the other devotees are holding kīrtana, just like we had kīrtana throughout the entire bathing ceremony. Prabhupāda continues:

> "After being bathed, Lord Jagannātha catches a fever. He's feverish now. And at that time, you may carry Him along with Balarāma-jī—Prabhupāda writes 'Balarāma-jī', it's an affectionate way of addressing the Lord or a devotee—and Subhadrā to My room. Prabhupāda's residing to My room for recovering during this time up to Ratha-yātrā. Any repairs may be made in Jagannātha Purī. During this recuperation period, the deities are completely repainted. But that is especially in Jagannātha Purī. Then Lord Jagannātha reappears on the day of Ratha-yātrā festival during His convalescence. Bhoga is offered as usual, but no visitors are allowed to see the Lord."

So, that we’ve done today.

Now, according to the Skanda Purāṇa, this Snāna-yātrā ceremony actually celebrates the birthday of Lord Jagannātha. Traditionally, this festival happens on Jyeṣṭha-pūrṇimā; it means the full moon day in the month of Jyeṣṭha, which generally falls either in May or June. We are observing it a little earlier this year, but that’s okay. Of course, we know that Lord Jagannātha is Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa’s birthday is Janmāṣṭamī—that’s the eighth day of the dark fortnight of the month of Bhādra. But Jyeṣṭha-pūrṇimā is Jagannātha’s birthday according to the Skanda Purāṇa. It’s understood that on this day, Kṛṣṇa appeared as Jagannātha with His form of big, dilated eyes. He doesn't close His eyes. He is so merciful because when He goes on His Ratha-yātrā procession, He is looking at everyone who is there to participate in the Ratha-yātrā—just like we go to the temple to see the Lord. But darśana also means the Lord is seeing us. Therefore, a sincere devotee may spend some extra time in front of the deities. Not just appreciating how the deity is dressed that day by the pujārīs, or offering our prayers from our heart to the Lord, but opening our hearts and letting the Lord look into our hearts. And when He looks, we get that glance of the Lord. There’s dharma-mārga. There’s purification. And one day, He can bless us with pure love. So, make it a point to stand as long as possible before you go to school or work, in front of the deities, so the Lord can see you.

Jagannātha is considered one of the most merciful deities because He doesn't blink; He doesn't miss a moment when you are in front of Him. And this is why He goes on the Ratha-yātrā ceremony, because in Kali-yuga, people are not so inclined to spiritual life as they were in previous ages, so they don't go to the temple. So, the Lord is so kind; He leaves the temple to see the general population. And in *Nectar of Devotion*—Prabhupāda’s summary study of *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* by Rūpa Gosvāmī—Rūpa Gosvāmī states that if even a low-born person, or a sinful person, stands up to receive Jagannātha as He travels by in the chariot, *Nectar of Devotion* says such a person is considered from that point on to be an eternal associate of Lord Viṣṇu. This is how kind Jagannātha is. Even if you are low-born, if you stand for the chariot, according to śāstra, that person is considered an eternal associate of the Lord. This is Jagannātha-svāmī.

So, on His birthday, He appears with big, dilated eyes—dilated means when you go in for an eye exam, they put some drops in your eyes and your eyes get bigger—with a round face and His hands and legs shrunken. This form of the Lord, Jagannātha, is known therefore as Mahā-bhāva-prakāśa, an ecstatic manifestation of Kṛṣṇa, as well as Subhadrā and Balarāma. There’s a whole pastime about that; we don't have time today.

This particular ceremony has been going on for many thousands of years or more. And actually, this ceremony and the activities that take place along with it have a very deep meaning and significance. We can be a newcomer and come and just enjoy the chanting and the dancing and some kathā and prasādam. But as we mature in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and we read books like *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* and *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, that knowledge is available. There is actually a very deep significance about this event, and we can take advantage and touch on it today.

Perhaps the best way to discuss it is to understand how Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu observed Snāna-yātrā. We often hear about how Lord Caitanya participated in the Ratha-yātrā and the special feelings that He was having, because Mahāprabhu appeared, as you know, for two reasons: to inaugurate the saṅkīrtana movement, the yuga-dharma of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare... but His internal reason, His not-so-secret reason, was that Kṛṣṇa wanted to try to understand the love that His greatest lover, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, has for Him, because He is always the object of that love. He couldn't deeply appreciate how much Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī loves Him. So, He took the mood of *rādhā-kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktir asmād*. Originally, God was one, but He expanded as two—hlādinī-śakti, Rādhārāṇī, His pleasure potency—but the two again became one in the personality of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the yuga-avatāra for this age.

He gave the simple process; each age has a process of becoming spiritually realized—understanding who we are, who is God, and what is our relationship with Him. Every age has a different process, just like there are different seasons: summer, autumn, winter, and spring. So, there are different ages: Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali. And just as we change our clothes according to the season, the process of becoming self-realized is different in every age. Because this age is very materialistic—and if you are reading the news, you can see it's getting more materialistic—a very simple process is given for the people of this age. But through that simple process of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, we can attain the same stage of realization that our forefathers attained in Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, and Dvāpara-yuga—the same exalted state of love of God just by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

It’s like a concession, and we should take advantage. Just like there's, you know, Christmas; everyone goes out and buys lots of products, but some people hold their money back because in January there's sales; you can get the same product for much cheaper, 50% off. So in this age, there's a concession: *kalau kala-yuge nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra*. The Lord has descended in the form of His name, and if you are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Prabhupāda said the Lord is dancing on the tip of your tongue. So we should take full advantage.

So Mahāprabhu appeared for that, and He also wanted to appear in the mood of Rādhārāṇī trying to understand Her love for Him. It's quite esoteric, but that’s actually Ratha-yātrā. There is Jagannātha on the chariot, and there is Lord Caitanya dancing in front of the chariot in the mood of Rādhārāṇī. He gets some taste like that. So we've heard a lot about Lord Caitanya’s dancing at Ratha-yātrā; there are chapters there in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. But there is also information on how Lord Caitanya observed this ceremony, which happens before Ratha-yātrā, a good amount of time before. This is when Jagannātha, you know, we have a bathing ceremony for Him, and Prabhupāda said He gets a fever, He gets the flu, and He retires to His quarters. During that time, if required, there are renovations; Jagannātha is painted again, sanded, and painted again, and new clothes are made. Everyone is waiting to see Him because He is hiding away for a couple of weeks because He is sick. No one can go and see Him, so everyone's mood of separation increases. So, that happens after this ceremony. But you could say this ceremony is the first chapter in this legacy of Ratha-yātrā.

So where do we hear about the Lord's participation in this part of the festival? It's not mentioned, or maybe briefly mentioned, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, but there is great detail in one śāstra called *Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahākāvya*. I was reading last night; it's chapter 14. And this book was written by a devotee named Caitanya Dāsa. And Śrīla Prabhupāda, to make this authorized, he quotes *Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahākāvya* several times in his writings. And it's a Sanskrit work describing Mahāprabhu’s life and participation by Caitanya Dāsa, although often it's said that Kavikarṇapūra was the author, but Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his writings says it's Caitanya Dāsa—anyway, it's authorized.

So, therein it's described that one year, or let us say "once upon a time"—it's a poetic way; Prabhupāda actually, I found three places where Prabhupāda starts off telling a pastime by quoting that common slogan "once upon a time." We use it for fairy tales, but this is not a fairy tale; this is absolute truth that Prabhupāda used. So, "once upon a time," which means 500 years ago, a group of devotees, they set out from Navadvīpa to go to Purī for two reasons: to participate in the Ratha-yātrā and to see Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And this party was organized by Śivānanda Sena. It was headed up by Advaita Ācārya. It included Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura along with his younger brother Śrīmān Paṇḍita, the great singer Mukunda, and Murāri Gupta, as well as Haridāsa Ṭhākura and Vāsu Deva Datta and many of their associates.

The Lord Caitanya—these personalities are so exalted that simply to hear their names, one becomes purified. If you hear the names Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīmān Paṇḍita, Mukunda Datta, Murāri Gupta, Haridāsa Ṭhākura, Vāsu Deva Datta, and Mādhava—the obstacles in the path of pure devotion, the impurities in the heart, material desires, they're washed away. We know that Kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa's presence is in His name, so He is the Supreme Pure. If we chant His name, we become purified. But so are the pure devotees of the Lord. They, very—just like Jesus said, "The Father and I are one." That doesn't mean Jesus is God; it means they are so, their love is so deep, they're like one person. Like sometimes we say *gṛhasthas*, the husband and wife are one; the lady is the better half. Like that in love. So to hear these names, you can say, "Advaita Ācārya, Śivānanda Sena, Mukunda, Murāri Gupta, Vāsu Datta, Haridāsa..." Now, when you chant, you'll get more *ruci* and more taste.

So, *Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahākāvya* chapter 14:39 poetically describes some of these devotees: *Amana adbhuta haridāsa-mahāmaṇi*. Advaita was the water; Śrīvāsa was a mountain of bhakti; Murāri Gupta was the nectar arising in that ocean; and Haridāsa Ṭhākura was the Kaustubha jewel. It's poetry. This is poetry. This pierces the heart. I’m saying, what is the use of a bowman’s arrow unless it pierces the heart of his enemy? So what is the use of poetry unless it pierces the heart and awakens the bhakti residing deep within our hearts? There are so many Vaiṣṇava poets. The prince amongst them all, of course, is Śarūpa Dāmodara. So śāstra actually describes that many devotees joined this pilgrimage as well—many other devotees. It said that just as the deities appeared in Tretā-yuga as monkeys to assist Lord Rāmacandra, and in Dvāpara-yuga as associates of Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā, similarly, when the Lord manifests His eternal abode of Jagannātha Purī, devatās come there as well to render service to Him. So this śāstra mentioned many devatās were there. I don't know how many—there's 33 million demigods—but they are also coming to Jagannātha Purī to see Lord Jagannātha, their Iṣṭa, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

So, in your mind's eye, just picture this amazing *parikramā* coming from Navadvīpa down to Jagannātha Purī, going south. So, when the devotees arrived, Mahāprabhu was there to greet them, and He embraced each and every devotee. It's described with His pillar-like arms. Mahāprabhu has—He's very tall; He was seven feet tall. His arms extended down to His knees. His lotus eyes extended all the way to His ears. He was very beautiful, and He had the countenance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, *taptakāñcana-gaura-aṅgī*. He had that beautiful golden—He's the golden avatāra. So He was waiting, and He embraced each devotee as they came in. And when I read that, I was thinking, I'd also like to be embraced by the Lord one day.

Hanumān was also—he was a dāsya-rasa when Lord Rāmacandra, after all was said and done and Rāvaṇa was killed and Laṅkā was conquered and Sītā came back—because Hanumān played such an essential role in that Rāmāyaṇa-līlā—Mahāprabhu, or Lord Rāmacandra, was so happy with him. So He said to Hanumān, "Hanumān, how can I reciprocate with you?" And because Hanumān is in the mood of dāsya, servant, he said, "Lord, just give me a hug." If the master gives the servant a hug, that's very intimate, isn't it? The master... and that's all the servant wants: "Just give me a hug." So that famous picture of Rāma hugging Hanumān—I like that. So Mahāprabhu is embracing each and every devotee. So I was thinking, when or when will that day be ours? The Lord will embrace us. I heard a lecture the other day; Prabhupāda said that when we get back to the spiritual world, our spiritual master is waiting for us. He's the first person to greet us. I heard it with my own ears. And Prabhupāda says then the Lord, or the spiritual master, takes you to the kuñja, to the grove where there's Kṛṣṇa, and he introduces you to Kṛṣṇa, puts your hand in Kṛṣṇa's hand, and leaves you alone for some time. Prabhupāda said sometimes, like Jesus said, "My cup runneth over with love." So sometimes, Prabhupāda, he would give these finer details of devotional service. So that's awaiting the sincere devotee. What can compare to that? What in this world can compare to an embrace from the Lord? The Lord takes your hand. Nothing.

But for that embrace, we have to be qualified. We want it, but we have to become qualified. That's *sādhana-bhakti* work now, samādhi later. So we have to work on ourselves. "Physician, heal thyself." We have to purify our hearts. We have to become qualified for that embrace. And the *Śāstra-dīpikā-ratna-bhāgavatam*—it’s a beautiful scripture—it illustrates it very nicely in one śloka. Therein stated: In relation to a deity, a holy place, a brāhmaṇa, a mantra, an astrologer, a physician, or a guru, one obtains reciprocation according to the degree and type of one’s faith. In relation to a deity or holy place, a brāhmaṇa, a mantra, an astrologer, a physician, or a guru, one gets reciprocation from them according to the degree of your faith.

So after all this embracing—I don't know how long it took, there was only 33 million demigods, but these things are mystical, they happen by the arrangement of the Lord—after all this embracing took place, Śivānanda Sena and Vāsu Deva Datta, they offered two jars of Ganges water to Lord Caitanya. They brought gifts. When you go to receive, or see, a superior, you should offer some gift. It doesn't matter; you may be poor, you can offer a fruit or a flower or a leaf to Kṛṣṇa; if it's offered with devotion, He accepts it. So these two devotees, Śivānanda Sena and Vāsu Deva Datta, they brought two big jars of Ganges water. And it's described in this scripture that just by seeing Gaṅgā-jala, Mahāprabhu began to sing and dance in ecstasy. How advanced is that? Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā, "Of mountains, I am the Himalayas; and of water, I am the sacred Ganges." And a purifier on the wind... we just came from R̥ṣīkeśa. It's the beginning of the Himalayan mountains, and R̥ṣīkeśa is in like a valley, so there's the Himalayan mountains and there's the Ganges and there's this wind that comes down every morning. So every morning I'd get up, and in my gumption, I'd stand at 5:00 in the morning. It's powerful. And Kṛṣṇa's on my left, Kṛṣṇa's on my right, and He's blowing in my face: "Kṛṣṇa, help. Kṛṣṇa."

So Śivānanda and Vāsu Deva Datta, they brought these two jars, and Mahāprabhu began to sing and dance in ecstasy—just singing, "Gaṅgā-jala." Then He instructed that that water should be divided into two portions, one for Himself, fine, and the other for the upcoming Snāna-yātrā of Jagannātha-svāmī. We bathed; perhaps the pujārīs made that water divine by chanting the appropriate mantras. But when Mahāprabhu was there, the Gaṅgā-jala was used.

So as the ceremony was going on, Mahāprabhu asked, "Where is Murāri Gupta?" He wasn't there. "Where is Murāri Gupta?" Everyone looked puzzled. "Yeah, he came with us. Where is he?" So Mahāprabhu sent the devotees: "You find him, you find him." As we love the Lord, the Lord also loves us, because love is reciprocal. We often talk about awakening our love for the Lord, but the Lord also loves us. In fact, He is unique in loving pastimes, because we can love our family members, some neighbors, a few associates, you know, but the Lord, He can love every created being and reciprocate with those persons or entities to their full satisfaction. This is Kṛṣṇa. He is the supreme lover; He can love everyone to their full satisfaction.

So Murāri Gupta was missing. He said, "Go find him." So they are running here and there around Jagannātha Purī. "Murāri! Murāri Gupta!" And eventually, they found him on the banks of the Narendra-sarovara. Narendra-sarovara is a very sacred lake in Jagannātha Purī. They found him lying on the ground, chanting, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare..." described as crying in ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa. It's described that when he reached Purī, he began wandering like a madman in search of Kṛṣṇa. That's the mood, actually, of Jagannātha Purī. Gaurāṅga-vinoda once described Purī as the pinnacle of all holy dhāmas because of this mood of separation—of course, which was perfectly demonstrated by Lord Caitanya in His pastimes in Gambhīra. That's a very deep subject matter, pining for the Lord: "Where is Kṛṣṇa?" So Murāri Gupta imbibed that mood. He got there; he got "infected," in a good way, by the atmosphere of the dhāma: "Where is Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa, we left Kṛṣṇa, but He—we forgot Him, but He never forgot us." So we start making progress on the path back home. "Kṛṣṇa, where are you? Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare..."

Prabhupāda would often translate the Mahāmantra as, "My dear Lord, my energy of the Lord, please engage me in Your devotional service." But on one occasion when Prabhupāda was in America, the same question was posed to him: "Swamiji, what does it mean, this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra?" So, again, "the cup runneth over with love," there was just some wonderful expression from Śrīla Prabhupāda, eternal resident of Vṛndāvana, and he bowed his head and he looked up and he said, "What does it mean, this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra? It means, 'My friend, my friend, my friend'—like that." Kṛṣṇa is our friend. A friend in need is a friend indeed. We've forgotten Kṛṣṇa, but He comes once in a day of Brahmā to get us. And time is calculated not by our puny time, by the calculation of the demigods. Every day Kṛṣṇa is coming, knocking on the door: "Jīva, jīva! Kṛṣṇa! Come back home."

So the devotees saw him in that situation. They said, "Murāri, Mahāprabhu wants to see you." So hearing these words, Murāri, he jumped up and went to see the Lord. And when he arrived, Mahāprabhu went into ecstasy seeing him again. This is love; it's reciprocal. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahākāvya* says in text: *kāma-sonā-sā-hāsa-rājita-candriā*. Upon seeing His devotee—this is very poetic—the moon of Gaurāṅga, smiling, tinged with beautiful red lips, bathed the faces of the directions in the effulgence of His limbs. It's deep. But it's good to hear these things because even if we don't know how the antibiotic medicines are working in our body, they're working. Like, I have an impacted tooth, and I went to the dentist yesterday. He said, "Mahārāja, all I can do now until you get to a, you know, a dentist somewhere in Europe when you're going, I'll give you antibiotics; it'll bring down the infection." I don't know how antibiotics are working, but I take them, and on the faith of the doctor, they purify me. So this is high subject matter, and we may or may not be qualified, but it's purifying. The moon of Gaurāṅga, smiling, tinged with beautiful red lips, bathed the faces of the directions in the effulgence of His limbs. He just was effulgent. So then, with blossoming lotus eyes, the Lord sprinkled Murāri with His tears.

One time, Prabhupāda came to our temple in Paris, and he took darśana to the deities—beautiful Rādhā-Pārthasārathi—Prabhupāda loved them so much. Came the next year and was on the vyāsāsana, and he was chanting, and then he stopped, and he started shaking. And I said to my temple president, Bhagavan, "Prabhupāda's having a stroke." He said, "No, Prabhupāda's experiencing some ecstatic symptoms." Generally, the pure devotees don't show ecstatic symptoms because they don't want the general populace to follow them for that reason. And they want the general populace to follow them for the divine knowledge they're giving, which takes us out of this material world back home to the spiritual world. But again, "my cup runneth over with love." And at that time, I saw Prabhupāda; his tears weren't just going down his cheeks—they were squirting from his eyes onto this top piece here. They were going like that, and they formed a wet spot. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu would sometimes, when He would cry, then the tears would jet out like that, and devotees would try to collect the tears, like especially during the Ratha-yātrā. It's there in śāstra. He would chant and the tears would come, and then the devotees would try to drink the tears. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So as He cried, everyone else cried along with Mahāprabhu, absorbed in His emotions. And then Mahāprabhu took His position at some little bit of a distance; He was sitting on a raised platform during the Snāna-yātrā, because that's why devotees had come to see the yātrā. So they came to see Mahāprabhu, but that was a time of the bathing the deities here. So everyone participated in that bathing ceremony, and *Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahākāvya* describes a little bit about the festival—and our pujārīs can take note for future—not much, but there’s something there. "Elegance is truth spoken concisely." So the mahākāvya describes: the bathing platform was decorated with, quote, "abundant flower garlands with an attractive archway." You like an arch over the podium there? A huge network of flowers along with small, tinkling, shining bells. We have flowers today, right? Did we have tinkling bells? Okay, next year. Love is in the details; have some tinkling bells. And the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahākāvya* says its beauty attracted the whole world. Just like when the curtain opened, right, and Mahārāja was leading kīrtana, there was this—oh, I heard, you know, how I heard—as you saw the deities, because Kṛṣṇa, by definition, He’s all-attractive.

So when the Snāna-yātrā began in earnest, there’s another śāstra, it’s called *Caitanya-sudhā*. *Caitanya-sudhā*, and it describes that some of the devotees broke out in the following kīrtana—it's sometimes referred to as the Snāna-yātrā song. There’s a song that accompanies this ceremony. Of course, it's enough just to sing, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare..." But there’s variations, just like Mahārāja and his team, they were singing variations. And that's this mood—you know, we're all transcending. No one becomes angry or complains or is depressed during kīrtana; kīrtana elevates us. As long as we're chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, we're safe. We're above the modes of material nature. Like Prabhupāda said one time, "If you've got time, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." So every moment we should be chanting.

So the *Caitanya-sudhā*—it's a bona fide scripture—it gives this: the devotees broke into a spontaneous kīrtana. It's called the Snāna-yātrā song: *kona nāce gaurāṅga-rāi bhakta-gaṇa-saha, snāna-maṇḍape jagannātha dekhe...* See Gaurāṅga dance in the company of His devotees, looking at Lord Jagannātha on the snāna-maṇḍapa. They're singing like that. Prabhupāda said one time there'll come a day when devotees will learn Bengali, so that when they read *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—which, by the way, was the favorite scripture of Bhaktivedanta—and Prabhupāda went to great length, even interrupting his translation of *Bhāgavatam* to give us—we should read regularly the verses and the purports, because Prabhupāda explains it and illuminates it for us. But just imagine if you—because there's always something lost in the translation, like we travel around the world, and you know, I'm in France, somebody translates into French, somebody translates into German or Russian; it's not exactly the same. So if we could learn Bengali... *ore, ore*... like that. "See Gaurāṅga dance in the company of His devotees looking at Lord Jagannātha in the snāna-maṇḍapa. *prabhu-bhāve nāche śacīnandana-deva*." As He dances, the son of Śacī remembers His previous life and sees Jagannātha as the son of Nanda in Vṛndāvana, where Paurnamāsī is joyfully giving Him the coronation bath. All deeper. Gaurāṅga turns to Svarūpa Dāmodara, laughs, and says, "Oh Lalitā, just look at your boyfriend." Meaning, in the spiritual world, Svarūpa Dāmodara's Lalitā. So, "You know, Lalitā, look at your boyfriend Kṛṣṇa." *bhāva-taraṅga-gaura-adhara-māthiyā rādhārāṇī-bhāve nācite-līlā*. Then overcome by waves of emotion and absorbed in Rādhārāṇī’s feelings of love, Prabhupāda dances wildly. This is what they're singing. This, you know, when you say something, it's one thing; when you sing it, it's different, isn't it? We can say, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare..." But if we sing, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare..."—singing this—why, this is the yuga-dharma! Not japa; japa is essential, but the real mood is what Gīta-Mahārāja has established this evening. That's the yuga-dharma. That type of kīrtana—loud chanting, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare"—and dancing in ecstasy.

One time Prabhupāda told a group of young disciples, "You Western boys and girls, you're so passionate, therefore I have to create so many engagements for you. But if you were qualified, you could just sit all day long and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, become perfected, and we could do—we could try." At the same time, we have the mission to spread the chanting of the Holy Names. *Śrī-nāma-prabhu*—we say it's a person—and He's pleased when we're chanting japa, and He's even more pleased when we're having kīrtana, congregational. And Śrī Nāma Prabhu is most pleased and gives His most mercy when we take His holy name to the people. That's *saṅkīrtana-yajña*, the *premā-sūtra*.

In this atmosphere of love—in this, there's no envy in the spiritual world; it's in this material world—but when we're chanting, there's no envy. Black, white, colored, this nationality, that nationality, man, women—it all disappears as one spiritual family. Kṛṣṇa is the father; Kṛṣṇa said He's the seed-giving father of all created beings. So we all have an original father, which means we're all brothers and sisters. In that mood of non-enviousness that's created by kīrtana, therefore it's the solution to all problems in this world; this is the peace formula. So in this atmosphere of love, some of the devotees sing, some devotees dance, and some fall to the ground in throes of ecstasy. That day will come. That day will come. Not artificially, but have faith that day will come.

Now, throughout the ceremony—this is getting quite deep here—Lord Jagannātha was looking at Mahāprabhu, and Jagannātha, by looking at Mahāprabhu, He was overcome by ecstasy. But as the bathing continued, the śāstra describes Jagannātha became anxious because of the bathing—you know, bathing, some, not just water, but you know, milk and yogurt and ghee and honey and sugar—He couldn't see Mahāprabhu anymore. When He's getting anxious—like the gopīs, they complain, "Brahmā, you rascal! You made our eyes blink, so we can't see Kṛṣṇa for a moment." And a moment means a lot to pure devotees: "Oh Govinda! Feeling Your separation, I’m considering a moment to be like twelve years or more. Tears were flowing from my eyes like torrents. Kṛṣṇa, I'm missing You." So even a blink. So Jagannātha is looking at Mahāprabhu, and then the substances are coming. So text 139 of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahākāvya* described why He was getting an anxiety: covered with the bathing water, Jagannātha seemed to be crying in separation from Gaurāṅga, thinking, "He will be hidden from My vision for a long time."

Anyway, so after the bathing ceremony was completed, Jagannātha, Subhadrā, and Balarāma, they were taken to a special room, as Prabhupāda has explained for us. Prabhupāda makes this all accessible to us. It's quite deep, but Prabhupāda makes it accessible. This is his miracle—that this message of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, which is ultimately culminating in Vraja-bhakti, the love of the residents of Vṛndāvana, it's available even to the common man. This is Prabhupāda's miracle, so we can understand a little bit. So Jagannātha—they were taken to a special room to recover from a cold; they got a cold, shaking, cold, for renovation. And it's described that as a result of being deprived of seeing Jagannātha—because His love is vice versa—Jagannātha can't see Mahāprabhu, now Mahāprabhu can't see Jagannātha, because Jagannātha is getting renovated. Mahāprabhu started feeling pains of separation, as described. He manifested the same sorrow that the gopīs felt in separation from Kṛṣṇa. In other words, as we’ll miss Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa will miss us. And separation makes the heart grow fonder. If you study the pastimes of Vṛndāvana, it's all about Kṛṣṇa going away to Mathurā, going away. All day long He's with the cowherd boys, herding the cows, and His mom and dad and His girlfriends miss Him, and then He comes back, everybody's happy. So it's like this *ad infinitum*. Not like Romeo and Juliet, the perfect love, but then death comes and takes everything away. Love in the spiritual world, it's *ānanda-vṛddhi*; it's increasing and increasing and increasing *ad infinitum*. How can we comprehend, understand with our tiny brains? But we can appreciate.

So as the days passed, Lord Caitanya, He was always crying in Gambhīra, incessantly. And His only relief came when He saw His devotees and His companions. That's the mood; feel a little bit better when His associates came. So finally He decided to clean the place known as Guṇḍicā—that pastime you can read in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—along with His devotees, and soon after, this magnificent Ratha-yātrā took place with Lord Caitanya dancing in ecstasy in the front: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

So we'll come close to the conclusion, because it's time for prasādam, and that's an integral part of Mahāprabhu's movement. I asked, I asked my dear God-brother, Jagannātha-svāmī—ladies about him—my dear God-brother, Śivarāma Svāmī, this great author, produced so many wonderful books about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We asked him—um, I didn't ask him personally, but a devotee asked him, "You've read the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* so many times; what stands out in your mind the most?" And there's so many pastimes, so many instructions, so many devotees; it's just pure nectar, Caitanya. So the devotee said, "Mahārāja, what do you remember?" He said, "I remember how many times Lord Caitanya took prasādam." There’s chanting, dancing, and some kathā, because we have to make sense of everything; there has to be the philosophy. Religion without philosophy is sentiment, and philosophy without religion is mental speculation. We have a strong foundation of *tattva* philosophy. So we must discuss these things, and after, you know, two hours of Mahārāja's kīrtana and half an hour, we're hungry. Mahāprasādam, go!

So um, we'll come close to—it's this—this piece is called the glories of observing Snāna-yātrā. Let's just conclude with—to put it all together. You summarize it like Prabhupāda’s *Kṛṣṇa* book is a summary of the 10th Canto, and it came out very early in the movement, and therein Prabhupāda said, "One day, this *Kṛṣṇa* book, which is a summary"—Prabhupāda speaks in simplistic terms, so kind to that we can approach these subject matters—he said, "One day, when my disciples reach the stage of feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, this book, *Kṛṣṇa* book, will give them solace." All glories to Prabhupāda. So this is a summary of what I've been speaking about, and it's chapter 31 of the *Puruṣottama-jagannātha-māhātmya*, which is part of—it's part of the *Vaiṣṇava-khaṇḍa*, which is part of a Purāṇa. We're speaking a lot from Purāṇas today. So this particular chapter was spoken by Jaimini Ṛṣi to the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya about the glories of just witnessing this ceremony today. It was so crowded, I couldn't get in, but I witnessed it from a little peephole in the window there. So, oh poor Mahārāja, no, just to see this ceremony, what to speak if have a kīrtana like you had, just to see this ceremony, what—what's been the result? How many of you witnessed this Snāna-yātrā today? Raise your hands. Okay, so this is spoken by Jaimini Ṛṣi to the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya about the glories of simply witnessing the bathing ceremony. It's said of Lord Jagannātha's birthday—that was described, Lord Jagannātha's birthday. You ready for this?

"Those who witness the Snāna-yātrā of Hari, all sinful reactions are vanquished. There is no other similar act that liberates one without exertion. He said, 'Just, I was just watching; something must have happened.' All other ritualistic acts like holy baths, charities, penances, oblations to the ancestors, japa, fire sacrifice, etc., may be multiplied millions of times, performed over many lives, yet they can never be compared to the devotional piety of witnessing the Snāna ceremony on the appearance day of Lord Jagannātha-deva in the month of Jyeṣṭha. Dear brāhmaṇas, a person who witnesses this Snāna-yātrā of Jagannātha with devotion, even once in any particular year, does not experience any grief when it comes to getting liberated from the material world. You'll be liberated, but painless. Okay."

I'd like to finish with one last, what's written by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and it's described: "Invitation to chant the holy names." And when I was doing research for this Snāna-yātrā, I was thinking, "Gosh, I wish I was there. Where was I? I don't even want to think; somewhere in some bandha, some species of life. How did I miss it?" It only happened in cosmic time, snap of the fingers. It was only a moment ago. Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in Navadvīpa, and these pastimes that were described today were taken. We just missed it. And then I came across this beautiful prayer by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. I'd like to finish today with this. He writes in full humility:

"Why did I, the most unfortunate, fallen soul, not take birth at the time when Śrī Gaurāṅgacandra inundated the entire world, including the highest mountains, with the flood of love of God? Therefore, I was unable to relish those waves of love of God. Why did I take birth at that time to serve the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya? Why did I not become the servant of Rūpa and Sanātana? Why did I not carry the water pot of Raghunātha? Why did I not wander with Rāmānanda Rāya around Cakra? Why did I not see the deliverance of Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, when Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, the leader of the sannyāsīs of Kāśī, attained spiritual bliss in the form of devotional service? Why was I not there to relish the devotion-filled nectar waves of the Lord's arguments with those Māyāvādī sannyāsīs? Even though such a coveted desire is rare, still if I would have taken birth as a mundane logician in the family of a brāhmaṇa at that time, then Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, the friend of all living entities, would have punished me with His sharp, arrow-like words and accepted an atheist like me as His servant. Then He would have entrusted me to Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura to be rectified by the chanting of the holy names. Alas! If I could have constantly seen with my spiritual eyes the Lord sitting in the midst of the Vaiṣṇavas and delivering all living entities who are burned by the fire of material existence through distributing the nectar of the holy name. How fortunate it would have been! How much ecstasy would the associates of the Lord have been in, when, after awakening all living entities from the lap of illusion, the Lord would have raised His hands and said, 'Take this remedy for material disease! Drink the mellows of ecstatic love! All of you, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and become immortal!' I could have seen it with my own eyes. Countless human beings, afraid of demon-like material enjoyment—wow, demon-like material enjoyment—would have begged in the presence of Mahāprabhu for His shelter. Where was I? Then the Lord would have embraced them out of love and happily awarded them love of Kṛṣṇa. Where was I? Thus, the material disease of the living entities would have been cured forever. I am a servant of Caitanya and am fallen in the material ocean. The Lord is my only guide and protector. According to His order, I am inviting all of you to chant the holy names of Kṛṣṇa. Oh, living entities, all my friends! Give up karmakāṇḍa, the path of fruitive activities; jñānakāṇḍa, the path of argument and speculation; and brahma-kāṇḍa, the path of worshiping the impersonal Brahman. Come and take the love of God distributed by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to your full satisfaction. Then your disappointment will be destroyed, your contaminated state of conditional life will be vanquished, and you will regain your original constitutional position. You will then attain peace, which is your constitutional characteristic, and you will relish unlimited ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa."

Śrī Gaurāṅga! Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you.""