"*00459*.*
"### Lord Balarāma’s Secret - Kāmyavana Part 6

Hi, Kṛṣṇa’s very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Vande ‘ham śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalam śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāmś ca. Śrī-rūpam sāgrajātam saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitam tam sa-jīvam. Sādvaitam sāvadhūtam parijana-sahitam kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devam. Śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca.* I bow down to the lotus feet of my spiritual master, who is a wish-fulfilling desire tree of divine love for Kṛṣṇa, the most munificent benefactor, and he who initiated me into the valuable jewel of the *mahā-mantra*. How can I sufficiently praise his glories? 

So, to prepare ourselves to welcome Vṛndāvana into our hearts today, I’d like to share with you a very beautiful description of Vṛndāvana from the Mathurā-khaṇḍa section of the *Skanda Purāṇa*. It’s stated there: "There is auspicious Vṛndāvana, which is always under the shelter of Vṛndā-devī, where Śrī Hari is always present, and which is served by the demigods like Brahmā and Śiva. Vṛndāvana is not easily accessible; it is filled with many large āśramas of munis as well as gardens full of Tulasī plants. Just as the ever-devoted Kamalā-devī (Lakṣmī) is Lord Viṣṇu’s most beloved, Vṛndāvana-dhāma is Lord Govinda’s most beloved. Lord Mādhava always takes Lord Balarāma, the cowherd boys, and the cows to play in Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Oh, how lovely is Vṛndāvana’s beauty! There one will find Girirāja Govardhana and many other holy places created by the Lord." Hare Kṛṣṇa, what a wonderful description!

In our last lecture, in our wanderings around Vṛndāvana, we discussed a number of cowherd boy pastimes that took place in the vicinity of Kāmyavana—beautiful Kāmyavana in Vraja. In *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, text number 22, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī glorifies Kāmyavana. He says: *gopīkā-ramaṇa-sāra-rādhā-mada-prada*. "Let me worship the forest of Kāmyavana, which is very dear to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and which contains the Kāma-sarovara lake where the Gopīs and Kṛṣṇa enjoy many transcendental pastimes."

But before moving on to another part of Vṛndāvana, which was my original intention, I’d like to relate a few more famous cowherd boy pastimes that happened in that same Kāmyavana vicinity. Actually, not to mention them would be a great disservice, and it would mean that we would not get a lot of blessings. I found a beautiful verse in *Padyāvalī*, text number 5, where Rūpa Gosvāmī prays: "May playful Gopāla’s flute music—which calls the far-away surabhi cows by name, which is the mystic mantra that charms the Gopīs’ hearts, and which delights and attracts the deer enjoying in Vṛndāvana—bless you all." Bless you all! We need blessings.

To begin with, I want to remind you of something that we mentioned the other day: what kept the cowherd boys busy all the time? You may remember the devotees say that was herding cows, playing games, and escaping from demons who came to kill Kṛṣṇa. Herding cows, playing games, and escaping from demons who come to kill Kṛṣṇa—that’s the life of a cowherd boy. Now, at the beginning of Chapter 12 of the 10th Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes some of the playful activities and games of the cowherd boys. We get more details here about Vraja. He mentions the cowherd boys would play in waterfalls, imitate the animals they’d seen in the forest, play on their flutes and their bugles. They’d shout ill names down the wells and pretend to get mad when the insults would come back as echoes. They’d play like monkeys, they’d climb trees, they’d wrestle, and of course, we read so many times how they play ball. 

Now, after relating all this, I was reading that Śukadeva Gosvāmī voiced his astonishment by saying the following verse about the cowherd boys: "In this way, all the cowherd boys used to play with Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of the Brahman effulgence for jñānīs desiring to merge into that effulgence, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead for devotees who have accepted eternal servitorship, and who for ordinary persons is but another ordinary child. The cowherd boys, having accumulated the results of pious activities for many lives, were able to associate in this way with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How can one explain their good fortune? How can one explain the good fortune?"

Now, I was doing some extra reading about the cowherd boys and I came across a passage from my dear godbrother, Śrutakīrti Prabhu, who was Prabhupāda’s servant for quite some time. He describes how, one day, he was massaging Śrīla Prabhupāda, and then Prabhupāda said during the massage, "I like the cowherd boys very much. Every day, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would go into the forest. Before they would go, their mothers would make lunches for them. Kṛṣṇa’s mother, Yaśodā, would make very nice tiffin, and in there would be purī, halavā, kacorī, and laḍḍu. And the other cowherd boys, their mothers were not so opulent, so their tiffins would have capātī, rice, and sabjī." Then Prabhupāda continued, "Then they would go and play all day, play all day. When they would stop for lunch, sometimes one of the cowherd boys would steal Kṛṣṇa’s lunch and begin throwing it around. They would play keep-away," Prabhupāda said to Śrutakīrti. "They would play keep-away with Kṛṣṇa. Finally, the cowherd boys would throw their lunches to Kṛṣṇa, and they would sit down with his lunch—that opulent lunch—and they would eat purī, halavā, kacorī, and laḍḍu. And Kṛṣṇa would sit with them and he would eat the rice, capātī, and sabjī." Then Śrutakīrti said, Śrīla Prabhupāda paused for a moment. He paused for a moment, and then he said softly, "I just want to go back to the spiritual world and eat kacorī and laḍḍu with Kṛṣṇa. I just want to go back to the spiritual world and eat kacorī and laḍḍu with Kṛṣṇa."

As regards the games the boys played, which we listed, a good number of these games again took place in the Kāmyavana forest. One such place, which many devotees know very well—I know the first time I went there, I went with Dīna Bandhu Prabhu, one of my parikramā gurus—is a hill called Indrasena Parvata. On that famous hill is a smooth, slippery depression—a slide, for all practical purposes—called Picchalī-śilā. You must go there; Picchalī-śilā. You can slide down, and there Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, and their friends would spend countless hours sliding down this stone and making what the ācāryas describe as "sounds of freewheeling joy." A little further up the hill is a mystical stone called the Bhajana-śilā. This stone, when tapped, makes a sound like a drum; it actually sounds like a drum. And the cowherd boys, five thousand years ago, would take great pleasure in playing it and dancing to the beats. 

Now, I think it’s important to mention that although all these games resemble those of ordinary children—they’re eager to enjoy themselves in playing these games—for the cowherd boys, these games are actually an act of selfless love meant to please Kṛṣṇa by playing with Kṛṣṇa in intimate friendship. Everything in Vṛndāvana is very deep. So, when the cowherd boys play with Kṛṣṇa, these are described by the ācāryas as acts of selfless love to please Kṛṣṇa in their intimate friendship with him. So, this is the nature of these activities, these games. The ācāryas describe it very nicely: "The gopas have no desire or even ability to enjoy playing without Kṛṣṇa. What gives them pleasure are not the acts of sliding and wrestling or throwing balls with sticks, but their success in bringing Kṛṣṇa happiness." Very nice description. And the games they play are forever youthful—forever playing games. That’s the cowherd boys. When I read that, it reminded me of a famous personality in America, Benjamin Franklin. He wrote one time, "We do not stop playing because we grow old; we grow old because we stop playing." 

Now, at the end and near the top of this famous hill, Indrasena Parvata, is a cave where the demon Vyomāsura—we all know of him—disguised as a cowherd boy, joined Kṛṣṇa’s playful pastimes with the intention of kidnapping and hiding each cowherd boy, actually one by one, in a cave. That exact place where that pastime took place is called Corī-kelā-sthāna. I’ll relate that pastime in a little detail. But first, an interesting note: this demon Vyomāsura was the last demon that Kṛṣṇa killed in Vṛndāvana before going to Mathurā on Akrūra’s chariot. These details are important. That’s a monumental moment in Vṛndāvana history, Kṛṣṇa’s departure. So much has been written about Kṛṣṇa’s departure from Vṛndāvana. You can imagine the Vrajavāsīs are so attached to him, and he’s leaving. 

As I was reading and studying, because I read that Vyomāsura was the last demon killed in Vṛndāvana and Kṛṣṇa left the next day, I thought I would read a little bit about Kṛṣṇa’s departure. Kṛṣṇa’s departure from Vṛndāvana is described by our ācāryas as more painful than the pain experienced by the demons when they are killed by Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa’s departure from Vṛndāvana is more painful than the pain experienced by the demons when they are killed by the Lord. You know, that’s how Kṛṣṇa’s departure is: painful for the devotees and painful for Kṛṣṇa as well. 

I found one episode: one time, a traveler passed through Vṛndāvana on his way to Dvārakā, and taking advantage of this, the Gopīs composed a letter to Kṛṣṇa, which the traveler delivered to Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā. Here is the letter, the Gopīs’ letter. We can understand how difficult it was when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana. They wrote to him, "O Hari, why is it that the soothing moonlight and the gentle breezes caressing the glittering shore of the Yamunā cannot cool the intolerable pain of separation scorching our hearts?" This is Vṛndāvana. "O Hari, why is it that the soothing moonlight and the gentle breezes caressing the glittering shore of the Yamunā cannot cool the intolerable pain of separation scorching our hearts?"

So that’s how the Gopīs were feeling, but how was Kṛṣṇa feeling? Love is a two-way street. When Kṛṣṇa heard these words, it is said that he began to sigh uncontrollably. Kṛṣṇa sighed, and the scriptures say that seeing his distraught condition, the Dvārakā queens’ feminine pride evaporated in the way that the morning mist dissipates with the sun’s appearance, because they could understand how much the Vrajavāsīs loved Kṛṣṇa. That last quote was from one of our favorites, *Padyāvalī*. 

Now, this Vyomāsura had a special mystic power where he could fly at very high speeds, and his plan was to go to Vṛndāvana, disguise himself as a cowherd boy, kidnap Kṛṣṇa’s boyfriends, and hide them in that cave we mentioned. He reasoned that by stealing the cowherd boys, Kṛṣṇa would be disheartened and therefore easier to kill. That was his whole plan. So, on the day it happened, Kṛṣṇa and his friends were grazing their cows along the slopes of this hill. Vyomāsura appeared amongst the boys in this disguise, and while the boys were absorbed in all those games, he secretly kidnapped each boy, one after another, and hid them away in the cave. When this was done, he blocked the entrance to the cave with a huge boulder. Kṛṣṇa soon figured out what was happening; the boys were disappearing one by one. And an interesting note: because he had already killed the demon Keśī earlier that day, he was very short-tempered that afternoon. So, at one point, as Vyomāsura was carrying away yet another cowherd boy, Kṛṣṇa just grabbed him by the neck. And when he grabbed him by the neck, Vyomāsura assumed a gigantic form—I was reading it even scared the demigods—but he was unable to free himself from the Lord. So, then Kṛṣṇa tightened his grip and he threw Vyomāsura on the ground so hard that the entire earth shook, so much that the cows that Kṛṣṇa was tending lost their footing, but the demon lost his life. 

Then Kṛṣṇa smashed the boulder that was blocking the cave’s entrance, and to give the cowherd boys assurance, he went up to each one of them and gave them a very warm embrace. These cowherd boy pastimes were really nectar. So Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains that Vyomāsura represents the propensity to speak lies and to steal the property of others, both of which we know are great obstacles to cultivating pure devotion and developing love for Kṛṣṇa. He says in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Eighth Canto, 20th Chapter, verse number 4: "There’s nothing more sinful than untruthfulness. Because of this, Mother Earth once said, 'I can bear any heavy thing except a person who is a liar.'" 

And in a *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* class on January 21, 1975, in Honolulu, Prabhupāda said, and I quote, "Nowadays, truthfulness is a dream. Only there is no truthfulness. Everyone, beginning from the president down to the ordinary man in the street, no one is truthful." And the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* confirms this, actually—the 12th Canto, 2nd Chapter, verse number 1: "Then, O King, religion, truthfulness, cleanliness, tolerance, mercy, duration of life, physical strength, and memory will all diminish day by day because of the powerful influence of the age of Kali." Now we have that verse, we can realize very early on in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness, some verses it will take us some years or maybe lifetimes to realize, but that verse—we can understand everything is diminishing in the age of Kali. And that is why, because truth—particularly we’re talking about truthfulness here—is diminishing, that is why to maintain some semblance of sanity in Kali-yuga, there has to be a brāhmaṇical order of men and women who speak the truth at all costs. *Śamo damas tapaḥ śaucam*. 

Another famous verse from the *Gītā*: "Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, knowledge, wisdom, and religiousness—these are the natural qualities by which the brāhmaṇas work." Of course, that’s difficult in Kali-yuga to find such brāhmaṇas because śāstra states in this age of Kali everyone’s a śūdra. However, our Śrīla Prabhupāda defied logic and reason and miraculously made brāhmaṇas out of people less than śūdras—mlecchas and yavanas. So that will go down in history one day as one of the most remarkable phenomena of the modern world. I hope I did that. As bell metal is turned to gold when mixed with mercury in an alchemical process, someone who is properly trained and initiated by a bona fide spiritual master becomes a brāhmaṇa immediately. So actually, Prabhupāda stated that one of his desires in coming to the West was to train students to become brāhmaṇas, to speak the truth. Now, it’s said that—because this is interesting—because Vyomāsura was the son of a brāhmaṇa (his father’s name actually was Maya), Kṛṣṇa thought it necessary to atone for the killing of the son of a brāhmaṇa. Kṛṣṇa thought like that: "I’ve killed the son of a brāhmaṇa, so I will set the example that I will atone for killing the son of a brāhmaṇa." So there, at Corī-kelā-sthāna, he performed the sacrifice. He performed the sacrifice because he is the brāhmaṇa boy.

Now, at that point, I was reading that the ācāryas they posed the question: "How did Vyomāsura attain the good fortune of being killed, liberated actually, directly by the Lord?" I mean, not all demons get that mercy, most don’t. The ācāryas, they posed this question—perfect questions, perfect answers as always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So how did Vyomāsura attain this good fortune? Well, "seeking, you shall find," and the answer is that in his previous life, he had been a king in Vārāṇasī by the name of Mahārāja Bhīmaratha. And eventually, Mahārāja Bhīmaratha left his kingdom, like we read that kings do, for the purpose of self-realization—very noble—and he retired to the Malaya hills to perform austerity for 100,000 years. Unfortunately, he became extremely proud of his devotional progress and the mystic powers that he attained. One day, the great sage Pulastya Ṛṣi and his disciples visited this former king’s āśrama in the mountains. And the king, thinking himself equal to this illustrious sage in spiritual advancement, didn’t show the sage any respect. So, Pulastya Muni said, addressing him as a king actually: "O King, since you do not know right from wrong and since your devotion is as fickle as the blowing wind, may you be born as a demon." I like that part—"and since your devotion is as fickle as the blowing wind, may you be now born as a demon." 

So, as we often hear, you know, when someone’s cursed like that, if they’re pious, they tell the person who’s cursing them... so the king, he immediately begged for forgiveness. So, Pulastya Muni assured him that, "Okay, you’re remorseful, so I assure you that even though you will be born as a demon, you will die at the auspicious hands of Śrī Kṛṣṇa." That’s the hard way out of this material world; the easiest way is chant, dance, and take shelter! Anyway, it’s said that upon his death, the soul of Vyomāsura—because we described how Kṛṣṇa killed him—entered into Kṛṣṇa’s body just as, quote, "a lightning flash merges into a dark cloud." So, in this way, Kṛṣṇa liberated Vyomāsura from material existence. 

Now, another question comes up. We may wonder how, after renouncing everything and engaging in austerities for such a long time, a devotee like Bhīmaratha would have strayed so far from the path of devotion as to ignore a great sage. How did that happen? So, the ācāryas say that even if one practices devotional service for a very long time, if he does so alone, it’s dangerous. The safest way, they say, and we know, is to always stay in the company of devotees. You’re safer like that—much safer. Lord Caitanya has taught us that principle, that no matter how advanced we are, the company of devotees—how shall I say it—is compulsory. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 22.83, *kṛṣṇa-bhakti-janma-mūla haya sadhu-sanga*. This is a really important verse. By associating with sādhus and gaining their mercy, one can get Kṛṣṇa-bhakti up to the stage of Kṛṣṇa-prema. Furthermore, a practitioner’s very life depends on the association of the sādhus. Without sādhu-saṅga, it is not possible to receive the seeds of bhakti. 

So, after killing Vyomāsura, Kṛṣṇa sat with Balarāma, it’s described, to share a meal at a very sacred place called Bhojana-thalī. We have to go there, Bhojana-thalī. In the confusion of being kidnapped, however, the gopas’ lunch packs were either lost or spoiled, and hungry from their ordeal, the cowherd boys, they sat empty-handed and down-hearted, it’s written. So, Kṛṣṇa, well aware that his uncle Akrūra was already approaching Nandagrāma to take him to Mathurā and that this meal would be his last meal with the cowherd boys, Kṛṣṇa decided to make it a memorable one, something they would never forget. The ācāryas said that he invoked his potency of maintenance; it’s called *poṣaṇa*. Kṛṣṇa invoked his potency of maintenance, *poṣaṇa*, and he manifested such a variety and quantity of food—especially milk products—that for a moment his friends were speechless. And then they served themselves huge portions of the foodstuffs, and what did they do? They talked about Kṛṣṇa’s latest heroic feat in killing Vyomāsura. 

So there’s Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, you know, eating, and there’s the cowherd boys eating, when suddenly Balarāma spilled his *kṣīra*—we could say sweet rice—and to the amazement of the cowherd boys, it flowed over a big stone and created a lake now known as Kṣīra-sāgara, like, *sāgar* means ocean, we can also take like lake, *kṣīra-sāgar*. This ocean, or this lake, of *kṣīra* or sweet rice... that stone, um, it’s famous as the Bhojana-thalī stone. The area is called—well, the holy place is called Bhojana-thalī, and the actual stone is called the Bhojana-thalī stone, and it still bears the mark of that spilled milk or *kṣīra* (sweet rice). There are different versions. That stone also has the impressions of Kṛṣṇa’s *thalī*, meaning his plate, surrounded by a number of impressions of several bowls. This is there from one of Kṛṣṇa’s previous visits, it’s described. So there for *thalī-thalī*. So you can see the impression of Kṛṣṇa’s plate and the different cups as well as this white streak from when Balarāma spilled his *kṣīra*. I’ve actually been there of course many times; the first time I went there was with Dīna Bandhu—he likes to go there, Dīna Bandhu Prabhu, like my parikramā guru—and we’ve seen on many occasions hungry pilgrims who visit this holy place of Bhojana-thalī, they go to that stone and they fill the impressions of Kṛṣṇa’s plate and the cups with varieties of sweets, and they sit down and they offer them to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. They have an ārati, and then they take the sweets off the plate, the stone, and they happily eat the remnants.

Yeah, so as the gopas were enjoying their feast, you know, joking and feeding one another, on the opposite side of the hill, the Gopīs were trying to attract Kṛṣṇa’s attention with a music festival in a clearing, you know, in a little forested area called Kalāvaṭa. The Gopīs were dancing and singing and, as described, with such artistic—*kalāvaṭa* (artistic) in Sanskrit is *kalāvat* (grace)—that’s how the forest got its name, Kalāvaṭa, that the sound of their voices and ankle bells while dancing and singing forcibly drew Kṛṣṇa away from his friends. He’s with the boys, they’re eating, but there’s the Gopīs, they had this music festival, and their voices and ankle bells just drew Kṛṣṇa away, somehow he escaped. 

And so Kṛṣṇa was very pleased to have the Gopīs’ company. However, as the sun started to set, it was time to return to Nandagrāma. So the ācāryas say that with a heavy heart, he was forced to leave the Gopīs, went back to his friends, he gathered them and all the cows together, and then Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys and the cows they set off for Nandagrāma before it got dark, on what the ācāryas say should have been a joyous occasion. You know, usually when they’re going back home that afternoon or evening, it’s a very joyous occasion; it should be, it should have been, you know, full of laughter, singing, mooing of cows, the sound of the flute. But the ācāryas say that although the laughter, the singing, and the mooing was there, the sound of the flute was missing because Kṛṣṇa’s heart was so heavy with sorrow at the prospect of leaving Vṛndāvana the next morning that he was unable to lift his flute to his lips, what to speak of playing any joyful tunes.

Now the cowherd boys, they assumed that Kṛṣṇa’s sadness was due to separation from his favorite gopī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, but Balarāma, he knew the real reason for Kṛṣṇa’s sadness, because tomorrow they were going to leave Vraja for Mathurā and on to Dvārakā. So it’s so nicely described that all the way back to Nandagrāma, understanding Kṛṣṇa’s sadness, Balarāma kept a comforting hand on his brother’s shoulder. This is like my favorite part today: Balarāma kept a comforting hand on his brother’s shoulder. 

So I have to finish today, but I’d like to finish with the following prayers. In that mood of, you know, Kṛṣṇa’s leaving Vṛndāvana, because that’s what we got to today—Kṛṣṇa is leaving Vraja—so that’s the final mood. We discuss many different moods; all those moods we worship from a distance, but we pray one day that they inundate our hearts. So the final mood is—here’s, you know, all these wonderful pastimes taken from Śāstra and being with the Gopīs and, you know, next day Kṛṣṇa has to leave. So I found a few corresponding prayers; this is the proper way to end today.

The first one is from Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s *Gopāla-campū*, Uttara section, part 3, verse number 20: "O Lord of our lives, today you are entertaining thoughts of accomplishing the death of Kaṃsa and accepting the monarchy of Mathurā. How will your return to Vraja ever be possible? We think it will be impossible. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa, do one last thing for us: in the various desire-fulfilling holy rivers and lakes around the city of Mathurā, please remember us and send us a gift of three palms of water." Now, I’m going to explain those three palms of water, but let’s let that verse enter very deeply in our hearts. You know, this is the Vrajavāsīs and particularly the Gopīs—they’re thinking, "How are we going to go on without you?" So Kṛṣṇa is about to leave Vraja, so they’re saying to him: "O Lord of our lives, today you are entertaining thoughts of accomplishing the death of Kaṃsa"—because Kṛṣṇa is going to go on to kill Kaṃsa—"and accepting the monarchy of Mathurā. How will your return to Vraja ever be possible? We think it will be impossible. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa, do one last thing for us: in the various desire-fulfilling holy rivers and lakes around the city of Mathurā, please remember us and send us a gift of three palms of water." 

Now, Jīva Gosvāmī says there’s a secret behind this verse, and that is—not so secret, but a subtle meaning here—gifts of three palms of water are sent only to the dead in the form of oblations. There’s a ceremony like that. So the Gopīs are indirectly saying that as soon as you, Kṛṣṇa, go away, we will die. "You did not fulfill our desires while we were alive, so at least fulfill one desire when we die: please remember us and send us a gift of three palms of water." Wow.

So the next verse is from *Padyāvalī*, *gokula-kṣaya-to yaśasva*. The Gopīs said: "The glorious splendor of Gokula, meaning Kṛṣṇa, has left today for Mathurā. The Gokula where our heart resides is now experiencing great perplexity." So the ācārya gives a subtle meaning here that the term "Gokula" has been used twice in this verse. The first *Gokula* means, of course, the village of Gokula, and the second *Gokula* means *go-kula*, the network of *go* (senses). So the Gopīs are saying that their *go-kula*, their network of senses where their heart resides as the center, is now experiencing great perplexity. 

One more verse. Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā, we know those times, and then he ended up in Dvārakā. We mentioned one time when we were speaking about Dvārakā that he spent most of his time actually in Dvārakā on this earth. And this is a verse uttered by Kṛṣṇa when he was in Dvārakā, because we can see how much the devotees are missing him, but how much is Kṛṣṇa missing the devotees? So I was reading that when Kṛṣṇa is speaking this verse, he’s crying, remembering Mother Yaśodā. So Kṛṣṇa says in Dvārakā: "Now who will take the half-chewed betel nuts from her own mouth and place them in mine? Now who will subdue me with sweet words when I depart from the path of righteousness? Now who will say, 'Come here, come here,' wave her arm, place me on her lap, and re-tie my peacock feather when it falls due to playing around in Vraja?" That’s *Padyāvalī*, verse number 338. The import is that in Dvārakā, nobody will dare to feed Kṛṣṇa the remnants of whatever betel nuts they’re chewing, no one will tell him when he’s acting, you know, like wayward in life, nobody will even place him on their lap and give him the love like Mother Yaśodā could give. And it was Kṛṣṇa who made the decision to go to Dvārakā; therefore, the ācāryas say that he’s crying while he says that in Dvārakā. Kind of sad, of course; we know that it all leads to the intense increasing of the intensity of loving mood between Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa for his devotees. 

But I was reading that in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, there’s a concept called *madhureṇa samāpayet*. I was very happy to discover this. Literally translated, it means "finish sweetly." You know, sometimes in my lectures, I’ve said, "You know, we should finish on a high note." That’s a Western concept; this is more our culture, this is the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, this is who we are, this Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava concept—it’s more—that’s much better: *madhureṇa samāpayet*. Finish sweetly. And when I read that, and I came across a room conversation of Śrīla Prabhupāda on July 5, 1971, which points to the same thing, this is what Prabhupāda said: "Indian dishes, especially in Bengal—Bengal especially—Brahmacārīs... the śukta is the beginning vegetable, and śukta in the beginning and at the end, milk, banana, sweet eating. Beginning bitter, ending sweet. *Madhureṇa samāpayet*. All kinds of tastes: bitter, sour, pungent, gradually ending in sweet. That is eating." That’s how Prabhupāda said. So this principle of *madhureṇa samāpayet* (finish with something sweet), the ācāryas say this is applicable to prasādam, but it’s also applicable to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava kathā. 

Thus, we should end on a sweet note, whether it’s prasādam or kathā. So, got a little sad there towards the end with hearing the lamentation of the devotees and Kṛṣṇa, so I’ll finish with the verse about Kṛṣṇa coming back to Vṛndāvana: *madhur madhur madhur bācī*. Sweet, sweet, sweet. So where did I find that? *Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta*. It is said, translation: "Having gone to Mathurā on the chariot of Akrūra and having killed many demons like Dantavakra, it is clearly mentioned in the Padma Purāṇa that our dear Lord Kṛṣṇa returned back to Vraja." *Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta*: "Having gone to Mathurā on the chariot of Akrūra and having killed all demons like Dantavakra, it is clearly mentioned in the Padma Purāṇa that our dear Lord Kṛṣṇa returned back to Vraja." And then he never left, in the sense that he would meet regularly with his devotees there, gopas and Gopīs, but it was all in *aprakaṭa-līlā*. *Aprakaṭa-līlā* means that the common people couldn’t see him. So therefore, it is said he didn’t come back because people could never see Kṛṣṇa, but he did come back for *aprakaṭa-līlā*, for unmanifest pastimes which are eternal and they’re even going on there today. 

So we’ll leave you with that. I’m not going to say "high note," I’m going to leave you with that sweet note today. And I will do my best to come back in a couple of days to share some more wonderful pastimes that are described in our scriptures and especially given to us by the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, by Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s order, and all that we can only understand by the mercy of our beloved Founder-Ācārya, Śrīla Prabhupāda. So we read his books, we read his purports, we hear his lectures, and we constantly pray for his mercy. So thank you everyone, thank you so much. See you in a couple days. Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! Kṛṣṇa!""