"*00132*.*
"Hi Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees. Once again, welcome back to our ongoing lecture series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. 

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.* 

So, we are continuing with our short series on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana, again as a means to prepare ourselves to properly observe His upcoming appearance day this year, which falls on May 15th here in Vṛndāvana. This lecture is part two, and today we’ll be quoting from several sources, including *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* by Rūpa Gosvāmī, with commentaries by Jīva Gosvāmī and Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. We’ll also refer to a book called *Vaiṣṇava-dāsa-ko-ṭippaṇa*. It’s a book by the poet by the name of Vaiṣṇava Dāsa, who was the grandson of Nābhādāsa, who wrote that very famous śāstra called *Bhaktamāla*, which describes the lives of many great Vaiṣṇavas in our line and other Vaiṣṇavas. And finally, we’ll refer to a śāstra called *Vṛndāvana-dhāma-nirṇayāvalī*, which is like a history book. It’s a historical account of Vṛndāvana’s main temples, which was written several hundred years ago. It’s really interesting; we’ve recently found it in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute.

So, in our first lecture, we discussed Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s ferocious nature as well as His very gentle and compassionate nature, which we compared to the nature of sandalwood in the sense that we were describing—you remember how sandalwood ash heats the body and sandalwood paste cools the body. So, for the demons, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva burns them up with the fire of His anger, and for devotees, you remember, He cools down the burning fire of material existence. So, He is compared to sandalwood like that. In the *Śrī Nṛsiṁha-stuti*, verse 10, written by a leading disciple of Śrī Madhvācārya—his name was Trivikrama-paṇḍitācārya—we hear how Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva burns His enemies. We heard in the last class too, but just another verse: how Nṛsiṁhadeva burns His enemies. He writes: "Dear Lord, the effulgence of many suns is destroyed by Your uncheckable potency. The many weapons sent against You are like sacrificial offerings, and You reply with unlimited weaponry. Put down, strike, and slay my illusion. Burn, Narasiṁha, burn my adversaries with Your unbearable power." Let’s do it again: "Dear Lord, the effulgence of many suns is destroyed by Your uncheckable potency. The many weapons sent against You are like sacrificial offerings, and You reply with unlimited weaponry. Put down, strike, and slay my illusion. Burn, Narasiṁha, burn my adversaries with Your unbearable power."

There are many verses like that, and as for Nṛsiṁha’s cooling effect on His devotees, at the end—I was reading at the end of the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*—Sūta Gosvāmī says, "Thus, I have made you all listen to this entire *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*, for it removes all sins and makes men free from all pain. It ensures success in auspicious deeds and offerings. People who read or listen to either one or a half hymn of it seldom die with their sins, seldom die with their sins." Wow. Now, that same Purāṇa, the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*, I’ve been reading it a lot lately. It even guarantees release from hell if one chants the holy names. In his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 2.9.36, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in this regard. He writes: "In the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa* it is said that as the residents of hell began to chant the holy name of the Lord, they were elevated from hell towards heaven." Now, I also read that Durvāsā Muni has supported this view. He has written much here; he writes, "Simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, the inhabitants of hell became released from their hellish persecution." So, as we see, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva can be terribly ferocious, He can be super kind, and He can even be super sweet. You remember in the last lecture how He picked up Prahlāda Mahārāja and licked him; He gave an abhiṣeka, like lions do their cubs. So, He can be very sweet, and this is also indicated by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.5, verse 119, where Rūpa Gosvāmī is discussing—it’s a little technical—the twelve rasas or relationships a devotee can have with the Lord. As we all know, there’s five primary rasas: śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, vātsalya-rasa, and mādhurya-rasa. Meaning that one can have a passive relationship with Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana like a tree or a flowering bush—that’s the śānta-rasa—or one can be a servant of the Lord, a friend of the Lord, a parent (the parental mood one can have with Kṛṣṇa), or mādhurya-rasa, a lover of the Lord. And there’s also seven secondary rasas, like for example, just a few: chivalry, compassion, astonishment, laughter. One can have this relationship with Kṛṣṇa also. So, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that these twelve different kinds of transcendental relationships are represented by different incarnations of God. I thought that was interesting. These twelve different kinds of transcendental relationships are represented by twelve incarnations of God. And some examples He gives—well, a few examples He gives: one, He says the incarnation Kapila represents śānta-rasa because Kapila emphasized a passive meditation. And then Rūpa Gosvāmī says Vāmanadeva represents sakhya-rasa because He had a friendly relationship with Indra and acts as the doorkeeper for Bali in lower planetary systems. Then, as we’re concerned today, He writes that Nṛsiṁha represents vātsalya-rasa or parenthood because of His regarding Prahlāda Mahārāja as His son and placing him on His lap. So, I thought that was very sweet. Rūpa Gosvāmī says Nṛsiṁhadeva represents vātsalya-rasa because of this mood of parenthood—you know, when He took Prahlāda and put him on His lap and like that. So again, the point is, we see Nṛsiṁhadeva—well, actually, we generally think of Nṛsiṁhadeva in His angry form, but here we see Rūpa Gosvāmī describing Him in a very sweet way, representing vātsalya-rasa. 

And of course, generally devotees like to see Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva as ferocious and ready to protect them. I even read recently a case where Nṛsiṁhadeva became ferocious and chastised an errant devotee. Bhakti Vikāśa Swami writes in his *Śrī Bhakti-siddhānta-vaibhava*—such a wonderful book, we have to thank Mahārāja for that book—1.223. He writes that in 1913, a brāhmaṇa devotee from Orissa by the name of Kṛṣṇa Pujari was engaged in deity service at the Yoga-pīṭha temple in Māyāpura. That’s the place where Mahāprabhu appeared, and Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura had a temple built there. So this Kṛṣṇa Pujari—good name for a pujari, Kṛṣṇa Pujari Dāsa—he was engaged in deity sevā in the Yoga-pīṭha temple. Now, once in the middle of the night, he suddenly ran screaming from the temple to a nearby temple, where he tearfully recounted to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī that in a dream, Nṛsiṁhadeva had straddled his chest and said to him, "You stole from My donation box, you rascal! You stole from My donation box! Now run, get out of My house immediately, or I’ll destroy you." So when he was with Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, this devotee started, it’s described, wailing and rolling on the ground, and despite all the attempts of Bhaktisiddhānta’s other devotees, he couldn’t be calmed down. And after some time, he just jumped up and ran and went to Calcutta as fast as he could. And then there, he had a parental home apparently where he just stayed there; he didn’t come back. But it’s mentioned he learned his lesson. How? Because I was reading that although two months' salary was due to him, he refused to accept even a paisa, or we would say a penny. He wouldn’t accept anything because he felt guilty. So, he learned his lesson. So, from this pastime, we can see that if a devotee does somehow fall into illusion—and sometimes it happens because of past bad habits or an offense or whatever—if somehow a devotee falls into illusion, the Lord is still so kind, He’ll rescue him from that illusion.

Śrīdhara Svāmī, who Prabhupāda describes as the original commentator on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, he writes in this regard, a famous verse glorifying Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. He writes: "Let me offer my obeisances unto Lord Nṛsiṁha, who is always enlightening Prahlāda Mahārāja within his heart and who always kills the demons that attack His devotees. His mercy is distributed like moonshine and His face is like that of a lion. Let me offer my obeisances to Him, the Nṛsiṁha, again and again." Famous verse. So anyway, in our previous lecture, we promised to speak on a number of Nṛsiṁhadeva deities and their service and their servitors in Vṛndāvana, their pastimes in Vṛndāvana. But the more research I was doing, I realized there’s so many deities of Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana. Actually, it would take months for me to describe all these deities and recount their glories; they’re so numerous. And how is that so? Well, primarily, all these deities were established through the ages—we’re talking about through the ages here—to protect Vṛndāvana and its inhabitants from invasions, from, you know, thieves, from dacoits, from inauspiciousness. Through the ages—sādhus say that we’re going back, you know, thousands and thousands and thousands of years—to protect the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana. I was reading that in ancient days, devotees in Vṛndāvana—this is so interesting—in ancient days, devotees in Vṛndāvana used to worship Śālagrāma-śilā forms of Nṛsiṁhadeva to protect the temples in Braja. We’re not talking about deities, we’re going way back. In ancient days, devotees in Vṛndāvana used to worship Śālagrāma-śilā forms of Nṛsiṁhadeva to protect the temples in Braja. They used to place the open mouth of the śilā—because a Śālagrāma-śilā is characterized by the fact that he has a gaping mouth, that that’s a Nṛsiṁha-śilā, it has to have an open mouth, you can see the cakras inside—so they used to place these open-mouth Śālagrāma-śilās of Narasiṁhadeva towards the entrance of the temple and place a small crystal of camphor in the opening of the mouth of that Śālagrāma-śilā to keep them cooled down a little bit. I never heard; I’m going to start doing that with my Nṛsiṁha Śālagrāma, put a little piece of camphor just to cool down. And so important was the establishment of such powerful Nṛsiṁha-śilās to protect the temples in Vṛndāvana that it explains why Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī goes into great detail in glorifying the worship of Śālagrāma-śilā in his immortal work, *Padyāvalī*, 1.6. You know, when I first read *Padyāvalī*, glories to the holy name, the devotees, Kṛṣṇa, and then I came across this verse—one of my favorite verses, of course—now, where Rūpa Gosvāmī, quoting another devotee of course, because many of the verses there are from other devotees, he just compiled them in his *Padyāvalī*. He included the following verse in *Padyāvalī*. I was so happy to find it, and here it is. It’s verse 116 of *Padyāvalī*: "A Tulasī leaf offered to the lotus feet of the Nṛsiṁha Śālagrāma-śilā destroys the sin of murder. Water that has washed the lotus feet of the Nṛsiṁha Śālagrāma-śilā destroys the sin of theft. Foodstuff offered to the Nṛsiṁha Śālagrāma-śilā destroys the sin of drinking liquor. Sincere surrender to the Nṛsiṁha Śālagrāma-śilā destroys the sin of adultery, adultery with the wife of the spiritual master. Association with the devotees of the Nṛsiṁha Śālagrāma destroys the sin of offenses to devotees." Then he concludes, "This is the extraordinary glory of the Nṛsiṁha Śālagrāma-śilā."

Now later, because we’re talking in ancient times here, later after Kṛṣṇa departed this world—we were speaking before, 5,000 years, because Vṛndāvana’s been here forever—so later after Kṛṣṇa had His pastimes in Vṛndāvana and He departed this world, Vajranābha—we’ve heard about him, he’s the grandson of Kṛṣṇa—in order to further give protection because Vṛndāvana became much more visibly glorious when Kṛṣṇa was present here, Vajranābha established different Śiva-liṅgams and actual deities of Mahādeva Śiva in various places for the protection of Braja. We discussed that in a class last year. For example, he established Gopīśvara Mahādeva in Vṛndāvana proper, Bhūteśvara Mahādeva in Mathurā. But I read that our ācāryas say that for groups of three forests together, he established the worship of Nṛsiṁhadeva. Wow, this is history. There’s many forests; remember we discussed there’s twelve main forests and there’s sub-forests and then there’s sub-sub, and there’s so many forests. So for groups of three forests together, Vajranābha established the worship of Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana. For example, for the three forests of the general Vṛndāvana forest—you know, there is a forest called Vṛndāvana, for the general Vṛndāvana forest—and Tālavana, Āṭalavana, and Belavana, he established a deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva which is still situated here in Vṛndāvana, the general area of Vṛndāvana. For those three forests, he established the deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva. Now I read that there were originally twelve such deities of Nṛsiṁhadeva established by Vajranābha, protecting, you know, these three different groups of three forests here and there, but later due to the Mughal invasions and for other reasons, unfortunately, many of them disappeared; only a few remain.

One of these Nṛsiṁha deities established by Vajranābha is in Kāmīvana. There, they call Him—it means "He who can see past, present, and future"—and it’s for that reason that this deity in Kāmīvana, Trikāla Nṛsiṁha, He has three eyes, the third one being on His forehead. I’ve seen this deity; it makes your hair stand on end. He has three eyes, the third eye is on His forehead. Therefore, He can see past, present, and future: three eyes. Now, there’s another version that I found by going out to Kāmīvana, you know, and inquiring—I love to do that, you know, the history of these places and the deities and personalities who served them, I love to do that—so there’s another version out in Kāmīvana as to why this particular deity has a third eye. The sādhus told me with great conviction: His third eye represents destruction, and His other two eyes represent mercy and patience. The Lord is patient with us; we’re not dancing fast enough, but He’s giving us His mercy. So that third eye represents destruction. And I said, "Well, could you explain a little bit deeper?" And one sādhu said, "Yes," he explained that if and when there’s ever a major and sustained attack on Lord Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa’s devotees in this world, the third eye of Trikāla Nṛsiṁha will open and the destruction of the world will begin. It’s like, "Whoa, okay." You know, we often hear, you know, the destruction of the world, it’s all going to come to an end, and well, this is an interesting discussion, that if there’s ever a sustained attack on Kṛṣṇa’s devotees, Trikāla Nṛsiṁha, that third eye will open, the destruction of the world will begin.

Now our famous poet, who we like to quote, Paramananda—he actually wrote twenty beautiful poems I found in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute describing the glories of Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance, twenty poems, and these poems are very famous here in Braja. I was mentioning the other day that there’s a song they sing for the five days of the celebration of Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance here in Vṛndāvana, and there’s many actually that he wrote, many like that to celebrate the appearance of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. And I was going through them, and I found that one of these poems is specifically about how Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva protects His devotees. Paramananda writes—he writes: "One time, Mādhava Kṛṣṇa took a vow in front of all the demigods, saying, 'My dear demigods, I order My Sudarśana-cakra to always roam above the heads of My devotees. But only devotees who are self-realized will be able to see these cakras above their heads. And whenever people attack My dear devotees, that cakra will destroy whatever pious karma those people have, while at the same time leaving their sufferings intact here in the material world.'" Strong warning: Don’t mess with Kṛṣṇa’s devotees, because they’re simply concerned with the spiritual welfare of the whole world. Then he continues, speaking to the demigods, "If they continue to harm My devotees—if they continue to harm My devotees—then at last that cakra will cut them to pieces."

So Paramananda concludes in this way: "Mādhava Himself cools the heart of His dear devotees by blessing them with fearlessness. 'I’ve taken a vow to protect you, My dear devotees; you can be fearless.'" What does that mean? It means you can go anywhere and preach. A modern-day understanding: you can go anywhere and preach, the Lord will be there to protect you because you’re doing His work. His work is to save the devotees, *ninyāya*, the miscreants, and reestablish dharma. So in His absence, the Lord comes to do those things, and His incarnations—but if someone, in His absence, continues with that mission, how dear that devotee, how dear that institution like the International Society for Krishna Consciousness is to the Lord! So, "I’ll protect you." Therefore, the Brajavasis say that to protect the residents of Kāmīvana, the Lord appeared as the three-eyed deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva, Trikāla Narasiṁha.

Now actually, the full history of this deity is really interesting—I think I should take the time, the full history of this deity is very interesting, this is going to be a long class. Although he was established—actually this deity was established by Vajranābha 5,000 years ago—he’s one of those deities, he just disappeared in time, but he was later discovered. The pastime is as follows: Well, hundreds of years ago, there was a disciple of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, his name was Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī. Many Vaiṣṇavas, their form of renunciation in those days was not to take sannyāsa, but to become—to renounce the world, to become bābājīs and sit and chant, study all day. So Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he had a disciple named Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī who was living out at Kāmīvana on the banks of Vimalā-kuṇḍa. And one night, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared to him in a dream and He said, "My dear Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī, Kṛṣṇa’s grandson Vajranābha manifested Me for the benefit of Braja, but in time, due to the influence of the age of Kali, I sank into this Vimalā-kuṇḍa. Please rescue Me and reinstall Me in some temple." So Kṛṣṇadāsa woke up and he’s like, "Whoa." So before, you know, fulfilling this order of the Lord, he wanted to be purified, so he went—the whole morning routine—he took his bath, he chanted his mantras, he prayed, then he felt qualified to execute the order of the Lord. This is significant; we should also follow like that: cleansed inside and out, and then we’re qualified to do some service with the Lord. So in the morning, after his daily routine, Kṛṣṇadāsa went to Vimalā-kuṇḍa, where he—actually it was just there, that’s where he slept—and he dove down deep into that lake and he actually found this deity. He rescued the deity which he brought to the surface, and there was a nearby—like a temple, like a palace that had been originally built for a Kṛṣṇa deity, but when everyone saw that he’d rescued this famous deity—people had heard about him, but no one knew what happened to him—Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī walked into town with this Nṛsiṁhadeva in his hands, people said, "Let’s give this temple to this Nṛsiṁhadeva deity, we’ll build another one for Kṛṣṇa," which they did. So the deity went from in the mud to this beautiful palace, and you can still see him there, you can take his darśana in that palatial palace. This is why we’re doing these lectures, so you can develop so much more appreciation for Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma and you can take notes and you know you can have it on your bucket list: "I want to go there! I want to go there!"

Now, I discovered another very, very famous Nṛsiṁha deity situated in a small temple just off one of the busy streets of Mathurā. Actually, there’s so many temples in Mathurā nowadays—it’s a big, I’m not going to say a materialistic city, but it’s covered by shops and, you know, businessmen and this and that—but there do you find so many temples in Mathurā! You can spend days there. There’s several streets I’ve been to that it’s just temple after temple after temple after temple, in the form of people’s houses, but they made their houses like little temples for their iṣṭa-devs. So the front door looks like, you know, the entrance to a temple. Such culture that’s disappearing. So, on one of those busy streets in Mathurā, there’s the temple of Bhaya-Nṛsiṁha. Bhaya means very, very fearful. This is a very fearful deity. Bhaya-Nṛsiṁha actually is one of the most powerful because I checked with the sādhus: "What are the most powerful and angry deities in the whole of Braja?" "Pratya’s madhura, madhura, madhura—sweet, sweet, sweet." Yeah, but what about Aurangzeb coming? What about invaders coming to make money? What about... so Nṛsiṁhadeva is protecting these dhāmas. This deity, Bhaya-Nṛsiṁha, they say he’s the most powerful and most angry Nṛsiṁhadeva deity in the whole of Braja. Now when I inquired more, I found out that he’s only the size of Rādhāramaṇa—nice things come in small packages! I was told he’s the size, the size of Rādhāramaṇa, but it’s said that Bhaya-Nṛsiṁha’s face is very big in comparison to his body, and that in his deity form he’s—in this deity form, he’s roaring at the asuras, crushing one of them with one of his hands, and in his other hand, he’s holding a bowl filled with the blood of his enemies. And with one foot, he’s crushing the face of Hiraṇyakaśipu and with the other foot, he’s crushing Hiraṇyakaśipu’s legs. So when I first heard about this temple, I wanted to see this deity. Unfortunately for those of us who have this desire to have his darśana, actually the sādhus in Braja and the priests who take care of that deity, the lineage of priests who take care of that deity, they say he’s so ferocious, he’s so angry that they have to put him in a large, ornate safe with a lock on it! In case anyone comes and opens that ornate safe in the temple—you can’t have darśana with him! He’s in this beautiful safe, they made it very ornate in the temple, and he doesn’t—he only comes out one day a year for three, three-and-a-half hours. He’s in that safe for 364 days of the year, but he’s worshipped daily by mānasa-pūjā. Mānasa-pūjā means that you do the pūjā in your mind. So the temple pujaris, they come before the box and they do mānasa-pūjā; they’re too scared to open the box. It’s said that if anyone were to open that safe, Bhaya-Nṛsiṁhadeva’s anger with the misdeeds of the asuras, past and present, would immediately burn down the temple and the whole of Mathurā. You don’t want to take a peek there! But only once a year, on the day of Akṣaya-tṛtīyā—you know, we just observed that a few days ago—on that day, they open the safe for exactly—exactly, I was told there’s somebody there with a watch—three and a half hours for public darśana. I just missed it, the day I was sick, otherwise I would have gone. I haven’t seen him yet; it’s on my bucket list: see that deity! However, in that temple, I know there’s a similar-looking pratimā. A pratimā is a deity that’s worshipped in place of the original deity. Or, yeah, if somehow the deity is not there, they’ll establish the pratimā; they consider it non-different than the original. You know, deities have been stolen here in India; the British took so many deities back to London. So they established a pratimā deity, which is—they consider non-different. So there’s a pratimā deity in that temple made out of silver, which is worshipped daily and who gives darśana to the pilgrims. But it’s not exactly the same thing; I want to see that deity!

Alright, Kṛṣṇa. Now, there’s a very beautiful Nṛsiṁha deity situated behind the Rādhāramaṇa temple, very famous deity, and Nṛsiṁha is in a milder form—He’s with Lakṣmī. If He’s, you know, killing Hiraṇyakaśipu—and there are deities like that—I have such a deity—then He’s very angry and it’s described only renunciates can worship Him because He takes everything away from the pujari. Then there’s Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁhadeva: Nṛsiṁhadeva is half-angry and half-peaceful. It’s described that gṛhasthas can worship [Him]. Then there’s Yoga-Nṛsiṁha or Śānta-Nṛsiṁha: He’s alone, He’s very peaceful, any initiated brāhmaṇa can worship that deity. So behind the Rādhāramaṇa temple, nearby—I can’t describe it exactly because [Vṛndāvana] has so many streets—but very near, you can, when you—if you want to see this deity, you can ask the Rādhāramaṇa pujaris, because I was told that Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī used to go and do bhajana in front of that deity. So it’s said that hundreds, hundreds of years ago, a brāhmaṇa in Vṛndāvana was taking his bath in the Yamunā when suddenly he saw a portion of this deity protruding out of the mud near the bank of the river, meaning that the deity was worshipped at some point but perhaps during an invasion, the pujaris put deities in lakes, they put deities in rivers or the forests so they won’t be harmed. So hundreds of years ago this brāhmaṇa was taking bath and he looked over, and maybe it was low tide, a little piece of that deity was protruding. So he called for a team of strong, young Vaiṣṇavas and they rescued the deity and eventually constructed a temple for him near to what would later become the Rādhāramaṇa temple. And this deity, I’ve seen him: He has one hand holding up the sun, with his other hand He’s holding up the moon, and with His two other hands He’s tearing the chest of Hiraṇyakaśipu, his chest and his abdomen—like scratching, like that. And Garuda and Indra are standing nearby offering Him prayers. This whole deity... Prahlāda is also there, paying daṇḍavats, he’s just daṇḍavats at the feet of the deity. And Lakṣmī is also there, affectionately staring at the Lord’s beautiful face. Beautiful chorus of deities! So try to see him when you come near the Rādhāramaṇa temple.

Now there’s another famous deity that I mentioned in our first lecture of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva—we didn’t go into too much detail the other day. That deity at the southernmost tip of Govardhana Hill... remember, I was saying how we go on Govardhana-parikramā, we cross Punchari, the southern tip of Girirāja, there’s a temple 50 meters away on a little hill. That hill is actually called Nṛsiṁha-ṭilā. Now I checked more of the history and it’s said that Mother Yaśodā used to sit there on top of that hill, the Nṛsiṁha-ṭilā, to watch over Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma’s pastimes with the cows. She would sneak out, because she wasn’t allowed to go on that—in that pastime, generally—so she would sneak and then, you know, very often Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, they take the cows to graze Govardhana, because the grass there is so tasty and it doesn’t cut the tongues of the cows—grass sometimes cuts tongues of cows—and it’s so tasty that the milk there is just... the milk that comes from the cows that eat that grass, I heard it was delicious. So she would go sometimes and she’d sit on that particular hill—it later became known as Nṛsiṁha-ṭilā—and she would always, you know, feel pained by seeing her boys walk barefoot in those thorny areas around Govardhana Hill. You know, as well as I do, there’s lots of sharp pebbles and there’s thorns. So she was seeing them like that. So in order to protect Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, she would very often call out from the top of that hill, "Nṛsiṁha! Nṛsiṁha! Nṛsiṁha, protect my boys!" So in honor and remembrance of that līlā, that pastime, sometime around the year 1740, the King of Bharatpur—now Bharatpur is not far from Braja, and the kings of Bharatpur were generally, you know, great Vaiṣṇavas, rāja-ṛṣis sitting on the throne—so around 1740, King Suraj Mal—we spoke about him also sometime last year, another hero, Suraj Mal of Bharatpur—he had the present temple as we see it constructed on that hill, and he installed, as I told you, later today, ferocious form of... ferocious. And just recently, one of my disciples from Delhi, want to give him credit, Prem Kṛṣṇadāsa, he helped renovate a portion of that temple that was dilapidated because, you know, 1740, that’s a long time ago. But he did it in a very beautiful way, much as the temple was originally constructed, using this red sandstone. Had a big ceremony the other, later day, opening, reopening that temple. I got to put my feet—my head on the feet of that deity, and I said a lot of prayers, but [my assistant] was pulling me away. My gosh! I said, "No, I’m not finished, I have a lot to say! Please purify my heart so I can be a good servant of my spiritual master."

Now there’s another very beautiful deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva who’s located in Gokula. That’s where Kṛṣṇa first lived, you know; He was born in the jailhouse of Kaṁsa in Mathurā, but Vasudeva, you know, took Him across the river the first night and took Him to Gokula, where Nanda and Yaśodā began raising Kṛṣṇa there. But as we know, Kaṁsa, having wind of that, he was sending a demon every day to come to Gokula. So Mother Paurnamasi, she requested Mother Yaśodā to worship a deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva for the protection of Kṛṣṇa. There you go, we go to your Vaiṣṇavas, we can worship Nṛsiṁhadeva. Of course, Prabhupāda again told us that we must worship Him along with Gaura-Nitāi, because Nṛsiṁhadeva is a very angry form of the Lord, and if one makes a mistake in the pūjā, it can be disastrous according to Prabhupāda. So he told Guru Kṛpa Prabhu at that time, when he first presented the first deity of that he’d found, you know, in South India, the first deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁhadeva, Prabhupāda said, "Okay, but worship with Gaura-Nitāi," because they don’t accept offenses—offenses—they’ll protect you. But here we see Paurnamasi requested Mother Yaśodā to worship a deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva for the protection of Kṛṣṇa. Of course Kṛṣṇa, He doesn’t need protection, but this is the līlās are like this. So Nanda Mahārāja, listen to this, he arranged for a Nṛsiṁha deity to be brought from Avantikā. Avantikā, that is present-day Ujjain. And this deity actually was the personal deity of Sāndīpani Muni, who later on, as we know, became Kṛṣṇa’s spiritual master. Because right now we’re talking when Kṛṣṇa is a baby, but later Kṛṣṇa goes to the gurukula with Balarāma and his teacher was His spiritual master Sāndīpani Muni. So at this very early stage, Sāndīpani Muni agreed to give his personal deity, the Nṛsiṁhadeva, to Mother Yaśodā to worship for the protection of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the Brajavasis say that the guru is also the representative of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, who always protects his disciples from spiritual offenses as well as material sins.

Now I also read recently in the institute that there was a very beautiful deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva worshipped for hundreds of years in Vṛndāvana just near to the original Govindadeva temple, which is partially still there, as we know. Much of it was destroyed by Aurangzeb, but this deity was worshipped very close to the Govindadeva temple. But when—I don’t even want to say his name—Zeb attacked Vṛndāvana, that deity went with Govindaji to Jaipur. Remember how Śivarāma Gosvāmī—his name, he was the main pujari of Govindaji’s temple—he rescued Govindaji and sent Him to Kāmīvana and so forth and so on. We told that pastime before, long past time. This deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva from that Vṛndāvana temple accompanied Govindaji all those years down to Jaipur, and He’s now situated in Govindadeva’s temple complex—not on the altar, but in that, you know, if you’ve been to Jaipur, you know it’s a huge temple complex, there’s many little temples there as well in that complex—and He’s situated, that deity is situated in that temple complex in Jaipur, and I believe very few devotees know, you know, that He’s even there, being worshipped there. It’s hard to find. I’ve actually never been there, I’ve always wanted to go, but so many things came up, we had a big park in my party, but that deity is worshipped there in a very small lane within that complex, that greater complex. If you can find that lane, you can acquire, you can behold the beauty of that special deity. And I asked the pujaris about Him one time and they said, "Yes, this Nṛsiṁha deity—listen to this—how they described Him: He’s laughing at Māyā." This deity is laughing at Māyā. And there’s a little Prahlāda standing next to Him, and also there’s a little Dhruva Mahārāja.

All right, Kṛṣṇa, so many treasures, so many jewels we’re finding in the treasure chest of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. So these are some of the ways in which Nṛsiṁhadeva protects Vṛndāvana and its inhabitants, from the ancient days as a Śālagrāma-śilā to more recent times—you know, what’s 500 years ago—recent appearances of the Lord throughout Braja-maṇḍala. So we become attached to these deities; we’re attached to Nṛsiṁhadeva because He rips out the anarthas there in our heart that, despite our efforts, we cannot get rid of. He protects us as saṅkīrtana devotees when we push on the movement; He protects us in many ways on our ultimate goal to go back home, back to Godhead, Goloka Vṛndāvana, and serve Rādhā-Śyāma, serve Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, Bhaktivinoda, like that. This is really the ISKCON mood of worshipping Nṛsiṁhadeva. We take on the mood of Bhaktivinoda; he said he’s just, he’s on the threshold of Nṛsiṁhadeva’s palace. He recounts this, or he’s saying like this, that he’s on the threshold of Nṛsiṁhadeva’s palace, praying to that half-man, half-lion incarnation of the Lord to remove all the obstacles in his heart, all the obstacles that may be there for developing the perfection of love, loving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Of course, this is his humility, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, but in this way, we understand why we worship Nṛsiṁhadeva. And I know when Prabhupāda introduced the Nṛsiṁhadeva prayers, *Namaste Narasiṁhāya*, you know, the prayers that we say after every āratī in ISKCON, Prabhupāda introduced those prayers for two days in the Los Angeles temple in the early 1970s. And then he said specifically on that occasion, he said, "These prayers are for the protection of the spiritual master and the International Society for Krishna Consciousness." So in this way, we see our lovable Lord, He comes out of the pillar—so ferocious, Prahlāda is well—I’ve never seen an incarnation like that! This is wonderful! To the eye of the beholder. But Hiraṇyakaśipu, when he saw that form, "My gosh!" He didn’t say "My Lord," "My gosh, what is this? Is it a man? Is it a lion? What creature is this?" Ah, beauty is in the eye of the beholder. 

So we’ve seen Nṛsiṁhadeva with love for all these reasons we’ve explained in this little short series of two lectures on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Braja, leading up to His appearance day in a few days. So I can understand the following statement written by Paramananda, our poet. He writes that Nṛsiṁhadeva one time said to Prahlāda Mahārāja, "On your request, then, I will not go back to Vaikuṇṭha, because I will always stay with My dear devotees in the form of My mūrti." Prahlāda didn’t want Him to go, and Nṛsiṁhadeva understood that, so He said, "Prahlāda, on your request, okay, I won’t go back to Vaikuṇṭha, but I will always stay with My dear devotees in the form of My mūrti." And we have those mūrtis in Braja, and we have those mercies. We have that famous mūrti in our Māyāpura community, the famous—that’s the mūrti of Nṛsiṁhadeva of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, and there’s deities of Nṛsiṁhadeva now all over the world, protecting this movement. So when Nṛsiṁhadeva said that to Prahlāda, "On your request, I won’t go back, but always stay here as My mūrti," Prahlāda became very happy and he said something so sweet. He said, "My dear Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, a snake can give birth to a snake, a lioness can give birth to a lion, but I saw for the first time that a stone pillar can manifest a deity whose heart is melted with the prayers and requests of His devotees." Oh my gosh! "Oh Lord, a snake can give birth to a snake, a lioness can give birth to a lion, but I saw for the first time that a stone pillar can manifest a deity whose heart is melted with the prayers and requests of His devotees." The perfect example is Prahlāda Mahārāja, and we can follow in his footsteps. So Paramananda concludes—and I’ll finish here—Paramananda concludes: "Lord Narahari, pleased by His devotee Prahlāda, then took a spoon filled with nectar and placed it into the lotus mouth of Prahlāda Mahārāja, saying, 'May My devotees always be victorious.'"

All right Kṛṣṇa, thank you for watching. It’s hard to finish, but what to do? There’s so much, there’s more nectar actually, but anyway, these are our two lectures on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Braja. Again, I hope that they’ve helped prepare you for His appearance day which is coming in a few days. *Nectar of Devotion* says devotees should not neglect any of the appearance days of the Lord or His devotees or significant events; they’re all nurturing the bhakti that is there within our heart. Thank you, be back in a few days. 

*Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya! Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! Māyāpura-dhāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa!*""