"*00573*.*
"We are reading from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 4.4.64. To save time, I will quote the Sanskrit: "My dear Lord, after creating by Your own potencies, You enter within the creation in four kinds of forms. Being within the hearts of the living entities, You know them, and You know how they are enjoying their senses. The so-called happiness of this material creation is exactly like the bee's enjoyment of honey after it has been collected in the honeycomb."

The purport: "The material cosmic manifestation is an exhibition of the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because dead matter cannot work independently, the Lord Himself enters within this material creation in the form of a partial expansion called Paramātmā, and He also enters by His separated parts and parcels—the living entities."

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. So, in this verse of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, we hear about the Supersoul who is there in the heart of every living entity. As we have discussed, or you have discussed many times, the Supersoul is one of the three aspects of the Absolute Truth. This is made very clear in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, or as we say, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*: "Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this non-dual substance Brahman, Paramātmā, or Bhagavān."

These are the three aspects of God. He exists in the spiritual world as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; He is all-pervading by His energies, which we call Brahman; and He expands as a Supersoul in the heart of every created being. As such, there are different classes of transcendentalists who study and worship these three aspects of God. The yogīs are interested in realizing the Supersoul within the heart, and the *brahma-vādīs*, or sometimes we say the Māyāvādīs, they are interested in this energy of God. But the Bhāgavatas—all of you, the devotees—we are interested in developing an intimate, loving relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. That is the highest truth because the Brahman and the Paramātmā are subordinate to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; they come from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa makes it very clear in *Bhagavad-gītā* that He is the source of the impersonal Brahman; He also makes it very clear He is the source of the Paramātmā. Of course, these different classes of transcendentalists, they argue, "Supreme, there’s only Brahman, the spiritual energy," and we say, "No, there’s Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is the source of the Brahman, and Kṛṣṇa is the source of the Paramātmā." We have a complete understanding.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the guru of Śrīla Prabhupāda, once told a nice story—it is a true story. He said when the British were here in India, they wanted to increase communication, so they brought in the railway system. The trains go everywhere in India, crisscrossing the whole country. The Rajdhani Express, you can go from Delhi to Kolkata on the Rajdhani Express in 22 hours. I took it many times. Of course, now planes are popular, but trains are popular. So, when the villagers—because, you know, previously India was mainly an agrarian culture—many farmers in India heard there was a train going to be built around the country, they were very curious because they weren't so literate; they didn't know what a train was.

So, to make a long story short, the British built, with the hard work of the Indians, these train tracks all over the country, and then they announced in each village, "Tomorrow, a train is going to come." The villagers had no idea; it's not like Europe or America. What's a train? So very often, the whole village would come to the place the train stopped and they'd wait for the train to come—hundreds of villagers waiting. "Wow, what's a train?" So finally, from a distance, the train was coming, but all you could see was the light—you know, the train has this big light. So, big, bright light coming. Some people said, "Oh, now I've seen a train," and they went home. Other people, they waited, and the train came closer and you could see it had, you know, the coaches. "Oh, now I've seen the train," and they went home. Other people waited till the *woo-woo* came to a stop and they got in the train and they saw the conductor, the person who is driving the train. So, those persons who waited, they saw the light, they saw the coaches, and they saw the driver of the train—the complete understanding.

He made that analogy. He said there are some who see the Brahman, the light—"I've seen God." Those who have seen the coaches, they've seen the Paramātmā. But those who go deeper into the subject matter, they see behind it all is a person who is driving the train. So, like that, Kṛṣṇa: Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān. Now, what's interesting is that everything rests upon the Brahman, the spiritual energy. Both the spiritual world and the material world rest upon this divine energy of Kṛṣṇa. And of course, Kṛṣṇa, He reigns supreme on the planet in the spiritual world. But what is very interesting, His feature of Paramātmā, He doesn't exist as Paramātmā in the spiritual world. Paramātmā is only in the material world, in your heart.

Actually, when we fall from grace, when we fall from the spiritual domain—I was listening to a tape, Prabhupāda said Kṛṣṇa accompanies you for some distance, saying, "Don't go to the material world, stay with Me." "You're falling, falling, falling. Kṛṣṇa, don't go to the material world, stay with Me." "No, I'm going." We're... so who can be proud in this world? We left the world, the spiritual world, which is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss; we came to this world, which is temporary, full of ignorance and suffering.

So then, when we came, Kṛṣṇa came into your heart. He says in the *Gītā*, "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me comes remembrance, knowledge, and forgetfulness." So He accompanies the living entity in our sojourn through material creation. There are two souls in these bodies; you're sharing this body with somebody else. You're not alone in this body. Actually, it's not your body, because the material energy comes from Kṛṣṇa. "I am the source of all that is material and spiritual." It's not even your body; it's Kṛṣṇa's. You're the guest, He's the owner of the body. Two souls: the finite soul and the Supersoul, or sometimes we say Supersoul. He would refer to the Supersoul as the overseer who is watching what we do. 

So, what is the Supersoul doing within the heart? "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me comes remembrance, knowledge, and forgetfulness." So, it's interesting—three things He's doing: He's giving remembrance, He's giving us knowledge, and He's giving us forgetfulness. When you're ready, He's giving you remembrance of who you are and what is your connection with Him as God. He's giving you knowledge: how to proceed on the path back home, back to Godhead. He's teaching you how to go from darkness to light, He's teaching how to go from ignorance to truth, He's guiding you in going from the material world to the spiritual world. But there's one more thing He's doing: forgetfulness. What? Forgetfulness? Yes, because if you want to be independent of God, you're dependent on Him to be independent. Just like the atheist, he says, "There is no God," but where is he getting that intelligence to come up with some stupid philosophy? Kṛṣṇa is giving him the intelligence to do like that if that's what he wants. And if you want to forget Him, you can't forget Him independently; we're totally dependent on the mercy of God. If you want to forget Him, He gives you the ability to forget Him. Why would He do that? Because by forgetting God, we struggle in this world and we suffer. And after suffering for a long, long time, we wake up and we think, "I'm such a fool. Is there a God? Let me go back to God." That suffering brings you ultimately to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā*, four kinds of persons surrender to Him.

Four types of persons take up spiritual life: the person in distress, the person looking for material facility, the person who is curious, and the person who is looking for knowledge. So many people come to spiritual life because they're just suffering, and there's no other resource than to go to a church, go to a mosque, go to a synagogue, go to a temple and pray for help: "Kṛṣṇa, help!" Practically every class, I quote the following verse from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*: "My dear Lord, I'm drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence. O You who give shelter to those who have no shelter, please, just this one time, extend Your hand to save me." So, the Lord is just waiting for you till you come to the point like, "Material life is useless, there must be a spiritual alternative." Then He takes over and He guides you from within your heart. He starts giving you good intelligence: "Stop your sinful activity. Give up meat-eating, give up intoxication, give up illicit sex, give up gambling, and go to the temple." "No, I like my beer, my cigarettes, I can't do... I like my gambling, you know, I can't do." So, He's giving us good instruction, but we're not listening because of the false ego. We can't listen, and we can't follow His instructions. From within, He's speaking to us from within the heart, but we're not hearing Him. Just like sometimes you turn on the radio and there's some static, and then you can't hear the program. So Kṛṣṇa is talking to us within the heart, but there's some static; it's called false ego.

And Kṛṣṇa knows this. He knows you're not listening. He's right next to you. We were in London and Prabhupāda was speaking about the Supersoul; he went like this. He said, "The Supersoul and the soul are this close together." I always remember he closed his fingers. Prabhupāda said, "The Supersoul and the soul, they're like this," and He's whispering in our ears. "No, no, I'm going to go to the cricket match." So Kṛṣṇa touches upon this phenomenon in *Bhagavad-gītā*: "If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you are lost, Arjuna." It's very frustrating for Kṛṣṇa. He's the well-wishing friend of every living entity. He's traveling with us through every universe we pass through, through every species of life we go through, through every body, He's accompanying us through the good, bad, and the ugly. He never leaves us as the Supersoul. Can you imagine? He's at every birth; He goes with you in your heart. He travels with you. What a friend! A friend in need is a friend indeed.

So, because we don't listen to Him, He manifests Himself externally in the form of the spiritual teacher, the guru. It's said the guru is the external manifestation of the Supersoul. The guru is not God—he's an expansion—but he's not God; he's empowered to represent the Supersoul within the heart. This is the Lord's first mercy upon us; He sends His devotees to help us. You know, sometimes a neophyte devotee, he may question, "Does Kṛṣṇa even know that I exist? This tiny *jīvātmā* here in Surat, in Gujarat, in India? There's over one billion people in this country; does Kṛṣṇa even know I exist?" Yes, He knows, because the definite sign for all of us is He sent His representative; He sent His spiritual master. That doesn't happen by chance. Meeting your spiritual preceptor, coming into contact with devotees, coming in contact with ISKCON—it's not something material, it's by divine intervention. We're wondering, but the Lord comes once in the day of Brahmā; He says, "Stop your nonsense," or if He's not here, you meet your spiritual Master. He says, "Stop your nonsense, follow four regulative principles." "Śrī Kṛṣṇa, yes, sir." Divine intervention. It's not by chance; it's all divine intervention. We should see it like that.

"We think we have met Your goodness by the will of providence, just so that we may accept you as captain of the ship for those who desire to cross the difficult ocean of Kali-yuga, which deteriorates all the good qualities of a human being." *Tvam* means your goodness, *naḥ* means unto us, *...meeting the spiritual teacher by providence, by God.* It's said that just as the light of dawn precedes the rising of the sun, so the mercy of a devotee precedes the mercy of God. Right? The light of dawn comes before the sun, so the mercy of a devotee comes before the mercy of God. Therefore, the *sādhus*, the *ṛṣis*, the sages, they say our search should not necessarily be for God, but for one who can take us to God. Kṛṣṇa agrees; He says, "One who says, 'I am My devotee,' he's not My devotee, but one who is the devotee of My devotee, he is My devotee."

Someone might say, "But if God is everywhere, why do I need a devotee to approach Him?" But the example has been given: electricity is everywhere, but if you want to connect with electricity, you have to plug into the socket in the wall. Electricity is everywhere in your house, but if you want to connect with electricity, you take the plug, you put it in—now you're connected. So if you want to come in contact with God, you have to connect through His *bhakta*, through His devotee. Once I met a boy, he said, "Why does someone have to come between me and God? That person is going to block my vision of God." So I thought for a moment, I said, "No, the devotee who's teaching you about God, he's like a telescope." God's very far away, so when you take a telescope, God's right there, right before you through the telescope. So I said, "Spiritual master is like that." Kṛṣṇa is very far away, but through the spiritual master telescope, God is very close. Like one time Prabhupāda went, "Here is Kṛṣṇa, take Him!" What Kṛṣṇa says: "After many lifetimes, one will achieve Me," but the pure devotee is so compassionate, Prabhupāda said, "Here is Kṛṣṇa, take Him!" 

Without the spiritual master, what can we know about God? Just like one time my godsister, Jānī, in the beginning of the movement, Prabhupāda asked her to make a painting of the Supersoul in the heart. This is 1968; we didn't know anything. So Prabhupāda said, "Jānī, paint the Supersoul in the heart." So she went back to her room and she put up the canvas, she got her paints ready, and her mind went blank. What does the Supersoul look like? This is America, 1968, there's no... you know, here in India you have prints of different incarnations of the Lord; nobody even knew who was Kṛṣṇa, what to speak of Supersoul. So she's like, "What do I paint? The Supersoul? I never saw the Supersoul." So she went back to Prabhupāda's quarters. She said, "Prabhupāda, I don't... how do I know how to paint the Supersoul? What does He look like?" So Prabhupāda was very serious; he said, "To see or understand the Supersoul, you have to practice yoga for 1,000 years, then you can see the Supersoul." So she became, like, despondent. She wanted to serve her guru. She thought, "I can't practice yoga for a thousand years." This is called *aṣṭāṅga-yoga*. But he said, "But if you have a spiritual master who is speaking according to Vedic literature, he can tell you in one minute what the Supersoul is like. Therefore, you don't need to wait 1,000 years." So he described the Supersoul as standing on the lotus with His four hands, having the weapons of Viṣṇu. 

The difference between this Supersoul preaching to us and the spiritual master preaching to us is: you maybe, maybe you can ignore the words of the Supersoul, but you can't ignore the words of your guru. You can ignore the advice of the Supersoul, go on with your false ego, but if you accept a spiritual teacher, you can't disobey. You cannot not listen; you have to listen to your guru. And just like the Supersoul follows us birth after birth after birth waiting for us to surrender, so if necessary, the spiritual master will also follow us. He'll be our master, our spiritual master life after life, until we fully surrender. He's as kind as the Lord Himself.

So, we discussed Paramātmā, the Supersoul, one of the three aspects of the Absolute Truth in some detail this morning. But it's important to note that the Supersoul is not the feature of the Lord that we as *bhaktas* are most interested in. We're curious: What's that second soul in my body? What does He look like? What does He do? We have some curiosity. If somebody is inhabiting your house, you want to know something about them. So we've learned something about the Supersoul, but that's not the feature of God that we're most interested in. We're interested in the original form of God who lives forever in Goloka Vṛndāvana. You have so many nice paintings here, and look how Kṛṣṇa has appeared to you in these beautiful forms of Rādhā and... what are the names of the deities? Rādhā-Rāṇī. Just look how cute Rādhā-Rāṇī is, so cute. I've never seen a Rādhā-Rāṇī so beautiful as this. She's controlling Kṛṣṇa. Control: She doesn't do what Kṛṣṇa says; Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhārāṇī says. So they're... I couldn't stop looking at them when I came. I mean, I can look at a nice Jānī's painting of the Supersoul for a while, but really, I'd rather stand in front of these deities forever. All glories to the Rādhā-Rāṇī forms! All glories to that Lord within my heart from whom I am renting this body! 

But we want to be *vraja-vāsīs*. We want to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. That was very, very evident in Uddhava's trip to Vṛndāvana. You know the pastime: Akrūra came, and he took Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma from Vṛndāvana to Mathurā for the wrestling match with Kaṁsa. Kṛṣṇa promised the *vrajavāsīs*, "I'll be right back, maybe in two days." But from Mathurā, He went to Dvārakā, and He lived there as a king, in a kingly master-servant relationship with the Dvārakā-vāsīs. But separation makes the heart grow fonder. He was in separation, always thinking, especially of the gopīs. And love is reciprocal. The gopīs were always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes at nighttime, Kṛṣṇa was sleeping, some of the queens of Dvārakā like Rukmiṇī, and in His sleep He would go, "Rādhā, Rādhā, Rādhā!" And the queens would say, "None of the queens in Dvārakā are named Rādhā. Who's this person that Dvārakādhīśa is speaking about in His sleep?" So, as Kṛṣṇa was missing the *vrajavāsīs*, the *vrajavāsīs* were also missing Kṛṣṇa. So, knowing that the residents of Vṛndāvana were missing Him, He decided to write a letter to them. He wrote a letter to the cowherd boys, He wrote a letter to Nanda, and He wrote a letter to Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs, and He chose one of His confidential servants, Uddhava, to take the letter to Vṛndāvana.

So, when Uddhava delivered Kṛṣṇa's letter to the gopīs, he read the letter to the gopīs, and the gopīs' reaction is very interesting, because in His letter Kṛṣṇa mentioned that He was the Supersoul in their hearts and therefore they're never separated from Him. But they wanted Kṛṣṇa, the original Personality of Godhead, who wrestles with His friends in the sands of Vṛndāvana and who dances in the autumn moonlight with the gopīs. That's the Kṛṣṇa they wanted, not the Supersoul. To the gopīs, He wrote the following: "My dear girls, you may think that I have left you, but in fact I haven't really left you. Just consider that I am in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. I'm in your heart, and I'm in every atom. So how have I left you? There's no reason to lament, there's no reason to cry, girls, because we're connected as ever before." The gopīs were shocked by these words. They just looked at each other and said, "Wait a minute, Kṛṣṇa is treating us like *jñānīs*, but we're just simple village girls. We're not interested in this complicated philosophy. We just miss Kṛṣṇa. We want to be with Kṛṣṇa. Does He really love us?" 

So, we've heard many times the gopīs are the greatest lovers of Kṛṣṇa. We should follow in their footsteps. We offer our respects to the Supersoul within our heart, but like the gopīs, one day we have to come to the point that we really miss Kṛṣṇa. We love Kṛṣṇa, we want to be in Goloka Vṛndāvana, not in Surat, Gujarat, Bharat. And how do we get there in one lifetime?

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. 

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""