"*00432*.*
"I want to start by saying that it is our great good fortune that we came here to Jaipur. When we announced that we would go on a pilgrimage to the "City of Victory," Jaipur, some of the devotees expressed their attitude to this by saying, "I do not want to leave Vṛndāvana." I told them that Jaipur is a hidden *gupta-vṛndāvana*.

I said that since Govinda-deva and Madana-mohana are present here, then for their sake one can leave Vṛndāvana. They live here; this is a good reason. There is something special in the tree. After all, these three main deities did not return to Vṛndāvana. Why? It is because the inhabitants of Jaipur have the mood of Vṛndāvana. We can continue to discuss the mind, the mood of the heart, for hours, days, weeks, and years. Volumes have been written about the arrangement of Vṛndāvana, but in essence, in brief, what is the mood of Vṛndāvana? How often is it said that a devotee loves Kṛṣṇa more than anyone has ever loved, and Kṛṣṇa, in turn, loves the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana as no one has ever loved. If you want to see the practical application of the manifestation of love, then of course you can visit various temples, but in particular, you can see it here. Who of you was yesterday at *darśana*? You saw how with all their hearts they chanted and called Govinda-jī. This is what we learn from them. 

There is an expression: "Less words, more action." The scripture does not describe this love for Kṛṣṇa, but if we see it, this will convince us more to develop this love for Him. Being one of the main deities, Govinda cannot return to Vṛndāvana because He is so much loved here. If you have such love and enthusiasm for worshiping Kṛṣṇa, then you can be a resident of Vraja, being in any part of the world. This famous deity, Govinda—in fact, we were so lucky; we were able to see Him yesterday and this morning, and moreover, He was able to see us. Why do we come to see Govinda? Why do we put so much effort into setting off on the journey here to Jaipur? The road takes a 4-5 hour drive, and so much effort still has to be spent to check into the hotel. Naturally, everyone, without exception, catches a cold in order to approach the front with open hearts, saying, "Here, Govinda, I came to You," and He can thus see us. How wonderful it is. People discuss meetings with various musicians; I saw this. How lucky you are. So we can confidently say that "I saw Govinda, and Govinda saw me." 

There is a wonderful verse described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, text 119. This is a very important, fundamental text. *Vaiṣṇava* means one who believes in Viṣṇu and Kṛṣṇa, and usually Vaiṣṇavas worship Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu, but Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are very selective; they worship a certain form of Kṛṣṇa. This verse describes a certain expansion of the manifestation of the Lord in the form of deities which we worship. The translation of this verse is: "Three deities conquered the hearts of the follower of the Lord. I worship the lotus feet of these deities, for they are the lords of my heart." A devotee like Kṛṣṇa is our authority, and we follow in his footsteps. These are the deities—the lords of his heart—and as followers, these deities are also the lords of our hearts. Especially today, this evening, we will see Gopīnātha, who is near the King. But He is also our love. And why are we trying to fall in love with Him? Because Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive, and there is a very beautiful description of how attractive He is given by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. 

"This is our Lord, the object of our worship. In the forest of the wish-giving tree known as Vṛndāvana, there is a golden palace, and in the middle of it stands a throne decorated with precious stones, called *yoga-pīṭha*. On the *pīṭha* sits Govinda, the true incarnation of Cupid. There He is served as a King, adorned with divine garments, ornaments, and other attributes, who is continuously served by thousands of devotees." 

What have we come to? As we recently heard in Vṛndāvana, "Govinda-jī" is an affectionate address to Him. Here He is called that. He was manifested, carved from stone 5,000 years ago. Remember when we went to the village of Campakalata? There was the *samādhi* of Kṛṣṇa’s great-grandson, Vajranābha. When Kṛṣṇa left this world, all the residents of Vraja cried, saying, "We miss our Lord." To calm and stop the crying of the *vrajavāsīs*, Vajranābha manifested the Lord in the original form of which He is, and we believe in this. Different of these three deities personify different forms of the Lord’s *līlās*, and one of these deities was Govinda. But like other deities in reality, over time it was lost. Can you imagine how time works? We are very grateful to Rūpa Gosvāmī for rediscovering Govinda in Vṛndāvana. In fact, Rūpa Gosvāmī was looking for Govinda. Why? Mainly because it was the instruction of Śrī Caitanya, given by the Gosvāmīs, to rediscover and restore the headquarters. As there is Jerusalem for the Jews or Mecca for the Muslims, with all respect to them, we say that they are not comparable to Vṛndāvana, but everyone—each religion—has its own headquarters. 

So, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, 500 years ago, made a statement. Although, in fact, He was born in a small village in Navadvīpa, He made a statement that soon throughout the entire universe, throughout the world, in all cities and villages, people will know His name. This was, of course, surprising to hear for the local residents because at that time they did not even know the name of the neighboring village. And every manager knows that this requires organizing an infrastructure that will help promote an international movement throughout the world, and for this, a headquarters is needed. 

And thus, Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave the order to the six Gosvāmīs to manifest this headquarters: "Kṛṣṇa, go to Vṛndāvana, write books, again reveal the places of the Lord’s pastimes, find the lost deities," and thus this knowledge again [was] objectified. One of the instructions was to find the deities. They were looking for these deities, but in fact, we can say: who else found whom? In fact, we know that the deities found them. Kṛṣṇa makes Kṛṣṇa consciousness very simple. As we know, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, on the *Rādhā-ramaṇa* deity... once he met with Brahmānanda Mahārāja in his house and saw that the *sevaka* was playing with the child—the deity did not come down from the altar and played because all the members of this family were pure devotees. The devotee was surprised, "Wow, what is this?" Brahmānanda said, "Well, this is the Lord." And Madana-mohana, He inspired this family to pass Him on as a deity to Rūpa Gosvāmī. This is the story. And Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, he worshiped *śālagrāma-śilā*, he meditated on the Lord on Rādhā-ramaṇa, and the next morning, what happened? He saw the beautiful Rādhā-ramaṇa; therefore, Rādhā-ramaṇa himself found him. 

The same principle applies to representatives of Kṛṣṇa, and Śrīla Prabhupāda is the ideal representative of Kṛṣṇa because we did not look for him, but he came and found us. Therefore, we must always remember that the Lord and His representatives are always looking for us. But the phenomenon of Govinda and Rūpa Gosvāmī is no less amazing. Historically, we know that basically Vṛndāvana was walked by that time, but Rūpa Gosvāmī still could not find Govinda. What is Kṛṣṇa consciousness if it does not have worship of deities? What is Kṛṣṇa consciousness without Kṛṣṇa? "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are not a statue; You are directly Yourself, the son of Mahārāja Nanda." If You can speak, then You can go to the heart. There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa and His deity form. What would our life be without Govinda? It would be empty. Of course, we have Kṛṣṇa in the form of His holy name; this is really enough. And like Rūpa Gosvāmī, we can also develop a desire to dress Kṛṣṇa, feed Kṛṣṇa, and thus serve Him. Therefore, we learn what the inhabitants of the spiritual world do, and this is called *sādhana-bhakti*, the process of devotional service. 

Therefore, we are so fortunate that Śrīla Prabhupāda, getting to the West, brought the worship of deities. Although this was a certain challenge—in theory, everyone thought it was just "idolatory." Here was a little girl, wanting a deity. What is her name? A little girl is looking for Gopāla; she came to me this morning and said, "Rūpa Mahārāja, can I have Gopāla?" What am I? No, I will tell her if a living being wants God... Can a little five-year-old girl understand? But I did not give her. That is why she is somewhere here; she is probably wandering and looking for Him because the worship of deities is so personal. Therefore, in fact, there are many rules and regulations; therefore, we do not take it lightly. I always say that the golden rule of worship of deities is to remember that Kṛṣṇa is a person. A person. Then you will follow everything. 

And Rūpa Gosvāmī did not have Govinda, and he wandered around the village. In fact, I read that he asked, turning to the local residents, "Have you seen Him?" They asked, "Who is Govinda?" Because He had been lost for the last 5,000 years. "Have you seen Govinda?" And therefore, no one had found Him; no one even knew or heard of Him. Here is little Rādha. If you want everything, you have a blessing; you can get it. Well, and he was so worried that he came to the bank of the river Yamunā, and he just cried, calling out, "Govinda! Govinda! Where are you?" He was so confused. Sometimes we cry and do not get a feeling of satisfaction. We want to desire; we must desire Kṛṣṇa just as much as we desire a feeling of pleasure. Sometimes we have these tears of despair flowing, and we must call Kṛṣṇa's name: "Kṛṣṇa, please!" 

And as he was crying, suddenly someone tapped him on the shoulder. He touched it, turned around, and there was a little boy, a seven-year-old boy. And the boy said, "Bābā, what are you doing in my village, sitting and crying?" "In your village? How old are you?" The child said with confidence, "Yes, in my village." And the child—he is this little boy, he is next to the Rūpa Gosvāmī—he said, "Bābā, please share, why are you so upset and angry?" Rūpa Gosvāmī, he began to open his heart, and the boy was told that, well, you know, all the other Gosvāmīs followed the instructions of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they found Kṛṣṇa deities, they established temples, but I still haven't found my Govinda. The little boy smiled, and he said, "Bābā, I actually play and walk all over the fields of Vṛndāvana, Vraja, and I noticed that in one place, on the shore, the cow Surabhi constantly comes to Him and waters the hill, that place, the hill's name, with such great love." And he told him, "Why don't you go there? Perhaps you will find Govinda there." 

He took this as a divine message and he immediately, quickly went to this hill. He saw this specific place that this boy pointed to, and lo and behold, there really was a little place that looked like a bump on top of His head. For thousands of years, Govinda was hidden there in the depths of the earth, and only the top of His head was slightly shown. A cow came out and washed Him every day. This was originally a *pīṭha*. And at that moment, he realized that this boy who directed him to this place was something different. Like Kṛṣṇa Himself, Rūpa Gosvāmī’s heart was satisfied, and he immediately called out to the local residents, "Look, I found It! Please help. Take all the necessary tools so that we can carefully get It out." 

This place is considered very sacred. It is called Govinda-kuṇḍa. This is actually the very place where Rūpa Gosvāmī built this temple. And in fact, this is the place where Govinda is located. The temple that was once destroyed by Aurangzeb and his soldiers is located there, and we don't often come there. But in fact, it is located on a hill. And when you go there, you will see that you need to climb a little. It was restored, of course, and even the worship of the deities was resumed there. 

And in fact, Rūpa is with you. He wrote a letter to the Lord. Just imagine. Do you know how people sometimes describe—my dear Lord? People sometimes write letters addressed to the Lord: "Oh my God, my mother has cancer, please cure her, or I need help with my position." Rūpa Gosvāmī, he wrote a letter to Caitanya Mahāprabhu saying that he followed His instructions and he plans to restore the worship of the deities, but he is here completely alone. Could He send someone to help him? And when did he receive this message, this letter? He was so happy because Rūpa Gosvāmī finally found his *iṣṭa-deva*. Mahāprabhu was thinking about which of His devotees are here in Purī? "I will send them to Vṛndāvana." Because no one wants to leave after many, many births. Kṛṣṇa says, "Finally, we achieve this, we achieve it." Imagine, here you are, finally, you have finally reached the Lord, and then He says to you, "Well, go ahead." Such is our love for Śrīla Vaiṣṇava; it manifests itself in action and not just sitting and warming oneself. 

As one of my spiritual sisters told me, at one time they were traveling with Prabhupāda from Calcutta to Hyderabad. They were on the train and at one of the stations, Prabhupāda looked out and said, "What an interesting, good place it would be for preachers! Install a temple here." They were like, "Well, in fact, they took it and did it." And thus the relationship with the spiritual teacher is expressed in service, in fulfilling his instructions. And one day in Purī, He said, "Kāśīśvara, come here, come here. I want you to go to Vṛndāvana and help Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *pūjā*, his worship." Kāśīśvara was resistant—what kind of absent-mindedness? The same feeling of separation that the gopīs experienced. She, at the same time, blissfully and... "It’s very painful, Mahāprabhu. I will miss You." And what did Mahāprabhu do? He actually had a deity—what was this deity called? Gaurāṅga—and He worshiped Him, and then He handed it over to Kāśīśvara. He said, "Here, worship Him, be satisfied. This deity is no different from Me." And Kāśīśvara, in fact, he was the first pujārī of Govinda. We know so much about Govinda 500 years ago, and he also worshiped this deity, Gaurāṅga. 

And when will be the next time we go to have *darśana* of Govinda? If you are looking at Govinda-jī on our left hand, look to the left of Him below; there is a small deity. This is Gaurāṅga-Govinda. In fact, to establish the worship of deities was not the only service of Rūpa Gosvāmī. To establish the worship of deities, which would later be followed in the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness—and in fact, another task of Rūpa Gosvāmī—in fact, he was awarded this honor to reveal, not just install there, but to fulfill this innermost desire of the heart of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is to reveal to the whole world in Vraja-bhūmi. Thus, our service is eternal, our life itself is eternal and devotional service; therefore, when we perform one service, we are also given another service, after it, the next, and thus we serve all our lives. He established the worship of the deities, as Mahāprabhu instructed him, and he went through Vṛndāvana, revealing various places where Kṛṣṇa manifested His pastimes. And in fact, he wrote many different books, and ultimately, he manifested this desire in the heart of Mahāprabhu, revealing who He really is. He knew the heart of the Lord, Caitanya, and he satisfied the desire of this servant. Therefore, being Gaura-bhakta, we pray, we give respect, we express our respect for him because he told us why he appeared in this world. 

For example, if you meet someone for the first time, the first question you ask is, "What are you doing here? What brought you to my city or my village?" People ask such a question, so we ask, "What brought the appearance of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to this world?" And we know that Mahāprabhu, He came here for two reasons: to distribute this love and to understand the mood of that love of Rādhā in relation to Kṛṣṇa, to understand transcendence. When Mahāprabhu first appeared on earth, He was not a *paṇḍita*; He was a scientist, He was just a villager, not particularly, and that's all. Everyone who studied with Him, they thought that He was completely ordinary. "Well, yes, He is good in Sanskrit," but they did not know that He is the incarnation of the Lord Himself. That is not *māyā*. Yes, He, and this needed to be revealed. Kṛṣṇa-caitanya later revealed Himself as Śrī Caitanya, and He spread the science of self-awareness, chanting the holy name. This is given; this is understandable. But more historically, the task was to reveal in Vraja-bhūmi all these feelings of friendly relations, of love, conjugal, parental, those feelings that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī experiences. It was not so easy, and it was very difficult to do. Mahāprabhu tested Himself; He wanted to understand what kind of love Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī feels towards Him as Kṛṣṇa, and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is exactly the person who saw and learned about this secret desire of the heart of Mahāprabhu. 

This is very beautiful, how he revealed love to you—all of us. Would you like to know about how sincere, secret desires of the Lord are actually difficult to understand? The secret desire of the heart, even if you ask, say, "Well, I really don't know how we can look into the heart of the Lord Himself," about what the world of *bhakti* has not heard. How did this happen? Who would like to hear? Well, as many people as possible. Rūpa Gosvāmī—in fact, when he first met his older brother, it was in the village of Ramakeli, and as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu recently mentioned, they were in the service of Nawab Hussain Shah, and they served... The story to retell, then Mahāprabhu, He was on the way, He went a little to the side, the cell, and there He met Rūpa Gosvāmī and said that you should leave the supreme court, and one way or another they were able to leave their affairs on the advice of the government. Once with you, about the confluence of the two rivers, it was in this place that Mahāprabhu began to open His heart. You know, when you meet someone and you open your heart to someone for the first time, it takes time, and Mahāprabhu gave, then bestowed on him one drop to understand His ocean of transcendental *rāga*-devotional service is so great that no one can measure it. 

However, "To give you a taste of this ocean, I will describe just one drop." The ocean of transcendental devotional services is so great that no one can measure it. However, to give you a taste of this ocean, I will write just one drop of it. Like an ocean of love, what can I paraphrase when describing this ocean of love? And He says, "To give you a taste of it, I will describe just one drop." It is said that He not only blessed him with this one drop, but also gave the blessing so that he could describe it and distribute it so that it would be available to others. He allowed him to taste it. Why not give you a much larger dose of this love at once? What, like Rūpa Gosvāmī? It is said that even this one drop is enough to flood millions and millions of universes. In fact, now that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī tasted this love, this is Vraja-bhakti, and then he went to actually distribute it through his manuscripts, through his books, and he described love not like that manifested in this material world, but selfless love. 

In fact, in this regard, there is a wonderful *śloka* about how you shared this nectar: "In my *pūjā*, to cleanse my physical body, I regularly take ablution using water. However, for the sake of complete purification of myself and my existence, I wash myself in the nectar of words." You can repeat: "To cleanse my physical body, I regularly take ablution using water. However, for the sake of complete purification of myself and my existence, I wash myself in the nectar of words." — Rūpa Gosvāmī. 

I think that we have more Russian devotees gathered, and Rūpa Gosvāmī, he thought that in order to fulfill this secret desire of the heart, he needs to flood Mahāprabhu like a play. Because it is difficult for someone... Maybe everyone likes to watch a performance sometimes. If you talk about philosophy, then people, they just sit and fall asleep. But if you tell them a story and the moral of this story, then they listen attentively. To express these sentiments of love, he decided to show this theatrical production. Of course, it was not an ordinary, everyday one. He said that "in this production I will show the secret beautiful *līlā* of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and how they meet in Vṛndāvana." Remember how I always told you that life and the essence of life is to always reunite, so they always try to unite them? Then he said that "I will also describe the *līlā* of separation of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, like the one when Kṛṣṇa leaves, or to Mathurā, or to Dvārakā," and such were the intentions of the Rūpa Gosvāmī. 

He began to write a book about Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s meeting in Vṛndāvana, also the separation when Kṛṣṇa goes to Mathurā or to Dvārakā, and along the way, as he was compiling this book, he decided to go to Purī to meet Mahāprabhu. Along the way, he stopped in a village called Satyabhāmāpura, and interestingly, what happened? When he stopped in this village and lay down to rest at night, Satyabhāmā came to him in a dream. As you know, she is one of the main queens, and this was a vision of Satyabhāmā. Rūpa Gosvāmī appeared in a dream, and she said, "Rūpa, please do not include in this one book a description of these two topics that you have chosen. It is better to write two books: one book about meeting and another book about separation. There is no need to combine them together." He woke up with the thoughts that, "Well, I wanted to write such a book; Satyabhāmā came to me and told me to write two," and he thought, "Is it worth doing this?" And here is the instruction to write about these relationships, and here are the meetings and separations. All this science is described there. And when, of course, he shared with Him [Caitanya Mahāprabhu] this vision, the dream in which Satyabhāmā appeared to him and what she told him, Mahāprabhu confirmed that this was indeed the right decision. But He did not express it so simply. He said that Kṛṣṇa is known by the name Yadu-kumāra; this is Kṛṣṇa, He is different from Kṛṣṇa, the son of Mahārāja Nanda. Yadu-kumāra shows His games in the cities of Mathurā and Dvārakā as never before—He never leaves Vṛndāvana. 

As *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 1.167 [says], in simple words, Mahāprabhu said, "Rūpa Gosvāmī, there is no need to take Kṛṣṇa away from Vṛndāvana without describing in one book about how Kṛṣṇa leaves Vṛndāvana; He goes to Dvārakā, it is very painful." And therefore, he agreed with these words and said that indeed, if necessary, then write it in two volumes, in two books, because none of the devotees want to hear about how Kṛṣṇa leaves Vṛndāvana because it is very painful when the Lord leaves my life. Therefore, two different books. Like Kavikarṇapūra, who is a great devotee of the Lord, Caitanya, he wrote *Ananda-vṛndāvana-campū*, and studying various scriptures—in particular *Ananda-vṛndāvana-campū*—I came across the fact that he gives descriptions of Kṛṣṇa’s various pastimes from His very birth right up to *rāsa-līlā* and how they swung on the swing of all these *līlās*, but he does not give a description of how Kṛṣṇa leaves Vṛndāvana; he stops at this point. In fact, one of the ācāryas gave comment on this, sharing the thoughts that visited Kavikarṇapūra, that "my lady Rādhikā cannot tolerate this separation, so I will not write about this." Therefore, Kavikarṇapūra was Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s devotee; he decided that if my lady, she does not want this, if this causes such pain, then that's it, I will no longer write about Kṛṣṇa who leaves Mathurā. 

And on the advice of the Lord, Caitanya, Rūpa Gosvāmī divided this play into two parts: and the first is *Vidagdha-mādhava*, which describes the various pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, and the second is *Lalita-mādhava*, which describes the departure of Kṛṣṇa to Dvārakā. The end of the story? No. And in fact, for our deeper understanding, Rūpa Gosvāmī, he wrote not only one book about meeting Kṛṣṇa; he also wrote a book about separation from Kṛṣṇa because in separation, our love grows even more. And someone can say that "I do not want to hear about how Kṛṣṇa goes to Dvārakā or Mathurā and about those queens; I want to hear only about Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana." But in fact, this separation develops our love even more on a transcendental, esoteric level, and this is the truth and nothing but the truth. 

In fact, it is very important for us to listen and learn from what *Lalita-mādhava* describes. We are very grateful because we hear there about how Kṛṣṇa cries in separation for the inhabitants of Vraja, and how the inhabitants of Vraja cry in separation for Kṛṣṇa. "Did I really spend so many lives trying to reconnect with Kṛṣṇa and He will just up and leave?" Well, yes, this is part of the plan; this is what happens, because in separation, in separation, our love increases even more, so be prepared. Kṛṣṇa will come, and then... 

While, in fact, in another book, *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes, he describes that without the state of mind of separation, the state of mind of meeting will not be returned to the highest levels of the stage. Like devotees—they go on vacation and then, returning, they turn to their loved ones with the words, "Oh, I missed you so much! I love you so much, I missed you even more." It is not so. And in fact, it's not just a meeting; meeting, a little separation, is necessary for the meeting to be even sweeter, and this is the science of devotion. One of the ācāryas wrote about the game: this is the mood of separation; it is very important because it plays a role in cultivating the sweetness of the meeting. We are diving deeper and deeper, so hold on. Rūpa Gosvāmī takes another step in helping us understand ours. He actually wrote a comment on *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*, and there he quotes Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa Himself prefers separation. Do you want to know what Kṛṣṇa once said? I will not read you Sanskrit; it is too difficult and the pronunciation is complicated. But here is what Kṛṣṇa said. Kṛṣṇa says to Uddhava that if I had to choose between meeting and separation, I would prefer separation from My beloved because when I meet her, I see her in only one place, whereas in separation, My whole universe is filled with her. 

Well, what does poor Rādhārāṇī think about this? Kṛṣṇa prefers separation again because the meeting becomes sweeter. Well, what about poor Rādhārāṇī, what does she feel about separation? And we learned about what Kṛṣṇa thinks on this account in the described mood. But also Rūpa Gosvāmī, he shares what Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī thinks about this. "Thanks Kṛṣṇa for this, thank you." Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, verse 240, describes that Rādhā says that separation from Kṛṣṇa is better than meeting Him. "When I meet Him, Kṛṣṇa is only one, but when I am separate, the three worlds are filled with Kṛṣṇa." These are deeper moments, but by the grace of Rūpa Gosvāmī, we learned about them and we know what awaits us ahead, all by the grace of Rūpa Gosvāmī. Therefore, we express gratitude to Rūpa Gosvāmī for giving us a more intimate, deep understanding. This in previous centuries many great souls found refuge with *bhakti*. However, in this age, by the grace of dear companion Rūpa, we give to realize His forms of *rasa*. Therefore, I offer him my obeisances constantly. Such a beautiful description of glorification, so interesting, that it is so deeply esoteric, difficult to follow this, but such is the science. Such is the true science of love, and we must study it. What is amazing is that the Lord, Caitanya, gave this exalted, transcendental love and the science of it to people. 

Kṛṣṇa says that people of Kali-yuga are *śūdras* of an even lower class. And all this knowledge is provided and intended for *brāhmaṇas* and those who can truly appreciate it. When Rūpa Gosvāmī only touched this secret desire of the heart of the Lord, he recited this prayer: "I glorify the Lord, Caitanya, as the very mercy of reincarnation that liberates the people of this world." And he says that you give this to those who are in London, Sydney, everywhere, they only go to clubs and drink, but You gave them this mercy. And what is this example of what people of Rūpa Gosvāmī is? He was surprised at how people of such a mentality are ready, how they can leave all this and completely surrender to the vibration of chanting the holy name. Do you want to see an example of this? Look in the mirror; it's a miracle. Give *Rādha-bhakti* to the people of Kali-yuga. People say, "I want to see a miracle." Look in the mirror; you are this, and you are a miracle. You are confirmation of the boundless mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And we begin to understand what Vraja-bhakti is. What is it? Everything is about You and not about me, not "I, mine, to me," but Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda says that he never asks Kṛṣṇa for anything, only serves Him. 

But what about the secret? I would like to tell and share a little. I knew this secret desire of Mahāprabhu. When did this moment happen, when Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to feel and learn about this love, *rāga*, which Rādhā experiences? When He wanted to know this Vraja-bhakti, this is a real history lesson. In fact, it was at the time when Rūpa Gosvāmī met Lord Caitanya as part of the festival. When such a magnificent *rāga*—reincarnation of the Lord—and suddenly the Lord quoted Caitanya... and suddenly the Lord quoted a verse from *Sahitya-darpaṇa*. Please do not read this ordinary scripture edition. Well, just as a young man and a girl say "I love you, I love you too," that is, this does not need to be read. But such everyday, let's say, worldly poetry, He quoted, Mahāprabhu. 

"The same person who stole my heart in my youth now has become my master again. The same moonlit nights of the month of Caitra, the same scent of Malati flowers, and the same sweet breeze blows from the Kadam forest. In our intimate relationship, I am the same beloved, but my mind is still unhappy. I can't wait to return to that place on the banks of the Reva, by the Vetasi tree. Such is my desire." 

You know, some girls, they can be so in the clouds, and you know, at that moment when Mahāprabhu quoted this ordinary poetry, all the devotees gathered there are like... Imagine, just like during a wonderful *kīrtana*, Rūpa Gosvāmī, he suddenly starts rap or something fatal or punk or some pop, and then Mahāprabhu begins to quote a verse that describes the feeling of a girl towards her boyfriend. But Rūpa Gosvāmī, knowing the heart of Caitanya Mahāprabhu—most likely because he is Rūpa Mañjarī, who actually serves the world—well, let's not take this into account. He really can and knows, understands what He is experiencing. Therefore, he rephrased this verse in a more poetic, spiritual way, where Mahāprabhu could find it, and then Mahāprabhu, having found this verse, would understand and be able to understand that Rūpa really knows there the desire, the secret desire of My heart. Wouldn't it be wonderful to hear it like the *dhyāna* from the recitation of Rūpa-Kṛṣṇa? This is how it sounds: 

"My dear friend, now I met my very old and dear friend Kṛṣṇa on this field of Kurukṣetra. I am the same kind of Rādhārāṇī, and now we meet together; it's very pleasant, but still, I would like to go to the shore of Yamunā, under the shelter of the trees. I want to hear the vibration of His sweet flute playing the fifth note in the forest of Vṛndāvana." 

The tricks of monkeys—let's clap, yes, the monkey also wants to listen to Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In this verse, I explained the inner meaning of the mood of the Lord, Caitanya, thus revealing to the world the importance, let's say, of *para-rasa*, a transcendental mood, a loving relationship between Lord Kṛṣṇa and gopīs, and this is very intimate. Another day, and who could know the heart if Rūpa Gosvāmī had not done this? We are so indebted to him. I would like to conclude today, quoting... He is approximately familiar with... And when I came across this at the Oslo Institute, I thought I saw that, in fact, this letter is a verse that was also addressed to you. It turns out they were contemporaries. And I thought, when, when will I be able to read this verse, get it and look? Where are we now? We are in Jaipur. We can read it now. And as far as I know, no Westerners have yet heard this verse. This verse is especially for everyone present. Are you ready? 

"If Rūpa Gosvāmī had not appeared in the era of Kali, who would have opened the doors of the great treasury of Vraja-prema? Who, except Rūpa Gosvāmī, could extract the essence of the scriptures just as a swan separates water from milk? Who could give up everything to perform *bhajana* in Vṛndāvana? Who could write such scriptures? He was this honeybee among many yellow blooming forest flowers and lotuses. Enchanted, without this bumblebee, to comprehend the art of drinking ambrosia present but hidden in these flowers... Who could understand the greatness of Mathurā and Vṛndāvana? Who could comprehend the subtleties of Vraja? Who could understand the *rati* between Śrī-Rādhā and Śrī-Kṛṣṇa? Who could know this love? By the grace of the lotus feet, all souls can sing and inspire others to sing the glories of love, Śrī-Rūpa-Mañjarī, thereby attaining true joy. O Gosvāmī, who has surrendered to your lotus feet, may this *jīva* be able to comprehend your limitless greatness." 

Okay, by the direction of the crowd, by the wish of the majority, pure nectar is called *yugala-vṛndāvana*. 

"If Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī had not appeared in the age of Kali, who would have opened the doors of the great treasury of Vraja? Who, other than Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, could extract the essence of the scriptures just as a swan separates water from milk? Who could give up everything to perform *bhajana* in Vṛndāvana? Who could write such scriptures? He was a honeybee among many yellow blooming forest flowers and lotuses. Enchanted, without this honeybee, to comprehend the art of drinking ambrosia present but hidden in these flowers... Who could understand the greatness of Mathurā and Vṛndāvana? Who could comprehend the subtleties of Vraja? Who could understand the *rati* between Śrī-Rādhā and Śrī-Kṛṣṇa? Who could know this love? By the grace of his lotus feet, all souls can sing and inspire others to sing about the glories of love, Śrī-Rūpa-Mañjarī, thereby attain true joy. O Gosvāmī, who has surrendered to his lotus feet, may this *jīva* be able to comprehend your boundless greatness."""