"*00418*.*
"### Lord Caitanya’s Journey to Vṛndāvana - Part 2

Hi everyone, a warm welcome back. I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master who gave me beautiful kaṇṭhī-mālā, a full tilaka, the beautiful form of a devotee, and who offered me his shelter. In one of his hands, he is holding my hand, and with his other hand, he is holding the lamp of knowledge which helps me to cross over the dark ocean of the material world. My Guru deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye. I bow down to him again and again. Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So, after a bit of a break—we were in America for a few weeks—we are continuing with our seminar on Lord Caitanya’s famous journey to Vṛndāvana. This will take us a few classes, actually, and then we will return to the Vṛndāvana pastimes. We gave the first lecture while in America, and this is part two. As I mentioned in part one, we are speaking from a number of authoritative sources including *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā chapter 17, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s book *Gaurāṅga-līlāmṛta*, and *Gora-līlā-sāgara* by Lalita Kiśora, who, as I mentioned before, was a contemporary poet of Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura.

In our first lecture, we discussed Lord Caitanya’s attempts to go to Vṛndāvana several times and how he was finally successful in beginning his journey there from Jagannātha Purī with one servant, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya. On Mahāprabhu’s first attempt to go to Vṛndāvana, he himself abandoned the trip because so many devotees were following him. I was reading *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā chapter 16, where Mahāprabhu says, "I then understood that I was going to Vṛndāvana like a magician with his show, and this is certainly not good. No one should go to Vṛndāvana with so many men." He continues, "I then began to consider that Vṛndāvana is a very solitary place; it is invincible and very difficult to attain. I therefore decided to go there alone, or at the utmost with only one person." Then he says, "Mādhavendra Purī went to Vṛndāvana alone, and Kṛṣṇa, on the pretext of giving him milk, granted him an audience." So, therein Mahāprabhu said no one should go to Vṛndāvana with so many men, and it is a fact because traditionally Vṛndāvana is meant for *bhajana*.

I remember when my dear God-sister, Devahūti Mātājī, asked Śrīla Prabhupāda one time in the early 70s if she could open a preaching center in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Prabhupāda thought for a moment and he said, "No, Rādhā-kuṇḍa is for *bhajana*." Also, one time Śrīla Prabhupāda encouraged his householder disciples to settle in Māyāpura and the unmarried men and women to serve in Vṛndāvana. Of course, we know that eventually, Śrīla Prabhupāda welcomed all his disciples and everyone to come to Vṛndāvana, and that is made very clear in the Fifth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, I think it is 5.13.8. There is an immortal purport there in which Prabhupāda states as follows: "One must go to the Vṛndāvana forest and take shelter of Govinda; that will make one happy. The International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness is therefore constructing a Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple to invite all its members as well as outsiders to come and live peacefully in a spiritual atmosphere that will help one become elevated to the transcendental world and return home, back to Godhead." Thank you.

But even then, the meditation and focus while in Vṛndāvana, we should try to make it very deep. You know, "Where can I find Kṛṣṇa?" That is the mood of great devotees. Vṛndāvana is the playground of God, so He is there, and we go to find Kṛṣṇa. Like Prabhupāda said many times, when he first went to Vṛndāvana, he was expecting to see Kṛṣṇa jump out from behind any bush. He said, "Like the Six Gosvāmīs, who were chanting very loudly everywhere in Vṛndāvana, they were shouting: *he rādhe! vraja-devīke ca lalite! he nanda-sūno! kutaḥ śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pāda-tale kālindī-taṭe kutaḥ*—where are you all now? Are you just on the hill of Govardhana, or are you under the trees and the banks of the Yamunā? Where are you?" These were their moods in executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In this way, Mahāprabhu concluded: "I have therefore resolved to go alone or at the utmost with one servant. In this way, my journey to Vṛndāvana will be beautiful." And as we discussed in our first lecture in the series, that most fortunate person to go with Mahāprabhu, who can imagine, was Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya.

So, in the last lecture, we concluded that they were just leaving Jagannātha Purī. After leaving Jagannātha Purī, after a day’s journey, they reached a place called Rāi Rāmānanda Bagīcā—Rāi Rāmānanda Bagīcā meaning literally the garden of Rāmānanda Rāya. Now, as many of us know, Rāmānanda Rāya was a governor of Mahārāja Pratāparudra; Mahārāja Pratāparudra was the king. So, Rāmānanda Rāya was a governor of the king in a town called Vidyanagara, and later he became one of the ministers in the court of Mahārāja Pratāparudra. A special personality, Rāmānanda Rāya. Well, both of them—more important perhaps—is that in *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, it is stated that some people hold that Rāmānanda Rāya was an incarnation of Lalitā-sakhī, while others say he was an incarnation of Viśākhā-sakhī. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* states that Rāmānanda Rāya was one of the Lord’s three and a half most intimate associates. The other two were Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śikhī Māhiti, and Śikhī Māhiti’s sister was the "half" person, but just as important. So, Rāmānanda Rāya, knowing that Mahāprabhu and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya were traveling in that direction, had arranged for Lord Caitanya to take rest in his garden, in that property that belonged to him. In the Vṛndāvana Research Center, we discovered actually the history of this property belonging to Rāmānanda Rāya, officially called Rāi Rāmānanda Bagīcā. We actually found the history, which is as follows—it is really interesting. One time, Mahārāja Pratāparudra, in appreciation for a battle that Rāmānanda Rāya had fought and won, gave Rāmānanda Rāya this piece of land, essentially a large garden. It is near the present-day town. 

I was reading that after that, Rāmānanda Rāya would secretly give the money that came from renting that property out to others to Svarūpa Dāmodara, Lord Caitanya’s personal servant, for the service of Mahāprabhu. You know, the taxes, you could say, or the rent from that property, Rāmānanda Rāya would give it to Svarūpa Dāmodara for the service of Mahāprabhu. I say secretly because Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu didn’t know where that money was coming from. Rāmānanda Rāya and Dāmodara didn’t reveal this to Mahāprabhu because Lord Caitanya, as a sannyāsī, didn’t want to use, you could say, government or royal money in his service. He didn’t associate with kings and go to palaces and things like that, so he wouldn’t approve that this money was coming from this land for his service. However, in his travels as a sannyāsī—especially I was reading when he went to South India—it cost money. Recently, when I was in Oṛissā, I read in the newspaper, it was in the headlines, that a copper plate was discovered in Oṛissā in an archaeological expedition, a dig, on which it was written—it is really interesting—that Mahārāja Pratāparudra himself gave funds for Mahāprabhu’s travels to India. Not only did Rāmānanda Rāya give money, but even Mahārāja Pratāparudra gave money. This was on this copper plate that they found, you know, the Archaeological Society. It is interesting. And like Rāmānanda Rāya, Mahārāja Pratāparudra was also a great devotee of the Lord, although the līlā was that Mahāprabhu would not favor coming to see him and spend time with him in his palace because he was a sannyāsī. But actually, he was a great devotee of the Lord. This we know from *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā* verse 118, where it is written: "Indradyumna, who previously worshipped Lord Jagannātha, was born as Mahārāja Pratāparudra with the same opulences as Indradyumna himself." That is really interesting. 

Furthermore, I discovered that Mahārāja Pratāparudra took initiation from Kāśī Miśra Paṇḍita. We spoke about that previously; Mahāprabhu stayed in the home of Kāśī Miśra when he was in Jagannātha Purī for 18 years, in that home, Kāśī Miśra had that room, the Gambhīrā, where Mahāprabhu experienced all his ecstatic symptoms. Now, another very interesting fact that we found in our research is that when the famous deity of Sākṣi-gopāla, that famous witness deity, came to Oṛissā—because the brāhmaṇa boy asked the deity to come from Vṛndāvana to Oṛissā to stand as a witness in a trial—so when Sākṣi-gopāla, following that boy, came to Oṛissā, I was reading in the institute, before being placed where he is worshipped now, that deity was temporarily worshipped in Mahārāja Pratāparudra’s palace. Historical records show that. And when Mahārāja Pratāparudra invited Lord Caitanya to visit Sākṣi-gopāla upon his arrival, Mahāprabhu again declined the invitation because it wasn't proper for him, as a sannyāsī, to go to a royal palace. Now, when his devotee, Mahārāja Pratāparudra, heard this, he said, "A palace becomes royal when the king is present, but when the king is not present, the palace simply becomes a monument." He sent that message to Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu and asked Rāmānanda Rāya to please convince Mahāprabhu with this logic to come and take darśana of Sākṣi-gopāla. So, he left the palace—he left for a week or something—and historical records show that Mahāprabhu actually went and visited, let us say, took darśana of Sākṣi-gopāla in the palace. It is written that when he came, he danced ecstatically before the Lord there. 

So, all the followers of our beloved Mahāprabhu in Oṛissā, they say that the deity of Sākṣi-gopāla is famous as the "witness deity" not only because he acted as a witness for the brāhmaṇa boy as described in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, but also because Sākṣi-gopāla witnessed himself, the deity, the dancing of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. They said that is why he is Sākṣi-gopāla, because he witnessed the dancing of Lord Caitanya. Now, it is also written that when Mahārāja Pratāparudra experienced—you know, later on, when he experienced separation from Lord Caitanya—he would go sometimes to take darśana of the Sākṣi-gopāla deity where he eventually was taken and worshipped. Because it is said that the eyes of Sākṣi-gopāla act like a mirror, and when Mahāprabhu was dancing in front of Sākṣi-gopāla, his image, Mahāprabhu’s image, was captured in Sākṣi-gopāla’s eyes. And when taking darśana of Sākṣi-gopāla’s eyes, Mahārāja Pratāparudra’s feelings of separation from Lord Caitanya were pacified, because in those mirror-like eyes, which captured the form of Mahāprabhu dancing, he saw Mahāprabhu dancing. So, his separation was mitigated, pacified. That is so much nectar. 

Kṛṣṇa, so anyway, back to the pastime where Rāmānanda Rāya had arranged for Lord Caitanya to take rest in his garden, in Rāi Rāmānanda Bagīcā. Soon after Mahāprabhu and Balabhadra had left Purī for Vṛndāvana, actually the first day, you could say, it is described that as Lord Caitanya laid down in that garden, tired from the first day of travel on a special cloth, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya started massaging his lotus feet. Seeing Mahāprabhu exhausted from an entire day of travel, he said to Mahāprabhu, "My dear Lord, I can understand from your deep breathing that you are really tired, you are exhausted." But then Lord Caitanya revealed the real reason for his deep breathing when he said, "My dear Bāla, the truth is I cannot live without Lord Jagannātha. At the moment, I am between Purī and Vṛndāvana. I am like a man who wants to achieve the stars but is between the sky and earth and not able to benefit from either." And pausing for a moment, taking another deep breath, he continued, "I am very grateful for my mother. Whatever I am doing in my life, and whatever little amount of Kṛṣṇa-bhakti I have, I have attained it only by her grace. Kṛṣṇa left His mother Yaśodā to give the absolute truth to the fallen conditioned souls. I also had to leave my mother for sharing the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and their love to all living entities. But Mother Śacī always stays within my heart." 

So after hearing Mahāprabhu’s words, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya offered him some—I was reading—mahā-prasādam of Lord Jagannātha that was given by Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita for Lord Caitanya. And when Mahāprabhu heard this, that this prasādam had come from Gadādhara Paṇḍita, he said, "Śrī Gadādhara is my eternal soulmate. He knows what pain I am going through in separation from Kṛṣṇa. When I was a gṛhastha, I used to cry day and night in separation from Kṛṣṇa. One day Gadādhara came to my residence, and I gave him a śālagrāma-śilā; actually, I gave all the śālagrāma-śilās worshipped previously by my father and grandfather. I had faith that Gadādhara would worship them with love and devotion." And then, remembering Śrī Gadādhara, and as we know an incarnation of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, this caused Mahāprabhu to close his eyes and stop speaking, and as a result, everything went silent. And the ācāryas describe it as the "calm before the storm of mahā-bhāva." Mahā-bhāva is the highest ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa that Rādhā experiences. So, the calm before the storm of mahā-bhāva. And after some moments, Mahāprabhu opened his eyes and, in the mood of Rādhārāṇī, started calling to Kṛṣṇa. Now, the ācāryas say this was not unusual, for a primary reason for Kṛṣṇa’s descent as we know into this world as Lord Caitanya was to understand and experience Rādhārāṇī’s love for Him. So, it is not unusual; He is calling out like that. And at this point, Balabhadra tried to control Mahāprabhu’s ecstatic symptoms by holding his hand and then finally embracing him. 

And after some time, Lord Caitanya called out in the mood of Rādhā, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, O Govinda! Please show me your pastimes in the flower groves of Vṛndāvana’s forests, in the waters of the Yamunā, and within the caves of Govardhana Hill." Now, then something really interesting happened; suddenly the weather started changing, and as dark clouds appeared in the sky, and as the sun hid behind the clouds because of the darkness, Lord Caitanya’s golden limbs assumed a bluish-black color. And instead of chanting Kṛṣṇa and Govinda’s names as Rādhā would do, he started calling out Rādhārāṇī’s names as Kṛṣṇa would do. Because now his complexion was dark, he started calling out—excuse me—calling out Rādhā’s names as Kṛṣṇa would do. He called out, "O Rādhē! Daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu! Rosebud! Rosebud of the garden of Rasa, please reveal your beauty to me!" 

Then just then, actually, the sun broke through the clouds, revealing Lord Caitanya’s golden form; his mood changed again and he started crying in separation from Kṛṣṇa. So, like this, back and forth—at one moment he is experiencing, Mahāprabhu is experiencing, Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa, which He wanted to know, and at the next moment, He is experiencing Kṛṣṇa’s love for Rādhā. Now, both are possible for Lord Caitanya because, well, in *Caitanya-bhāgavata* we have heard it said, *śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya kṛṣṇa*. Lord Caitanya is none other than the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā 4.56, we hear: "To taste this divine mellow, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have appeared in one body as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who appeared in Māyāpura-dhāma." And I also found a quote by Dāmodara Gosvāmī who said one time, "Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa assumed oneness in the form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." And I read another ācārya—he wrote it is really beautiful: "As the wind comes from Jagannātha Purī, love for Śrī Rādhā overwhelms Mahāprabhu, and as the wind comes from the direction of Vṛndāvana, love for Kṛṣṇa overwhelms him." 

And as Mahāprabhu was inundated by this love, it is described his deep breaths increased. Viśvanātha describes his deep breaths increased, and as he inhaled, he experienced Kṛṣṇa above, and as he exhaled, he experienced Rādhā. Kṛṣṇa, of course, these are very deep subject matters and probably better, you know, we should try to understand them better by studying Śrīla Prabhupāda’s purports and explanations in chapters 14 and 15 of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Antya-līlā. These subject matters are discussed by Prabhupāda; those chapters are entitled "Lord Caitanya's Feelings of Separation from Kṛṣṇa" and the other chapter is entitled "The Transcendental Madness of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu." It goes deep into that. So after witnessing Lord Caitanya’s ecstatic symptoms of love of God, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya wrote a letter to Śrī Gadādhara and sent it back to Jagannātha Purī with a messenger. And I found the letter in the research center in the books I quoted earlier at the beginning of this lecture. In his letter, he wrote: "Dear Paṇḍitajī, today I witnessed the prema—the love—of virahiṇī Rādhā being separated from Śrī Rādhā and virahī Kṛṣṇa being separated from Kṛṣṇa, all together in one body as Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Unable to pacify Mahāprabhu, your servant cries and weeps in helplessness." Now, it is written that after reading this letter, Śrī Gadādhara, he became anxious as to how Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya could take care of Mahāprabhu all alone. So many things are happening, you know; he has got the money to provide all the provisions and whatever is required, we as we discussed, but all these ecstatic emotions—how is he going to juggle all these things? Gadādhara Paṇḍita became a little anxious. It is so nice to see into the daily lives of these great devotees by previous historians.

So the next day, after walking for many hours, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya and Mahāprabhu arrived at the village of Priyānagara. I saw it on a map—Priyānagara—and they were greeted by a large group of villagers who were just transfixed; it is described that seeing the beauty of Lord Caitanya, they just saw this effulgent golden avatar and they became motionless, just transfixed. And Lord Caitanya, after eating some sweet berries and drinking baela juice in his continuous ecstatic state, he asked Balabhadra to look at the map and tell him how many hours they were away from Vṛndāvana. Although they were only two days or so into a three-month journey, he is asking this question, and Balabhadra didn’t want to disappoint or discourage Mahāprabhu, so he said, "Kachu-kachu kṣaṇi," which means, "We will reach in a short time." But knowing that he had not been able to tell Lord Caitanya the actual fact—they were still far from Vṛndāvana—Bhaṭṭācārya, it is very touching, he started crying uncontrollably while sitting under a tall tree. Now, the people of Priyānagara, they say that that tree, which was irrigated, they say, by the tears of Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, it still exists. They say it was irrigated by the tears of Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya and it still exists. And it is said that pilgrims come regularly to embrace that tree and dig up the earth where he cried and take a little dust and put it in their mouths. When I heard that, I think, "I have to go there. I also want to embrace that tree and take some dust to become purified, so that my love for Caitanya Mahāprabhu and service to Caitanya Mahāprabhu by spreading the message of Lord Caitanya under Prabhupāda’s direction all over the world, that opportunity will be there as long as possible." That is what I love to do. 

So after some time, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya is described—he wiped his tears away and went to a nearby pond and drank some water to refresh himself. Then he came in front of Mahāprabhu and said, "Mahāprabhu, we should continue now before it gets dark." Now, thinking that Vṛndāvana was not far away, it is described Mahāprabhu started walking very fast in hopes of reaching Vṛndāvana before it became dark. But in reality, the ācāryas say they still had, what is interesting, three months and 56 stops to go. That is how it is put in śāstra: they had three months and 56 stops to go. So that night, they slept under a mango tree, but in reality, neither Balabhadra nor Mahāprabhu slept. Balabhadra didn’t sleep because he was in anxiety—what to say to Mahāprabhu the next morning should Mahāprabhu ask again, "How far is Vṛndāvana?" And Mahāprabhu, he didn’t sleep because, well, he was so anxious to get there. 

So the next day, they walked 15 krośas, which I calculated to be 40 kilometers, without stopping, and they just crossed over the border of Oṛissā; that is so far, they crossed over—you have seen the map of India—Vṛndāvana, they just crossed the border of Oṛissā. So our poet Lalita Kiśora concludes in his account of this part of Lord Caitanya’s journey to Vṛndāvana by writing as follows, and I will finish today—we have got, you know, three months and 56 stops to go, so there is more nectar coming from us. He writes so beautifully: "May my body be the bridge from Purī to Vṛndāvana that Mahāprabhu can cross in just one breath. All along the way, I, Lalita dāsa, hanker to hold an umbrella over Mahāprabhu’s head, offering him with the cāmara fan, and singing the sweet holy names of Kṛṣṇa to make his journey through the country easy and smooth." Obeisances to the poet, to Viśvanātha, to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, and all the devotees who took part in those pastimes. All right, Kṛṣṇa. So again, we have a long journey ahead of us, but a very blissful journey, and we will continue in a few days’ time. Good to be back again and I will see everyone soon with part three. 

Śrī Śrī Gauranītāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa! 

Take all the fallen conditioned souls with this message! Śrīla Prabhupāda—revealer of the Dhāma, King of the Gaura-bhaktas—jay!"