"*00420*.*
"Everyone, welcome back. I came across a very beautiful poem written by Surdas, a famous Vaiṣṇava poet from several centuries ago, glorifying the spiritual master. He writes: "I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master, who gave me beautiful kaṇṭhī-mālā, effulgent tilaka, the beautiful form of a devotee, and who offered me his shelter. In one of his hands, he is holding my hand, and with his other hand, he is holding the lamp of knowledge which helps one to cross over the dark ocean of the material world." Surdas says my guru deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye. I bow down to him again and again. All glories to Prabhupāda.

So, for the next seven days, leading up to Gaura-pūrṇimā, we are going to have a seven-part seminar on Lord Caitanya’s very famous journey to Vṛndāvana. We will be speaking from a number of sources, primarily *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Madhya-līlā 17), Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's unpublished book called *Gaura-līlāmṛta*—which we found in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute—and also *Gaura-līlā Sāgara*, another unpublished book by Lalit Kiśora Dāsa. Lalit Kiśora Dāsa was a contemporary poet of Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura; he was from the village of Uṭgāon near Varṣāṇā. When I say it, I can just see it in my mind; it’s the village of Lalitā Sakhī. We’ve been there many times. He was initiated in the line of Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita of the Pañca-tattva, and his beautiful poetry is still sung today in both the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple in Vṛndāvana and Govindajī’s temple in Jaipur. It also brings thoughts of Govindajī to me. His descriptions of the pastimes of Lord Caitanya were all written in the Brajabhāṣā language of Vṛndāvana—it’s a dialect they speak in Vṛndāvana. An indirect result of this was, unfortunately, that his poetry was not widely read during his lifetime because, as we know, most of Mahāprabhu's followers at that time were Bengali and were not so conversant with the Brajabhāṣā dialect. But fortunately, we found some of his writings in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute as well, and we procured his poetic songs and works from the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple in Vṛndāvana and the Rādhā-Govinda temple in Jaipur. So, we will begin today with several verses from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* Madhya-līlā 17, texts 3, 4, and 5.

When autumn arrived, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu decided to go to Vṛndāvana. In a solitary place, he consulted with Rāmānanda Rāya and Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī. The Lord requested Rāmānanda Rāya and Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī to help him go to Vṛndāvana. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "I shall leave early in the morning and go incognito, taking the road through the forest. I shall go alone. I shall not take anyone with me." So, by studying the life of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we can understand that he was actually always absorbed in thoughts of Śrī Vṛndāvana. Often, he would inquire in a deep devotional mood, "Where is Vṛndāvana?" And he actually made three attempts to go to Vṛndāvana before finally succeeding while living in Jagannātha Purī, after his tour of South India. Now, in Jagannātha Purī, Lord Caitanya expressed a very strong desire to visit Vṛndāvana to two of his very close associates—who was that? Svarūpa Dāmodara and Gadādhara Paṇḍita. Now, initially, they also tried to discourage him. Svarūpa Dāmodara would say, "Mahāprabhu, it’s not the time to visit Vṛndāvana," and Gadādhara Paṇḍita would say, "Mahāprabhu, look, Kṛṣṇa is standing right in front of your eyes as Jagannātha Svāmī, and please consider that there’s no difference between Vṛndāvana and Nīlācala." Nīlācala is another way of saying Jagannātha Purī. So, out of love for his followers, Lord Caitanya hesitated to leave for Vṛndāvana. 

Until—this is really interesting—one evening after an annual Ratha-yātrā festival in Purī, Mahāprabhu visited the temple of Jagannātha, and after hearing a devotee sing a very beautiful song about Vṛndāvana, he just ran out of the temple all the way to the Guṇḍicā temple at the other side of Purī, and called for Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya and Narasiṁha Brahmacārī. Now, when these two exalted devotees arrived, he sat them down and he said, "Please get me some maps that will help guide me to Vṛndāvana." Of course, the Lord doesn’t need any maps; he’s *aiśvarya-svarāt*, which means that he is all-pervading, and as a result of being all-pervading, he’s conscious of everything at every moment—past, present, and future. But he likes to give service to his devotees because we’re always asking him for service—*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*—it’s a prayer to be engaged in service. So, he gives service; he asked for these maps. So, very reluctantly, Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya and Narasiṁha Brahmacārī went and they approached the King of Purī, Mahārāja Pratāparudra, who was also reluctant to send a map of how to get to Vṛndāvana because he didn’t want to lose the association of Mahāprabhu.

Maps were needed because, in those days, it was a very dangerous trek; it actually took a little over three months to walk, and on the way, there were bandits and robbers, you had to pay toll taxes, and there were wild animals. So, unable to bear the pain of even thinking Mahāprabhu might leave Purī, Mahārāja Pratāparudra sent the map, but he couldn't do it alone. He couldn't take it personally; it was too much for him. Giving that map to Mahāprabhu guaranteed that Mahāprabhu would leave, so he couldn't do it. Mahārāja Pratāparudra simply couldn't do it, so he gave it to a soldier who is very famous—or infamous—he had to deliver the map. His name was Antarī-bija. He had that service. So he left with the map to see Mahāprabhu. 

While Mahāprabhu was waiting for the map, he called for Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and when Gadādhara Paṇḍita entered into the room, it’s so beautiful; he called out to Mahāprabhu, just like if you love someone when you walk in the room, you say, "Oh, my dear," or you greet someone, "Oh, my dear." So these are all very intimate associates of Caitanya Mahāprabhu; all these male personalities were gopīs, for the most part, in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes five thousand years ago. They just accompanied Mahāprabhu in male forms in Kali-yuga. So, very intimate. Gadādhara Paṇḍita comes in and he calls out to Mahāprabhu, "O Gaurāṅga, O ocean of mercy, O mahābhāva-rasarāja-mūrti!" What a name: *mahābhāva-rasarāja-mūrti*. So then Lord Caitanya told Śrī Gadādhara to sit with him; he wanted to reveal his heart. When you love someone, you want to reveal your heart to them. So Mahāprabhu began by sharing the dreams that he had been having over the past several nights. This is the literal quote from the scriptures: Mahāprabhu said, "Śrī Gadādhara, my attachment to Vṛndāvana has grown day by day; now it is at the point of intense. I simply must go to Braja. I am having the most nectarean dreams that I am in Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Last night I saw *kuñja-nikuñja*—that means a special grove of trees—I saw the river Yamunā, and I saw the Braja-gopīs, and Kṛṣṇa was standing nearby under a kadamba tree, shooting arrows of love from his eyes into the heart of Śrī Rādhā and her maidservants." 

Now, as Lord Caitanya described this scene—which we can’t say it’s a dream; when the Lord or pure devotees who are transcendental to the influence of material energy dream, it’s vision. You know, when we dream, Prabhupāda said dreams are generally nonsense; you see something in the day and you combine it with something else and you dream about it. He said, "But dreams of the spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa, that’s very nice." But we should understand the dreams of the Lord, like *yoga-nidrā*, or the dreams of his pure devotees are visions, they’re reality. So as Lord Caitanya described the scene that he was seeing to Gadādhara Paṇḍita, suddenly he became ecstatic, and Mahāprabhu stood up and he began dancing like a mad elephant. I’ve seen a mad elephant several times in India; you don’t want to get in their way, they can break everything. So he began dancing like a mad elephant, and tears poured forth from his eyes like torrents of rain. Now, Śrī Gadādhara, who is none other than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī herself, perfectly understood his mood and how memories of his previous līlās as Kṛṣṇa in Dvāpara-yuga were rising in his heart.

Now, the ācāryas have analyzed Mahāprabhu's progression in his desire to go to Vṛndāvana, because it was always there, but at one point it became very strong in the heart. That’s bhakti. We look forward to that, that our desire for devotional service to our Prabhupāda, ācāryas, Mahāprabhu, Nitāi, and Kṛṣṇa is there, but it’s dormant now, and it can be awoken or it can rise up like a seed develops and then it grows into a plant and then it produces flowers and fruits. So our bhakti can grow like that if we water it under the instruction of the spiritual master to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. You can feel it growing in your heart; you love the Vaiṣṇavas, you love the guru, and you love the Lord. All are important. 

So the ācāryas have analyzed Mahāprabhu's progression in his bhakti—of course, his bhakti is always there, but for pastime's sake, it’s manifesting like this. The progression of his desire to go to Vṛndāvana is as follows: the first point is called *yoga*, which means attachment; the second stage is called *viyoga* or separation; and the third stage is called *saṁyoga* or meeting. These three things—it’s a little technical—attachment, then separation, and then again meeting, what does it do? It manifests *vipralambha*. *Vipralambha* is the intense pain of love and separation. So how did that all happen? Our ācāryas described these three stages that Mahāprabhu went through. To begin with, the song that he was hearing in the Jagannātha temple about Vṛndāvana acted as *yoga*, awakening an attachment to Vṛndāvana. Just like we all get attached to Vṛndāvana just hearing about it. But being unable to see Vṛndāvana with his own eyes caused him to feel *viyoga* or separation from Kṛṣṇa and Vṛndāvana. Then the darśana of Vṛndāvana in his dreams—remember, he saw the divine couple and so forth and their assistants—that worked as *saṁyoga*, and that *saṁyoga* progressively erupted into *vipralambha* for intense separation, causing him to blurt out to Gadādhara, "Now I am going to Vṛndāvana." A nice analysis! One time Prabhupāda said, "Kṛṣṇa consciousness is scientific." So those stages he went through, and now nothing’s going to stop him.

So, after revealing his heart to Śrī Gadādhara, Mahāprabhu thought to himself as follows: "No one can enter Śrī Vraja-bhūmi without the express blessings of the queen of Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." So with that understanding, Mahāprabhu folded his hands and he turned towards Gadādhara Paṇḍita for permission to leave for Vṛndāvana. How was that? Well, we explained a little earlier, because in Caitanya-līlā, Śrī Gadādhara of the Pañca-tattva is Śrī Rādhikā herself. In the *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, verses 147-153, it is stated, and I quote: "The pleasure potency of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, formerly known as Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, is now personified in the form of Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita in the pastimes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." So it’s for that reason that Mahāprabhu requested Gadādhara Paṇḍita's permission to go to Braja, because you can't go there unless you get Rādhārāṇī's blessings. 

Now, in his *Stava-mālā*, when he writes, it’s a very beautiful quote: "Without worshipping the pollen of Rādhā’s lotus feet, without taking shelter of Vṛndāvana which bears her footprints, and without respectfully greeting the great souls whose hearts are filled with deep love for her, how will one be able to plunge into the nectar ocean of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa?" We approach Kṛṣṇa through Rādhā; why? Because she’s the best lover of Kṛṣṇa. If you want to know someone, then it’s easier to come close to the person who’s close to the person you want to know, and then it’ll become easier. So Rādhā has the *mahābhāva*, the highest love for Kṛṣṇa. Those three personalities have the *mahābhāva*. So we want to love Kṛṣṇa, so we beg those three personalities to please introduce us to Kṛṣṇa. One time Prabhupāda said about Rādhārāṇī—I think he was lecturing on her appearance day one year—and he said that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is so compassionate that she takes pleasure ten thousand times more by engaging another gopī in Kṛṣṇa’s service than she would by doing that service herself. That’s her compassion. And Prabhupāda said one time that when Rādhārāṇī sees an aspiring devotee here on the earth planet who wants to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, perhaps someone has just walked into the temple and said, "Yeah, this is nice, I’d like to be part of this movement," then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī goes to Kṛṣṇa and says, "Kṛṣṇa, you see there’s that nice boy, there’s that nice girl? Please accept them in your service." She’s so compassionate. 

So Gadādhara played an important role in Mahāprabhu's pastimes. Actually, Mahāprabhu—I was reading—he gave Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita three essential services in his mission: to be the authoritative teacher of *Grantha-rāja Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*; to give *dīkṣā*, formal initiation, on behalf of Mahāprabhu to devotees aspiring on the path of pure devotion; and to worship the deity of Śrī Gopīnātha, Toṭā-Gopīnātha, along with his eternal consort, Śrī Rādhā. In Jagannātha Purī, of course, we know that the deity of Toṭā-Gopīnātha, as described in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, was found by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu himself, but later he entrusted the service of Toṭā-Gopīnātha to Gadādhara Paṇḍita. It’s very interesting; it’s described that as Gadādhara Paṇḍita got very old, he couldn’t reach up and put the garland around Gopīnātha; it’s a big deity. So one day, Toṭā-Gopīnātha sat down to receive the garland of Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and it remains like that to this very day. If you go to Jagannātha Purī, you go to the Toṭā-Gopīnātha temple, sometimes the pūjārīs will shift the cloth so you can see the deity is sitting—it’s a sitting deity—and there’s a crack in his knee where we understand that in his final pastime, Caitanya Mahāprabhu entered into that crack. He entered into that deity to leave this world. A very special deity, a very special deity. Pilgrims go to see Jagannātha Svāmī, which of course is wonderful, but this deity of Toṭā-Gopīnātha is also very wonderful. It’s said that that deity of Toṭā-Gopīnātha can give *prema-bhakti*, *prema* to a *sādhaka*, meaning a practicing devotee. 

I was telling the devotees early this morning that in the early days in the 70s, when we would take groups of devotees on *parikramā* around India, we would go to the Toṭā-Gopīnātha temple in Purī, understanding that Toṭā-Gopīnātha can give *prema* to a *sādhaka*—and we are *sādhakas*—and we would have kīrtana for hours and hours and hours in front of that deity. I didn’t get *prema*, but I’m still hoping. 

So, after Mahāprabhu and Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita met, a very famous servant of Mahāprabhu named Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya arrived. Just like when we say the names of Kṛṣṇa, our hearts become purified; similarly, by saying the names of Kṛṣṇa’s pure devotees, our hearts also become purified because the Kṛṣṇa and the pure devotee are like this, intertwined very closely in love. So if you think of one, you think of the other, like if you think of a husband, you think of the wife; if you think of the wife, you think of the husband. So if you think of the Lord who is always surrounded by his devotees, then you think of the devotees, and if you think of the devotees who are always glorifying the Lord—their whole life is dedicated to the Lord—you think of the Lord. You think of the Lord, you think of the devotees; you think of the devotees, you think of the Lord—spiritual mathematics. So who was this devotee who came to see Mahāprabhu? His name was Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya. 

When he arrived, Mahāprabhu immediately addressed him, saying, "I want to go to Vṛndāvana alone, but as per the King’s desire and others' request, I have decided to take someone with me—only one servant—and that will be you." Can you imagine to be the personal servant of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu? He said, "But we must leave quickly, for my heart is heavy and filled with *rasa*." Wow! "We must leave quickly, for my heart is heavy and filled with *rasa*"—it means love or desire for loving exchanges with Kṛṣṇa. So, hearing of Mahāprabhu's imminent departure, Mahārāja Pratāparudra arranged to give Mahāprabhu and Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya legal documents and money to pass safely through all the many toll stations that we mentioned on the way to Vṛndāvana. He also provided them legal documents and money needed for passing through religious places like Kāśī, Benares, and eventually Mathurā. All these legal documents and monies were needed because at that time the Moguls were ruling India, and one way they’d get money is they taxed all the pilgrims. The Vaiṣṇavas, when they went to holy places, they made lots of money because Vaiṣṇavas like to go to holy places. So you needed legal documents, you needed money, etc. So Mahārāja Pratāparudra arranged that, and it’s all given to Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya because, of course, Caitanya Mahāprabhu—he was a renunciate and, what’s more, he was fully immersed in transcendental affairs like chanting, dancing, feasting, and glorifying the Supreme Lord. That’s the business of a sannyāsī—it’s not a business, it’s his pleasure. Mahāprabhu was totally disconnected from this world; he was just thinking of Braja and getting to Braja. So all these practical affairs were done by Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya. 

Now, I was reading that the devotee community had approved of Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya as the right person to accompany Mahāprabhu, for besides being capable in handling all of Mahāprabhu's practical affairs, he had already journeyed three times to Vṛndāvana. Wow, he’d already been up and back from Purī to Vṛndāvana three times! Also, he was famous for knowing which way to go, for finding directions simply by looking at the sun or the moon’s shadow on water bodies. Whoa, he can know which direction to go by looking at the sun or the moon’s shadows on bodies of water? That’s an art that’s been lost in time. 

So, on the day of their departure, Mahāprabhu embraced Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and because his entire body was smeared with sandalwood paste, he left his bodily impression on Gadādhara Paṇḍita. Just imagine, Mahāprabhu’s devotees put this cooling sandalwood paste on him, and then he embraces Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and on the body of Gadādhara is the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. As they turned to leave, Mahāprabhu was walking barefoot as Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya followed behind, holding Mahāprabhu's only possession, which was his *kamaṇḍalu*, his water pot. The poet—one of the persons whom we’re getting this information from, Lalit Kiśora—he concludes in a very beautiful way, and we’ll finish today; we have six more days. He concludes so beautifully: "May my heart sing the glories of Śrī Mahāprabhu, which are not revealed even in the Vedas. Such glories are hidden in the hearts of rasika devotees and revealed in the hearts of all sincere devotees who hear them. I offer my respects to my guru, who is the source of all devotional arts and who is full of love for Śrī Gaurahari. I pay my respects to Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya, who are the bees that drink the nectar of the lotus face of Śrī Mahāprabhu at every moment. *Śrī rādhā-rasika*, *śrī rādhā-rasika* had the desire to go to Vṛndāvana and behold the beauty of the groves of that transcendental abode, along with the beautiful Yamunā River, the great Govardhana Hill, and the twelve green forests of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, as well as Vraja-raja, the dust of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma."

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you so much. That’s the first in a series of lectures about Mahāprabhu's journey to Vṛndāvana. We have a lot of territory to cover; it’s a long journey, but there’s a lot of nectar along the way. So please stay with us every day for the next seven days. It’s going to be every day up until Gaura-pūrṇimā. Thank you so much for being with us. *Śrī Śrī Gauranitāi kī jaya! Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam kī jaya! Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya!* 

Hari Kṛṣṇa.""