"*00506*.*
"# Lord of the Sky

Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Actually, the lecture today is the 200th lecture I have given in this series, which began almost two years ago, all by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace. *Viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve...* the revealer of the dawn.

In our last lecture, we discussed Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s noonday pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and their subsequent departures for Yāvaṭ and Nandagrāma. Now, other versions of the noonday pastimes state that after Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa leave Rādhā-kuṇḍa, they meet again at Sūrya-kuṇḍa at 3:00 PM. The *Aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā* śāstras mention that it is a daily meeting. The *Aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā* śāstras are Gosvāmī literatures that describe in detail the eightfold daily pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but "daily" doesn't necessarily mean every single day; they say it means most days. Our śāstra specifies that Sunday is the day of Sūrya Bhagavān, worshiping the Sun-god, so Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa performed a special āratī at Sūrya-kuṇḍa on that day.

So, today I would like to begin by describing in a little more detail Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes at noon at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and then their famous pastimes later in the day at Sūrya-kuṇḍa. I say "famous" because our beloved Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has immortalized the Sūrya-kuṇḍa pastimes in his *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, text 88. He writes there: "Seeing her father worship Sūrya-deva, out of fear of the nearby Kaṁsa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, in the secluded place known as Sāntanu-pada, also earnestly worshiped Sūrya-deva to attain a certain youth whose complexion is as dark as a host of monsoon clouds as her chosen husband. I pray that Sūrya-deva may protect us all." Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī also glorify these pastimes at Sūrya-kuṇḍa in his *Bhakti-ratnākara*, verses 585–586. 

He writes: "This village is also known as Morano. Just see the deity of the Sun in the temple in the forest. Along with her friends, Rādhā went with great joy for Sūrya-pūjā, and Kṛṣṇa enthusiastically became the purohita—which means the priest. This Sūrya is the great giver of prīti towards Kṛṣṇa. Hearing his glories, who will not worship Sūrya here?" Very beautiful. 

So first, as I mentioned, we will speak a little bit about their pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes at noon or midday. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is staying at Yāvaṭ on the request of Jaṭilā, leaves Yāvaṭ to worship Sūrya-deva, the Sun-god, at Sūrya-kuṇḍa on the request of Jaṭilā. Jaṭilā’s reasoning is that worshiping Sūrya-deva will increase Rādhārāṇī and her husband Abhimanyu’s prosperity, but Śrī Rādhā sees it as an opportunity to get out of Yāvaṭ to meet with Kṛṣṇa. So, on the way to Sūrya-kuṇḍa, she first meets Kṛṣṇa at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa has come from herding the cows with His friends in the forest, as we explained the other day. Now, the ācāryas say that sometimes Kṛṣṇa arrives early at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and has to wait for her, but other times it is Śrī Rādhā who has to wait until He arrives. When He does arrive—very beautifully dressed and ornamented, although He has been in the forest with the cows—Śrī Rādhā greets Him with great respect. She places a garland around His neck and she puts sandalwood paste on His limbs. In the summertime, when the heat is very oppressive, the Divine Couple enjoys swing pastimes together at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and afterwards, they swim in the cool waters of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The ācāryas write as follows, and I will quote here: "Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s water sports may resemble the play of older children, but actually they are expressions of selfless love disclosed only to devotees with the deepest faith and a grasp of the sublime."

So after swimming, a lot of Kṛṣṇa’s friends come ashore and their friends dress them in fresh clothing and flower decorations. Then they sit down for a game of dice. I was reading that Rādhārāṇī, she rolls black dice and Kṛṣṇa rolls gold dice, but Rādhārāṇī is actually more skilled at throwing dice than Kṛṣṇa. So, although Kṛṣṇa wins some throws, Rādhārāṇī almost always wins the game. And when she does, Kṛṣṇa places the dice in her hands and He says, "Today, the goddess of fortune has smiled upon you. I submit myself at your lotus feet, Śrī Rādhā." Now, as a result of all this activity—swinging and swimming and playing dice—the Divine Couple gets very hungry. So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī feeds Kṛṣṇa fruit which has been collected from a nearby forest by her maidservants, savories which she has brought from home, and sweets that she personally prepared with her own hands earlier in the day. After Kṛṣṇa has eaten, Śrī Rādhā and her sakhīs, the older girls, honor His remnants, and then the Divine Couple retire to a beautiful jeweled temple at Rādhā-kuṇḍa to rest. Meanwhile, the sakhīs also rest in their respective groves, which we have described many times are around Rādhā-kuṇḍa, while the mañjarīs—the very younger girls—they happily finish the remnants of the meal that was prepared for Kṛṣṇa by Rādhārāṇī with the help of her maidservants, before busying themselves to prepare for Rādhā’s visit to Sūrya-kuṇḍa. Whatever preparation is left over, the mañjarīs eat, and they do the last-minute preparations before going to Sūrya-kuṇḍa.

So after this break, I was reading a parrot—a parrot suddenly arrives at Rādhā-kuṇḍa with news that Abhimanyu and Jaṭilā are on their way to find out why it always takes Śrī Rādhā and her friends so long to get to Sūrya-kuṇḍa to worship the Sun-god. Jaṭilā and Abhimanyu received a message that perhaps Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and maybe that explains why Rādhārāṇī hasn't arrived yet at Sūrya-kuṇḍa, so they are on their way; it’s passed by Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The ācāryas, they write, it is very interesting that this news is like a bucket of ice water tossed on Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa, and the Gopīs, who all leap to their feet. So, very quickly, Rādhā and her friends are off to Sūrya-kuṇḍa, and the ācāryas say Kṛṣṇa heads to Kuñjara to change clothes to appear like a celibate brahmacārī priest. Now, why is that? Well, we’ll discover very quickly. Carrying the items with which to worship the Sun-god, Rādhā and the Gopīs are the first to arrive at a very beautiful altar at Sūrya-kuṇḍa, which stands in the center of a flower-filled grove within a forest of wish-fulfilling trees—that’s how it is described. So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her maidservants, they then sit down near the deity of Sūrya-deva, the Sun-god, and they place gifts and items of worship on a silk cloth before the altar of the Sun-god and they begin to sing traditional songs that glorify the Sun-god. 

Then, a little while later, Madhumaṅgala appears along with Kṛṣṇa, who is disguised as a brāhmaṇa priest, a young brāhmaṇa priest. Kṛṣṇa’s disguise: Kṛṣṇa is dressed in a white cloth and His hair is tied up in a top knot, looking like a lifelong brahmacārī, and a scarf also hangs from His neck, and there is a large red spot of tilaka seen on His forehead. His fingers are decorated with rings, and in His two hands are kuśa grass and a sacred book. The śāstras say that He moves with an air of detachment; He is a renounced brāhmaṇa priest disguised. So it is not long before Madhumaṅgala notices the sweets that are waiting to be offered to Sūrya Bhagavān, to the Sun-god. So Madhumaṅgala says, "We should not keep the Lord of the Sky waiting." He refers to Him as the Lord of the Sky. "We should not keep the Lord of the Sky waiting for His worship or offering. Let us do the needful very quickly." 

So Rādhārāṇī nods in agreement to Madhumaṅgala’s proposal and offers a seat to Madhumaṅgala and the pujārī who is approached to do the worship, from Kṛṣṇa disguised as a priest. So then she places the tray of sweets into this brāhmaṇa priest’s hands, into Kṛṣṇa’s hands, for offering along with gifts of garments and ornaments. Now at that very moment, Abhimanyu—who is sometimes called Āyāna—he arrives with Jaṭilā. It is mentioned that on the way to Sūrya-kuṇḍa, they didn’t find Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, but the whole way they had been speaking very harshly about Rādhārāṇī, you know, this rumor or that rumor, how she’s meeting Kṛṣṇa, and they’re talking about all these in a very harsh way. But because they are now in the presence of a demigod, Sūrya-deva, the deity of Sūrya-deva, and two brāhmaṇas—Madhumaṅgala and the priest—Jaṭilā and Abhimanyu, they control themselves and sit down in a corner of the courtyard to observe the ceremony, the worship of the Sun-god. 

So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she acknowledges their arrival by bowing her head as disguised Kṛṣṇa begins reciting mantras, as you do when you worship the deities, reciting mantras to the Sun-god. While Kṛṣṇa is doing that, Rādhārāṇī becomes very nervous that her in-laws may recognize Kṛṣṇa, who is in this particular disguise. So she sits there, it’s mentioned, shaking with fear, not knowing what to expect. Now the other cowherd girls also sense some impending danger, and they whisper amongst themselves, "Āyāna will surely recognize Kṛṣṇa’s voice. What should we do?" But Kṛṣṇa is totally calm as He chants mantras in praise of the Sun, for He is very happy and very content to be with Rādhārāṇī again so soon after their pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. 

But seeing Rādhārāṇī’s nervousness, Kṛṣṇa comes up with a plan to calm her down as well as deal with Jaṭilā and Abhimanyu’s constant suspicions and criticisms of her. How does He do that? What’s His plan? So suddenly, Kṛṣṇa makes His voice sound as if it’s coming from the deity. It is ventriloquism, transcendental ventriloquism. He makes this voice sound as if it’s coming from the deity, Sūrya-deva. So the voice says, "You, Rādhā, are as pure as My rays; thus, I cannot tolerate those who falsely accuse you of misconduct. O chaste girl, no matter how many sacrifices you perform for Me, in return for their sins, I will send death to your husband and ruin to Jaṭilā, her relatives, her cows, and the people of her village for their sins of always blaspheming." 

So then, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, hearing this voice and understanding Kṛṣṇa’s intentions, she plays along by saying to the deity with folded hands, "I pray to You, my worshipable deity, whom I have served all my life. What will be my fate if my friends and relatives all die? My husband, Abhimanyu, is my life; if he dies, how can I live? My mother-in-law over there, Jaṭilā, always treats me with affection. If she is destroyed, how will your Rādhā survive such a calamity? Oh, please be kind to them." 

So as Kṛṣṇa in Sūrya-deva’s voice and Śrī Rādhā speak like this, Jaṭilā and Abhimanyu, you know, they are standing there totally stunned, described wide-eyed with their mouths agape, hearing this. So finally, the deity, the Sun-god—Kṛṣṇa’s voice—says, "O chaste one, Śrī Rādhā, your intense devotion to Me is very pleasing. Therefore, rest assured that no calamity shall befall you. If there’s no more criticism going on, you, your husband, family, and friends are now safe. Be at peace." The condition was no more blasphemy, no more criticism, no more rumors. 

As these words of reassurance from the deity of Sūrya-deva come, they take their seats very close to each other to complete the offering. The priest is assisting, so they’re sitting very close as they chant mantras to the Sun-god and offer incense, lamps, flowers, and garlands. As they do so, the śāstra describes their heartbeats quicken and their love for each other shines brightly in their eyes, the priest and then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. After the pūjā is completed, Śrī Rādhā addresses the deity, Sūrya-deva. She says, "O Lord, if You are still my protector and well-wisher after all I have asked, please throw me a flower, just to indicate that what You said is true. Then I will be reassured." 

Then as soon as she finishes speaking, the deity smiles, shakes His body, causing all the offered flowers that are on Him to fall like a shower to the floor. All the Gopīs present, they jump to their feet and they joyfully cry out, "Jaya!" Then while Madhumaṅgala is trying to put all the offered sweets into his cloth, Kṛṣṇa, disguised as the priest, goes to each Gopī, places His hands on their heads, and blesses them with the words, "May you be happy with your husband, may you be happy with your husband." 

Now Abhimanyu, who is relieved to even be alive now, he sneaks away with Jaṭilā without being noticed and they head back to Yāvaṭ. On the way home, he and his mother Jaṭilā, they just start praising Śrī Rādhā profusely along the same road that not long ago they had accused her of terrible things and called her bad names. After arriving in Yāvaṭ, Abhimanyu says to Jaṭilā, "Mother, never listen again to the advice of your foolish neighbors, who will be the death of me, and never again fault your daughter-in-law, lest the Lord ruin you." As the two of them talked about all they’d seen and heard at Sūrya-kuṇḍa, they agreed not to speak about those things to anyone, but from that day on to simply praise Rādhā when she returned home—which didn't happen eventually—but this is the pastime for that day. 

But Rādhā wouldn't be home immediately. She would be a little late in coming home that day, for after her husband and her mother-in-law Jaṭilā had departed, she and Kṛṣṇa returned to Rādhā-kuṇḍa and continued their pastimes that had been, how would you say, rudely interrupted by Jaṭilā and Abhimanyu. Remember, they had to leave quickly. To free themselves from the stress of the episode at Sūrya-kuṇḍa, they again immerse themselves in the refreshing, nectarian waters of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and the ācāryas say that they were relieved of all stress by splashing their worries away in games of love—that’s how they put it, "by splashing their worries away in games of love." 

Now the ācāryas say that this pastime takes place every day. We’ve mentioned this principle before, but every time it’s like the first time; it’s always fresh and new. For us to always remain conscious of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we should hear about, we should chant, remember, and repeat such pastimes over and over and over and over again. One devotee has written, and I quote: "O swan of my mind, swim always in the waters of nāma-saṅkīrtana, play amongst the lotuses of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s midday pastimes, and reject thoughts of religiosity, wealth, sensual pleasure, and even liberation." Very nice. 

All right, Kṛṣṇa, very sweet pastime, it’s a famous pastime, it’s really good. So we can finish today with three very beautiful prayers calling upon the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, then Rādhārāṇī, and finally a prayer to the Divine Couple together—well-known prayers but very appropriate, I think, for today. 

The first is Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura, it is *Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta*, verse 104. He writes: *pramada-madana-līlā...* "Well Kṛṣṇa, You and You alone are my worshipable deity, the giver of love and the fulfiller of desire. You alone are the object of my knowledge, my power and wealth, my vital force, and my very life." 

And Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays in *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*, very famous verse 96: "O Rādhā, I am yours, I am yours. I cannot live without you. Please understand this and bring me to your feet. I am yours, I am yours. I cannot live without you. Please understand this and bring me to your feet." 

And finally, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī prays to both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in his *Gāndharvā-prārthanāṣṭakam*, verse 6: "Oh Queen of Vṛndāvana, when can I fan You with a yak-tail fan with the jeweled rod when You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are sitting under a tree, Your lotus-like faces beautified by drops of perspiration from fatigue after Your pastimes on the shore of Your pond?" 

Kṛṣṇa, thank you very much, Prabhu. As we always say, we’ll do some more research and we’ll be back in a couple of days with more nectarian pastimes from the twelve forests of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Kṛṣṇa Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Sundara kī jaya!""