"*00303*.*
"All of us have engaged in one way or another in different parts of the world, spreading the holy names under the order and through the prediction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu declared very clearly that one day this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa will go to every town and village of the world. And of course, being the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He could have accomplished that in one moment—in one millimeter of a second. But He wanted to establish that the devotees are the servants of the Lord. And what is the meaning of servant if there is no service? Service means that you serve someone, and we are fortunate to be serving Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas. Service is the natural nature of the soul. I listened to a tape last night of Prabhupāda, and he said, "If you don't serve God, then you'll end up serving dog. You'll buy a dog and serve the dog." So this is natural. But fortunately, we've been dragged into the service of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

You see, the servant is happy when he or she is serving. The servant is always happy if the master is very benevolent, loving, and kind. I saw the devotees watching the Vedic drama, and I thought, "Lord Caitanya wanted to spread the saṅkīrtana movement, but He wanted us to get the credit for the service." So He left that service to all of us. And considering the position, it can be quite exhausting spreading a spiritual movement in the material world. We come back to our original home, to Navadvīpa, where it all began, and we dance in great ecstasy and we get our spiritual strength and inspiration. Even at the dhāma, there's always the association of the devotees. It's divine in advancing all the devotees who came in from many places. They are all my old saṅkīrtana buddies from France—I mean, from 1972 through 1986. All those boys, we did saṅkīrtana together throughout the whole country, so there's a very strong bond there. 

You see, everything is at the request of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We do something like that at the front lines of the battlefield. Lord Caitanya, you never lose your affection for your comrades because the fellowship is based on spiritual love. It was very nice meeting the devotees here today, and it is a very special place. And we have a very special Deity of Lord Varāhadeva, which I know is quite prominent here, a very special place, indeed. Thank you very much.""