"*00278*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone. Welcome back again to our continuing series. We are continuing with the journey of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu from Jagannātha Purī to Vṛndāvana. Let us begin with the glorification of Śrīla Prabhupāda: *oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā, cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ.*

To begin with, you can see I am wearing a large, gold kavaca, but there is a very important reason for that, and I would like to share that with you. Over many years, I have been able to collect some transcendental gems, having had the good fortune to be here in India, and many of those gems are inside this gold kavaca. I have a little card here which I use to explain what is in here, so I will read the different articles that are in this kavaca, which I carry everywhere: 
* There is a small piece of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s wooden shoes.
* There is a small piece of the original manuscript of *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, which was given to me at the Vṛndāvana Research Institute.
* There is a small piece of the manuscript of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary on *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*.
* There is a small piece, very small, of the manuscript of *Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta* by Jīva Gosvāmī.
* There is a small piece of the manuscript of *Prārthanā*, written by Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura.
* There is a small piece of the final kurta worn by Śrīla Prabhupāda.
* There is a very small piece of Caitanya’s wooden shoe from the Dāmeśvara temple. 
* There is a very small piece of Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita’s dhoti, one of my great heroes.
* There is a very small piece of Lord Caitanya’s kaupīna. 

Of course, there is a story behind each of these items, which we won't have time to tell today, but it is all there. There is a small piece of the tree from Seva-kuñja under which Rūpa Gosvāmī would do his bhajana 500 years ago. There is a small piece of the manuscript of the last chapter of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* Antya-līlā, which was given to me by those who are taking care of it here in Vṛndāvana. There is a very small piece of the pillar which was established by Ballabhācārya in Kāmī-vana, which differentiates the spiritual world of Vṛndāvana from the world of illusion beyond. I also have a very small, tiny Śālagrāma-śilā with beautiful cakras inside, and I have a very tiny Govardhana-śilā and a very tiny Dvārakā-śilā. It is like I am carrying the spiritual world with me; I am very, very, very grateful.

All right, Kṛṣṇa, so we are continuing with our series again on Lord Caitanya’s journey to Vṛndāvana. In our last lecture, number five in the series, we discussed a number of forests that Mahāprabhu first visited when He came to Vṛndāvana, including, if I can remember, Madhu-vana, Tāla-vana, Kumuda-vana, and others, and we finished the last lecture with Kāmī-vana. Now, from Kāmī-vana, Mahāprabhu, His dedicated servant Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, and their guide Kṛṣṇadāsa proceeded to Nandagrām. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī relates in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* that Mahāprabhu was overwhelmed with ecstatic love on His visit to Nandagrām. Actually, after bathing in the lakes in that area, including Pāvana-sarovara, He actually climbed to the top of the hill of Nandagrām, and very famously, He asked the locals, "Are there any deities on top of this hill?" It is there in *CC*: "Are there any deities on top of this hill?" And the people replied, "Yes, there are deities on this hill, but they are located within a cave." Then they specified, they said, "There are a father and a mother, and between them is a very beautiful child—three deities." So Caitanya Mahāprabhu very happily entered into that cave, and seeing these three deities—which were there, Nanda Mahārāja, Mother Yaśodā, and little Kṛṣṇa—He offered His respects to them. Now, we read that every day the Lord would visit these deities, and He would chant and dance in front of them in great ecstasy. And some time later, much later actually, Sanātana Gosvāmī came to live at nearby Pāvana-sarovara, which was one of the lakes, and he moved those deities from the cave to the top of the hill where they are now; we can all go and take darśana there.

Next, Kṛṣṇadāsa, the brāhmaṇa who is taking Mahāprabhu on tour, suggested to Lord Caitanya, "Let us proceed to Govardhana Hill." Now, Mahāprabhu became ecstatic just hearing this suggestion, and He immediately began walking in that direction of Govardhana Hill. Now, I was reading that our ācāryas say that Lord Caitanya’s circumambulation of Govardhana Hill was in no way ordinary, meaning that it was not the sort of parikramā that is commonly seen, heard of, or performed. Because in circumambulating Govardhana Hill, they explained, Caitanya Mahāprabhu followed the path of intense ecstatic love. It is a little subtle, that Caitanya Mahāprabhu followed the path of intense ecstatic love, which they say sometimes coincided with the established parikramā path, or at other times it diverged—He went off into a forest here or there. His parikramā of Govardhana Hill took many days, and of course, it included the forests and the lakes and the many pastime places that surround Govardhana Hill. And in every forest that the Lord visited, He would eagerly embrace each tree and vine—stated in śāstra—every forest He visited, He would eagerly embrace each tree and each vine. And at the sight of cows in Vṛndāvana’s pastures around Girirāja, the Lord would run to them in great happiness and then fall to the ground in tears. And the very sight of a peacock feather would cause Him to tremble, again fall to the ground, roll about, and cry madly. Then He would rise up, run around again, only to collapse one more time unconscious. This is Mahāprabhu. And once I read that at the sight of a herd of calves running through the forest with their tails raised, Mahāprabhu fainted in ecstasy. He fainted in ecstasy and fell into the bushes on the roadside, and local cowherd men had to come and carefully untangle Him and pull Him out. Wow.

So, the very first place that Lord Caitanya visited at Govardhana Hill was Ariṣṭagrāma. Ariṣṭagrāma—this is described by Kavirāja Gosvāmī in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 18, verse number 3. He writes: *mātā mahāprabhu nācite*, He danced in ecstasy, but when He arrived at Ariṣṭagrāma, His sense perception was awakened. Now, Ariṣṭagrāma is simply another name for Ariṣṭagrāma, indicating where the demon Ariṣṭāsura was killed by Kṛṣṇa. So when Mahāprabhu reached Ariṣṭagrāma, He surprised the local people there when He asked, "Please tell me, where is Rādhā-kuṇḍa? Where is Rādhā-kuṇḍa?" But because so much time had passed—literally, you could say 4,500 years—people had forgotten about Rādhā-kuṇḍa. And so the people said, "Well, we know of no such lake, but there are two very small bodies of water nearby which we call Gauri-pukur and Kāli-pukur, which we, as farmers, use to irrigate our fields and crops." So, curious, Mahāprabhu went to see these small bodies of water, and it is described very wonderfully that as soon as He stood in front of them, His shadow reflected as Rādhā in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and as Kṛṣṇa in Śyāma-kuṇḍa. His shadow reflected as Rādhā in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and His shadow reflected as Kṛṣṇa in Śyāma-kuṇḍa. So then and there, Mahāprabhu bathed in one of the ponds, and then the other, and after bathing, He came out and He declared that the two ponds were Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa.

Then, while all the villagers looked on, He offered the following prayers to those two sacred ponds to become lakes. He said, "Just as Rādhā is most dear to Kṛṣṇa, Her lake is also very dear to Him. She is the most beloved of all gopīs." Then, you can just imagine, He had found Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Then, overwhelmed by love, He danced and danced and danced around both of those lakes. Then He took some mud, famously, from Rādhā-kuṇḍa and He marked His body with a tilaka. Not only that, He collected some more of the mud to take with Him. Then He turned to His servant, Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, and He said the following: "My dear friend, please meditate on Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is beautified by pavilions draped in flowering vines. This lake is praised by the great splendor of Vṛndāvana. Its waters are filled with the beauty and sweetness of the divine couple's loving pastimes, and it is respectfully worshipped by Girirāja Govardhana."

So we can see that by Lord Caitanya’s mercy, both Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are now accessible to all of us. By His mercy, they are all accessible, the two of them. And Śrīla Pūrvānanda Sarasvatī has written as such in *Caitanya-candrāmṛta*, one of my favorite books, verse 33. He writes as follows: "A stone, even if sprinkled with nectar, will never sprout a single blade of grass. A dog’s tail, no matter how carefully stretched out, will never become straight. A dwarf can reach out his arms as much as he likes, but he will never touch the moon. Similarly, those who follow religious rituals without the mercy of Lord Gaura will never attain ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa." Everything that we have is by the grace of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, including Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa.

So then, from Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Lord Caitanya walked to Kuśuma-sarovara, one of the favorite places on Govardhana for ISKCON devotees or any devotee—Kuśuma-sarovara with that beautiful palace behind there. And there, overwhelmed with joy at the sight of Govardhana Hill—because Govardhana Hill becomes quite manifest there—in the madness of divine love, He embraced a stone, or we say a śilā, from Govardhana Hill. You may have seen that painting; there is a famous painting of Mahāprabhu sitting on the ground, and He is with His arms embracing a Govardhana-śilā. And then from there, He proceeded to Mānasa-gaṅgā, that lake which is next to the town of Govardhana. There is a town of Govardhana, and there He went to the temple of Harideva. Harideva—one of my favorite places, perhaps one of your favorite places too—because we know that is where Caitanya Mahāprabhu had one very ecstatic kīrtana. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 18, verses 19 and 20, we hear *harideva āge loki dekite*. Quote: "Mad with ecstatic love, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu began to dance before the Harideva deity. Hearing of the Lord’s wonderful activities, all the people came to see Him. Just like when we hear there is some ecstatic kīrtana nearby, we go." So what could be more ecstatic than Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana? He descended for the purpose of inaugurating the saṅkīrtana movement. So according to Kavirāja Gosvāmī, when Mahāprabhu was dancing in front of Harideva, so many people came. *prabhu prema-saundarye heki lokī*.

The people were astonished when they saw Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s ecstatic love and His personal beauty. The priest who served the Harideva deity offered the Lord a good reception—that is how Kavirāja Gosvāmī puts it. The priest who served the Harideva offered the Lord a good reception. Then afterwards, just a few meters away, the Lord took prasādam at Brahmakuṇḍa. Those of you who have been there, you know there is Mānasa-gaṅgā and there is the Harideva temple, and then nearby there is this smaller kuṇḍa, Brahmakuṇḍa, and the Lord took prasādam in there. That is *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya 18.21. Quote: "At Brahmakuṇḍa, the Bhaṭṭācārya cooked food, and the Lord, after taking His bath at Brahmakuṇḍa, accepted His lunch." It is so nice; we have all these details about Caitanya. Now, He had this ecstatic kīrtana in front of Harideva, and I know that whenever I go there with the parikramā party, sometimes we will have kīrtana in front of that deity for hours. And the origin of the Harideva deity, who inspired Caitanya Mahāprabhu so much, is very interesting, and I thought I would share with you the history of that particular deity. 

So, 5,000 years ago, when Kṛṣṇa was present in Vṛndāvana at the site where Harideva now stands, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Her girlfriends, they were once talking amongst themselves about all the times that they had been enjoying with Kṛṣṇa. And as they talked excitedly about Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful features, His charming ways, and His humorous words, they felt that He was there with them in sound but at the same time separated from them in form. That is astonishing; they felt that He was there with them in sound but at the same time separated from them in form. So very quickly, their feelings of separation intensified to—it is described—a fever pitch. Then the gopīs could no longer speak coherently, so they just resorted to simply chanting Kṛṣṇa’s holy names. They were chanting, "O Hari! O Deva! O Hari! O Deva! O Hari! O Deva!" That is all they could do—that is everything, actually. So the ācāryas say that, unable to neglect His beloved’s call in the pain of their sorrow, Kṛṣṇa suddenly appeared before the gopīs with His flute held in His right hand and His left hand raising, as if lifting, Govardhana Hill. Now, once Kṛṣṇa had appeared before them, the gopīs, you know, they fed Him, described they fed Him delicious food, they decorated Him with flowers, and they massaged His limbs. But when it was time for Him to return to His cows—because that is where He came from, He appeared before them because they were calling Him—when it came time for Him to return to His cows, they wouldn't let Him go. Rādhārāṇī pleaded, "Always stay with us here." But at the same time, Kṛṣṇa could also hear His friends, the cowherd boys, nearby, anxiously calling, "Kṛṣṇa, where are you? Where have you gone?" because He had disappeared from them to come to the gopīs. So it is so nectarean; to satisfy both groups of His dearest devotees, Kṛṣṇa returned to His cowherd boyfriends and the business of attending cows, but left behind a deity of Himself for the gopīs to serve. Wow. Kṛṣṇa returned to His friends and the cows, but He left behind a deity of Himself for the gopīs to serve. And that is Harideva; that is the deity that is there. 

So from that day on, the gopīs came daily to serve that deity of Kṛṣṇa whom they named Harideva, because they were calling out to Kṛṣṇa. It is the name. And daily, by bathing and dressing and ornamenting Him—Harideva—the ācāryas say that there was no end to the ecstasy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, because She felt that being able to freely serve this deity of Kṛṣṇa, whom the other residents of Vraja thought to be an incarnation of Lord Nārāyaṇa, it eased Her feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa—Harideva. So next time you do go to Vraja, please stop by at Mānasa-gaṅgā and visit that temple of Harideva and have an ecstatic kīrtana as Mahāprabhu did, and as the gopīs did. We are following in their footsteps. So after taking that lunch we mentioned, cooked by Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, Lord Caitanya rested there at Brahmakuṇḍa. Actually, but that night, He stayed awake—actually, I was reading that He did not sleep that night, He actually stayed awake the whole night chanting in Harideva’s temple. He was supposed to sleep, but He didn't; He stayed up all night having kīrtana. But in the morning, when Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya came and found Him still doing kīrtana, Bhaṭṭācārya said, "You didn't sleep?" 

So at that moment, Caitanya Mahāprabhu revealed His heart to Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, that it was very nice to be dancing in front of Harideva, but up until this point, He was unable to see Mādhavendra Purī’s Gopāla deity—nowadays we call Him Śrīnāthajī—He was unable to see the Gopāla deity, another deity intimately linked with Govardhana Hill. Because the Gopāla deity stayed in a temple on top of Govardhana Hill near the village of Aṇīyora, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu, thinking and presenting Himself as a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, He was unwilling to climb the hill. Mahāprabhu never climbed up Govardhana Hill, and neither do His followers, because Girirāja is not different than Kṛṣṇa. So He was lamenting to Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, "Since I shall not at any time climb Govardhana Hill," He said, "how will I ever be able to see Gopāla-rāya?" The words He used, "Gopāla-rāya." He was lamenting. However, Gopāla, the deity, knew what was on Mahāprabhu’s mind, and so He played a trick. The Gopāla deity on top of Govardhana Hill, the Gopāla deity knew the heart of Caitanya Mahāprabhu because, well, they are non-different. So He played a trick. The Gopāla deity discovered by Mādhavendra Purī, and at that time worshipped on top of the hill, He inspired a villager from within the heart to spread a rumor that a group of Muslim soldiers were nearby and they were preparing to plunder Govardhana village and that whole area. 

So this villager, he spread this rumor—he was very convinced, because the Lord in the heart convinced him that the Muslim soldiers are coming—so he went around everywhere telling the villagers, "Everyone must leave this village immediately along with the deity Gopāla on top of the hill, because the Muslim soldiers will come tomorrow and cause harm to the Lord." So the head priest taking care of Gopāla, or Śrīnāthajī, was a devotee named Rāmadāsa. And so Rāmadāsa, hearing this rumor—"the Muslim soldiers are coming"—he quickly assembled three Vaiṣṇavas—two of them were named, I was reading this in the Prabhupāda Research Institute, Sādhu Pāṇḍey and Kumbhanadāsa, and the other was a farmer—and what those three devotees did, or four because Rāmadāsa was there, they very quickly took the deity of Gopāla out of the temple on top of Govardhana Hill, and they put Him on the back of a buffalo so no one would, you know, suspect. Covered Him with a cādara, they placed the deity on the back of a buffalo and they shifted Him to a village named Gaṇṭaulī on the opposite side of Govardhana Hill at the bottom of Govardhana Hill. Now, in Gaṇṭaulī, Gopāla was kept in the house of a brāhmaṇa for fear of the Muslims, and for several days His worship was conducted secretly. Now, it is very interesting, I was reading again in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, it is written: Several writers, poets, scholars of those times, they write that in those days deities used to personally talk with their priests. Obviously, those priests were very advanced souls. So it says in the scriptures, "In those days the deities used to personally talk with their priests." So one day Rāmadāsa, you know, he asked Gopāla why He wanted to leave the top of Govardhana Hill and come to such a secluded place as Gaṇṭaulī. So Gopāla, Śrīnāthajī, replied, "While being worshipped on top of Govardhana Hill, I was so far away from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I was so far away from Her for so many years. So I am waiting here in Gaṇṭaulī to see Rādhā, who has appeared in the combined form of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the personality of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Kṛṣṇa, as Kavirāja Gosvāmī explains very clearly in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, the Lord was originally one, but to enjoy pastimes of pleasure, He expanded as two—hlādinī-śakti, the pleasure potency of the Lord, manifested as Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So the two, Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā, then again became one in the personality of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So this is the Gopāla deity—"I am waiting to see Rādhā because She is present in the personality of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His mood." And that was soon to happen.

Because after waking up at the Harideva temple and lamenting He could not see Gopāla, Mahāprabhu continued His circumambulation of Govardhana Hill, dancing and at times singing in ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa. And while doing so, He recited a verse once spoken by Śrī Rādhā: "Of all the devotees, this Govardhana Hill is the best. Oh my friends, this hill supplies Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma along with Their calves, cows, and cowherd friends with all kinds of necessities: water, very soft grass, caves, fruits, flowers, and vegetables. In this way, the hill offers respects to the Lord; being touched by the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, Girirāja appears very jubilant." He is going on like this. So, as soon as Mahāprabhu reached Govinda-kuṇḍa, which was further down, He heard that Gopāla had been moved from His temple on top of Govardhana Hill to this town of Gaṇṭaulī, Gaṇṭaulī-grāma. So He was happy. He very quickly proceeded to that village, where He got the opportunity to take darśana, and the deity got to see Him. As we mentioned earlier, Mahāprabhu very much wanted to see the deity, as we were hearing, and the deity very much wanted to have darśana of Mahāprabhu. So Paramātmā arranged it all. And while in front of this beautiful deity of Gopāla, discovered by Mādhavendra Purī and now in Nāthadvāra, further south in Rajasthan, Mahāprabhu sang the following verse: "May the left arm of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus flower, always protect you. With His left arm, He raised Govardhana Hill as if it were a toy."

So we hear from our ācāryas that Mahāprabhu remained in Gaṇṭaulī for exactly three days until it was revealed that it was only a rumor; it was only a rumor that the Muslim soldiers were attacking. So at that time, with that news, Gopāla was taken back on top of Govardhana Hill. And as He was being moved, His pujārī, Rāmadāsa, asked Śrī Caitanya, "Now, how will Your followers be able to take Gopāla’s darśana in the future? Gopāla came down to see You, and You saw Him, but in the future, how will Your followers be able to take darśana of this beautiful deity?" Because again, Mahāprabhu didn't walk on Govardhana Hill, and neither should we. So Lord Caitanya replied as follows, quote: "My followers' love will drag Gopāla down from the hill to this ground." And we see that took place, because Gopāla and Śrīnāthajī, by the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas who so much wanted to worship Him, now He is accessible in Nāthadvāra. You can go to Nāthadvāra and have His darśana. And it is true that the love of the followers of Caitanya Mahāprabhu will give us access to the Lord. That is true in more ways than one, for Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s followers—one of His followers, for us the most important follower, our Śrīla Prabhupāda—his love for Kṛṣṇa has brought the Lord into reach for all of us. 

Prabhupāda has brought Kṛṣṇa to us in a very appropriate and easily attainable form, in the form of His holy names—brought the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare to the West. Prabhupāda did a miracle in bringing deity worship to the West. He gave us access to the Lord in the form of the scriptures, even prasādam, you can say. So in that sense, we owe everything good, everything auspicious, to Śrīla Prabhupāda. He made Kṛṣṇa very accessible. His love brought Kṛṣṇa to us. The possibility that we can leave this world and go back home, back to Godhead, we owe that all to Śrīla Prabhupāda. So in that regard, I would like to conclude today with a poem by a very close associate of Lord Caitanya, Kaśīśvara Paṇḍita. We read about Kaśīśvara Paṇḍita in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, and we know that Kaśīśvara Paṇḍita, Mahāprabhu sent him to Vṛndāvana with the deity to worship alongside the Govindajī deity—Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Govindajī deity in Vṛndāvana. Rūpa Gosvāmī needed a pujārī for Govindadeva, as that pujārī, along with a beautiful deity for the devotees there. So he is a famous devotee, and like many devotees, he wrote poems about the Lord. And there is one poem that I found in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute where he glorifies the form of the guru who makes Kṛṣṇa accessible to us. And we will read this poem now while envisioning the beautiful form of our spiritual master, the founder-ācārya of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, Śrīla Prabhupāda, as I repeat the words of Kaśīśvara Paṇḍita. Just meditate on Śrīla Prabhupāda. He writes as follows:

"The forehead of the guru is the only source of satisfaction for a disciple. The eyes of the guru are the treasure house of all the secrets of the three worlds for the disciple. The nose of the guru is the pride of knowledge for the disciple. The lips of the guru are the gates to the knowledge of the Vedas. The tongue of the guru is the nectar pot of Dhanvantari. The neck of the guru is renunciation from the material world. The shoulders of the guru are the grace of devotional life. The chest of the guru is the abode of the divine couple. The hands of the guru are the source of all blessings. The torso of the guru is the ocean of bliss. The thighs of the guru are the strength of the bhakti for the disciple. The lotus feet of the guru are like cintāmaṇi gems for the disciple. The toes of the guru are like millions of pilgrimages. The toenails of the guru are the moonlight of love for Kṛṣṇa. The shadow of the guru is the eternal protection of the disciple. The dust from his lotus feet are the opulence of the fourteen worlds. The remnants of the guru’s prasāda are the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips. Cloth used by him is the good fortune of the disciple, and the words of the guru are the only shelter for the disciple." 

Hare Kṛṣṇa. And Kaśīśvara Paṇḍita then concludes his work by writing the following, and we will finish today with this deep insight: On that blessed day in which one is accepted as a disciple by the guru, at the conclusion of the ceremony, the disciple should pray as follows: "My dearest spiritual master, with no support in this world, I was falling into the ocean of great sorrow and lamentation. You are my only shelter. Now you kindly took my hand and placed me in the boat to Vṛndāvana, where one finds divine love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. My guru, my shelter, my only savior, from this day forth I am yours. Make my body your āsana, my hands your instruments, and engage all my senses in your service. Please kill my false pride, destroy my material desires, beat my uncontrolled senses, smash my bad fortunes, and deliver me to the son of Mahārāja Nanda. Today I offer my respects to you again and again and again."

So we have more places to visit with Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and we will continue that amazing journey in a few days. Thank you so much. Glorious! 

All right, thank you.""