"*00576*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Good evening everyone and welcome this evening to this beautiful city of Surat, which was graced by the lotus feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda. I would like to speak this evening about love, because actually, our whole process is about love. Dāśur, the great saint, he said, *harir-guru-vaiṣṇava*, that we are learning to develop our love for the Hari, the Vaiṣṇavas, the spiritual masters, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes it’s said this is a movement of love masquerading as a philosophy. It’s a movement of love masquerading as philosophy. Of course, love is a theme that everyone in this world, without exception, is interested in. Do you want to translate? Maybe everyone wants to love and everyone wants to be loved. We can just understand how important love is in our modern world, and that most, if not all, of the songs today, as well as movies and novels, are about love. "I want to love," "I lost my love." It is being said in English, "Love makes the world go around," and I was reading the other day that one's love of the family is the main force behind all economic pursuits. But be that as it may, we are here tonight in pursuit of a different kind of love.

You could say the original love: the love of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Actually, to speak quite frankly, the love of this world is a perverted reflection of that love. Love in this world is compared to iron, and love in the spiritual world is compared to gold. Now, the love that we're speaking about, *bhakti*, can be summarized in a very interesting way by one of our *rasa-ācāryas*. *Rasa-ācārya* means the *ācārya* who is teaching us the process of loving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He writes in his illustrious *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* (1.2.233): 

"Just as the minds of young women are attracted to a young man and the minds of a young man are attracted to young girls, Kṛṣṇa, may my mind be attracted to You."

We all know that—let's be honest—we all know the power of attraction for the opposite sex; it is a very powerful force. Are you married? Yes. So you love your wife? Yes. How much? How much do you love your wife? This much? That's good. And where is the wife? We don't want to embarrass her. And how much do you love your husband? This much? There you go, thank you. So that's good, it’s household life, this is proper. But ultimately, we have to transfer this loving propensity to Kṛṣṇa. But in modern society, it's all backwards. First of all, we're taught, "Love your body," then extension, "Love your father and mother," then "Love your brother and sister," then "Love your society," "Love your country," "Love humanity." But such love is not fully satisfying because it's temporary, and therefore it's not satisfying to the eternal soul.

Of course, such love is human nature; I am not absolutely condemning it. Śrīla Prabhupāda himself compassionately addresses this type of love for humanity in a purport to *Bhagavad-gītā*, Chapter 1, verse 28. We hear Arjuna say, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, seeing my friends and relatives present before me in such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my mouth drying up." Arjuna is attached; he's attached to his friends, he's attached to his relatives, and he sees there's going to be a big battle. He's attached to their bodies. But in the purport, Prabhupāda said that's not such a bad thing. *Hare Kṛṣṇa*. Prabhupāda writes: 

"Any man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities which are found in godly persons or in demigods. As such, Arjuna, just after seeing his kinsmen, friends, and relatives on the battlefield, was at once overwhelmed by compassion for them who had so decided to fight amongst themselves. Such symptoms in Arjuna were not due to weakness but due to his soft-heartedness, a characteristic of a pure devotee of the Lord."

As Śrīla Prabhupāda gave. But there's a higher understanding, a higher love to be achieved, and Kṛṣṇa points that out in Chapter 2, verse 2 of the *Bhagavad-gītā*. Seeing Arjuna attached like this, Kṛṣṇa says, "My dear Arjuna, how have these impurities come upon you? They are not befitting a man who knows the higher values of life." Prabhupāda said that, you know, human natures were attached; it is a quality of a devotee to be soft-hearted, but there's a deeper understanding of love. And what is that? The soul's love for the Supreme Soul, God. That love was once there. Jagannātha says in his *purport*, we turned our face from God to come to this world. If you're talking with someone and then you go like that, it's very offensive. So he uses this word, "back-faced." My mother used to say when she was chastising me, "Son, you look at me when I'm talking to you." So we gave up that loving relationship; we gave it up to come to this world of birth and death, and the purpose of life is to re-establish that lost relationship. 

In English, we have the word "religion." I said "religion." So the Latin verb *religare* in religion means to re-establish our connection with God. Just like yoga; yoga means to reconnect with what? With Kṛṣṇa, with God. Religion and yoga are the same. So that's the purpose of life. But first of all, we have to understand that the inherent faults in a loving relationship in this world—the imperfection is that it's temporary. Sorry, it's temporary; it's frustrating. Either you're separated by divorce, or we're separated by death. And as much as you're attached to something, when you're separated from it, you feel the same pain. If I lose my watch—if it's a, you know, a very simple 200 rupee watch—okay, you know, but if it's like a Rolex... 

So these are the hard realities of life. We've all, probably everyone has lost a loved one—grandma, grandpa, child—it's painful. Yes, this is love in the material world. But in relationship with Kṛṣṇa, the love *ad infinitum*, the love with Kṛṣṇa, is growing, growing, growing, growing forever and ever and ever. In the spiritual world, we can hardly imagine. We have to be real about this world; we're strangers in a strange land. We don't belong here. We are spiritual essentially; we are spiritual *ātmā*, souls. We belong in the spiritual world. We're like fish out of water. You must have some beautiful lakes or rivers here in Gujarat. You go take a fish—don't go fishing—but you take a fish and bring him to Surat. "I'm fishing, fishy. You're in the murky water, I'm going to take you to Surat. You're going to have a good time. Is she... our Prime Minister Modi is from Surat, things are improving here, things are improving." So, "Fishy, here's a car for you, Mercedes. Here's the keys for you, enjoy." You take the fishy to some bar and you offer him some beer, "Come on, fishy." It's getting better. You introduce the fishy to a beautiful girl, his eyes go, his fins are flapping, and the girl gets scared and she runs away. So, a fish cannot be happy outside his element. Take the fish, put them back in the water. We're laughing at ourselves, we're laughing at ourselves, because we're also like fish out of water. We're trying to enjoy those things; they don't bring any lasting satisfaction. We'll only be happy when we get back to the spiritual world. 

And what's the highest happiness? Love. Even in this world, love is the highest happiness. Here, if you have everything—money, gold, fame, nice house—but you don't have someone to share it with, you can't be happy. Loneliness is the most miserable thing. But if you have nothing but the shirt on your back, but you have a beautiful wife, a nice husband, children, family members—if you have someone to love—even if you're poor, you can be happy. I've been traveling as a *sannyāsī* in this world for 44 years. I've met kings and queens, prime ministers, presidents, famous athletes, Bollywood stars, big businessmen, and very often they tell me, "Swāmī jī, help me. I have everything, but I'm not happy." Because sometimes when you're on top, it's very lonely. You have many associates but no lovers. Whereas I've been in the slums of Mumbai and the *favelas* of Rio de Janeiro, in the townships of South Africa. I meet poor people, but they have a loving wife, they have a loving husband, children, friends; they're happy because love is the highest happiness. So, logically, in the spiritual world, love is also the highest happiness, but love is eternal. Logically, that's actually what we're looking for. 

So therefore, we should be gradually detached from this world. It takes time to become detached. We can't be artificial and just hearing a lecture like this, you know, run to Rishikesh, you know, just wear a *gumpha* and sit in the forest and, "Oh, you're a yogi." Gradually, we become detached. We can practice renunciation, and in household life, husband and wife take according to their need, not according to their greed. They can live a simple life and be happy, practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We have many examples of persons who have realized these things in their lifetime. Recently, someone sent me a message on WhatsApp, there's a new movie about Alexander the Great—the Great—you've heard about Alexander the Great, so they said you should watch this movie. But I said I've already learned from Alexander the Great what needs to be learned from him, because on his deathbed he summoned his generals and he shared with them his three ultimate wishes. He's going to die, so he calls his top generals, "Come, I have three wishes, three instructions to you." He said, "After I die, the best doctors in the land should carry my coffin to the burial. And all the wealth that I have accumulated in this life—the money, the gold, the precious stones, the jewels—it should be scattered all around the ground as they carry my coffin to the grave." As they're carrying his coffin, all the money just throw it on the ground, as the coffin's going, money, money, gold, gold, throw it all. And as you carry me in the coffin, make sure my hands are outside the coffin, hanging like this. So one of his generals said, "Alexander, this is a really unusual request. Could you explain why you're saying such things? Can you explain?" So Alexander said, "Yes." He said, "I want the best doctors to carry my coffin to demonstrate that in the face of death, even the best doctors in the world have no power to stop death. I want the road to be covered with my treasures so that everyone can see that material wealth acquired on this Earth stays on this Earth. And I want my hands to hang outside the coffin so that people understand that we come to this world empty-handed and we leave this world empty-handed." 

It's interesting, but does it go to the heart? Do we really understand those truths and act accordingly? Or is such wisdom in one ear and out the other? So everything is temporary, like he was explaining; love will come and love will go. We come together as friends and family and country members, and then we're separated. We come together as friends and family, marriage, together, and then we're separating, birth after birth. *Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, 5th chapter, verse 25: "Many planks and sticks, unable to stay together, are carried away by the force of a river's waves. Similarly, although we're intimately related with friends and family members, we are unable to stay together because of our various past deeds and the waves of time." 

So that's the first half of the lecture; it's pretty heavy. Don't despair, there's a positive alternative. There's always a happy ending in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Mahāprabhu has said: "The Supreme Lord to be worshipped is the son of the King of Vraja. His personal abode is Vṛndāvana. The most favorable mood of serving Him is that which was practiced by the young maidens of Vraja. The scripture *Bhāgavatam* is the spotless source of reliable knowledge, and pure love of God is the supreme goal of life." *Bhakti*. 

And if someone says, "Okay, but how to love Kṛṣṇa? I'm convinced, Swāmī gave the lecture, I want to be renounced, I want to get attached to Kṛṣṇa. What do I do?" Mahāprabhu says, if you want to know the process of worshipping Kṛṣṇa or loving Kṛṣṇa, just try to follow in the footsteps of the *gopīs*, the cowherd girls of Vṛndāvana. Their love is the highest perfectional love. It's very easy to fall in love with Kṛṣṇa. The whole process is to fall out of love with the material world into love with Kṛṣṇa. We can fall in love with Kṛṣṇa because He's so adorable, He's so attractive. You're blessed in this country. In the West, if you ask someone, "Tell me something about God," not Bhagavān, God, they'll say, "God? He lives up there." "Can you tell me something else about God?" "He's got gray hair because He's the oldest person; He's the original person. So He's an old man." "Can you tell me something more about God?" "No." With all due respect, I'm not criticizing another religion, but my point is, how can you love someone you know nothing about? Why did you choose your husband or your wife? Because the way they look, the way they walk, the way they talk, the clothes they wear, the music they like. Love is in the details. They're translating, the translator, he's trying his best. So we have so much information about Kṛṣṇa, the original form of God, many incarnations. But Kṛṣṇa is *avatārī*; He's the source of all incarnations. 

And it was mentioned that love of the *gopīs*... Why do the *gopīs* love Kṛṣṇa? Because He's a cowherd boy, and along with His friends and cows, He goes to the pasturing grounds of Vṛndāvana every day. Kṛṣṇa used to go to the pasturing grounds every day, and the *gopīs*, by social custom, they stayed home. But when Kṛṣṇa is in the forest all day long, they're thinking, "Kṛṣṇa's feet are so soft. Now He's walking on the rough ground, the stones are pricking His feet. He must be feeling some pain." Thinking this way, the *gopīs* start to cry. You see, their relationship with Kṛṣṇa was so intimate and so deep that Kṛṣṇa himself had to admit one day, "My dear *gopīs*, it's not in My power to repay your love. My dear *gopīs*, it's not possible for me to repay your debts which you have created by your deep love for me." 

So we're meant to follow in the footsteps of the *gopīs*. And amongst the *gopīs*, who is the topmost *gopī*? So we have to come to that stage. We have to become perfect in one very short lifetime. And how do you fall in love with Kṛṣṇa? You hear about Him constantly. Just like many of you, it was an arranged marriage, wasn't it? Love marriage, arranged marriage. And how did you become attracted to someone you never met? Your mother said, "He's a nice boy, he's so tall, he has dark eyes, he's handsome, lots of money, and he's Kṛṣṇa conscious." "Oh, I can't wait to marry him!" That's... you're speaking about yourself. Yes, handsome boy, educated, he looks like a *murti*. 

So, brings... or if we hear about Rādhā and Lakṣmī, then in our heart you have a lot of love for Rādhā. I can see, but you're Gujarati, you're supposed to love Kṛṣṇa. I'll tell you one short story about a pastime about Kṛṣṇa. I think it will help you love Him even more. So, one day, after hearing Kṛṣṇa had stolen butter from the local ladies, Yaśodā approached Kṛṣṇa and said, "Kṛṣṇa, you've stolen butter?" "Yes, Mayā, it wasn't me! How could it be me? You sent me to Madhuvana today to herd the cows. I left very early this morning, I've just now returned as the sun is setting. The cows and my friends are my witness, how can you accuse me like this, Mayā?" And Kṛṣṇa started crying. "I returned today very tired and hungry, now you're calling me chore, Mayā! You're calling me thief! Oh, Mayā, how can you be so cruel? Am I no longer your son? If not, I will not live here any longer, I'll run away from Nanda." So Mother Yaśodā's heart softened. She said, "Perhaps I'm mistaken. Maybe, maybe the neighbor saw someone else." So she put her face in her palms and she started crying. "Oh, my son, I was wrong, I'm so sorry. But it was... it was the neighbors who complained, they swore upon their cows that you spent all day terrorizing their homes, breaking their yogurt pots and eating the contents and giving it to the monkeys. But maybe they were wrong, maybe it was some other boy." So, seeing his mother crying, Kṛṣṇa's heart softens, and placing one hand on her arm, he pleaded, "Mayā, don't cry. I confess, I stole the butter." So Yaśodā started crying even louder. "No, Lālā, forgive me, oh innocent one. I wrongly accused you. It's as you say, you were in Madhuvana, you couldn't have done it." So then Kṛṣṇa, squeezing his mother's arm, "Mayā, you are not to blame, I did do it. I did steal the butter." Yaśodā said, "No, you didn't." He said, "Yes, I did!" But now barely able to control her laughter, she said, "No, you didn't." She's playing a little trick on Kṛṣṇa, she's playing a little trick on him. "No, you didn't, Kṛṣṇa." "Yes, I did!" Kṛṣṇa shouted. But now detecting something funny in his mother's voice, Kṛṣṇa came very close to her face and realized that she was tricking him. So then Yaśodā looked at Kṛṣṇa with wide open eyes and said, once more with a smile, "No, you didn't." And then laughing, she threw her arms around her son, covering his now smiling, tear-stained face with kisses. So at that point, Kṛṣṇa, affectionately, he stroked his mother's hair, and still determined not to be outdone by his mother, even after being exposed as a thief, he kissed Mother Yaśodā's cheek and whispered in her ear, "Yes, I did." 

Mom Kṛṣṇa. 

Hare Kṛṣṇa.""