"*00162*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

First and foremost, I'd like to thank my very dear, dear most friend—as we say in old English, "bosom buddy"—Tukaram Prabhu, for once again inviting me to this wonderful festival of Pāṇihāṭi. I have many nice memories of participating in this event over the years, and somehow I get invited back every year. I am also happy to be in the association of such an august assembly of devotees who I was observing are relishing—actually relishing—there is some *nāma-ruci* here. Rūpa Gosvāmī encourages us to, as quickly as possible, develop taste for the holy names. *Kālī-kālī nāma-rūpa kṛṣṇa-avatāra*. Why? Because in the Age of Kali, Kavirāja Gosvāmī describes *kālī-kālī nāma-rūpa*—the avatāra for this age, of course, is Caitanya Mahāprabhu—but he is stressing the holy name in this verse. The avatāra for this age is the Supreme Person, and when we say "Person," we mean Kṛṣṇa. *Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa-vigraha*—He is fully present in the sound of His name. Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and your life will be sublime." Somewhere along the line, somebody changed it to "be happy." "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, be happy." But Prabhupāda actually said, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and your life will be sublime." Happy is nice, but sublimity is something very internal; you become fully satisfied because you're reconnected with your heavenly Father. You're reconnected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

So, to see here in this temple, before the beautiful deities of the Pañca-tattva, it only makes sense. You're chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa in front of those who brought this holy name to the world. The Pañca-tattva—to see you relishing the *kīrtana* is so satisfying. And of course, here you have the mood of Aindra Prabhu. I think the second generation very much appreciated Aindra Prabhu's contribution and example of *nāma-ruci*. He actually had taste for the holy names. We grew up a little bit together. We weren't always together, but in the 70s we met and we decided we would like to become attached to the holy names. So in the early days, we would exchange melodies. Mundane people—you know, young people of my age—they exchange baseball cards, even as teenagers. But in our society, we sometimes trade melodies. So he had his truck at one point in New York City. He was going out with a truck on which he had a sound system, and he would sit there and play harmonium. Someone would play mṛdaṅga and kartālas, and he'd go throughout New York City with these melodies that he'd come up with. And I was serving in Europe, and I would also come up with melodies.

Prabhupāda encouraged Viṣṇujana Mahārāja. Viṣṇujana Mahārāja asked Prabhupāda, "We have our Bengali melodies from Bengal, but can I—I don't want to say 'make up'—can I be inspired to come up with certain melodies?" And Prabhupāda said, "Yes, you can do also," so it's authorized. So we would exchange melodies through the years, and then eventually he went to Vṛndāvana and he went—way, he became light-years ahead of me in Kṛṣṇa consciousness because of *nāma-ruci*, because of his faith in chanting the holy names and the time that he gave. He would chant, you know, sometimes 24 hours a day. So to come here and see that some of you have taken up that mood, it's very pleasing. He's a legend. And to take up that mood and that spirit—it's very unique. I don't see this in Europe. I don't see it in Australia or Russia. It's kind of like this is a spring that comes up from the ground; it bubbles up the water. Here you have that mood of Aindra. So, thank you very much for doing that, and may God bless you. May the Pañca-tattva bless you to get that *nāma-ruci*, because we need it desperately. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says you can only give up something if you get something better. So we also have to practice renunciation. As Jesus said in the Bible, you can't enjoy *mammon*—meaning materialism—and God at the same time. Doesn't work. It's not the formula. You have to give up *mammon*; you have to give up material desires. But it's a challenge. Kṛṣṇa says, *daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā*—this divine energy of mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, meaning matter, the material world, it's very difficult to overcome. But one who surrenders unto me can easily overcome it. So, when God says something, it's really significant. It's very difficult to conquer our material nature, our material desires. Our attraction for this world is almost impossible in Kali-yuga, but it is possible by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, because He is even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu doesn't accept our offenses; He only accepts our *sevā*, and the savior for this age is the holy name.

Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. So here in this church—it used to be a church. I remember I used to surf this area when I was a teenager. I remember passing this building; it was a church, and now it's also divine. It's a sanctum, a Hare Kṛṣṇa temple. The worship is going on, so there's something special about this building. Our Christian brothers and sisters, they were singing "Hallelujah, hallelujah, hallelujah." It's very nice. And we took over and we're singing "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." So to enter into this building is to enter into sanctity. It's a sanctuary. The ether is permeated with God's name. Even if there's no *kīrtana* going on, you can sit here because the ether is permeated by Kṛṣṇa's sweet holy names. Such a sanctuary. We should spend as much time as possible in this building, in this temple room. You should be here for every Sunday feast, not just the Pāṇihāṭi; you should always come.

I remember one time, Prabhupāda—unfortunately, there was a court case about the proprietorship of the land, our property in Māyāpur. So he had to come to court to defend that this was our property. It was given, whether we paid for it, but there were some *goondas*—we won't go into detail—it was a court case, so Prabhupāda had to go to the court in Kolkata with his disciples, *dharma*, to stand up for Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's property. So when he walked into the courtroom with his disciples, Prabhupāda stopped maybe 10 feet into the courtroom. He said, "This place is contaminated." The devotees were looking around—did they sweep the floor, or you know, they're wondering what does Prabhupāda mean? They're looking around. He said, "This is contaminated. He said because lawyers mean 'liars'." If you're a lawyer, please don't take that personally. You're a Hare Kṛṣṇa lawyer; you're defending *dharma*. It's your work, it's okay. We know you have a clean heart. Prabhupāda said, "Lawyer means liar." So the devotees didn't know what—Prabhupāda said, "I'm not going in. It's too contaminated." So the devotees said, "But Prabhupāda, you have to go. You have to go for the court case." Prabhupāda said, "Okay, the solution is *kīrtana*." And you know when you walk into a courtroom—you know, when the judge comes in, everyone stands. It's very formal, especially with the British laws that were there. They had this formal dress, the lawyers, the courtroom. Prabhupāda said, "Kīrtana. What kīrtana?" So they ran outside to the bus; they had some cars and were done. "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare..." like that. And they marched through the court, you know. Prabhupāda said like this—he'd sometimes, to get us going, Prabhupāda would go like this. As soon as he did that, the *kīrtana* exploded. I met many occasions where I saw, like in Paris and Geneva and Rome, we were having *kīrtana*, you know, a little nervous of Prabhupāda, and everything exploded. Devotees were touching the ceilings almost. So the *kīrtana* was raging, and I was told the judge was like this, and Prabhupāda was singing too.

Prabhupāda recommends that the chanting of the holy names is especially beneficial if it's heard from the lips of a pure devotee. I always remember that the holy names are particularly potent when heard from the lips of a pure devotee, and that's why I sometimes lament as I travel the world and visit different countries and different temples that you don't hear Prabhupāda's *bhajanas* so much anymore. No disrespect to the *kīrtana* leaders—I loved every *kīrtana* leader today, my heart was "boom, boom, boom." It's so nice. But we should also remember Prabhupāda's pure sound vibration. I know that, so it's nice to have those. Of course, when there's a *kīrtana* like this, we have our *kīrtana*, but during the day, for the pleasure of the Pañca-tattva—who so much love their pure devotee, the *senāpati-bhakta* general who brought this wave, this tsunami wave of *kīrtana* to the West—certainly they love Śrīla Prabhupāda as he loves them. They'd love to hear his *kīrtana* playing on the speakers throughout the day. There's enough *bhajanas* that we can do that, because to hear even a recording—because I heard the Gāyatrī mantra on a tape. Prabhupāda couldn't travel the world so much to give brāhmaṇa initiation personally. So I heard it through a tape, and I was questioning, "But is it the same? Temple President, this is Prabhupāda's policy." Of course, it's perfect. So even a tape recording is enough.

When my godbrother Jayananda Prabhu passed from this world to join Prabhupāda in his *nitya-līlā*, his eternal pastimes, he was in a room across from the Los Angeles temple. The devotees—he had leukemia, he was on his last hours, no one knew—and the devotees went to Maṅgala-ārati. And when they came back from Maṅgala-ārati, Jayananda Prabhu had passed from this world. Prabhupāda said he was ISKCON's first saint, for all the service he did in establishing Ratha-yātrā in America and thus around the world. So fortunately, when the devotees went to Maṅgala-ārati, they put a tape of Prabhupāda on singing Hare Kṛṣṇa. So when Jayananda left, he was hearing a tape recording of Prabhupāda singing Hare Kṛṣṇa. So my point is that Prabhupāda's sound vibration is as perfect through a tape recording as it was when he was personally with us.

So later, Prabhupāda wrote a posthumous letter to Jayananda. Posthumous means after someone departs, some words are spoken or a letter is written. You know, like when my godbrothers or god-sisters depart, I always write something directly to them. I don't speak, you know—"in the past, you have now left us, you are there, you are with Prabhupāda." So Prabhupāda wrote a posthumous letter to Jayananda: "My dear Jayananda, please accept my blessings. I remember you were the first one to come forward with a donation for the publication of my Bhagavad-gītā. Thank you very much. If you had any material desires in your heart when you left this world, then you've gone to *svarga-loka*." Just see, even if you have those nasty desires in your heart, you haven't conquered the desires—it says after many lifetimes one comes to the point of *ātma-jñāna*, of full surrender. So it may be that we don't finish Kṛṣṇa consciousness in this lifetime, but that's okay. We'll be born in a devotee family, and we can continue from where we left off. Prabhupāda said, "My dear Jayananda, if you had any material desires in your heart when you died, you've gone to *svarga-loka*, the planets of the *devas*, where you can fulfill those desires. But more importantly, you can finish your Kṛṣṇa consciousness and go back to Goloka." Said like that.

So do we have anything to worry about? Should we be afraid of death? People are afraid of death because they don't know what's going to happen, and they should be afraid even if they know they believe in reincarnation because they haven't taken up the safeguard, the beauty of devotional service. So it's a little dicey what's going to happen. But we know, even Arjuna asked the question: "When I die, is it—I'm just cast by the wind to some unknown destination?" Kṛṣṇa says, "No, you'll be born into a family of wealthy merchants where you don't have to struggle for the necessities of life and you can continue your Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or you'll be born into a family of transcendentalists. Verily, such a birth is rare." And many of the young people sitting in here today were born into devotee families. All the children of Tukaram and Radhika, they're all special souls. Give them a big round of applause. They're old souls.

I asked them all, Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja—I was just about to start initiating and I said, you know, "Is there any difficulty in being a spiritual master?" He said, "Yes," interesting, he said, "Yes, sometimes you have to accept as a disciple someone who's more advanced than you. You don't know who's taking their last birth, you know." We are all the pioneers of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but we were born in *mlecchas*. Who are we? We're just caught up in this unfathomable mercy of this divine grace, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, and we can proudly call ourselves his disciples, but you never know who's sitting next to you. So anyway, Prabhupāda said, if you had any material [desires], for Goloka, and from there you can transfer yourself to Goloka. But because you were hearing the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, I say you've gone to Kṛṣṇa-loka. It was a recording; there was a repetition of Prabhupāda chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. So all glories to ISKCON's *kīrtaniyas*. They're keeping the tsunami, the tsunami flowing, the tsunami of mercy. The holy names are sweeping this planet, people being caught up in it even unknowingly, but always remember the pure sound vibration of His Divine Grace when he chants, even in a recorded *bhajana*. So please, in your homes, you know, they're online. Prabhupāda's—someone said the other day, "How do I find Prabhupāda's *bhajanas*?" I said, "What? They're online. Seek and you shall find."

So here, this is like—I remember one time one devotee told me this, this Laguna Beach temple is a *cakra*. It's a *cakra*. *Cakra* means like the Sudarśana-cakra is spinning. Actually, Sudarśana-cakra had a *sevā* to Govardhana—Kṛṣṇa's weapon, he had a *sevā* to Govardhana. In that, when Indra, all the rain was pouring down to inundate Vṛndāvana as a punishment because the cowherd people stopped worshiping Indra and they started worshiping Govardhana, because from there came all the green grass for their cows and the flowing rivers. You know the pastime. Indra, this rain was pouring down in buckets—we say in America, "like cats and dogs." So to protect the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa lifted Govardhana Hill. But still there was so much water that was coming down on the sides; it was flooding underneath. Even Girirāja, the flooding was even coming, and everyone was getting wet underneath. So the Sudarśana-cakra came and spun above Govardhana, and that way the rain went like that, outside of Vṛndāvana, some other part. So this is like a *cakra*, and it's a sanctified atmosphere. As soon as the *kīrtana* stopped, Prabhupāda said, "Stop." By that time, the judge was like, "Ah" in the courtroom. The *kīrtana* stopped, and Prabhupāda said, "Now it's auspicious." All the lies, all the diplomacy and the envy and the hatred and the anguish and the stress of a courtroom—if there's any place where there's stress, it's a court—it's auspicious. That's the power of the holy name. Everything becomes purified. We have to discuss these things so our *śraddhā*, our faith in the holy name, increases day by day, so that when we sit down and chant our *japa*, our *japa* is better than the day before. That's one rule, an unspoken rule in *japa*: I'm going to make sure that my *japa* is more focused and comes from the heart more than it did the day before. So these types of discussions, they help us develop our faith in *śravaṇam*.

Prabhupāda gave me a personal instruction. He said, "Preach boldly and have faith in the holy names." So my whole life has been dedicated to that simple instruction. Like Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī told Prabhupāda, "If you ever get money, print books." And look what's come from that instruction. Elegance is truth spoken concisely, according to Kavirāja Gosvāmī. So thank you for keeping Aindra's spirit alive here, and thank you for all the *kīrtanas*. Thank you for all the *sevā*. I mean, you're really fortunate; there's not a lot of Pañca-tattva deities around the world. And Pañca-tattva—I mean, Caitanya Mahāprabhu is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa himself, and Nityānanda is even more merciful than Gaurāṅga, because we see in Mahāprabhu's pastimes, as a Yuga-avatāra, He made so many concessions. So many concessions. "You don't do this, you don't do that; just chant Kṛṣṇa and be civilized beings, follow regulative principles." That means civilized. But He was speaking to the intelligentsia, Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, Pratāparudra—He was speaking to the elite, the 1% we say. But Nityānanda, He went to the *favelas*, we say in Rio de Janeiro—I went to the *favelas*. He went to the—we say in South Africa, the townships in KwaZulu-Natal. The kind of places that He went. He went to the bad districts to deliver Jagāi and Mādhāi. Why? Not just to deliver Jagāi and Mādhāi—yes—but to show the power of the holy names. By delivering Jagāi and Mādhāi, that gives more credit to the holy names than delivering Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. With all due respect, Nityānanda—you have Nityānanda here. One time Prabhupāda told us in Detroit, he wrote us a letter. He said, "You go to India and you purchase Gaura-Nitāi deities, small deities, and you go door-to-door in the ghettos of Detroit and you sell Gaura-Nitāi door-to-door." I was, "What? We're going to do what?" You sell Gaura-Nitāi deities door-to-door. You just tell the people, "This is God," and you offer Him a flower and a stick of incense every day. He actually said that, that you go door-to-door. Because Gaura-Nitāi, just see their unfathomable mercy. It's called *audārya*. They don't accept offenses. Don't take advantage of that! They don't consider our offenses; they only consider what *sevā* we do for them. And if you take up their mission, how dear you become to their hearts! That's why everyone should experience some type of preaching: either you cook for the preachers, invite the preachers into your home, or donate to the preaching, or distribute, because that's where the mercy comes from. Because that was their mission. That was Prabhupāda's mission.

Prabhupāda, an eternal resident of Vṛndāvana—one time they asked Prabhupāda, "Who are you in the spiritual world?" And Prabhupāda said, "If I told you, you'd faint." But he came here. What's he doing? In Goloka, we're not meant to speculate, but you know how the gopīs and the cowherd boys, they serve. Even simple activities, so much *bhāva*, so much devotion—even the smallest of activities is supreme, supremely sublime. But he came here and he waited in line for a shower from the Mott Street boys who joined him at 26 2nd Avenue. He'd wait in line for the shower. He'd cook the feast. He'd serve the feast. And whenever he went home, he would clean up. And eventually, we took over. We were begging for service. "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, give me service." That's what it means. Let me reconnect. I'm your eternal servant. I—without a master, who am I? There's no joy in life unless I have a master. So we serve—the most glorious position, the most—the best position we can achieve is to be the servant of a glorious master. That's all. We don't want name, fame, wealth. We just want to be the servant of a glorious master. That's *sauśīlya*. But then Prabhupāda said, "out the Mott Street boys." You see on that video, something 2nd Avenue, there's that special video. Brahmananda is playing a big drum, and they're coming out—"out, give it, share it." And then Śrīla Prabhupāda, he—and the mercy comes from Nitāi, just like if you're—I see in India, I spent a lot of time in India, there's a lot of stores, "Agarwal and Sons," isn't it? The Indian people here—"Mr. Sharma and Sons." That's just the tradition. The sons take up the business of the father. So who's our father? Prabhupāda means the master where all the other masters sit. He's taking us on the eternal *jalada* back to the spiritual world. So if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and you share the mantra, then the Pañca-tattva, then you feel the real mercy.

Rūpa Gosvāmī says in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* that the first experience one has in pure devotional service is not crying tears, but freedom from the miseries of material life. If you're drowning in an ocean and somebody pulls you out, you don't have to be a mile high to be satisfied. You're just one inch above the water. It's the beauty of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We don't have to wait for *rāgānugā-bhakti*. Yes, but *vaidhī-bhakti*, we're experiencing freedom by practicing the regulative principles of freedom, giving up sinful life and the reactions that come in your face from it. We're experiencing freedom. Freedom, just—you're just a little bit above. So that's the first experience. So it's nice, but freedom from—you know, like peacefulness, that's not our goal. We want ecstasy. When I first joined, coming to the temple, I remember they had the *daśāvatāra* on the wall, the paintings, and I was going from, you know, from Kūrma to Matsya to Vāmana, and I thought, "This is nice." And then I came to Buddha. Now, I was a 19-year-old boy struggling in this world, just out of the military, all kinds of PTSD—you know, psychological problems from the army. "Ah, Buddha, peace." Then one devotee tapped me on the shoulder. He said, "Brian, look at this photo." It was a picture like this: Pañca-tattva dancing in ecstasy. And I said, "Yeah, that's what I want. I don't want just being." Oh, what a fool I am! I don't want to be disrespectful to the mantra, but this is what we want—ecstasy. So that you get by participating in the *yuga-dharma* itself. Here, we prepare ourselves for battle every morning: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." Prabhupāda chanted on these beads. He chanted. This is my life. If you offer me $5 million, I would not—if you offer me a billion dollars, I wouldn't give these. But Prabhupāda said these beads—those beads, once you get initiated into the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, it's an eternal blessing. So we prepare for battle: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare."

Everyone likes *nṛsiṁha-kavaca*. This is the *kavaca*. Just like Lakṣmaṇa, when he left to join Rāma in the search for the *mṛcī*, the deer, he took his sword and in the dust he made a circle around Sītā with mantra—also mantra, so powerful. Prabhupāda has said that in the Age of Kali, everything deteriorates except two things: the potency of jewels—if you're an astrologer you'll love that—the potency of jewels and mantras. They're never affected, even by the evils; they're always supremely pure. So Rāvaṇa came, the greatest *asura* that this creation has ever known, and as a delicate princess, Sītā—soft, tender skin, you know, bare feet, had never been out of the palace, you know—couldn't touch a hair on her head because of what? Mantra. So mantra protects us from anxiety, from stress, from doubt, etc. But more important, deep within the heart there's a golden seed of *prema*, of *bhakti*, of love for the Divine. *Kṛṣṇa-balarāma*, and by watering that creeper, Prabhupāda said it grows, it pops out of the ground, and that creeper grows and grows and grows, breaks through the covering of the material world, goes through the Vaikuṇṭha planets—for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas it doesn't stop in Vaikuṇṭha because that's the official kingdom of God, Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, *aiśvarya*—and it goes to Goloka, the playground of Kṛṣṇa, where you can wrestle with Him and dance with Him and hold His hand in a transcendental way as a divine lover. That's the ultimate benefit of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. And that blessing comes from sharing the mahā-mantra. We become strong, but then we go out in various ways and we support the preachers and *śruti*, meaning a person fully conscious, God himself dancing on the tip of our tongues. He blesses you. We make more advancement by blessings than we do our own attempts at being good *sādhakas*. We should be good *sādhakas*, but really it comes from blessings from our superiors. We are blessed. They're compassionate. They're very compassionate. Mahāprabhu is the most compassionate because He comes in the mood of Rādhā. Rādhā is the tenderhearted feature of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa—He's soft like a rose but He's hard like a thunderbolt sometimes. Rādhā, she's the compassionate feature of the Absolute Truth. So Mahāprabhu, when He comes to this world—thank God He is God—but thank God, oh my God, OMG, He comes in her mood. And her mood, Prabhupāda said, her mood is such that when she's in the spiritual world—Prabhupāda said in Los Angeles, he said it—that when Rādhārāṇī sees a new *bhaktan* walk into the temple premises and walks in the temple and thinks, "This is cool"—I didn't say that, but "This is so nice, these people. I like the colors. I like the songs. I love the food. What's it called? *Prasādam*." And she thinks, "Maybe I'll stay here." And she stays overnight, and she doesn't go home. So Rādhārāṇī says, "Kṛṣṇa, look, you see that young *bhaktan*? She just joined two days ago. Please give her your mercy." And Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhā says. Rādhā doesn't do what Kṛṣṇa says. That's the relationship. She has the *prabhu*—she controls Kṛṣṇa by her... She's got Kṛṣṇa wrapped around her little finger. So Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhā says. So Kṛṣṇa looks down to—whatever the address is in Watseka Avenue in Los Angeles—and he blesses that girl. This is the mood.

So there's unlimited mercy. One time Prabhupāda's father said to him, "My son, the Lord, in His various incarnations, He has so many hands. Kṛṣṇa has so many hands. If He wants to give you mercy from all His hands, how much your two little hands can hold? You think about it." We have so much mercy. We have guru, we have Gaurāṅga, we have Prabhupāda, we have the holy names, we have *śāstra*, we have the Vaiṣṇavas, we have temples, we have Vraja, we have Māyāpur, we have hope for the future. What hope do materialistic people have? Their destiny is such that when they die, they have to accept the good, the bad, and the ugly reactions to what they did. Our slate's clean when we take initiation. The chalkboard is there—it's wiped clean by mercy of guru and Gaurāṅga. A clean slate. And if we stick to the rules and regulations and we chant every day and we serve to our capacity, our future is very bright. We have nothing to fear.

I had a dream—probably I don't like to speak about myself, but anyway—I had a dream not long ago that I was in a tunnel and there were like doors on either side, and I was running and the monsters were chasing me. You know, sometimes you have those nightmares when I was a kid, and I don't know why I had this one. The monsters were chasing me and I was running down this hallway, and I was trying to open the doors and they weren't opening, and the monsters were getting closer and closer. And I was chanting, kind of "Hare Kṛṣṇa," not very loudly, but at least I was chanting. And the dream was going on, it seemed like hours, but of course dreams don't last that long. And suddenly, at the end of the hallway, a door opened. This light—just couldn't see anything else. This light came and my eyes adjusted, and there was Prabhupāda. He said, "Come on." So I started running. He said, "Chant louder! Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." I was chanting. He said, "Chant louder!" Like when we chant *japa*, you know that tape—Prabhupāda says, "Sit properly," right? So whenever—everyone says, "Chant louder," I chanted it louder and louder. The monsters are coming and then I get to the door, Prabhupāda reaches down, he pulls me into the other side, and the light—bright light—goes away and it's all beautiful trees and birds and peacocks. And Prabhupāda said, "Welcome to Vṛndāvana." Then I woke up. So, it's just a dream, it's just a dream, but Prabhupāda said dreams are nonsense. You see a mountain and you see a piece of gold and you dream of a golden mountain. But he said, "When you dream about Kṛṣṇa or you dream about the spiritual master, he said that's very nice." So I just took it as an encouragement and to chant louder. I started chanting louder and my *japa* improved. Now people ask me, "How do I improve my *japa*?" Chant louder, like that.

So that's our future. We spend so much time lamenting for what we don't have. And that's human nature. You're never complete. Believe me, you're never complete in this world. In my travels, I met kings and queens and professors and scientists, and you know, so many people, the 1%, and they often say, "Mahārāja, it's nice talking to you. Can I reveal my heart? Yeah, go ahead." They say, "I have everything, but something's missing. I'm empty. I'm empty." And I say, "Yes, because you don't have love. You're a big person, but everyone's adoring you, but you don't—" Many times they don't. They're alone, actually. And love is the highest happiness. And I've seen that if you have everything but you don't have someone to love, you cannot be happy. But I've seen, relative sense, that like I was mentioning the *favelas* of Rio de Janeiro. I was there. I was in the Zulu land, KwaZulu. They call God *uKuluma*. And I saw how the Zulus, they live on the ground in grass huts. The water—they have to walk two miles to get water. And I've been in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. And I see that people may be very poor and they don't have anything but the shirt on their back, but they have a beautiful wife or a nice husband or a friend or children or neighbors or compatriots. If they have someone to love, they're happy. So even in this world, love is the highest happiness. But there's the story of Romeo and Juliet—that was like a match made in heaven, but it ended on a bad note. So that's "hard talk." Here in America, you have those shows called "hard talk" where they come together and they talk. That's life.

So Prabhupāda told my godbrother Satyarāja Mahārāja, when he gave him his *daṇḍa* in the renounced order of life, he said, "Never look back and think that you've left anything important behind, and never envy the position of those people out there who seem to be enjoying. Real happiness is love in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So yes, we have loving relationships, especially as devotees. That's like the beginning. We have our spiritual master. He's our master. But because he's delivering us, our attraction to him, our affection for him turns into love as well. And that love propels us into the divine world of Goloka Vṛndāvana, where love reigns supreme. And there's no concept of Romeo and Juliet. You're loving the most lovable person, Kṛṣṇa, and He's reciprocating fully. And the Rasa dance, the gopīs, they have the most love for Kṛṣṇa. I was listening to a tape—Prabhupāda was talking about the love of devotees in different capacities, different ways they can love Kṛṣṇa. Then Prabhupāda said, "But the gopīs, their love was such they never asked Kṛṣṇa for anything," and Prabhupāda broke down crying. It was a two-minute lecture. So the love in the spiritual world, we really can't grasp it. We're getting it, but we're like children—with, you know, what can we see? When you're a baby, when you're born, mothers will tell you the baby has eyes, but he can't see form. He can barely see colors. And as the eyes mature after a few weeks, then he sees Mommy. And the relationship goes deeper. As a teenager, if he's a good boy, then Mommy becomes—so we're like infants. Our eyes are just being opened by the scalpel of knowledge from guru. Our eyes are being opened. We're gradually beginning to see, but until then, we have to have faith.

One time, one of my god-sisters, she said to Prabhupāda, "Prabhupāda, is it true that God's a little boy and He plays on His mother's lap and sucks her breast and He has a little peacock feather in His hair? God, the Almighty? And He has lotus eyes and He's bluish-black like a monster? Is that true?" Prabhupāda—she's a new devotee—and Prabhupāda, he said, "My dear spiritual daughter, do you think I would cheat you?" And she blushed. She just, "Oh," she said, "No, Prabhupāda, I don't—I believe you." Prabhupāda said, "What do they know, these scientists? They're like an ant in the corner; what can they really say about the universe? Yes, the engineer has four heads, Yes, Śiva, He has snakes and spiders on His body, and there are devas." There is that faith. That faith begins by having faith in the Yuga-dharma: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." And everything will be revealed by chanting. All the desires in your heart—not the bad ones, but the good ones. You don't even know yet. You don't even know what are your deeper spiritual desires. You're getting some idea. But you study Prabhupāda's life, then you'll know what is—what is to have.

One time we were having *kīrtana* in Detroit and Prabhupāda was sitting on the *vyāsāsana*, and I was sitting right like that, or in front, near Prabhupāda's hands. He'd play the kartālas. He—couldn't imagine—he'd take the silver cup and he'd pour it and the stream of water would come like that. I said, "What is this?" I thought that's against the law of nature. It went like that. It was mystical. Prabhupāda was mystical. He always smelled like sandalwood paste any time of the day. So he's playing the kartālas, and I'm blushing. And I turned to my godmother. I said, "Prabhupāda's having a stroke." He said, "No, this is *sāttvika*, this is ecstasy." Generally, the pure devotees, they don't show those symptoms; they—even they have mystic powers. A pure devotee has all the eight *siddhis*, but they don't show it, and they certainly don't show their ecstatic symptoms because they want the people to follow them for the *jñāna* they're giving. Our relationship with our spiritual master is such that our connection is like the umbilical cord. He's giving us knowledge: "Armed with knowledge, stand and fight." That's our relationship with guru. He doesn't necessarily solve our marriage problems and help in the business. He can give some good advice, but his business is to enlighten us with knowledge. How to get out of the darkness into the light. How to get out of ignorance into truth. How to get out of the material world into the spiritual world.

But sometimes, as Jesus said, "My cup runneth over with love." So we saw sometimes, and Prabhupāda was crying, that tears were going. I was a new devotee, but when I saw that, my—whatever hesitancy I had, whatever doubts I had, it was like the sun just *whoop*, appeared in the sky and all the clouds just went away. All my doubts went away, just seeing a pure devotee in this world singing from his heart for Kṛṣṇa. So these things, they're waiting for us. Prabhupāda wanted us to distribute books, distribute books, distribute books. He wanted us to become *sādhakas*. He also wanted us to become pure devotees. So we have two things to work on: become pure devotees and become powerful representatives, the sons and daughters of the Founder-Ācārya, not "Agarwal and Sons," Prabhupāda and his family, and spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. How will we do both of those things? It's very simple. Three words: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." So today's a good day to do it. It's the Pāṇihāṭi festival—actually it's next weekend—but we don't need a festival to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. We can chant Hare Kṛṣṇa 24/7, 365, 100 years if we could, and one day we will in Goloka. But we can take advantage of this moment and we can sing—what time's the *ārati*? I'll sing a little bit. I'm not really a good singer, but I'll sing, and just try to remember some of these instructions as we're chanting. That knowledge, it's like it destroys the ignorance, and it gives us a taste, and from that our future is very bright. So thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""