"*00526*.*
"Very dear devotees, welcome back again. Śrīmatī Bhaktivedānta, namaste, Gauravani Pacharani. 

So, the other day we finished our series on Rūpa Gosvāmī’s beloved deity of Govindajī. But we mentioned at that time that, before moving on from Jaipur, we would discuss the pastimes of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s deity. So that’s what we’ll do today. Previously, we discussed in great detail Madana-mohana’s history a few months ago, I think, from the time He was carved by Vajranābha 5,000 years ago after the departure of Kṛṣṇa. We discussed His discovery by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī 500 years ago, as well as the beautiful temple that the rich merchant, Rāma Dāsa Kapūra, built at that little hill overlooking the Yamunā River in Vraja. Of course, in time, Madana-mohana suffered the same fate as Govindajī when Aurangzeb attacked Vṛndāvana in 1670. 

Now, unknown to most devotees, during that attack, Madana-mohana’s temple was also largely destroyed, as was Govindajī’s. What we see today—and this I learned from my research at the Vṛndāvana Research Institute—what we see today, what we assume is the main temple of Madana-mohana in Vṛndāvana, you know, that huge red sandstone spire going upwards, it’s not actually the original main temple. If you look off to the side of the property, you can see a large flat surface of red sandstone, kind of like a platform. Now, this is where the original large temple stood. I was surprised; that structure was said to be twice as high as the large dome that we see now. And actually, if you’ve seen the present dome, you can understand that two large, very large deities like Rādhā-Madana-mohana are presently in Karauli, Rajasthan—there’s no way they could have fit in there. That structure had another purpose. So the original temple was there with this flat-like platform, or part of it is existing now, and it was massive. I was reading, unfortunately, it was destroyed practically to the ground by Aurangzeb’s soldiers.

So, as we mentioned some lectures ago, Rādhā-Madana-mohana were quickly removed from their temple there. They were hidden and then taken out to Rādhā-kuṇḍa and then to the border of Vṛndāvana at Kāmyavana for safekeeping, along with Rādhā-Govinda. And from there, when Rādhā and Govinda left by bullock cart one day for eventually Jaipur, Rādhā and Madana-mohana also left soon after in their bullock cart. And they also traveled for several decades in secrecy, as did—and you will remember how we discussed that just after Govindajī left the town of Govindapura for Kanak Vṛndāvana, that garden area near Jaipur, Madana-mohana and Gopīnātha and their consorts moved into that temple in Govindapura. And finally, some time later, Jai Singh II, you’ll remember, brought all three sets of deities into his palace in Jaipur for two years, and then eventually they all had their separate temples.

So these three deities and their consorts—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, of course—are very dear to us. It is said that we approach Vṛndāvana, or you could say spiritual life in general, by taking shelter of these three deities in particular. We re-establish our lost relationship with Kṛṣṇa by worshiping Madana-mohana; we cultivate and nurture our relationship with Kṛṣṇa by worshiping Govindajī; and we enter into the goal of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, pure devotional service in the mood of the gopīs of Vṛndāvana, by worshiping the deity Gopīnātha. Śrīla Prabhupāda has written, and I quote, "These three deities are the life and soul of the Bengali Vaiṣṇavas, or Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, who have a natural aptitude for residing in Vṛndāvana." That’s so true. 

Thus, we take our first steps, our baby steps, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness by worshiping Madana-mohana with the following prayer: "Glory to the all-merciful Rādhā and Madana-mohana! I am lame and ill-advised, yet they are my directors, and their lotus feet are everything to me." One ācārya has written, "Madana-mohana’s enchanting smile draws surrendering souls away from sense gratification, nullifies their attachment to long-standing bad habits, and frees them from the grasp of Cupid." I’d like to recite that again just so we can really focus on Madana-mohana today with our minds and our hearts: "Madana-mohana’s enchanting smile draws surrendering souls away from sense gratification, nullifies their attachment to long-standing bad habits, and frees them from the grasp of Cupid."

So all three sets of deities were being worshipped in Jaipur, but as many of you know, well, Madana-mohana, he’s now in Karauli, which is some distance away from Jaipur. So how and why did he move to Karauli? Well, in the year 1724, Jai Singh II desired to marry one of his two daughters; I think she was 17 years old at the time. Now, the culture in Rajput royal families at that time was that Rajput kings' daughters would only marry into other royal families; even if it was necessary, they married into a royal family far away like Orissa or Bengal, South India, North India, Punjab, etc. The criteria was that the king who accepted a daughter of another king had to be superior in status and more wealthy. One king would give his daughter away to another king who was more powerful than him. 

The problem for Jai Singh II was that he was respected as the most powerful and stately ruler of the times. Anyway, somehow a marriage arrangement was made with another Rajput king, the king of Karauli, whose name was Rāj Gopāl Siṅgh. He was a very powerful king, also a great warrior, I was reading, and he hailed from the Yadu dynasty of Mathurā. So now, when kings gave their daughters away in marriage, their daughters were given away with very large *kanyādāns*—very large dowries. So sometime before her marriage to Rāj Gopāl Siṅgh, Jai Singh asked his daughter one day what she would like as *kanyādān*, her dowry. So she said, "Father, I have no desire for jewelry, nor do I want to take any number of maidservants with me to Karauli, and I have no need of fine clothes, palanquins, etc. I only have one desire, Father." So Jai Singh II said, "And what is that, my dear daughter?" So then she paused, and then taking her father’s hand and looking into his eyes, she said, "I just want to take Govindadeva with me, please, Father."

"I just want to take Govindadeva with me, please, Father." This is the history as we have read it in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute. I’ve heard other versions, but I think this is the most authoritative because I saw it in writing. So Jai Singh was speechless, but his historians say, "What could the king say?" It wasn’t his decision. Govindajī was not the king’s property; Govindajī was considered the property of the Gauḍīya ācāryas. That was the tradition. He was considered the property of the Gauḍīya ācāryas, and at that point in history, the Gauḍīya ācāryas were Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa. Just to say their names makes your hair stand on end. So Jai Singh said, "My dear daughter, please ask for something different. It is not within my power to give away Govindadeva. I am just serving and taking care of him." But his daughter was determined, and she repeated with emphasis, "I do not want anything else; I will only accept the deity."

So Jai Singh was in a very difficult situation. So, as he often did—we mentioned in another lecture—he decided to write a letter to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. That’s a long letter, but the gist of the letter was, "Can I give Govindadeva to my daughter as her dowry?" So Śrīla Viśvanātha, he replied by letter; in summarizing, "I cannot give you permission to give Govindadeva to your daughter, because I would be discriminating, that he is more important than Madana-mohana or Gopīnātha. He is not. All three deities look similar, all three deities are full of mercy, and all three are to be equally respected. But I have a solution for you. Please put the three deities in a dark room. Cover your daughter’s eyes with a strip of cloth. Then have her move throughout the room in the darkness, and whatever deity she touches first, that deity will go with her." Wow, the instruction of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

So Jai Singh organized everything according to the instructions of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. In the letter, he had a beautiful arrangement made in a room inside his palace where these three deities—Madana-mohana, Govindajī—were placed on a solid gold platform in the dark room. Then he blindfolded his daughter and took her into that dark room. Then he said, "My dear daughter, you walk around this room, and the first deity you touch may go with you to Karauli." So she entered the room blindfolded; she walked very slowly. And the first deity that she approached, but she walked by, was Govindadeva. Then she kept walking, and then she walked quite close, it’s described, to Madana-mohana, who—suddenly, this is how it’s written by the scribes—suddenly Madana-mohana’s right hand came a little forward as if to say, "You can take me with you to Karauli."

And as the princess took hold of Madana-mohana’s hand—it was right there—she walked into the hand, she opened her eyes, she took his hand, opened her eyes, and smiled seeing Madana-mohana. It was the Lord’s desire. So from that day on, I was reading, Madana-mohana’s hand was not positioned properly to allow a flute to go through his two hands, you know; he moved a little bit forward, so it wasn’t possible as it was previously to put a flute through his two hands because one was down a little bit, which is why the pūjārīs, then and now, place a flute which is bent in three places. That’s kind of crooked, hard to describe, but it’s crooked, making it possible to go through Madana-mohana’s hands.

So, yeah, Rādhā-Madana-mohana went with Jai Singh II’s daughter 175 kilometers away to Karauli on the occasion of her marriage in 1775. And there, he was installed in the city palace. Now, on his way—this is really interesting—on his way from Jaipur to Karauli, there was this massive procession of thousands of people accompanying him, escorting him from Jaipur to Karauli. And thousands of people, and they were, you know, singing and dancing, and they’re dressed in playing different musical instruments, and everyone was dressed in very colorful clothes, as they are when you go to Rajasthan, you see how colorfully, especially the ladies, dress. So it’s this huge procession, and there was a very large *cāraṇa-gajēśana*—*cāraṇa-gajēśana*—which means they were all accompanied by an army of four types of animals: an army of royal elephants, an army of royal camels, an army of royal horses, and an army of royal bullocks. 

That’s a *cāraṇa*. And from 1775, when Madana-mohana arrived in Karauli, up until the year 2011, there was a ritual known as *ḍhalkī-jhalkī* in which each day, or each evening after śṛṅgāra-ārati, the Queen of Karauli would come for a private darśana. No men were allowed in the temple at that time, not even a male priest. But it was discontinued because the queens became very much—you know, the queens in the times of the Rajput kings, they mainly stayed within the palace, they didn’t go outside, they were engaged in various affairs within the palace, and the tradition was that the common people couldn’t see the queen; she was with her king and her maidservants and her various duties. But in modern times, the queen started going out, and I think the Queen of Karauli around 2011, she was involved in politics, so she took a position in politics and she was right up front, so they—the priests—discontinued that ritual where she had private time with the deity in the evening. So, I was also reading that in 1897, Rāj Bhombal of Karauli made a big temple adjacent to the city palace where Madana-mohana is situated now. Those of you who have been there, you know it’s a very beautiful temple. 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So, there’s one more very beautiful pastime of Madana-mohana that I would like to share with you. I came across this pastime during a visit to Karauli, a visit to Madana-mohana in Karauli some years ago. One morning while attending maṅgala-ārati, I was listening very carefully to the song that everyone was singing during the ārati, and I’d heard the same song the day before also at maṅgala-ārati, and it was curious that I would hear this word, "Taz." People were singing, you know, this word, "Taz," with great affection during the morning of the maṅgala-āratis. I was thinking, "Taz? It’s not a Sanskrit word or a name I’ve heard before." So later that day, I went to the head priest, who was very friendly and he spoke really good English, and I asked, "What is the meaning of the word 'Taz' which everybody shouts out so affectionately at every maṅgala-ārati?" So he smiled and he said—with great emotion—he motioned for me to sit down, and he said, "Let me tell you the pastime of Taz and Madana-mohana."

He said, "We are fine." So, pointing towards the altar, he said, "Do you see that golden plate there on the altar?" And it’s a big plate like that, quite a big plate. I said, "Yes, I do, I’ve noticed that golden plate." He said, "Very good. Now listen carefully." 250 years ago, he began, "There was a Muslim man living in Karauli whose name was Taz. He was a postman. And at that time, there was a court case going on regarding the property of Madana-mohana’s temple, and he used to bring summons or letters from the court to the temple office. Now, in the midst of his duties, the priest was saying, he had heard many pastimes about Madana-mohana, like how he was discovered by Sanātana Gosvāmī, how he traveled from Vṛndāvana to Jaipur, etc. And he was intrigued by these pastimes of Madana-mohana. But being a Muslim, the priest told me, he had never had the chance to actually see Madana-mohana with his own eyes. Muslims were not allowed in the temple at that time."

"So one day when he came to give a letter to the temple office, the pūjārī said there was a big crowd going into the temple of Madana-mohana. So in an innocent way, Taz asked someone, 'Can I go inside with you?' So, not recognizing that he was a Muslim, the man said, 'Sure, come along.' So merging into that surging crowd, the priest said he soon found himself in front of the altar, in front of Madana-mohana. And while gazing upon his beauty and his grace, Taz immediately fell in love with Madana-mohana. So he actually made it a daily routine that just after bathing in the morning, he would run to the temple and take darśana of Madana-mohana. And he said that each day in order to get in, he would disguise himself in some Hindu dress—like one day he would dress as a sādhu, another day he’d disguise himself as a cook, another day as a bricklayer, another day as a Hindu cowherdman. It’s like this he was getting in."

So, as I was sitting and listening to this pastime, I was, like, spellbound by the story. So the priest continued. He said, "So in this way, in the big crowds, no one ever recognized him as a Muslim, and he went on like this for many years. But one day, the crowd was less in the temple, and while the head priest was looking at the devotees, all the devotees taking darśana, he noticed Taz. He said, 'That’s Taz, the Muslim postman, in a disguise taking darśana.' So he ran into the crowd and he caught him, and he shook him, and he said to Taz, 'How did you get in here? You know you’re not allowed. This is the last you’ll ever see of Madana-mohana and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī,' and he threw Taz out of the temple."

"So Taz went back home and he cried and he fasted the entire day. That same day in the evening, that same priest at that time made an evening offering to Madana-mohana on a gold plate with various delicious sweets. So my priest said, 'In those days, the priests would leave the plate on the altar all night in case Madana-mohana got hungry.' I thought that was interesting. Then the priest at that time, he left and he closed the altar doors behind him. Then several hours later—my priest was getting really excited, telling the story—several hours later, he said Madana-mohana disguised himself as a security guard at the temple, took the gold plate with all the sweets, and ran like the wind to the home of Taz. And when the Lord arrived, he knocked on the door of Taz’s home, who came, and seeing the security guard—because the Lord was disguised—Taz said, 'Sir, may I help you?' So the Lord in disguise, Madana-mohana, said, 'Oh, the priest of the Madana-mohana temple sent this mahā-prasāda of Madana-mohana for you.' And as described, the priest said all of Taz’s despondency suddenly disappeared, and he said to the security guard, 'Seeing your face and receiving this plate of mahā-prasāda is nothing less than having darśana of Madana-mohana.'"

"Taz said like that. So later that night, Madana-mohana appeared in a dream of that pūjārī who had chastised Taz and thrown him out of the temple. The Lord said to him, 'You made a big mistake. To the lotus feet of my dear devotee, you have realized nothing. Even after serving me for the last 15 years, by offending my devotee, you have offended me. Tomorrow morning during maṅgala-ārati, you will not find the golden plate with the sweets you offered me. I have personally delivered everything to my devotee Taz’s house. Go there and you will find the golden plate.'" 

"So the priest, he woke up that morning with a start and, startled and remembering the dream, he ran to the altar and not finding the golden plate or the sweets on the plate—the golden plate with the sweets—he ran to Taz’s home where he found Taz singing the glories of Madana-mohana with the gold plate in front of him. And this pūjārī, he understood what had happened, and he fell down at the feet of Taz and he begged for forgiveness. He said, 'It was my mistake. I did not understand that divine love transcends all designations. The Lord loves those who love the Lord.'" 

So the priest, you know, he took the golden plate and came back to the temple and placed it on the altar, where my friend the pūjārī said it remains to this very day. Looking at me, that pūjārī priest, he said, "And each morning, we worship it during maṅgala-ārati while devotees in attendance sing the glories of Taz for the pleasure of Madana-mohana, for Taz is a pure devotee of the Lord."

So still enthralled by this story, I paid my obeisances to the pūjārī and I went back into the temple room and I paid my obeisances to Madana-mohana and Taz and the golden plate, and I prayed to all of them that one day by the mercy of my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, I too will achieve pure devotion to the Lord. I’d like to conclude today with a short quote from Śrīla Prabhupāda from a lecture that he gave in Bombay, India, December 4th, 1974: "Kṛṣṇa is ready to talk with you. He has come; He has descended in arcā-mūrti form to talk with you, to be visible by you. Now make yourself ready and fit to talk with Kṛṣṇa; then He will exchange conversation." 

This is possible. Oh, glorious.

Be back in a couple days. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Prabhu.""