"*00382*.*
"We would like to welcome everyone to this very auspicious occasion where these candidates for first and second initiation are taking essentially their spiritual birth. Even in the material world, when a woman gives birth, it’s a big thing for the family. Everyone crowds around—is it a boy? Is it a girl?—and they congratulate the mother and they bless the baby: "May you live a long life, have a prosperous, happy life." There is no reason, but how much more important and how much more significant is it when one takes the second birth, or this spiritual birth? We are also here all crowding around: who’s getting initiated? You know, what is their spiritual name going to be? We are also blessing them for a prosperous, conscious life and, at the end, to not take birth again but go back home, back to Godhead. 

Actually, the first birth from our dear mothers and fathers, whom we respect, it’s a birth into ignorance. I mean, spiritually, one is totally in illusion. One doesn’t know who they are, what’s the purpose of life, does God exist? You know, we have to learn these things in our lifetime. Even materially, we’re in total ignorance. As for the animals, when they’re born—the little birds, the *chirp, chirp, chirp*—they can connect; the mother understands exactly what’s happening. From the very moment a duck is born, it is swimming. The duck is born and it can swim. It takes us, you know—many devotees don’t know how to swim. You know, so we are really born into illusion. But this birth, this is a birth into wisdom. By the time we take our initiation, we are already convinced, "I am not the body," because we heard Gurudev speak so many times from the stage at the festival—how we’re not the body, how the body is 76% water.

I said, "What have you learned from this event?" He was an intelligent man; I could tell he’s well-to-do, you know, and intelligent. But he kind of joked, he said, "Mahārāja, I’ve learned that my body is 76% water." So, I kind of apologized. I said, "You know, it is a simple lecture, but it has to be like that because every time there’s a new audience, so I have to like give an introduction." And the proof that it works is that we sell so many *bhagavad-gītās* afterwards. So, he said, "No, no, don’t worry." He said, "I could listen to that lecture a thousand times; each time I learn something new." 

So, initiation means that one has come to the point of accepting, in totality, the philosophy of Krishna consciousness and is putting it into practice in an excellent way. That a devotee is ready for dīkṣā initiation is because, essentially, what is initiation? That golden seed of *bhakti* that’s there within the heart of every living entity, even a fly or bird, that becomes activated. Philosophy, and that philosophy along with the chanting of Hare Krishna, is watering that golden seed of *bhakti*, and it starts to germinate. It’s a scientific process. We know at what stage the seed is growing according to the teachings of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. Actually, the spiritual master takes great pleasure in seeing his disciples gradually advance to the stage of *anartha-nivṛtti*, which means nothing material is left in the heart, all contamination is gone. And then by further watering, there comes *niṣṭhā* and steadiness, and *ruci* and taste, and *bhāva* and love of God. This is very encouraging for the spiritual master.

A material father, he likes to see the children grow. "You’re a big boy now," because big boys can do something more than little boys. He was a little rascal when he was a boy; I’d be giving class and he’d be running around. And sometimes I’d say to Nārāyaṇa, "He’s a good boy." Gurudev: "Yeah, I know he’s a good boy, but now he’s a big boy, and he’s doing so much nice devotional service to the spiritual master." So we like to see you grow. I prefer him like this, with his mustache, than running around, you know, playing with his friends.

When I was young, every summer I’d go to stay with my grandparents. They lived in the countryside and I’d get lots of presents. Yeah, you know, grandparents are *babuśka*, and grandfather—even Prabhupāda said one time, referring to our disciplic succession, he said the grandfather is sometimes more lenient and softer than the parents. So he was speaking about his Guru Mahārāja: "I have to chastise you sometimes," he said, "but the grandfather, spiritual master, you can go to him and ask first, just ask for mercy. I give you permission," he said.

My grandfather would take me to the garage where they had the cars, and they had a scale like this, and he would put me under the scale and see how much I’d grown during the year. And he’d make a mark there, and I’d always stand on my tiptoes so I could look bigger than last year. He said, "No, no, two feet flat. How much have you grown? Oh, two inches. Good boy." I’m like so proud of myself—I grew two inches. So when I was 16, I came down and they measured me and I measured six feet, a little over six feet tall. He said, "You’re the tallest member of the family now. We’re going to have a big dinner and feast you." So, I walked into the kitchen where my grandmother was, and I stood up on my tiptoes. I said, "I’m over six feet tall, Grandma." She said, "Congratulations," like, "Okay, YouTube."

So, we’re not concerned about growing, you know, tall or smaller or skinnier or fat; we’re concerned about growing spiritually. And just like I came before my grandfather, you know, to show him how I’d grown physically, the disciple should each year present him- or herself to the spiritual master to show how they’ve grown spiritually. Like, I would work hard during the year; I was like an athlete, you know? I just swam and I lifted weights and I’d, you know, to get big and strong and think of Grandpa, you know? So the disciple should chant abundantly. And we should apply the nine processes of devotional service. So then, when we come before our spiritual master, we’re coming closer to the first goal: *anartha-nivṛtti*, getting rid of all material contamination, and then start working on the real business, which is awakening our love for Rādhā and Krishna. That’s what pleases the spiritual master. That’s the beauty of the Vyāsa-pūjā ceremony. I can tell you, when I hear the offerings of my disciples or read the offerings of my disciples at Vyāsa-pūjā, I can understand how much advancement they’ve made.

It’s just like when I go to different *dhāmas* every year, like after all this preaching, I go back to Vṛndāvana, and I always go to Prabhupāda’s samādhi and I tell Prabhupāda what programs I’ve done during the year, what are the results. And then I stand like this, I say, "Prabhupāda, you look in my heart and you see if I’ve made any advancement. You please bless me. I’m your servant; do with me as you like." That is why we’re in this movement: to develop love for the Divine Couple. By how much that love is awakening, all the obstacles to loving God and Krishna, like lust and anger and greed, to take them and throw them to a distant place so that seed can grow in a healthy way. And we have to protect that blessing that we get at the moment of initiation. The blessing is that that seed is activated. That’s why we need to get initiated. That seed becomes activated like—there’s seeds in the store, but they’re sitting on the shelf, nothing’s happening. They can sit for 10 years. But a farmer comes and buys them, plants them in the ground, waters them, then they grow. So our real growth starts at the moment of initiation.

As I told you many times, I’ve said that my god-sister, Suku-sajari, she got initiated by Prabhupāda, then she lost her beads. So she sent new beads to Prabhupāda in India along with a letter, "Can you please chant on my new beads?" Yeah, so Prabhupāda chanted on them and he sent them back with a letter: "But this is the last time I’m going to chant on extra beads for my disciples," he said. "Try to understand, these beads—those beads, it’s not so significant," he said. "The real thing is that the moment of initiation, it’s an eternal blessing. You get the eternal blessing of this mantra."

What does it mean, eternal blessing? It means we don’t make it in this lifetime, it’s guaranteed next lifetime you’ll again receive the same mantra. And the next birth you’ll receive the same mantra. And when you finally make it back to the spiritual world, you’ll be chanting eternally to glorify Rādhā and Krishna. It’s the most valuable thing we possess. You judge the value of something by how much you can get out of it. Engagement ring, you know, there’s two-carat diamond, there’s ten-carat diamonds. So if the girl gets a 10-carat, "Oh, I’m going to protect this, this is so valuable." Yes, so how valuable is this mantra? The *karma* is destroyed, the material desires are torn out of the heart and thrown to a distant place. "Feeling your separation, I’m considering a moment to be like 12 years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain. I’m feeling all vacant in the world in your absence." That comes by chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare. And sometimes we chant so casually.

In fact, Maya will test you. Don’t think of Maya as like a witch or something; she’s a pure devotee of Krishna. She’s the expansion of Yoga-māyā in the material world. She’s Yoga-māyā, but in her feature in this world, she’s very powerful. How powerful is Yoga-māyā? She arranges all of Rādhā and Krishna’s pastimes, everything that happens in Vṛndāvana. You know, every morning, Pourṇamāsī and Vṛndā Devī, her servant, they arrange all the pastimes: where Rādhā and Krishna will meet, what the mood will be, who will be there, what the scent will be in the air, how many flowers on the trees, when the leaves will fall. Pourṇamāsī is very powerful. And that energy from her, it’s no less powerful in this world. So why would she test the devotee? To see if you’re really sincere about going back to Godhead. She doesn’t want to see someone go back to Godhead who still has some selfish motivations that will disturb the *līlā* in the spiritual world. So sometimes she tests: "Are you really—do you really want to go home?" "Yeah, yeah, no, I like the town, Gurudev said it’s really nice there, I can have a lot of fun."

It’s a classic story of that—you know, he was a devotee, but he was kind of a very materialistic devotee. He wanted to get initiated so he could get a new name and, you know, be known as a devotee. So he went to the guru and he said, "Guru Mahārāja, I think you’ll benefit a lot by accepting me as your disciple. I’m a well-known person, I have a lot of money, so I think you should initiate me." "Now, are you ready for initiation?" "Yeah, I think so, yeah." So the guru said, "Come with me." So they went down to the river—that’s a true story. The guru took the disciple by the hair, it grabbed the disciple, and put his head under the water. One minute, two minutes, three minutes—you can survive, I think, four minutes and 27 seconds without air, and then you pass out. How bad did you want air? So the disciple said, "Like life itself, as a boy." So the guru said, "When you want initiation like that, then you come see me." That is so Maya will test this. So we should always be on our guard. Chanting Hare Krishna is for developing love of God, following the four regulative principles, which can take away our progress in Krishna consciousness. You’re protected from the influence of Maya so you can peacefully chant and focus on Rādhā and Krishna or Krishna-Balarāma and develop your love for them by chanting. So it’s very important to follow the regulative principles because you’re protected, and never underestimate the potency of the material energy. She has a lot of tricks up her sleeve. We say, one time Prabhupāda said to one of my godbrothers—I won’t mention his name—he said, "Your problem is you’re not afraid of Maya."

So when we ask for protection, it’s not necessarily to protect our body or like that, but we’re asking for protection from the power of the illusion of the material world. We’re praying, "Guru-deva, please protect me from illusion so I can always remember your lotus feet." You know, Maya’s always—like we say, "Rain, rain, go away, come again another day." "Maya, Maya, Maya, Maya, go away, come again never mind." But never underestimate her potency. If an ordinary magician can trick us, what to speak of the illusion of the material energy?

Yes, like one time—this is a true story, actually, it happened in the 1700s. There was a very famous magician in Bengal; he was, like, better than any magician that we have today. I don’t know, maybe you know the names of some famous magicians now. Nowadays they can do really amazing things from the stage, but he was better than them, better than Copperfield, Houdini. So he was very famous. So the king of that land—I forget his name—it was his wife’s birthday, so he decided to have a magic show. So this magician, he agreed. He came with his family, like his assistants. So you know, the party was open actually to all the ministers and the servants and anyone that was in the royal house, you know, helping. I think there was about eight or nine hundred people in the audience. The magician was there with his family and everybody, and the King said to his wife, "You know, this is going to be a really good show, it’s my present to you."

And then at one point, the magician, he manifested a diamond, a pure diamond necklace with hundreds of diamonds; it was brilliant. So then he said to his son, "Go put it on the Queen." So the Queen was going to—so the wife of the magician became jealous. "So, why didn’t you give that to me? I mean, if you can make a diamond, you never gave me a diamond necklace, and the Queen has everything anyway." So then the magician said, "Yeah, but you know, it’s just because I have that *tejas*, I can do that, and just don’t complain in front of everybody." So they started an argument and they’re screaming at each other, and the King and Queen are like, "Whoa, what happened to the magic show?" So at one point, the wife slapped her husband really hard and, in a moment of rage, he had a knife, took the knife out, and slit her throat. She died. Everyone in the audience, like, "What?" he says, "Oh, it’s magic."

So then the son, he saw his father the magician kill his mother; you take the scene. So he was wearing a sword, big heavy sword, and he took the sword and—*shoosh*—he chopped off the head of the magician. It’s a true story. So then the sister of the brother, she saw that, so she jumped on the back of the brother and she strangled him to death. Then she took the knife that her father had killed—no, the mother—that her mother had killed the father, and she slit her own throat. And they’re all, like, lying on top of each other, you know. The blood was like a little rivulet, like that. And you know, the Queen, she was, like, took her children, she’s hiding their faces, and people are screaming and running out of the amphitheater, and the King fainted. That scene went crazy. So wow, I guess the story is too heavy for TV. Yeah, they don’t let these things on air, you know. And then they had to clean everything up. So the King, he said, "You know, just take the bodies and throw them in the river," I guess, outside. So all the servants, they took the bodies, you know, whatever, in the river, and it took a day to clean all the blood. Everyone was traumatized, really, trauma; they need a special psychological counseling. 

But that’s not the end of the story. Seems like the end, right? Two years later, the King gets a letter. "Someone has brought this letter for you." It’s a true story, and the letter said, "Your Majesty and the Queen Mother, we all want to thank you, me and my family, for the opportunity that we had to put on that wonderful magic show for you two years ago. I hope you enjoyed the theatrics and the illusions that we created that look like we all killed each other, but actually we didn’t; it was just a magic show. And we’re all going to be coming next week to the palace, and we’d like to, you know, get our salary for the show two years ago."

So they came the next day and the King—the Queen fainted actually—and they paid him. They paid his magicians. Let our modern-day magicians, you know, who use so many subtle ways, and I don’t know how they do it, pretty much they can’t do that; this is getting like science fiction now. I think that those of you who are watching on the internet, we’re trying to correct this problem; I don’t really have for-arms. But what’s my point? If a, you know, magician can create such an illusion, historical illusion, then how, what—how Maya can obviously create so many other attractions that might attract us. 

Yes, but I guarantee you, if you stay, if you stick to the four regulative principles and you chant Hare Krishna, you can’t be captured by Maya. Just remember, see, today when Lakṣmaṇa left to join Rāma in the forest to capture the golden deer, before he left he made a circle around her with a sword in the dust along with a mantra—*Oṃ Kṛṣṇa*. And even the greatest rakṣasa the world has ever known, Rāvaṇa, Rāvaṇa tried to come to capture her. She was a delicate princess; she had never lived in the forest, she was in the palace all the time, but here she was alone with no, you know, no one there. But the mantra—when Rāvaṇa tried to come, each time he’d come close to her it was like an electric field, he’d burn his hands, he couldn’t touch her. The biggest rakṣasa ever known couldn’t touch a fair princess because she was protected by that mantra. 

But Rāvaṇa was able to capture her, right? We see it every second day on—no, that we see it, the first play of the first day of our festivals, Rāvaṇa actually gets you to howl. You know, how she stepped outside the circle, stepped outside the mantra, and therefore no one could protect her. So it’s a good example for us: if we stick to our vows and we continue chanting Hare Krishna, the road will be very smooth. Of course, there’s some bumps along the way, but generally it will be very smooth. It’s my experience in counseling devotees for so many years that if there’s trouble there, I always ask, "Are you chanting 16 rounds well?" "Okay, you’re not." And that—the trouble comes then. Of course, troubles will come, but if you’re steady and you’re chanting, you can handle them. Chanting makes us go very deep in Krishna consciousness; some go fast, some go slow, but if you keep chanting you will go deep in Krishna consciousness, and whatever life throws at you, you’ll be able to handle it.

Just consider the ocean is very deep, okay? And although many powerful rivers enter into the ocean, because it’s so deep it’s never affected. The ocean is—most rivers, they ultimately end up at the ocean; they come from the mountains or from springs, they always flow to the ocean and end up in the Bay of Bengal. And you’ve seen, you know, videos how powerful the *Mātā* can be, how powerful the Yamunā can be, how powerful the Kāverī—they all end up in the ocean, yeah. But because the ocean’s so deep, it doesn’t flinch an inch, yeah. So in the same way, if you become deep in your Krishna consciousness, primarily through chanting, you won’t be disturbed. Lots of services—don’t think because you’re a devotee, you know, troubles aren’t going to come. It’s—that’s not what it means, "Krishna is going to protect me, nothing bad is going to happen." You’re in this world for a little while longer, so things will come, but if you’re deep, Krishna... and eventually, Maya-śakti removes the curtain of illusion so you can speed home back to Godhead. That’s what she does. The curtain’s very, you know, there’s a curtain between us and Krishna, illusion. She sees a devotee sincere to go, and—that’s the original *darśana*. This *darśana* is there, but she removes the curtain of illusion and you have *darśana* with Rādhā and Krishna. She’s Krishna’s devotee; she wants you to go home. 

And if you stumble sometimes, you know, sometimes we’re weak because of our past conditioning or some desires come deep in the heart. If you, you know, if you make a mistake or you’re weak in your Krishna consciousness, stand up, express some remorse, and "Never again, I’m just going to go forward from this point on." That’s there, because of course, you know, we’re born in Kali-yuga, so we have our weaknesses. 

But take advantage of the regulative principles. Don’t think they’re a burden. They’re like a, you know, a powerful *kavaca*. Everyone likes to wear *kavaca*s; you’ve got to *kavaca* it, so it’s your vows at the moment of initiation. If that’s your *kavaca*, you know, if you have a *kavaca* or not, if you’re strict and following, that’s your *kavaca*. Rāvaṇa can’t enter, Hiraṇyakaśipu can’t enter, Kumbhakarṇa can’t enter, you’re protected. And if you’re chanting, you’re making progress like that, you’re going deeper and deeper. So straight and narrow, the best path is a straight and narrow path. And there’s an example and there’s precept. The precept is the philosophy I’m saying, and the example is your spiritual master; he’s your role model. Yes, that’s why Gurudeva is heavy, because he’s a heavy responsibility on his head; he has to act properly. Because for the disciple, the best devotee is their spiritual master. Of course, Śrīla Prabhupāda is our best devotee forever and ever, but we need a living example. So the spiritual master is your example, and if you’re feeling a little weak, you look towards your spiritual master’s example and you listen to his classes, and you’ll get the strength to go forward.

Therefore, the disciple is grateful to get to the point of *anarthas*—all the bad things gone from the heart—number one, and grateful for being led to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s feet. Because Prabhupāda is that master at whose feet all masters sit. And with Prabhupāda’s grace, we go home. You may walk past my room and you hear I’m listening to *bhajanas*; this Gaudiya Bengali, old, senior Gaudiya Vaishnava devotee, it’s just the *khole* and the *karatālas*, just *mṛdaṅga* and the *karatālas*, and they’re singing all these *bhajanas*. And there’s so many songs about Rādhā and Krishna and so many songs about Vṛndāvana and Mahāprabhu, many songs about the spiritual master. And when they’re singing, you can feel the *niṣṭhā*, the faith they have on their spiritual master. It’s so deep, and it’s like my hair stands on end and I’m praying, "Can I have the same *śraddhā* they have for who their guru was for my spiritual master?" Because that’s the safest place to be in Krishna consciousness: to have faith in Guru and Gaurāṅga. 

Just as our Guru has faith in his spiritual master, we should have the same faith in our spiritual master. Krishna sees that; He’ll bless them. The blessings... so we wish all the candidates here today all success. Take your vows, be strict, and chant this beautiful mantra, and be sober, you know, knowing that Maya may try to trick you. But be happy because you have the protection in the form of your spiritual master and this beautiful mantra. It’s an interesting mood to be sober and happy at the same time. Usually we’re sober or we’re happy, but it’s interesting; a devotee is always, you know, a little careful in the world because he knows Maya, but he’s very happy that he has a positive alternative, and his arms are always in the air. Hare Krishna.""