"The stewardess must have been a bit confused when we boarded the plane, which didn't have any passengers yet, and started to interfere, so Śrīla Prabhupāda turned around, looked at me, and said something about the garden—there is prasāda, because... You can tell by the stewardess's face, the mop-headed man who was flying with us was well thought out. He had all the prasāda he needed. He took it before; he wanted to eat something at that time, and so he collected it. "Yes," I said. "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I guess I don't have any of your prasāda." Prabhupāda said, "I found something in this bag," one of the devotees gave me oranges for a snack during the flight. I said, "These are our oranges." "Yes," he said, "add them to the quota." Prabhupāda said, "A sound idea." You know, he had paper plates and even a knife, which at that time was not being restricted. He brought an Oxford, rolled up, a basket of foodstuffs. You'll get the hang of it; take what you have. He minced the oranges, and along with that, the process was like a historian soaking in a hoard of oranges.

I cut these oranges into slices as best I could, arranged them beautifully on a plate, and offered Śrīla Prabhupāda. He began to take the slices one by one and suck the juice out of them. With such a sound, he enjoyed the oranges, and I laid out the peels on a plate and he ate all the oranges. I was just there, and he was turning to me, he said, "Well, you will also take prasāda." And I, like a true neophyte, said that I chose to accept the remnants. "Yes," he said, "you all ate one, but in one fell swoop, she just brought flowers and remnants; this will digest the sins, fully," he said, "when you become a devotee."

Vedas say that the remains of a pure devotee's food, the dust from his lotus feet, or water which has washed his feet, greatly help in spiritual development. He was smiling at us, by the way, and gave this to me, and I was so filled with enthusiasm—he collected the remnants, offering me his in one fell swoop, the mahā-prasāda—that I took a plate and began to stuff these pieces into my mouth instead of sucking out the juice, peel and all. I don't know if you've tried to survive with orange peel. My lips were burning and tears were flowing from my eyes, but I managed to eat about three oranges. When I looked at Prabhupāda, he reacted like that.

Prabhupāda was so peaceful, and he was happy, and when I, as a servant, collected the remaining peels and shoved them into my jacket pocket, which immediately got wet from the juice, I managed to get them home, and I dried them. I kept them with me for about two years. So, every day before going out on saṅkīrtana, I ate a small piece of the peel as a special favor after his disappearance."