"*00400*.*
"### Man Singh: The Great Rajput General — Kārtika Parikrama 2022

It has been almost 30 days now since we have been on *parikramā*. There are different ways that we can acknowledge this: we are much richer in our understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. We have an increased appreciation—a great appreciation—for each other as Vaiṣṇavas. There are different ways we can appreciate that we have been on *parikramā* for one month. Another very practical way of understanding that we have been on *parikramā* for one month is that, in the *kīrtanas*, the devotees cannot dance anymore; they are too tired. It is not a criticism; it is just an observation. "I am so exhausted I cannot even go on for another day," I said. "I can go on for another month," he said, "but I cannot; I do not think the devotees can." I was thinking of extending it for another month—let’s go down to Śrīraṅgam and Tirupati—and she said, "Well, if you say that, they will all applaud, but actually, they are tired." The fact is most *kīrtana* groups go out for 10 days. Thank you to all the different ones just coming now; they are going to do a week or something, and we went for one month.

But it is a month we will never forget. When you are older, you will look back on these times and remember, "Wow, from Vṛndāvana we went to Jaipur; we saw Govindajī; those were the golden days." So today, here in Jaipur, this class is going to be a history lesson. I was preparing and I kept thinking there is not much philosophy today; it is mostly history. But for those of you who are history buffs—you like history—this is the only relevant history in our lives: the history of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Today I am going to speak about a devotee, an actual devotee, who was one of the rulers of this area maybe 350 or 400 years ago. His name is Man Singh. It probably does not ring a bell for you; it is not one of the six Gosvāmīs or Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, just Man Singh. He was a king and he is one of my heroes, and he was one of the kings of Amer. You saw the beautiful fort when you were driving in. Amer existed before Jaipur; this was the place of the kings, Amer, and later on Jai Singh II built Jaipur. So we are going way back in history here. History lesson 108.

We are talking about the 1500s. The kings who ruled Amer, this gorgeous fort here, when they passed away, they were entombed here. This is the *samādhi* area of these previous kings. Many kings or other illustrious personalities are buried here, but Man Singh’s *samādhi* is towards the back there. After we finish, you can go and take *darśana* of his *samādhi*. But we will backtrack a little bit just to get some understanding of who this person was. If you have listened to our Vṛndāvana lecture series through the last few years, you will be familiar with the name Akbar. How many of you have heard of Akbar? You watch the videos we have made, so you know India was ruled by the Mughals, the Muslims, for hundreds of years. Actually, they invaded from the north and they took over the country, and well, the British also took over the country a few centuries ago. So India has had a lot of foreign invaders, but they considered it their land. So one of the Emperors—Emperor means what? King of kings. There are lots of kings, but the King of Kings, he is the emperor; he controls all the kings.

This is history lesson from 1556 to 1605. Akbar the Emperor ruled North India—actually much of India, you could say in one sense the whole subcontinent of India—he was a very powerful emperor. We have heard of bad emperors; you know, they subjugate the people, they are cruel, they are a despot, but that was not the case with Emperor Akbar. He was very open-minded and he was also interested not only in Islam but other faiths as well. Actually, he was the patron of different arts and cultures during his reign here in India. He created a library of 24,000 books written in Sanskrit, Urdu, Persian, Greek, Latin, and Arabic, and actually, he is famous for establishing a special library of extensive works exclusively for women. During his reign, he created many schools for both Muslims and Hindus. Although he was a Muslim, he was a little disillusioned with orthodox Islam; he felt it was a little—and there was not enough philosophy. So, hoping to bring about religious unity in his empire, he created his own spiritual movement.

He mixed in Islam, Hinduism, and Christianity; actually, there are many different spiritual traditions because there are different kinds of people. And my understanding is we should accept that spiritual tradition that you feel comfortable with, surrender to it, and become a pure devotee of God, whether you are a Christian, a Hindu, a Muslim, or a Jew. We should not fight; these are all paths back to the spiritual world. We have chosen Kṛṣṇa consciousness for obvious reasons, but we should understand that these other religions are *bona fide* in their sense and they can help people advance spiritually. If we put it all together, it becomes like a soup; it does not really work. It should stick to your tradition and follow and respect other traditions as well. But the good side of it all is to show how open-minded he was; he accepted other traditions. But like these politicians, he was very ambitious to expand his empire far and wide, so he did a lot of fighting. Beyond just fighting battles to achieve an end, he entered into many alliances with both Muslim and Hindu rulers to achieve that goal, and that is why Jaipur was spared because they entered into an alliance with the Mughals, so the Mughals did not destroy Jaipur. Yes, an interesting point in history.

They would intermarry, the Mughals and the Hindus, just to keep a sense of peace rather than just destroying everything. An alliance: "I scratch your back, you scratch my back." As a result, many rulers, both Hindus and Muslims, were in his army. If there was some rebellion somewhere in India, this army—composed of Hindu generals and Muslim generals—they worked together to subjugate the rebellions. This is a really interesting point in history here in India; how it worked, it worked. One such king who he welcomed into his army was Rāja Man Singh, the king of Amer. "I won't destroy you if you fight for me." "Okay, I will save my family, my children, my land." So Man Singh joined the army—the best army—of Akbar.

Just understand the history of the times: just like Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, they were also employed in the army of Nawab Hussain Shah, because he said, "I am the ruler; you are both very intelligent men. Unless you work for me, I will kill all the Vaiṣṇavas in this land." "Okay, let's go. What do we do?" "You are the Finance Minister; you are the Prime Minister." Okay, you know, it is just diplomacy. So here is Man Singh; he is the ruler of Amer, but he is obliged to join this vast army. The thing is, he was a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Because it is described he had to engage in 67 major battles, but he is a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Yeah, he was a great devotee, but he was a great fighter also. Historians say that Akbar included him in the *navaratnas*, or the nine gems of his royal court. Listen to this: one time Akbar ordered Man Singh to quell a major rebellion that was happening all the way over in Bengal. "You take some troops and you stop those guys, they are rebelling." At this time, Man Singh was in Lahore, Pakistan—because Pakistan used to be part of India—so he needed troops to go to Bengal and fight the bad guys. So what he did is he came to Mathurā because he had some of his troops stationed in Mathurā, so he came to Mathurā to get some soldiers to go and fight in Bengal.

This is where the history lesson today becomes a little transcendental. He met his troops—"We are going to go fight in Bengal"—and one of the lieutenants who was stationed there said, "It is going to be a difficult fight; let's go get the blessings of a saint who lives in Vṛndāvana." Man Singh said, "What is the name of that saint?" The lieutenant said, "His name is Rūpa Gosvāmī. Let's go get some blessings from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī." Wow, I love this history lesson; it is getting really interesting. Here we have a great king; he is employed in the Muslim army, but he is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa and he hears about a saint in Vṛndāvana, so naturally, "Yeah, let's go get the blessings of this saint, Rūpa Gosvāmī, so we can be victorious in battle." It is not pure *bhakti*, but you know, Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement is—so they get on their horses and they start riding towards Vṛndāvana. On the way, the lieutenant says, "You know, I think we should first stop and pay our respects to the deity worshipped by Rūpa Gosvāmī."

Double blessings: we will get the blessings from the devotee of the Lord and we will get the blessings of the Lord. "What is the name of this deity of Rūpa Gosvāmī?" The lieutenant said, "Govinda Dev." "Yeah, okay, let's go see Govindajī and then we will see Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī." Oh my gosh, what an opportunity! So they took him to see Govindajī. At that time, Govindajī was living in a very simple accommodation; there was no temple, just something living there. But Man Singh walked in, and when he saw Govindajī, because he was a devotee, he was just mesmerized by the beauty of Govindajī. Just like you are when you go to see Govindajī for *maṅgala-ārati* or opening the deity—he is so beautiful, so many people are chanting his glories, he is mesmerizing to visit that temple—that is what happened to Man Singh.

Just imagine, this is hundreds and hundreds of years ago, the same deity standing there. He made a vow. You could say it wasn't a vow in pure devotion like the Gopis—"we just want to please you"—he had some reason, but approaching the Lord like this, gradually one becomes purified and understands the deeper meaning of *bhakti*. He stood before Govindajī and he asked Govindajī to bless him to win the upcoming battles in Bengal. He said, "If I win, I will come back and build you a temple." I think Govindajī said, "Okay, all right, I will let you win the battle and you build me a temple because I am just in this grass hut and it rains and I get wet; you guys are in the gym mode." What is really interesting is that there was a court poet there at the time who recorded Man Singh’s actual words and then later wrote them in a manuscript called the *Mān-prakāśi-prabandha*. Should I share with you?

"Which is praised by all the hosts of demigods, I will respectfully construct a dwelling abode for Śrī Govindajī, as a result of which there will be immense facilitation for the festival of Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī." So he made his prayer, and then he went to see probably the best day in his life: he gets *darśana* of Govindajī and he gets the *darśana* of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Now, when I was doing research in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I came across an interesting fact. He recognized Rūpa Gosvāmī was the same personality who was previously the *dabir-khas* in the court of Nawab Hussain Shah in Bengal. Forced to serve in the under the Mughals in Bengal, they gave him the name—his name was Dabir Khas. So, Man Singh, because he was well-situated, he knew the political personalities of India at the time, so he had been there and he had seen Rūpa Gosvāmī; he was like, "Wow, what a change has come over you!" Yeah, it is like you go home, right? You are a history student or a medical student, you joined the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, you go home with a shaved head, "Hi Mom, what happened to you?" "I want to graduate from the material world, not from the University; I am a Hare Kṛṣṇa." "Whoa, come on, mommy."

Both politics—because we were who we were—but of course, Rūpa Gosvāmī, whatever dress he was wearing, whatever language he was speaking, he is always a pure devotee. Just like Śrīla Prabhupāda said one time, "There was never a time I ever forgot the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." He just discussed his plans for going to fight in Bengal, he asked Rūpa Gosvāmī for his blessings, but he did not mention his vow or his interactions with Govindajī. This is the nature of a Vaiṣṇava; they are very humble, they do not want to share their achievements or anything with anyone. That is a *gupta*; they keep these things very hidden in their hearts. Their progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they do not like to advertise it. "I took a vow," no, the devotees are very humble, they do not advertise themselves.

But he also revealed at this time to the Emperor Akbar his confidential vow to construct the temple and asked his help. This is how Kṛṣṇa consciousness spreads; one devotee becomes a devotee and encourages his family members to do some service, they become devoted, Grandma becomes a devotee, neighbor becomes a devotee. It is by word of mouth that the Kṛṣṇa conscious movement is spreading all over the world. They say the best type of advertising is not big billboards and the internet, it is by word of mouth; that is how people become convinced. So here is Akbar, he is pious, and here is Man Singh; he met Rūpa Gosvāmī, he was impressed, he met Govindajī, who said, "We have to build a temple for the saint and for this deity, you just have to do it." Akbar said, "Yeah, okay, sure, okay." So now the emperor is doing devotional service. This is the mystery of Mahāprabhu’s movement; how it spreads all over the world, it is mystical.

Okay, so the next day, Akbar made a decree and he granted 135 *bighas*—*bighas* means approximately 84 acres or 33 hectares of land—by today’s calculation, a property in Vṛndāvana exclusively for Govindajī. What does Govindajī need 84 hectares for? Fruits, vegetables, grains, and flowers—lots and lots of flowers. Flowers are the only opulence left in Kali-yuga; lots of flowers, use them, right? And that is why when you walk around Vṛndāvana, sometimes you look over the wall, there is just big gardens. Even today, those properties belong to Rādhā-Ramaṇa, Rādhā-Govinda; these are all lands that were owned, officially owned, by the deity, not some corporation or some person; they are owned by the deity to be used in the deity’s service. This is India, this is old India, "the glory that was India." In that decree, he also declared that in the future, any taxes from that land should not come to the government, but they should go for the *pūjā*. I was told that this decree or proclamation is presently still in the Jaipur City Palace somewhere, in a library, that is signed by Akbar. 

So he was excited, Man Singh was excited, "I did some service, I am going to go tell Rūpa Gosvāmī." So he went to Vṛndāvana to reveal these plans to build the temple for Govindajī. Rūpa Gosvāmī was older; I think he was 53 years older than Akbar, I read, and he wasn't so much involved in developing and so forth; he was just doing his *bhajana* in secluded places and writing a little. This is what he wanted to leave the world; thank the Lord he did. So when he revealed his plan, Man Singh’s plan, Rūpa Gosvāmī responded in a very interesting way: he said, "There is no need to construct a large temple because Śrī Govindajī likes the nature of Braja, he likes it as it is—a forest grove. Why build a big temple?" The original environmentalist, Rūpa Gosvāmī: "Don't cut the trees." He actually said, "Why cut all these trees? They are all *kalpa-vṛkṣa* trees." But Man Singh had taken a vow; there was a song when I was young, "Don't make promises you can't keep." If you take a vow before the deity, this is something very serious; you can never take it lightly. "I vow to you, Lord, I will do this," and you have to do it, even if it takes you many births, you have to do it. And if you take a vow in front of Kṛṣṇa’s representative, the spiritual master, you have to do it.

He got instructions: "If you ever get money, print books." A lifetime in preparation; Prabhupāda’s whole lifetime was preparation to fulfill the instruction, simple instructions, but pregnant with history. His whole life was just to fulfill the instructions of the spiritual master. *Atha nandana*—fixed in determination. What the Lord has said, what Guru has said, that is my life and my soul. So Man Singh was kind of adamant; he said, "You know, I took this vow, and it would be nice, many people would come." "Oh, many people will come? All right, you can do it." So some documents were made and signed, and when I was researching, I saw all the documents; they referred to Govindajī as "Govinda Rai." "Rai" means king. It is like a familiar terminology, you know, like Prabhupāda said, "My friend, my friend, my friend," talking about Kṛṣṇa. So we want to come to that point, so people affectionately say Govindajī.

So now Man Singh had his prayer answered and he started thinking exactly where to build the temple for Govindajī in Vṛndāvana. So many sacred places in Braja, 60 billion holy places in Braja, so like, where am I going to build this temple? I am just a devotee, but he wasn't like the six Gosvāmīs, things were revealed. Where am I going to build this temple? But eventually, he settled at the *yoga-pīṭha*. Remember, I had to explain to you what *yoga-pīṭha* is? *Yoga-pīṭha* is where the Lord appeared. He decided, "Let's build the temple on that little hillock where Govindajī was discovered by Rūpa Gosvāmī." And that is now, you go to Vṛndāvana, you see the temple, you have to walk up the steps, right? To walk up a little hill, and then there is the temple of Govindajī in Vṛndāvana—that is where the deity was found. So he said, "We will build the temple there."

So you are still with me? History went away, but it is nice to know the history of our movement. There is a specific reason why he decided to do the temple there. According to the *Ādi-Varāha Purāṇa*, the *yoga-pīṭha* hill there is in the shape of a turtle, like Kūrma. Yes, we walk up the hill, but if an ant in Vṛndāvana put his drone up and filmed it, that hill is in the shape of a turtle. And in ancient times, like way, way back in Vṛndāvana times, it was known as Kūrma-ṭīlā, and according to the *Brajavāsīs*, it is the very place where Kūrmadeva rested after churning the ocean of milk. You know, he was there, oh there, so after he came to Vṛndāvana and he laid on that hill there. And in the scripture called *Bhakti-kavaca*, I found it is mentioned that Bhakti-devī’s *āsana*—you know, Bhakti-devī’s *āsana*—is this *yoga-pīṭha*; that is where she sits, Śrīla Prabhupāda. So Kūrma-ṭīlā, that hill is in the shape of a turtle. So that is interesting, because Rāja Man Singh, he comes from a family lineage called the Kūrma-kula-kavaca lineage; it is a lineage of Lord Viṣṇu who incarnated as a turtle, tortoise. Connected. So he decides to build the temple on Kūrma-ṭīlā. It just increases your faith in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Then construction began and, you know, of course, later on, we won't discuss, much of the temple was destroyed by Aurangzeb, but just being kind of like enchanted by all this history, I just wanted to go down and see the temple, climb up Kūrma-ṭīlā, you know, *yoga-pīṭha*, and kind of like, "Wow, it all happened here." No, this is better than Disneyland, this is better than Big Ben, London Tower, the Eiffel Tower. And I was thinking, gosh, I just wish that there was more history about Man Singh, more history about Govindajī, more history about the temple, because it is all connected. It is our history, it is our family. Yeah, recently I was talking to my sister, Annie-banana—my little sister—and she was saying, "Indra, why don't we just take some blood or something and then you can find out your DNA, and you can find out your whole family history, you know, who your grandparents, great-grandparents, great-great-great-great parents, all the way back to when your ancestors were Neanderthals."

The main books, the *Bhāgavatam*, describes how due to the force of the rivers moving, the waves of the river, you know, little pieces of grass and leaves and sticks come together and they clump together for a while, right? And then, after some time, by the same force of those waves, they are all separated. So I said, "In the same way, by the force of time and karma, we come together as family members, but then again, by the influence of time and karma, we are separated. So whose family, you know? What is my family? This temporary bunch of sticks, or is our family something greater than that?" She said, "Hmm, you were always smart in school, Indra." I said, "Not me, it is the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." So she said, "Where can I get the *Bhāgavatam*?" I said, "I will get you a *Bhāgavatam*, Annie-banana."

Yes, we need family, and I said yes we do, and we have a family. We have an eternal family in the spiritual world, and there is Kṛṣṇa, he is the Supreme Father because he is the progenitor, the original progenitor. *Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi*—I worship Govinda, the first progenitor. Brahmā says that is our real life; he is our real father and we have so many brothers and sisters there. "Hey, Vaiṣṇava, can you translate for me? Excuse me, Gurudev, I am making a garland for Rādhārāṇī, you told me yesterday." I said, "I will be there too. I won't be like this old man, I will be like a young boy, eternally young boy."

So then I was looking around, I just wanted more history like the real family, like all these great devotees. I got initiated into this family. And I found on the temple one inscription in stone, and I will read to you what the stone said about our family; it is a little technical, but it is interesting: "In Samvat 1747, in the reign of the King Śrīmān Akbar, the great King Śrīmān, the Śṛṅgāradeva, son of the King Śrī Bhagavadas, of the lineage of Śrī Pṛthvīrāja, of the Kūrma-kula-kavaca family or lineage, made a temple on the *yoga-pīṭha* place of *yoga-māyā* in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī was in charge of the work, and on Śrī Govinda’s temple, Marak Chandan Choppa was the architect, Śrī Govinda Dāsa Devalaye was the builder. On Thursday, Guru-sambhava—iccha—made everyone be happy." Isn't that interesting? We probably cannot remember all that, but maybe I will ask Caturāma to get it tattooed on his back.

So originally, when this idea came to construct, Rūpa Gosvāmī was very happy eventually, and he was the one who designed the temple. It is not that he actually drew the temple like that, but rather he gave indications how he would like it to be. He gave some ideas—he wanted a Vedic planetarium inside the temple—he gave some ideas. So it is said that when meeting with this proposed architect of the temple, Rūpa Gosvāmī, there was some discussion, also Rūpa Gosvāmī went into meditation. He went into *samādhi*, it is described, and in that *samādhi* it is written he envisioned Goloka Vṛndāvana. Yes, the architects like, "What is happening?" The servant said, "Ecstasy!" In Māyāpur festival, in the middle of a class on Lord Caitanya, he went like this, we were all quiet for a long time, and then Prabhupāda came out. This was really far out. Try to hide these things—danda—like as though we talked about that day of that class. So when Rūpa Gosvāmī came out of the *samādhi*, he shared his vision of Goloka Vṛndāvana with the architect, and based on that, that is how the temple was built.

Akbar gave 13 lakhs of rupees for the construction of the temple. In those days, 13 lakhs was Akbar’s entire budget for the year. "Now, everything for Kṛṣṇa, nothing for me." So work began, and 24 hours a day, seven days a week, lots of workers, not just men but camels, horses, elephants, bullock carts. Where did all the elephants come from? There were no elephants, all the elephants came from Akbar’s empire, from his elephant home. They had lots of elephants; they used elephants for battle, for ceremony. He had lots of elephants, "Send them to Vṛndāvana, construct the temple, you are welcome." And Akbar ordered that it be made with red sandstone. I think, "Why not marble? We see so many temples," but in those days, red sandstone was a sign of royalty, of opulence; only the palaces of kings used red sandstone. Devotees, everyone is coming together to build this—this is our history, this is our family history. I have got to tell Annie-banana, "This is the real history, Annie-banana." It was all the devotion of Rūpa Gosvāmī and a flood of mercy from Caitanya Mahāprabhu, engaging all these people in their services. The *Yuga-avatāra*—come on, everybody serve! We need a few good men, and we are also being called for the same purpose. This, your great-grandchildren will read, "How you did this and you did that." It is the same; that is all Rūpa Gosvāmī’s mercy, all Prabhupāda’s mercy. You are all being called.

How do we get this service? He said, "Yes, you were all sinners, but when you heard the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, you came running." You came running. This is our good fortune, including this wave, like the wave on the beach—you see the waves are coming, wave after wave, it doesn't stop. There are countless waves coming, and if you are a surfer, you know the seventh wave is always the best. So the waves are coming, but the seventh wave is the best wave for surfing onto the beach. So we are on the seventh wave; so many devotees have contributed through the centuries, but there is a big tidal wave of Kṛṣṇa consciousness inundating the Earth, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s movement, and we are riding, all of us, on that wave of that mercy.

How significant are our problems? You know, we have this problem, health problem, relation problem, this problem—insignificant compared to the wave of mercy that we have caught from Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We are so blessed; we cannot become deviated, diverted by the temptations of this world or our problems. Our problems will be solved if we don't fall off the wave. Stay on the wave to reach the shore of Vaikuṇṭha. So the temple took 30 years to complete, but unfortunately, Rūpa Gosvāmī didn't live that long to see it. But the wave, the waves kept coming, and the next wave was Jīva Gosvāmī. It just keeps going, the waves keep coming. We are a wave, and then your children, then their children's children, there is the wave, until the whole world is inundated in the nectar of the holy names and the whole 14 worlds, according to Bhaktivinoda; he said he wouldn't rest until the whole 14 worlds were chanting. Then we can go home, not before. We have to fulfill Prabhupāda’s desires here to qualify ourselves to serve his desires there. It is there; he saw the completion because he was younger, he was the son of Anupama, who was the younger brother of Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, so he was very prolific in his writings and his organization, and he was there when the temple was completed.

Now, I was told it is Vṛndāvana lore that there is a prayer attributed to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī when he came for *darśana* one day to see Govindajī in this magnificent temple; it is attributed. I believe that at this time he was about 79 years old; he lived to be 85. So while gazing upon this magnificent temple that was facilitated by Akbar and Man Singh—you know, he got it going—and here he is, it is completed. So these prayers are attributed to Jīva Gosvāmī. Whether they are or not actually from him, I cannot say, but they are very beautiful prayers. So I would like to finish today with these prayers; they are called *Govinda-mandira-aṣṭakam*. *Aṣṭakam* means eight, right? *Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam*. So this is *mandira* means temple. *Govinda-mandira-aṣṭakam*; there are eight, but I only have seven that were recorded and written down. So open your hearts and drink deep the nectar, and afterwards we will go take *darśana* of Man Singh, my hero, Man Singh. We will take *darśana* of his *samādhi*, which is 400 years old or something.

So here is *Govinda-mandira-aṣṭakam*:

"Śrī Kṛṣṇa, manifesting a thirst to protect his own devotees, always appears situated on the *yoga-pīṭha*, the divine pastime place here in Vṛndāvana’s forest. Vṛndāvana, which is praised by the group of gods beginning with Śiva, Vṛndāvana is thus the major cause of dissatisfaction even in Vaikuṇṭha, Viṣṇu’s own realms, at heart. In such a Vṛndāvana, it manifests what is to be known by means of the group of hundreds of scriptures—*śrī-mūrti*—through the principle of Śrī Govinda. That Govinda manifests the truths of all scriptures there."

"This is when Śrīmān Akbar, Śrīmān Akbar, protected the world in his rule. The good people engaged in their respective *dharma* and obtained happiness in the highest degree. The virtuous Vaiṣṇavas always gave him blessings joyfully because they considered that very placement to be the place of Śrī Govinda and therefore worth residing in. Under Akbar, such residence was possible."

"In this place, Vṛndāvana, his Akbar’s constant companion, the king named Śrīmān Singh, was like a moon that causes swelling of the milk ocean that is the glory of Pṛthvīrāja’s shining lineage. Man Singh was the son of Bhagavadas, who in turn was born of the king."

"The temple by his own strength, ever partake of joy with stable Lakṣmī, Prosperity, the Goddess of Fortune. The scholars who I was working with on this, who felt that this was actually written by Jīva Gosvāmī, they were saying, 'Just see how much credit Jīva Gosvāmī gave to Akbar and Man Singh for their efforts to build the temple.'"

"So what goes on, similar to Śrīmān Akbar, was another king named Man Singh who was such that when he marched into the enemy’s direction, he would cause his victorious side to cast aside all doubts and enjoy around. Who on this Earth does not know of that very lion amongst men, kings? In his camp, who fell on the ground and died in wars, went to heaven and found themselves to be like flag bearers of victory even in Svargaloka."

"And similar the victorious King Śrī Man Singh is one born in the royal Kavaca lineage, his best man, the intelligence Śrī Kayanadas, who takes shelter at the lotus feet of Śrī Govindajī, must always be victorious, joyfully creating that—his Govinda’s temple—speedily. Man Singh zealously brought the work to completion. Śrī Haridāsa, the foremost leader of those serving the lotus feet of Śrī Govinda, grants love to those serving Govinda. He is the one by means of whom, from the very beginning, this temple is increasing in the joy, *rasa*, sweetness of service. He is the one by whom the King Śrīmān Singh duly obtained incredible bliss. May Śrī Haridāsa always rejoice."

"And the last verse here I have: Among the architects residing at Delhi is a venerable one named Govinda Dāsa. Sheltered by Śrīmān Singh, he built this beautiful temple here. He is the cause of happiness and prosperity to the respectable Vaiṣṇavas, now and in the future, and thus he himself must ever be made a receptacle of Śrī Hari’s own compassion."

And thus, History Lesson 108 is now concluded. You can go to the school cafeteria for your breakfast. Isn't that interesting? So it is time for breakfast, but I think, out of respect, before we eat, we should first go take *darśana* of Man Singh’s *samādhi* there. You can pray to him for the courage he had to help develop Lord Caitanya’s movement in that particular way, and you can pray to him too that he might share with you some of the mercy that he receives by having *darśana* of Rūpa Gosvāmī as well as Govinda Dev in those early years, and that you can dedicate your lives in this particular period of history to the great General Upānanda, who, like Man Singh, acts ferociously in a lion-like way without any fear and is always victorious, spreading the *saṅkīrtana* mission to every town and village of this world.

So we will walk as a group, I will lead the group over there, have a little *kīrtana* just to get his attention, and then tomorrow is our last day of *parikramā*, Kārtika 2022. It is hard to think that it is over, but of course there is always another chapter in the wonderful pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, so we will proceed on. Myself, after Kārtika-māsa and Braja-car’s wedding, I am going to go straight to Māyāpura. Yes, so if any of you are free or just want to escape from your various duties in life, run with us to Māyāpura. Yes, we will be giving a series of lectures, possibly on Lord Caitanya’s pastimes in Vṛndāvana. I think yeah, he is going to be there; we are just going to keep going—*kīrtana*, lecture, *prasādam*, *kīrtana*, lecture, *prasādam*, *kīrtana*, lectures—at least you can watch it on our videos.

We will say some more thank yous tomorrow, but okay, technically we are going to be there for the *darśana* at 8:15. You can go earlier if you want for *maṅgala-ārati*, but you know, most devotees will come at 8:15. We will have *darśana*, then we will walk to Śrī Rādhā-Gopinātha Temple. How many of you have never seen...? I hope your life is not successful yet; tomorrow your life will become success, especially when you hear all the old ladies chanting, you know. And our girls also will dance, and we will conclude wherever the wave of Mahāprabhu’s mercy takes us. Okay.""