"*00272*.*
"### Many Are Called But Few Are Chosen

Śānti, śānti. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa.

My dear devotees, it gives me—well, it is a great honor and a privilege to be with all of you Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs this evening. I’ve seen here in New Delhi, by the grace of my dear departed godbrother Gopāla Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja, so many temples have been established for the glorification of—well, here we have Gaura-Nitāi, Jagannātha, Subhadrā, and Baladeva, and your exquisitely beautiful Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities.

When I saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, I almost fainted. Not that I’m anything special, but beyond just the external beauty that we see with the eye of transcendence—which is nourished through the process of bhakti-yoga, especially chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa—we can appreciate the true beauty of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I have been traveling the world as a sannyāsī for 54 years, and I’ve seen many beautiful deities in different temples, but I must say these are probably the most beautiful deities, and I’m sure that is due to the pūjā that you offer according to all the rules and regulations of deity worship.

When Śrīla Prabhupāda installed Choṭa-Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Los Angeles, California, America, in the very beginning of ISKCON—like, maybe 1971, even before the big deities came—little Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, beautiful from Luy Bazar, Prabhupāda told the audience of devotees who had been practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness just for a few years, he said, "If you think these deities are brass, they’ll remain brass to you forever according to the naked eye. If you think they’re brass, these Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa mūrtis, they’ll remain brass to you forever. But if you worship these deities according to the rules and regulations as I have given you and according to our guru-paramparā, how to worship Bhagavān, how to worship, Prabhupāda said one day these deities will speak to you."

The words of the ācārya are as good as the words of the Vedas. The body of knowledge that we study is the Vedic literature, in particular, the grantha Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the Amala Purāṇa, the most pure of all scriptures because Bhāgavatam describes Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and their loving pastimes in Vṛndāvana along with the cowherd girls, the cowherd boys, etc. So we have that knowledge and we’re building our devotional service by śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ—hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa. But the words of a pure devotee are as good as the Vedic literatures because they are self-realized souls. Our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda came from Goloka Vṛndāvana on the express desire of Lord Kṛṣṇa. One of my godbrothers who acted as Śrīla Prabhupāda’s secretary for many years, he told me in confidence that one time Prabhupāda told him in a moment of intimacy, "I did not want to come to this nasty world, but Kṛṣṇa asked me, 'You please go and I will take care of everything else. You go to the material world and you write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and I will arrange everything else.'"

So, Gurudāsa, my illustrious godbrother who’s also since departed, he said there are two types of nitya-siddhas. Nitya means an eternally liberated soul, not one that lives in this nasty world, duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam—they’re eternally liberated. Two types of nityas, eternally liberated souls in Goloka. They come to this world, he said. One of them comes of his own accord, perceives the suffering of the jīvas in this material creation—Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura said, "Here I am in the middle of a holocaust, trying to enjoy myself." Holocaust means a terrible place. So, out of compassion—like father, like son—the son embodies the qualities of the father. So as Kṛṣṇa comes to this nasty world out of compassion to deliver His devotees, annihilate the miscreants, and reestablish the principles of dharma. So like father, like son, there’s some souls up there who know what’s going on in Delhi. They’re aware of the pollution. Yes, I was reading: the pollution is so bad here that breathing the air of Delhi is like smoking four packs of cigarettes every day.

But perhaps worse than the smog is the traffic. So like this, these souls, they come, but some of them are chosen by the Lord to come on a special mission. In the absence of the Lord who delivers the pious, who annihilates the miscreants and reestablishes dharma, He sends His ambassador, His representative, to do the same, to carry on the same message. One time Prabhupāda was walking with his disciples on the beach in Bombay—because then we called it Bombay—at Juhu before there was a temple. And Prabhupāda was walking along, and in the morning walks we could ask Prabhupāda questions. It was kind of like more relaxed than the vyāsāsana. Prabhupāda was the supreme commander, but when we walked with Prabhupāda it was more relaxed. He liked to be with his disciples and Prabhupāda wanted association. He didn’t run back to Vṛndāvana to associate necessarily with the sādhus and vrajavāsīs. He liked to associate with his disciples. He appreciated their efforts to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we could ask questions.

And one devotee asked the question: "If Lord Caitanya is God, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Rādhā Kṛṣṇa nahe anya—He’s more than God. He’s the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." Originally the Lord was one, but for His transcendental pleasure He expanded into hlādinī-śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the Lord’s consort; but for the purpose of enlightening the souls in Kali-yuga, those two became one in the personality of Kṛṣṇa. So how powerful is that? It’s described the Lord is as strong as a thunderbolt and soft as a rose. So Kṛṣṇa came strong as a thunderbolt. Prabhupāda preached very heavily against the Māyāvādīs, but the other part of his nature was Rādhikā—soft as a rose. Śrīmatī, Rādhārāṇī, compassionate. Mahāprabhu showed so much compassion on the fallen souls. Kali-yuga—Prabhupāda said Caitanya Mahāprabhu is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa, and I think that Prabhupāda is more merciful than Caitanya Mahāprabhu by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He made—he adapted our way of life for the people of Kali-yuga.

Anyway, one devotee said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, if Caitanya Mahāprabhu is God—and He is God—He’s not one of the daśāvatāras. He’s a special incarnation, channa-avatāra. He’s hidden." Prabhupāda said, "If He came as God, everyone would want to imitate Him and become God. So He came as a devotee, hidden, to teach us how to develop love for Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world." Those who have intelligence, they’ll be able to perceive, according to this verse in the 11th Canto of the Bhāgavatam, that the Lord will appear in Kali-yuga. He’ll be surrounded by His devotees all singing His sweet holy names.

So my godbrother said, "If Mahāprabhu, Bhagavān, if He’s Kṛṣṇa in the age of Kali, why didn’t He spread this movement all over the world?" If you read carefully Caitanya-caritāmṛta, you know that Antya-līlā, parts of Mahāprabhu’s... He took sannyāsa and He traveled practically the whole continent of Bhārata—nowadays we can say Bhārata, India—He went from Bengal down to the very tip of India, He came back up to Mahārāṣṭra, up to Vṛndāvana, He came through... He made so many devotees, established the foundation how to preach. So why didn’t He go across the ocean and go to America or to Europe? There was a Renaissance going on in Europe. They were coming out of the Dark Ages. Michelangelo was painting, and poets and composers were doing so much fine music—very civilized, quote-unquote. So why didn’t Mahāprabhu go around the world? He could have done it in a flash.

So Prabhupāda stopped—and sometimes he would stop to answer the question—and he put his cane into the sand and he looked up like this. "Why didn’t Caitanya Mahāprabhu spread the saṅkīrtana movement all over the world? Because He wanted me to do it." It’s a big service, and devotees, that’s all we ask for. We’ve been disconnected from Kṛṣṇa for millions of lifetimes, wandering through different brahmāṇḍas, species of life, different bodies. We want to reconnect with Kṛṣṇa. That’s our goal: to reconnect with Kṛṣṇa. So special souls are sent here to facilitate, and I think that our spiritual master is the chosen one. Many are called but few are chosen.

So when a pure devotee like Śrīla Prabhupāda speaks things that we may not necessarily hear in the Vedas—like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she’s not spoken about. She’s Vraja-gopyā. Her pastimes, her love, is so refined, it’s so deep, it’s a secret. Vraja-gopyā—she’s not mentioned in the Vedas. Even in the Bhāgavatam, she’s just mentioned as that special gopī. Because Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who’s speaking Bhāgavatam, his iṣṭadeva is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, his... his worshipable Lord is Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And had he begun speaking about her pastimes, he would have gone into trance, into ecstasy, and stopped speaking.

So there are devotees who are sent here, and they speak about Vraja, like the Six Gosvāmīs—Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī—they speak about the spiritual world openly. You know that verse, *adadānau...* from the lips of Rūpa Gosvāmī. The first time he saw Lord Caitanya, Lord Caitanya was on His way from Bengal to Vṛndāvana, but He took a diversion and He went way up north to Rāmakeli to see His beloved devotees, Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. And when He came into the village, Rūpa Gosvāmī saw Him. He said, "Oh my God, what is this incarnation?" He could understand this incarnation. Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He’s the most merciful because this incarnation has come into Kali-yuga to give the deepest understanding of religion or dharma: to surrender to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, even beyond Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world. Vaikuṇṭha is called the official kingdom of God, but Goloka—it’s the playground of God. So who is this incarnation? Who’s come to talk about that? Nobody ever described that before. And who’s He describing it to? The fallen souls of Kali-yuga. What could be more amazing than this? This is the most amazing incarnation. He’s giving the deepest, topmost message to the jīvas and mūḍhas. He’s bringing them to the topmost platform by three words: Hare, Kṛṣṇa, and Rāma in the form of the yuga-dharma. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So Rūpa Gosvāmī, although Mahāprabhu is a hidden incarnation in the spiritual world, Rūpa Gosvāmī is Rūpa Mañjarī, so he knows all these things. Just like if you dress up for Halloween, your kids still know who you are. Do you do Halloween here? I hope not. So Prabhupāda is one of those Vrajavāsīs. How blessed we are, and he came on the personal invitation of Kṛṣṇa. We have to discuss like this so we understand our good fortune. To demonstrate how we know that Prabhupāda comes from Goloka Vṛndāvana—not necessarily Vaikuṇṭha—one time he was cooking for the devotees in New York. Sometimes Prabhupāda would cook; ācārya means one who teaches by example, so everything we do now in ISKCON was done by Śrīla Prabhupāda in the beginning to teach. So one time he made samosas, and he not only made the samosas, he cooked them, then he distributed the samosas to the devotees who were sitting on the ground with their plates. And afterwards, my dear godbrother Tamal Krishna Goswami, he said to Śrīla Prabhupāda, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, that was the best samosa I ever had." And Prabhupāda said, "Yes, that’s because it was Mother Yaśodā’s recipe for samosas." How did Prabhupāda know Mother Yaśodā’s recipe unless he was a resident of Goloka? So we’re so blessed.

Certain souls, they’re sent here to deliver us. Others come of their own accord. Today, our Christian brothers and sisters are observing Christmas, and it’s not "Jingle Bells, Jingle Bells, jingle all the way." No, it’s a sanctified day. It’s the appearance of Jesus Christ, and although he’s not part of our Gauḍīya tradition, we may still honor him. In a letter to Gurudāsa dated May 16th, 1970, listen to this. Prabhupāda wrote about Jesus Christ: "My dear Gurudāsa, regarding your question, where in our scriptures is there mention of Lord Jesus Christ as a recognized and sanctified person for preaching God consciousness? We do not find in the scriptures Lord Jesus Christ’s name. But so far as I am concerned, we bow all our obeisances to Lord Jesus Christ because his whole life was devoted to the service of the Lord."

Elegance is truth spoken concisely. So Jesus said, "Love and honor thy Father with all thy heart and soul." It’s the same. He’s not asking God for money or wealth or get-free. No, just "Let me love You." And in another letter to Upendra on August 14th, 1970, Prabhupāda wrote, "Lord Jesus Christ is a śaktyāveśa-avatāra, an empowered living entity or jīva. In order to attain such a position, one must be pure." So in this sense, Lord Jesus Christ was a pure devotee. So he was... I don’t know, maybe he just came out of compassion or maybe Kṛṣṇa sent him, I don’t know, but he was an emissary, so we can think about him. But we should understand in our closed community here that he did not reveal everything about the Lord. In fact, in the Bible, there’s a section called John 16:12. Jesus says, "My dear people, I have more to teach you, but you cannot bear it at this time. I have more to teach you, but you won’t be able to understand." So we take it that he knew everything about God because in the Bible it said he sits at the right hand of his Father. I’m giving you a Bible class. It says in the Bible—that’s their scripture, we have Gītā, Bhāgavatam, they have Bible—so there it says that Jesus, he sits next to his Father. So we take it that he knew everything, but the people at that time in history couldn’t go deeper than the message he gave. He didn’t speak about Vṛndāvana. He didn’t reveal Kṛṣṇa. He didn’t talk about Kṛṣṇa’s consort. He didn’t talk about the cows of Vraja.

No, it’s not a criticism of Christianity, but think of it like this: there’s a vastly learned mathematician and he’s asked to address children in grade school. Remember when you went to first grade, the first day you went to school, your little backpack on and mommy took you there and you crying and you went in and the teacher started teaching you 1 + 1 is 2. Next week 2 + 2 is 4. No, 2 + 2 is 5. No, 2 + 2 is 5? Did I get it wrong? This is my whole life. But you understand, he’s a vastly learned mathematician, but he’s speaking according to time, place, and circumstance. And then when they’re in their, what do you call it, secondary school, there’s algebra. I still don’t understand algebra. Teacher told me just go out and do your sports, you’ll never get it. But he reveals more because the students are more mature. And then you go to university. What type of mathematics do they teach in university? Higher mathematics. Yes, higher mathematics. Do you know anything about mathematics? You’re like me. But you get my point. More is revealed in university, masters, PhD. So Jesus spoke in such a way as to get people ready for the deeper message. He taught them how to be pious. He gave them Ten Commandments which basically make people civilized. "Thou shalt not kill." Civilized people don’t kill other living entities.

Nityas, they see the soul in everyone’s heart. The Kṛṣṇa-bhakta, like that famous musician George Harrison, he said one time, "Everyone’s a devotee of Kṛṣṇa; some know it and some don’t." So therefore, don’t kill; if you pinch me, it hurts; you pinched the cow, so this is piety. Just like we become pious by no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no gambling, and no intoxication. By following the four regulative principles, you don’t become God-conscious; you don’t get prema-bhakti; you become a civilized person. So that when you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, you get the benefit. It brings you to the mode of goodness. And from the mode of goodness, śuddha-sattva, you go to transcendence. How? By chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. But if you’re a sinful person, you chant, you’re not going to get much out of it. It’s like pouring ghee on ashes. But if you pour ghee on a fire, viṣṇu, viṣṇu, viṣṇu. So therefore, if you want to be initiated and get the full benefit of the yuga-dharma, you have to follow the four regulative principles. So just in our close company, this is what Jesus taught people. He prepared them for amala-bhakti. Perhaps in another life, I don’t know. We thank him for that. What would the world be like if Jesus hadn’t appeared 2,000 years ago in the Western countries? People would be like racketeers. So he encouraged them, "Thou shalt not kill." This makes him pious. It’s not enough to go back to Godhead in this regard.

You’re going to be amazed. Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote to my temple president, Bhagavān dāsa, March 2nd, 1970. I was there. Here’s the letter, because when you got a letter from Prabhupāda in the old days in the Detroit temple, you had to come down and read it in front of all the devotees. Sometimes that was really nice, but sometimes Prabhupāda was chastising you, but blessings are there either way. So when this letter arrived, Bhagavān dāsa read it out loud, and listen to this. This is about the destination of the devotees of Lord Jesus Christ. In other words, when they die, they can go to heaven. That’s all—that is a planet in the material world. Their heaven, as they conceive it, is a planet in the material world. That’s where our dear brothers and sisters the Christians can go. Just like one time Prabhupāda had a dream and he woke up and he told his servant, "I just had a dream that I went to a planet where the Muslims live. He said, "So the people who follow Islam, they go to a planet in the material world. But from the highest planet down to the lowest, all are places of repeated birth and death. But one who comes to Me, he never comes back again."

So with all due respect, pious activity cannot take you beyond the Virajā River which divides the material world. It’s good to be pious, but on your piety, the foundation, follow the regulative principles but chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. That’s where they go—still the material world. And Prabhupāda continues, "When one is pious instead of being sinful, he’s promoted to the higher planetary systems like Janaloka, Maharloka, Tapoloka, and they are above the planets... So persons who are cleansed of sinful life by becoming pious become eligible for transcendence, śuddha. Therefore the conclusion is that the devotees of Lord Jesus Christ are promoted to the heavenly planets, which are within this material world. That’s their destination."

So when my godbrother Jayananda—you know Jayananda, the famous devotee who began Rathayātrā instruction in America, we always have a picture of him—he passed away from leukemia. He’d only been a devotee six or seven years and he passed away from leukemia, cancer of the blood, in Los Angeles. He had a room there and devotees were chanting to him, but it was Maṅgala-ārati. So everyone went to Maṅgala-ārati and he was alone and a tape of Prabhupāda was playing. You know how that bhajan... That was playing and he died. He wasn’t chanting; he was hearing. Just like Prabhupāda said one time, "The chanting from the lips of a pure devotee has a special effect." So therefore, we have many favorite kīrtaniyas. We like to play their bhajans. We should also constantly play the bhajans of Śrīla Prabhupāda in the temple.

So anyway, after he died, Prabhupāda wrote him a letter—a posthumous, we call it, posthumous means after someone died—he wrote a letter: "My dear Jayananda, please accept my blessings. I want to thank you for the service you did for me in this lifetime. You were the first person to give me a donation of $5,000 by which I could print Nectar of Devotion. You maintained the San Francisco temple by driving a taxi and you inaugurated the Rathayātrā festival, San Francisco, New York, etc. So I’m missing you." What is that? The spiritual master misses you. This is the awakening of love. Love is reciprocal. You serve without wanting anything in return, you endear yourself to your master. The highest position that we can achieve is to be the servant of a glorious master. We want nothing more than that. So he was thanking Jayananda and he said, "If you had any amount of material desires still left in your heart when you died, you’ve gone to Svargaloka. The race isn’t over till it’s over. We have a lot to do and we have a lot of cleansing to do." Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa... Go away lust, go away anger, go away greed, be done with you. Like Kṛṣṇa said to Pūtanā, or Pūtanā said to Kṛṣṇa, "Go away boy, leave my breast." So we have this same "go away." Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam, the heart is cleansed, and then only bhakti can blossom just like the lotus flower when the sun rises.

So Prabhupāda said, "If you had any desire, you’ve gone to Svargaloka. There you can fulfill those desires in that nice atmosphere and gradually promote yourself to Vaikuṇṭha." Then he said, he wrote, "But because you were hearing the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra at the time of your death, I say you’ve gone to Kṛṣṇaloka." So we don’t want to go to Svargaloka. We don’t want to go there. Everything’s peachy-keen dandy. It’s so nice up there. You’re born sweet sixteen. You don’t have to go through babyhood and diapers and nappies, and everyone’s beautiful. Perspiration smells like roses. And the girls there, gentlemen, they—really, the men are very handsome. So that’s a distraction. There’s practically no misery. What is the misery? Prabhupāda said one time on Svargaloka, the fear that the demons are coming, because sometimes the demons attack Indra. Look at Hiraṇyakaśipu. He took over the throne of Indra. He ruled the demigods. Nārada Muni was the foot-servant of Hiraṇyakaśipu. Did you know that? Foot-servant. He was so powerful. So the only anxiety in Svargaloka is that, "Are the demons coming to attack us?" They live in fear. And as soon as your pious activities, your pious credits run out—just like you take the hourglass with sand and you turn it upside down and the sand starts going down. You’ve got time, time. And then there’s one grain, and as soon as your pious credits run out, New Delhi!

Because Bhārata isn’t what it used to be. When I first came to your country, 1970, all the men were dressed in white and they wore those funny little caps. Everything... ladies weren't wearing blue jeans. All had nice sarīs or Pañjābī outfits. You see in Rājasthān, the veils... everyone was going to the mosque or the temple or the Golden Temple. It was very different than it is now. Nelson Mandela wrote a book about his country. He said, "Cry, my beloved country. Cry, my beloved country." So sometimes I think of India like that: "Cry." ’Cause I’m your adopted son. I live in Vṛndāvana. I don’t live in New York. I have to go back to New York to preach. But my home is Vraja. So I’m your adopted son.

I’d like to get an OCI card if there’s any politicians here! But so we don’t want to go to Svargaloka. So how did Jayananda make it back to Godhead? He pleased the pure devotee. He actually admitted to one of my godbrothers, Yogeśvara, a week before, he said, "Yogeśvara, I’m a little anxious because I have... I still have material desire. Only been a devotee seven years, I have some desires, you know. I’m a little anxious." But just see the mercy of a pure devotee. We make more advancement by blessings than we do by our strict... we have to be strict sādhakas, but it’s by blessings that we actually make progress. So we want to go beyond piety. There’s goodness and there’s pure goodness, transcendence. And only when we’ve transcended all these desires that are there festering—it’s a heavy word, like disease, festers in our heart—we can go. But the ticket back to Godhead is prema, love. We have to fall out of love with the material world and into love with Vraja.

So how do we do that? How do we fall out of love with the material into love with Vṛndāvana-ānanda-Kṛṣṇa? How do we develop our love for God? Not so difficult. Everyone talks about love of God, other spiritual traditions. My challenge in preaching in China: in China, there’s no concept of God. There’s no word "God." There’s no Supreme Being. They worship their ancestors. Can you believe it? So, how do you give a lecture in Beijing? Supreme Personality of Godhead, who? But because they have no... because religion is banned for the most part, it’s a communist country—banned. There’s no God. There’s no soul. They don’t have any spiritual experience, but they’re spirit souls. So what happens is, when we go—I travel throughout China—we get a group of students and I say, "All of you, repeat after me," and I chant the mantra, then we have kīrtana. They all cry. It’s all stored up. Everyone, everyone ultimately is looking for love. And the perfection is love: to love the Person who can reciprocate with all your loving desires, now and forevermore, Kṛṣṇa. So when they come in contact with Kṛṣṇa’s name, they cry and cry and cry. And I’m very jealous. I don’t cry when I chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, but that emotion is there and it comes out like you see sometimes a spring of water bubbles out, a new spring bubbles out, and fresh water goes all over the field, bubbling. That’s what happens in China. Kṛṣṇa, so kind. He comes in the form of His name, *kali-kāle nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra*. The incarnation for this age is the name of Kṛṣṇa. Or Prabhupāda said any name. He said you can chant "Hallelujah." You can chant the Islamic name for God.

Or like when I was in South Africa, I met the King of the Zulus. Zulu, Zulu, Zulu. They still live much of their old habits, spears and the grass. There’s millions of them in South Africa. I made friends with the King, the King of the Zulu, King Goodwill. I was in the hospital, I’d had an operation and I got septicaemia. Doctors will know what that is. I wasn’t supposed to live, but I was like dying on the bed. And King Goodwill came to see his daughter who was in the next room. Came with his entourage and his guards and security. When he walked past my room, he saw me there. He said, "My dear boy, what’s..." You know, 65. I was 65. He was quite elderly. "What’s wrong?" I said, "I’m sick. I’m praying to God." He said, "What is your name for God?" I said, "Kṛṣṇa." And I said to him, "King Goodwill, so happy to meet you. What is your name for God?" He said, "uLulu." There’s unlimited names for God denoting His majesty or His sweet Vṛndāvana-līlās. So I said, "Oh really? Um, uLulu... like what does uLulu mean?" And get this, he said, "It means that person who owns the most cows." I said, "King Goodwill, we’re on the same page," because Nanda Mahārāja has 900,000 cows in his Gokula, and Kṛṣṇa is Govinda—He’s a lover of the cows. So we became very good friends, actually very good friends. Sometimes I’d see him and we’d chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and sometimes we’d chant uLulu. I had to do it. He was pious and we were there chanting the names of God.

So but the special mercy that we have, and we have to note this—although we respect all these religious traditions ultimately which come from God according to time, place, and circumstance—we have special mercy. Because how can you fall in love with someone you know nothing about? When I travel different countries, I ask people, "Who is God?" "Oh, He’s God." Okay, let’s move on. Can you say something else? "He lives up there." Anything else? "Well, if I’m good, I go there, and I’m bad, I go to hell." Is that it? That’s all you need to know? "Because Jesus died for our sins. So, stop sinning. You go." Okay, that may have worked in the, you know, the Middle Ages or something, you know, but how can you love someone? How can you awaken your love for God if you know nothing about Him? And how much do we know? Govinda!

You know as well as I know. You’ve all been coming to Bhāgavatam classes. We’re reading the 10th Canto by Prabhupāda’s mercy. We know everything. Again, elegance is truth spoken concisely. Prabhupāda said, "We even know God’s telephone number." He said that in a class, we didn’t have iPhones and, you know, fax machines. And he said, "We know everything. The beautiful face. Kṛṣṇa’s lotus eyes, how they go to His ears. His nose like a sesame flower. Lips red like bimba fruit. Teeth like rows of pearl. Tribhaṅga-sundara. He’s standing bent in three places. His hair is going down. Three lines on His neck. Broad arms, thin waist, lotus feet with special marks on the feet. Playing what? A flute. He’s playing a flute and His consort, Vṛndāvaneśvarī, who has the most love for Him. Therefore, she’s in charge of bhakti and she sees someone who’s aspiring for bhakti. She recommends to Kṛṣṇa, 'See, this new person has just walked in the door to learn about You, Kṛṣṇa. Please accept that person as Your devotee.' We know Kṛṣṇa’s friends. We know His favorite foods. He loves butter. We know that God is a thief." You tell that to someone in another religion: "Yes, He’s a thief." "Oh, what does He steal?" "He steals butter." "But what kind of thief is that?" "No, He also steals little girls' hearts."

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, back to Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. We sing in Russian, and people both play... it means thank you very much. Close your legs.""