"*00305*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees, friends, and well-wishers. Please accept my most humble obeisances. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

Devotees have requested me to clarify my feelings and provide guidance on the situation in Ukraine, particularly as there are currently statements circulating on the internet purporting to be my position. I am greatly aggrieved seeing the conflict presently going on in Ukraine. Who would not be? The suffering there and throughout our planet is cause for a devotee to feel sadness. Our Vaiṣṇava tradition teaches that devotees are *para-duḥkha-duḥkhī*—saddened seeing the suffering of others—and *para-sukha-duḥkhī*—happy seeing the happiness of others. Prahlāda Mahārāja further teaches that devotees are well-wishers for all living beings and do not think or see the world in terms of friends and enemies. As such, we should be concerned how all souls, regardless of which country they are in, are being afflicted, and do our best to help them through Lord Caitanya’s saṅkīrtana movement. 

The devotee's nature is to find opportunities to extend compassion to all who suffer, and the ultimate remedy for material suffering is to develop awareness of our spiritual nature as spirit souls and to reawaken our loving relationship with Kṛṣṇa. I therefore humbly request all devotees to take shelter of the holy names and pray to Kṛṣṇa that wisdom can prevail to bring about a peaceful settlement of differences, recognizing that more can be achieved when we appreciate what we have in common as humanity, as souls, and as sons and daughters of Kṛṣṇa, who is the *bīja-prada-pitā*, the seed-giving father, and *sarvasya prabhava*, the master of all living beings. 

Who to blame for conflict in this world? It is not our business. Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā* that "the intricacies of karma are difficult to understand." In such situations, if at all possible, we must be prepared to give immediate relief in the form of Kṛṣṇa-prasādam and other remedial measures. 

To my disciples, I say I love and care for all of you equally as your spiritual master. It is not my duty to address the politics of the world, but to guide you safely home to the spiritual world. Such knowledge must be shared with all of humanity. 

I quote a verse from the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Fifth Canto, 18th Chapter, verse number 9: 

> "May there be good fortune throughout the universe, and may all envious persons be pacified. May all living entities become calm by practicing bhakti-yoga, for by accepting devotional service they will think of each other's welfare."

Therefore, let us all engage in the service of the supreme transcendence, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and always remain absorbed in thoughts of Him. 

Hare Kṛṣṇa. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Thank you very much.""