"*00420*.*
"This morning we're reading from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, Chapter 14, verse 44:

*oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya*

*kiṁ kiṁ na vismaranty uta māyayā mohitāḥ svayam*
*yeṣāṁ vilupya-smṛtīnāṁ para-tattvam apāvṛtam*
 **Translation:** "What indeed is not forgotten by those whose minds are bewildered by the Lord's illusory energy? By that power of *māyā*, or illusion, this entire universe remains in perpetual bewilderment. And in this atmosphere of forgetfulness, no one can understand his or her own identity."

*oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā*
*cakṣur unmīliṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ*

*śrī-caitanya-mano’bhiṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhūtale*
*svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadāmahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam*

*jaya śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu nityānanda śrī-advaita gadādhara śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda*

*hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare*
*hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare*

These are the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the absolute truth. Kṛṣṇa says in the *Gītā* that He is the source of all that is material and all that is spiritual within this world. What better authority do we have than the Lord? And here, Kṛṣṇa is giving His opinion about the nature of this world. Of course, He has given it before in *Bhagavad-gītā*: *duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*. It is a temporary place full of miseries—like rainy days on a little island in the river. We were hoping for sunny weather, but this is the nature of this world. He has given His opinion here about this world of illusion, where the entire universe remains in perpetual bewilderment. And in this atmosphere of forgetfulness, no one understands who they are. 

So, we should take His opinion as fact. Who knows better? He created it. Just like an architect; an architect designs the building, and perhaps he oversees the construction of it. Who knows better about that building than the architect? Just like someone who comes up with an invention and makes a patent; if someone wants to really know what that patent is like, they call him up and ask him. Because he is the creator, he has manufactured it, he is marketing it, so he knows better. When Kṛṣṇa speaks about this world in which we live, we have to listen. Although we have heard it many times—you are all young, but most of you have grown up in Kṛṣṇa consciousness—you have heard of this illusory nature of the world, *māyā*, over and over and over.

So, why are we speaking about it again? Why is Kṛṣṇa speaking about it in the 10th Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*? Later on, we will hear the Lord's very wonderful, beautiful pastimes in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the topmost of all *līlās*. Here, He is still in the 10th Canto, speaking about the illusory nature of the world. Why is He speaking about it again? Because Prabhupāda said, "Repetition of something is good, because by repetition, repetition, repetition, repetition, we finally understand."

Sometimes we can understand quickly by the mercy of Guru and Gaurāṅga. That is a special grace. Remember the very first time I saw Śrīla Prabhupāda? We were waiting at the Detroit Airport. Last night we gave a long discussion about Prabhupāda's pastimes, how I experienced them, but the very first time we saw Śrīla Prabhupāda was when he arrived at the Detroit Airport. None of us had ever seen him before. This was 1969. He got off the plane, they walked on the tarmac, the passengers came up the gateway, and then there he was. We were like 200 enthusiastic, basically new devotees, and there was Prabhupāda shining like the sun. We brought this big Vyāsāsana—a huge Vyāsāsana, like that part of the stage, really; it was ginormous. We brought it into the airport, and in the way you walk between the gates, we put it right in the middle. People couldn't even pass by. We were having this huge *kīrtana* down there, and all the people going to the gates were totally bewildered. Prabhupāda came in, totally detached, and he sat on the Vyāsāsana. 

*Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava Kuñja-bihārī Gopī-jana-vallabha...* Thinking about the *gopīs* in the Detroit airport. All glories to Prabhupāda. And then he sat down, and we were all youngsters, so he gave a very simple lecture. And that lecture, of course, is one we have all given many times to newcomers: how we are not the body. We were listening—we were young, we were listening—and then Prabhupāda leaned over. I was sitting right there, a few of us boys were there. Prabhupāda leaned over and he said, "Please believe me when I say you are not this material body."

And I had this realization: I am not the body. I had heard it in so many lectures since I joined, but somehow, when Prabhupāda said it, "Believe me when I say you are not this material body," it clicked. So, repetition is required. Not *ahaṁ brahmāsmi, ahaṁ brahmāsmi*—no, I am not this body. You know those cartoons where the light bulb goes on above somebody's head? I got it. But repetition is necessary. Here we are hearing again Kṛṣṇa talking about *duḥkhālayam*—the illusory nature of this material world. 

Actually, traditionally in the *āśrama* with the guru and the disciple, because previously people were more advanced than we are—they were more pure, in Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga; people were much more refined—repetition was necessary, but only three times. The guru would say, "You are not the body." You assimilate. "You are not the body." Getting to understand it. "You are not the body." Boom—the light bulb comes on. Realization. How unfortunate we are to be born into Kali-yuga. We are so covered over, it is hard to understand these things. Just imagine: three times. "You are not this body. You are not this body. You are not."

But we can get there. Slow but steady wins the race. It's not how you start, it's how you finish. If we are diligent, if we take this process seriously—especially from youth. Youth is meant for acquiring knowledge. Just like all of you who are in school. What school is now is very much different than when I was in school. You just breeze through what I went through in high school. Now it's much more difficult, so much competition. Very, very difficult. But in previous ages, things were much more simple. So, we have some difficulty, but if we are persistent, we can do it. 

Youth is meant for knowledge. Middle age is meant for utilizing that knowledge in one's career, in one's family, and one's contribution to society and the world. And old age is meant for realization. You get that knowledge, you work on that knowledge, and then comes *vijñāna*. From *jñāna* becomes *vijñāna*. So, you guys have a head start. Many of us, I came when I was 19, 20. Mādhavījī was mentioning last night how there is hardly anyone under 30. Just Jayānanda, he was 35, I remember, in San Francisco. If you were over 30, you were really old. But we started a little late. Many of you have started in the womb; your parents had the *garbhādhāna-saṁskāra*. So, due to your pious activity or your previous devotional service—most likely due to your previous devotional service—you took that birth, and this is meant to be your last birth. 

So, you have to give everything, all of your youth, to this process, along with your education, your career, your marriages, and so forth. You have to find the time to chant: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma...* 16 rounds. "Oh, Swami, you don't understand what life is today in this world. And I have school, and I have my friends, and I have this and that." No, Prabhupāda set the standard. Previously it was 64 rounds; everybody in the Gauḍīya Maṭha did that. Prabhupāda said 16. One time we were sitting, Prabhupāda was giving an initiation lecture, and the candidates came up. One of my god-sisters—forget her name, bless her soul—she said, "Prabhupāda, what are the rules and regulations? How many rounds will you chant?" And she said the four regulated principles. That was a little, you know, confidence, some pride. It's okay. She said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I promise to chant a minimum of 16 rounds every day." And then Prabhupāda, it was unusual; he leaned over and said, "Why a minimum? Why not more?" 

Because the chanting is the source of all our auspiciousness. Anything auspicious in our life comes from that sacred sound, *śravaṇam*. So, try to come up to that point. But the odds are against us in one sense because, *dharmaḥ satyaṁ śaucaṁ kṣamā dayā kālena balinā rājan naṅkṣyanty āyur balaṁ smṛtiḥ*. "Then, O King, religion, truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy, austerity, duration of life, physical strength, and memory will diminish day by day because of the powerful influence of the age of Kali." So, actually, we are fortunate to have this advice from the Lord because when you look at the world, it's okay for the most part, right? When you look around, it looks okay.

But it's not all that meets the eye. For example, when you look at a beautiful forest—here we are on the island, I was appreciating, "This is really beautiful. The nature in Australia is really beautiful." So, you may think, "Oh, look at this beautiful forest, a lovely place, pretty green trees, deer." Do you have deer here? Deer roaming around, birds chirping. Do you have wombats? Can't remember. Even butterflies—it's all peaceful and quiet, right? It looks nice. But actually, if you've ever lived in a forest, you know that there's a bitter struggle going on, for every living entity is food for another living entity. That is described in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, I think it's First Canto, 13th Chapter, verse 47: *ahastāni sahastānām apadāni catuṣpadām / phalgūni tatra mahatāṁ jīvo jīvasya jīvanam*. "Those who are devoid of hands are prey for those who have hands. Those devoid of legs are prey for those of the four-legged. The weak are the subsistence of the strong, and the general rule holds that one living being is food for another." Yuck. That's what's going on. 

Even the trees are engaged in a bitter struggle. Where do they get their sustenance? Where do they get their nourishment? Under the ground. They have their roots. But if you look at a tree—I studied botany when I was in high school—the branches are like this, but the roots of the tree by nature's way are as wide as the branches. Did you know that? The roots are as wide. What are the roots doing? All competing. There's only so much soil, there's only so much nourishment. So, the trees are fighting under the ground. The beautiful tree. Look at the cherry blossoms. Look at the tree. And they're also competing for the sunshine, because they thrive on the sunshine as well. So, you go to a forest, you often see the tall trees are the most healthy, green, and producing flowers or fruits. And the ones that didn't make it that high, you know, maybe there's just a few leaves and there's no fruits. So there's a big competition going on just amongst the beautiful trees. So every creature—I think you have five types of snakes in Australia. Uh-oh. We're going to go to the countryside, have to be careful. And so many rabbits and so many kangaroos and so many butterflies and all. Look at the beautiful, but they're all fighting for survival because one living entity is food for another.

So there's a bitter struggle. The material world often looks very nice, but we have to see with the eyes of *śāstra*, guru, and *śāstra*. It is said that a saintly person, an intelligent person, he sees with his ears, not with his eyes. So we have the guru and we have the *śāstras* so we don't fall prey to becoming enamored by what the material world has to offer us. It's an illusion. In a more subtle sense, the material enjoyment here doesn't really exist. Therefore, elsewhere in the *Bhāgavatam*, Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes material enjoyment as what? *Gandharva-pura*. *Gandharva-pura*. What's a *gandharva-pura*? It's a house in the sky. Mirage. Houses are not in the sky. Yeah, well, that's the point. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, material enjoyment is *gandharva-pura*. It's a house in the sky. "Oh, that means it doesn't exist?" "Yeah, you got it. You got it." Or elsewhere it's described as a horse's egg. There's no such thing as a horse's egg. Horses don't lay eggs. Yeah, the material world doesn't give real enjoyment. 

Nevertheless, *māyā* is very expert in keeping us here, in making the material world look attractive. And she's so powerful. Actually, she's a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Māyā Devī is actually a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda said she has the thankless task of keeping the living entities bound here in material existence until they become qualified to go back to the spiritual world. You don't have to stay here forever. Oh, she doesn't want anyone unqualified to go back to the world of her Lord and try to serve there with some selfish desires. So, she's the warden of the prison of material existence, Māyā Devī. We're scared of her, but actually she's a pure devotee. She has a thankless task. Can you imagine being the warden in a prison? But as soon as the prisoners are rectified, they open the gate, you can come out. So, as soon as you become rectified, *jīvera svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya-dāsa*, we realize, "I'm not of this world. I'm Kṛṣṇa's devotee. I'm out of here." And that veil of illusion fades very slowly. And one day you have *darśanam* and you can go home.

So, don't underestimate her, her tricks, how we become attracted here. I was sitting with Prabhupāda in London, and my godbrother, Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu, he was having a little trouble. So, Prabhupāda said to him, "The trouble with you, Kuru-kṣetra, is you're not afraid of *māyā*. You're playing. You're tinkering with her. So, give it up." How? You can only give up something if you get something better. That's *nīti-śāstra*. You can only give up something if you get something better. If you have $1 and I have $10, I say, "Let's make an exchange." "Hey, okay." You give me your $1, I give you my $10. So, we have to be honest. We have some attractions here. They're obstacles in the path of pure devotion. How do we give them up? *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare, Hare Rāma...* Why? Because Kṛṣṇa, the *māyā* can't stand Kṛṣṇa's *caitanya-rasa-vigraha*. Kṛṣṇa is present in the sound of His name. And what? Prabhupāda paraphrased everything about Kṛṣṇa. He said, "He is the reservoir of all pleasure." If you get the reservoir of all pleasure, anything less than that, you can renounce it. So, there, renunciation becomes very easy in this world. You just chant your rounds every day: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa*.

It's that simple. Simple for the simple-minded, difficult for the complicated. So, how is *māyā* so powerful? Because Māyā Devī is an expansion of Yogamāyā in the spiritual world. You know Yogamāyā? Paurṇamāsī in Vṛndāvana *līlā*, she's the one who arranges all the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. She gets up in the morning with Vṛndā Devī. They go to Gupta-kuṇḍa, which is near Vṛndā-kuṇḍa, and they make the plans—how Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa will enjoy their day together, the place that the pastime will happen, the breeze that will be there, the flowers that will be there, the different perfumes coming from the flowers, what tunes, what melodies the birds will sing, what animals can come and watch, how the pastime unfolds. Everything is arranged by Yogamāyā Paurṇamāsī and Vṛndā Devī. Every day they meet at Gupta-kuṇḍa and they make the pastimes. She's so powerful. And she is so powerful that the residents of Vṛndāvana, by her mercy, forget Kṛṣṇa is God. Because God means "Sir, yes Sir." But Kṛṣṇa, He allows the spiritual potency of Yogamāyā to be ordered so that they just think He's some cool little boy who they can wrestle with and they can dance with. But all the while, He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yogamāyā is so amazing. 

So she expands that power—even sometimes Kṛṣṇa forgets He's God, according to Jīva Gosvāmī, to facilitate the pastime. He forgets He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is Yogamāyā. So they can have a more intimate relationship. No *aiśvarya-bhāva*, you know, awe and reverence, but *vraja-bhakti*—just pure, intimate love. So that personality, Yogamāyā, she expands into this material world as Mahāmāyā. We say in Polish, *uwaga*—be careful. Be careful and you'll be protected if you chant. Everyone likes to wear the little *kavacas*. How many of you are wearing little *kavacas* in the *śṛṅgāra*? This is the real *kavaca*: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma*—protection from *māyā*. 

Just like when Mārīca became a deer in *Rām-līlā* and went into the forest, wanting to serve Rāvaṇa by allowing him to capture Sītā. Sītā, Rām, Lakṣmaṇa, and Hanumān were in the forest, and so Mārīca, by his mystic powers, appeared as a deer—a golden deer, very attractive. So the deer came by that transcendental party, and Sītā saw the deer. She said, "Rām, I want the deer. Go get the deer for me." So Rām chased off. What can you do to a poor husband? And then, but Mārīca, he had this mystic power. He cried out in the voice of Rām, "Lakṣmaṇa, help!" So Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa, they heard this voice, and they were thinking, "Oh, Rām's in trouble." So Lakṣmaṇa said, "Wait a minute, Rām's not in trouble. He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This must be a trick." So Sītā said, "No, no. You go help your brother. You go. You don't disobey the Goddess of Fortune." So Rām said, "Okay, I'll go."

But it was a dangerous forest. So he took his sword and he made a circle around Sītā in the dust, in the dirt, while chanting a mantra—a *kavaca* mantra, a *kavaca*—and he left. And you know the story. Rāvaṇa came, you know, the biggest *asura*, the most powerful demon ever in creation. Ten heads. Of course, he was disguised, but so powerful. Here is this little princess in the forest, just out of the palace. Her tender feet were getting pricked by the rocks and the stones, and, you know, pale, just a young lady in the forest. And he came and he tried to...

But this is not mythology. This is not a fairy tale. This is absolute truth. He couldn't touch her because of the mantra. Prabhupāda said one time, "Two things never deteriorate in Kali-yuga: the potency of jewels—because astrologers use jewels sometimes to ward off the planets—and mantras." When I heard that, I was amazed. Two things never deteriorate in Kali-yuga. A good jewel. Here's a jewel. What's a *sannyāsī* wearing a jewel for? No, but this jewel, it's a long story, was worn 500 years ago by Lord Nityānanda. Yes. When Nitāi went back to the spiritual world, Jāhnavā took his paraphernalia. And you know when Gaura-Nitāi would go on *saṅkīrtana*, they would dress up very nicely, you know, long black hair, and they had their garlands and their jewels to attract the people to the chanting, etc. So, when Nitāi left this world, Jāhnavā Mātā, his wife, brought all that paraphernalia to Vṛndāvana for safekeeping in the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple of Jīva Gosvāmī. It's been kept there for hundreds and hundreds of years under lock and key. 

But one of the *mahāntas*—this is a little confidential; uh-oh—one of the *mahāntas* became a very dear friend of mine. And he showed me the paraphernalia one day, and one jewel dropped onto the table. And he looked at it, and I looked at it. I said, "Baba, Baba, please, I need mercy. I'm traveling the world. I only stay in one place three days. You can imagine in 54 years how many beds I've slept and places I've been." He said, "All right. You're a disciple of His Divine Grace Śrīla A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Śrīla Prabhupāda. You take it, and you continue his mission." So I took that jewel that was worn by Nityānanda. I mean, it's priceless. If you gave me the whole world, I wouldn't give it to you. And I put it in this ring. And I wear this ring to get some mercy from Nitāi to keep pushing forward this *saṅkīrtana* movement. Anyway, that's a little bit off, but I thought you'd like... You can see it, but you have to go like this. Like they do, you know, when they put the lamp after the *ārati*, you can go like this. Get the mercy. Come on, get the mercy.

So, jewels and mantras don't deteriorate. So therefore, Rāvaṇa couldn't touch tender Sītā—only when she stepped outside the mantra to grab her. So you also have that *kavaca*. For the age of Kali, *Kali-nāma-rūpa-kṛṣṇa-avatāra*—that holy name of Kṛṣṇa has descended from the spiritual world in the form of the *mahā-mantra*. It's very powerful. If you chant it regularly, you're protected. You could wear a million of those little silver *kavacas*; it's not as powerful as one *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare*. So, Yogamāyā is very powerful and Mahāmāyā is just as powerful. So, we have to be very, very cautious. We have to be very, very careful, not thinking that, "I won't be fooled." We can be fooled. Even great demigods are fooled. Look how Brahmā became fooled one time. Indra—Indra, he was inundating all of Vṛndāvana with, you know, the clouds and the water. He became a little bewildered. There are so many examples. 

So, knowing that, we have to be very careful. We're very small. Material world is very big, but if we know where to take shelter, we don't have to worry. Like one time, Prabhupāda was walking on the beach with the scientist-devotees in Juhu. And as they were walking, there was a little colony of crabs ahead of them. So, as Prabhupāda and the devotees were walking, the crabs went "whoop." Crabs don't go forward; crabs go sideways. What a birth. You can't go straight, you have to go sideways everywhere. So, the crabs went into the ocean. So, Prabhupāda said, "Why have those crabs gone into the ocean?" And one of the scientists—I think it was Bhakti Svarūpa Dāmodara Mahārāja—he said, "Prabhupāda, when we put our foot on the ground, it creates a certain energy, and that vibration goes through the sand. And when it comes close to the crabs' body, it goes into their brain and the C-fibers in the brain say 'danger'." Prabhupāda said, "What?" So, Prabhupāda said, "No." He said that the crabs, they could sense danger because this large body of human beings was coming. So, they could sense there was some danger, and they're very small and all the big feet were going to come at them. So, although they're very small, they went left into the ocean and they were protected in the greater ocean. So, the little crab, there's danger, he takes shelter in something much bigger: the ocean. So, *māyā* is very big, very powerful. Demigods are getting bewildered. And who are we? We're little *jīvātmās*. What do we do? *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare, Rāma, Hare Rāma...* 

Yes, *māyā* is very... even we can get bewildered just by some simple magic. There's magicians nowadays, I've seen on the internet they do tricks. So, how are they doing that? Sleight of hand. And we get bewildered by a little magician. What to speak of *māyā*? So, every day we have to chant our rounds, right? *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa...* I'll tell you a quick pastime. That's not a pastime. It's a story. Sometimes Prabhupāda would tell stories. How powerful is magic? So that we can appreciate how powerful *māyā* is, so we take shelter of the ocean of the holy name. It's a true story. It actually took place in the 1700s. There was a king in Bengal. Very powerful *rāj*. He conquered over all his enemies and they were living in an era of prosperity and peace. 

So, one year it was his wife's birthday, and he decided, "Let's have a big celebration. My wife's going to be 35 or something like that. We'll have this big bash." And so he had so many things on the agenda that they would enjoy, and one of them was a magic show. And at that time in history, there was a very famous magician who lived, I think, 100 km away in some village. He was very famous. So, the king, he sent a message to the magician to come and do a magic show for the king and the queen and then the rest of the family and the ministers. It was a big deal. They had a big auditorium. The queen was, "Oh, magic show, honey. I love magic so much." So, the magician came with his wife and his son and his daughter. And like, you're the crowd, and here's the magician, and the king's sitting there with the queen, and they're all watching. So, they were doing all kinds of things. I don't know, pulling rabbits out of hats, putting a gold coin here and taking it out the other ear, whatever. But they were really good magicians. 

So, at one point, the magician takes his wife—she was wearing a diamond necklace—so he took the diamond necklace off his wife and walked up and put it on the queen. "Oh, that's wonderful. The magician has given a diamond necklace from his wife." His wife didn't like that. So, they started arguing. Like, in the middle of the show, they're arguing, "WHY DID YOU GIVE MY DIAMOND NECKLACE TO THE QUEEN?" "Because she's the queen and maybe she'll give us a bigger..." "No, no, no." They're fighting, and they're fighting like that. So, suddenly, the wife of the magician, she slaps him in the face. So then, what he does—he's so angry—he takes his sword, and she keeps slapping him and slapping him. He steps back, he cut off her head. Oh man, right in the middle of the magic show. This is true. I saw the scribes of that particular king. It was written in a museum in Orissa. He cut off his wife's head. And the whole assembly was like, "Oh my god, what's happening? Oh my god, what's happening?" So, then very quickly the son, her son, their son, he had a dagger, he went and he slit the throat of his father, the magician. And then his sister picked up the sword and stabbed him through the heart. And then she committed suicide. Oh my god, Mahārāja, this is *Bhāgavatam* class. 

And there was this river of blood. I mean, you know, it wasn't a river, but there was so much blood. And some of the bodies were still shaking, you know, because of the nerves. This... Oh my god. So, the queen, she fainted. And the king was like, and then they... he picked up the queen and he carried her back to their chambers. And their children were totally bewildered. And all the citizens, they were just like, "What happened?" And it just, you know, then the soldiers came and cleaned up the bodies and cleaned up the blood and... yuck. 

So, several months later, people were still in shock. Several months later, a courier came with a letter for the king and the queen. That was, I think, at dinner time. And the king received the letter and he said, "No, I'll read it later." And the courier said, "You have to read it now, this letter." "No, no, I'm having dinner." "You have to read it now." "All right. Everyone stop eating." Because he didn't want to... he wanted to eat with everyone. So, everyone's listening, you know, the children are there, the ministers are there, everybody important is there. And he pulls out the letter. And the courier said, "Read it out loud." "Read it out loud?" "Yes, read it out loud." "All right." "My dear king, my dear queen, your children, your ministers, the citizens of that great region, we would like to thank you for allowing us to put on a magic show for you. Three months ago, you heard we were very good. Actually, we're the best ever. So, I hope you enjoyed the show. Please don't think that anyone died. It was all magic. It was all magic. There wasn't a single drop of blood. We're doing very well back in our village here. If you need us again, please let us know. And can we have the diamond necklace back?"

This is a true story. I mean, if our modern magicians—I don't know, David Copperfield or something—if they can do that, what can these magicians of days of yore, maybe they had some subtle powers and *siddhis* or something. What could they do? So, my point is what? My point is that if we can get fooled by a magic show, what about the greatest magician, Māyā Devī, who makes this world look so nice? But actually, it's not nice. The niceness is the spiritual world. So, remain protected, because if demigods can get bewildered, what about little people from Sydney and Brisbane and Fiji? How we can... But we have Mahāprabhu's grace. Just like Sītā, "Oh, I'd like to see that." In the Tretā-yuga, somebody could be protected by a mantra put around them. You have the same benefit. It's very mystical. You're very blessed. *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare, Hare Rāma...* You're protected. 

But of course, the *mahā-mantra*, the goal of the *mahā-mantra* is not to be protected, because one day you have to die. So, what's the real deeper essence of the mantra? *Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam*—it cleanses the heart of lust and anger and greed, and it uproots those nasty material desires which cause those material qualities to be there. Those material desires are thrown to a distant place and deep within your heart there's a golden seed of *prema*, love for Rādhā-Śyāma. And if you chant long enough, the heart becomes purified, the material desires go away, and then you can see Kṛṣṇa. And it's possible to go back to Godhead in one lifetime. I mentioned that the other day. Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura said, "I see no reason all my disciples cannot go back home, back to Godhead, in one lifetime." And you've got a head start, all of you. You have an advantage. By the time you're my age, you may be, "Oh Govinda," feeling your separation. "I'm considering a moment to be like 12 years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain. I'm feeling all vacant in the world in your absence," just like Mahārāja said at the Bhakti Fest in 2026. 

You have a great future. Don't get tricked by *māyā*. It's a little difficult in youth because your senses are stronger, but don't get tricked. Just have faith in what I'm saying. And Prabhupāda said, "When we get back to the spiritual world, we'll all recognize each other." And he said, "But you won't recognize me like this, as an old man. I'll be a young boy." And he told one of my godbrothers that when we get back to the spiritual world, the spiritual master is waiting for you. This is right from the lips of Śrīla Prabhupāda. When you get back to the spiritual world, your guru is waiting for you. And he greets you. And he takes your hand, Prabhupāda said, into the *kuñja*, into the forest where Kṛṣṇa is waiting for you. And he puts your hand into Kṛṣṇa's hand, and he leaves the two of you together for a little while. This is the goal. What else, what illusory *māyā* illusion in this world could compare to the ultimate journey that we're on? So, stay strong. Don't get distracted. *Eka Kṛṣṇa*... keep your eye on the goal. Vraja, Vṛndāvana; read everything, hear everything about Vraja, that will inspire you. And in this one lifetime, you'll make it. 

Prabhupāda gave a lecture in Detroit on his first visit, the first time I saw him. And he said to us, "The children of your children will become pure devotees." He said that. So then I said, "What about me? What about my children?" I was thinking like that, you know. He said, "The children of your children can become pure devotees." So that's you. You're like third or fourth generation. We're expecting you to come to that point and keep pushing on this movement that this first generation has carried on from Śrīla Prabhupāda. And be happy. So thank you very much. Time for *prasādam*. 

*Hare Kṛṣṇa.* Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jai. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura ki jai. Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara ki jai.

Okay, thank you. *Hare Kṛṣṇa.*""