All right everyone, thank you so much for this opportunity to be with all of you today for this memorial ceremony for our beloved Shamali. I'd like to begin by offering my respectful obeisances to all of the devotees and to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

For this memorial, I've written a letter actually, to my beloved disciple, Shamali Dasi, which I'll read off of my computer. My dearest Shamali Dasi, please accept my blessings. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

I'm writing this letter to you with faith that through the transcendental medium, my loving words will find you. My dear spiritual daughter, I'm intensely feeling your separation. During the last months of your life, I watched with profound admiration as you passed life's final tests with dignity and grace.

From the initial report that revealed your advanced stage of cancer to the moment you departed this world, you were peaceful and composed, proving to everyone your deep faith in the process of Krishna consciousness.

Yes, there were moments when the enormity of the situation overwhelmed you, but upon hearing transcendental knowledge from me and those who surrounded you, you would always exhibit a peace and tranquility that amazed me. In the midst of your endeavor, you wrote to me, "My dear spiritual master, you are now guiding me with spiritual knowledge and love to the greatest transition we will all face.

In preparation for leaving this material body, you have kindly instructed me to be fearless and detached from the body, while fixing my mind on the next destination." If nature takes its general course and one leads a pious life, a person can expect to live up to an advanced age of seventy or even eighty years.

That much time is generally required to successfully finish the course of Krishna consciousness and graduate from this world.

But you, Shamali, seem to have come close to completing the curriculum before even a third of your life had passed. I feel you accomplished this because you took full advantage of all the blessings you received. You wrote to me not long before you left, "Dear Śrīla Gurudev, you have helped me to reflect on how Krishna has given me the greatest blessings in this life: Your shelter, devotional service, the association of devotees, prasadam, and the holy names." My dear Shamali, I was deeply impressed by how you accepted your disease without regret and how you resigned yourself to fate.

Even better, you saw your disease as Krishna's mercy.

This mature attitude in one so young must have certainly touched the Lord's heart. As such, we can only imagine what was your final destination. A quote from *Nectar of Devotion*, Chapter 10: "A devotee who was not perfectly freed from the resultant actions should therefore continue to act in Krishna consciousness seriously, even though there may be so many impediments.

When such impediments arise, he should simply think of Krishna and expect His mercy.

That is the only solace. If the devotee passes his days in that spirit, it is certain that he is going to be promoted to the abode of the Lord. By such activities, he earns his claim to enter into the kingdom of God." During your illness, I called you many times and offered you advice on how to face your final challenge.

I always looked forward to those calls because I knew you took whatever I said to heart. There's no greater satisfaction for a spiritual master than when his disciple accepts with full faith what he says and acts without hesitation on those instructions.

I knew you had that *guruniṣṭhā*, faith in the guru. When you wrote to me, "Dear Śrīla Gurudev, your words and guidance bring me so much peace. Indeed, Lord Krishna describes in the *Bhāgavatam*, 'Simply by the grace of the spiritual master, a person can fulfill life's purpose and attain eternal peace.'" And Shamali, how wonderful it was that Lord Krishna, the master of all mystics, arranged that I was able to phone you and chant into your ear the holy names as you took your last and final breath.

I feel very fortunate to have you as a disciple. My duty has always been to bring you to the lotus feet of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

He is the master at whose feet all masters sit. I pray He will always watch over and protect you until we meet again. Know for certain that the relationship between the guru and disciple is eternal and is never limited by time and distance.

Today, on the occasion of your memorial, so many, many devotees are missing you. No doubt this is because you were the perfect daughter, the perfect wife, and the perfect friend. And I will add that you were the perfect disciple as well.

I miss you, Shamali. I remain, now and forevermore, Your ever-well-wisher.