Oh, I'll definitely take the duty-free stuff from this Hare Krishna song in your garden.

Very dear devotees, at the Russian Sadhu-Sanga festival in the past, Boris Lev, Garrosh. First of all, I'd like to say how much I miss all of you and all the Russian devotees who live in Russia. This whole pandemic that's been going on for the last couple of years is extremely painful because during this time, we miss each other.

Only in May are there tremors. Some of my best memories during my devotional service are connected with all of you in Russia. I first came to your country even before many of you were born. I think that I first came in 1988.

Despite the difficulties, there was only a small sprout, a tiny seed of Krishna consciousness planted by Śrīla Prabhupāda and some first devotees in Russia.

Therefore, I think that the greatest luck in my life was to see how throughout your glorious country this little seed sprout grows into a real banyan tree of consciousness. I heard how Śrīla Prabhupāda said when we were in Geneva, Switzerland.

He said Krishna consciousness is filled with bliss when it expands.

The Hare Krishna movement, as we say in English, the Hare Krishna movement, means that she moves, how she moves, she moves forward.

It's Hare Krishna, will be brave, as it goes.

And that's why it was so inspiring in my life to see how the Hare Krishna movement is growing in your country and how it exists in our time.

Krishna says in one verse of the Bhagavad Gita, he says that he is an adventurer.

Preaching in your country was a big adventure, and there was one of us, and in Samara, the International Devotees. Your beginnings. Here already. And now unfortunately I have to enjoy the fruits of their sermons, not my sermons, but the fruits of the sermons of one of the international devotees, one of the leaders, or yourself in Russian theaters.

I have to see these fruits from afar. It is painfully threatening. The essence of the sermon, the fruit of the sermon of sadhu-sanga, is an opportunity to get together and enjoy what we love most. This is kirtan, hari-katha, Bhagavad prasadam, and communication with each other.

This is the essence of your festivals. I am so far from Russia, so far from the festival. This is, as an example, my situation is like a hungry man looking at a mango tree with a ripe mango on the top, but he can't reach it.

He's hungry, but he can't get the mango. And even in Samara, how much he provided. We can only imagine so many of us are outside your country now. So many devotees can't come to this festival. We all just look at the ripe mango, sadhu-sanga, with great pleasure.

We want to taste it, but we can't. We collect and pick up fruit. I miss you very much and I hope that this fruit, this mango from the top of the tree, will fall into my hands in the not too distant future.

In the sense that in the not too distant future, me and my spiritual brothers and sisters and other wonderful devotees from all over the world will be able to come again to the great country of Russia and together enjoy the sankirtana movement, Krishna's association, good job.

So through your communication, you can help this fruit fall into our hands. Praying to Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi, praying to Rādhā and Krishna, praying to our mothers, praying to our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, so that in time we will all be together again.

Thank you for us from Vrindavan, but also from Russia. We receive fast from the lotus feet for a good prayer, or vandana for us. This is one of the nine authoritative and powerful processes of Krishna consciousness.

It is very powerful. I think that Krishna, of course, hears these joint prayers of many devotees.

Please provide a volcano. And of course, since you are the select few who were able to come here, it is your duty to leave this festival and return to your villages and towns and share some with others. So you like to get a kind of fruits of the nectar.

They describe the fruits of Valov. I find here in Vrindavan for almost two years. In Vrindavan, we often see fruit carts passing by, carrying mangoes, apples, bananas, and various fruits. Full carts pass from one place to another. These vendors sell their fruits to others so they can enjoy them.

In a similar way, you choose the fruits of the festival nectar of fruits, and you distribute these fruits throughout your country. Be merciful. Pray for us so that we can come, and we will pray so that we can come.

This is double strength. Next year we will be together. I hope that I will speak from the stage. I look forward to the opportunity to hold a kirtan with all of you. I was given a brand new harmonium made in a special performance by India's most famous harmonium maker.

I will bring it with me, and we will have a kirtan all night. And I will tell you many wonderful lilas and stories that I learned while living here in Śrī Vrindavan. I will bring this fruit of the king of mangoes to all of you.

Thank you very much for this opportunity to address all of you. I miss you. I love you more than you can imagine. I express special respect to all Russian leaders who have passed all the stages, received all the titles, and taken on such great responsibility in Russia.

I express my special respect to your devoted leaders. I believe that Chaitanya is a sample of one of the organizers. He asked me to speak. And my very good friend, Bhakti Raghava Goswami Maharaj. I watch his lectures online even though I don't understand Russian.

They are so wonderful. We miss you. Hare Krishna.

And so, thank you very much. All glory to Śrīla Prabhupāda.