"*00235*.*
"### Mount Kailash: Lord Shiva’s Abode
#### With Indradyumna Swami

My fascination with Tibet began in the 1960s. I was 15, and the hippie movement, with its unconventional philosophies and ways of life, had just taken hold in America. I often visited alternative bookstores in the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco, and one day I found a book, *The Tibetan Book of the Dead*, in the Eastern spirituality section. I read it for years until I found a deeper understanding of spiritual philosophy in Śrīla Prabhupāda’s *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is*. 

Three years ago, an opportunity to visit Tibet arose when several devotees invited me to join them on a pilgrimage to Mount Kailāśa, the sacred abode of Lord Śiva situated in the remote western part of the country. But our plans ended abruptly when the Chinese government refused our visa applications. My interest in Tibet was reignited last year when I met a Buddhist monk from Tibet in New Delhi. He was traveling to Bodh Gayā, the place of Lord Buddha’s enlightenment in Bihar, India. The monk had encountered many difficulties in his travels, and I did my best to help him in the short time we were together. A close, almost mystical bond arose between us, and as we separated, he told me he would leave something of great spiritual value for me in his monastery in Tibet. I wanted, of course, to know what he would leave for me, but I wondered if or how I would ever obtain it. Though I am used to packing my bags on a moment's notice and traveling to wherever my service takes me, Tibet had never been within my realm. 

Then, a few months ago, I received a call from the group who had planned the original journey to Tibet. The Chinese government was again issuing visas for Mount Kailāśa, and they asked if I would be interested in going; of course, I agreed. Thirteen of us were granted visas through an official Tibetan travel agency. My motivations for visiting Tibet went beyond the fascination I had as a teenager and even beyond the desire to obtain the gift from the Tibetan monk. My objective as a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa was to obtain the blessings of Lord Śiva, who resides with his consort Pārvatī atop Mount Kailāśa. In Vedic teachings, we learn not to approach the Lord directly but through his pure devotees. As the verse, *my dear partner*, Lord Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna in the *Ādi Purāṇa*: "One who claims to be my devotee is not so; only a person who claims to be the devotee of my devotee is my devotee." And of all the devotees of Kṛṣṇa, Lord Śiva is considered to be the best. There is another śloka: *nadi-nam-amita-ganga devan-am-acyuta-tatha vaisnavanam-yatha-sambhuh purananam-idam-tatha*. Just as the Ganges is the greatest of all rivers, Lord Acyuta (Kṛṣṇa) is the supreme amongst deities, and Lord Śambhu (Śiva) is the greatest of all Vaiṣṇavas, so *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* is the greatest of all Purāṇas.

So now, Kailāśa is 22,000 feet—6,700 meters—above sea level, and it is very special because it is the sacred dham where Śiva meditates on Lord Kṛṣṇa and meets with great sages like Nārada. Through Mount Kailāśa, the Ganges descended with great force from the spiritual world to the material world and was caught by Lord Śiva in his matted locks. The demigods observed Lord Śiva sitting on the summit of Kailāśa Hill with his wife Pārvatī for the auspicious development of the three worlds; he was being worshiped by great saintly persons desiring liberation. The demigods offered him their obeisances and prayers offered in great respect. That is again from the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Kailāśa is also known as Mount Meru, the center of the universe. Throughout the ages, it has been called by various names, including the Jewel Peak, Lotus Mountain, and the Silver Mountain. The city of Kuvera, the treasurer of the demigods, is said to be near Mount Kailāśa. Local Buddhists recognize the spiritual significance of the mountain and consider it one of their holiest places of pilgrimage. It is also fervently worshiped by followers of the Bön religion, the religion of Tibet prior to the arrival of Buddhism in the 7th century. Tibetans say that there is an invisible ladder connecting Kailāśa to heaven, and the rulers of ancient Tibet were said by their citizens to have descended to Kailāśa from heaven attached to ropes of light. Because of the mountain's sanctity in the eyes of several of the world's greatest religions, no one has ever attempted to climb it. Reinhold Messner, the famous Austrian mountaineer who has scaled all 14 of the 8,000-meter mountains of the world, was offered a license to climb the mountain by the Chinese government in the 1980s. Of course, he denied; he writes, "It would not have been intelligent to do otherwise. One should not trample on the gods," he said. A Buddhist saint once said, "Only a man entirely free of sin can climb Kailāśa, and he wouldn't have to actually scale the sheer walls of ice to do it; he’d just turn himself into a bird and fly to the summit." 

Through the centuries, Westerners have been attracted to visit Kailāśa, not for spiritual reasons though, but out of curiosity. The first recorded Westerner to visit Kailāśa was an Italian Jesuit missionary, Ippolito Desideri, in 1715. He wrote, "Kailāśa is a mountain of excessive height and great circumference, always enveloped in clouds, covered in snow and ice, and most horrible, barren, steep, and cold. The Tibetans walk devoutly around the base of this mountain, which takes several days, and they believe this will bring them great indulgences." Only to the snow in the mountain, my eyes became so inflamed that I almost lost my sight.

Within hours of arriving in Lhasa at 11,000 feet—3,500 meters—above sea level, most of our team began struggling with altitude sickness, also caused by reduced air pressure and lower oxygen levels that affect climbers, skiers, and travelers. At times, altitude sickness can be life-threatening, causing pulmonary edema or cerebral edema—fluid accumulation in the lungs or the brain—both of which require the sufferer to be evacuated to a lower altitude. In most cases, those symptoms are mild: difficulty in sleeping, dizziness, fatigue, headache, loss of appetite, nausea, and vomiting. Altitude sickness was an ongoing problem for us during our stay in Lhasa, one of the highest cities in the world. I had acclimatized myself somewhat by spending 12 days in the mountains of Kashmir before the trip to Tibet. Most of the other members of our team, though, suffered from headaches and dizziness during our first days in Tibet. While they rested, I decided to take a look around the old city of Lhasa that I had heard about during my youth. It was harder to find than I expected; much of the city had been rebuilt with endless modern structures like apartment buildings, office buildings, and shopping complexes. The romantic idea of exotic spiritual Tibet I had formed as a young man seemed nothing more than an insubstantial dream, until I rounded a corner in the city. I saw thousands of Tibetans in traditional dress walking in pilgrimage around the sacred Jōkhang Temple, built, I think, in 1652—the most important site of pilgrimage in Tibet. Hundreds of Buddhist devotees were bowing down repeatedly, while others walked around the temple, fingering their wooden prayer beads as they chanted *oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ*—"I worship he who sits on the divine lotus." I joined the surging crowd circulating the temple and then just sat down amongst the pilgrims. I immediately became an object of discussion. I was pleasantly surprised that everyone, without exception, welcomed me, and several even came over to congratulate me on my good fortune to be there. When I took out my japa beads to chant, swarms of pious people surrounded me and listened attentively to my chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.

Well, if someone were to ask me about my relationship with Lord Śiva, I would simply say I wish I had one because, of course, Lord Śiva is the greatest devotee of us, and in our Vaiṣṇava tradition, in order to become a devotee, one must worship and take shelter of a senior devotee. And to that extent, for many, many years now—at least 10 plus—I’ve been worshiping Lord Śiva with the *mahāmantra* from the deities and pray that he would give me entrance into Vṛndāvana-dhāma. This is one of the services that Lord Śiva provides to the sincere Vaiṣṇava: he will award entrance into the holy dhāma.

Well, when I found out we were coming to Mount Kailāśa, it was never something that was on my radar or something that I thought about doing. And because it kind of fell out of the sky, so to speak, I took it that it was the Lord's desire for me to come and do this. So then, I wanted to understand, "Well, why? Why does he want me to come?" And I began to read more and more about Lord Śiva because this is Lord Śiva's place, and Śrīla Prabhupāda speaks a lot about how Lord Śiva loves devotees; he just loves devotees. He is... even his own followers are not so dear to him—devotees of Kṛṣṇa are really, really dear to him.

You know, I generally don't go anywhere unless I'm invited, but when we heard that, just told he was interested and Swami was going to do the kora, I couldn't resist but ask if I could come along, and he kindly gave me his mercy. But then a little time later, when I heard about the risks involved of high altitude sickness, I actually was a little bit concerned and I started reading up on it. And then I began to think that maybe it's not such a good idea for... you know, a guy my age, etc. I love the fact he goes on these adventures, but it just seems a little bit over the top. So I asked to not be included, but it was too late because the visas had already been made for a group, and whatever, every person on the group has to go. So I realized that Lord Śiva somehow or another wanted me to come, and in that way, I came to understand that my desire to get purified, to get my movie projects made—and that they weren't being done, my devotional service was being stymied—this was an invitation by the circumstances to come and prostrate myself to the greatest Vaiṣṇava and ask for his mercy. He is the one who kept the instruction of a spiritual master most topmost in his mind, just like our divine spiritual master, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami. So in this way, I'm on this trip to hopefully get purified of my false ego and be able to go on and make wonderful theatrical movies that carry Kṛṣṇa consciousness to the masses.

The next morning, we were meant to fly to Ngari, a city just 100 kilometers from Mount Kailāśa, but we were informed at breakfast that the flight had been canceled. China's security was on red alert because of North Korea's recent test-firing of missiles, and it was another setback in our pilgrimage. The only other way to reach Mount Kailāśa was a four-day drive across 1,300 kilometers of mountainous roads. Our government travel agency provided two SUV cars with drivers, a small truck for our luggage and cooking equipment, and two official guides who were required to be with us every minute of our stay in Tibet. Ultimately, the pressure worked to our advantage because wherever we went, we were subjected to strict security checks. Upon departing Lhasa, we learned that a storm and cold front were about to descend on western Tibet. We had to get to Mount Kailāśa just as fast as possible; by driving 17 hours one day and 11 hours the next day, we managed to cut the journey in half. The long hours in the car were austere but gave me time to reflect again on the purpose of our journey to Mount Kailāśa, which was again to obtain the blessings of Lord Śiva that we might become better devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa and his representative, my beloved spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

After two days of driving, we approached the town and an even more important nearby lake, Mānasa-sarovara. It’s called *Mapam Yumco* in Tibetan. Every pilgrim takes *darśana* of Mānasa-sarovara on the way to Mount Kailāśa. It is famous for three things: its changing colors, its infinite variations of reflection, and its fearsome storms. On the top of Mount Kailāśa, Lord Śiva and Pārvatī once sat in deep meditation on Lord Kṛṣṇa for 12 years by the calculation of the demigods. No rain fell in the area during that period, so Lord Śiva called Lord Brahmā to create a sacred lake where he and his consort could bathe. Lord Brahmā created Mānasa-sarovara from his mind; after their baths, a self-manifested golden Śiva-liṅgam appeared in the center of that lake.

I'm not emotionally, physically, or spiritually fit to be here. I'm here only by the mercy of my dear friends, Reading and Eliza, and the merciful master, and I'm doing as much as I can to get his permission for *kṛṣṇa-bhakti*.

From the Sel-Gang, we had a clear and direct view of Mount Kailāśa—a beautiful, awe-inspiring southern face. All the devotees lay down on the ground for a few minutes of rest; already exhausted by the high altitude, I began to wonder if I could carry on, especially when I saw the trail ahead. From where we were, it entered the Glacial La-Chu Valley, a flat, rocky wasteland that wound along vast, scraggly mountain slopes. The weather was changing for the worse and we didn't want to lose time, so we rode in jeeps to where we had stopped the day before. After walking for an hour, I realized how physically and emotionally exhausted I was from the events of the previous day. I asked one of our guides if he could arrange a horse for me, but Hari-dāsa and Drum-beat I also asked for horses. The guide found horses to rent further down the valley, and all three of us began; we rode and the others walked at different places, braving the high altitude. We all chanted and absorbed ourselves in the remarkable beauty of the scenery. The mountains were beyond description. I remembered a quote from the *Rāmāyaṇa* where it said there is no mountain range like the Himalayas, for this range contains both Kailāśa and Mānasa-sarovara. As the dew is dried by the morning sun, so our sins are dried when we gain sight of the Himalayas. Beautiful quote. In late afternoon, all the devotees had reached Deraphuk, our campsite for the night. The yaks, which had carried all our paraphernalia up the day before, were waiting for us. Situated at about 5,000 meters, the site allowed us a view of the soaring, resplendent North Face of icy Mount Kailāśa. I prayed for the eyes to see the spiritual beauty of Kailāśa, which is described by Śrīla Prabhupāda as a celestial place, quite different from the cold, icy granite mountain I was now seeing.

We’ve made our... brought to us in our prayers... we’re as close to Mount Kailāśa as we’re ever gonna get. And we’re gonna take rest tonight and do another 18 kilometers tomorrow. And we should know that at least 20 people already on this journey have died in the past month, so this is not something to joke about; it’s a very serious endeavor.

Right behind we have Mount Kailāśa. We’ve come for the *darśana*, but *darśana* doesn't just mean we come to see the Lord or his devotee or some sacred place; it means they get to see us too. So we’re praying that Mount Kailāśa and Lord Śiva and Pārvatī will look into our hearts, purify us, and awaken that *prema*, that love of Godhead, through Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. There was so much desire on this *kora*—on this program here at Mount Kailāśa, in this western region of Tibet. We’ve made it to the base of Mount Kailāśa; this is the best spot to view the entire mountain. Now we look at that mountain behind us, and it’s all covered in snow and barren and not very inviting, but *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* tells a different story of Mount Kailāśa. So it means we have to have purified vision; we have to use that *premañjana-cchurita* of Śrīla Prabhupāda to see the real Mount Kailāśa where Lord Śiva resides, and in that way, take his blessings to be able to advance in devotional service by seeing everything in our life through that devotional lens.

It's real, real purification of the heart, and it's what we pray for. And it's Lord Śiva's kind of granting us that purification that we need so desperately; it means so much. And although it's a very austere place, at the same time, we know that Lord Śiva is an extremely merciful, kind, soft-hearted, and loving devotee—the greatest devotee of the Lord. So we feel his presence here in both ways in this purification.

It was the closest we would come to the mountain itself. We began our second day—the day of "departure from the false ego." After a breakfast of hot porridge—nobody ate much, as the fire of digestion is not strong at such altitudes—the second day proved the greatest challenge of the *kora*. We had to walk or ride more than 10 kilometers upwards to the highest point of elevation on the *kora*, a pass called Drolma La at 5,630 meters. It would take approximately seven hours. Before leaving, I sat down in a quiet place and meditated on beautiful Mount Kailāśa. I took out my notebook and read several verses from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, trying again to see the sacred mountain through the eyes of scripture. One quote: "The abode known as Kailāśa is full of different herbs and vegetables, and it is sanctified by Vedic hymns and mystic yoga practice. Thus, the residents of that abode are demigods by birth and have all mystic powers. Besides them, there are other human beings known as Kinnaras and Gandharvas and are accompanied by their beautiful wives who are known as Apsarās or angels." That's from the Fourth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Again, we made our way in small groups at different paces. Clouds moved in at mid-morning and rain began to fall; the storm we had feared was upon us. Several hours later, cold winds picked up, and the rain turned into sleet and then snow. Everyone, including our guides and horses, moved at an agonizingly slow and painful pace, and our faces were whipped by little drops of ice and freezing cold droplets of water. Each step took an immense amount of strength, and I could see everyone was gasping for oxygen in that rarefied atmosphere—except the Tibetan pilgrims, who walked past us one group after another at a steady pace, eventually disappearing in the distance. I was wearing many layers of clothes, but I was chilled to the bone; the protection of my layers was no match for the harsh weather. As I was contemplating the severity of the cold, a jeep with an open cab and several somber-faced policemen inside rumbled down the rough terrain towards us. As it passed by, I gasped at the sight of a dead man lying face-up in the back of the cab, his ankles and wrists tied with rope; he was fully clothed for doing the *kora* and apparently died while doing it. I glanced over at one of our guides; he just shrugged his shoulders as if to say, "You know, no big deal; it happens every day." My lamentation of how the cold melted away; I was grateful I was still alive.

Eventually, I came to a small plateau. A passing pilgrim told me it was the famous Shiva-sthal charnel ground, named after a place of cremation at Bodh Gayā in India. Pilgrims undergo "symbolic death" at Shiva-sthal; it is traditional to leave an item of clothing or a bodily part, such as hair, teeth, or blood, to represent the renouncing of life. In fact, what is being renounced is the false ego, the false identification with the material body in favor of a true spiritual identity. For followers of Vedic tradition, such renunciation means giving up all temporary bodily designations such as race, nationality, family name, fame, beauty, and all material attachments, and realizing oneself as a pure soul, the servant of Kṛṣṇa, servant of God. It is said those who are close to that goal of self-realization immediately leave their bodies. While passing through the Shiva-sthal charnel ground, I left a favorite hat as a sign of renunciation and prayed to Lord Śiva to help me realize that I am an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. But I didn't leave my body. Disappointed, I mounted my horse again and continued up the steep path. I was encouraged, though, when an old sadhu I had never seen before loudly greeted me with the following statement: "O Kailāśa-vāsī!"—a resident of Kailāśa. I took it to mean that although I had a long way to go in spiritual life, Lord Śiva was pleased with my humble prayers at the Shiva-sthal charnel grounds. Though I had ridden and not walked up the steep path, I was exhausted from the harsh atmosphere, the altitude, and the cold. A post and sign read: "5,630 meters." Because of the extremely high altitude, pilgrims are warned not to stay there longer than 10 minutes. Navigating my way down the steep ridge, I saw to my right a beautiful turquoise-green lake that I had seen in photos. It was Gauri Kund, the lake of compassion. The lake is the bathing place of Pārvatī, Lord Śiva's consort, and the site of numerous pastimes between them. It was here that Pārvatī performed austerities to win Lord Śiva as her husband. Devout followers of the Vedic tradition bathe in the frigid waters to become freed from sin. I resisted the temptation. Watching two pilgrims struggle to get down the jagged hill to bathe in the current, I reflected on how simple and sublime the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is compared to other paths which encourage great austerities and penance. In the *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa says, *rājā-vidyā rāja-guhyaṃ pavitram idam uttamam*. He says that this knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of religion. It is everlasting and it is joyfully performed.

10–15 years from now, we'll look back on this, you realize how blessed we were, what an amazing opportunity this was. Right now, we're struggling, too short of breath, so many difficulties, but when we look back on this, it'll be an amazing memory. Sites like this right here, this beautiful river following us the entire way around Mount Kailāśa, crystal-clear, tasty, cool, refreshing—these are the sights that are "real life." That life in the city with skyscrapers and subways and hustle-bustle, that's not it; this is it.

But perhaps the most deep impression I've left with is how people come here to worship. That's actually why we go to a dhāma: to worship, to develop *bhakti*, devotion. So that's a very deep impression on me. Everyone sees Mount Kailāśa as a divine personality, and of course, for us and our Vaiṣṇava tradition, we see that the personality who rules this, oversees this divine abode, is the personality of Lord Śiva, his consort Pārvatī. So leaving here, I'm left with an impression of deep devotion for the sacred mount, Lord Śiva, Pārvatī, and the many pilgrims who had come here to awaken the devotion of something transcendental. And it feels like here, besides you're a little bit closer to the Lord, and that your prayers, they become listened to. I mean, because of all the austerities, maybe because of the influence of this holy place, but certainly this is a lifetime journey and I will take it with me.

My journey to this *kora* has been very personal for me because Lord Śiva was very much instrumental for me to come to the association of devotees. It was because of Lord Śiva that I met the devotees, as well as Śrīla Prabhupāda. So when this opportunity came, I was very humbled. I felt a lot of gratitude, and I felt a personal connection that somehow Lord Śiva was once again being merciful to me, 15 years later than the first time, and he introduced me to the devotees of Kṛṣṇa. Yeah, it's very transformative, hard to describe. I won't be the same after this. The whole way, due to the uncertainties, maybe they feel like, "How will I go through this?" And now I'm feeling like, "How will I go back?" It's not... I'm very, very grateful to have had this experience. I feel a little bit more appreciation for the devotees and feel a great appreciation for the indigenous people here in their own form of *bhakti* worship. We're grateful to have this opportunity.

Real adventure is to be found in service to the Lord and his representatives. This is why we were on the *kora*, trying to attain the blessings of Lord Śiva. There are, however, easier ways to get His mercy. When we reached our campsite, we found the same rudimentary facilities as those of the previous night. Once our packs were brought off the yaks, I changed into dry clothes and jumped into my sleeping bag to try to warm up. Later that evening, I was dozing off in the freezing cabin and I wondered if the second day of the *kora*—the day of "departure"—had had any tangible effect on me. I once again prayed to Lord Śiva to help destroy my material attachments and grant me eternal residence in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We awoke to a sunny morning on the last day of the *kora*, the day of renewal. Renewal means that having gone through so much austerity on the *kora*, the pilgrim would be purified of sin so that his or her spiritual nature would shine forth. When I looked in the mirror that morning, all I saw was an unclean, bearded, disheveled person, but in my heart, I had the feeling I had become purified. That morning, I chanted my japa with extra attention, and but the *kora* was not over by any stretch of the imagination; we still had 12 kilometers to trek until we reached our original starting point, the village of Darchen. The path wound up and down, you know, several gorges that run along the Indus River, in ancient times called the Sindhu. The gorges were so steep that they were unsuitable for the horses. When we were one hour into the trek that morning, that Tibetan family that had rented the horses to us appeared from nowhere to reclaim them. All that kept us going from that point on was the thought that by evening we could take our first shower in days. It was late afternoon; we walked out onto the open plain and into the village of Darchen. Our *kora* was officially finished. We all prostrated ourselves on the ground in the direction of Mount Kailāśa and paid our final obeisances. I stayed on the ground for a long time, reflecting on the journey and all that I had undergone. It had been an adventure, but having completed the Kailāśa *kora*, I would not recommend it as an adventure for most of my Vaiṣṇava devotees; the risks are too great. But I indeed felt I had become a different person: reborn, purified, and cleansed. While walking the path of the *kora*, I felt I'd also journeyed further along the path of *bhakti* to Lord Kṛṣṇa. I got up and took a last glance back at the arduous path we had traversed; then, without looking back again, I walked forward toward my next service for my spiritual master. But whatever that... wherever that service takes me, part of my heart will always remain in the mountains and valleys of Mount Kailāśa. I pray that all the mystics, sages, and *ṛṣis* who reside there, and most importantly Lord Śiva himself, will truly accept me as a "Kailāśa-vāsī"—a resident of Kailāśa—that mysterious and sacred abode.""