"*00152*.*
"# Vyāsa-pūjā Address: Bhaktivedanta Manor

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. I would like to thank all the devotees who read their offerings today. So many nice, beautiful, and wonderful sentiments were expressed. It is a little hard for me, a little embarrassing, but of course, it is the duty of the disciple to hold the spiritual master in the highest regard. This is in accordance with the seventh verse of *Guru-aṣṭaka*, which repeats over and over in our hearts daily: the spiritual master is to be honored as much as the Supreme Lord because he is the most confidential servant of the Lord. This is acknowledged in all revealed scriptures and it is followed by all authorities. However, it must be noted that hearing such praise, the spiritual master is remembering his spiritual master and thinking, "Gurudeva, Gurudeva, give to this servant just one drop of mercy. I am lower than a blade of grass. Give me all help. Give me strength. Let me be as you are, without desires or aspirations. *Gaurāṅga*! If you examine me, you will find no good qualities. Your mercy is all that I am made of. If you are not merciful unto me, I can only weep, and I will not be able to maintain my life."

So, this humility is actually required for all Vaiṣṇava devotees of the Lord, but especially for those who hold roles of responsibility where, as a result of holding that responsibility, they may sometimes have to sit in a big seat like this. They may have to be honored and adored by others. However, we must always remember that we are simply instruments in the hands of the Lord. Kṛṣṇa says in a very famous verse in the *Bhagavad-gītā* (11.33): "You can be but an instrument in the fight." In other words, the Lord is empowering His devotees to do His, Kṛṣṇa's, work. That is all. He comes and He goes. In His absence, the work has to go on. I often say this is a missionary movement, so the work has to go on. So, those who take up that work, what can we do? We are just *dāsas*. Yes, the Lord takes us and He empowers us to continue the work. 

Like one time I said—I think yesterday—Prabhupāda said, "Lord Rāmacandra conquered Laṅkā and Rāvaṇa with monkeys and bears, and I am conquering the world with my disciples." Another time, Prabhupāda said, "I have a plan to take over the world in 18 days." "Oh, Prabhupāda, let's do it!" Prabhupāda said, "But you are not ready yet." So, the onus is on the followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda—today, tomorrow, and for the next 10,000 years, the golden age of Kali-yuga—to come up to the standard where we can properly represent our spiritual master, our spiritual master's spiritual master, and the whole *guru-paramparā*. 

Especially going back 500 years when Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared as the *yuga-avatāra* with the *yuga-dharma* of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. All those devotees who took up the mantle each generation, they were all preparing for this moment to fulfill the prophecy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu that this *saṅkīrtana* movement—which essentially means chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra—will go to every town and village of the world. If you study each generation, maybe they didn't go out of the country, but they were preparing for someone, some *śaktyāveśa-avatāra*, to take the chanting to every town and village. First generation: Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Śyāmānanda; later, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa; and then the great pioneer, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who took up the mantle in earnest in modern times, his glorious son, and then who in the service of all those great Vaiṣṇavas who boarded the *Jaladūta* to go to the West: our beloved spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

I was there one time when a devotee asked Prabhupāda, "Prabhupāda, who are you in the spiritual world?" Prabhupāda said, "If I told you, you would faint." But we can know for sure that he is an eternal resident of Vṛndāvana; you just have to read his poetry as he is on the *Jaladūta* going to the West. So everything was preparation for that moment. We hear how there was just one, perhaps one devotee—I think his first disciple in India was on the docks seeing Prabhupāda off. I imagine it a little differently: I see 33 million demigods showering flowers as this movement really gets going. 

So Prabhupāda was that instrument. I would say he is the chosen son. "Many are called, but few are chosen," and Prabhupāda was chosen. In fact, one of my dear godbrothers was a secretary for Śrīla Prabhupāda for many years. He said that Prabhupāda told him in a moment of intimacy, "In the spiritual world, you please go down to the material world, to the earth planet, and you preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So Prabhupāda humbly said, "But Kṛṣṇa, I am not inclined towards austerity. There is no austerity in this stage; where I was, all is nectar." So Kṛṣṇa said—this is from Prabhupāda—Kṛṣṇa told me, Prabhupāda said, "You just go down, you write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I will take care of everything else." And so it came to pass. Prabhupāda got the mantle, he was empowered; this is called *aiśvarya-śakti*. He was an instrument in the hands of the Lord, and we are instruments in the hands of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and his followers are the *dāsa-dāsa-dāsa-dāsānudāsa*—we are the servants of the servant. So you get a lot of mercy if you consider yourself the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant. You are getting empowered blessings from all of these various devotees. 

So, knowing this—that we are just servants—the few words of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in *Śaraṇāgati* to his Guru... I thought, "If I ever got a tattoo—I am not into tattoos—but if I ever got a tattoo, it would be *tava dayā* across my chest: 'Your mercy is all I am made of.'" And I was thinking how to prove what the proof is that we are empowered instruments in the hands of the Lord and our spiritual masters; it is that if need be, they can take that mercy away as well. I think it is Job 1:21 in the Bible: "The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away." And in that regard, there is a nice example of Arjuna. Actually, Kṛṣṇa used Arjuna in many ways to teach us lessons. 

In this instance, Kṛṣṇa wound up His pastimes in the material world. He had gone back to the spiritual world, and sometime afterwards, Arjuna, this famous, great warrior who had fought in the Battle of Kurukṣetra, was asked to transport and watch over a group of Vrajavāsī gopīs, to take them from one village to the next because rumor had it that there were some *dacoits*, there were some bandits in the forest. So Arjuna was deputed. So, with a little touch of pride—of course, he is eternal; we shouldn't think that he can ever be contaminated, but sometimes devotees even take the service of something like Arjuna to be put into illusion so the Lord can give some instructions to the general mass of people. Devotees are so surrendered. So with a touch of pride, Arjuna said, "Of course, I can do such a simple task. I fought on the battlefield of Kurukṣetra." It is told that the gopīs, the horse cart was there, the cart was there, and there was something like 20 wagons, and Arjuna is riding in front, and his sword is there, and suddenly this entourage was attacked by a group of *dacoits*, bandits—but not big bandits, just kind of weekend bandits or whatever—and there was a fight, and Arjuna was defeated. And what is more, the Vrajavāsī gopīs in the entourage were kidnapped by the *dacoits*. 

I was thinking, I heard that, and I was saying, "How is that possible?" Because actually, like Sītā was stolen by Rāvaṇa, but Prabhupāda says we can go deep into the pastime; actually, it wasn't the real Sītā, it was a false Sītā, a *māyā-Sītā*, pretend Sītā, like an actor. But you cannot touch the Goddess of Fortune; she is supremely pure, no one can touch her. So in the same way, I was thinking, "How did these gopīs get kidnapped and touched by these *dacoits* if Sītā couldn't be touched by Rāvaṇa?" So Arjuna was devastated, but later a sage told him—because *sādhus* reveal the truth to us kindly—the *sādhu* said, "Arjuna, it was all the Lord's plan to teach you humility, that you are but an instrument in His hands." The *sādhu* explained that when Kṛṣṇa saw Arjuna getting a little proud, the Lord expanded as the *dacoits*. There are many incarnations; we hear as there are waves in the ocean, right? Kūrma, Matsya, Narasiṁhadeva, we just celebrated His. Where Kṛṣṇa appears in the form of sound—it is a material element, but sound—*kalau kṛṣṇa-kīrtana-avatar*. In this age, the *avatāra* is Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. And we hear how Kṛṣṇa expanded as Mohinī, a beautiful woman. When I was a new devotee, I thought, "Well, that is pretty far out," but here the Lord expanded as bandits. It is not a very famous incarnation; we don't really worship that. It was all time, place, and circumstance, and Kṛṣṇa, in the form of those bandits, defeated Arjuna. Otherwise, who could kidnap such pure souls as the Vrajavāsīs? It was Kṛṣṇa, He kidnapped them. So the Lord arranged this pastime to humble Arjuna. 

And what is the lesson for us? When the Lord gives a lesson to Arjuna, it is not just Arjuna, but it is meant to be for all conditioned souls, just like the spiritual master. When the spiritual master gives an instruction to one disciple, generally it can be accepted by all. There are, of course, individual instructions, but generally, when the spiritual master gives an instruction to a disciple, other disciples can take it to heart. So the lesson is that we ourselves are but instruments. Nowadays, Caitanya Mahāprabhu's desire to deliver the conditioned souls in this world—we cannot take credit. 

The reason I am saying this is that in all humility I say I am sitting on this seat today above others whom I feel I should be sitting at their feet, only out of duty. In researching for my lectures, I read in Bhaktisiddhānta's—just to say his name, you derive... you feel that perfection. I love to quote all these *ācāryas*. He had a magazine called *The Harmonist*, like our Prabhupāda has the *Back to Godhead* magazine. He was very insistent that the *Back to Godhead* magazine go on and on and on. Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, his father Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura had *Sajjana-toṣaṇī*, and Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī had *The Harmonist*. It would come out every other month, and actually, somebody printed... maybe I think one of our devotees in ISKCON, he printed it, and I have all the volumes and I am going through them one by one. So amazing to hear of the preaching activities of the previous *ācāryas*, because history repeats itself, and many of the obstacles that they came upon, we have today. And many of the opportunities that our previous *ācāryas* had in some form or another, we also have today. So you can learn from them. 

So therein I was reading in one *Harmonist* magazine, at the conclusion of one Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was sitting in a canvas chair on the veranda of his residence called Bhakti Vijaya Bhavan. I was like, "Where is it, Bhakti Vijaya Bhavan?" We know that Bhakti Bhavan was the household of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in Kolkata. He actually established different preaching centers and even at Rādhā-kuṇḍa; Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and his son Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, they had a home there, and they had a home in Māyāpur, but the main home for Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was in Kolkata, and he actually supervised the construction of that home. He was there when they were digging the foundation because he wanted it built in such a way that it could be used for preaching. And he had a big family; he had 12 children. So during the digging of that foundation, at one point Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said, "Stop." The workers were like, "What?" And Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura walked down, you know, because the foundation has to be very deep to hold the building, and he out of the dirt, he pulled out a Kūrma-śilā. Yeah, a Śālagrāma-śilā. I don't know who knows how that Śālagrāma-śilā got there. But Vedic history is *Purāṇa*. *Purāṇa* means we talk about the history of the universe, the galaxy. So whatever, Śālagrāma-śilā. And when Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was 14 years old, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura gave him that Kūrma-śilā to worship, and he gave him a mantra as well to protect him in his future preaching. 

Just a side note: I was recently in Kolkata, and ISKCON has purchased that property after a great fight for many years. It will come out in *ISKCON News*, and, you know, against *goondas*, we have that property now. So when the devotee was going to that home so that the residents could sign over the papers to us—because who lives there now? The great-great-granddaughter of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. She lives there, and her daughter, great-great-great-granddaughter, and I went there, and they look like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. They are the same faces. And the deed was signed. It was historic. I was thinking maybe 33 million demigods are watching this too. So historic, because other people wanted it. A big fight for that home. They wanted to build a condominium apartment or anyway. 

So I am in the house and I am walking around. Well, this is where Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura lived. And I walked into the little temple room, and there was the Kūrma-śilā. And next to the Kūrma-śilā, there was a Govardhana-śilā that the great-great-granddaughter of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said was worshiped by Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī; he used to carry it around his neck. And they were doing very simple worship, little flower, incense. So I told the Prabhu, "I stayed there, I don't know how many rounds I chanted in front of that Kūrma-śilā. Mercy, mercy, mercy!" And I asked that when they renovate the place and the worship starts, can I come there for one month and live in that Bhakti Bhavan and just worship those śilās? He said, "Yes, okay." So I am just waiting; wherever I am in the world, I am just going to go straight there and worship that śilā. And there was the bookcase of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura there, there was his bed in the same room. And I said, "Where are his japa beads?" So those distinguished women, they said, "Oh, we were afraid that maybe someone might come and steal them, so we hid them 10 years ago and we forgot where we hid them." I said, "Uh, can you look for them? It was 10 years ago." He said, "Just please, just try. Maybe you can find them. I want darśana." So they went, and I was looking at my watch. 45 minutes later, they come back. "We found them." These are the japa beads. Here is his neck beads. They put them in front of me. I was like, "Could I touch them?" "Yes." So I touched one bead: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. I was waiting for my hair to stand on end, but they didn't do it because I have got a long way to go, but I felt so privileged. They showed me his *Bhagavad-gītā*. He had an edition that was published before he published, but he apparently saw it as proper. I held that to my heart. And then his neck beads were there and I touched them to my neck beads and Kṛṣṇa... So that place is still there. So I got off a little bit here, but it is nectar, right? Our *ācāryas*. And you will be able to go there and see those and be present in that home of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. 

So that was Bhakti Bhavan, but his son Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, he had a home called Bhakti Vijaya Bhavan. *Bhakti-vijaya* means victorious. And he was there one day; he had just taken a lot of devotees on pilgrimage to holy places in that area. And he was addressing the pilgrims when he noticed his disciple whose name was Madana Mohana dāsa, who by the way had donated the entire cost—this is the 1930s—for constructing Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's main temple in Kolkata called Śrī Caitanya Maṭha. This devotee worked so hard. He collected all—in those days he collected hundreds of thousands for a beautiful, palatial temple—but he was sitting unassumingly, you know, very shy, in the group of other disciples, directly on the floor in front of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. So Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī saw him and commented that he was such an exemplary devotee, he was due so much praise and so much honor. But because he was a *nirmatsara* Vaiṣṇava—*nirmatsara* Vaiṣṇava—he didn't have any designation like *saṅkīrtana* leader, temple president, regional GBC, *ācārya*, so no one was worshiping him, although he was due the worship. 

In a mood of humility, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī said, "I am obliged to accept all this worship because I have a designation—designation of *ācārya*." That is the only reason. He was so humble. He saw his disciple who had done so much, because he didn't have a title, no one was worshiping. He said, "I have a title, *ācārya*, so I have to accept this worship on behalf of my disciples." So I feel the same way. I have a title, and that is why there is this ceremony today. There are actually godbrothers and godsisters here who are due the same honor and the same praise as myself, and one *sannyāsī* case as well. I call him the "seventh wave." The seventh wave means you probably don't understand, but I come from California and I grew up on the beach. I was a surfer. Probably he said one time, "Surfers are sufferers. They will take birth as dolphins their next life." Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda, for saving me. But we knew the art of surfing, that every seventh wave, by nature's way, every seventh wave is a big wave. Waves are coming; we would catch some of them, but there was always this big fight for the seventh wave. So so many devotees have preached in this *yātrā* around the world and developed so much, but when I hear Keśava Mahārāja's lectures, those little tidbits he puts up once in a while in his lecture, I feel, "Around the world, I think he is the seventh wave in the UK *yātrā*." Let's give him a big... 

But he is not just surfing the wave alone; he is, it is like a tsunami, and everyone is caught up in the excitement of his preaching. So you are in safe hands here. So, because I have this designation, Gurudeva, which translates for the disciples as, I sit here and I take great pride in seeing my disciples make advancement. I am just passing on the instruction that Prabhupāda gave to me and to all of us. I am just trying to set a good example for them. And when I see how it works, I have so much pride. I often say it that just like when I was young, I would go to see my grandfather every summer on a farm, and he just had this... in the barn, he had this, you know, I would stand there and he would make a mark on the wood like how much I had grown that year. And it started when I was five, and by the time we left I was 6'1". So every year he would do that; he would stand by, "You have grown a lot, boy, that's good." And I take great pride. Yeah, I am getting paid like, "What the body," but like that, when I see this, it is the same type of thing, that every year when there is Vyāsa-pūjā, I hear the disciples read. Prabhupāda one time, you can understand the quality of a Vaiṣṇava by his speaking, how he speaks. Like Rādhanātha Swami, he can speak for four hours and no one gets bored. *Puḥ-śloka-kāla*, if he were to give class, he could just do *ślokas* from A to Z, but he throws them in from time to time like Śrīla Prabhupāda. So devotees like this... so when I hear the offerings, I am just more convinced of the power of the Mahā-mantra. 

How do we get to where we are at? It is the power of the holy name. It is the essential ingredient in the process of devotional service. Prabhupāda said one time that this is Kali-yuga, and Kali-yuga means everything is deteriorating. You read the 12th Canto, you will understand. Everything is deteriorating anyway because of the material energy. But all good qualities deteriorate in the age of Kali. Prabhupāda said there are two things that never lose their potency, they never deteriorate in Kali-yuga. I was listening to a tape; I stopped the tape like, "Oh, what?" You know, like you want to relish the moment, like Christmas, right? Little kids are in front of the presents, like when you open them up. So Prabhupāda said, "Two things never lose their potency in Kali-yuga." Like, "What is it? Like, what is that?" Prabhupāda said, "Jewels and mantras." Because we always hear how you obviously, that means a jewel that is not flawed, you know, like sapphire or ruby or emeralds; sometimes in astrology these things are used. We don't need them because we are protected by the Mahā-mantra and *a-śaraṇāgati*, but jewels never lose their potency. And Prabhupāda said, "Mantras—however degraded this age becomes, mantras will never lose their potency." And when I heard that, my next 16 rounds I chanted—some of the best of my life. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Chanting in that mood that Prabhupāda said one time—they asked him, "Oh Swāmījī, what is the meaning of this mantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra?" Prabhupāda had the typical... he would always reply, "My Lord, O energy of the Lord, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please engage me in your service." This time Prabhupāda said, "What does it mean, this Mahā-mantra? It means, 'My friend, my friend, my friend.'" So after I heard that "mantras and jewels don't lose potency," I was chanting, I was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa but in the mood of "my friend." "A friend in need is a friend indeed." Like that.

So this was the humility of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, that he was thinking it is only because I have this title I am getting this praise, whereas someone else is sitting down there who should also get praise, but he doesn't have a title. So just a little glimpse into his humility, and he not only spoke of humility, but he also demonstrated it as well. One time in Navadvīpa, there was this confrontation, the tension was going between the brāhmaṇas and the Vaiṣṇavas because the brāhmaṇas were born brāhmaṇas, and generally they are thinking like that, that "I am born in a brāhmaṇa family, so I am better than others." It may be true, they take an elevated birth, but Sanātana Gosvāmī says that just as bell metal can be changed into gold by a mystical process, in the same way, a fallen conditioned soul can be elevated to a *śāstra-sammata* brāhmaṇa, or including *brahma-jñāna*, to a Vaiṣṇava by *dīkṣā*, by initiation to the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. So there was this fiery debate going on because many devotees were coming from, you know, lower births in Navadvīpa, you know, cleaners and street sweepers; they were caught up in the tsunami, the wave of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. He was accepting them, "Stop your nonsense, Kṛṣṇa." And it was proven they became wonderful devotees. 

So the brāhmaṇas didn't like this, so they challenged Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī to a debate. "We will have a debate between the brāhmaṇas and the Vaiṣṇavas. We have our number one brāhmaṇa and your number one Vaiṣṇava. Let us have a debate." A famous debate. I think there were 800 or 900 exalted people in the assembly hall. So the brāhmaṇas spoke first. There were so many verses glorifying the brāhmaṇas, and rightfully so. Then it was time for Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, but he was a strategist. He was able to apply the teaching: "Caitanya Mahāprabhu, make innovation in such a way as not to affect the core tradition." This is what an advanced *ācārya* should do. Looking at time, place, and circumstance, he should see how to inject Kṛṣṇa consciousness in modern society, an innovative way, without touching the core of our tradition. So Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī would sometimes wear Western clothes. He would wear Western shoes. He would ride in motor cars to impress the common people. He was criticized. But anyway, Bhaktisiddhānta got behind the pulpit there. What did he do? He was so smart. He started glorifying the brāhmaṇas like—like almost as if he was defeated. He was just going on and on. And then slowly started introducing these verses, you know, about the glories of a Vaiṣṇava, how there is *sattva*, there is ignorance, passion, and goodness, yes, but there is *śuddha-sattva*, and these Vaiṣṇavas have been elevated by Vedic mantras because they are all Kṛṣṇa. Inside they are all devotees of Kṛṣṇa. And through this chanting thing, he said, "You look at their faces, you hear them speak." And the brāhmaṇas agreed. This went on for hours. They actually accepted defeat because he was a lion guru. If he came to town, all the different, you know, spiritual groups or people who were adverse or against him, they would all run away. But these brāhmaṇas, there was a standing applause, which is unusual, you know? English were there. So these things were introduced. All the brāhmaṇas... "We accept defeat!" Like what? They were glorifying Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. 

So what did he do? He went like this. He went like this. And you know, sometimes in ISKCON we do that, we go like this and then one side chants, the other... He went like this like Moses and the Red Sea, and by the power, everyone went to the side. And then he went like this, he paid his respects. And there were tears in his eyes, and his Guru Mahārāja, Gaurakiśora dāsa Bābājī, was sitting at the entrance to the hall in the chappals, in the sandals, and Bhaktisiddhānta said, "Don't look at me, it is the mercy of my Guru Mahārāja." And everyone turned, and Gaurakiśora dāsa Bābājī jumped up and ran away. But you see, he had accomplished something great, but he gave the credit to his guru. He is teaching us, teaching all of us. Each of us have responsibility. This is a big responsibility, but I see it as a service, and I am very happy because I am always thinking my duty is to one day bring my disciples to Prabhupāda's lotus feet. This is not cryptic philosophy, no; I am thinking that Prabhupāda is the master at whose feet all masters sit. He has asked us to take on this service of initiating. And I remember, it was in New York. I was on the way to London on the same flight as Śrīla Prabhupāda. Actually, we were going to Europe. He had asked us to go to France and help the movement there. So, um, yeah, we flew on that plane. Forget my point there. Lost my thought. Kartī, where was I? Yeah. This is called a senior moment. After 75, they come sometimes. You got to pretend I wasn't. Huh? Yeah, bringing all the devotees to... Oh, thank you. Good disciple. I just wanted to see if you could remember the presence. 

So, in New York, in the temple, there were a lot of new devotees—like some of them had just come a few days earlier, some of them Prabhupāda had just initiated—but the temple president at that time, it was so nice, I was just recently initiated myself, I was also in the line. So then, in Prabhupāda's room, the temple president was bringing each of these new devotees and introducing them to Prabhupāda. He was so elated, you know, some of them had this fresh hair, the cuts on their head, you know, just shaved up like that. And it was so nice introducing each of these devotees to their spiritual master. It was such a momentous moment for me. *Brahmāṇḍa bhramite*. Our history is there, that we have been traveling from one universe to the next, from one species of life to the next. This is our history. One body to the next. But, somehow Kṛṣṇa, or if not Kṛṣṇa, His representatives, the *saṅkīrtana* devotees, the book distributors, or maybe you go to a lecture, there is some senior devotee initiating guru you hear, and by hearing them you stop your nonsense and you take up the process of Kṛṣṇa. This is historic. So I saw it as an historic moment because I knew the lives of a lot of these boys, didn't know them personally, but I could understand what they were doing two months earlier. Now they are bowing down to a pure devotee. The most important moment since they left the spiritual world, to reconnect with Prabhupāda, falling, falling, connecting. It is a big smile once we start the journey upward in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So this is my point: Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, he was known and feared as the *niṣkiñcana* guru, but he was also very humble in that role. 

I was also remembering this morning how our own Prabhupāda, though worthy of the praise of many demigods, he would sometimes show the perfection of humility as a spiritual master. There was one deity installation in Amsterdam. It is a famous pastime. And Prabhupāda was overseeing the installation of the deities. He was actually preparing the fire-yajña arena. He was putting the sand there, doing the bricks, putting the flowers around. This is *ācārya*. *Ācārya* doesn't just mean he sits on the big seat. He also, you know, sweeps the floor. One time Prabhupāda showed Yamunā Devī how to clean the floor. *Ācārya*. So Prabhupāda is preparing the fire and he asked the disciple to go get some fruits in the kitchen, but the disciple misunderstood and he went to the kitchen and prepared a fruit salad, and he came back—Prabhupāda's waiting to put the apples—and he brings a fruit salad. What? Prabhupāda gets angry because, you know, television crews were filming all of this. Kīrtanānanda Mahārāja told me this story, that the television was there and Prabhupāda got angry. And there was one guest there who frequented the temple from time to time. He said, "Swāmījī, just Hare Kṛṣṇa, you know, we do some *śānti* Kṛṣṇa." So Prabhupāda said, "Oh," he took his japa beads, sat down. 

This is humility. "One should accept nectar even from poison, as well as gold even from a filthy place. One should accept knowledge from a person of lower birth and a good wife even if she comes from a low family." So many ways Prabhupāda demonstrated humility: "Just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Swāmījī." "Okay, Hare Kṛṣṇa." And my godbrother, Śivānanda... most devotees don't know him. He was one of the very first devotees in Europe, in Germany; he did so much to establish Kṛṣṇa consciousness in *Deutschland*. So one time he shared a pastime of Prabhupāda's humility. Actually, Prabhupāda was designated by his godbrother Śrīdhara Mahārāja as *śaktyāveśa-avatāra*, but even as a *śaktyāveśa-avatāra*, he was very humble. This instance happened when Śivānanda was massaging Prabhupāda one day; he is massaging, sometimes Prabhupāda would speak up in the massage. So Prabhupāda spoke up, "Śivānanda, you should pray to Kṛṣṇa for me." "What? You should..." Prabhupāda's asking the disciple, "You should pray to Kṛṣṇa for me." So Śivānanda, he was stunned. He said, he blurted out, "But Prabhupāda, I don't think that will work." That is all he could say; he didn't speak very good English. "I don't think that will work." Prabhupāda said, "Why not? You are a devotee of Kṛṣṇa." Another demonstration of Prabhupāda's humility. 

And for myself, one of the most notable signs of Prabhupāda's humility as his role as our spiritual master was when he once thanked us for accepting him as our spiritual master. Usually you thank the spiritual master for accepting you. In one lecture—it actually was a letter, actually, to Nityānanda, it was dated November 12th, 1971 from Delhi—Prabhupāda wrote to the devotees in that temple, "I want to thank all of you disciples very much for accepting me as your spiritual master, and I promise I will take you back home, back to Godhead. So far as my qualities are concerned, I am simply trying to carry out the order of my Guru Mahārāja." Wow, is that humility? 

Another occasion, Prabhupāda went so far as to say that sometimes the spiritual master sees his own disciples as spiritual masters. What? The guru sees his disciples as spiritual masters? That is the epitome of humility. Because Prabhupāda explained—in one, I was listening to that series where Prabhupāda is speaking from *Nectar of Devotion* in Vṛndāvana, 1972. So in October 23rd, he said, "The spiritual master does not think of himself as Hari, although he is offered the respect of Hari. He thinks of himself as a humble servant of Hari and all others. A spiritual master even takes his disciples as his spiritual master. He thinks, 'Kṛṣṇa has sent me so many spiritual masters because they have to be trained. Kṛṣṇa has appointed me to train them. Therefore, he thinks of himself as a servant of his disciples.'" 

So, taking all these lessons in humility, I promise my disciples that, and all of you, I will never take credit for what they are all saying about me. I am listening to these offerings; I am thinking, "Why? I'd like to be the person they are all talking about." This gives me a standard to work for. And this way, I remain a humble servant. Of course, we all have the reminder about seeing ourselves as humble servants, isn't it? There is that verse in Caitanya-caritāmṛta; it is in *Śikṣāṣṭakam*, but there is a purport. Chapter 17, verse 31, to remind us how to always practice humility no matter what service we have. "*Tṛṇād api sunīcena...*" One who thinks himself lower than the grass, who is more tolerant than a tree, who does not expect personal honor yet is always prepared to give all respect to others, can very easily chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Now Prabhupāda's purport to that eternal *śloka* from *Śikṣāṣṭakam* is there in the *CC*. Prabhupāda gives a purport; I was so happy to come across it. Here is his purport and it is relevant to today: "The grass is specifically mentioned in this verse because everyone tramples upon it, yet the grass never protests. This example indicates that a spiritual master or leader should never be proud of his position. Being always humbler than an ordinary common man, he should go on preaching the cult of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." 

Now, everything always gets better in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is my understanding. So the next verse, *Ādi-līlā* 17:32, Lord Caitanya says, "Raising my hands, Mahāprabhu, I declare, everyone please hear me. String that verse on the thread of the holy name and wear it on your neck for continuous remembrance." *Tṛṇād api...* One of my god-sisters, Kiśorī from France, she actually tattooed the Mahā-mantra around her neck like that. It is fading now. She is almost 80. Kṛṣṇa sees it. She took it literally. And the next verse, 17:33, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja advises us, *ālocana-ācāra...* One must strictly follow these principles given by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this verse. If one simply follows in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya in the Gosvāmīs, certainly he will achieve the ultimate goal of life, *kṛṣṇa-prema*. 

So then, I therefore pray to all of you to please pray that I can remain humble in this position and develop that crest jewel of all qualities: humility. Um, showing the example, in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, *Antya-līlā* chapter 25, the verse is 25: *vaiṣṇava-abhimāna...* "Although a Vaiṣṇava may be a most respected person, he is prideless and gives all respect to everyone, knowing everyone to be the resting place of Kṛṣṇa in the heart." And there is a beautiful verse in this regard—we are coming to conclusion here—by one of my favorite poets, his name is Dvija-nandana, *a-kala-vaiṣṇava-namaskāra*. *Bhakti-nanda-śābara-īnda*. This is another tattoo. Probably get it like here or something. "I offer my obeisances unto the lotus feet of all Vaiṣṇavas. Praying I will not commit offenses in my attempts to please them. To all Vaiṣṇavas who have ever been and to all Vaiṣṇavas who will ever be, I offer my most respectful obeisances." This is a Vaiṣṇava. 

And here is another beautiful composition by the same author, Dvija-nandana, in a mood of humility. He is focusing on honoring specifically all the devotees in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. It is very nice. The poem is called *Vaiṣṇava-caraṇa*, and the translation is from a lecture by His Holiness Gaurāṅga Mahārāja in 1986. Just sit up a little bit. Be all ears. This is a binder: 

"*Śābara-īnda* to the Vaiṣṇavas residing in Vṛndāvana, I first pay obeisances at your lotus feet. I worship your lotus feet. *Nīlācalavāsī jata mahāprabhu-gaṇa, bhūmi-paḍiyā bhāṅgi śābara-īnda*—to the associates and devotees of Mahāprabhu residing in Nīlācala and Jagannātha Purī, I fall flat on the ground and worship your lotus feet. *Navadvīpavāsī jata mahāprabhu-bhakta, śābara-īnda hana anurāga*—to all the devotees residing in Navadvīpa, I worship your lotus feet, one and all. This is humility, invoking the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas. *Mahāprabhu-deśasthiti śābara-īnda, koriyā praṇati*—to the devotees of Mahāprabhu who are residing in Gauḍadeśa, I worship all your lotus feet. I pay my obeisances at the lotus feet of each and every one of you." Isn't this nectar? 

"*Jihvā-bahu-īnda*... to the Gauḍīya-bhaktas, the devotees of Gauḍīya, who may be residing in any country, be it an eastern country, a western country, or wherever you are, with hands raised up, I pay *daṇḍavats* to all your lotus feet." This is 400 years ago, to all the Gauḍīya-bhaktas! "If you are in an eastern country, western country, wherever you are on the earth planet," he is envisioning the *saṅkīrtana* movement going, "he worships *anāgatapūrva-śābara-īnda*—those who are already devotees of Mahāprabhu, those who will come to Mahāprabhu in the future, and all of you who will be devotees of Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, all you future Gauḍa-bhaktas, I worship you lotus feet, one and all." He has got all bases covered! I never heard anything like this. *Śaktyāveśa*. Even a single pure Vaiṣṇava can deliver the whole world; such is his potency. This was the Vedic conclusion. One must obey it, one must glorify the Vaiṣṇavas. As one who glorifies the Vaiṣṇavas is very fortunate, for all of his sinful actions will be destroyed. That is stated in the Vedas and the Purāṇas. 

"*Mahāprabhu-gaṇa-śābara-īnda, pati-pāvana-thai, lobho-mui pāpe, lo-śā-ha*—the associates of Mahāprabhu, the devotees of Lord Caitanya, all of them, every single one of them, is *patita-pāvana*, for they are deliverers of the *patita*, the fallen souls. Developing a greed in my heart, I hold their lotus feet close to my chest. *Bha-na*... I have no strength, no *śakti* to glorify the Vaiṣṇavas. I think, 'Yes, I can do it, I can glorify Vaiṣṇavas,' but this is impossible because they are so great. Only out of ignorance have I developed such pride. *Lāla*... you can speak after me. *Agyā*... there is a nice string outside—*mana-śāmo-mohadāsa*. Yet my misfortune is such that I am *mūka*, a dumb man. I have no power, no speaking power to glorify the Vaiṣṇavas. Still, I get pleasure in my mind by doing so. Please excuse my offenses at your lotus feet. Please all of you Vaiṣṇavas, past, present, and future, accept me as your servant. *Sāra-o-jñā*..." 

All desires will be fulfilled if one gets the mercy of a Vaiṣṇava. You will be freed from the clutches of Yamarāja. Then you will be able to achieve *prema*, which is very rare in this material world. It is only by *guru-kṛpā* and Vaiṣṇava-kṛpā that one can get that *prema*. Here is this last verse: "The deep, transient desires that you have in your mind will be fulfilled very soon if you get the mercy of a Vaiṣṇava. It is for this reason Dvija-nandana has sung this song." Let's give him a big round of applause. 

So let us conclude today with Śrīla Prabhupāda's own words glorifying devotees. I just love it. It is in a letter dated February 4th, 1972. Prabhupāda wrote, "The devotees of Kṛṣṇa are the most exalted persons on this planet, better than kings, all of them." So we should always remember that, and like a bumblebee, always look for the nectar of the best qualities of any devotee, past, present, and future. *Back to Godhead*. Take all the 14 worlds with this, Kṛṣṇa.""