"*00392*.*
"### My House Transformed Into Vaikuntha
 **Adventurous Japa.** 
For generating [interest]. We are speaking from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, chapter 22, text number 128. It is translated: *sādhu-saṅga, nāma-kīrtana, bhāgavata-śravaṇa, mathurā-vāsa, śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana*. One should associate with devotees, chant the holy names of the Lord, hear *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, reside at Mathurā, and worship the deity with faith and veneration. So, essentially, these are the five principle activities in our Krishna consciousness movement. They are very powerful because they wake up the sleeping soul. One of our great ācāryas, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, sings, *jīv jāgo, jīv jāgo, gauracānda bole*. Lord Caitanya, the yuga-avatāra, is appealing to the people of this planet: "Wake up, wake up, wake up, sleeping souls! How long will you sleep in illusion?"

There are many definitions of illusion. But for us, the primary consideration is that illusion basically means we have forgotten who we are. We have forgotten who is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and what is our intimate, loving relationship with Him. That is the essence of illusion. I have forgotten who I am as a spirit soul. I have forgotten the all-blissful Supreme Personality of Godhead, and I have abandoned my intimate, loving relationship with Him. What is the result of that illusion? I find myself here in the material world. This is the place for forgetful souls who have forgotten who they are, who is God, and what is our relationship with God. This is where you come. Just like a criminal, when he disobeys the laws of the government, he commits a crime; they send him to the jail. So, dear prabhus, we are all living in the jail of material existence. I am sorry to tell you. We have lost our freedom to serve God in a very intimate, loving way, and we are struggling in this prison house of material existence. From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places of misery where repeated birth and death take place. Birth, death, birth, death.

Like a prison has four walls so high you cannot get out, so there are four walls, four realities in this world that no one can overcome except by the mercy of Bhagavān: birth, disease, old age, and death. These are four realities. Science and technology can make life a little easier in the prison house of material existence, but with science and technology, you cannot escape birth. You cannot escape disease. You cannot escape old age. And you cannot escape death. So, isn't it? We are in a prison house of material existence. All because we have forgotten ourselves as spirit souls. We have forgotten God and our very intimate, loving relationship. So, you fall down from the spiritual world to Pune. 

So, how to get out of this prison house of material existence? *Sādhu-saṅga, nāma-kīrtana, bhāgavata-śravaṇa, mathurā-vāsa, śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana*. You associate with sādhus, you chant the holy names of Kṛṣṇa, you hear the *grantha-rāja*, the king of all scriptures—*amala-purāṇa* means it only deals with pure love for God—and you reside in a holy place like Mathurā or Vṛndāvana, and you worship the deity with faith and veneration.

Of course, we are not in Mathurā. We are not in Vṛndāvana. We are not in Śrīraṅgam. We are not in Tirupati. We are not in Vārāṇasī. We are in Pune. What sacred river runs through this place? I do not know. I mean, obviously, some of Bhagavān's pastimes must have taken place here in the annals of time, but mainly it is a city of business. People, you can make money here. If you can tolerate the traffic, you can make money here. But we can make it into a sanctified place by following these four aṅgas, or limbs, of devotional service. Just like our great saint, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura—he was a great devotee, the pioneer of this movement to spread the holy names all over the world. A modern-day saint, a modern-day pure devotee. In the 1800s, he worked in the British government. You have to do some work to survive, so he was a magistrate. He was not a sannyāsī; he was a gṛhastha with a beautiful wife and 12 children, but he was a very strict sādhaka. He associated with devotees. He chanted the holy names of the Lord. He studied and commented on the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. He made his home a holy place by worshiping the deity of the Lord. So he said, "One day, I woke up and I saw my house had been transformed into Vaikuṇṭha." 

How could this house transform into the spiritual world? *Vaikuṇṭha* means in Sanskrit "that place where there is no anxiety." We live in "kuntha." If someone asks you, "Could you please give me your address?" "Yes." "Excuse me, what town do you live in? What street number do you live in? Where is your house?" No, elegance is truth spoken concisely. "Sir, you write this down: I live in kuntha." What does that mean? "I live in anxiety, stress all the time." You see, I am 40 years old; my hair is already gray. So here is an example of someone who is not necessarily living in a holy place, but by dint of his holy activities, he transforms the place he lives into Vaikuṇṭha. This is the secret of bhakti-yoga. Material things used in the service of the Lord become spiritual. It is called *tadīya*. *Tadīya* means that material object which is used in service to Bhagavān, it becomes spiritual. Like you take a cold piece of steel, you put it into burning fire, you take it out; it is burning fire by association. So by association, that which is material becomes spiritual by the mercy of the Lord. And the art of that work is described in this verse. You just follow these five things, and your house will also turn into Vaikuṇṭha. You will wake up one day and say to your wife, "Darling, no more stress, no more anxiety. We have no problems. We are happy." 

Yes, and all of you in this great country of Bhārata, you should take advantage of those special holy places like Vṛndāvana, like Mathurā, like Māyāpura, like Jagannātha Purī. When you go on vacation, don't go to some materialistic place. I meet so many Indians in Florida; I say, "Where are you going?" They say, "We're going to Disneyland." Excuse me? You could have gone to Vṛndāvana. You could have gone to Mathurā. "No, we want to have fun. We're going to Disneyland." When you have time, visit the holy dhāmas because they are very powerful. Whatever sevā, whatever spiritual practice you do in a holy dhāma, the benefit is magnified by a thousand times. If you chant 16 rounds, you get the benefit of 16,000 rounds. Kṛṣṇa, I live in Vṛndāvana, and I better see your faces there. Jai! And you go to Disneyland? No, you can't cheat Kṛṣṇa.

Regarding living or visiting, it is just as good, a holy dhāma. *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, one of our great scriptures, says the following. I found this verse this morning. Our sacred books, they're like treasure chests with valuable jewels inside, jewels of knowledge. Those are the real jewels, the real opulence. One great saint, he told me, "The opulence of night is the moon. The opulence of a family is a beautiful, chaste wife. The opulence of a kingdom is a pious ruler. But knowledge, transcendental knowledge, is the opulence of everything." So the Vedic scriptures say the knowledge is: "Go to Vṛndāvana, run to Vṛndāvana!" And here is a valuable jewel in that treasure chest of knowledge that I discovered this morning that's more valuable than a million crores of rupees. It says, "One who says to Kṛṣṇa with feeling from his heart, 'Kṛṣṇa, I belong to You,' and who joyfully travels to holy places related to the Supreme Lord, is to be considered a fully surrendered soul." Huh? One who says to Kṛṣṇa with feeling from his heart, "Kṛṣṇa, I belong to You," and who joyfully travels to holy places related to the Supreme Lord, he is considered a fully surrendered soul.

Śrīla Prabhupāda encouraged us to preach in this world. He made one eternal phrase: "Distribute books, distribute books, distribute books." At the same time, he wanted us to become pure devotees. He wanted us to go back to Godhead. One time, one of my godbrothers said to Prabhupāda, "Prabhupāda, I want to take birth after birth after birth in this world just to distribute your books." That's a very nice service, but I—that's not what I want, that you take birth after birth. I want you to become a pure devotee and go to Goloka Vṛndāvana to serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa like Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura. He is a powerful preacher, but he is a very deep, rasika devotee. "Oh Govinda, feeling Your separation, I'm considering a moment to be like 12 years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents. Kṛṣṇa, I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence." We want to encompass that. We want to feel that. We want to have that love for Kṛṣṇa.

So, therefore, you should visit Vṛndāvana, the abode of love, the abode of love. Actually, Prabhupāda invites us all to come to Vṛndāvana. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Fifth Canto, 13th chapter, text number eight, he writes: "One must go to the Vṛndāvana forest and take shelter of Govindajī; that will make one happy." The International Society for Krishna Consciousness is therefore constructing a Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple in Vṛndāvana to invite its members as well as outsiders to come and live peacefully in a spiritual atmosphere. You have an invitation from a pure devotee. Then, his concluding words: "That will help one to become elevated to the transcendental world and return back home." Not Pune, return back home. Not Mumbai, not Delhi of all places, but back home, back to Godhead. Jaya! So many holy places in your country. Why is Prabhupāda inviting us to Vṛndāvana? Because that's the home of Śyāmasundara, your father, your eternal lover, your ever well-wisher, Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā that He is the seed-giving father of all created beings. Not just people of India, but Denmark, Canada, America, North Korea—not only humans, but cats, dogs, birds, elephants. *Eka*, there's one Supreme Personality from whom all that is material and all that is spiritual is coming. Today, Kṛṣṇa says that everything that is material and spiritual comes from Me. That means each and every one of us, we have the same father. Now, if you have the same father, that means you are brothers and sisters. This is the peace formula for the world. We are all brothers and sisters. We have one common father. Culturally, many, but spiritually one. It's nice there's different cultures in your country of India. It's nice there's different cultures and languages around the world. Variety is the spice of life. But the absolute truth: culturally one, spiritually one, we are all brothers and sisters. We have the same God. This message of Godhead has to go to every country in the world, and that is what the International Society for Krishna Consciousness is doing. Not mundane material welfare—spiritual welfare work.

One newspaper reporter asked Prabhupāda, "But if you are successful, there will be no one left in the world." Prabhupāda said, "That's the point. We'll liberate the jailhouse of material existence. It's a big jail. Somebody comes, opens the doors, and then all the prisoners run out. That's what we'll do. But we won't go commit more crimes. We'll go back home, back to Godhead and serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the beauty of Vṛndāvana." This is the Vṛndāvana, the spiritual world. That's where we belong. But you have to change your heart. You have to fall out of love with this nasty world into love with the spiritual world, which is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. 

Kṛṣṇa created this world, and He put His stamp on it. Like if you buy something with a government stamp, you can pretty well rest assured it is okay; it's authorized. Kṛṣṇa, He put a stamp: "This product is *duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*." It is a temporary place with so many miseries. There must be some alternative. There must be some alternative. And Vedic scriptures describe beyond this world—which is sometimes created and sometimes unmanifest—there is a world which is eternal. Here, it is sometimes created, sometimes destroyed—created, destroyed. There is a world which is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss, where every word is a song, where every step is a dance, where the flute is the constant companion, and every day is a festival. "My dear daughter, please rise, take your pot and go out with the cows." "My dear mother, thank you so much. I love you. But mostly I love Kṛṣṇa." That place is so charged with love, and one can experience that love when one goes to a place like Māyāpura, Jagannātha Purī, or Vṛndāvana. Even an unconscious traveler, he'll understand something special about this Vṛndāvana with 7,000 temples, with goshālās and sādhus and desire trees. So potent, you'll feel something. 

There's a nice verse in *Padma Purāṇa*: "The Lord may offer liberation or even material happiness to a devotee. But once one has rendered devotional service in Vṛndāvana, particularly during the month of Kārttika, from that time on that devotee hankers only for pure devotional service." Get ready, you're going to have a change of heart. You're going to go to Vṛndāvana and you're going to have a change of heart. When you come back home, nothing material is going to really attract you. You're just going to want "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." Hey, you become mad with love of God. Of course, generally we think that only advanced souls, pure devotees, live in these places like Vṛndāvana or Māyāpura. But no, even materialistic atheists come onto Vṛndāvana. I don't want to go? Go there. All right, just go for a visit. I'll have a lassi or something. Everyone is welcome. Vṛndāvana, Prabhupāda writes, "Unless one is very advanced in spiritual life, it is recommended that he live in a holy place like Prayāga, Mathurā, or Vṛndāvana." Now, in that particular purport, Prabhupāda doesn't mention Māyāpura—it's interesting; he just says even if you are not very advanced, go to Prayāga, go to Mathurā, or go to Vṛndāvana. But we would say, and Prabhupāda would back this up, "Go to Māyāpura," as... yeah, but it didn't say that in the purport. That's okay, because the ācāryas say there is no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura. They are identical. They are the same. 

Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings, *yāṅhāra smaraṇe, yāṅhāra kīrtane*. One should also know that Gaura-maṇḍala-bhūmi, the place where Mahāprabhu appeared, is equal to Braja-bhūmi or Vṛndāvana. And I will finish this lecture with a little story in that regard. Sometimes it's hard to hear philosophy, you know, at 9:00 at night after a hard day of work, or a Sunday where you—Saturday—you've been with your family. Too much philosophy. So sometimes a little story to illustrate a point makes it easier. And then, *pāścātya-deśa-tāraṇe*, this Swami went on for 4 hours. So here is a nice pastime to show there is no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura. How? Why? Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared in both places. Kṛṣṇa appeared in Vṛndāvana, Bhagavān, and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa appeared in Māyāpura as Caitanya Mahāprabhu. *Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya rādhā-kṛṣṇa-naṅga*—the same Kṛṣṇa, He appeared in both places, so there is no difference. So, on your next vacation, you can flip a coin: Māyāpura, next year Vṛndāvana. They are non... Don't just don't flip the coin, "Disneyland," please. After this lecture, if any of you go to Disneyland, I'll make some curse on my brāhmaṇa... For we had a horrible time. That's 'cause Indradyumna Swami cursed you. I wouldn't do that. Mickey Mouse, Mickey Mouse, Kṛṣṇa. Go back. Beautiful Disneyland.

I think our translator is doing really good. Let's give him a bigger plug. Here is the pastime to show there is no difference between Vṛndāvana and... Once upon a time, there was a brāhmaṇa, a resident actually of Vṛndāvana, who had this urge to go on pilgrimage and visit different holy places in India. He went here, he went there, he went everywhere, and eventually he found himself in Bengal. Now, in Bengal, there's also many holy places. One in particular is Ekacakrā, Ekacakrā is the divine appearance place of Lord Nityānanda. He just kind of found himself there. He didn't really know the significance of the place. So someone said, "You know you're in Ekacakrā? This is a really sanctified holy place." He said, "Oh, okay. Can I rent a guide to take me around?" They said, "Yes, the people said, 'Yes, this old man sleeping under the tree here, he is the guide. He can take you around.'" Actually, as you'll see, this guide was not sleeping. He was in samādhi. He just finished his 192 rounds that day. 

So the guide started taking him around Ekacakrā. So at one point, our pilgrim he said to the guide, "I mean, like, is there anything special about this place? It just looks like jungle. What's significant about...?" So the guide, he replied as follows. He said, "Actually, you are from Vṛndāvana, isn't it? There is no difference between Vṛndāvana and Ekacakrā. This is all part of the great Navadvīpa. The great place where Gaurāṅga and Nityānanda have appeared. It's non-different than Vṛndāvana." So the pilgrim chuckled. He said, "How can you say that? You haven't been to Vṛndāvana; there, it's a big difference." So the guide said, "No, no, no, the ācāryas have said no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura." So the pilgrim challenged the guide and said, "Sir, if this is Vṛndāvana—you say it's non-different—if this is Vṛndāvana, show me the Yamunā River. If you say Ekacakrā, Navadvīpa, Māyāpura, no difference in Vṛndāvana... this is a jungle, a dry forest. Come on, show me, if this is Vṛndāvana, where's the Yamunā?" 

So the guide said, "Yeah, the Yamunā is here. Actually, it flows around Ekacakrā. I'll go show you." So the guide led our pilgrim to a little distance, and he came across a little stream flowing around. So the guide was very excited, you know, he's a self-realized soul. He said, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa! He's wandering on the banks of this river!" And the pilgrim's like, "River? It's like a puddle of water, come on!" Anyway, there was enough water you could, you know, just wade in up to your waist. So it was noon, and the pilgrim said, "All right, I mean, it's definitely not the Yamunā, but it's a body of water. So I'm going to go in there and chant my noon Gāyatrī." He had a walking stick. He was elderly, he had a walking stick. So he put his walking stick down on the bank of the river, and he went inside and he chanted his Gāyatrī mantra. But the stream started picking up a little speed, and while he was in there, the stream caught his stick and carried it away, down the river. He finished his Gāyatrī. "Where's my stick? Ah, I had that stick for 20 years. I was attached to this... the little stream has carried it somewhere to the Bay of Bengal or something." So he was pained by the loss of his stick. But he continued on his pilgrimage and went to different parts of India. And two years later, he arrived back home in Vṛndāvana. 

And naturally, his family members and neighbors, they all inquired, "How did your pilgrimage go? Share with us some of the places you went." "I was in Viśākhapaṭṭaṇam. I was in Mangalagiri. I was in Śrīraṅgam. I was in Tirupati. I was in Rāmeśvaram. And I went to this place in Bengal, Ekacakrā, near Māyāpura, Navadvīpa. And all those silly people, they told me it was non-different than our Vṛndāvana. It's 3,000 kilometers away! Huh? They have this little stream going through the village, and they call it the Yamunā River!" Now, at this point, I want to say that the ways of the Lord are mysterious. How the Lord inspires His devotees to advance in Krishna consciousness, how He removes all doubts from the hearts of His devotees. And so it was one day, by the arrangement of the Lord, our friend, our pilgrim, he went to the Yamunā River to chant his Gāyatrī. He was up here. It's flowing quite strongly. He's chanting his Gāyatrī like this, and all of a sudden, something bumped into his leg. Something coming down the river smashed into, got caught between his legs, actually. He couldn't move. So he finished his Gāyatrī, put it around his neck, and he reached down between his legs and pulled out a stick—getting close to the punchline here—pulled out a stick, and his eyes opened very wide in wonder because it was the exact same walking stick that he'd lost in the stream in Ekacakrā. They're exactly identical, the same. So at that moment, he realized there is no difference between Māyāpura-Ekacakrā and Vṛndāvana. Otherwise, how could it have been the same stick going into the Bay of Bengal, now coming down from the Himalayas in the Yamunā? It's all the arrangement of the Lord to convince him of this important fact. Don't go to Disneyland.

That's only one of the many gifts that Śrīla Prabhupāda has given to us. The holy dhāmas, we have more gifts from our ācāryas than we can actually comprehend. Sometimes we lament for what we don't have, when we have so much mercy at our disposal. There is no reason that everyone in this room should not go back to Godhead in this very lifetime. We have so much good, so much mercy. In the beginning we just mentioned five things that we have: *sādhu-saṅga, nāma-kīrtana, bhāgavata-śravaṇa, mathurā-vāsa, śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana*—just those five. But we have other jewels, other nectarean, priceless gifts from this treasure chest of love of God that our ācāryas have given. 

I will finish with a verse by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in which he reveals, beyond these five, how many precious jewels we have to enable us to go back to Godhead in this very lifetime: "I bow down to the beautiful lotus feet of my spiritual master, by whose causeless mercy I have obtained the supreme holy name, the divine mantra Gāyatrī, the service of the son of Śacī-mātā, Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, the association of Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his elder brother Sanātana Gosvāmī, the supreme abode of Mathurā, the blissful abode of Vṛndāvana, divine Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Govardhana Hill, and the desire within my heart for the loving service of Śrī Rādhikā and Mādhava in Vṛndāvana." Thank you very much. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""