"*00418*.*
"So, we are here in front of Madan-Gopal. This deity, Madan-Gopal, is known as the son of Advaita Ācārya. He is the Lord and Master of Śāntipura. This is distinct—Ācārya is at Śāntipura, and this is where Advaita Ācārya was born. Advaita Ācārya resided in Sylhet, Bangladesh. He stayed in Bangladesh for 12 years, and then he came to Śāntipura. One period of Śāntipura is known as the place where the Lord appeared. He is the one who brought Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to this world. Advaita Ācārya is the cause—the *kāraṇa*—to please Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s birth. And Mahāprabhu personally confirmed this in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana in front of all the devotees. In front of the Ācārya, Mahāprabhu said, "Again and again, again and again, it is because of Advaita—meaning Advaita Ācārya—that I am here." Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave all the knowledge to Advaita Ācārya; the Lord is the *kāraṇa*, the supreme cause. So, I will try to keep it brief and try to say something about this deity in this place, and then when we go to Phūliā, that is also one pastime place of Advaita Ācārya, so we will discuss it there.

The scriptures describe that besides Phūliā, Advaita Ācārya lived in Śāntipura. When Advaita Ācārya moved to Śāntipura, his parents also moved from Bangladesh to Śāntipura. Advaita Ācārya really served his parents with a lot of love and devotion. After some time, both of them left this world in Śāntipura only. Advaita Ācārya, seeing his parents leave, decided to go to Gayā to do the last rites for his parents. All the places that he went are described in *Prema-vilāsa*; he practically covered all of India. Finally, he went to Vṛndāvana. Entering into Vṛndāvana, Advaita Ācārya cried incessantly, just thinking of the different pastimes of the Lord in Vṛndāvana. And when he finally came on the bank of the Yamunā, he had a beautiful dream, and this pastime is described in *Prema-vilāsa*. He saw Kṛṣṇa appearing in the dream. Advaita Ācārya explains the beauty of Kṛṣṇa that he saw in the dream, totally stunned to see the beauty of the Lord. Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata says:

> *kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kahe, gopīra-sevī*
> *he Advaita!*

Kṛṣṇa told him, "My dear Advaita, get up, get up. You have appeared in this world to rediscover the holy places of My pastimes and freely distribute love of Godhead through the congregational chanting of the Holy Name." Advaita Ācārya asked, "Why are You appearing in this condition in this very place?" A beautiful deity of Madana-mohana is there under a kadamba tree. Advaita Ācārya said, "Why are You hiding in this hole?" So, the Lord jokingly said, "Because I am scared of the rascals." He said, "Please get me out of that place; you worship Me, and through this worship, you will deliver so many fallen souls." So saying, the Lord disappeared from the dream. Advaita Ācārya was thinking how fortunate he was. Advaita Ācārya is the Supreme Lord, but he is playing that part of a devotee, a Vaiṣṇava. Advaita Ācārya was moved by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. He would roll on the ground, and actually, that particular deity was worshipped by a brāhmaṇa in Mathurā. So, he went to the Vrajavāsīs, and he told everyone about his dream. Everyone came, and with the help of the Vrajavāsīs, Advaita Ācārya got this beautiful deity of Madana-mohana. Advaita Ācārya bathed the Lord with his tears and served him with so much love. 

One day, Advaita Ācārya told a brāhmaṇa, "Please take care of the deity, Madana-mohana, and I will just go on a *parikramā* and I will be back soon." So, when he went out, a group of people from a different religion came to attack, and the *pūjārī* wasn't there. Advaita Ācārya wasn't there, and the Lord just disappeared. When the brāhmaṇa *pūjārī* came back, he did not see Madana-mohana, so he began to cry. And when he was crying, Advaita Ācārya came down. Seeing the Lord not there, Advaita Ācārya just broke down; he cried. He said, "It is because of me that I did not serve You properly, because I neglected You, and now You just left me like that." Advaita Ācārya decided to fast; he did not eat or drink anything. He didn't eat or sleep for quite some time, and then he just fell asleep. Madana-mohana came to his dream and said, "Advaita, you know everything; why are you doing this to yourself? I am here, I am hiding in this particular place under the flowers. You take me, you worship me again." Advaita Ācārya just jumped out from this dream, woke up that brāhmaṇa, and got this deity. Actually, the Lord said, "Why are you fasting anyway? Now it is very late; just get some fruits, offer them to Me, and you accept it right away." Advaita Ācārya was completely ashamed; he could eat the fruit. 

So the Ācārya again worshipped for some time. Then one day, Madana-mohana told him in his dream, "Tomorrow morning, a devotee from Mathurā, his name is Dāmodara-dāsa, will come, and you please offer Me to him." Advaita Ācārya didn't believe what he was seeing or hearing in the dream. Advaita Ācārya said with tears in his eyes, "My Lord, how could You say that? You are my very life and soul. I could not live without You. In fact, I am thinking to take You to Śāntipura now." He cried so much that Kṛṣṇa told him, "Okay, okay, it is okay; be pacified. You give Madana-mohana to Dāmodara-dāsa, and I give you something very, very special." He said that in Sevā-kuñja, according to *Prema-vilāsa*, there is a deity personally made by Viśākhā-devī. All the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana know that this deity is personally made by Viśākhā-devī. Seeing that form of the Lord made by Viśākhā-devī, even Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī goes into transcendental joy, stunned simply by seeing the beauty of this deity. "You name Him as Madana-Gopāla, and you worship Him. You take Him to Śāntipura. I am offering you Madana-Gopāla, but you give me Madana-mohana. This particular deity of Madana-Gopāla is nondifferent from Me." 

Advaita Ācārya heard that he was getting the deity that had been personally made by Viśākhā-devī, and he just went into ecstasy. Sure enough, the next day, Dāmodara-dāsa was there. Dāmodara-dāsa knew that Advaita Ācārya wasn't any ordinary person, so he just paid obeisances. "Please take Him," he said. So, that deity of Madana-mohana later on went to Dāmodara-dāsa; now He is being worshipped at Karauli by Sanātana Gosvāmī. Madana-Gopāla came with Advaita Ācārya here. And when Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, the guru of Advaita Ācārya, came to Śāntipura and he saw this deity of Madana-Gopāla, both Advaita Ācārya and Mādhavendra Purī danced in ecstasy, seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this very form of Madana-Gopāla. This became the heart and soul of Advaita Ācārya and the inhabitants of Śāntipura. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to Śāntipura very, very often, so He saw this deity very, very regularly. He would cry in the ecstasy of love of Godhead in front of this deity. In the chest of the deity, there is a small painting that is painted by Viśākhā-devī also; it looks exactly like Madana-Gopāla. I asked the *pūjārī* when he saw it. He said he saw it once when he was a child. It is very, very difficult to see. 

When Mahāprabhu ended His pastimes, there are two descriptions, and both are authentic: one, Mahāprabhu entered the deity of Toṭā-Gopīnātha, and the other description is He entered the Jagannātha temple, and another is that He ended His pastimes by entering into Tota-Gopīnātha or in Ekacakra with Nityānanda Prabhu. A time came when it was time for Advaita Ācārya to withdraw His pastimes. He told his elder son, Acyutānanda, and other sons that it is time for me to go, so please invite all the Vaiṣṇavas to come here. All the devotees of Bengal gathered in Śāntipura. And before the *kīrtana*, Advaita Ācārya said something to all the devotees which is very much applicable to each and every one of us. Advaita Ācārya, with folded hands, told all the devotees, "Please, I beg to all of you, simply preach the glories of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Then he said the second instruction: "Please try to avoid the association of atheistic people and people who make offenses—non-devotees." And the *kīrtana* began. Devotees just went into ecstasy; they just chanted and danced for hours and hours. The body of Advaita Ācārya became like a Kadamba flower, and while crying, while dancing, the Ācārya entered the deity room of Madana-Gopāla and entered the deity of Madana-Gopāla. Just like Mahāprabhu entered in Toṭā-Gopīnātha, Advaita Ācārya entered the body of Madana-Gopāla.

We have to be extremely fortunate to come here. And that fortune comes when we take shelter of a devotee. And by the mercy of Prabhupāda, by the mercy of Mahārāja, we are here today. Prabhupāda, when he was having difficult times in getting the land in Māyāpura, he actually contemplated to build everything here in Śāntipura. This is the famous pastime of Prabhupāda: he would come here from Calcutta very regularly to Śāntipura and cry for hours. The *pūjārī* was thinking, "Who is this person coming here and chanting and crying?" Prabhupāda would come here very often just to pray. Then he stopped coming for some time, and suddenly a sannyāsī came to Śāntipura, and he was chanting and crying in front of the Lord. The *pūjārī* saw the same person—who was not a sannyāsī before—and he was crying and chanting. "Why are you crying like this?" He said, "My Gurudeva has given me an impossible task. I just come here and beg Advaita Ācārya to fulfill the desire of my spiritual master." "What is that task?" "He wants me to take Mahāprabhu's teachings and the congregational chanting of the Holy Name all over the world." The *pūjārī* said, "Yes, I don't know, but this is definitely a big task." Prabhupāda just stayed there and cried in front of Advaita Ācārya, begging for mercy to preach. Then after many years, Prabhupāda brought many devotees to Māyāpura—Western devotees. Some devotees came to Śāntipura with a *Back to Godhead* magazine, and they were chanting and dancing in front of the temple. This *pūjārī* had never ever seen any white-skinned devotee chanting and dancing; it was like he thought he was dreaming. They handed over the *Back to Godhead* magazine with Prabhupāda's picture. He just went, "Oh, Swamiji!" He told the whole story of how Swamiji used to come here. He used to come here whenever he was suffering, and when he took sannyāsa, before he left, he used to come here and cry, just begging for mercy from Advaita Ācārya that he is able to preach. 

Another very, very important aspect of this particular temple is that we are here in front of the same very Śālagrāma-śilā. In the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, it is a beautiful painting: Advaita Ācārya is sitting on the bank of the Gaṅgā, and the Śālagrāma-śilā is there, and Advaita Ācārya is worshipping that Śālagrāma-śilā with Gaṅgā water and Tulāsī leaves. The same very Śālagrāma-śilā is right here. Advaita Ācārya was thinking, "I have to do something so that the Lord will be so indebted to me that whatever I ask, He will give it to me." Sometimes we become so happy because someone has done so much for you, you just say, "What do you want? What could I do for you?" So he was going through the scriptures; he found one śloka in *Gautamīya-tantra*. That śloka says:

> *tulasī-dala-mātreṇa jalasyāpi tri-bindunā*
> *yo bhaktir namate nityam māṁ tasyāi vaha-dāmyaham*

The translation is: "When someone offers a Tulāsī leaf or a few drops of Gaṅgā water to the Lord with devotion, the Lord becomes so pleased and so indebted that He looks around to see what He can give in order to be grateful." He cannot find anything to give in return to that particular devotee. In the *Gautamīya-tantra*, it says, "He sells Himself; He gives Himself to that devotee." Advaita Ācārya, when he read this, said, "This is the way." So every day, he would just cry and roll, and he would worship this Śālagrāma-śilā with Gaṅgā water and Tulāsī daily. And therefore, by Advaita Ācārya's prayers and his service, the Lord appeared as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. This is from *Caitanya-bhāgavata*: *advaita-ācārya-sthane, avatāra-sāya-prabhu*. The Lord again and again says, "I am here because of him." 

Now, I was talking to the *pūjārī* to see if we all can have the darśana of one particular utensil that is used by Advaita Ācārya. He said his brother has the key and his brother is not here. Advaita Ācārya was an amazing cook—really, really good. So good that when Mahāprabhu ate the cooking of Advaita Ācārya, Mahāprabhu would say, "Where did you learn how to cook? I always hunger to eat your cooking." Mahāprabhu loved his cooking. There is a famous pastime in Jagannātha Purī. So one day, Advaita Ācārya went to Mahāprabhu in Purī and told the Lord, "My Lord, I would like to invite You to my place so You could have lunch. I want to purify myself by cooking for You." Mahāprabhu replied, "My dear Advaita, anyone who eats the Prasad cooked by you immediately gets love of Godhead. Prasad cooked by you is my very life and soul." Mahāprabhu said, "I don't mind begging from you; I am inviting You, and I am begging from You to eat Prasad cooked by you." But he was happy that he was getting the permission to cook for the Lord. 

So Mahāprabhu said, "Fine, I will come." Today, in Mahāprabhu’s arrival, Sītā Ṭhākurāṇī made all the arrangements for cooking. You know how the Bengali preparation goes, right? It starts with bitter cooked, and then comes spinach. He cooked 10 different types of spinach. This is the beginning. Normally, we have like one spinach, maximum two, right? But Advaita Ācārya began his preparation by cooking 10 spinach dishes. He was in ecstasy cooking for the Lord. But there was something bothering him. Every time he called the Lord to take Prasad, He doesn't seem to be honoring it to His heart's content because He is accompanied by so many other people, and He feels He is a sannyāsī, so He shouldn't eat too much. "Why doesn't He just come by Himself? No one is watching Him, so He can just honor Prasad to His heart's content. I just want to put everything on His plate." So he prayed, "I just want Him to come by Himself, and I should be able to just offer Him everything and He should just eat everything without saying no." 

The cooking was done—a huge, mahā-feast. The Lord was just about to leave with His associates. But the moment they were just about to go to the house, a huge storm and rain began. It was like a sandstorm. It was thundering and heavy rain. Some people actually came out of the house, but because of the thunderstorm, they actually lost which way to go, and they just got totally bewildered. But where Advaita Ācārya’s house was, where he was cooking, there was hardly anything. The Lord appeared there by Himself. There was nobody else. Advaita Ācārya was so happy that Mahāprabhu was there by Himself and there was nobody else. That was his desire. Mahāprabhu didn't say anything at that time; He sat to honor Prasad. Whatever Advaita Ācārya put on Mahāprabhu's plate, He just devoured; He just ate everything. Advaita Ācārya thought his life was successful. Mahāprabhu began to honor Prasad and glorify Advaita Ācārya like anything, "How tasty it was!" Mahāprabhu was so pleased and said, "Advaita, where have you learned this style of cooking?" Then Mahāprabhu began to glorify the spinach, "I have never ever eaten such spinach, so many varieties, and the taste is so distinct." And then what to speak about the sweets—he cooked *kṣīra*, *sandēśa*, and so many things. As soon as the Lord ate everything, Advaita Ācārya gave Mahāprabhu a *tāmbūla*, and he looked up and he started thanking Lord Indra. Mahāprabhu said, "Advaita, I never knew you were a devotee of Lord Indra in your dream. What are you praying for?" Laughing, Advaita Ācārya said, "My Lord, don't worry about it." Mahāprabhu said, "I know exactly what happened; it is because of your desire that there was a thunderstorm. I know your desires, everything happens because of your desire." 

Mahāprabhu began to glorify Ācārya like anything. Advaita Ācārya fell at the lotus feet of the Lord and began to cry, bathing Mahāprabhu's lotus feet with his transcendental tears. He was just thinking how merciful Mahāprabhu was towards him. Advaita Ācārya showed so much humility. Mahāprabhu said, "Advaita, you are my very life and soul. I came here because you wanted Me to come. I am distributing love of Godhead from door to door because that is what you wanted. You remember what you told me in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana? Before I appeared, you cried, you called out for Me. You saw how the living entities are suffering in this world. You fasted, you rolled on the ground, you didn't sleep for so many nights, because you wanted Me to come here. Because it was your desire to freely distribute love of Godhead, I did it." The Lord began to glorify Ācārya like that. Advaita Ācārya became like a statue; he was in ecstasy. He just could not say anything. The only thing Advaita Ācārya was thinking was that Mahāprabhu is *bhakta-vatsala*; He is the ocean of mercy, and I am simply His servant. 

It was the desire of Advaita Ācārya that Mahāprabhu comes to this world, and Mahāprabhu left this world in Mahāprabhu's style because Advaita Ācārya told the Lord, "It is time for You to go." When the Lord saw that note, He said, "This is a very big, complex thing." Mahāprabhu used His words—He gave an example: "Just like after we have Durgā-pūjā and so many pūjās, then after the pūjā, the last day, they take the deities and throw them in the river." Mahāprabhu said, "Advaita Ācārya asked Me to come to stay here for some time, and now Advaita Ācārya feels it is time for Me to go, so I will go." So, we are eternally indebted to come to Śāntipura to get the blessings of Advaita Ācārya so we could spread Mahāprabhu's message. And every time I see Madana-Gopāla, all of you know that whatever lecture I give, I end with preaching. This is the mood of Advaita Ācārya—this is his last instruction: "Whatever you have, just give for us." And it was by the desire of Advaita Ācārya that Mahāprabhu freely distributed love of Godhead. So you can pray here, and then the last stop will be going to Advaita Ācārya's house; there also you can pray to Advaita Ācārya. We are all involved in it, but if you want to get this—this Śālagrāma-śilā—the key is the mercy of the guru. Just perform *kīrtana*.""