"*00508*.*
Hare Kṛṣṇa

Today—I did, I did—so while we were at Śāntipura, we were discussing how Advaita Ācārya spent the first twelve years of his life in Sylhet, Bangladesh. He just disappeared from there because he wasn't very happy, because the king was a devotee of Mother Kālī. You know why he left Bangladesh and the king's son? Because the child's father was very close to the king, so one day the Ācārya went—there's some other path before that, but anyway, they went along with the king's son. So the king's son went and he paid obeisances. This young boy, who was known as Kamalakānta, at this young age did not pay obeisances to the Ācārya. Kālī is an expansion of Mother Durgā, in a sense; Kālī is the wife of Lord Śiva, but the king's son didn't know all this. 

So he paid obeisances and Kamalakānta didn't pay obeisances. The king's son got very upset, so he was asking, "How could you not pay obeisance to Mother Kālī? I am the king's son! I pay obeisance and you can't say anything? Just keep quiet." The king's son kept on criticizing him, kept on saying so many things, but at one point, the Ācārya—the king's son fell unconscious right there, as if he were dead. So immediately the news went that his son had died. The king heard this news, so the king came running there and he saw him lying down. So the king also made sure that the Ācārya's father also came with him, Kuvera Paṇḍita. So the Ācārya was asked by the king, "What happened?" So he explained that, "I came and I didn't pay obeisances and your son kept on nagging me, so I just... and he just—that's what happened." The king said, "It's true, why don't you pay obeisance? I'm the king right now." So he didn't want to disobey his father; Mother Kālī could not accept respect or obeisances. The moment the Ācārya paid obeisances, the deity of Mother Kālī broke into pieces. The king saw that, so they all got frightened, and the king's son was still lying down dead. 

Advaita Ācārya began to preach about the glories of Lord Viṣṇu and Kṛṣṇa; he started to glorify the caraṇāmṛta. So he said, "You give caraṇāmṛta to your son, he'll regain [consciousness]." So the king had no choice, "Please, sir, no matter, I'll give it to my son." So after that, the caraṇāmṛta was given, and the son actually came back to life. After that, without really telling anybody, he just left and he came to Śāntipura later on. His parents followed him to Śāntipura, and much later, the king came and took initiation from Advaita Ācārya in Śāntipura. So when he came to Śāntipura, he was for the next two years with Advaita Ācārya. I'm not sure whether he was staying here or he was walking from his place to here, but this place right now is called Phuliā. At that time, this is where he got his education; he was studying under this teacher. 

No, no, no, no, sorry. The teacher said, "No, no, no, it's okay, there are a lot of snakes in there, you do not have to worry about it." Right in front of all the students, the teacher, Ācārya, began to walk on the water and on the lotus leaves; just walked in front of everyone and picked a bunch of flowers, lotus flowers. So this Phuliā is also very famous for where the Ācārya came and studied for two years. Now, regarding Haridāsa Ṭhākura, Mahārāja has been glorifying Haridāsa Ṭhākura, so I'm not sure which pastime he described. Unfortunately, I was not there in those classes; any time I say, "You know, this pastime that you spoke," please... 

Bhāgavata says to show the world that birth, wealth, education, everything is useless, that one simply needs a simple heart and faith in order to surrender to the Lord. The devotional service does not depend on birth, education, wealth, so on and so forth. To prove that, by the order of the Lord, Haridāsa Ṭhākura was born in a low family, and *Prema-vilāsa* has very interesting information: he says Haridāsa Ṭhākura is Prahlāda Mahārāja and Brahmā together. So one particular pastime that happened in here, where we are sitting right now, is the exact place where Haridāsa Ṭhākura was chanting for a long time. In this area, he stayed here and he stayed in Śāntipura, what we are going by Advaita Ācārya. Now, there are two pastimes, it's very similar; one took place here and one took place in Benāpola, Jessore district. I've been to Benāpola; you know that famous story, pastime, Māyā Devī comes—I mean, as a prostitute—comes to that place. That pastime took place in Benāpola. If you cross the border, it's not very far from here, maybe an hour and a half drive to cross the border, or like with the rickshaw maybe 20 minutes. I went there and that place is kept quite nicely, actually. 

Even the surrounding area is not very favorable because of the Muslims, but that particular temple is kept quite nice. So that pastime took place in Benāpola, and the other pastime took place here, similar kind of description, but that was a prostitute and this was Māyā herself, Māyā personification. Same, you know, she comes three days and just keeps on chanting all night long. And later on, this is the place where Māyā Devī herself came to see. And interesting is that this is from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, the *stotra* Kṛṣṇa-Brahma... so Māyā Devī tells Haridāsa Ṭhākura, "I have even bewildered Brahmā, but Māyā Devī, you are not bewildered." So *dāmi Brahmā, Haridāsa, jaya...* "Everywhere, I have bewildered Brahmā and others, but you are the only person I could not." It just shows the power of the holy name. That pastime took place here. Mahārāja spoke about that. Another pastime took place around this place. 

Where you call those people, snake charmers? Mahārāja spoke about the snake charmer. So there was a snake charmer here. Mahārāja spoke because he was a good singer and he was a good devotee. So you have seen in the villages here, they play some type of music, you know, the *bin* and everything, and the snake goes like this according to that. The snake charmer was singing this beautiful pastime of Kāliya-damanalīlā and the snake was moving and dancing. The whole village came; it was very attractive. So Haridāsa Ṭhākura was going past by, he heard the song. He wasn't very interested in the snake thing, but he heard this beautiful song and he saw some purity in that snake charmer. *Ismṛtā... bhāvā...* So when he came close by and he saw these devotees singing about Kāliya-damanalīlā, Haridāsa Ṭhākura could not control his emotions and all the symptoms of ecstatic love of Godhead began to exhibit in his body. *Gorā gorā...* Haridāsa, this is from *Caitanya-bhāgavata*. Immediately, Haridāsa Ṭhākura began to roll on the ground, he began to cry. So suddenly what happened? There was a snake, so going on, right? Haridāsa Ṭhākura, hearing this song, began to cry and they saw this great devotee in front of them. 

Immediately, they touched the lotus feet of Haridāsa Ṭhākura, the dust put all over their bodies; they started to pay obeisances to him. So to glorify Haridāsa... Anything stop me, still I see... I actually personally would say, "Wow," so much respect was given by the inhabitants of Phuliā to Haridāsa Ṭhākura. There was a brāhmaṇa—anybody, a brāhmaṇa—he was thinking, "Look at this, here is this person, just because he's crying and rolling on the ground everyone is touching his feet, taking the dust and paying obeisances. Oh, what a way to get respect! I could do the same thing." He saw Haridāsa Ṭhākura in *mahā-bhāva* and he saw a brāhmaṇa who was faking the symptoms of a pure devotee and actually was insulting. So he decided, "I have to do something." He took a stick, he said, "Let me see how much love of God he has!" He started to beat that brāhmaṇa. Once he started to hit, all these so-called symptoms of love of God just disappeared. Real, just, this was real crying because he got real beaten up. He just ran. *Symptomatic bhāva...* [Laughter] 

...so much better now, by the snake charmer. He says, "Bāpa, we know in Bengal, you know, like when something happens, all Kṛṣṇa, we say 'O Kṛṣṇa', right? So in Bengali, we'd normally call 'Bābā, Mā', you know, father, mother. That's a normal thing that comes out in people's mouths." So immediately this brāhmaṇa ran from there. So when this brāhmaṇa ran away, the snake charmer became so happy and began to dance. Because simple people didn't really know what's going on. So I told this snake charmer, so when Haridāsa Ṭhākura heard... the snake charmer was still unconscious... when Haridāsa Ṭhākura was crying and fell unconscious and we all paid respects to him, and you were so happy with the same thing, the brāhmaṇa said, "Haridāsa with the Kṛṣṇa..." When Haridāsa Ṭhākura chants and the Supreme Lord also dances with him. When Haridāsa Ṭhākura dances, the whole world is purified. He is real Haridāsa, the servant of Lord Hari. And then he talked about the fake. So the villagers really understood and were saved from this brāhmaṇa. That pastime also took place in Phuliā. 

We saw in the life of Haridāsa Ṭhākura, but the Lord actually personally took care of everything. The boy, *śūla-kṣaya...* and Mahārāja talked about that, Haridāsa Ṭhākura had been beaten in 22 marketplaces. And when Mahārāja talked about Mahāprabhu meeting Haridāsa in Jagannātha Purī, I'll just talk about that, but the whole point about this pastime is just to show how much the Lord loved Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Along with 400 devotees, he went from Bengal to Jagannātha Purī, and this is from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. All the devotees walked in front of Śrīvāsa and went to Gambhīrā. When the Lord heard the devotees are coming close by, the Lord ran from his home, from his Gambhīrā, on the road. And when the Lord saw the 400 devotees also, he was in tears, and he began to worship in front of all the devotees. The Lord began to glorify each other. With some or other, you have all seen Gambhīrā; Gambhīrā is very small. Four hundred devotees go to anybody's mind, but by the desire of the Lord, the Gambhīrā actually expanded for the moment. Even though he had all these wonderful devotees, Mahāprabhu asked... so they explained that Haridāsa Ṭhākura, in his humility, felt that he is not qualified to come anywhere near the temple. *Gambhīrā...* he was worried about the Jagannātha-paṇḍās seeing him and, you know, their service being disturbed. 

Immediately, some devotees came and informed Haridāsa Ṭhākura that the Lord wants you. In great humility, Haridāsa Ṭhākura explained that he's not qualified to go near the Lord. The devotees came back to Mahāprabhu and told him about Haridāsa Ṭhākura's humility. This was to some extent similar to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī; Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī also felt, "Let my Lord come to me." So Mahāprabhu decided to go out and look for his devotee. He did not take anyone with him. So all those 400 devotees and the devotees of Navadvīpa, all stayed back in Gambhīrā because the Lord said, "Nobody comes with me." The Lord went himself, looking for Haridāsa. From a distance, Mahāprabhu saw Haridāsa Ṭhākura totally absorbed in chanting the holy name of the Lord. The moment Haridāsa Ṭhākura saw Mahāprabhu, he just fell flat. Haridāsa began to cry loudly. *Do you name prema...* Mahāprabhu also began to cry, and both of them just embracing each other and bathing each other with their transcendental tears. They could not control their emotions; that went on for quite some time. 

Then at one point, Haridāsa Ṭhākura realized that he's been embraced by... guessing, initially the mood was sad, he didn't know what was going on, the Lord just grabbed him. But then, you know, after some time he realizes that he's holding the Lord. He said, "The only reason I'm touching you is for my purification." He told Haridāsa Ṭhākura, "The reason I am embracing you is so that I may be purified." *Prabhu...* "I am not qualified to purify you," the Lord said. "I am embracing you, so I am purified." *...sādhu-saṅga...* Anyway, Mahāprabhu actually told Kāśī Miśra, he said, "I need a place very close to my house and it should be very secluded." The Lord did not say, "I need a place for Haridāsa Ṭhākura." So that place where *Siddha-bakula* is in Jagannātha Purī, that was actually personally asked by the Lord to Kāśī Miśra, to talk to Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, to talk to the king, to have that place. *...Gambhīrā...* He said, "You stay—" the Lord actually brought him there, he said, "You stay here. You don't have to come to me, I'll come and see you every day. From here, you pay respects to Sudarśana-cakra in Jagannātha Purī and I'll personally make sure that you get *prasāda* every day." The *prasāda* would be sent to you every day; personal servant Govinda used to bring the *prasāda* every day. "You chant the holy name and the Lord will take care of you." 

Yesterday, I was reading something from Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura before I sang the *kīrtana* in the night. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says—well, he starts a song—"I have a very good news for all of you," and the good news is the holy name. And in that example, I'll end with one small story about Mahāprabhu and the holy name. Nimāi was two years old, and you know, when Nimāi was small, all the ladies used to chant, and to make him happy, to make him smile, the ladies would just keep on chanting. The Lord was thinking that, "You know, they've been chanting, I must do something for them." He's thinking like a child, so he went out on the street. So when baby Nimāi walked out of the house, two years old—baby, how old is he? He's five, okay. So smaller than him, like two years old. So when baby Nimāi walked, some of the Mātājīs walked behind him. They were just watching what Nimāi does. He approached some *Mātājīs* and some of them had *sandēśa* in their hand, some of them had bananas. The Lord went and put his hand like this, like, "Can I have some?" Everyone was captivated by his beauty. When I put out his hand out like this, the mood of the *Mātājīs* was, "Why only this? I'll give you my life!" So when the two-year-old—normally when the baby wants food, it's really for himself or herself—this small, two hands filled with *sandēśa*, and the ladies in the back, "Nimāi is gonna start eating!" Did not beg for himself; he wanted to offer some gratitude to those who were chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*. He begged *sandēśa* and bananas, came into the house, and personally distributed to all the ladies that were chanting. *...sandēśa, bananas, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Haridāsa Ṭhākura...* 

So the Lord cries in order for us to chant, and when we chant, the Lord is very, very grateful, because he knows that by this process, we'll be delivered. In this place, Haridāsa Ṭhākura chanted, and the Lord saw that you chant, everything else is taken care by the Lord. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Haridāsa Ṭhākura *ki jaya!* His Holiness Indradyumna Swami Mahārāja *ki jaya!* Nitāi Gaura Premānande! 

So, normally this place is called Guphā, Haridāsa Ṭhākura's. I remember coming here some 20-25 years back. I remember that hole, that hole inside this, and that was Mahārāja talked about the snake pastime yesterday, that was that's where the snake was. So in Muslim language, *guphā* means "place for bhajana." So this is actually *bhajana-kuṭīra*, just like with temple and *masjid*, so we say *bhajana-kuṭīra* and *guphā*. This is Haridāsa Ṭhākura's *guphā*. Even I thought all this time, I was thinking, you know, it's a cave, looking for a real cave kind of a thing, and I saw there was this... wasn't there with you, some kind of... Yesterday when I came and I was talking to the pujārī, he actually explained and it makes sense. So...

Short announcement: I'm actually not going to give a class this evening because I'm leaving tomorrow morning at 6:00 in the morning and I have to do a lot of packing. I'm leaving some things here because I'm coming back. I'm going all the way to Africa and I'm coming back for the wedding of the century. Yeah, Africa, we're in East Sudan, that's why... Bhūyaka Kāli is gonna get married to Śyāma, so we're gonna—I'm going to organize that and perform that. And then after that, we're gonna be doing *parikramā* for *brahmacārīs* for about a week. We're gonna go to Rājapur, Kāliya, and other places as well. So I have to pack my deities and buy clothes and arrange everything like that. If I do the program, I won't get back until like 9 o'clock, and then I have to get up at 3. It's *dāmodara* month, class, to... to do... *nāma-saṅkīrtana* after yesterday's *parikramā*, right? So please forgive me, but we will continue when I come back. Those of you who are still here, we will continue *kīrtana* myself and I want to thank you all for participating the last almost two weeks, right? I can't believe I've been here almost two weeks and it's been a wonderful experience. Lord, you just opened up all these new frontiers for us and opportunities for *sevā* and adventure. I never expected that I would do *kārtika-parikramā* here; never crossed my mind. Everything happens by the mercy of devotees. 

On my phone, I'm getting like hundreds of messages, you know, "Can I come? I want to," it's already went all over the world that we're doing *Kārtika-parikramā* here. And the only person who is not happy is Catur-ātma Mahārāja; he wants to be by Govardhana Hill. But if you're watching, you're coming to my *dāma*, this is how we get to Vraja, this is the first step to Vraja. So we'll also do Jagannātha Purī. So the ways of the Lord are mysterious. I didn't have those plans, but the proverb, "I have my plan, you have your plan, and Kṛṣṇa has his plan." So I guess Kṛṣṇa wants the devotees to come to my *dāma* if you will come and join us. So I'm just—I'm basically I'm saying goodbye to the *sādhanā*, allow us to remember the *kīrtanas*, the amazing *kīrtanas* we had. And if you weren't there, you can see them on Facebook. There's some pretty wild photos on Instagram, Facebook; actually, none of this was planned. We—I didn't actually have a plan to do *parikramā*, we were just coming. What was I coming for? My apologies to the ISL meeting; I never made one meeting. Emails and telegrams and letters and pigeons with little messages, and somehow I didn't go to one ISL meeting. But those are important meetings, they're important for the future of our society, but this is also important: going out on *parikramā* and diving deep into the holy names and the *līlās*. Nobody could imagine. You mean you watched them? Let's give a big round of applause for all the Gurukula boys! Can I thank you boys? And yeah, we'll see you in... unless you're hanging to go back to the snows of St. Petersburg, it's 25 degrees below zero! All right. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda *ki jaya!* Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava *ki jaya!* Śrī Śrī Pañca-tattva *ki jaya!* Navadvīpa-dhāma *ki jaya!* Varāha-nṛsiṁha-deva *ki jaya!* All the devotees *ki jaya!* All the teachers *ki jaya!* Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura *ki jaya!*""