Taking a rickshaw to the busy streets of Nabadwip, we see the modern part of Bengal coming up in Kolkata, of course, and Mayapur. It's very modern, done in a very beautiful way. It will attract people from all over the world.

Although this is a little inconvenient on these bumpy roads, these old, rickety rickshaws, I like it. It reminds me of the old days when we'd come in the '70s, when Śrīla Prabhupāda would come to Mayapur for the Vāmana Dvādaśī Festival.

He'd lecture every morning, and we'd sit and listen at his lotus feet. He'd inspire us in so many ways, enlightening us to the real nature of this world and the positive alternative of the spiritual world. I remember we were so eager to keep doing saṅkīrtana while we were in the land of sanātana.

Now, we'd be young men, 20, 21, 22. We'd come together and take the boat over here to Mayapur, take these old rickshaws, and come into the center. We'd do harināma in the hot sun from 12 to 3. People would say, "You're a little crazy." They always respected us.

What do they say? "Mad dogs and Englishmen are the only ones that go out in the hot sun." And then they'd say, "Hare Kṛṣṇa." But, you know, kind of nostalgia coming back again, going through the streets.

I've already met a few people that I knew all the way back then. Gentlemen, they meet me at the gate on the street, and, "Oh, Balarām, it's kind of like family, isn't it?" Our greater movement of Lord Caitanya, all the Vaiṣṇavas, it's like one big family.

So it's good to see old friends here in Nabadwip. Such a great fortune it is to be favored by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, which has descended upon all of us.

This is the Gauraṅga Mahāprabhu Temple. There's an exquisitely beautiful deity of Lord Caitanya here, that was given to Viṣṇupriyā, the wife of Lord Caitanya, before he took sannyāsa. He arranged that this deity was actually carved, I've been told, by stone saints from the Tāṅgā tree that Lord Caitanya was born under.

So she received this deity, and when Mahāprabhu took sannyāsa, she worshiped that deity with all her heart and soul. She gave everything to the worship of that deity. And when she was to leave this world, after all that purification for so many years, she entered into the deity room, closed the door, and did bhajana, and then she merged into the deity.

So it's nice to take the blessings of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and all the wonderful devotees that actually serve here. I've heard we're going to get a special treat. We're going to be able to see the shoes, the wooden shoes of Mahāprabhu, that after taking sannyāsa, Mahāprabhu could understand the feelings of separation that these devotees were feeling.

So Mahāprabhu gave the shoes to his mother Śacīmātā to give to Viṣṇupriyā. Those shoes have been worn here for 500 years. So I'm just praying for a lot of mercy so that I can share my good fortune with other people around the world.

It's not an ordinary thing. I always say Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not ordinary, it's extraordinary, and we get these opportunities, special opportunities. I think they come to purify, purify our hearts, so that we can be proper representatives of our Founder-Ācārya, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

What are we doing?

Please give me service. So the most cherished service for all of us is to continue the mission that Mahāprabhu did, in a very bold, adventurous, risky way. Let us all get out of our comfort zones and take some risks for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Śrīla Prabhupāda will protect us.

We just had his appearance here. So I just wanted to share with all of you some of the scenes here. I don't know if we can actually take a shot of the shoes, but other things we can take and feel that you're here.

Be enlivened, and let us all pray for assistance. Here we see a very beautiful deity of Lord Caitanya. Gauraṅga means that he's the Lord of this Gaura Maṇḍala. This is actually an eternal dawn. But Mahāprabhu takes his time to come here.

He waits through all the ages, Satya Yuga, Tretā Yuga, Dvāpara Yuga, and then he comes in Kali Yuga. Actually, Kṛṣṇa is known as Tri-Yuga Avatāra. He comes in three ages, but he also comes in Kali Yuga, thank God. But he comes as the Caitanya Avatāra, the hidden Avatāra.

Initially, no one knew who he actually was. It was just Himāṅśu Paṇḍita. His diastere. Eventually, he revealed his Supreme identity as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and then he started the sanātana movement. Just before the sanātana started, Mahāprabhu was having kīrtanas in Nadia in the house of Śivānanda Ṭhākura, with his confidential associates.

But then, one day, it was time for his mercy to flood the Earth for the rest of Kali Yuga. And he used to go out on saṅkīrtana with all his devotees. Just imagine, the Supreme Personality of Godhead finds pleasure in going out on saṅkīrtana and sharing the mahā-mantra.

So if it's good enough for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then that saṅkīrtana is good enough for all of us. Actually, we all experience a special, spiritual, special mercy when we're out on the streets. Sometimes devotees ask me, "What's your favorite temple?" I say, "My temple is on the corner of First Street and Vine," you know, figuratively, some corner street somewhere in some city in the world, downtown, distributing books, or stopping people, giving invitations, selling our magazines, inviting people to a blissful Hare Kṛṣṇa event.

For me, that's home because home is where the heart is, and as follows as Śrīla Prabhupāda said, our home is actually His desire.

What is in His heart is in our hearts, like father, like son. So I'm praying to become qualified, to become purified, to actually develop some taste for the holy name and develop real compassion, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu did, and Lord Nityānanda, His transcendental brother, to develop that quality, the quantity and quality of their compassion for the world.

And I think if, by Prabhupāda's mercy, we were able to do that, we can change the face of the Earth.

The holy name is all-powerful. It is non-different than Kṛṣṇa. So if we chant it with a purified heart, in a mood of compassion, and out of love for the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, our chanting will have an effect.

So sanātana begins when we sit down every morning and we chant our japa, and we attend Guru Pūjā, and we go to ārātrika. These are the things that purify our hearts. They're very powerful. There's so much mercy on saṅkīrtana.

I related recently in a class that Prabhupāda was talking about Viśvāmitra, how in Treta Yuga he meditated for 60,000 years, 60,000 years, and he achieved perfection.

This is an example, a Śrīla Prabhupāda, he said, he said, "Now, by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you can achieve the same perfection by going on saṅkīrtana for two days." I was sitting in a chair, almost fell off the chair, and we shouldn't think it's an exaggeration.

One of the offenses against the holy name is to consider the glories of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa as imagination.

So let's not live in the world of imagination. This material world. Let's live in the absolute reality of sac-cid-ānanda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The incarnation of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Here in India, we want to make Caitanya Mahāprabhu as famous as the Daśāvatāras.

Everyone knows the Daśāvatāras, the ten incarnations of Kṛṣṇa. We want to make them, we want to introduce them. Because of all the incarnations, he's the most merciful. Mahāprabhu's mission is to preach all over the world, take all the fallen conditioned souls home with us, back to the spiritual world.

Here we are before this "virile" lion. Lions are kings of the jungle. Everyone bows to him, and they can do whatever they want. So, in a similar way, although sanātana devotees are supposed to be humble, really realizing how great God is, that's one way to become humble.

And, you know, ultimately, we should go out and preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sometimes the material energy is so strong. Sometimes there's opposition. One time, Śrīla Prabhupāda was explaining how there was so much opposition to the preaching, and Prabhupāda said, "Yes, if there's no preaching, there's no opposition." So that's good, but we have to be determined.

In fact, we have to push for it to be bold. And that's signified by the lion. Just like Jāḍa Narahari, who was trying to stop the sanātana movement. So Śrīla Prabhupāda, who is strong like a thunderbolt and soft like a rose, he became strong like a thunderbolt to defend the sanātana movement because it has to go on.

At least for 10,000 years. We've heard that the sanātana goes on for 10,000 years. Call it a yuga. So sometimes we have to be a little bold like that. And I think the best example you'll find is if you read my dear godbrother, Devamrita Swami's, new book about establishing our temple in Juhu Beach in Mumbai.

It was one of my favorite books now, and you just see how Śrīla Prabhupāda was so determined to establish Mahāprabhu's movement.

And after all this quality and this fighting and court cases, we won. And I was told that Prabhupāda said at the end, "It was a good fight." So many times, Prabhupāda talked in militaristic terms.

You know, these are time bombs ready to explode his works in different parts of the world. I was discussing today in my lecture about the uniform, you know, we have to wear a uniform like you do in the military.

Like, yeah, not a military. We have to destroy. It's a military. We have to get to give people back their lives, give them the real life, the wonderful life, the happy life of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And we have to be like lions.

Sometimes should be. We're visiting yet another temple here that I've ever actually seen in Nabadwip. Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Kavirāja Goswāmī said that in Vṛndāvana, I can't remember, he said there's either 5,000 or 7,000 temples.

And I've always wondered what that meant, because, you know, we know there's seven main temples in Vṛndāvana.

And you go around, there's other major temples. But I didn't see 7,000. So, over time, I came to understand it means that, you know, in the old days, and even to some degree in these days, every house is a temple.

Everyone has deities of, you know, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, like that. So when we come to the land of the Ganges, we would expect to see many temples of Lord Caitanya, as we just visited, Gauraṅga Mahāprabhu. And here is a temple.

It's called Śrī Gaṅgā, Śrī Gaura. Śrī means golden. So, golden Lord Caitanya and golden Nityānanda. And the pujārī just told me this temple is over 100 years old. It's under, you know, the direction of the government. So it doesn't look as spectacular as it probably should, but it has that ambiance of antiquity.

And you walk in here, and you just imagine, you know, 100 years ago in Nabadwip, how, you know, people were, you know, playing, singing. You get this ambiance, you get this feeling here. And that's the purpose of the temple.

It's the purpose of a church. It's the purpose of a synagogue. It's the purpose of any religious organization where they meet to come into the house of God, feel a part of that family, and become spiritually enlivened. Because ultimately, we're all devotees of Kṛṣṇa.

We identify with so many false, you know, ideas. I'm American, Canadian, German, Russian. It's all illusion. This is very much present in the writings of, you know, Bengali authors like Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Goswāmī. He writes like that in Caitanya Caritāmṛta.

So reading Caitanya Caritāmṛta and coming to Nabadwip is like the book comes alive. The book just comes alive. So we're at another beautiful altar with Gaura-Nitāi deities. And I'm sure if we kept searching around, we'd find more, more major temples.

And because this is Bengal, we'd find Gaura-Nitāi deities in people's houses. And because Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa combined together as Mahāprabhu for several reasons. But today, we're discussing their reason of, their reason of coming to the material world to start the sanātana movement.

So in that sense, there's no difference between Vṛndāvana and Mayapur.

Just a little bit of difference in the flavor, like that. So, it's so nice to come back and forth from Vṛndāvana to Mayapur.

Sometimes, we're following in the footsteps of our predecessor ācāryas. That's what they did. They would go back and forth like this. So we feel blessed here in front of Śrī Gaura-Nitāi. My brain's getting a little foggy because it's a hot, 105 degrees now outside, but that's not going to stop us on our Kṛṣṇa consciousness mission.