In the Sri Narasingha-stuti, verse 10, written by a leading disciple of Sri Madhvacharya, his name was Trivikrama Acharya, we hear how Lord Narasinghadeva burns His enemies. “Dear Lord, the effulgence of many suns is destroyed by Your uncheckable potency. The many weapons sent against You are like sacrificial offerings, and You reply with unlimited weaponry.

Put down, strike, and slay my illusion!

Burn the *shringas*, burn my adversaries with Your unbearable power!” May the fire born out of the friction of the teeth of Hari’s saw-like arm against the chest of the demon purify you.

On the demon’s skin, this fire made the noise. His flowing blood created the noise. The fire burning his fat made a loud *dhakka* sound, while the fire burning his bones created a loud cracking sound. And as for Narasingha’s cooling effect on his devotees, at the end, I was reading at the end of the Narasingha Purana.

Suta Goswami says, “Thus, I have made you all listen to this entire Narasingha Purana, for it removes all sins and makes men free from all pain. It ensures success in auspicious deeds and offerings. People who read or listen to either one or a half hymn of it seldom die with their sins.” Now, that same Purana, the Narasingha Purana, even guarantees release from hell if one chants the holy names.

In his purport to Srimad-Bhagavatam 2.9.36, Shrila Prabhupada writes, “In the Narasingha Purana it is said that as the residents of hell began to chant the holy name of the Lord, they were elevated from hell towards heaven.” Now, I also read that, um, Dasya Muni has supported this view.

He’s written much, “Yet, simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, the inhabitants of hell became released from hellish persecution.” As we see, Lord Narasinghadeva can be terribly ferocious. He can be super kind, and he can even be super sweet.

He picked up Prahlada Maharaja and, you know, licked him. He got a *navi-chek* like lions do their cubs, so He can be very sweet. And this is also indicated by Shrila Rupa Goswami in *Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu*. These twelve different kinds of transcendental relationships are represented by twelve incarnations of God.

And some examples he gives. Well, a few examples he gives. One, he says, um, the incarnation Kapila represents *shantarasa*, because Kapila emphasized passive meditation. Then Rupa Goswami says Vamanadeva represents *sakhyarasa*, because he had a friendly relationship with Indra and acts as the doorkeeper for Sutala in lower planetary systems.

Then, as we are concerned today, he writes, “And Narasingha represents *vatsalyarasa*, or parenthood, because of His regarding Prahlada Maharaja as His son and placing him on His lap.” Rupa Goswami, he says Narasingha represents *vatsalyarasa* because of this mood of parenthood, you know, when he took Prahlada and put him on his lap and like that.

Well, actually, we generally think of Narasingha in an angry form, an angry form, but here we see Rupa Goswami describing Him in a very sweet way, representing *vatsalyarasa*. Shridhara Swami, who is Prabhupada describes as the original commentator on Srimad-Bhagavatam, he writes, “Let me offer my obeisances unto Lord Narasingha, who was always enlightening Prahlada Maharaja within His heart, and who always kills the enemies that attack His devotees, and who always kills the enemies that attack His devotees.

His mercy is distributed like moonshine, and His face is like that of a lion. Let me offer my obeisances to Him, the finger, again and again.” Famous verse. This *Narsimha* deity feared in the month of May, so they say.

Well, that’s why it’s always so hot. And the *Narsimha* deity is famous in that way for the fire that emanated from His form. He’s called *Jualo-Narsimha*, the fiery form of the Lord. And we hear about that fire emanating from Narasingha in a number of verses.

For example, the famous verse, *ugram viram mahavishnum, jvalantam sarvato mukam, nrisimham bhishanam bhadram, mrityu-mrityum namamy aham*. “I bow down to Lord Narasinghadeva, who is ferocious and heroic like Vishnu. He is burning from every side. He is terrific, auspicious, and the death of death personified.”