"*00153*.*
"Good morning, everyone. Hare Kṛṣṇa. I would like to thank the temple authorities for giving me this opportunity to speak on the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* in front of such an august assembly of devotees. Thank you. Reading from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, I believe we have a few verses to cover, but the verse we are chanting is Canto 10, Chapter 65, text 14. The title of this chapter is "Lord Balarāma Visits Vṛndāvana."

Because we have a few verses, I will just quickly chant them and go through the purports; otherwise, it would take 45 minutes. We will go to verse 11 and then arrive at 14. 

Verse 11: The gopīs are speaking to Balarāma for Kṛṣṇa’s sake. "Oh descendant of Daśārha, we abandoned our mothers, fathers, brothers, husbands, children, and sisters, even though these family relations are difficult to give up. But now, oh Lord, that same Kṛṣṇa has suddenly abandoned us and gone away, breaking off all affectionate ties with us. And yet, how could any woman fail to trust His promises?" 

Text 13: "How can intelligent city women possibly trust the words of one whose heart is so unsteady and who is so ungrateful? They must believe Him because He speaks so wonderfully and also because His beautiful, smiling glances aroused their lust." 

Purport: According to Śrīdhara Svāmī, some gopīs speak the first two lines of this verse, and others reply in the second two lines. This is the verse we chanted: "O Sanskrit-speaking [person], why be talking about Him? Dear gopīs, please talk of something else. If He passes His time without us, then we shall similarly pass ours without Him." Very deep verses today. 

Purport: Śrīdhara Svāmī points out that the gopīs here subtly indicate that Lord Kṛṣṇa spends His time happily without them, whereas they are most unhappy without their Lord. This is the difference between Him and them. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura adds the following commentary: considering themselves different from other women, the gopīs thought as follows: "If other women are together with their lovers, they live." And given the meaning, the word *ramaya* also indicates that these messages were confidential.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, *Kṛṣṇa-caitanya-caranāmṛta*. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of all Vaiṣṇavas, praying I will not commit offenses in my attempts to please them. To all Vaiṣṇavas who have ever been and to all Vaiṣṇavas who will ever be, I offer my respectful obeisances to the Lord’s feet. This is composed by a great poet named Devananda Dāsa. Another beautiful prayer: I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master, who gave me beautiful *kīrtana-mālā*—the beautiful form of a devotee—and who offered me His shelter. In one of His hands He is holding my hand, and with His other hand, He is holding the lamp of knowledge, which helps me to cross over the dark ocean of the material world. The poet says my Guru deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye. I bow down to him again and again and again.

So, dear Prabhus, once again, the title of this chapter is very significant: "Balarāma Returns to Vṛndāvana." We gave a class a couple of days ago, and we mentioned how both Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma left for Mathurā on the invitation of Akrūra’s chariot. From there, they went on to Dvārakā. Kṛṣṇa established the city of Dvārakā to protect the Yadu dynasty, and one of His purposes, of course, was to defeat the asuras who were harassing the devotees. So Kṛṣṇa didn't go back to Vṛndāvana immediately; He felt He had to protect His devotees in both Vṛndāvana, Mathurā, and Dvārakā from the asuras, and there were many great battles with Jarāsandha. We mentioned another subtle reason why Kṛṣṇa didn't go back to Vṛndāvana: He wanted to increase His devotees' love for Him, because there is that principle: "Separation makes the heart grow fonder." It is an essential theme in our whole process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and we will touch on it today. Although I have no qualification to discuss this matter, I am sitting here today, and that is the nature of the verses. The gopīs are feeling so much separation from Kṛṣṇa. 

So Kṛṣṇa lived in Dvārakā for 96 years. And during that time, the residents of Vṛndāvana—and we have to say especially the cowherd girls, the gopīs—I was reading recently or listening recently to Prabhupāda, and he was speaking about the flavor of different devotees' services. There are different types of devotees with different moods of serving Kṛṣṇa. It was a short class, and Prabhupāda got to one point and said, "But the gopīs, they never asked anything from Kṛṣṇa. They just wanted to serve Kṛṣṇa." And Prabhupāda broke down crying. It was a 10-minute lecture, and then he said, "All right, that was it." So everyone in Vṛndāvana, the Brajavāsīs, they love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone has ever been loved before. And so in separation, their hearts are pounding, but that separation enhances their hankering for Kṛṣṇa and love. So, especially the cowherd girls, they were feeling separation. We, as aspiring devotees, can hardly understand the separation that the residents of Vṛndāvana felt when Kṛṣṇa left. Logically, as much as you are attached to something, to that degree you feel separation from that item when you lose it, isn't it? If you lose your pencil, it hurts a little bit. But if someone steals your car, it is very painful. So how attached were the Braja-gopīs to Kṛṣṇa? Again, they love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone has ever been loved before, so therefore their pangs of separation are impossible to understand, except for the most advanced devotees. 

I remember one time sitting in front of Prabhupāda, like this young man is sitting here. Prabhupāda had come to Paris; his previous visit, he had installed beautiful Rādhā-Pārthasārathi. He gave the Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deities the name Rādhā-Pārthasārathi. At that ceremony, at one point, Prabhupāda was standing in front of Pārthasārathi with his hands folded and praying to Him. I was standing right next to him; I could see. So, a month later, Prabhupāda got a photograph of that moment and he remarked, "Oh, see, Kṛṣṇa is looking at me, and I am looking at Kṛṣṇa. So sweet." So, the next visit, Prabhupāda came; he sat down on the *āsana* after greeting the Deities and he started singing *Govinda jaya jaya*. And at that point, Prabhupāda started shaking. His *karatālas* dropped, and I turned to the temple president—I was a new devotee, still a new devotee—and I said, "Prabhupāda’s having a stroke!" He said, "No, Prabhupāda is feeling ecstasy. He’s feeling the mood of the separation from Kṛṣṇa." And I watched this; the tears, they didn't go like this, they came out of his eyes like that; they were jetting, and he was struggling, and we were completely silent. We didn't know what we were supposed to do or not do, but I was sitting there thinking, "Here I am, seeing a resident of Vṛndāvana, a nitya-siddha, an eternal resident of Vṛndāvana, displaying deep affection for the Lord." It happens rarely. Just like Jesus said, "Sometimes my cup runneth over with love." So generally, the pure devotees don't show their deeper sentiments because they don't want the public to follow them for that reason; they want the public to follow them for the knowledge that they are giving, which takes us out of material life into spiritual life. So Prabhupāda came to, like that. He said, "Hare Kṛṣṇa," that’s all, and went upstairs. Someone said, "That’s all?" I said, "That’s enough." 

It was wonderful. So, this mood of separation, we discuss it from time to time because it is in our scriptures, where we must discuss it. But really, it is only understood by very advanced devotees. But we can get a glimpse. We got a glimpse that day. But all of us can get a glimpse of that mood from the words of Mādhavendra Purī. You know Mādhavendra Purī; he appeared before Caitanya Mahāprabhu and he introduced this mood of Vraja-bhakti. Because previously, for eons of time, people worshipped Kṛṣṇa in the mood of *aiśvarya*; it means the mood of awe and reverence. That mood must be there first before one goes deeper into Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That’s why we study the first nine cantos of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* before we get to the 10th Canto, where Kṛṣṇa is engaging more intimately with His devotees. We can still understand He is God, but He is very kindly allowing Himself to be approached in a very intimate way. So, it is a science. Mādhavendra Purī was the one who introduced this idea of the mood of the Brajavāsīs: everything for Kṛṣṇa, nothing for myself, especially the mood of the gopīs. He introduced that, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu came, and through the Six Gosvāmīs, He established the mood of the Vrajavāsīs as the highest sentiment of love of God. 

So when Mādhavendra Purī was on his deathbed, he was calling out to Kṛṣṇa in a feeling of separation that the gopīs expressed when Kṛṣṇa left for Mathurā. Just like we are hearing today, these verses that we recited today, these are probably some of the deepest verses of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. They are very deep. And that same mood that the gopīs are expressing to Balarāma today, Mādhavendra Purī expressed that when he was leaving his body. He left behind for us a little glimpse of what it is, what is separation from Kṛṣṇa. A very famous verse he called out: "Oh my Lord, oh most merciful Master, oh Master of Mathurā, when shall I see You again? Because of my not seeing You, my agitated heart has become unsteady. Oh most beloved, what shall I do now?" This is the mood of the most advanced devotee of the Lord, the Brajavāsī feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. I first heard this verse in a Bhāgavatam class the third day I joined the movement. I didn't really understand it, but that afternoon we went on *harināma* and the saṅkīrtana leader, he sang this verse on *harināma*. I said, "Wasn't this very deep?" He said, "Yes, but as part of our philosophy and the people have to hear." I said, "Okay." We were chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. So then he started singing the verse on the streets of Detroit: "Oh my Lord, oh gracious to the lowly, Thou art now living in Mathurā. When will Thou come to me? Oh darling mine, my heart is burning in pains of separation. Oh what shall I do? Oh what shall I do? Oh what shall I do?" We got a crowd. People were like—I said, "Maybe we should just chant that in our temple." Anyway, Lord Caitanya is very kind. 

So when Mādhavendra Purī chanted that verse, there was one disciple present at that time—his name was, I don't want to say his name, but Ramacandra Purī. He was a foolish and ignorant disciple, and being so, he said to Mādhavendra Purī, "Guru Mahārāja, why are you lamenting like a worldly man who is about to die?" Because you could take it like that if you’re foolish or ignorant, this verse that he is calling out like the gopīs. "Why are you lamenting like an ordinary man?" And fortunately, there was another disciple there, his name was Īśvara Purī, who understood that his spiritual master was actually experiencing separation from Kṛṣṇa. And because of that understanding and the service that Īśvara Purī rendered to Mādhavendra Purī—he would even clean up his stool and urine when he was dying and the body was falling apart—he did this menial service and had so much faith. Because of that, he was empowered later to become the very spiritual master of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

So of course, this matter of separation, it is called *vipralambha-bhāva*. It is a very elevated subject matter. But even as neophyte devotees, we are being trained one day, hopefully, to experience this mood. It is not forbidden for us to discuss it because it is our goal. In the BBT publication—that little book we distributed on saṅkīrtana everywhere, *Elevation to Kṛṣṇa*, Chapter 5—we are distributing this book everywhere. Prabhupāda says those who follow the teachings of Lord Caitanya should experience and relish the feelings of separation. *Samyoga* means meeting and *viprayoga* means separation. So it is a transcendental science, how the gopīs are feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa one day and the next day they get to maybe meet Him, you know, for the *rāsa* dance. So, going back, separation, meeting, separation, meeting; this is the whole theme of Vṛndāvana. It is the whole theme. And Prabhupāda said here, "Separation is better than meeting." In the book *Elevation to Kṛṣṇa*, Chapter 5, which we distribute every day in Paris and London and Sydney and Moscow, Prabhupāda wanted us to know. Therefore, we are discussing the subject matter today by his grace. 

I remember when Prabhupāda came to New Mayapur—I think it was 1974—we just established that community like a farming community at the big château, and Prabhupāda came. He was very pleased that we purchased this huge property. We were 300 devotees, 100 kids in the gurukula, lots of families. We were the best book distributors in Europe. Prabhupāda came, he said to us on his arrival, "If we had five properties like this in Europe, we’d take over the whole continent." We went "Haribol!" like we’re going to do it tomorrow. Still trying. But one afternoon, he gave *darśana* on the lawn in front of the castle, and I didn't want to sit too close because I had this whole mood of awe and reverence; I didn't want to get too close to Prabhupāda. I just sat a little distance away. So, he spoke how a devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere. He was speaking from the 10th chapter, "Opulence of the Absolute." So, there are indications how one can see Kṛṣṇa in nature; anything wonderful is an indication of the glory of God. So, he said, "A devotee who is trained, he will see Kṛṣṇa everywhere." That was the theme of the *darśana*. And at the end, he said, "Are there any questions?" So, you know, every disciple wants the guru to notice him or her, right? So, I am thinking, "Well, if I ask a question, Prabhupāda, he will know that I exist and maybe he will look at me and I will get some mercy." So, I raised my hand. "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I have a question." I didn't have a question; I leaped before I should jump. He said, "Yes, what is your question?" I said, "You’ve been speaking that the pure devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere, but in the *Śikṣāṣṭaka*, Lord Caitanya in the mood of a devotee is saying, 'Oh Govinda, feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment to be like 12 years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain. I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence.' It’s the opposite, Śrīla Prabhupāda, that the devotee feeling he doesn't see Kṛṣṇa anywhere. Can you explain this?" And then he looked at me for a long time. He said, "This is very deep subject matter. In Kṛṣṇa’s absence, one thinks of Him more, and the love for Him increases more." And I kind of went [silent]. He said, "This you will not understand, but one day, when you are advanced, you will understand this principle of *vipralambha*." So, I thought, "Well, Prabhupāda said one day, maybe I’ll understand it. That’s a long way away from Rāja." But that is the kindness of Prabhupāda, that he took the time to explain these deeper concepts to us. 

Just like there was a singer—I won't use his name in this class—but a reggae singer, he one time said, "We know who we are and we know where we are going." So, we know who is God. Many times in Western countries, when I am preaching, I will ask people, "Who is God?" "He's God." "Anything else?" "He lives up there." "Anything else?" "Well, if I am bad, I won't go there; I will go down." I am not being disrespectful; I am just saying, "Well, sir, how can you love someone you know nothing about?" Why does a person accept a wife or husband in particular? Because of the way they dress, the way they talk, their humor, their profession, the clothes they like, the songs. Love is in the details. So, how can, ultimately, we awaken our love for God unless we know who He actually is? And that is the beauty of our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition; we can see Kṛṣṇa every day in His full glory. "My dear Lord, You are not a statue; You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda." And our expert *pūjārīs* are *japa*-reading and dressing the Deities so nicely as Kṛṣṇa is in Vṛndāvana. So, in that way, because we know who Kṛṣṇa is, we know what the abode of Vṛndāvana is like, and we know the mood, the selfless mood of devotion by which the Brajavāsīs are serving Him. Everything for You, nothing for me; it’s all about You, it’s not about me. That mood of Vraja, we know it, and therefore we are trying for it, to keep it in our sights by reciting these verses of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. 

So, separation, we will get a little technical here. There’s actually four kinds of separation from Kṛṣṇa, not just one. There is *pūrva-rāga*, *māna*, *pravāsa*, and *prema-vaicittya*. Different types of ways that the Brajavāsīs feel separation from Kṛṣṇa. In *pūrva-rāga*, it’s described that even before you meet your lover, you are anticipating separation from them. This is typical with the younger gopīs; they are always observing Kṛṣṇa from a distance. By social custom, they couldn't associate closely; boys and girls didn't associate closely. So, the gopīs, they are seeing Kṛṣṇa from a distance at every opportunity. Just like when Kṛṣṇa goes to herd the cows in the morning, the gopīs peek out from the windows of their homes; they look at Him, they get attached, but they can't meet Him. But by that attachment, they feel intense separation. They haven't even met Kṛṣṇa, but just by looking at Him—He’s so beautiful, He’s so wonderful, He’s so amazing—as He walks by with His cowherd friends and the cows to the pasturing grounds of Vṛndāvana, they just see Him. How charming He is! They get attached, and they feel separation even before meeting. This was *pūrva-rāga*. 

The second type of separation is called *māna*. It means that you are with your lover but you know one day you will be separated. The gopīs will be with Kṛṣṇa, sometimes in the evenings; they are with Kṛṣṇa, there is the *rāsa* dance, but they know the separation is going to come. That’s called *māna*. It is intolerable. You don't want that day to come, but that’s life. There is that saying, "Tomorrow always comes too soon." The *rāsalīlā* dance lasts one night of Brahmā; what’s that? Millions and millions and millions of years. But the gopīs are thinking, "We are going to be separated," and it causes some pain. That’s called *māna*. 

And the third type of separation is called *pravāsa*. It means when you are actually separated from your lover, meaning Kṛṣṇa, of course. For example, when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana and went to Mathurā, the residents of Vṛndāvana are described by the Gosvāmīs as they were drowned in *pravāsa*. He left, and He didn't come back. And again, this particular sentiment—this *pravāsa*—that’s the verse: "Oh Govinda, feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment to be like 12 years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain. I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence." So that is *pravāsa*. 

And then the fourth type of separation, it is extremely deep and esoteric, it is called *prema-vaicittya*. We won't go into detail, but *prema-vaicittya* means you are feeling separation although your lover is right next to you. There is a famous pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, which maybe we can tell another time. Basically, that you are with your lover, but you don't know you are with your lover because you are thinking of your lover, and in separation. So basically, you are crying in separation when you are with Kṛṣṇa, or Kṛṣṇa is with you. Anyway, four types of separation. 

So the other day, a devotee said to me, "I just don't understand. I am spending my whole life trying to reconnect with Kṛṣṇa only to eventually be separated from Him. What is this?" You know, we started off—what? 10, 20, 30, some devotees 50 years ago. It’s all about reconnection; connection’s always there, of course, but we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, but He never forgets us, even for a moment. So we are reconnecting. Actually, the word "religion" comes from the Latin verb *religare*, which means to connect, and the word "yoga" has the same meaning; it also means to connect with Bhagavān, with Kṛṣṇa. So to connect. After finally making that connection, the devotee said, "I am going to be separated the rest of my life, for eternity?" So I had to think how to explain it. And sometimes elegance is truth spoken concisely. So I explained by quoting a short phrase, a verse from she who experiences the greatest separation from Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. In verse 240 of his *Padyāvalī*, Rūpa Gosvāmī quotes her in the sentiment that she is feeling when she is separated from Kṛṣṇa. Is it really so bad, as that Prabhu was thinking, "I am going to connect and be separated"? Want to know what is separation? We can learn from that person who feels the most intense separation, and Rūpa Gosvāmī quotes her in verse 240 of *Padyāvalī*: "These words are from the lotus mouth of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī: 'Separation from Kṛṣṇa is better than meeting Him. For when I meet Him, there is only one Kṛṣṇa; but when I am separated from Him, the three worlds become filled with Kṛṣṇa.'" 

So how to understand? Like, when you are with a person, there is a one-on-one conversation; you are talking about something particular, or you are meditating on something about that person, their eyes or their clothes. But when you are separated from someone—even in this world, right? You are separated; let's say your wife, your husband goes away on a business trip—in a flash, you are thinking about so many things about them: how they walk, how they talk, how you used to prepare dinner for them, what that walk you went on last Sunday. So many things are flooding your mind in a moments of time because of that *lobha*, that greed. So this is Rādhārāṇī’s mood. "Separation from Kṛṣṇa is better than meeting Him, for when I meet Him there is only one Kṛṣṇa, but when I am separated from Him the three worlds become filled with Kṛṣṇa." And that same mood of separation—it’s like a deep understanding, but it’s there in our *śāstras*. That same mood is expressed by Kṛṣṇa in Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary to *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*, Chapter 15:3. His commentary is called *Ānanda-candrikā*. There we hear Kṛṣṇa say, "If I had to choose between union and separation, I would prefer separation from My beloved, because in union I see her only in one place, whereas in separation my entire universe is filled with her." It’s practically the same statement, just a few words difference, because they are lovers, and love is reciprocal; they are feeling the same sentiments. So it’s deep, but it’s really interesting these things have to be discussed. 

In this way, in these ways, we can see that both the Lord and the devotee feel separation from each other. It’s not that mundane statement, "Love is a two-way street," love is reciprocal. And so, while the Brajavāsīs were all experiencing intense separation from Kṛṣṇa when He left Mathurā, when He left Vṛndāvana to go to Mathurā and to Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa was also feeling intense separation from them. I didn't understand that concept. I thought it was just, you know, we are, when I first joined, we are just, you know, feeling hankering for Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa is there waiting for us. But there is that statement in the Bible, "The Lord so much loveth the world that He sent His only begotten Son, Jesus Christ." Same sentiment, that God so much loves the people of this world regardless that they have turned their face from Him. Just like sometimes, you know, a mother, her son is put into prison, she’ll say, "He’s a good boy, he just was naughty for a moment, please," she forgives because of love. Mother is saying to the police, "He’s not so bad." So Kṛṣṇa has that same sentiment; although we are bad, He still comes. Once a day, someone knocks on your door every day, that’s something significant. What, what, what? The gopīs—we hear once in the day of Brahmā—that in higher circles time is calculated not by our puny humans but by the time of the demigods. He knocks on the door every day. "Come on home." He is so kind. 

So as we are awakening our love for Him, His love is already fully established. So when Kṛṣṇa left Vraja, He was also feeling intense separation. He didn't forget the Brajavāsīs, not in any way. It is described that when Kṛṣṇa was in Dvārakā, His mind and heart were in Vṛndāvana. He certainly loved all the residents of Dvārakā, but He just couldn't forget the loving sentiments, the 24-karat gold sentiments, of the Brajavāsīs. I was reading in *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, published by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, that in Dvārakā, sometimes when Kṛṣṇa was asleep at night, in His sleep, He would call out the names, the name of Rādhārāṇī, or Lalitā, Viśākhā, and the queens are like, "What, what’s He talking about?" And those feelings of separation cause suffering for both Kṛṣṇa and the Brajavāsīs. Of course, we say "suffering," but we should understand that the suffering that these great devotees like our Prabhupāda and the ācāryas are feeling, it’s not—it’s not like suffering, really. It’s an impetus for increasing love. In that same *Bhāgavata*, Kṛṣṇa makes this very clear to Nārada while in Dvārakā. This is really an important verse, if you listen carefully. Kṛṣṇa says to Nārada, "This anguish of separation is praised as greater than the happiness of enjoying with those one loves. Separation is so pleasing to the mind that it cannot be described; it always transforms at last into an abundance of pleasure. Only experts in tasting these moods can understand how this happens." There you go. When you see the pure devotee crying, "Oh, it’s so sad," no, this anguish of separation is praised as greater than the happiness of enjoying those one loves. "Separation is so pleasing to the mind that it cannot be described; it always transforms at last into an abundance of pleasure. Only experts in tasting these moods can understand how this happens." So we worship that *vipralambha* of our Vaiṣṇavas and the devotees of Lord Caitanya. 

Now, part of Kṛṣṇa’s frustration when He was in Dvārakā was He couldn't explain that love to the residents of Dvārakā, because their love is mixed a little with *aiśvarya*, because Kṛṣṇa is King. "Long live the King!" They worship Kṛṣṇa in that mood, that He is God is great and we are very small. But there is also some—some love is mixed in, the love is increased in Mathurā, but is perfected in Vṛndāvana, perfect, more perfect, and most perfect. Jīva Gosvāmī gives that analogy: Dvārakā is perfect because of the nature of the love of the Dvārakā-vāsīs, but Mathurā is more perfect because it’s more pure; Vṛndāvana is most perfect. And where are we situated by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace? We are sitting in Śrī Vṛndāvana. 

So Kṛṣṇa was frustrated; He wanted to, you know, share His love, He wanted to explain His loving feelings, but how could He explain how in Vṛndāvana He wrestles with His cowherd friends in the sands of Rāmaṇa-reṇu? How He dances with young girls in the autumn moonlight? I mean, they are going to go like, "What? You’re the King?" So it was frustrating. Couldn't share His heart, always thinking of Vraja. But amongst the residents of Dvārakā, there were a few who actually understood Vraja-bhakti. How is that possible? One of them was Rohiṇī. And who is Rohiṇī? She is the mother of Balarāma. She lived in Vraja; she gave birth to Lord Balarāma in Vṛndāvana. So she knew this mood of Vraja-bhakti. But after some time, Rohiṇī had come to Dvārakā. So one day—it’s really interesting, this is history. People like history lessons. History lessons in the material world, it’s like, you know, history repeats itself, so many difficulties, so many problems, so many politics. But history in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very beautiful, all about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So this is the history lessons that we study. 

One day Kṛṣṇa approached Rohiṇī and said—He was actually thinking of going back to Vṛndāvana, so *nāṭaka* describes this—"Actually, I am going to leave Dvārakā; I am going back to Vraja. What do you think?" She said, "Well, we better think about it." So they called Lord Balarāma and the three of them had a meeting—Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, Rohiṇī—and at that meeting, Kṛṣṇa asked Rohiṇī if she thought that the three of them should go. He said, "Mother, what do you think? Should we go to Vṛndāvana secretly without telling Vasudeva and Devakī?" Who are Vasudeva and Devakī? Devakī gave birth to Kṛṣṇa in the jailhouse of Kaṃsa, you know, not far from here; they were the original parents, but Kṛṣṇa was transferred to Gokula as you know, to Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. So finally, you know, Vasudeva and Devakī, they missed all the childhood pastimes of Kṛṣṇa which are so sweet. We are going to celebrate for one month the Dāmodara-līlā, Dāmodara-aṣṭaka; we are going to sing it every evening here for one month. Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes are so beautiful, they missed them. So they moved—when Kṛṣṇa went to Dvārakā, Vasudeva and Devakī, they went to Dvārakā also to see their son. So Kṛṣṇa said, "Do you think we should go to Vṛndāvana without telling them?" 

So Rohiṇī replied, "Kṛṣṇa, Vasudeva and Devakī suffered so much on Your behalf. You should be very careful not to disobey them or cause them any pain. You can't leave." So Kṛṣṇa said, "God, what should I do? Uh, maybe I’ll send a representative. Plan B." I remember we were in, um, in France and Prabhupāda was sick in London. He was supposed to come visit us in France, so Prabhupāda said, "I am too ill, I will send my representative, some sannyāsī." Okay, wasn't exactly the same, but it was actually very nice when that sannyāsī came. But so Kṛṣṇa can't come, so He’s thinking, "Who can I send as My representative?" If you have got an important mission, something that is very dear to your heart, you pick your best man. I often think like that, you know, that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Lord Caitanya, they wanted this saṅkīrtana movement to spread all over the world; they chose their best man. I was reading in *The Harmonist* recently that the one time the sannyāsīs, with all due respect, the sannyāsīs—a number of the sannyāsīs of the Bhakti-maṭha—they were complaining to Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, "This Abhay, he’s a householder, he gives donations, and he comes and gives some classes, and he does some kīrtana, but why are you giving him so much attention?" So Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī shot back, "Do not speak like that. In the end, he will do everything. Do not speak like that. In the end, this Abhay, he will do everything." And he did. And therefore, Prabhupāda was the best person. It was planned, I think, for 500 years; all these great ācāryas, every century, they are working towards that point where the saṅkīrtana movement can go all over the world, as Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu predicted. They are all working towards that goal, and finally that goal was achieved when Śrīla Prabhupāda boarded the *Jaladuta* and went to America. I can imagine—we hear no one was there except his, maybe I think his first disciple was there, but actually I think that the 33 million demigods were in the sky, you know, watching that special moment when Śrīla Prabhupāda was going to the West. That’s just my fantasy, anyway. 

So Kṛṣṇa thought of Uddhava. He said to Balarāma and Rohiṇī, "As a child, Uddhava worshipped Me and developed love for My childhood pastimes. As a youth, He studied under Bṛhaspati and achieved *prema*, but He hid that fact from others, as devotees do. Then He studied *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* and perceived the truth of love for Me." By studying *Bhāgavatam*, He perceived the truths of love for Me. This is why we are sitting here today: to perceive the truths of love for Kṛṣṇa, especially the Brajavāsīs, because we live in their midst. Therefore, He is the only suitable messenger. 

So it’s a long story; I only have 10 more minutes, because I get the grace of 10 extra minutes. He sent Uddhava. He sent for Uddhava, sat him down, took his hand, and requested, "Go to Vṛndāvana with messages of My—Kṛṣṇa’s—love for the residents there." It’s almost as good, isn't it? You can't meet the beloved, you get a letter. Just like one time—I sorry to keep speaking about myself, but when Prabhupāda came to Detroit for the first time, we were all new devotees; he did initiations. I was 10 days short at the time frame you had to be there for one year, and the temple president said, "You are 10 days short, so you can't get initiated." What? So I was so sad. And when Prabhupāda—so when Prabhupāda was leaving, I ran upstairs to my room, and I had given all my money to the temple. I had—I was saving $10 for emergencies. So I took that $10, put in an envelope, and wrote a letter to Śrīla Prabhupāda: "I please accept this gift for your um—I heard a company you are going to print books with or something—and thank you for coming. I didn't get initiated, but I hope one day I can, and I am feeling so much separation from you." I wrote like that: "So much separation, I will be feeling so much separation." I signed it, I ran downstairs, and Prabhupāda was getting in the car, maybe, you know, 30, 40 meters away. I said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, wait!" Like, you know, all the devotees like, turned around, "Who is this person?" "I have a letter for you!" So Prabhupāda, "Come." So I ran and Prabhupāda was standing in the car and I said—I said, "This is from me to you." He—what is your name? Bṛhad-Brahma? [Bhakta Brian]. Put in his pocket. Two weeks later, a letter arrived in the temple. And in those days, Prabhupāda’s disciples, they will tell you that when a letter came from Prabhupāda, at least in our temple, the devotee who received that letter had to stand in the Gītā and read it out loud. Sometimes that was good, sometimes it was awkward because the spiritual master’s letters, he also has to chastise. So I had to read my letter: "My dear Bhakta Brian, please accept my blessings. I want to thank you very much for your letter and your kind donation of $10 towards my newly created book fund. I have information from the temple authorities that you are doing nicely in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, so keep following the four regulative principles, chant 16 rounds a day, and in due course of time I will accept you as my duly initiated disciple. Your ever well-wisher, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami." And then I put the letter away, and then I read it later that evening, there was a postscript. P.S., you know, we say, P.S., "My dear Bhakta Brian, I can understand your feelings of separation because for me—because I am also experiencing separation from my spiritual master, but I always feel that he is watching over and protecting me." 

At that moment, that was nice, you know, that Prabhupāda is watching over and protecting us. But when Prabhupāda departed this world, that letter was like my only solace. I drenched that letter in tears of separation from Śrīla Prabhupāda for many years. So that instruction was very helpful. So the letter was like—Prabhupāda, I don't know if emails are like that anymore, when you get an email, but I—I can understand. Kṛṣṇa sent a message; He didn't go personally, but He sent a message, He sent a letter with Uddhava to the cowherd boys, to Nanda, Yaśodā, and ultimately to the gopīs. It was a letter. I am kind of sad these days that, you know, emails aren't exactly like, you know, a handwritten letter from a friend. Sometimes if I really want to express myself, instead of sending an email, I will do a snail mail. Snail mail means you write the letter and put it in the post; someone opens, reads it. But I think it’s more personal. As Kali-yuga goes on, things become more impersonal. But to get a message from one’s beloved is very soothing. 

So, therefore, Kṛṣṇa couldn't go for various reasons, but He sent His best man, Uddhava. And that episode, it’s actually described in Chapter 46, Chapter 46: Uddhava going and meeting all the Brajavāsīs and reading Kṛṣṇa’s letter to them. That episode is very dear to the hearts of all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, that chapter, Chapter 46 of the 10th Canto of the *Bhāgavatam*. But it appears that Kṛṣṇa’s messages to the Brajavāsīs that Uddhava brought to them went in vain. How can we say that? Because here, in Chapter 65, in the very verses we are reading today, we hear the gopīs in front of Balarāma, this time responding to the messages that He has brought from Kṛṣṇa. They are responding in the same way; they are not pacified. They are not pacified. If you listen carefully to these three verses, they are not—no, why are they not pacified? For the simple reason, they wanted Kṛṣṇa, not messages. So in this 65th chapter of the *Bhāgavatam*, we will see that, like Uddhava, Balarāma will fail—not a fail—He will fail to pacify the gopīs' feelings of separation. If they were satisfied, then there was no need for Balarāma to come, because Uddhava came first. But they weren't satisfied because we can hear, "We are not—no, we don't want these messages, we want Kṛṣṇa." But now all our ācāryas and our saints and our sages, they agree: He is not going to pacify them. Why should He? Because the gopīs and all the residents of Vṛndāvana are experiencing the deepest love for Kṛṣṇa in that mood of separation. Just like Kṛṣṇa prefers to be separated, we referred—we heard that. It’s very subtle. They don't mind in the long run, because nothing higher than the separation, which brings forth the strongest feelings of love for Kṛṣṇa. Yes, they do feel, they do reveal their anguish in separation; that is clear in the 52nd verse of that 47th chapter of the 10th Canto. It’s a verse that also pulls the heartstrings, even of aspiring devotees like you and me. This is how the gopīs are expressing their anguish; it’s one of my favorite verses: *hā hā brajānanda-nātha...* "Oh Master, oh Master of the goddess of fortune, oh Master of Vraja, oh destroyer of all suffering, Govinda, please lift Your cows out of the ocean of distress to which it is drowning." 

But as we have discussed, such anguish brings forth a mood of complete dependence on the Lord and a type of selfless love that’s not seen anywhere in these 14 worlds, even in Vaikuṇṭha, only in Goloka Vṛndāvana. And that love was appreciated by Uddhava. He saw it firsthand, even before Balarāma arrived in Vṛndāvana, and he expressed it so nicely for the benefit of all of us to understand—how, okay, like that boy said, "How am I going to handle it?" You’ll handle it because Uddhava, he said the following: "Among all persons on Earth, these cowherd women alone have actually perfected their embodied lives, for they have achieved the perfection of unalloyed love for Govinda. Their pure love is hankered after by those who fear material existence, by great sages, and by ourselves as well. For one who has tasted the narrations of the infinite Lord, what is the use of taking birth as a high-class brāhmaṇa or even as Lord Brahmā himself? The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have given up the association of their husbands, sons, and other family members who are very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the path of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic knowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate enough to become one of the bushes, creepers, or herbs in Vṛndāvana, because the gopīs trample them and bless them with the dust of their lotus feet." 

So in conclusion, we can conclude that Balarāma’s visit to Vṛndāvana that we are studying for the next few weeks, in no way will pacify the Brajavāsīs and the gopīs in particular. But rather—on the high note, because you always want to finish on a high note—it will serve to increase their ever-increasing love for Kṛṣṇa. This is the science of separation. Actually, it is nicely outlined by Śrīla Prabhupāda in the very beginning of our movement—like in *Nectar of Devotion* these things are discussed, or *Kṛṣṇa Book*—he wanted us to discuss these matters as we today did today, under his excellent guidance. For in Chapter 46 of *Kṛṣṇa Book*, he writes, "Those in the most exalted position of devotional service and ecstasy can live with Kṛṣṇa always by remembering His pastimes. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has given us a transcendental literary work entitled *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta*, which is full with Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Exalted devotees can remain absorbed in Kṛṣṇa by reading such books." Any book of Kṛṣṇa, even this book—*Kṛṣṇa Book*, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s *Kṛṣṇa Book*—which is a summary study of the 10th Canto *Bhāgavatam*, or our *Teachings of Lord Caitanya*, will actually be a solace for devotees who eventually feel separation from Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda gave us everything, everything. Because here he said, "This *Kṛṣṇa Book*, talk about all the other books, that’s fine." *Kṛṣṇa Book*, he said, "It’ll give you solace when you reach the stage of *viraha*." Prabhupāda left everything behind for us. So, "Oh, when will that day be ours that we’ll get to that stage?" But that’s why we have come here, all of us, isn't it? To Vṛndāvana, for the simple reason of reconnecting with Gaurāṅga, with Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, with Banke Bihārī, that’s why we’re here. We should never forget it. 

In closing, Haridāsa Prabhu, a godbrother who joined Prabhupāda a long time ago, he quotes Śrīla Prabhupāda in his book *Vṛndāvana Days*, 47: "I’ll leave you with this verse, just to know you’re at the right place at the right time doing the right thing and stay through Kārttika." Here’s what Prabhupāda said one day: "Yes, that effect of living in Vṛndāvana and being so close to Kṛṣṇa cannot be underestimated. At every turn you are reminded of Kṛṣṇa here in Vṛndāvana, and your spiritual strength increases due to that contact." *Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya*. 

Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""