"*00385*.*
"Good morning everyone. Hare Kṛṣṇa. *Pōṅkal*—you say it right, *Pōṅkal*? This is your *Pōṅkal* in South India. So, happy *Pōṅkal* and Hare Kṛṣṇa. I am happy to be here. We are having a big festival, yes, for three days. Many big Mahārājas are coming—BB Govinda Mahārāja, Mukunda—whatever. Very great scholars in ISKCON. Of course, you have a great scholar you have been living with for many years, Bhānusvāmī Mahārāja. I was saying yesterday, this whole fantastic, amazing project is just a manifestation of the heart of Bhānusvāmī, out of his love for Śrīla Prabhupāda, to produce this wonderful temple here. You are very fortunate, all, to be serving under his guidance. So, we have a short, short class today—made shorter by the fact that we had longer *kīrtana*, but what to do? It is our process.

Because time is limited, I will just recite the verse myself, and the translation, and part of the purport, because this is really a four-page purport. This is *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.2, "Prayers by the Demigods," text 36:

"O Lord, Your transcendental name and form are not ascertained by those who merely speculate on the path of imagination. Your name, form, and attributes can be ascertained only through devotional service."

Purport: As stated in the *Padma Purāṇa*, *ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ*—one cannot understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, quality, and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through one’s materially contaminated senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality, and pastimes of the Lord revealed to him. Since Kṛṣṇa and His transcendental name, form, and activities are all of a transcendental nature, ordinary persons—those who are only slightly advanced—cannot understand them. Even big scholars who are non-devotees think that Kṛṣṇa is fictitious. Yet, although so-called scholars and commentators do not believe that Kṛṣṇa was factually a historical person whose presence on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra is recorded in the history of *Mahābhārata*, they feel compelled to write commentaries on *Bhagavad-gītā* and other historical records.

"O Lord, Your transcendental name and form are not ascertained by those who merely speculate on the path of imagination. Your name, form, and attributes can be ascertained only through devotional service."

So, once again, because it is the *yuga-dharma*, it is the process for becoming self-realized—more than self-realized, becoming God-conscious. Self-realized means "us," but more important than us is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The *yuga-dharma* of chanting the holy names of the Lord—Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare—is the religion of this age. Therefore, we constantly hear about the Holy Name throughout our Vedic scriptures, in particular our Gauḍīya scriptures—scriptures written by the followers of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is the *yuga-avatāra*. In this verse, we hear how the holy names of the Lord can only be fully appreciated and understood by those who practice devotional service to the Lord. 

As we know, we have discussed many times, the Lord has unlimited holy names. Lord Caitanya states this in His *Śikṣāṣṭaka*, comparing that the Lord has hundreds and millions of names, and then He gives just two, like Kṛṣṇa and Govinda. He selects two out of all the unlimited holy names. Mahāprabhu selects two. It is interesting, Kṛṣṇa and Govinda. Now, it is interesting to note that although the Lord does have unlimited names, we are instructed by our *ācāryas* to specifically chant the name "Kṛṣṇa." In other words, we don't have to just—it is not like you are picking shoes; all the names are transcendental and we can chant any of them, but specifically we are instructed to chant this name, Kṛṣṇa.

Now, if all the Lord’s names are absolute, why are we instructed to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*? Well, this is interesting. There are a number of reasons why we as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas mainly chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*. Because Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has described that, although all the names of the Lord are absolute, meaning non-different than Him—one time Prabhupāda said when you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, the Lord is dancing on the tip of your tongue; there is no difference between the name of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa himself; that is the meaning of that, His name is absolute—but that being the case, some of the names are, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, they are primary and some are secondary. Kind of a technical term there. Some of God's names are primary names, some of His names are secondary names. Meaning, some of the Lord's names are of the utmost importance and some may be lesser important. 

Uh-oh, how can one of God's names be less important? Not that any name of God is less important, but some are more powerful and some are less powerful. Absolutely less powerful. Wow, what a statement! Some are very powerful and some are not quite as powerful. So, let me explain that. *Śāstra* says 1,000 names of Viṣṇu are equal to one name of Rāma. So, there is "less powerful" and "more powerful." A thousand names of Viṣṇu—Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu—thousand times is equal to one name of Rāma. And three names of Rāma are equal to one name of Kṛṣṇa. So, you can chant Viṣṇu, you can chant Rāma, but better you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, because it is all in one. 

The name "Rāma" can mean felicity, pleasure, enjoyment; it can mean Lord Rāmacandra; it can also mean Lord Balarāma. And Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes that the secondary names of Kṛṣṇa—there is the primary and the secondary, remember—so secondary names, they describe the greatness of God. Mahā-Viṣṇu. *Mahā* means what? We know *mahā-padam*; *padam* is absolute, but *mahā-padam* comes from the deities. So, Mahā-Viṣṇu, the Great Viṣṇu. This is a secondary name; it is describing the greatness of God. *Paramātmā*. *Param* *ātmā*. *Ātmā* means the soul, *Param* the Supreme. *Param Puruṣa*, Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is describing the greatness of God. How great is Paramātmā? When we fall from grace, we fall from our spiritual position into the material creation, He accompanies us in our hearts, birth after birth after birth. Not just you and me, but all created beings. If they are unfortunate enough to come here, He accompanies us. 

I heard a tape recently, Prabhupāda said when you fall from the spiritual world, the Lord accompanies you a little distance, tries to convince you, "Don't go, don't leave My abode, don't go down to Chennai, don't go to the material world, stay with Me." We don't agree. So, He expands Himself into the heart of every living being. He is personally in the spiritual world, He is all-pervading by His energies, and He is in the heart of every living entity. Very great. A friend in need is a friend indeed. We abandon Him, but He never abandons us. We forget Him, but He never forgets us. He always has our interest at heart, and every day He comes knocking on the door: "Boom, boom, boom, come home you fool!" Every day, yes, every day of Brahmā. And the demigods are more elevated than us, so their calculation of time—by the time of the demigods, like, who cares about the time of ants? Ant, that does mean we are more, but most important is the demigod is more important, demigod. So, time calculation. So, once in a day of Brahmā, every day He comes. If someone knocks on your door every day with the same message, kind message, mercifulness, causeless mercy—that is something special. 

So, He is there in the heart. He accompanies us. Or like "Allah," *alḥamdulillāh*. These are mantras, not really mantras, because I do a lot of preaching in Muslim countries. When I come to the immigration—foreigner, Caucasian, white person—in Kazakhstan, they are like, "What are you doing here? Like, are you on some secret mission? Are you a missionary?" *Alḥamdulillāh*, I say, "There is no God but God and Muhammad is His prophet, welcome to our country." It is a little diplomacy with respect. Actually, I say with respect. And "Buddha" means the enlightened one. So, such names indicate the power, the majesty, the awesomeness of God. That is fine, secondary. 

But *Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ / anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam*. These reveal the very sweet, confidential nature of the personality, the characteristics, and the pastimes of the Lord. Those are primary names. And the result of chanting those primary names—not just the Allah, Buddha, Viṣṇu, but the primary names like Īśvara, Kṛṣṇa—what is the result of chanting those primary names? That is described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda in his *Nāmāṣṭaka*. That is taken from a book called *Stavamālā*. It is very nice what he says, why we chant the primary names. He writes: "O Holy Name, I pray that my love for you in your many forms, such as Aghadaman—the crusher of Agha; Yaśodā-nandana—the son of Yaśodā; Nanda-sūnu—the son of Nanda; Kamalā-nayāna—the lotus-eyed one; Gopī-candra—O moon of the gopīs; Vṛndāvana-vibhrama—King of Vṛndāvana; Prāṇa-ṭhākura—" (that is an interesting name, *prāṇa-ṭhākura* means merciful to the surrendered souls), "and Kṛṣṇa, may increase and increase and increase my love for you." That is why we chant primary names: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, with great eagerness, *lobha*, greed. "O my Lord, I am drowning in the fathomless whirlpool of material existence. O You who give shelter to the shelterless, please, just this one time, won't You extend Your hand to save me?" *Pāhi śrī-kṛṣṇa*. 

So again, chanting secondary names of Kṛṣṇa, they awaken our appreciation for God, and that is necessary. That is necessary—a means to recognize the superiority of God before moving on to His intimate pastimes in Vṛndāvana. First, we have to realize that we are very small and God is very great. Where we have the same qualities as God, but not the same quantity of those qualities. Like the ray of sun has all the qualities of the sun but not in quantity. So, we are Godly, but we are not God. If we are God, why are we struggling in this material existence? Is this a *līlā* of God, to struggle? Kṛṣṇa, who is the all-attractive Supreme Enjoyer—we are struggling with birth, disease, old age, and death. So, how are we God without God? 

So, we first have to reestablish a lost relation, a lost connection with God. We have to realize He is very great, we are very small. He is master, we are servant. And when that is firmly established, then we can go deeper into understanding the loving pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. That is why those pastimes are described in the Tenth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. That is why we studied the first nine cantos, to get an understanding of how great is God, how great He actually is, and then we won't misunderstand His loving pastimes with His devotees where He becomes, you know, Rādhā's friend and they wrestle in the sands of Ramaṇa-retī and He dances with the gopīs in the autumn moon under the autumn moon in Vṛndāvana. We won't misunderstand those pastimes. 

So, chanting secondary names awakens our appreciation for Kṛṣṇa, but chanting primary names awakens our deep love for Him. Now, we heard of some of those names—Nanda-sūnu, Kamalanayana, Gopī-candra, Vṛndāvana-vibhrama. But of all those primary names which awaken our *bhāva*—there is a deep seed within the heart, *prema*, love for Kṛṣṇa. It is there, even in the bumblebee and the flower and the tree, but it becomes awake by chanting the most potent of God's primary names. We are going into detail here—primary, secondary. So, we heard some primary names, but what is the most important? Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa. Of all the primary names, Kṛṣṇa is the most important. Why? Because that is what He is known by in His hometown. 

Hometown. What is Kṛṣṇa's hometown? Vṛndāvana. It is not—that is actually, it is described as the playground of God. Vaikuṇṭha is the official kingdom of God. But the topmost planet, Goloka, that is where Kṛṣṇa allows Himself to be controlled by the love of His devotee. In Vṛndāvana, everyone knows Him as Kṛṣṇa. If you say "Bhagavān," Mother Yaśodā, she won't know who—you know, of course, she may know, social norms are there, they worship Viṣṇu, but it doesn't elicit the same sentiment from her heart as if you say "Kṛṣṇa." If you say "Bhagavān," Parāśara Muni says that is the definition of God, He who owns all six opulences, but that is not going to bring the power, the love from the heart of Mother Yaśodā. If you say "Bhagavān"—you say "Kṛṣṇa," tears flow from her eyes like torrents of rain. Because a little boy has gone to her the cows in the forest with the cowherd boys all day and a moment of separation from him seems like 12 years. "O Govinda, feeling your separation I'm considering a moment to be like 12 years or more, tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain." So everyone calls Him Kṛṣṇa. So that is the—of all the primary names, that is the most important, Kṛṣṇa. 

Now, you are saying that is because you are a Kṛṣṇa-bhakta, that is because you are a Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava, that is because you are a Hare Kṛṣṇa devotee. You say that, but in spiritual circles when you say something you have to back it up with *śāstra*. If you say—especially here in South India, so many intelligent persons, so many great ācāryas have come from South India—but if you say something, you have to back it up by *śāstra*. You have to be a *śloka-vālā* like Bhānusvāmī Mahārāja or you have to be a *śāstra-vālā* like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. You back it up. So, it is not our opinion because we are Kṛṣṇa-bhaktas that Kṛṣṇa's name is the most important of the primary names. It is there in the commentary of Parāśara Bhaṭṭa on the *Śrī-Viṣṇu-sahasranāma*, the thousand names of Viṣṇu; he makes it very clear this primary name, Kṛṣṇa, is most important. He writes: "Of all the names of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa is the most important, as the Lord Himself has confirmed: 'My dear Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa is the most important of all My names.'" There it is, you can tattoo it. We don't do—some I don't like tattoos, but if you want to do a tattoo: "Of all the names of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa is most important as the Lord Himself has confirmed: My dear Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa is the most important of all My names." Voila, we say in French. 

It is also considered the most important name because it comes from the most important planet in the spiritual sky. There are so many planets, as I was mentioning, unlimited, and Kṛṣṇa likes it like that—variety is the spice of life. *Para-vyoma* is there, He likes to be served as the master in the hearts of many devotees, that is how they like to serve Him. But there is "perfect," "more perfect," and "most perfect," and "most perfect" is our understanding of Kṛṣṇa in Goloka. *Go* can be taken to mean cows and *loka* means planet. So, according to Jīva Gosvāmī, Goloka means the planet of cows. What is your—what is your goal of life? "My goal of life is to go to the planet of cows." "Excuse me?" I will explain a little bit later. You tell them "planet of cows," and there the Lord of all creation is a cowherd boy and His devotees enjoy very intimate loving dealings with Him. He is the king in Vaikuṇṭha, but He is a little darling child, Dāmodara, in Goloka. In Vaikuṇṭha, He is the king, but aside from the kings, the mood there is, you know—you know, He to—He has His wives and His family members, but everyone else's relationship is fairly limited. Not like Vṛndāvana where you can touch and wrestle and play with Kṛṣṇa. There, it is from a distance, but it is also very nice. 

So, the name Kṛṣṇa is a primary name of the Lord. It is its original name. And by His causeless mercy—causeless means there is no cause except His compassion—that we don't deserve it. What do we deserve? The living entity has been traveling since we fell from grace. Prabhupāda would use that term when someone left Kṛṣṇa, "bloop." He said, "Like throwing a rock in the ocean, *bloop*, makes a sound." So we bloop back into the material world. So when we fell from grace into this material world, it was a very sad situation. We don't deserve His mercy. We turned our back on Him. If you are speaking to someone and that person just goes, "ha," turns their face and walks away, that is an insult. So *bahirmukha*, it is described in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*—we turned our face from God. The beautiful, healing God, you turn your face, you see the shadow of material existence, the darkness of ignorance, illusion. Nonetheless, He comes. He comes to this material world to save us. It is described, the incarnations are as unlimited as the waves of an ocean. You have an ocean here; it flooded your community recently, so you see how many waves are coming—almost unlimited, almost, but they keep coming, coming, coming, coming. So that is how many incarnations are—10 primary incarnations. God is called *tri-yuga-avatāra*; He comes in Tretā, He comes in... in *dvāpara-yuga* (there is no mention, He personally comes), Viṣṇu comes in four yugas, *kali-yuga*. But He comes—how does He come? *Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam*. He comes in this age by calling the holy name of the Lord. The Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra* is the incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Simply by chanting the holy name, one associates with the Lord directly. Anyone who does this, who chants Hare Kṛṣṇa, is certainly delivered. 

So, He has come. But who cares? Out of millions and millions and millions and millions and millions and billions and quadrillions, maybe one person is interested in spiritual life. And out of those, hardly one understands Kṛṣṇa in truth. That is all of you. You are a rarity. You are rare gems in the muck of material existence, because you recognize that incarnation Kṛṣṇa comes in—in us, in the form of sound. And when an incarnation comes, what do they do? Just hang around? No, they come for a specific purpose or purposes. Incarnations come. The 10 incarnations come for those three reasons alone: to deliver the pious and annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion. *Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām... saṁsthāpanārthāya... sambhavāmi yuge yuge*. Does this incarnation, Śrīla Prabhupāda, qualify as a bona fide incarnation? Does he do those three things? Does the holy name deliver the pious? Yes, look in the mirror. Does he—does he annihilate the demons? Yes, but in a special way. He annihilates their demoniac consciousness. He doesn't kill them like in previous ages; he kills their divine—their demoniac consciousness. And does the holy name reestablish religious principles? What is religion founded on? What is the foundation, the basis of religion, fundamental building block of religion? Cleanliness, truthfulness, mercy, and austerity. You have to start there to become civilized. So when you become a Hare Kṛṣṇa devotee, you promise cleanliness, truthfulness, mercy, austerity. So yes, this Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*—Kṛṣṇa in the form of His holy name—is fulfilling the obligations of an incarnation and in a big, big way. In a big way. If it wasn't for this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, which is the principal movement—let us just say, in-house here, the principal movement for propounding the glories of that—that Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*, the world would be in a much worse situation. You can be sure of that. If Prabhupāda hadn't come to the West with the message of Mahāprabhu, who knows what society would be now? 

This is all due to the sound of Kṛṣṇa's holy name: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa... People are considering so many ways to save the world from war, environmental destruction, greed, abuse, misgovernment. But there is a panacea. *Panacean* means one almost magical, mystical solution, and that is just if everyone chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Everything is purified. Your heart is purified, those who hear the chanting are purified, everything is purified. One time Prabhupāda had to go to court in Kolkata because there was an issue with the Mayapur land. He had to go, he was so kind, he went to the court with his devotees. There was a case taking place. He had to be there personally. So when they got in the courtroom, Prabhupāda said, "Have *kīrtana*." He said, "This atmosphere is impure because of the lies of the lawyers." He said, "Lawyer means liar—I am sorry if any of you are lawyers." So he said, "It is contaminated." You know, there is the judge, there is, you know, all the advocate, everybody in—in Kolkata, everyone. The judge is like, "What?" Prabhupāda said, "Stop, it is all purified now." So this mantra is very, very powerful, very, very powerful. 

So we may sing many *bhajanas* and many names of the Lord; we should definitely do that. But mainly, we should chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Mainly, we should chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. In the *Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha*—I was reading the other day, *Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha* by Jīva Gosvāmī—he writes something really amazing: "Kṛṣṇa is the original name of the Lord and all the other names are simply part and parcel of the original name of Kṛṣṇa. The original name of Kṛṣṇa is more powerful than the other names, His other names. And the result of chanting the name of Kṛṣṇa is greater than that of chanting any other name of God." Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

So, we have had many classes. I am going to finish now. We have many classes about the holy names, but this philosophy shouldn't go in one ear and out the other ear. My father used to help me with my homework and I'd fall asleep. He'd say, "Son, what I'm saying to you is going in one ear and out the other ear." We should take this to heart—is that the saying right, "to take something to heart"? We should take the chanting to heart. We shouldn't lament what we don't have. We should just consider what we do have. You'll never have everything. There was a song, "I have it all, I want it all, and I want it now." There was a song like that in the 80s: "I want it all, I want it now." Even if you get it all now, you won't keep it, like Hiraṇyakaśipu, Rāvaṇa—they got it, but they lost it because they had it for the wrong reason. They didn't use it properly. So, we—well, that are, you know, we must be satisfied with what Kṛṣṇa gives us, but we should always meditate on what we have in the form of all the blessings. And the supreme blessing that we have is this mantra: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. 

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, *prabhu-dattā-rasāmṛta*, he writes in *Manah-śikṣā*: "O Lord, just as the miser continually collects, counts, and remembers his money, in the same way, let us continually collect, count, and remember Your holy names." This is our good fortune. We have so much good fortune, we don't know what to do with it. Prabhupāda's father, Gour Mohan, he said the Lord has unlimited arms and hands, and you know, it is, if He wants to give you something, what your two little hands can hold... We have so much. There is a long list of our good fortune, so we shouldn't get depressed, we shouldn't get unhappy, disillusioned. So many things don't go our way—that is okay, because we have a long list of blessings. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has written a list of our good fortune in his *Manaḥ-śikṣā*: "O mind, I grasp your feet and beg you with sweet words, please throw away all your pride and develop intense, extraordinary love for my spiritual master, Bhānusvāmī, the people of Vraja, the Vaiṣṇavas, the Brāhmaṇas, the Gāyatrī mantra, the holy names, and the transcendental shelter, which is the youthful couple of Vraja." 

That is our list. They are going to blow the conch now, and with that, I finish. I should finish now, yes, finish. Two seconds. So we should take time to cultivate this, take it to heart. And Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura suggests the following to develop our appreciation and love for the mantra, our most precious blessing, the *mahā-mantra*: "The devotee should make it a regular practice to spend a little time alone in a quiet place and concentrate deeply on the holy name. He should utter and hear the name distinctly. It is impossible for the *jīva* to single-handedly avoid and overcome the illusion of distraction. By the mercy of the Lord, however, this is accomplished with ease." 

So we should chant, chant, chant, chant, and we should distribute that chanting to others. Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, in his purport to *Caitanya-śikṣāmṛta*, writes: "In the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, there are only two principal instructions: develop a taste for chanting the holy names and display compassion for the fallen, conditioned souls." Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you very much. Kṛṣṇa.""