"*00160*.*
"# O! Most Munificent Incarnation! Gaura Pūrṇimā Class

On this blessed day of Gaura Pūrṇimā, because we are actually *gaura-bhaktas* in this age, no one can actually approach Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa without the mercy of Mahāprabhu. Technically, we are *gauras*, therefore you could say for *Gaura-bhakti*, this is the most important day of the year. I know it's holy, you know, but that's not so much our focus today. This is a *mahotsava*. *Maha* means festival, but *mahotsava* means big festival, so this is a big festival. I'd like to read briefly from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, which I was just reading—it was the favorite book. This is *Līlā-text* number two. I'll just read the translation in part of the purport so we can comment on all this nectar:

> "O my most merciful Lord Caitanya, may the nectarean Ganges waters of your transcendental activities flow on the surface of my desert-like tongue. Beautifying these waters with the lotus flowers of singing, dancing, and loud chanting of Kṛṣṇa's holy names, which are the pleasure abodes of unalloyed devotees, these devotees—you devotees—are compared to swans, ducks, and bees. The river flowing produces a melodious sound that glads their ears."

I think that's my most favorite verse, *prat purport*. Śrīla Prabhupāda’s movement of Kṛṣṇa, this is full of dancing and singing about the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa. It is compared herein to the pure waters of the Ganges, which are full of lotus flowers. The enjoyers of those lotus flowers are the pure devotees who are like bees and swans. They chant like the flowing of the Ganges, the river of the celestial kingdom. The author desires such sweetly flowing waves to cover his tongue. He humbly compares himself to materialistic persons who always engage in dry talk from which they derive no satisfaction. If they were to use their dry tongues to chant the holy names of the Lord, Hare Kṛṣṇa, as exemplified by Lord Caitanya, they would taste sweet nectar and enjoy.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. There's so much that could be said today about the transcendental characteristics and the pastimes of the Lord; they're just like innumerable precious gems, so which one do you pick up and comment on? But most significant, of course, is that Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the *Yuga-avatāra*. As we know, in each age, out of his kindness, the Lord appears to inaugurate the process for that age. Prabhupāda would often quote that line from the *Bhāgavatam* that no one but the Lord himself can inaugurate a process of religion, and he does so in each age. *Sādhū-trā*, he comes in each age and he gives a process which is applicable for the people of that time. People are different through the ages, so the processes of becoming self-realized, of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious, we would say, differ. But he is the singular, only person who can inaugurate a process for each age, and he's very kind to come and call *Yuga*.

Actually, Kṛṣṇa is sometimes called *Tri-yuga-avatāra*. *Avatāra* means he who descends from the spiritual world to enlighten the fallen, conditioned souls. *Avatāra-tri* means three, so *Tretā-yuga*, *Dvāpara-yuga*, *Satya-yuga*—Kṛṣṇa generally just comes in three ages. Because this age is so bad—I don't have to remind you; you just, if you want—not today, but just glance at the news, oh my gosh, it's getting worse and worse. So Kali-yuga, it's clearly stated, most people born in the age of Kali have a lowborn birth, so we kind of get, you know, overlooked. We're the burnt remnants of people from the previous ages. But it is said Lord Caitanya is even kinder than Kṛṣṇa. Although Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa—Rādha-Kṛṣṇa—he's the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but he comes in a very compassionate mood, just like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She's the compassionate, tender feature of the Lord. So when Kṛṣṇa comes in Kali-yuga, he comes in a golden form, as Rādhārāṇī is in a golden form. It's all very, very deep, actually. But he comes, he's very kind.

There's a verse in *Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, Second Chapter, verse 34, very important:

> "All the above-mentioned incarnations, because Kṛṣṇa comes personally—but he expands—these very incarnations are either plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions. But Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead, *avatārī*. All of them appear on planets whenever there's a disturbance created by the atheists; the Lord appears to protect the theists so they can complete the mission of life, which is to develop our love of God."

Now, it's interesting, actually, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has said that this particular verse is the *paribhāṣā-sūtra*. What does *paribhāṣā-sūtra* mean? It means the seed verse of the book, the seed verse. It's like you take a seed, you take a banyan tree seed, you plant it in the ground, and the whole tree comes up eventually. So the seed of the *Bhāgavatam*, from which all the knowledge is coming in the *Amala Purāṇa*, the most pure *Purāṇa*, the king of all scriptures, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*—the seed verse is this. These different verses, the *Bhāgavatam* develops, it grows from that verse according to Jīva Gosvāmī. So many incarnations are coming, but out of all this multitude—because why do we say multitude? Because Prabhupāda said that the incarnations of God in the material world are more numerous than the waves of the ocean. We have the *Daśāvatāra*, the ten principles, but if we studied deeply, if we had access to that knowledge, there's as many incarnations as there are waves on the ocean. I'm from California, so I know what it means to sit on the beach, I know what it means to catch the waves, but I won't go into that—every seventh wave is a surfer's dream. But the waves are coming constantly, constantly; it's just one beach, waves all over the world. So there's more incarnations than there are waves on the ocean.

But out of all these incarnations, Lord Caitanya is unique; he's special. Actually, technically speaking, he's not an incarnation. We say he's the incarnation for this age, but in learned circles, he's not an incarnation because an incarnation—when Kṛṣṇa expands as Rāma, Śrī Nṛsiṁha, or Vāmana—these different incarnations, only some of his opulences are manifest in that particular incarnation, not all. Kṛṣṇa has all six opulences of Godhead. But it's interesting, our *ācāryas* say that when Lord Caitanya comes, he also manifests all six opulences of Godhead. What are they? Strength, fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty, renunciation. If you study, you see Mahāprabhu, he displays these six opulences. So that's special. He's not an incarnation, technically.

But his real specialty—what's the real specialty about Caitanya Mahāprabhu? That he introduces and he widely distributes *vraja-prema*, the highest goal of life, to develop the love of the Vrajavāsīs for Kṛṣṇa. Because the spiritual world is called Vaikuṇṭha; in that regard, we call it the official kingdom of God. It's very official: "Sir, yes, sir." But Vṛndāvana is the playground of God, and there he relates in a very intimate way with devotees in different *rasas*. That understanding was introduced by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And that we know from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who knows Caitanya very well, because in the spiritual world, of course, Rūpa Gosvāmī is Rūpa Mañjarī, so he has all information and he's very kindly sharing it with us.

But he was living up in Rāmakeli, which is a bit north of Māyāpur itself. And it's a long story, but he and Sanātana Gosvāmī had a private residence, although they were engaged in the service of the Nawab, the ruler up there. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu was on his way from Eastern Bengal to Vṛndāvana, a long journey—it takes three months to walk, a straight arrow—but on the way he deviated from that path. He went due north to Rāmakeli to see his devotees, Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. They hadn't met him yet; they wrote a letter to him, but they hadn't met him yet. So, Mahāprabhu—I actually visited this part of Rāmakeli, this little home of Rūpa and Sanātana and their family. It's maybe six kilometers from the palace of the Nawab. They had their private residence, they had a little *Rādhā-kuṇḍa*, *Govardhana*—so he created Vṛndāvana in that village. I visited that home; it's still there and some of their deities are still there. The original Madana-mohana deity of the family is still there. Later on, Sanātana Gosvāmī, as you know, received a deity, Madana-mohana, when he was in Vṛndāvana, and that's one of the principle temples now in Vṛndāvana.

But it's described that Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to Rāmakeli, came to this village, and he was walking on the path near the home of Rūpa and Sanātana. Rūpa and Sanātana, they were there studying the scriptures, and suddenly from around the corner came this fulgent, transcendental personality. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was seven feet tall, his eyes stretched like lotuses to his ears, and his arms hang down to his knees, and his lotus feet were quite big. I've seen the imprints in Jājpur, where the pastime of dancing with the animals—I've seen his footprints in the sand. Like this, very beautiful, very unfolding golden *avatāra*. Tears were streaming down his eyes, and at that moment, that was the first moment that Rūpa Gosvāmī saw Mahāprabhu. As soon as he saw him, the following words came out of his mouth—he could say from his heart: 

> "O most munificent incarnation! You are Kṛṣṇa himself appearing as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. You have assumed the golden color of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. We see that in all our deities at Vṛndāvana. You are widely distributing love of Kṛṣṇa. We offer our respectful obeisances to you."

So that verse practically encompasses the whole mission of Śrī Caitanya. "You are widely distributing love of Kṛṣṇa; therefore, we offer our obeisances to you." This is the essence of Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission: above and beyond all of the incarnations, he's widely distributing *prema*. What kind of *prema*? *Vraja-prema*, *aukanḍya*—feeling your separation. "I'm considering a moment to be like twelve years and more; tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of Kṛṣṇa. I'm feeling all vacant in this world in your absence." The Vrajavāsī-gopīs' type of love he's distributing, *kāla*, or worse yet, to the Jagāi and Mādhāi—this is the most amazing thing. This is what he does, this is his mission. There's no mention of other incarnations doing that. Of course, if you follow the other incarnations, you'll be gradually elevated to love of God, to *rūpa-nugā*, but generally the followers of Lord Caitanya, it's understood that they—Vrajavāsīs in particular—they want to be *rasikas*, but that's another lecture. There's no mention in *Śāstra* of other incarnations focusing on distributing love of God during their missions in this world. There's no mention of a breaking open the storehouse of ecstatic love. Their mission is actually very, you could say, very clearly stated in *Bhagavad-gītā*, and it's an important and essential mission verse we've quoted ten thousand times: *dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya*. He comes to deliver the pious devotees, annihilate the miscreants, as well as to establish the principles of religion. Kṛṣṇa says, "I advent myself millennium after millennium." This is what the incarnations do: they rescued devotees, they killed demons, and they reestablished *dharma*. But there's no mention that they distribute *vraja-prema*. For example, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared to protect Prahlāda Mahārāja, Lord Varāha appeared to kill the demon Hiraṇyākṣa, and Lord Kapila, one incarnation, he appeared to establish the absolute truth because in this age things get mixed up pretty quick. So there's no mention in these particular *līlās* of a wide distribution of love of God. But Mahāprabhu, whose appearance it is today, we must take advantage; that was his main purpose, to flood the world with *prema*.

And how? Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes in that when Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared, he displayed his pastimes, but the conditioned souls didn't participate. It's like a theater—you can watch it, and by watching that theater, you get inspired. Like, you know, when we were young, we go to movies, we come out inspired in one way—to be a warrior, to be a lover, to be a businessman. It would inspire us, but we couldn't jump into the film; we were just inspired by it. But by watching it, we became inspired. So in the same way, when Kṛṣṇa comes in his various incarnations, and we may not be present, but we can read about them, especially in the *Purāṇas*, especially in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, we get inspired. Nothing's more attractive than those *līlās*. Kṛṣṇa's *līlās*, actually, I was reading recently, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that when we chant, Kṛṣṇa is personally present in that name, but all of his Vṛndāvana pastimes are also in the sound of the Mahāmantra. That just increased my greed even more for the pastimes. They're all there. Nothing's more attractive than Kṛṣṇa's *līlās*. That's why he comes and displays them. The world appears beautiful to our conditioned eyes, but when we see or even hear about the pastimes of the Lord, we have a change of heart.

Like a caterpillar—we're like caterpillars, we're *sādhana-bhaktas*, we're on our way. So a caterpillar is kind of an ugly creature; how many, 32 or 36 legs? They go like this. I used to collect them when I was young; my mother hated it. They'd escape and get all over the house. But there's a point where they have a metamorphosis in their life, that they curl up in a little ball somewhere safe, in a tree on a leaf or something, and they spin a cocoon. And after—well, I used to collect monarch butterflies, I was this fanatic as a kid, had these cages all over my room, you know, with these funny-looking—they call them larvae or, you know, cocoons. My mother come in, "Oh my God, am I cleaning this room full of larvae?" And then in the spring, at one point, they'd all open up, and out would come this beautiful entity, a monarch butterfly. Why Monarch? Is a sign of royalty. They're orange on the tip of yellow and some black lines like that, and the tips of their antennas... I just, you know, it's good I came to this, and probably be a monarch butterfly my next life. And I had this whole thing that at one point, you know, I'd go outside and open all the cages, they all fly away, I'd cry like a baby. But it was a very beautiful thing to witness, from a caterpillar to a butterfly. So right now we're in the cocoon, *sādhana-bhaktas*, we're in a metamorphosis, we're having a change of heart. And one day when our *bhakti* flower manifests, we'll also fly home, back to the spiritual world.

So Kṛṣṇa came and he showed his pastimes. "So many, I want to do that." Okay, that you do *yoga*, you do *jñāna*, you do different things in different ages—Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, different *avatāras*—you come inspired: "I'm going to become serious, Vaisnava, not going to live the life of a hedonist, and control my senses, live a pure life, practice whatever is the process of that age." Just by seeing or hearing about those pastimes, we get inspired. But we can't participate in them until we get back home, back to Godhead. However, at the end of Dvāpara-yuga, not that long ago, 5,000 years ago, when Kali-yuga started, Kṛṣṇa went back to the spiritual world. And by the mercy of Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, who's also a resident of Goloka Vṛndāvana, we get an insight: what happened when Kṛṣṇa went back to Goloka Vṛndāvana after his pastimes, his theater pastimes on this planet? He reveals something very interesting. When Kṛṣṇa went back to the spiritual world, he considered as follows—this is *Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā* 3.14:

> "For a long time I have not bestowed unalloyed loving service to me upon the inhabitants of the earth. Without such loving attachment, the existence of the material world is useless. Therefore, I shall personally inaugurate the religion of the age of Kali, *kāla-nāma-saṅkīrtana*, the congregational chanting of the holy names."

It means we all come together, because even in the past three ages there were Kṛṣṇa *bhaktas*. They were like *dhyānīs*; they were somewhere in the forest, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." But there was no mass chanting of the holy names. "I shall personally inaugurate the religion of the age, *nāma-saṅkīrtana*, the congregational chanting of the holy name. I shall make the world dance." I love this part—*dāni* and ecstasy. Not just New York or Moscow or Neo or San Francisco or Sydney; he said, "I shall make the world dance." What is at the beginning of this movement? Prabhupāda: "No problem, taking further birth in this movement. If we do, we may see one day the world dancing." This is not exaggeration. The saints and sages don't exaggerate, *tad-darśī*; they can see past, they can see present, and they can see future. So one day the world—Prabhupāda did say to Guru-dāsa, my God-brother, in 1972 in London: "One day, this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement will save the world in its darkest hour." And how do we save the world? And we get an army, we go out with guns? No, our *astra*, our weapons by which we defeat illusion, is very simple: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

And how will he make the world dance? They'll dance in ecstasy. Kavirāja Gosvāmī says, realizing the four mellows of loving devotional service beyond Vaikuṇṭha, with all due... beyond the official kingdom of God—"Sir, yes, sir"—to Vṛndāvana: "Hey, Kṛṣṇa, you think you're some big boy? Let's have a fight, let's wrestle on the sand, and I win out of love." Kṛṣṇa is actually—Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the love of his devotees. So very sweet. In other words, Mahāprabhu is saying, "I'll do a dramatic performance when I come as Caitanya Mahāprabhu chanting the holy names, and I'll invite all the fallen souls into the *kīrtana*." It's the first time that you don't just witness it; you get to be part of the play. It's not a play, it's reality. We see when Mahāprabhu—you see the pictures sometimes of Mahāprabhu's *kīrtanas*, there's Pañca-tattva, there's somebody playing, and there's some ugly guy in the back, some haggard woman, you know—he—that was his pleasure, of course. We know he sent Haridāsa and Nityānanda to deliver Jagāi and Mādhāi. Everyone can join. And in this way, all the obstacles in the path of pure devotion very quickly disappear, and very quickly one can taste Kṛṣṇa. Everyone's a candidate. Prabhupāda said even a dog can take advantage of this movement. 

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī remarks like that part, as one can transform *kāṁsa*—or that's another name for base metal—*kāṁsa* into gold by treating it with mercury, one can also turn a lowborn man into a Brāhmaṇa by initiating him properly into the Vaiṣṇava mantra. And that mantra is very clear. We have different stages of chanting. We have early *japa* in the morning—Prabhupāda was always emphasizing it's so important, sixteen rounds; if you don't finish your rounds, make them the next day—that constant association with the *śabda*. There's so much mercy there. But just like Jīva Gosvāmī describes in his *Ṣaṭ-sandarbha*, the mood, the mellow of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in different places—*līlā-sthāna*. *Līlā-sthāna* means the places of the Lord's pastime. So there's Dvārakā, where he rules as the king, he has thousands of wives and many loving servants. There's Mathurā, where he's also royalty, but there's also a mood of *mādhurya* with the queens and Mathurā, more deeper mellow. And then there's Vṛndāvana, pure, the pure, unalloyed love of the gopīs. So Jīva Gosvāmī describes it very nicely: Dvārakā more perfect, Mathurā and most perfect *vraja-bhāva*. So you can use that transcendental mathematical equation in different ways as well. *Japa* is perfect. Congregational chanting when we come together, it's it's more perfect because it's mentioned in the verse I quoted earlier, the loud chanting. 

The verse we're discussing, "the loud chanting"—I only know one devotee who really screams the Mahāmantra, and that's Jayākāra Mahārāja. Yeah, when I first joined, I went to Toronto, and he was, you know, some years ahead of me. And when we would go chant in the morning, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare..." and the temple president would always throw him out, "Go chant on the mountain!" He'd go halfway, we could still hear him, "Go chant on the mountain!" That's okay, look where he is, how advanced he is. But when we come together like this, it's even more perfect because within every congregation there's devotees more advanced than you, there's devotees in the same level of you, friendship of you, and there's devotees up and coming. So you get the benefit of encouraging the younger devotees: "Come on, chant Kṛṣṇa!" And you relish chanting because you're getting the same taste with your God-brothers and God-sisters. And when you see advanced devotees singing, like Bhadra Prabhu, Bhakti-mārga Mahārāja, these devotees who have *nāma-ruci*, these devotees have *nāma-ruci*, they have taste, then you, "I want that taste." It's called *laulya*. It's called greed. Instead of greed for something material, we become greedy for something spiritual. Rūpa Gosvāmī describes in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* as young boys are attracted to young girls and young girls are attracted to young boys with the same intensity, let me be attracted to you, my dear, but in a transcendental, loving way. So in the association of advanced devotees, we become... so that's the beauty of congregational chanting. And you can see it's overwhelming, the people that are coming every night. They probably have, some of them have never had experience in *kīrtana*, but immediately they're elevated to the transcendental platform beyond even such—I haven't witnessed any of these people becoming angry or confused or bewildered. Or everyone's laughing and dancing and singing. This is the miraculous nature of the holy name. Miracle means something which contradicts the law of nature.

So by dint of our past activities, *brahmāṇḍa* traveling from, you know, falling from grace, going through different universes, different species of life, different bodies, we're carrying a lot of baggage. It's an obstacle, and you have to remove it. And what Jīva Gosvāmī... but I can see the just rivers of this, you know, inauspicious things just flowing out of this all every night, and the people come away glowing. And they they often come up to me, "How can I continue this?" They don't even know the philosophy. It's like you go to a doctor, he gives you antibiotics, you trust them, you take them, and you get cured. You don't know how the antibiotics are working, but they work. So you don't even need to know the science behind the chanting. The holy name is so merciful; you just take it and you become purified. And as you become purified, you become more Kṛṣṇa conscious. Like, Prabhupāda many times was asked, "Swāmī-jī, what is the meaning of this Mahāmantra?" And Prabhupāda would say, "My Lord, my dear, inner teacher Lord, Rādhārāṇī, please pick me up from the ocean of death and engage me in your devotional service." But one time Prabhupāda was asked, "Swāmī-jī, what is the meaning of this mantra?" And he paused—sometimes we'd see him, he'd pause, he'd think—he always gave the perfect answer. He said, "What does it mean? This Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, it means 'My friend, my friend, my friend'." So this relationship, *rasa*, it it's developing. Sometimes people will complain, "You know, these young—this is not *bhakti*. *Bhakti* is, you know, the great saints..." You can't say your followers are getting a taste of *bhakti*. "How so?" "All—oh, they are—*ā-sā-te* in Kolkata." "Oh, yes they are." "Oh, wow." 

I... then he gave the analogy of the mango. He said, "There's a green mango and there's a ripe mango." Ripe mango means yellow with black spots, right, ladies? You go and you can smell, but it doesn't mean the green—green mango is not valuable. Because from green mango we make *ācāra*, we make pickle, and many of us who came in the early days were here in India, we became attached to this *ācāra*. I can't have a meal without *ācāra*, little spice according to what's how I like it. Nice. So Prabhupāda said, "So their their devotion is green, but it's real, and in due course of time their devotion will mature if they keep chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa."

So congregational chanting—so where is it stated? In learned circles in India, when you speak in a learned circle, if you say something, you have to back it up by a verse in *Śāstra* or the quote of a great devotee like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. His words, his writings are as good as *śāstra* because these devotees all come from the spiritual world. So whatever the *ācāryas* say, that's as good as *śāstra*. So where is it stated that congregational chanting is important? *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11.5.32. And it's actually referring to taking the chanting to the people, take it to the streets. Mahāprabhu chanted for sometime in *śayan* just to get it initial, like you warm up your car. One day you open the door, go out, and chant all over Nadia. Prabhupāda did the same thing. You see that film, you know, something on 22nd Avenue, that original Hare Kṛṣṇa film—you know what somebody came and filmed, the devotees inside? There's one point where Brahmananda coming out with a big drum and Gargamuni there, and you know Kīrtanānanda there, going out on *sankīrtana* for their first time, like really nervous. So it—what we really mean by chanting, we take it to the people. Is a person—I keep going with that, over and over and over in my head—there's no difference between Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa-nāma. The holy name is the *avatāra* in this age. So he's very kind, he's dancing on the tip of my tongue. But then I'm chanting with all the devotees; I'm getting more benefit. But *śraddhā* becomes most merciful when you take him to the non-devotees, as Mahāprabhu did, as Nityānanda did, Advaita, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa—that's what they did. They took it to the streets. So we can do that in different forms: Harināma *sankīrtana*, festivals, book distribution, internet. And as time goes on, the decades, the years, centuries, we'll have to innovate without sacrificing the tradition. Advanced devotees, Prabhupāda did that, we'll also have to do that. But this verse explains that this type of chanting, Hare Kṛṣṇa, it's the process for this age.

First verse I ever memorized: "In the age of Kali, intelligent persons perform congregational chanting to worship the incarnation of Godhead who himself constantly sings the name of Kṛṣṇa. Although his complexion is not blackish, he's Kṛṣṇa himself. He's accompanied by his associate servants, weapons, and confidential companions." 

Now, in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Jīva Gosvāmī comments that the process of this type of chanting amongst ourselves and in public is so potent that even a neophyte devotee sometimes experiences deep spiritual emotions. He's actually referring to the five fundamental processes of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness: chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, hearing *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, living in a holy place like Badrināth or Dhāma, worshiping the deity, and associating with devotees. I read it recently, he says in *Bhakti-sandarbha* that even a neophyte devotee like us can sometimes experience ecstasy. That these processes are so potent, you can experience ecstasy through hearing *Bhāgavatam*, living in a holy place, associating, and especially chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes I see it even amongst our guests—I'd see them, like, they've never been before, they've never come into a congregation of strangers, raised their hands and called out to God, "Hare Kṛṣṇa!" with so much feeling. That must be some deep spiritual emotion. This is a movement of miracles. We have to see it. We can't just become familiar with it; we have to see how this movement has changed the lives of the people, changing the world, making it a better place. Somehow or other we're covered, but by the causeless mercy, we can attain glimpses once in a while. 

Just like a sailor, he's sailing, you know, on the sea, and the heavy fog comes in. My dad was a sailor at one point and we had a boat, and we go out in San Francisco Bay, it was like just fog, we couldn't see like one inch ahead. And the only hope was that sometimes the the sun would appear and then the fog would disappear and they would see something and then the fog would come again. So sometimes like that, in a *kīrtana*—like Bhadra Prabhu, he has this, okay, that wherever he is, when he sits down—you know, we travel together like 15 years around the world, we were in all different types of situations—and when he sang the right melody, it was just the right melody for that group of people to get them a deep appreciation for, and dancing. I was mystified sometimes; he'd keep a melody when singing it for three months later at that right time, and you could see people—there was some transformation there. Where my God-brother, Govinda Mahārāja, one of my God-brothers—I think it was Bhakti-mārga Mahārāja—he said, "When Govinda sings, it's like gold; when he speaks, it's like gold; and when he cooks, it's like gold." He doesn't cook very often. A few months ago he invited me, it was a *kottis*, he said, "Come over, some potatoes." Okay, those potatoes, oh my God, those were the best potatoes I ever ate. Or sometimes you get a glimpse, you know, by reading like a devotee's diary, like Yamunā Devī, her memoirs of Śrīla Prabhupāda—especially the book that she produced about cooking. That's like a manifesto; that book should be in every devotee's kitchen. She she learned recipes from Prabhupāda, she stayed in India for a long time. Many devotees don't even know her; she was a wonderful devotee. And her cookbook should be the standard for *prasādam* in the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. So like that, we get little glimpses by associating with those types of devotees and those types of activities. 

I've never been bored in a *kīrtana* of Bhadra. I've never been bored in the *kīrtana* of Madhava. He sings real slow, but he usually when someone sings slow, people fall asleep. But everyone knows when Madhava, it's going to, after an hour and a half, *boom*! So these are spiritual experiences. Nothing in the world can compare to any of these touches with reality. 

So again, this is always to bring us to the point of *vraja-bhakti*, to the chanting. Yes, because what what is its origin? Just like when you meet someone: "Hey, where—what's your name, or where are you from?" You get an idea, right? You meet somebody for the—"What's your name? Where are you from?" "My name is Jean Paul, I'm from France." I get an idea, because I lived in France for 15 years. Or an Africa, "How you keeping, man?" "Aiyoh." I know Africa, so I know people like that. So where does this mantra come from? What is the name of this mantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa? Where does it come from? 

It says it comes from Goloka, the highest planet in the spiritual world. That says something. And it's meant to take us home. It's meant to help us develop the mood of the Vrajavāsīs. Generally, Vaiṣṇavas before the appearance of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they were worshiping Lord Nārāyaṇa. But the idea of worshiping Kṛṣṇa in a more, um, deeper way, which takes time—we can't jump over—but at least we know who we are and we know where we're going. The idea of worshiping Kṛṣṇa in *mādhurya*, as a lover—as a lover—that came from Mādhavendra Purī. Just like before the sun rises there's these—the sunrise, the dawn is coming. You don't see the sun, but you see the dawn. So before the appearance of Mahāprabhu, who introduced the concept of *vraja-bhakti*, loving, having God as a lover, the dawn was given by Mādhavendra Purī. He appeared just before Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and through his example and his preaching, this understanding of *mādhurya-rasa* or loving mood of the gopīs was there. And on his deathbed, as an example, the final lesson—well, when the *ācāryas* leave, it's the final lesson. He was feeling so much separation from Kṛṣṇa, he was lamenting in separation:

> "O my Lord, O gracious to the lowly, Thou art now living in Mathurā. When will Thou come to me? O darling mine, my heart is burning in pains of separation. Oh, what shall I do? For what shall I do? O my Lord, O gracious to the lowly, Thou art now living in Mathurā—not Vṛndāvana—when will Thou come to me? O darling mine, my heart is burning in pains of separation."

Transcendental love on his deathbed, that was what he was singing. So one of his so-called disciples, Rāmachandra Purī—Rāmachandra Purī, he was present. He said, "Gurudeva Mahārāja, why are you lamenting at the moment of death?" He didn't understand, didn't catch it. "You're supposed to be a liberated soul and not lamenting like an ordinary soul. You should be blissful when you're leaving this body." So Mādhavendra Purī said, "Get out of here, you rascal!" So then he called for another disciple, and this disciple understood the deeper meaning of the mood of Mādhavendra Purī, who was that disciple? Īśvara Purī. And he served his master in a very confidential way: clean up his stool and urine, he'd redress him, he'd bathe him—like this, very intimate service. And then he was blessed by his Gurudeva Mahārāja, and later on he became the spiritual master of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Mahāprabhu, to set an example, he took a guru, and that guru is Īśvara Purī. Of course, Mahāprabhu doesn't need a guru, but he sets the example. So Mādhavendra Purī introduced the concept; when Caitanya Mahāprabhu came, he introduced the *yuga-dharma*, *Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare*. He introduced Vṛndāvana as most sacred of all holy places, and he established that the gopīs have the most exalted love. He ushered in that understanding. 

So every time the Lord comes, he does these things. With weapons generally, the Lord has his *astras*. He comes with a club, *kaboom*. He comes with a disc—his name, senior moment, Sudarśana-cakra—who got it? Kṛṣṇa's pastime. Blaspheming, no, Śiśupāla—there's a painting, his head's flying across. He comes with bows and arrows. But Lord Caitanya also had—he came with a weapon, because you have to destroy the ignorance. What was his weapon? *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. 

> "In the age of Kali, intelligent persons perform a congregational chanting to worship the incarnation of Godhead who sings the names of Kṛṣṇa. Complexion is not blackish, he's Kṛṣṇa himself, and he's accompanied by his associates, servants, companions, and again, weapons."

So what are his weapons? *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. It's like the atomic bomb, nowadays; you can drop a nuclear weapon above a city, it'll kill all the people but all the buildings remain intact. Some *asuras*, some... something. So the same way, the weapon of the holy name—it can destroy all your demoniac tendencies, it can destroy your *karma*, it can destroy your demoniac desires, it can, and leave you as a person and bless you with *prema*, a love of God. So that's his weapon. Mahāprabhu didn't use his Sudarśana-cakra. In Kali-yuga, of course, we know that when Mādhāi broke the pot on Nityānanda's head, that was too much for Mahāprabhu. He heard about it from, he came running, and he had the Sudarśana. Mahāprabhu became overwhelmed with love for Nityānanda, and you know, and then Mahāprabhu—or Nityānanda stopped him. He said, "Wait a minute, Lord! If you're going to act like this, you're have to do that with everyone, because everyone's like Mādhāi and Jagāi in Kali-yuga." You're in a different mood; you destroy the demoniac mentality of the people but not their bodies. In this way, the holy name is conquering the world. People come with all these demoniac *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*... and anyone can take benefit.

As Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the age of Kali, persons who have been bitten by the serpent of *saṁsāra* should get relief by the medicinal herb of chanting the holy names of the Lord. And what? Menial service to lotus feet; you include that in, you get some extra benefit. "In the age of Kali, persons who have been bitten by the serpent of *saṁsāra* shall get relief by the medicinal herb..." You know, I just had an operation, a knife in my back and stitches, you know? There's another—it takes some medicinal herbs to cure your disease. The medicinal herb of chanting the holy names of the Lord and menial service to the Vaiṣṇavas. So that's our business, because we've been blessed. We have to take the chanting into the streets. But here we don't have to do it; the people come from the streets to hear. As I said so many times during our stay here for Lad Mahārāja, "I don't want to go to the Himalayan mountains and become liberated myself. I'm going to stay in the city and deliver the people." Well, the people are all here in the mountains, so we get to come to the mountains—better than being in New York or Chicago or, you know, in Beijing. We are there, we're going to go back there, but it's kind of... sweet, sweet, sweet here. We're in this beautiful—we've got the Himalayas there and the Ganges there, and the purifiers of wind coming down every morning. We're right in the lap of Kṛṣṇa. And what are we doing? We're sharing: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

I'd like to finish today with a poem by a devotee named Premananda Dāsa. What a name! The scholar, Śukadeva Sen, famous scholar, in a book called *A History of Vraja-bulī or Vrajabuli Literature*, it's written that he he was known, he had a nickname, Prema, he lived in the 1700s, and he was a disciple of Harideva Gosvāmī, a devotee in the line of Nityānanda's wife, Jāhnavā-mātā. There's different Gauḍīya lines, Jāhnavā-mātā, her line, the devotee there. And this Premananda Dāsa, he was born in Kṛṣṇanagar in Advaita. And when he was 16 years old, I was reading his history, I mean, just enlightened by these previous devotees. I want—how did they do it? So I can do it too in Kali-yuga. I'm fascinated. There's so many poets and devotees who lived previously, and they—how did they make it? So when he was 16, he left home and he came to Vraja, where he was a cook for Govindajī, the deity of Rūpa Gosvāmī in Jaipur, 1700s. He was cooking there, and he wrote a book called *Vamśa-śikṣā*, a poem dealing with the life and teachings of an associate of Mahāprabhu called Vāmanī-vadana. And this Premananda Dāsa, he also wrote a book called *Caitanya-carita-koḍi*, it was a Vrajabuli metrical version of *Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka* of Śrī Kavi-karṇapūra—it's all quite scholarly stuff. But today I'll recite his poem. It's so wonderful, like when you finish a symphony. So here's a way to perfectly finish the class or recite his poem. The poem is called "Without the Son of Śacī." Who's Śacī? Śacī is the mother. Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you for joining us. I'm very safe in his arms, a great Vaiṣṇava. If you speak with him, he knows so much, Gauḍīya literature. Thank you for joining us.

So this is the poem "Without the son of Śacī":

> Mahāprabhu, whose ears would have heard the most wonderful holy name which is renowned as *prema*? 

So Premananda Dāsa is describing that there's no difference between *prema* and the holy names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. 

> *Mahimā-vṛndāvana-viharā, mahā-mahimā, prema-hārā...*

> Who would have informed us of the glories of the names of Lord Kṛṣṇa? Who would be able to enter the greatest sweetness of the Vṛndāvana forest? All glorifying Mahāprabhu. 

> *Kṛṣṇa-dhyāna, madhura-madhura-rasa, yaśa-camatkāra-vihara...*

> Who would have informed us of the splendid nectar, fame, and sweetness of Śrī Rādhā? Who would have understood her *vihāra* and transcendental ecstasies? 

> *Vraja-mahārāsa, prema-pāri-jāta, tat-mahimā-vicāra, śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya...*

> Who would have understood the pastimes in Vraja, the *rāsa*, the *mahārāsa*, the nature of love, and *pāri-jāta* love, the glories of the gopīs, and the topmost limit of love of God, had not it been for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the son of Śacī? 

> *Vimukta-prema-pāṭha-adhikārī...*

> So glorious and fortunate is this age of Kali—oh my gosh, he's glorifying the age of Kali—so glorious and fortunate is this age of Kali. Lord Nityānanda and Lord Caitanya being absolutely merciful have revealed the great ecstasy of pure transcendental love, and they filled the entire universe with it. An attainment which is beyond their reach and even Lord Brahmā, but available to all the souls in Kali-yuga. Without considering who is exalted and who is degraded, Caitanya and Nityānanda offer their loving embrace to one and all. Premananda Dāsa says, "Please embrace such munificent Lord Śrī-Aṅga within your heart."

*Śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya*, Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""