"*00253*.*
"Haribol. Hare Kṛṣṇa. So to begin with, thank you everyone for inviting me here this evening. I'll be honest with you, one of the main reasons that I accepted your invitation was that I saw a beautiful photo of my Iṣṭa-deva, Lord Narasiṁhadeva, on the invitation. Did you get an invitation? There’s Narasiṁhadeva there. His disappearance day was a couple of days ago. I took that as a cue to come here and speak something about Him this evening. Śrīla Prabhupāda, and of course, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

I was also thinking that it is appropriate to visit you because your name, your designation, this group is Pāṇḍava Senā. That gives chills to the core of us—if they’re Pāṇḍavas, they are still around. Because Pāṇḍava Senā means the army of the five Pāṇḍavas, and that means you basically identify yourselves as spiritual warriors. Yes, you’re all spiritual warriors. Māyā—it means that this divine energy of mine, Kṛṣṇa says, is very difficult to overcome, but one who surrenders to Me can easily overcome it. So, actually, we are all fighting against the material energy. Material energy is trying to keep us down until she sees that we’re pure enough to go home, and we’re trying to rise. We’re trying to go up. So in a sense, we’re all spiritual warriors.

In fact, this particular group—I was reading the history of Pāṇḍava Senā—it was created to fight the attempt to close down Bhaktivedanta Manor. Some of you were not born yet, I think. There was an attempt to close down the Manor, so some of the youth created this Pāṇḍava Senā saying, "We’re going to fight," and they won. So I thought, surely this evening you’d be happy to hear a pastime about the greatest fighter of all time. Who’s the greatest fighter of all time?

Why do we say He’s the biggest fighter? Because He defeated the best, or maybe it’s better to say, the worst demon there ever was. There are different asuras. Even today, there are some bad guys out there. But before, there were really bad guys. Rāvaṇa—he was a bad guy, he was an asura. His name means "one who makes the universe scream." Hiraṇyakaśipu was the person that Narasiṁhadeva killed. It was a great battle. So those of you who are from Pāṇḍava Senā, you should like to hear these types of Mahābhāratan stories and Hiraṇyakaśipu fighting Lord Narasiṁhadeva—at least the boys.

So, I’d like to share a pastime of Narasiṁhadeva—not directly with Narasiṁhadeva, but a pastime about Hiraṇyakaśipu’s sister. Did you know he had a sister? She was really ugly. Some of you may know, you’re from Hindu families; her name was Holikā. She was a demoness. She didn’t have a nice smile—you all have nice smiles. She had two fangs that came out of her mouth down here. She had a hard time eating apples. But she would eat little children and drink their blood.

So actually, Hiraṇyakaśipu employed his sister during his attempts to kill Prahlāda. You know the story, right? Hiraṇyakaśipu was just so angry that his son was contaminated by pure devotion for Kṛṣṇa. Some people think like that. I’ve met many devotees whose parents think they got contaminated by joining Hare Kṛṣṇa. No, we live the pure life. So when Hiraṇyakaśipu learned that his son was actually a Viṣṇu-bhakta, and Viṣṇu was Hiraṇyakaśipu’s enemy, he became furious. He tried to change Prahlāda by sending him to the karmi school where the teachers were Śaṇḍa and Amārka; they were atheists and their hero was Hiraṇyakaśipu ki jaya—don’t say jaya. And they tried to convert Prahlāda to become a Viṣṇu-bhakta, a demon, but he remained a very staunch devotee of the Lord. He never changed; he never left ISKCON.

So as a result, Hiraṇyakaśipu was so demoniac he wanted to kill his own son. Are there any instances of that in modern society, that the parents want to kill the children? Yes, it’s a tough subject matter. It’s called abortion. They kill the baby in the womb and they have so many laws to protect that heinous activity. So these things go on. So it’s not difficult to understand. Hiraṇyakaśipu, "You’re a Viṣṇu-bhakta? You’re my son? I’m going to kill you."

So what did he do? He threw Prahlāda under the feet of elephants, and the elephant’s foot stopped two inches above; they couldn’t do it. He threw him in a pit of venomous snakes—it’s a torture they used to do in the old days. All these cobras and rattlesnakes—he threw him in there and they went away. A devotee is so powerful he can convert even a snake. And they used destructive spells—Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma. They threw him from the top of the hill and who caught him? Lord Vāmana. They gave him poison. They actually starved him, but he just kept chanting, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." So they couldn’t actually touch him. *Kṛṣṇa māri kṛṣṇa rākhe*—it’s Bengali. If Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you. And if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you. This is the Lord, and we have faith in that.

Sometimes devotees voluntarily put themselves into dangerous conditions to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness and they come out fine because the Lord really is there. He really is there. Especially if you’re chanting His name, He really is there because He is present in the sound of His name. It’s not just some poetry. Kṛṣṇa is actually present when you chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. In fact, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said that all of Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana pastimes are present in the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. If you read *Kṛṣṇa Book*, there are lots of nice pastimes, right? Some ferocious ones, some loving ones. All those pastimes which melt the hearts of a pure devotee are present in the sound of Kṛṣṇa. He really is there. You just have to believe that and then you’ll be peaceful.

So eventually, Hiraṇyakaśipu said, "Now I’m going to use the ultimate destructive force." What is the ultimate destructive force? Fire. And according to the Vedas, many destructive things like the wind, or a mountain boulder falls on you, or you slip on the ice. The ultimate destructive force is fire because, you know, at the end of creation, Śiva does his dance of destruction; he’s Naṭarāja and he’s got that little drum that gets him going. And he dances so fast, Mahādeva, that he creates friction, which creates a fire, which destroys the creation. It’s not mythology. It’s not made up. It’s real. It’s the Purāṇas. It’s the history of the universe.

*Yuga-patana*. Sometimes this world is created, sometimes it’s destroyed. It’s cyclic. Śiva is the destroyer, Brahmā is the creator of the universe, Viṣṇu maintains the universe, and Śiva, he destroys the universe. So he does it by dance, and his dance makes fire. Like we have a saying in ISKCON: "I’m fired up." That’s not in the Webster’s dictionary; it was made up by one ISKCON devotee, actually. He was just like, "How can I explain? I’m fired up." "What do you mean you’re fired up? You’re on fire?" "No, I’m fired up." And now, how many of you say that sometimes? "I’m fired up" or "I’m fried." "I’m so fired up. I’m fried. I fried myself." That’s ISKCON lingo. "I’m fried." I said to my mom one day, "I’m fried." "No, you’re fried. What happened? You burned yourself in the pot? What do you mean you’re fried?" It just means I’m not really doing well. So, don’t use that word, "I’m fried."

This has all these terms, like when Prabhupāda would take a nap. He was in Paris and he said, "I’m going to take a snap." "What? I’m going to take a snap?" "What’s that, Prabhupāda?" He said he meant nap. It was very cute. Prabhupāda said when someone left the movement, they "blooped." And they asked him, "What does bloop mean?" Prabhupāda said, "Like in the ocean, if you have a rock, you throw it in the ocean—bloop." So someone who leaves ISKCON to go into the ocean of material existence—bloop. Sometimes people can’t understand us. Like I can’t understand people from—where’s Bhakta from? Bhakta from Liverpool. Liverpoolian. I can’t understand a word he says. Can you speak English? "This is English." "Your American English. I can’t understand your American English." Anyway, ISKCON has its own language. It takes a while when you join this movement to learn all these things. Probably one person said, "I’m fried." "Am I in danger?" "No, no."

So this fire, this friction, it destroys the whole creation. So this is the ultimate destructive force. So nothing was working; they couldn’t kill Prahlāda by the elephant, by drowning him, by poisoning him. So Hiraṇyakaśipu—he was learned, actually; he was actually a brāhmaṇa, but he misused his auspicious birth to become an asura. So he was intelligent. He said, "I’ll use fire on Prahlāda. I’ll burn this rascal who’s taking shelter of my enemy, Viṣṇu. I’ll burn him to ashes. Oh, watch out."

So, it’s described that he chose an auspicious time. He’s a demon, but he chose an auspicious time—it’s hard to explain that anyway—to begin his function. It was the month of Phālguna. It was the night of the full moon, which for us is what? Holi. So he took advantage of the stars; you know, things are successful if you follow. So he had his servants build a big funeral pyre. The funeral pyre means where you take a dead body and you place it there and you light it and it burns the person to ashes. So he built this huge funeral pyre, and he put a big wooden seat on top of the funeral pyre in the middle.

And then Hiraṇyakaśipu took blessings of Śiva, because many times we see these demons, they take blessings from Śiva because Śiva is a pretty amazing personality. He’s Āśutoṣa—he’s easily pleased and he’s easily displeased—and he associates with all these hobgoblins and witches and scary people. But it’s a thankless task, because by his association they become purified. Why? Because he’s the greatest. It says in the Bhāgavatam, of all the devotees, Lord Śiva is the greatest because he has the greatest compassion. He dresses, you know, like in a tiger skin and puts ashes from the crematorium. He’s got snakes and scorpions, tarantulas all over his body. But he does it on purpose to attract those in the mode of ignorance so that by his association they can become Viṣṇu-bhaktas. So, the devotee’s association is so powerful; even a moment of association with a devotee of Kṛṣṇa can begin one on the path of perfection. That’s why we go out and preach, even us. We’re not pure devotees yet—well, maybe some of you are—but by your association, people get purified and they become interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So, he built this huge pyre and a seat there, and he put on that seat, just so he couldn’t escape—it was as high as this greenery here—little Prahlāda sitting up there. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Oh, a devotee is happy anywhere. He’s unaffected by the material contamination because he’s so pure. And just to make sure that Prahlāda wouldn’t escape, Hiraṇyakaśipu had his sister on a wooden seat next to him, and she took Prahlāda and put him on her lap. His sister. He put his sister on the funeral pyre and she took Prahlāda on her lap so he couldn’t escape. He would get burnt up and die. That’s kind of a mean thing to do to your sister. "Well, I’m going to kill this little boy. You get up there and put him on your lap." "But what’s going to happen to me?" "Just get up there." Brothers are supposed to what? Protect their sisters, right? How many of you have sisters? Do you ever argue with your sisters? Shame.

Who, any girls have brothers? Rādhā. Okay. So, I’m telling all the brothers: from now on, you do whatever your sister says. Right, girls? If she wants some ice cream, a new saree, a ride to school, you go, "Yes, ma'am." I’m just joking. But anyway, sibling rivalry, it’s there in youth, but when you get older, your sisters and brothers become your best friends. Actually, it’s so sweet. It’s just nature’s way. So, that’s pretty mean. "Hey sis, get up on the funeral pyre and hold that little boy and I’m going to light this."

But there was actually no problem because Holikā had received a boon from Lord Brahmā. Lord Brahmā gives out a lot of boons. He gave a boon to Hiraṇyakaśipu which, you know, almost made him immortal—actually, at the end of this pastime in the Seventh Canto, Narasiṁhadeva says to Brahmā, "Stop giving out boons, okay? It’s causing... I had to come all the way from Vaikuṇṭha and I’m pretty busy up there."

So she sat there in this wooden chair in the middle of the wood, and he was just smiling, saying, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa." She’s like, "What’s wrong with this kid?" So Hiraṇyakaśipu, he lit the funeral pyre. In Vedic culture, the son is supposed to light the funeral pyre of the father, not the other way around. That’s the Vedic way, but he did the opposite. He used religion in the wrong way and he did it with fire.

And this fire was the potency of Śiva. He got the blessings of Śiva to use this energy, this most destructive force—fire. So this wasn’t just any fire. This was the fire at the moment of the destruction of the cosmos. It wasn’t like you light a candle, you turn on the stove. No, that was that potency. It was like the fire at the end of the universe, and you know, it was so bright that Hiraṇyakaśipu couldn’t even look at it. It was so powerful it could burn up the cosmos, and it’s just supposed to burn up a little bunch of sticks, some logs.

So finally, when the fire cooled down, Hiraṇyakaśipu was like this: "Haha! Finally! Finally, Prahlāda’s been burned. And my sister Holikā, she had the boon from Lord Brahmā that she would never get burned by fire. That’s the boon he gave her. Holikā, you’ll never be burned by fire." So Holikā said, "I’ll get up there and I’ll sit there. No problem. Come on Prahlāda, you’re going to get burned, not me." She had a boon from Brahmā.

And then, Hiraṇyakaśipu opened his eyes and there’s Prahlāda walking away, dancing, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." And where’s Holikā? She’s all burnt up. What about the boon? Not just from some sage, but from Brahmā that she could not be burned by fire. So how did she burn up? They say she was consumed by the flames of her offense to Prahlāda Mahārāja. What’s the first offense against the Holy Name? To criticize or offend devotees who have dedicated their lives for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And Prahlāda is a real preacher. He didn’t want to go to the mountains and practice silent meditation; he wanted to stay in the city and distribute books, something like that, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. He was a very compassionate devotee.

But she burned up because of her offense. This is called *hatī-mātā*, to criticize those who have dedicated their lives to preaching the glories of the Lord. And that nullified Brahmā’s boon, and Prahlāda was just skipping away, you know, "Hare Kṛṣṇa." Hiraṇyakaśipu is thinking, "What—" I was going to say, "Oh my God," but he didn’t say that, he didn’t believe in God. You do not believe in God, don’t say that. He said, "All my endeavors to kill failed, and somehow he saves himself by mystic powers." But he was wrong. It wasn’t that Prahlāda was protected by mystic powers. The reason he didn’t die was because he was fully protected by Kṛṣṇa. If you do Kṛṣṇa’s work, Kṛṣṇa is obliged to take care of you. It’s like you join a company, right? And you get sick. Well, their insurance policy, the company’s insurance policy takes care of you. So if you become a devotee, you’ve got the ultimate security policy. Kṛṣṇa protects His devotees because, out of the 7 billion people on this planet, how many are devotees of the Lord? Less than 1 percent—less than 0.1 percent. I don’t know how to say it. So those who are doing Kṛṣṇa’s work, Kṛṣṇa is grateful and He protects them.

In this world, there’s so many dangers. "Oh no, I’m the king. I have my soldiers. I have my palace." But there’s a saying that there’s accidents even on the royal road to Versailles. In France, they had the Palace of Versailles where the kings would live. So they went into Paris and there was a road only for the king. No common people could go on the road, only the king, and it was *pakka*, nice road, there’s guards the whole way, what can happen? But *padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām*—Prabhupāda said one time, "Don’t be surprised when things go wrong; be surprised when things go right." So we have to expect that dangers will come, but because devotees are Kṛṣṇa’s servants, we’re protected. Of course, that doesn’t mean we’re not going to get sick. It doesn’t mean we’re not going to die. We have to tolerate. The ultimate protection the Lord gives is to protect us from illusion—to forget who I am, to forget who is God, to forget my eternal relationship with Him, to forget to chant my rounds, to forget my Gāyatrīs, to forget to take gulab jamuns. No, we don’t forget that.

Māyā is very strong in the spiritual world—she’s Yoga-māyā; she’s arranging all the pastimes with Vṛndāvana. So what we’re actually asking for protection is to never forget Kṛṣṇa. And that’s possible. How can you never forget Kṛṣṇa if you keep Him close to your heart? If someone’s very close to you, like in your face, you go, "Hey, where are you?" "I’m right here." So how close is Kṛṣṇa? He’s in your heart. He’s the Supersoul, and if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, He’s dancing on the tip of your tongue. So there’ll be no fear. Fear personified is afraid of the Holy Name. So there’s no need to be fearful. You just chant and leave the rest up to Kṛṣṇa. If you leave this world, that’s not your destiny; that’s Kṛṣṇa’s desire. He wants you to serve in some other part of the universe or He wants to take you home to the spiritual world. But for devotees, the future is always bright. We’re on our way back home, back to Godhead. The materialistic people, by their nefarious activities, are going down, down, down to hellish planets. So we have to stumble a little bit. If you’re climbing a high mountain, you may slip once in a while. That’s okay. Just get back up. Keep climbing. One Muslim priest, he said to me one time, "Swamiji, in your movement, do people sometimes fall down from their practices?" I said, "Yeah." "In Islam too," he said, "Yeah, we have a saying in Islam: if you fall down eight times, stand up nine." So that’s a good one. So sometimes there’s difficulties, but if we persevere, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas will always be there to protect us and lift us up. We can go back home, back to Godhead. So when there’s danger, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

So this destruction of Holikā, this is a festival that’s celebrated in India. It’s called Holikā. And people in India, even in Vṛndāvana, they celebrate this on Gauṛa-pūrṇimā. People reenact this pastime to honor the *śraddhā*, the quality of faith that Prahlāda Mahārāja had, that the Supreme Personality of Godhead felt it necessary to protect him. And in Vṛndāvana, they hold this festival at a lake; it’s called Prahlāda-kuṇḍa. There’s a lake—it’s not a Braj-vāsī name, right?—but Prahlāda-kuṇḍa, and they’ve been holding this festival since time immemorial, because when did this pastime happen? In Satya-yuga. Then there was Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali-yuga; people are still—because they’re so impressed with the faith of Prahlāda.

I asked Kṛṣṇa-kṣetra Mahārāja, my dear godbrother, one time, "What’s the most important quality to look for in a disciple? Should they be clean? Should they be truthful? Should they have a desire to serve?" He said, "Yes. But the most important quality of a disciple is *guru-niṣṭhā*, is faith in the guru." *Yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau*. One who has full faith in his spiritual preceptor, his spiritual master, and the Vedic literatures—the full import of Vedic knowledge. Whatever you need to know to get out of this world and back into the spiritual world, you’ll get it by blessings. We make more advancement by blessings than we do our attempts at *sādhana*. That doesn’t mean we shouldn’t do *sādhana*. But our masters are very kind, they’re very benevolent when they see we’re trying our best.

Shakespeare said it fallth from heaven from above as a light rain upon those below. This is mercy. So we try our best. So to honor this *śraddhā*, this faith in Prahlāda Mahārāja, they reenact this festival. Even Kṛṣṇa, when He was here, I was reading He participated in that festival, because Kṛṣṇa appeared in Dvāpara-yuga, right? This is Satya-yuga. So even Kṛṣṇa, every year of His life, He would go to Prahlāda-kuṇḍa and observe this Holi, this festival where they celebrate the destruction. What they do is they build a big effigy, means like out of straw, a big, wicked monster witch with two big teeth like that, and they put her on top of this thing and they light the fire and they run around it. You might think it looks like some kind of African dance or something, but that’s just what they do. They go, and it burns all night. It’s huge. And in the morning when the sun comes up, the tradition is that people go to their homes and they get colored dye in the form of powders, and wet—with syringes they throw the dye with the powders. What’s that called? Holi. So the original Holi—because Kṛṣṇa appeared in Dvāpara-yuga, right? This is Satya-yuga. So the original festival of Holi comes from this pastime of Holikā. So you learned something really interesting.

But we all like Holi, right? Did you play Holi? "Ho-ho, Holi!" they say in Vṛndāvana. I went there; it took me three weeks to get the color off my—I don’t know what kind of powders they use, like chemicals or something. "Ho-ho, Holi!" And Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa would play Holi. That’s the mood we celebrate. But Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, in his writings, he says this is the original Holi, even before Kṛṣṇa’s Holi pastimes with His girlfriends 5,000 years ago.

So this pastime of honoring—we love to honor Vaiṣṇavas, right? Because Vaiṣṇavas are showing us the way. If you’re lost in some horrible jungle with lions, tigers, and bears—oh my—and you don’t know how to get out, if someone comes and says, "I can take you," and takes you by the hand and leads you out of the jungle, are you not going to feel indebted to that person? Now what if that person takes you out of the forest of illusion, the jungle of material existence, and takes you back to the positive alternative, the spiritual world where every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there’s a festival every day? How indebted you feel to that person! You want to glorify your guru or your gurus or your friends or anyone who helps you on the path. You feel indebted like that. So this is our culture: to feel gratitude and express our gratitude and our love to those who are our teachers. And because we feel ourselves the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant, we’re the lowest. We have so much thanks to offer the Vaiṣṇavas, the guru, and Kṛṣṇa. So therefore, every morning before the day begins, we’re bowing down to the Vaiṣṇavas in our immediate vicinity. But in our heart, we’re bowing down to all Vaiṣṇavas who lived before, because they prepared the way for us. They kept the tradition going, or like the Six Gosvāmīs who wrote books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They went to Vṛndāvana, they discovered the lost holy places and they established deities. So they departed, but we’re still grateful to them, right? So when we’re doing this *praṇāma*, it’s not just to my friend next door, the temple president, any Vaiṣṇava—whoever lived, Vaiṣṇavas now, all the Vaiṣṇavas who will come in the future—this is Vaiṣṇava... we feel that without their mercy, where would we be?

So Holikā—next time you play "Ho-ho, Holi," you can remember Holikā. Why? Don’t think you should meditate. Don’t meditate on her too much, there’s big fangs and she can’t eat apples. But she’s dead and gone. But it’s really the faith of Prahlāda. So Śrī Narasiṁhadeva ki jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya!

All glories to Lord Narasiṁhadeva, all glories to Lord Narasiṁhadeva who is the Lord of Prahlāda Mahārāja. And like a honeybee is always engaged in beholding the lotus-like face of the Goddess of Fortune. Pāṇḍava Senā ki jaya! Spiritual warriors ki jaya! Back home, back to Godhead ki jaya! Take all the Holi with us. Yeah, there’s lots of *jāyā* and *māyā* and Holikās. They’re still out there. We want to take them back to the spiritual world, right? So say "Jaya." Okay, thank you very much. I have to go now; I have another appointment and there’s some *prasādam* waiting for me, and I’m really hungry because I gave a lecture. I use a lot of energy. So thank you. All the best.

You’re carrying out a great tradition. You’re spiritual warriors. Don’t think you’re not. "Well, I don’t have big muscles and I don’t have a sword and a..." No, you’re very courageous. You’ve turned your back on material existence. And Māyā always tries to test a devotee to see if they’re really sincere about going back to Godhead. She has lots of tricks up her sleeve. So if you can resist—"Nope, I’m going to chant my rounds. I’m not going to go on the internet and watch this"—if you’re a strict devotee, then you’ll make it back home, back to Godhead. So you’re spiritual warriors, and I’m very happy to be in your association. I think this is the third time I’ve come here. So, can I come again next year?

Excuse me? I don’t hear anything. Okay, I’ll come. Thank you. Bye.""