"*00425*.*
Thank you. So, for the next few days, we will be speaking about Lord Narasiṁhadeva up until His appearance day—I think it is May 4th. Can everyone hear and understand? Narasiṁhadeva is obviously a very popular deity in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. You need only walk into an ISKCON temple and you will see either a deity, a picture, or a painting of Narasiṁhadeva. Although we are to engage in the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, or Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, He is very dear to everyone in this movement. Am I correct?

So, therefore, we find Him throughout His glories in our literature, especially in Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books. In fact, in the very beginning, we hear about Lord Narasiṁha. In the very beginning of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, Third Chapter, text number 18, it says: "In the 14th incarnation, the Lord appeared as Narasiṁha and bifurcated the strong body of the atheist Hiraṇyakaśipu with His nails just as a carpenter pierces cane." He didn't understand Kṛṣṇa’s *avatārī*; it means He is the source of all *avatāras* or His expansions. And each of the incarnations of Kṛṣṇa has their unique name, fame, form, pastimes, and paraphernalia. We know that the Lord appears as a turtle, as a fish, as a boar, etc. He appears in a very interesting form; He appears as half-man, half-lion. Therefore, He is called Narahari. It is important we know what these words mean in Sanskrit: *Nara* refers to the man, and *Hari* can mean many things, but it can also mean lion. So, why did the Lord appear in this very interesting form, Narahari—half-man, half-lion? One principal reason is to fulfill His promise. Kṛṣṇa’s promise in *Bhagavad-gītā* is that He comes to deliver His devotees. In particular, Narasiṁhadeva came to deliver one of His favorite devotees—my best friend, my favorite hero, my favorite athlete, my favorite singer. So God is holy and solely devoted to His devotees, so He has His favorites. And one of Narasiṁhadeva's favorites is Prahlāda Mahārāja. They are famous as a couple, so to speak.

We sing: "One who always remembers your activities, Prahlāda, and my activities also, and who chants the prayers you have offered, becomes free in due course of time from the reactions of material activities." Could we analyze that verse? He says if you just remember my activities, but he also says anyone who remembers your activities—the same thing—your heart becomes purified. What’s more, the Lord says anyone who hears the prayers you are chanting, they also become delivered. Now, we mentioned the other day that actually, this incarnation, Narasiṁhadeva, is really at that time in history just to deliver one devotee. If you study the history of Kṛṣṇa’s incarnations, when He comes, He delivers hundreds of devotees, ten thousands of devotees, millions of devotees. But this incarnation—He loved Prahlāda so much—He just came for Prahlāda and went home, back to Godhead. He appeared specifically to save Prahlāda from the hands of the great Asura Hiraṇyakaśipu, who tried to kill Prahlāda in so many ways. Of course, we know that killing demons is not very difficult for Kṛṣṇa’s *nāma*. 

The bigger they are, the harder they fall. Before lunch for Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa would kill the demons. In Vṛndāvana, they appeared just before lunchtime; you know that Kṛṣṇa would kill the demons. So, the subject matter at lunch with the cowherd boys was how Kṛṣṇa killed that demon, how He punched him, how He did this, that—what the cowherd boys were talking about during lunch. How big was Pūtanā? How big was Tṛṇāvarta? He is just a baby; gone, finished. Similarly, prior to appearing as Narasiṁhadeva, the Lord appeared as Varāha, and He very easily killed Hiraṇyākṣa, Hiraṇyakaśipu’s brother. It was a little fight, then finished. But no, however, there was a little problem in killing the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. At least, it was a great challenge because Hiraṇyakaśipu had received a boon from Lord Brahmā that almost amounted to immortality. The whole part of the *Bhāgavatam* where, you know, Hiraṇyakaśipu, he goes to the mountains to perform severe austerities, particularly to get the favor of Lord Brahmā. Yes, if you want to get something from someone, you want a lot of it, you go to the person who is topmost.

If you need money, you go to a millionaire, a billionaire. He went to perform austerities to get the attention of Brahmā because Brahmā is very powerful; he is actually the creator of this material world, of course, under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. But just see how Kṛṣṇa empowered him. Everything we see in creation is there by the power of Brahmā; therefore, he has four heads. To obtain spiritual blessings, materialistic persons and demons in particular, they worship demigods for material blessings because demigods are more powerful than us. Because they can only give material blessings, and material blessings are here today; they are gone tomorrow. Yes, that famous verse: "Those whose minds are distorted by material desires and surrender unto demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship for the demigods according to their own natures are very foolish." His request of Lord Brahmā was unusual, to say the least. You know, usually, money is the honey: "Please, Lakṣmī, give me some money," or "A particular demigod, free me from my bad health," or "Sarasvatī, give me some intelligence to pass my exams." His request was unusual, to say the least. He didn't want the usual *dhanam*, *janam*, *sundarīm*—wealth, women, and fame. He wanted immortality in the world of mortality. Like, hello, through the math—how do you get immortality in the world of mortality? It is like, "Duh."

When his austerities were finished, he said to Lord Brahmā, "Oh my Lord, O best of the givers of benediction, if you will kindly grant me the benediction I desire, please let me not meet death from any of the living entities created by you." That covers everybody who created, or who placed the living entities in this universe—Brahmā, of course, under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. So, every created being in this world, let nobody touch me. He has got all his bases covered. Who is going to kill him? A germ, bacteria, another demigod? It is pretty smart. How do you become immortal? Nobody can kill you. But there was a problem: Brahmā couldn't give that boon because he himself is mortal. Of course, he lives a very long life, but everyone in this created world is subject to birth, disease, old age, and death. You cannot avoid it. He is quite smart, actually. His son once addressed him as the best of the asuras. Can you imagine if you said to your father, "Pita, you are the best of the demons," what would your father do? He would probably spank you. But it is left—yeah, this is—

But when Hiraṇyakaśipu heard those words from his son, "You are the best of the asuras," Hiraṇyakaśipu went, "Right, okay, thank you very much. Yes, you are correct; I am the best of the asuras." So, we sometimes think of the demons as foolish—yes—but we think of them as less intelligent, no brains. That is not always true; they are sometimes very, very intelligent, but their intelligence is misused. Just like intelligence—with intelligence, or let us say a knife: if you have a knife, if you are an expert surgeon, you could do nice service, you can cut the cancer out. But you give the knife to a thief or a burglar, it becomes very dangerous. Yes. So, the demons are sometimes very intelligent; actually, Rāvaṇa was born as a brāhmaṇa, but he used his intelligence in the wrong way to kidnap Sītādevī, the Goddess of Fortune. It is like, that is not very intelligent; you are going to get it sooner or later. He couldn't grant this boon of immortality because he was not immortal. His brain started working: "Let’s see, how can I cover myself? What boons can I get from Brahmā so that I become immortal? I am going to keep trying."

What can I ask for? "Well, save me from death." So then he spoke—then Hiraṇyakaśipu spoke up. He said, "Brahmā, grant me that I not die within any residence or outside any residence, during the daytime or at night, nor on the ground or in the sky. Grant me that my death not be brought about by any being created by someone other than you, nor by any weapon, nor by any human being or animal. I am immortal." It is very interesting, you know; scholars, philosophers, they like to analyze things, analyze scripture and *śastric* statements. So Prabhupāda, in that part of the *Bhāgavatam*, he actually comments in his purports about these particular boons that Hiraṇyakaśipu was asking for. A philosopher is—

Prabhupāda comments that Hiraṇyakaśipu was particularly afraid that Viṣṇu would again become an animal like Varāha, who had killed his brother in the form of a boar. Therefore, he included his request that he not be killed by any human being or animal because his brother was killed by an animal, Varāha. So he said, "No animals; don't—don't—don't try to become, you know, another boar or whatever and kill me." So Brahmā said, "Granted."

He requested this because Hiraṇyakaśipu was well aware that Viṣṇu carried weapons; you know, he is Viṣṇu, he has four arms, and two of those arms he is carrying weapons. So he is thinking, "Yes, I will be protected; no weapons. Viṣṇu killed my brother, so don't let Him become an animal; don't let Him have any weapons." You know, he knows no human can kill him, no animal can kill him, no bacteria can kill him, but maybe Viṣṇu can kill him. So he is asking for this particular request so that Viṣṇu won't take the form of an animal, won't have any weapons. And then, Prabhupāda said the Lord—this includes Prabhupāda—it includes Viṣṇu’s most famous weapon, His Sudarśana-cakra: "Make sure that Viṣṇu doesn't come with the Sudarśana-cakra." Granted.

Prabhupāda comments on the boon that Hiraṇyakaśipu asked: "That I not die within any residence or outside any residence." So Prabhupāda writes that in this request, Hiraṇyakaśipu meant any and all countries, because he was afraid of being killed in a distant land or in higher or lower planets. It is very interesting how Prabhupāda fleshed out the deep meanings of these boons, trying also to include Viṣṇu, that Viṣṇu can't kill me with His weapons or by becoming an animal or in some place in this universe. So, we are explaining this because, in some ways, the prospect of killing Hiraṇyakaśipu appeared more complex, more difficult than killing demons like Kṛṣṇa does in His eternal pastimes—He just goes, "Boom," and the demons are finished. Here, it is a little more complex. This is where Kṛṣṇa says He is the master of all mystic powers, and despite those boons created by Brahmā—Brahmā—He didn't appear as a man or a beast, but a combination, man and beast. Voilá! Kṛṣṇa is the most intelligent. Any known weapon? No, but with the nails of His fingers.

He didn't kill him in any specific residence or home abroad; He killed him in the doorway to the palace, which was neither in or out of the residence. He will not be limited. It is amazing because in these ways and other ways, He kept intact the boon of His devotee, Brahmā. Brahmā is supposed to give boons, so He kept intact the boon because He didn't want to disturb, probably—He didn't want to disturb Brahmā in his duties and his *sevā*; He didn't want to discourage him: "Keep on giving boons; that is what you are supposed to do." But this time, "I have arranged in such a way, you don't have to be embarrassed." But you can imagine how surprised Brahmā—or rather, Hiraṇyakaśipu—was when he was on the verge of death: "Hey, wait a minute, what about all those boons? And death is coming at me? Well, wait a minute, I am supposed to be immortal! Brahmā granted me all those boons! What is happening?" In this regard, his final words—Hiraṇyakaśipu’s final words—are very relevant. You know what he said when he was dying? Someone the other day, they asked me, "How is it possible? How do we know what he said? There were no tape recorders, microphones, audio recordings, iPhones. Who recorded Hiraṇyakaśipu’s words when he was dying? Who was there?" We are speaking in such a way as to make it very real for you what actually happened. Who was there? Was there another friend there with a video camera? Oh, from our scriptures, we understand that everything a living entity does in this creation, from the time of creation to annihilation, it is all recorded. For example, Yamarāja, the Lord of death, has a clerk—I don't know, I couldn't find a better word—a clerk named Citragupta, who keeps a record of the good and bad things that people do. Yes, he has his servants, too, but they are noting everything you do in life, from your first scream to your last dying breath. It is all recorded in a little book. At the time of death, Yamarāja comes and looks at your book: "Okay, down, up," something like the Christian theology. Yes, it is not a fable, it is not fiction; it is real news: "Such and such died today. Bring me the book. All right, bring me the person," and they are standing in front of him. "But I was good; I helped my grandmother cross the street." "Yes, but you were also a drug dealer and a murderer." "But I chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa." "All right, take birth again in a devotee family."

So, Hiraṇyakaśipu, like, he tried to cheat death, but death came to him. And when it did, these were his following words. It is in scripture—that is the scripture; it is a tongue-twister, *transcendental* verse 15. He saw his servant running towards him in fear. He said, "My servant, what is it? What’s happening?" He was like white like a ghost and shaking and trembling. His servant said, "Oh Lord, it is a lion!" So, his servant said, "Oh Lord, it is a lion with a human body. I have never seen such a strange creature." This is *śāstra*. Nothing scares Hiraṇyakaśipu; he killed so many weird entities. The scripture says, very nonchalantly, "In that case, bring him here." All right. He said, "Bring him here." So the servant said, "My dear master, he is coming on his own! I am fine; he is coming on his own! He is out—he is here! He is here! Give me my chopper! Give me my bow! My—look! Oh, his nails!" He is calling for his bow, but then the last words come out of his mouth: "Ah... his nails."

That was really the commentary about the scriptures; it is that ācāryas, they comment on these scriptures and they reveal, you know, other details that may not have been spoken because the scriptures were quite concise, actually, because they are very voluminous. He appeared in the 1700s; he gave very many interesting real details into many of the pastimes that Rūpa Gosvāmī had revealed. So, on this particular, really, with His nails, he gives very interesting comments. I was reading; he said Lord's nails were actually a manifestation of His Sudarśana-cakra, Kṛṣṇa’s Sudarśana-cakra. And there is actually a deity in the *Śilpa-śāstra*—there are different deities described—there is a deity of Narasiṁhadeva sitting in a yogic āsana, you know, with the bound, with the rope, and in His four hands, He is holding four Sudarśana-cakras. There is an amazing deity; I saw a photograph, a Narasiṁhadeva sitting with four Sudarśana-cakras, and His nails, because He has four arms, right? His nails are expansions of the Sudarśana-cakra, all by the grace of Bhūṣaṇa. And we know this is—

A few months ago, I visited South India. I have a number of friends down there; one is Muralī Bhatta. He is a descendant of Venkata Bhatta, who received Lord Caitanya in his home 500 years ago. He is an old friend; he used to get my diaries, and, you know, we keep in touch, and he knows that as a traveling preacher, you meet opposition; sometimes we meet asuras. He is always worried about me. Yeah, I always think, to have a descendant of Venkata Bhatta, who became a great devotee of Lord Caitanya, worry about you—hey, I’ll put myself in danger anytime because they are such wonderful personalities thinking about me. Yeah, "Just to be sure, let us do a *yogi* for you; I will get the brāhmaṇas together, we will do a fire *yajña*, we will chant all these auspicious mantras to give you protection." I said, "Yes, sir, why not?" What is the name of the *yogi*? He said, "To protect you, the Narasiṁha combined with His weapons, that will give you protection." I said, "Let us do it." So we went down to the bank of the Kāverī River, and they had built a *yajña*, and there were 12 brāhmaṇas were chanting all the mantras, and then the power of all the mantras went into the water that was there. So at the end, to my surprise, they took the pot and they poured all the water over me. "What is happening?" "This is the liquid protection that is going to protect you from your enemies. Keep pouring it." *Laughs.*

A five-hour ceremony. It is considered—it is, you know, as a preacher, why not, you know? Whatever can protect you so you can keep serving your master, yeah. So after the *yajña*, we are sitting; I am dripping wet, I am sitting there like, "Wow, Kāverī water, liquid mantras protect us." So I could see Muralī Bhatta was thinking, looking at me—he was thinking, looking at me—yeah, he said, "The essence of this *yajña* is a certain mantra; I am going to give you that mantra. So, wherever you go, if you see some danger, you just chant this mantra; you will be okay. And you have to chant it 108 times a day." Yes, and he said, "While you are chanting this mantra, you meditate on this form of Narasiṁhadeva holding the four Sudarśana-cakras." He reveals to us—how would we ever have known? He reveals that Narasiṁhadeva's nails are an expansion of a Sudarśana-cakra. So, how powerful are those nails? Like, you know, he knows about the material things, but not so many spiritual things; he didn't know about the transcendental form of the Lord, that His nails can kill. What is more, His nails give liberation.

Because with His nails, not only He tore out the heart of Hiraṇyakaśipu—He went through it to the other side of the assembly hall—He took out his intestines, but He also took out his false ego. He took out lust, He took out anger, He took out greed, He took out all material desires. And the definition of *mokṣa*, liberation, is when all your material desires are gone, then you can start on the path of pure devotional service. Chapter 45, text 30, where Hiraṇyakaśipu starts realizing, "What are these nails that are going into my abdomen, in my chest?" It was very hard to find this verse because *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*—*purāṇa* means very old and very voluminous—it is very big. The *Narasiṁha Purāṇa*—but we found this following verse: "Alas, my chest, which is being pierced by Narasiṁha at this moment, is the same chest on which the teeth of Airāvata, the elephant of Indra, was split into pieces, and the acute blow of Mahādeva’s ax was made blunt. It is rightly said that even a straw dishonors when destiny rejects." He just broke his teeth. "Oh, my teeth are gone! Who is this guy?" And apparently, Śiva also tried to attack Hiraṇyakaśipu with an ax—"Boom"—on his head, but the ax became blunt; it was no longer sharp.

He is relating in this way to the nails of Narasiṁhadeva. Little did he know that he was going to become immortal, but not like he thought he would be. He became immortal in the sense that he went back to Vaikuṇṭha. The *Narasiṁha Purāṇa* says he is there as a servant in the courtyard or the court of Narasiṁhabhagavān, and he still has his mustache. "Oh Lord, the tips on top of whose hair (*keśa*) are like glowing, hot (*tupta*) gold (*hātaka*) sparks. Oh Lord, whose eyes exhibit a burning, violent fire (*pāvaka*). Oh Lord, the touch (*sparśa*) of whose nails..." Chapter 31, verse 13, *Agni Purāṇa*. Like, where do you get that? When you love, you want to love someone, you want to know everything about them. There was a song in the 1950s, "Getting to Know You, Getting to Know All About You," yeah, right? So then you want to know more and more. The more you know about these transcendental personalities, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the more your love for them is awoken. Love is in the details.

It is amazing; it just gets so enthusiastic. You just—like you relish *prasāda*, and you begin to relish the scriptures. You meet someone, you say, "Tell me more about yourself," be a good friend, you know, how you have been doing, what have you been doing? So we are eager to know more; therefore, we have to study, we have to read Prabhupāda’s books. Your enthusiasm will dry up. You don't have to be a *paṇḍita*, you don't have to be a scholar. Prabhupāda has written in such a way that a common person like me, or all of us, we can understand these very, very deep philosophical truths. It is very mysterious; it is a golden opportunity for us. We are all blessed.

Appear to kill Hiraṇyakaśipu. So, it is the appearance day of Lord Narasiṁhadeva, and it is the disappearance day of Hiraṇyakaśipu. According to one lecture by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, which I read in *The Harmonist*, he gives emphasis to the disappearance day of Hiraṇyakaśipu even more than the appearance of Narasiṁhadeva. Yes, in *The Harmonist*, which was published by Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta—it is like our *Back to Godhead* magazine—in 1927, he said the following, and what he spoke was very eloquent English because he wanted to impress the poor British who were here, not getting what the point of Vedic culture was; he wanted to enlighten them, so his English is very eloquent, even for scholars. Participants, but I will recite it and I will explain it: "More than Prahlāda, by the adoption of the method of negative propaganda, proclaimed greatly the glory of Narasiṁhadeva." He translates that Hiraṇyakaśipu’s death at the hands of Narasiṁhadeva made Narasiṁhadeva more famous than Prahlāda’s glorious pastimes with Narasiṁhadeva. What is—how do we make sense of that? Because the killing of Hiraṇyakaśipu by the hands of the Lord was an act of extreme mercy. Hiraṇyakaśipu, of all persons, did not deserve to be liberated, but he was liberated. This is amazing. Just like in the pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we refer to Him as the most merciful incarnation because He delivered—and probably the whole world is full of it—it is all getting delivered by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu; this is what we focus on: the acts of mercy.

Ultimately, the Lord sees everyone as His son and daughter; He is just figuring out ways to get them back home. He is telling us devotees, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, follow the regulative principles, take *prasāda*, live in My airport—or Vṛndāvana—and for the demons, come on, let’s fight; I will kill you, be liberated. Take your choice which path you want to follow—the path of Prahlāda Mahārāja, a devotee, or the path of Hiraṇyakaśipu." Ah, His nails! Yeah, "Be quiet, you are going home." And so this is the Lord; He is very merciful. And we should take advantage of His mercy in the form of Lord Caitanya’s name, rather than become a big demon. It is not easy to become a big demon like Hiraṇyakaśipu, but it is fairly easy to become a big devotee, meaning a devotee with a pure heart, just by sitting in your apartment every morning and chanting. It is kind of full of blood and guts and gore and, like, we don't recommend that, yeah, but just so you don't become inclined in that way, I will read a couple verses from which describes the Narasiṁhadeva’s dealing with these asuras and how they get *mokṣa*.

"You take great pleasure in slaughtering the armies of demons. You wield your heavy mace in the most cunning manner with the force of a great mountain." *Rādhe-śyām-hari-oṃ*. You can’t dance like that. "You take great pleasure in killing demons with your heavy club in a very funny way, like a great mountain you come down on their heads." It is not so exciting? "Sensing the ghastly scene of destruction created by your chopping the enemy to pieces, as soon as the foot soldiers or the demons arrived, they immediately flee for their lives. Oh, intolerable, Narasiṁha, burn and give me potency."

"Like thunderbolts, you happily bear the redness of His blood on your body, just as the peak is borne by a mountain. Your abdomen is nicely folded; your navel is very deep. Oh, auspicious one, oh intolerable, burn and give me strength." Thank you. So, how is this beautiful, lady? Because beauty is in the eye of the beholder. This form of Narasiṁhadeva is coming out of love to deliver His devotees. So we see the love, the essence of why this is taking place: Narasiṁhadeva loves His devotee; He is delivering him from the asuras. It is very beautiful. Everyone loves a movie where somebody gets rescued from the bad guys; the cavalry comes, gets the lady, whisks her away from all the bad people, and, "Yeah, yeah, I like the ending of that movie." Well, this is the ultimate movie, the ultimate truth: that Kṛṣṇa loves His devotees, and however He can, He comes to rescue them.

So, this way we understand this very unique incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa, *Bhagavān Narasiṁhadeva*. Yeah, so shall we continue tomorrow? It is not too scary; he was scared. Often, I ask children, "You know, would you like to hear a story?" "Yes!" "A scary story? A funny story?" "Scary story, Mahārāja." "Okay, yes, scarier and scarier and scarier." As we get to the day of May 4th, Narasiṁhadeva’s appearance, you are going to run in the temple—"Hey, buddies, who are they?" "They are Russian devotees; they went to Indradyumna Swami’s class for the last week." Thank you.