"*00446*.*
"### On the Banks of the Kaveri River: Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī

Everyone, once again, welcome back to our continued series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, as well as many of the ācāryas who have had their pastimes there. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.* 

After lecturing on a number of our ācāryas connected to Vṛndāvana for the past few weeks, I was going to move on and describe some more of the holy places in Vṛndāvana. But then, I suddenly remembered one very powerful ācārya, a great devotee whom I hadn't spoken on. I cursed myself, thinking, "How in the world could I have forgotten to mention him—not only mention him, but lecture about him and the valuable contributions he made in glorifying Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura and furthering the saṅkīrtana movement of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu?" And who is that great ācārya, that great personality? The illustrious Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī. How many times have we quoted him in the last 11 months? And how many times have we heard Śrīla Prabhupāda quote him in his books and in his lectures? So many times he quotes that great devotee.

So today, I have the honor to speak about him. A blessed day. Of course, speaking about Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī poses as much a challenge as it did speaking about Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, in the sense that there is not a lot of information about either of them. As great as these devotees are, they don't want their greatness to be advertised. Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī only agreed to give his blessings—as we mentioned some weeks ago—to Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī to write *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* if Kṛṣṇadāsa Gosvāmī didn't mention his name in the book. And that is confirmed in the *Bhakti-ratnākara*, first chapter, text 222; we hear: *śrī-gopāla-bhaṭṭa harṣita haiyā ājñā dilā, granthe nija-prasaṅga varṇite niṣedha dilā*. “Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa was also pleased to give Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī blessings to write the book, but forbade Kṛṣṇadāsa to write about him.” Who can understand why he forbade him? He always considered himself to be very lowly. There is some confirmation there.

And so it is with Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī. We find no date of his birth or departure from this world in any of our śāstras or historical records. All the information about his youth, wherever he traveled, or even his time spent in Vṛndāvana—where he spent most of his life—could probably fill just an A4 page of white paper. Fortunately, however, he left us a veritable treasure chest of his writings, which have become very, very dear to all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, including the members of our International Society for Krishna Consciousness. Devotees love to read his writings, particularly *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*. He also wrote *Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi*—it’s a very deep book, but sometimes we quote from passages from that book—*Saṅgīta-mādhava*, and *Caitanya-candrāmṛta*. That’s one of my favorites; I am often using verses from there to glorify Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the saṅkīrtana movement. He also wrote *Navadvīpa-śataka* and other books. I found a quote where Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī refers to the writings of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, and I will quote Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. He writes:

> "The moods and sentiments are quite distinct. His language is simultaneously filled with sobriety and sweetness. All the devotees who have accepted shelter at the feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu get pleasure beyond measure by regularly reciting Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī’s *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, as we do."

One important thing we do know about Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī is who he is in the spiritual world, Goloka Vṛndāvana. For these types of things, we can always refer to *Śrī Gaurāṅga-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, which was written by Kavi-karṇapūra. In reference to Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, it is in text 163: "Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, who was previously known in the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Vraja as Tuṅgavidyā, who was fully conversant with all scriptures, has now become Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī and is engaged in singing the glories of Lord Gaurāṅga."

In the *Gaura-govinda-arcana-smarana-paddhati*, it is stated that Tuṅgavidyā is 14 years, 2 months, and 22 days old. It also mentions that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is 14 years, 2 months, and 15 days old. This would mean that Tuṅgavidyā is 7 days older than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. But according to the *Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, Tuṅgavidyā is 15 days older than Śrī Rādhā. Anyway, it’s written that Tuṅgavidyā’s complexion is the color of kuṅkuma, and the fragrance of her body is like sandalwood mixed with camphor. Her dress is *pāṇḍu-maṇḍana*; *pāṇḍu-maṇḍanī* means pale yellow. She is hot-tempered by nature and is expert at resolving arguments. Her parents are Puṣkara and Medhādevī, and her husband is Balīśa. Actually, she is one of the leaders of the gopīs because she is one of the aṣṭa-sakhīs. She is very learned in 18 branches of knowledge and is very expert at arranging meetings for the divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I was reading that she is very learned in *rasa-śāstra*, or the śāstras of transcendental mellows. She is also very learned in *nīti-śāstra*—that translates as morality or sometimes logic—as well as being very expert in dancing, drama, literature, and all of the arts and sciences. She is a celebrated music teacher; she is expert at playing the vīṇā and sings in the style known as *mārga*. That’s her expertise.

Furthermore, her eight gopī messengers, headed by Mañju-medhādevī, are especially expert at arranging political alliances. That’s called *sandhi*. *Sandhi* is the first of the diplomatic maneuvers in the art of politics between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. These gopīs of Tuṅgavidyā are known as the best dancers amongst all the mañjarīs, and they themselves are musicians, very expert at playing the mṛdaṅga and singing. It’s described that in recital halls—I thought that was interesting—they sing in recital halls. These assistants of hers take great pleasure in fetching water from the streams of Vṛndāvana. It sounds very simple, but remember, it’s all imbued with great devotion for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; it’s very special.

Now, the *Gaura-govinda-arcana-smarana-paddhati* goes on to describe that on the western petal of Madana-sukhada-kuñja, the extremely beautiful, crimson-colored Tuṅgavidyā resides. This is all very, you could say, confidential knowledge, but our ācāryas have revealed it to us so that we can become purified and one day desire to enter into these pastimes in Goloka Vṛndāvana. Śāstra says that she loves Kṛṣṇa very much and is "filled with eagerness for that prema." It is also described that she possesses a specific bhāva, or love, known as *viplambhatva*. I researched that, and this is the mood of a gopī who is very distressed at heart because her lover, Kṛṣṇa, has not arrived for the secret meeting. The behavior of such a gopī is marked by despondency, anxiety, lamentation, weeping, fainting, and sighing—of course, on a transcendental level. An example is given in the scriptures that once a certain gopī said to her friend, "O friend sakhī, as surely as the moon has risen, have we not been deceived by the Lord of Lakshmi? In this situation, what shall I do? You please give me some advice." Saying this, she became depressed.

So there is a very beautiful verse also in the *Gaura-govinda-arcana-paddhati*, I think it's verse 283, describing Tuṅgavidyā, who descended into this world as Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī: "I worship the very rasika Tuṅgavidyā, who was adorned with sandalwood paste mixed with camphor. Her beautiful saffron-colored body is decorated with many fine jeweled ornaments. She delights in wearing a lovely red dress, and she has many wonderful qualities. She knows many transcendental songs, and she dances before Śrī Hari to the beat of a ḍamphā."

Her specific birthplace is called Rādhā-rāo. The ācāryas write that because it’s her friend’s home, as a child, Śrī Rādhā often goes there to play with her dolls, because that’s where Tuṅgavidyā lives. When Rādhā is a little girl, she goes to that place to play with her dolls. There is a very nice pastime describing how Rāo got its name—the place, or you could say the village, where she was born. That is as follows: one day, while Kṛṣṇa was herding his father’s cows in the area of Varṣāṇā, Subala told him that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was playing nearby with her friends in a beautiful village, a beautiful place. So Kṛṣṇa said, "Okay, let’s go see her." So Kṛṣṇa followed Subala to a cluster of trees outside that area, that village, from where he could see all the gopīs playing ball. A very beautiful description is given of those gopīs: "Their dresses billowing in the wind and their laughter warming the sunshine, they engaged in their playful activities." Wow, "laughter warming the sunshine." So the girls, it’s described, look like carefree goddesses of fortune, but one of them, it’s mentioned, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī stood out like a sparkling diamond set amongst valuable jewels. And when Kṛṣṇa saw Rādhā’s elegant movements and her honeyed laughter, his eyes flooded with tears. So from that day on, the locals called the village, or the place where the Lord’s tears flowed from his eyes, Rāo. Let’s go there! We have to go there on our next Kārttika parikramā. And that is where she appeared.

So it is she who appeared in the material world 500 years ago as the illustrious Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī. So again, there is no information available—at least I couldn't find it after many, many hours of research; actually, it took me two days—as to when and where Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī took his birth. Essentially, we are first introduced to him during Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s famous tour of South India. After taking sannyāsa, Mahāprabhu started on that tour from Jagannātha Purī to South India in the year 1511. As we know from reading *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, he first came to the Godāvarī River, where he met Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, and they had those very beautiful exchanges and discussions. After visiting many other holy places, Mahāprabhu eventually arrived in Madras—nowadays Chennai—and from there he went to Śrī Raṅgam-kṣetra. That’s where the Raṅganātha deity is. I’ve been there many times; actually, it’s one of my favorite places in India. It’s like really old India, wonderful, beautiful temples, and many pākā brāhmaṇas and devotees of Kṛṣṇa. He arrived there, as we know from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, just as the four months of the rainy season, Cāturmāsya, were beginning. So he decided to stay in Śrī Raṅgam during that four-month period, as was and is typical of traveling sādhus, because it’s raining—like, it rains really hard in India during the monsoon season—so it’s difficult to travel, it’s difficult to have pandal programs, outdoor programs, etc. So sādhus, during that four-month period, they pick a holy place and they sit and they read and they chant and they pray and associate with each other.

But unknown to others, Mahāprabhu had a secret desire, and that was to deliver and to empower the family members of one Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa. Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa was a prominent priest in the Śrī Raṅgam temple, and by Mahāprabhu’s desire, he met with Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa—I think it was in the temple they met—and Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa was very impressed with this sannyāsī, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and he invited him to stay for those four months in his home, in his house. And that’s an invitation that Mahāprabhu graciously accepted. Now, Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa had two brothers; he was the middle brother, actually. His older brother was Tirumalaya, and his younger brother was Gopāla Guru—and Gopāla Guru later became our Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī when he took to the renounced order of life. And Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa also had a young son, and his son’s name was Gopāla, who would later take initiation from his uncle, Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, and become Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

That Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī is the actual guru of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is stated in the beginning of *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, first chapter, second verse, actually: "Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, a disciple of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, a dear associate of Lord Caitanya, is compiling the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* to please Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī." So there you have it, "a disciple of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda." Jīva Gosvāmī also confirms the same fact in his *Vaiṣṇava-vandanā*. In verse number seven, he writes: "I offer my humble obeisances unto the spotless Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, who joyfully compiled the *Caitanya-candrāmṛta* and whose disciple is Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī." So there, it’s confirmed.

Now, initially, when Lord Caitanya arrived at the home of Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, all the members of Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa’s household were Śrī-vaiṣṇavas, meaning they were followers of Śrī Rāmānujācārya. Now, the Śrī-vaiṣṇavas worship Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa; their mood is in the mood of *aiśvarya-bhāva*, or awe and reverence—the mood of Vaikuṇṭha. But during his stay with the Bhaṭṭa family, Lord Caitanya famously converted them all to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, worshipers of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the mood of spontaneous love like the gopīs of Vraja. And it’s very interesting how it happened. Of course, it probably happened gradually, but there is a conversation related in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* and elsewhere where Mahāprabhu gave very convincing arguments how the worship of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is higher than the worship of Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa because of its spontaneous, intimate, loving nature.

So one day, Lord Caitanya inquired from Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa. He said, "My dear Veṅkaṭa, your worshipable Goddess of Fortune, Lakṣmī, always remains on the chest of Nārāyaṇa, and she is the most chaste woman in the creation. One time, however, she gave up all that transcendental happiness in Vaikuṇṭha to perform austerities in Vṛndāvana to join Kṛṣṇa in the rāsa dance." So, you could say in a joking way, Mahāprabhu was suggesting that Lakṣmī Devī was not chaste because she left Lord Nārāyaṇa for Lord Kṛṣṇa. So Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, a learned priest and scholar, he smiled and he said, "My dear Lord Caitanya, you know Kṛṣṇa and Nārāyaṇa are the same person. They are just wearing different dresses. Therefore, Lakṣmī Devī is not breaking her vow of chastity." And it’s true; Kṛṣṇa and Nārāyaṇa are the same personality, of course—Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead and Lord Nārāyaṇa is his expansion—but they are identical, the same person, different moods.

So then Mahāprabhu said, "True, but my dear Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, why is it that Lakṣmī was not actually successful in joining Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa dance?" Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa said, "I cannot enter into the mystery of this incident; I am just an ordinary living being." So Lord Caitanya said, "The answer is that simply by performing austerities, that does not qualify one to join the rāsa dance. Rather, only by following the gopīs' mood of worshiping Kṛṣṇa in spontaneous love can one eventually join the rāsa dance. One has to follow in the footsteps of the Vrajavāsīs."

And then Mahāprabhu continued. He said, "My dear Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, seeing Lakṣmī Devī performing austerities, Lord Kṛṣṇa said to her, 'My dear Lakṣmī Devī, you are faultless and I am deeply touched by your determination, but your reverential mood in serving—always serving me as your husband, which you could not give up—is incompatible here in Vṛndāvana. In Vṛndāvana, my devotees are unaware of me being the Supreme Lord. My mother accepts me as her son and ties me to a grinding mortar. Subala, my cowherd friend, sees me as his intimate friend, and in our games, he playfully climbs on my shoulders and says, "Hey, what kind of big man are you? Do you want to fight?" My dear Lakṣmī Devī, how can you enter the rāsa dance while maintaining the body and identity of the Goddess of Fortune and showing me the respect due to Lord Nārāyaṇa as you always do? The gopīs think of me as their lover; it’s not compatible. Can you imagine yourself as Lakṣmī walking around these pasturing grounds, collecting cow dung off the ground, making patties, and cooking simple preparations over a fire like the Vraja-gopīs do? Your service and the love that we share is all part of the loving exchanges that I enjoy throughout Vaikuṇṭha. Therefore, as much as I am indebted to you for these austerities and penances that you were performing here in Vraja, I cannot fulfill your request or desire, and neither do I want to. I’m very happy with your service in Vaikuṇṭha.'"

So hearing this sublime explanation and philosophy from Caitanya Mahāprabhu, quoting Lord Kṛṣṇa, Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa and his family members were convinced, and they became Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. And even today, that family—the descendants of that family, Murāri Bhaṭṭa—he’s one of my very dear friends in Śrī Raṅgam. Murāri Bhaṭṭa Prabhu, he’s a descendant of Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, and very often when I go to South India and I go to Śrī Raṅgam, I stay with the family in their house. And for many years, it was the same house that Caitanya Mahāprabhu visited—a stone house. Recently, it had to be, well, I wouldn't say destroyed, but it had to be disassembled because they were making a big road there or something. But the parts of the house are preserved. But I stayed there on a number of occasions, and in that house, there was actually an indentation on the floor where Caitanya Mahāprabhu would take rest every night—his form was there on the floor. And when I would go there, they would very kindly, Murāri Bhaṭṭa Prabhu would provide a nice bed and, you know, all facilities, nice prasādam, and wonderful association. He’d take us to the temple and we’d have special darśana of the Raṅganātha deity, etc. But I never slept in the bed. When everybody left the room, I slept on top of that impression of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu that he made when he was sleeping on that stone. That’s why I would sleep—so special mercy there.

But today, their priest in the temple identifies very much with Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, of course, because his ancestor, Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, did, and his ancestor, the brother of Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, Gopāla Guru, became Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, and Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa’s son became Gopāla Bhaṭṭa. So he identifies very closely with us. He’s a very nice Vaiṣṇava, very, very favorable to ISKCON, and very much appreciates what Śrīla Prabhupāda has done in spreading the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa around the world.

So after the four months of the rainy season were over, Lord Caitanya left to continue his travels. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta has written how the three brothers—Tirumalaya, Veṅkaṭa, and our Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī—felt at the time that Mahāprabhu was leaving. You can imagine; they lived with him, they served him, they took his remnants of prasāda, and they heard him speak Kṛṣṇa-kathā. Such intimate association, living with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for... I found the passage how those three brothers felt when Mahāprabhu was walking away from their home, and I quote Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī with great pleasure: "These three personalities are thinking, 'Oh, how will we remain in the absence of Mahāprabhu? People will try to take us with them to bathe in the Kāverī River, to sport and enjoy some fun, but we will only be able to weep and cry in separation from Caitanya Mahāprabhu.'" That’s how they thought, and that comes from the mouth of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. I’ll read it again: "Oh, how will we remain in the absence of Mahāprabhu? People will try to take us with them to bathe in the Kāverī River, to sport and enjoy some fun, but we will only be able to weep and cry in separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Then Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī continues by saying: "Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī then entered deeply into the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, his inner being totally possessed by Mahāprabhu’s glories. Within a few years, he left Śrī Raṅgam, setting out with the solemn vow to attain the most cherished object of his meditation. Without wasting time, he came to Mathurā-maṇḍala and he took up residence in Kāmyavana. Later, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī followed in the footsteps of his uncle, arriving in Vṛndāvana."

So some very nice details given to us by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī of how he left home and came straight to Vṛndāvana, and he came to Kāmyavana, that special forest of Kāmyavana. There’s nothing much written of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī’s many years in Vṛndāvana after arriving in Kāmyavana. Like many sādhus and renunciates, he often moved to holy places in Vraja to write those many books that he left us. And one of his favorite bhajana-kuṭīras was on the bank of the Yamunā River at Kāliyā-ghāṭa. When we go on our Kārttika parikramā, we always pass by Kāliyā-ghāṭa; I mean, it’s just a few meters off the parikramā marg, which was originally where the Yamunā River flowed. So you see the ghāṭas there because the river was originally flowing there—now the river is flowing some distance away, the Yamunā—but there’s still the same tree that Kṛṣṇa jumped off to chastise the Kāliyā serpent; that’s still there. So that was one place that we know that Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī used to go and do his bhajana. And eventually, when he departed this world, he was placed in samādhi just behind Kāliyā-ghāṭa.

It remains to this day a very quiet, a very clean, a very charming, secluded place, like a little forested area. It’s one of my favorite places in all of Vṛndāvana to spend time alone or with a few devotees, you know, reading or chanting or praying or having a soft bhajana. And I originally found out that his samādhi was there—a little courtyard, not a very big area, a beautiful samādhi—but there’s a little āśrama of sādhus that live there as well, some beautiful trees. It’s only a two-minute walk off the parikramā marg, actually. And I used to go there—I remember 1974, ’75, 1976—and at that time, not many devotees knew about it, or it wasn't perhaps one of the main places that we would go on parikramā in those days. But I always walked down there; I’d go down that parikramā marg, and I’d sit there and I’d chant and I’d pray and especially pray to him, another one of my heroes, actually. And I tried to keep it secret because no one ever went there—just very few devotees went there—and to get, you know, quiet and undisturbedly sanctified. But yes, now devotees know about it, more devotees know about it. So please, next time you go to Vṛndāvana and you pass by Kāliyā-ghāṭa, you can ask the local people, "Where is the samādhi-mandira of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī?" And believe me, you’ll be so pleased to have been there. It’s such a wonderful spiritual atmosphere. And as we know, we can pray to our ācāryas at their samādhis and we can know that they’re hearing and we can know that they reciprocate. So please go. Hearing these few glories that we know about him—but it’s enough—and of course we have his writings, *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* (so many devotees love that book) and *Navadvīpa-śataka*, describing the holy places in Navadvīpa, Māyāpura. So you can take the books—that’s what I do, I take the books and I go and I read there—and you can sit right next to the samādhi and you can reveal your heart to that great devotee and pray for his mercy.

So before we conclude, I would like to mention that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī brings up a rather interesting issue that I found in my research. He writes: "Some people attempt to establish that the Māyāvādī resident of Kāśī/Vārāṇasī today, Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, is one and the same with the foremost Vaiṣṇava, Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī. We, however, do not accept this in any way, shape, or form." That’s the quote of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī—that some people say that the Māyāvādī sannyāsī of Vārāṇasī, we all know from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Prakāśānanda; he had thousands of Māyāvādī followers. Mahāprabhu converted him, of course, but he was a Māyāvādī for most of his life, actually. He wasn't actually converted, I read, until he was more or less elderly. So they’re not the same person. Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī and Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī are two different persons. And actually, I did find a number of scholars and historians even today who support this nonsensical theory that the Māyāvādī sannyāsī Prakāśānanda and our Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī are the same person. I found many references like that. Their logic is that after Lord Caitanya converted Prakāśānanda and all his followers in Kāśī, Prakāśānanda changed his name to Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī and then he went to Vṛndāvana.

Well, we know from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* who he was: in Śrī Raṅgam, Gopāla Guru associated with Mahāprabhu, came from there to Vṛndāvana, and never left. He didn't go to Kāśī and become a Māyāvādī, or he wasn't... he didn't start off in Kāśī and go to Vṛndāvana. It’s just nonsense. It’s simply not historically true, and there’s no written record of this—that the Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī became Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī when he was converted and came to Vṛndāvana. And what’s more, from our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava perspective: why in the world would Tuṅgavidyā—who we opened this class with describing her, relating from the śāstras so many of her beautiful qualities, unlimited qualities; she’s one of the eight aṣṭa-sakhīs—why would Tuṅgavidyā descend into this world and become a Māyāvādī and then be converted to a Vaiṣṇava? It’s offensive! We understand that Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī is a *nitya-siddha*, an eternally liberated soul, and an eternally liberated soul is never contaminated by coming in contact with the material energy. And when you come in contact with material energy, how do you become contaminated? Well, there’s different degrees of contamination. Probably there’s two types of illusion in this world, or you could say contamination: one is to think "I am the body," and the second is to think "I am God." That’s how you get contaminated. A conditioned soul can come under the influence of the material energy or the spiritual energy. But when one is under the influence of the material energy, he strongly is convinced "I am this body." Another extension of that illusion is that "I am God," and the Māyāvādīs, they preach this illusion: "I am God." Therefore, Prabhupāda writes in a purport in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*: "Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that the Māyāvādīs are the greatest offenders." So, again, how could Tuṅgavidyā, one of the eight aṣṭa-sakhīs, girlfriends of Rādhārāṇī, appear in the material world as a Māyāvādī and become the worst of the offenders? No way. It’s not possible. Of course, it is wonderful that Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī became converted to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, as did all his followers, by the power and the potency of Mahāprabhu, the Yuga-avatāra. But historically, they all stayed in Kāśī and they practiced Kṛṣṇa consciousness there after Mahāprabhu left. Anyway, there’s no need to discuss this matter any further; it’s not very tasteful. I only brought it up because Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura brought it up and because one day in your preaching, you may be called upon to defend Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī from this false doctrine. Preaching means also defending—defending Kṛṣṇa.

So rather, let us close today with several very wonderful glorifications of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī by devotees down through the ages. We may not know about them, but if their preaching and their siddhānta is identical with ours, then there’s no harm. Just like my dear godbrother, Śrīla Girirāja Mahārāja, has just published a book on Śrīla Prabhupāda’s pastimes in Juhu, Mumbai, how Prabhupāda established the temple. So we’re hearing it from a contemporary of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and there’ll be devotees in the future who will also write wonderful things about other devotees, about Śrīla Prabhupāda, about the history of ISKCON. So we hear from them. So we can also hear from personalities who appeared in the several hundred years after Caitanya Mahāprabhu if their śāstra is in line with ours, and if the philosophy that they’re speaking and the pastimes are the same as we’re hearing from our beloved Prabhupāda and from our previous ācāryas like Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī or Bhaktivedānta.

So I found one passage wherein we hear a very beautiful description of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī in a book called *Vyāsa-jī-kī-vānī*. *Vyāsa-jī-kī-vānī* was written by one Harirām Vyāsa in the 16th century, and here’s how he describes our Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī. It’s very beautiful:

> "Poets like Prabhodhānanda are very rare. He sang about all mellows in the divine pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Having broken the strong bonds of material life, his only hope was to relish those loving pastimes. His natural, sweet words stole the minds of other exclusively devoted rasikas. In his heart, he always held the Lord’s pure qualities, names, and forms, and thus turned away from all sensual agitation. Like a cātaka bird, he kept his eyes on the moonlight reflection of the beautiful nails of the Lord’s lotus feet, and in this way gave up all illusory happiness, the bodily concept of life, and the grip of Yamarāja."

I love the way he ends it: "He gave up all illusory happiness, the bodily concept of life, and the grip of Yamarāja." So we thank that Prabhu for that beautiful glorification.

Also, another beautiful tribute is found in the writings of a highly respected Vaiṣṇava poet; his name was Priyādāsa. He wrote in the year 1712:

> "Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī was a great rasika bhakta and a devoted associate of Lord Caitanya who was bliss personified. He gave fresh descriptions of the loving pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the groves of Vṛndāvana. He relished their forms and rasas and made them dearmost in his poems. He revealed the splendor of residing in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma and thus merged the devotees into an ocean of unlimited happiness. He came aloof from all materially motivated activities and religiosity. Listening to his poems, millions of people fell in love with Kṛṣṇa and Caitanya Mahāprabhu while residing himself in the beautiful Vṛndāvana, sacrificed his body and mind in the service of the Lord."

And finally, we’ll hear from the first chapter of *Bhakti-ratnākara* where Narahari Cakravartī [writes]:

> "He had many virtues. Even in dreams he did not know anyone else besides Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, the Supreme Brahman who was so dear to him. He was fascinating, supremely detached, affection personified, a great poet, and incomparable in dance and music, both vocal and instrumental. He would increase the happiness of all those who heard him speak."

And I can add, he also increases the joy and happiness of those who speak about him, as I had that golden opportunity today. So thank you, Prabhus. We’ll move on again; I’ll see if there’s any more personalities who resided in Vṛndāvana during their lives to speak about and glorify them, and if not, then we’ll move on to some more Vṛndāvana-līlā. I really enjoyed the research; I really enjoyed sharing all the research with you today, and I’ll see you in a couple days. *Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya!*""