Here we go again, back in Rishikesh at the beautiful Ananda Ashram, just above the Ganga. We're starting to see, just like the waves of the Ganga are flowing, waves of people are coming each night, and hearts are being transformed through chanting, dancing, and, of course, feasting.

Beautiful feasts prepared every night. This is the Yuga Dharma. In fact, Śrīla Prabhupāda built his whole International Society on chanting, dancing, and feasting.

So we're inspiring people to take full shelter, full nourishment, from the holy name, and we're seeing new friendships, brothers, and sisters. And it's from this place the whole world comes, you know, and gathers in Rishikesh, and then they're taking this with them and sharing it all over the world.

We're all feeling so grateful to be here. Oh, hi!

I'm Lassa. And, yeah, it's my third day here at the festival, and I'm just keep coming back every day, again and again, because the energy here is just so amazing. I mean, the chanting, the dancing together, it's just full of love, and you can really feel it.

It's doing something with me, and I'm really happy to be here, and I feel so lucky and grateful. Some people say that Rishikesh means the locks, the keśa of the rishis, the dreadlocks of the rishis. And all these little ashrams along the Ganga, the Ganga's flowing, it's like the dreadlocks of the rishis.

But actually, the original temple, the oldest temple, the Bharat Mandir in Rishikesh, calls it Rishikesh, the master of the senses. So, for millennia, people have come here to let go of the attachment of their senses and to pour their attention and intention towards the Supreme Lord, the master of the senses, the goal of the senses.

So here we are in this kind of valley, surrounded by mountains. There are these beautiful flags always blowing in the wind. Mornings are chilly, but as the sun rises and people begin bathing in the Ganga, the town comes alive.

And, you know, searchers from all over the globe come here. And many of them don't know what they're looking for. They come to this place searching, but what are they looking for?

And just like Nara gave to Dhruva, Dhruva, you have to add mantra to your Ashtanga yoga and pranayama practice. He gave him the mantra, "Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya." In the same way, we're saying to the people of Rishikesh, whatever your spiritual activity, please add mantra to your practice.

Please begin chanting with ecstasy and with love the holy names of the Lord. And certainly, here we are, you know, on the banks of the Ganga. She's just below the ashram. We know she hears our prayers, and the resonance of our vibration of the holy names, and we know that she's blessing us.

We feel her presence. And even this morning, a few of us went down, bathed in the chilly waters, and came out refreshed and invigorated for another day of service. So what I felt when I was inside, oh boy, I felt that it didn't matter where we're from.

And I really enjoyed seeing people from different countries. And I feel that when we're chanting, we all speak the same language, and I felt that I could be one with everyone, and I sort of knew everyone. And I just felt thankful, honestly.

I think I do it for the gratitude, and just feel the energy and the vibration of everyone's voices just makes me feel alive. I think it's difficult to explain how you feel in a kirtan. And I'd never done them before coming to Rishikesh.

This is my first time in India. And, um, you just, even when you're sitting with your eyes shut, you can feel the vibrations lifting. And there's such a feeling of love and energy in the room. And I was quite nervous, to be honest, about all the getting up and dancing, but, you know, that kind of vanished and drifted away, and you get carried away with the lovely energy.

The Rishikesh Kirtan Fest, for myself, has been a very special event. There's something about this culture and how the culture of bhakti plays out in the lives of those that are practicing it. This event, it's really an event where a group of people, a group of very beautiful, deeply spiritual people, have come together to serve and to highlight what's most important in life, and do it in an aesthetically very beautiful, cultural way.

You know, there's, if we go back to the ancient texts on bhakti yoga that were handed down by sages that walked, you know, on the bank of the very river where we're gathered here for centuries and centuries and centuries and centuries, they said that there's a soul to the entire universe, Lord Vishnu.

And that same soul of the universe enters the heart of every living being, and it's there we can feel the presence of that, uh, of that soul within ourselves, that divine soul. But mostly, we're distracted. Mostly, we're out of touch.

And the most accessible way to come in touch is through this sound of Vishnu or Krishna's name.

And so here, it's a group of people recognizing that, experiencing that, feeling it themselves, saying, let's invite people to come and experience that. And it's a team of people that are just here to serve, that serve it selflessly. People serve selflessly out of love, then beautiful magic things happen, and that's what happens here at this event.

I was in one temple in South America many years ago, and now I'm here in India, doing yoga and studying some classical Indian music. So I was really positively surprised when a friend told me, you have to come here to the Kirtan Festival, and it's been amazing.

I've been here every night since it started, and it's just such incredible energy with all these professional musicians coming from all over the world, sharing their own faith and their own stories about how they view the world in such a good way.

And the fact that it's all by donation, offered, even the food here, and face painting, and women get some saris. I mean, me and my friends, we are pretty amazed, you know, what we can do as human beings coming together like this.

It's beautiful. Everyone, keep it up. Together. There's a famous song by Bob Marley. He says, "One good thing about music, when it hits you, you feel no pain." Hit me with music, hit me with music. So, even just music, it uplifts the spirit.

But when you chant divine names, when you cry out and call out to your source, that sound vibration, you know, shoots out into the universe. And how can God ignore the cry of a heart, of a soul?

For me, chanting is a way to transform any circumstance and immediately feel connected and reminded of who I really am, become free from fear, free from anxiety, and to share that with the world is such a blessing. Together. Your hand, your hand.

Oh, take. Oh.