"*00509*.*
"This afternoon, we’ve just opened up the *Bhāgavatam* because there are 18,000 *ślokas*, and all of them are pregnant with very deep meaning. We opened up to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, Third Chapter, text 28. Prabhupāda said everything is there in the First Canto.

*ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam*
*indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ mṛḍayanti yuge yuge*

"All of the above-mentioned incarnations are either plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of the Lord, but Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead. All of them appear on planets whenever there is a disturbance created by atheists. The Lord incarnates to protect the theists."

In this particular stanza, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, is distinguished from other incarnations. In other words, He is *avatārī*, meaning the source of incarnations. He is counted amongst the *avatāras*—incarnations—because out of His causeless mercy, the Lord descends from His transcendental abode. *Avatāra* means "one who descends." All the incarnations of the Lord, including the Lord Himself, descend to the different planets of the material world and also in different species of life to fulfill particular missions. Sometimes He comes Himself, and sometimes His different plenary portions, or parts of those plenary portions, or His differentiated portions directly or indirectly empowered by Him, descend to this material world to execute certain specific functions after leaving His transcendental abode.

So, this verse of *Bhāgavatam*—of course, *Bhāgavata* means scripture, and *Rāj* means like "King," *Bhāgavata-rāj*, the king of all scriptures—it discusses Lord Kṛṣṇa's appearance in this nasty world. This material world has been compared to a prison where rebellious souls are sent to spend their time. In this regard, we often refer to it as *durga*. I know here in Bengal there is a whole festival dedicated to Durgā, but she is the warden. I never see prisoners in a prison worshiping the warden, but she has the thankless task—she is a pure devotee—she has the thankless task of keeping the conditioned souls in this world up until that point where they call out to Kṛṣṇa: "Please free me from this *saṁsāra*, this repetition of birth and death. Oh my Lord, I’m drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence. Please, oh You who give shelter to the shelterless, please, just this one time, won’t You extend Your hand to save me?" A beautiful verse from *Bhāgavatam*.

So, we are struggling here, and rightfully so, because we have dishonored Kṛṣṇa and our relationship with Him, and her job is to make sure that we stay here up until that point where we have a change of heart, where we want to go home, back to the spiritual world. Then she releases us from the illusion of the material world and helps us back home to the spiritual world. So, her world is called *durga*; it’s actually a prison house. Just like an ordinary prison typically has four walls, and in some places they are maximum security—really hard for prisoners—nowadays they have prisons that are so advanced there’s just no hope for those prisoners to get out. So, there’s no hope to get out of this prison house of material existence except by her boss, who is Kṛṣṇa.

What are the four walls of Durgā’s prison? The high walls which are inescapable: birth, disease, old age, and death. No one can escape. You can’t escape; birth is forced upon us. Disease: each and every person on this planet, practically to the person, was forced to get COVID. No matter how many vaccinations you got and how many masks you wore, you couldn’t avoid COVID; very few people escaped. Old age: all of a sudden, it just comes upon you. Like Prabhupāda said on his deathbed, "Don't think this won't happen to you." So, I remember when I was young, you know, a young preacher, 19 years old, going to programs like this and speaking to the older generation—you know, "Old age means lots of suffering, you guys should be serious about your spiritual lives"—with no realization, just like parrot-like. And now that I’m 75, now I’m speaking with realizations.

It will happen to everyone; it’s no fun. Of course, old age, the beauty of old age is, as devotees, we have realizations. Youth is meant for acquiring knowledge; middle age is meant to apply that knowledge for the practical things we need in life—we have to work, make money, raise a family, pay our taxes; old age for devotees is a beautiful time. I heard Locanānanda say one time, "I’m happy I’m getting old because my senses are no longer as powerful as before; I can bring them under my control." So old age has advantages, but it’s not *vaikuṇṭha*. *Vaikuṇṭha* means *kuṇṭha* means anxiety, and *vaikuṇṭha* means a place where there’s no anxiety. So old age is one of the walls you can’t overcome.

And what to speak about death? Who has ever escaped the Great Wall of Death? In China, I’ve been to China many times; I actually walked the Great Wall of China. The whole country was a wall in those days; that was a big thing, but invaders to come, they couldn’t get over the wall. Times have changed, but the Great Wall of China—but this Great Wall of Death, one of the miseries of *durga-ma* in the prison house, who has ever overcome death? You have a saying, a proverb in Bengali: *goyal-marer chara*, did I get it right? I read it in this verse book. Even if I smeared stool on my body to avoid punishment for my sins, Yamarāj will not release me, or no one can escape death by any means. Many times here in Bengal, he would use that phrase: "Who can escape death?"

We all know the story of the ride to Ahmedabad. There was one wealthy man some distance away—perhaps let’s say in Delhi or something—and he sent his servant to the market to buy some fruits and vegetables. And when his servant was in the market, he saw Death personified at the market, some hiding in some corner looking at him. Death personified, Jarāsaṅdha, looking at him; he became terrified and he ran back to the residence of his master and he said, "Master, I saw Death in the market. He was looking for me, he was looking right at me! I’m afraid he’s going to take me today." So his master said, "Get on this horse and ride swiftly to Ahmedabad to avoid Death. You’ll get away like that; he won’t catch you here in the town. Get on the horse!" Slap the horse, servant took off. "Ah, saved my servant!"

So, the master had the audacity then to go to the marketplace and find this Death personified and chastise him. He found Death: "You, you were going to take my servant this morning! Oh, ha-ha, you can’t catch him!" So the servant of Yamarāj said, "What’s the name of your servant?" He gave the name; Yamarāj took out his little book and he said, "Ah, your servant? Yes, I have an appointment with him today at 12:00 on the road to Ahmedabad."

So, who can escape death? In my country, you’ve all heard of Disneyland, huh? Who hasn’t heard of Disneyland? Walt Disney was the creator of this whole phenomenon called Disneyland, and you know, Disney World and so many films, etc. So when he was in his 50s, he was informed he had cancer; he had fourth-stage cancer and he was destined to die. So he thought, "I’m going to cheat death. I’m going to have them freeze my body to a certain temperature where the body is nearly frozen, but the soul is still able to survive inside—this point where you freeze the body, but not enough to die—but you stop the cancer cells from multiplying." Suspended animation. This is a true story. He talked to the doctors and the scientists, so they froze his body to a certain degree, put him in some kind of chamber where the temperature was near to freezing, and the cancer was stopped; it couldn’t grow anymore. His idea is that in the future, someone, some scientist, some doctor, is going to find a cure for cancer, and when they find the cure for cancer, they’ll thaw me out and get the cure, and I’ll keep living. Unfortunately, there was a big blackout one year in New York and the electrical system was out for six days; everyone’s freezer, you know, melted, and Walt Disney melted as well. And you know, so you can’t cheat death.

Yamarāj, actually, with all due respect, he’s one of the 12 *mahājanas*, super intelligent, one of the 12 *mahājanas*, the learned personalities in the science of devotional service, just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Yamarāj. So, these walls—these walls of birth, disease, old age, and death—they are the real Mount Everest. No one will ever conquer them.

So Kṛṣṇa summarizes—elegance is truth spoken concisely—Kṛṣṇa summarizes this whole phantasmagoria of this material creation, all 14 worlds in our universe with all the other universes beyond. One time, Prabhupāda was walking on the beach; he said there’s more universes in this material creation than there are grains of sand on this planet. Oh my God! And how did he summarize it? *Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*. This is a temporary place full of so many miseries. Everyone has their story. We walk down the street, we had that toothpaste smile—you know, they pay a girl to advertise a certain toothpaste or toothbrush and she’s got good teeth, "I’m very happy, I’m getting some money for this advertisement." Everyone has their story. The story of how we struggled as babies, infants, children, high school, college, marriage, families, our country is invaded, or whatever the case; everyone has a story.

So, this is the material world, but the Lord comes to this prison house. Like what? The spiritual world is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss by definition, where every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there’s a festival; every day is... Is this world eternal? No, temporary. Is it full of knowledge? We’re all born into ignorance. Is it full of *ānanda*? We say in Russian *chut-chut*, or *thoḍā-thoḍā* in Hindi—there’s a little bit, but it’s like, the ratio to sadness is 90% sadness and 10% happiness at most. This is an intelligent person who can realize this; he’s actually intelligent. Prabhupāda said the definition of intelligence is to see things in the proper perspective. What’s the proper perspective? *Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*.

So, how is it that the Lord, who is full of *ānanda*, comes to this world which is full of miseries? Like, for example, you might meet some gentleman, some well-known, distinguished gentleman in a bad part of town. There’s bad parts of town where vice goes on—prostitution, drugs, you know, so many things—so you may see that person there: "What’s a nice person like you doing in a place like this?" Oh, well...

Yeah, so what’s Kṛṣṇa, who’s a reservoir of all pleasure, doing in this *duḥkhālayam*? Why does He come here? Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, our great scholar, logician, *nīti-śāstra*, how to live in this world as best you can so that you can practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness—that’s logic. So he was a logician. I heard Prabhupāda say one time, he wasn't a Vaiṣṇava, but he gave good advice. So what did he say? He gave some advice:
*   Never go to a place where there’s not a clean flowing river. In other words, water—we all need water. Our bodies are 74% water, so we have to drink water. The doctors say two liters a day, and after a hot time like that we need three liters a day.
*   Don't go to a place where there’s not a good physician, because from time to time we catch a cold, we get the flu, you know, maybe something more serious, so you never know the unexpected.
*   Don't go to a place where there’s not a pious king.
*   And he concludes: "Don't go to a place where people don't like you; don't go to a place where people are inimical towards you."

So this world is for inimical people—not you, Bengal, you’re very pious here, you’re all aspiring devotees—but I’m talking about the 7.5 billion people on this planet. We’ve come here to forget Kṛṣṇa. The classic 1970s preacher would say, "You know, we want to be the big fish." In the spiritual world, we can’t be the big fish; our position is to always be subordinate to God. He’s the master, and we’re the servant. God is great, and we are very small. Our greatness lies in being the servant of a loving master. That’s our...

We’re created as servants. To be masters is artificial. But if you have... I’ve seen South Africa in particular—when I was originally going there 23 years ago—many families had servants, but they took good care of those servants, and the servants were actually like part of the family; they were happy. Very often, servants are exploited in this world; we’re not talking about that. Like, for example, one time Prabhupāda was walking on the beach at Juhu with his disciples, and you know how the dogs are always running around this country; they all look the same, there’s only one breed, Indian dog. But there was one wealthy businessman who had purchased a dog from overseas, a beautiful, big, fluffy, white dog, you know, with a big tail flowing like this, completely different than the dogs here. He was kind of fat and merry, and the owner had him on a leash and they were walking, and then off to the side were some local dogs who were fighting over some scraps of food, skinny dogs fighting over some scraps of food.

So Prabhupāda said to his disciples, "What’s the difference between that dog and these dogs?" So the young disciples said, "Well, Prabhupāda, that’s a white dog and that’s a brown dog." Now, we were young, naive. Prabhupāda said, "No, you see that dog’s very happy and those dogs are miserable." "Why?" Everyone scratching their heads. Prabhupāda said, "Because that dog, the white fluffy dog, has a master, and these dogs have no master; they have to fend for themselves." So we’re the same. We left our master foolishly; we want to be like the master. You can never be the master. We’re created to be servants, but the glory of being a servant is having a glorious master. Just like we have Prabhupāda; he’s our master, *prabhu-pāda*, that master at whose feet all masters sit. We have his representatives in our ISKCON movement, our spiritual masters, and we know the joy of surrendering to and serving those masters; we’ve tasted that. We’re getting a little taste of what it’s like to be back in the spiritual world because the spiritual master is a representative of God.

But we’ve left that kingdom of God basically to try to be masters—"I" and "mine" in this world—but it’s not working. So people come here to greater or lesser degrees to forget God. The greater degree is that there is no God—an atheist. To a lesser degree: my mom used to say, "Son, there’s something out there." "What is it, Mom?" "Son, there’s something greater out there." "What is it, Mom?" "I don’t know, someday we’ll find out." I didn’t find out till I met Śrīla Prabhupāda, then I found out what’s out there. Not just some love, some energy—Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda. How can you love someone... *Dharma*, religion, means to awaken our dormant love for God. How can you love someone you don’t know anything about? This is the glory of India: India is teaching the world who is God, how does He dress, what are His preferences in food, who are His associates, what are the different moods, the different *rasas* by which you can serve God in a loving mood. This is India. This is India, and we have to keep that light burning here because we have so much information about God. Prabhupāda said one time—well, this is the 70s—"We know His telephone number." So devotees said, "What is it?" Prabhupāda said, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa..."

So despite the fact that this is the world of forgetfulness, ignorance, forgetfulness of God, where most people are inimical—Prabhupāda said, "Don't go to a place"—I’ve been many places where people are inimical. I’ve been to many places where people... I don’t want to name the countries because I’ll get in trouble, but I’ve been to places where we’ve been attacked. My *harināma* party was attacked; we had to fight for our lives. I’ve been to places where I’ve been imprisoned—I’ll say that. In the 70s, Franco was a dictator; Spain was ruled by a dictatorship, and we young boys had the idea, "We’re going to go and make everybody in Spain Kṛṣṇa conscious." My little *saṅkīrtana* party of seven—me and seven *brahmacārīs*—we’re going to go there and chant on the streets and give out *prasādam* and sell books in a dictatorship where Franco didn’t tolerate anything that he didn’t believe in. He didn’t believe in Hare Kṛṣṇa; he wasn't even a Christian, he was just an autocrat. We drove into the country, we drove into Madrid, got out of the car: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa...* We met a few people, a family; they said, "Come to our home and tell us about who is your God." We said, "Sure." So we took our drums and our *karatālas*, and that evening we had a program in their home, just you know, the parents and the daughter and the son. And suddenly, like a knock on the door—I’d heard that knock enough times to know what it meant.

It wasn't the *strī*, it wasn't *rūpa-bhojana*, the police came in and they arrested us. They manhandled us, they were very abusive, kicking us and punching us—each got our black eye—and they took us to the police station, and they stripped us down to our *kaupīnas*, burned our *dhoti*s, etc., tore off our neck beads, threw away our passports—they ripped up our passports—and the chief of police said to me, a young man, "You’re never going to leave this prison. We’re putting you in; no one will even know you exist because we’re burning your passport."

So it was me and my *brahmacārīs* and the son of the gentleman who invited us to his home. They put us in a cell—there were eight of us—they put us in a cell made for two people. We were like this, and there was a bucket in the corner for answering nature’s call, and they let us bathe once a week, only once a week, and they knew we were vegetarian so they’d throw meat, cooked meat, into the cell once a day to eat. We fasted, we fasted. And to survive, we had a morning program—we’d get up, which means we were standing up, sleeping—and we pretended to have *maṅgala-ārati*, then *guru-pūjā*, then we imagined Tulasī Devī, Tulasī-pūjā, then *Bhāgavatam* class. I would give *Bhāgavatam* class like this. Because if we made any noise, they would come with boiling hot, scalding water and throw it on us. So we had a home morning program, and we’re dancing—we were in ecstasy—we just stuck to the process, regardless; we stuck to the progress, the process. Showering once a week, woo-boy, did the boys stink!

And we were there something like five weeks. I learned later that our authorities kind of wrote us off, like no one knew where we were, and we were actually thinking we would be there for the rest of our lives. But what happened is that the son, his father who had invited us, he was a judge—Here Comes the Judge—he was a judge and he knew what happened. So through the legal processing, he was a very powerful personality; somehow, you know how judges are, lawyers, somehow they turned the tables. So they let us out one day in our *kaupīnas*. They drove us outside of town 5 kilometers, and it was freezing cold, and it’s like 4:00 in the morning in the dark, they let us out of the van: "You’re free." We had no idea where we were, but we could see the bright city lights of Madrid, so we walked: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa...* into town, half-naked, and by the time the sunrise, all the cars were driving by, it’s like, "Whoa!" And everyone was calling the police, but police didn’t come. So we got into town, we found a telephone, we called back to France to our temple president or GBC, and somehow they arranged some mysterious van to come pick us up and took us to a place; they got us dressed, put us on a train. We lost our car, we lost our books, everything, but we were in ecstasy the whole time because we weren't in the material world; we were transcending by chanting mainly Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So this is a place where people have come to forget to greater or lesser degrees—atheists, and there’s pious people, but in between there’s dictators. So still, Kṛṣṇa comes to this nasty place. He’s so kind. We may have forgotten Kṛṣṇa; He never forgot any of His parts and parcels. Just like a father, you know, many of you are fathers; sometimes children are naughty, or many times they’re naughty, when they get to be teenagers they’re independent, don’t listen to dad anymore; these things happen, still you love them. I had one friend, he committed a serious crime, he was sent to jail; his mom used to say, "But he’s a good boy." I mean, he really was bad; he did some bad stuff, but whenever his mother—"But he’s a good boy." Kind of a perverted reflection, Kṛṣṇa, you know. He’s—out of many millions of people, He favors His devotee, but actually He loves everyone. From Him comes everything, material and spiritual. So He takes the initiative to come here. Like what? Yes, He states it very boldly in one of the 700 verses of *Gītā*. Someone gave me a *Gītā* the other day—it wasn't Prabhupāda’s, but it had an interesting translation of that verse: "For the protection of the good people, for the destruction of the wicked, and for establishing *dharma*, I take birth in every age." Something close to... He comes personally. He sends His representatives: Jesus, Muhammad, the apostles, saints, and every spiritual tradition. There are... we would consider, according to time, place, and circumstance, representatives of God. But sometimes He comes personally.

This is amazing. He comes personally! It’s amazing. It reminds me of Akbar, you know. Akbar was a Muslim emperor ruling much of India from Delhi, but he was an interesting personality; he was somewhat broad-minded, he was inquiring into different faiths, and he actually created a kind of faith of his own, a mixture between Islam and Hinduism, you could say. But he was favorable even to Vṛndāvana; he gave some land for various temples in Vṛndāvana, he released the Hindu from taxes. He was a different kind of ruler. And the story is that one time he was walking in one of those beautiful gardens in Delhi—you know, during that period in history in India, much of India was ruled by the Muslims—and he had his beautiful palace and beautiful gardens in Delhi, and he was walking there with his family and his extended family, his ministers, his soldiers (because the king always has to have protection around him, big contingent, soldiers and ministers and helpers and servants, the king doesn't go anywhere alone, he has his entourage). So his 5-year-old grandson kind of separated from the party, and there was a lake in the gardens, and the little boy, according to the scribes—because this is written down—he was trying to catch them, little fishes, you know how boys are, and he fell into the pond, the grandson of Akbar, and he started to drown. It wasn’t that far, perhaps where I am to the wall.

So Akbar, he took off his crown, his heavy coat loaded with all types of jewels, diamonds, sapphires, rubies, emeralds, took off his sword with the gold handle and dropped it, then his knife, and then his tunic, and then his pants—he was in his underwear—and he ran to the pond and jumped in personally. I read he was a good swimmer, unlike many people in India. Anyway, and he dove to the bottom; with his little finger, he picked up that boy, bottom, put him on, then he came back and like this and stood on a wooden stool and his servants all dressed him back up. So his minister, his chief minister, Birbal, he said, "Lord, I mean, you had soldiers, family members, the public, you had strong men, anyone you could have given the order, anyone could have gone and saved your grandson, why didn’t you order them?" He said, "Because I wanted to do it. He was my grandson; I wanted to make sure he was saved."

So we’re all the children of God, *iśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām*. At least that’s how Kṛṣṇa sees it. Even an ordinary sage, he sees the equality of all living entities, *paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ*; he sees everyone equally because he doesn’t see the body, he’s an enlightened soul, he sees the soul. All souls are equal in the eyes of God. So what to speak of God? He sees His sons and daughters equally, so He comes to rescue us. Sometimes His servants come, but He comes once in the day of Brahmā. Oh, that’s a long time! Not in the calculation of time by the... my god, just say, who cares about the time of ants? They have their time frame, when they get up, when they work, when they go to sleep; we don’t, it’s inconsequential to us. So similar, on a greater scale, in this universe, the time of humans is like, wow, it’s nothing; it’s calculation by the time of the *devas*. So once in the day of Brahmā, Kṛṣṇa comes with His message: "Wake up, you’re my servants! Take to the *dharma* of that age." Whether it’s *satya*, *dvapara*... "Take the *dharma*, take the *yuga-dharma*." He comes as the *yuga-avatāra* and asks us to wake up. He personally comes. Why? His representatives could do it, but it shows how much He actually cares about us. Once in a day of Brahmā, someone comes to your house every day: "Excuse me, sir, you know, I have an important message for you," and you slam the door. Next day, He comes again, I slam the door, but He keeps coming. It’s very determined. The Lord’s determination is more powerful than our determination. Therefore, as much as we want to try and stay and enjoy this world, He comes in this age, *asura*, and gives us a taste of the spiritual world: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.*

And we’ve embraced it, but much of the world has not embraced it yet. So we have to share it. If you have a lot of something that is good, some good fortune, don’t be a miser, be a benefactor. As you’ve been delivered, you go out and share that process. And believe me, it’s much easier here in Bengal. Of course, Bengal has its problems, but everywhere I’ve walked here in this great city of Kolkata—great because this is where Prabhupāda was born and Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Thakura began his Gauḍīya Maṭha mission—there’s so much greatness. I visited all the holy places associated with Prabhupāda. That’s the... the greatest, that’s the most historical thing that ever happened in Kolkata, is when Prabhupāda took birth in 1896, of September first, that’s historically, that’s the real glory of this place. When I walk around, people say "Hare Kṛṣṇa," they’ll see me in *sannyāsa* cloth, still in this country the dress of a *sannyāsī*, people were paying obeisances yesterday and inquiring. So your job’s a little easier than places like North Korea, and you have to preach, because India is the only guardian of this faith. We offer our respects to all other spiritual traditions, but this is like the quintessence of *dharma*. Just like we have kindergarten, we have grade school, we have secondary school, we have college, we have master’s programs, we have PhD programs; Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the PhD of religion, PhD of *dharma*. And it can’t fade out in this country, otherwise the world will be lost.

What I’ve seen—I first came to Kolkata in 1972, before many of you were born—I’m probably the oldest guy in the room nowadays. I’m on a bus, I’m like the oldest person on the bus, and the terminal... I’ve seen the country go through its, you know, its woes, various governments, various leaders, various interests, the country has various customs; and to some degree, the glory of this country is fading away. When I was in South Africa, I had the good fortune to make friendship with Nelson Mandela. You may have heard of Nelson Mandela; he was a great ruler in that country—we won’t go into detail—and he wrote one book called *Cry, My Beloved Country*, because at that time there was apartheid, which was a horrible system of government. But he came into power and he abolished this apartheid, but he saw how destructive it had been to his country; minorities were subjected to all kinds of vices and misery, etc. So he in many ways he helped the country. So he wrote a book, seeing the state of his country after he got out of prison, he said, "Cry, my beloved country."

So sometimes they come back to—I say, "Oh, they’re just imitating the West." I ran away from the West to come here to *Bhārata*. *Bhārata* means in Sanskrit "light," but it can also mean the light of transcendental knowledge. The Vedas giveth the light of who we are, who is God, and what is our relationship with God. So this is a message that the whole world has to hear; they have to learn about who is God. It can’t... the lamp can’t go out. The light of this transcendental knowledge can’t go out, but it’s getting a little darker as time goes on. So it’s up to us who’ve had contact with the *yuga-avatāra* and the process for enlightening are the people here in Bengal and India and then the foreigners as well. Prabhupāda had wanted that. In fact, my dear friend Bhakti Charu Swami, he told me one time that Prabhupāda told him that he, Prabhupāda, had gone to the West on the instruction of his spiritual master. You know very well what was the first instruction he got: "The instruction of that beautiful building which has been renovated, you look like a nice educated gentleman, why not you spread the message of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the Western countries?" Boom! It hit Prabhupāda’s heart, resonated. He didn’t act upon that instruction immediately, but he kept it in his heart. And when the time came, he boarded the *Jaladuta* and went to the West.

So the Prabhupāda said, "On the order of my spiritual master, I went to Western countries, I preached Kṛṣṇa consciousness successfully," he said. He said, "Now I’m coming back to India. I’m coming back to Bengal to revive the *sanātana* movement of Lord Caitanya, which can save the world." You should clap! Prabhupāda was a Kolkata boy, you know that story. This is where he was born and raised and imbibed eventually the culture, the original culture of Bengal, the culture of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So seeing it in many ways had gone to hell, he said one time, "Ramakrishna Mission, because of Ramakrishna, it’s all gone to hell." Don’t quote me on that, we want to keep friendly relations with everyone, but Prabhupāda saw it going, so he came back here to Kolkata. There’s so many lectures Prabhupāda has given here in Kolkata; I was listening to them before I came here, encouraging the people of this beautiful region, the state—the mantle on you, the mantle on every Indian. Prabhupāda said that the most pious people in the universe, they take birth again in *Bhārata*.

But the glory of *Bhārata* is this Bengali culture. My favorite food is Bengali *prasādam* cooked in mustard oil. I know, I’m just waiting for a Bengali feast. Someone said last night, "Do you want pizza?" Hey, *bābā*, I’m not in Rome, I’m in Kolkata! Give me some Bengali *od* and I have an idea that Caitanya Mahāprabhu, of course, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who’s Mahāprabhu? He’s combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and they combined to come to this world to introduce the understanding of *vraja-bhakti*, the love of the residents of Vṛndāvana for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and to introduce the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*. So where did He appear? Thank God—meaning Him—He didn’t appear in Chennai, with all due respect, because they have what’s it called, *pongal*... you know, you have a meal there and in the end they bring the sweets, *payasam*, which is like, you know, sweet Brahman spaghetti or something. I don’t... here we have *sandesh*, we have *barfi*, we have *mishti doi*, we have *gulab*... we have *rasmalai*. No one’s giving me *rasmalai* yet, no.

And, and therefore, you know, when we’re spreading the *saṅkīrtana* movement around the world, because that’s what I’ve been doing for 52 years, people, they love this philosophy. Any intelligent person will embrace it. Everywhere I go—I was even in the Amazon jungle for 5 months—we’d go into the interior where people never seen white men, we get the people chanting: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. They’d love it! They in their own way, they are dancing. You know, in Russia, in China... in China, there’s no word for God in the Chinese language; they have no concept of a supreme being, they worship ancestors. We go there and we tell them, "Above your ancestors, the supreme cause, His name is Kṛṣṇa, chant His name." Yes, Kṛṣṇa accepts. And then we give them *rasmalai*, *mishti doi*. *Mishti* means sweets and *doi* means yogurt, but that’s my favorite.

And so it is around the world. When there’s a feast—feast means, it means first the salties and then the sweets. Of course, if you go to Gujarat, first it’s the sweet, then there’s the salties, you have to have the *shrikhand*. Yeah, but your culture is perfect, you have such nice *prasāda* and people love sweets. And when we go around the world to all these distant places—I’ve been in South America, Central America, North America, I’ve been in Australasia, Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, Guadeloupe, I’ve been, I’ve actually been anywhere and everywhere—and the same formula: chanting, dancing, and feasting. That was Mahāprabhu’s intelligent formula, it works, it works! So please keep your culture, keep your Bengali food. Don’t be inclined towards pizza and whatever else they have. I mean, once in a while it’s okay, but we have the best of the best! We have the best masters, we have the best *śāstras*, the best books, we have the best company, best association, we have the best song: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

We have the best place to go on vacation—it’s not Disneyland, please, it’s Kolkata! Who wants to go on vacation in Kolkata? Believe me, if you’re enlightened, you’ll know the four or five places I went yesterday, I was so enlivened, remembering our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda’s birthplace and the preaching of Bhaktivinoda Thakura and the places associated with Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Thakura, the museum I went to, I went to the Gauḍīya Maṭha—we have the best of the best and we don’t want to lose it being, you know, somehow enchanted by Western culture. I was thinking the other day, I was flying to India from London—actually excuse me, I was flying from San Francisco, you know, we have our Silicon Valley there, IT—and as my group, we were leaving America to come to *Bhārata*, I imagine myself because lots of planes crisscrossed, all the *brāhmaṇa* boys educated IT, they’re flying to Silicon Valley, so all the young boys for IT, they’re going to San Francisco, and we, Westerners disillusioned with Western culture, we’re coming to Kolkata and *Bhārata*. What is the irony? We have to combine the cultures. We need technology, of course, we can spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness with science and technology, but we can defeat Mr. Rudyard Kipling, who said "East is East and West is West and never the two shall meet." Excuse me, sir, this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is blending the East and the West together! We’re using Western technology and science to spread the message of Śrī Caitanya.

So please keep your Bengali culture. When you have sweets, you don’t need ice cream, you have, what’s it called, *kulfi*—*kulfi*, *kulfi*. You don’t need Baskin-Robbins, you have *kulfi*. You have everything original; the original is the best. The perverted reflection is not best. We have the spiritual world, which is the original. Don’t be enchanted by the perverted reflection of this material... keep your Bengali culture, share it with the local people, revive Kṛṣṇa consciousness in this region of India, revive your compatriots all over India, and then, like Prabhupāda, somehow-other help the whole world, which is going to hell, to again become Vaikuṇṭha by chanting: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. Teach them to dance in ecstasy and eat Bengali sweets. Thank you very much, Hare Kṛṣṇa.""