"*00300*.*
"Hi Krishna, dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma and its very beautiful līlās. I would like to start off today once again by quoting Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s very famous verse from *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.294. I have opened the classes several times with this verse, but it’s just so important. He writes: "The devotee should always think of Kṛṣṇa within himself and should choose a very dear devotee who is a servitor of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. One should constantly engage in topics about that servitor and his loving relationship with Kṛṣṇa, and one should live in Vṛndāvana. If one is physically unable to go to Vṛndāvana, he should mentally live there."

Now, in his commentary to this verse, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī reiterates what Rūpa Gosvāmī has stated in a very beautiful way. He writes, "If one is able, one should reside with one's physical body in the geographical area of Braja, which is the residence of Śrī Nanda Mahārāja."

Now, of course, it goes without saying that one has to be very serious about Kṛṣṇa consciousness to actually live in the dhāma, to stay in the dhāma full time. If one has very strong material desires, it’s not recommended to live in the dhāma because such material desires could lead to offenses, which are magnified a thousand times by being in the dhāma. Nevertheless, such devotees are not banned from the dhāma. Instead, such devotees are recommended to come to Vṛndāvana from time to time or to stay in Vṛndāvana for shorter periods of time. The good news is that even if a devotee has material desires, if he or she has a genuine taste for hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa, the dhāma itself will gradually purify such material desires. We have to have a strong taste, a genuine strong taste for hearing and chanting; that will be our saving grace. And Rūpa Gosvāmī makes that very clear also in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.54 regarding the potency of having a strong taste for hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa. He writes: "For a person who has sincere *ruci*, which means a taste in his bhajana of Hari, even the severest of material attachments are almost completely destroyed." So, if we go to Vṛndāvana with that in mind—a strong taste, to dive into hearing and chanting—that is our protection. The conclusion is that however we are situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we should visit the dhāma or reside in the dhāma according to our level of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Of course, being the infinitely compassionate person that he is, and having full faith in the dhāma and the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and the potency of the dhāma to purify us, he has actually invited anyone and everyone to come and stay in Braja. He is so merciful. There is a famous purport in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 5.13.8, where he makes it very clear—he opens it up for everyone if we are serious. He writes, "One must go to the Vṛndāvana forest and take shelter of Govinda; that will make one happy. The International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness is therefore constructing a Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple to invite its members as well as outsiders to come and live peacefully in a spiritual atmosphere that will help one become elevated to the transcendental world and return home, back to Godhead." Oh, glorious!

And by accepting that invitation and always acting properly in Vṛndāvana, anyone can get, you could say, the ultimate benefit of living in Vṛndāvana. And that’s so nicely described in a verse I was reading the other day in *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* by our beloved Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī. It’s in the chapter on pastimes. He writes: "Where do all people effortlessly attain pure prema for Kṛṣṇa? Where is Lord Kṛṣṇa's most amazing form meant for pastimes manifest? In what place is the highest level of great bliss from worshiping Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet manifest? Oh brother, I will tell you a secret; please listen. All this is manifest in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma."

So, yes, yesterday during my research, I came across a very interesting verse about Vṛndāvana. I was reading *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, and this particular verse describes two pilgrims who are entering that transcendental abode for the very first time. It is *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 5.12. Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes: "After reaching Mathurā, they meeting these two pilgrims started visiting the different forests of Vṛndāvana and came to Govardhana Hill. They visited all 12 forests, and at last came to the town of Vṛndāvana." And Prabhupāda has a very beautiful, very detailed purport about Vṛndāvana. In the purport, he writes: "The five forests situated on the eastern side of the river Yamunā are Bhadra, Bilva, Loha, Bhāṇḍīra, and Mahāvana. The seven forests situated on the western side of the Yamunā are Madhu, Tāla, Kumuda, Bahulā, Kāmya, Khadira, and Vṛndāvana. After visiting these forests, these pilgrims went to a place known as Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana." Out of the 12 forests, the Vṛndāvana forest extends from the town of Vṛndāvana up to Nandagrāma and Varṣāṇā, a distance of 32 miles, within which the Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana town is situated. Now, of course, like many of you, I have read *CC* many times, but I didn't remember particularly hearing about this Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana. That’s why it’s important to read Prabhupāda's books many times so we absorb everything. And after that, I was thinking, Prabhupāda mentioned Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana twice in his purport, so I was curious: what is Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana? What does it mean, or what is it? So I searched and searched, and finally I found a wealth of information on Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana, which I would like to share with you. To begin with, *pañca* of course means five, and *krośī* comes from the Sanskrit term *krośa*, which indicates a distance of 3 kilometers or 1.8 miles. So *pañca-krośī* would mean $5 \times 3$ kilometers, and that equals 15 kilometers. So *Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana* literally means the area of Vṛndāvana that is contained within a 15-kilometer circumference, and that, my dear devotees, is what our ācāryas say is the present town of Vṛndāvana. As many of you know, the *parikramā* marg that we often walk around Vṛndāvana, that encircles the town of Vṛndāvana, is approximately 15 kilometers long. 

So that is *Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana*. That’s what’s meant by *Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana*—the town of Vṛndāvana that we are all very familiar with. Of course, we all assume the town of Vṛndāvana that we know very well—we go there, we visit the temples, we sometimes have harināma through Vṛndāvana, we shop in the bazaar—so we assume the way it appears to us and a little bit of the history of the last few decades, we assume this town of Vṛndāvana that we see now manifested 500 years ago. Because we know that when Lord Caitanya sent the six Gosvāmīs to Vṛndāvana five centuries ago, what was Vṛndāvana? It was a jungle, and only when the Gosvāmīs began to establish temples there did it become a regular place of pilgrimage for people, some of whom settled there then and continue to settle there to this very day. So that’s our concept of Vṛndāvana town. But you may be surprised to learn that in reality, the original town of Vṛndāvana—the original town of Vṛndāvana 5,000 years ago—was constructed by Viśvakarmā, the architect of the demigods, for Kṛṣṇa and the Brajavāsīs. *Pañca-krośī Vṛndāvana*—this is the original Vṛndāvana. Now, this information I actually discovered in the *Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa*, and therein there is a very fascinating and detailed description of just how the original *Pañca-krośī* Vṛndāvana town was constructed.

Now, before I share that information with you, I wanted to say that I’ve heard some devotees question the authority of the *Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa*. I’ve heard that on a number of occasions, but that śāstra is definitely authorized. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Canto 9, Chapter 6, Text 7, in Prabhupāda's purport—really, everything is made so clear about Śrīla Prabhupāda's reports—he writes: "Quoting from the *Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa*, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said—this is a minor quote here—'In this age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the offering of a horse in sacrifice, the offering of a cow in sacrifice, the acceptance of the order of sannyāsa, the offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers, and a man's begetting children in his brother's wife.'" So my point here is that Prabhupāda is saying that Mahāprabhu is quoting from *Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa*, and Prabhupāda is quoting Lord Caitanya in this regard. So there is no room for doubting the authenticity of *Brahma-vaivarta*.

So, I thought that today, rather than speak about a particular forest—as we have been doing for weeks and months, a year—I would like to speak about the ancient history of Vṛndāvana proper, the town of Vṛndāvana in all its glory. Actually, this glorious original Vṛndāvana, *Pañca-krośī*, still exists today. It’s there, but it is unmanifest to our material vision. We see a town and it’s wonderful, but the original Vṛndāvana, which I am going to describe to you today, it’s also there, but unmanifest to our material vision. Again, we need a spiritual vision to see spiritual things. What does that mean? We need a "third eye." What we need to do is awaken our spiritual senses, because we are not this body; we are pure spirit soul. And this spirit soul is a person, and a person has senses and intelligence. So, when we awaken our spiritual senses, we can see things in Vṛndāvana as they are. Oh, for that day!

So here is the very interesting history of the original Vṛndāvana town. I’ll start off by saying "once upon a time." Of course, in the West, this is how a storyteller begins a fairy tale, but what I’m going to share with you is not a fairy tale; it’s *Purāṇa*. It’s the real history of this world, of this universe of creation. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* actually goes into great detail about the history of creation; we go back millions of years. And therein, actually, in the *Bhāgavatam*, this term "once upon a time" is used. I found it: *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, 18th Chapter, verse 24 begins that way. *Ekadā*—Prabhupāda translates as "once upon a time." It’s there in black and white: *dhanur-anurasyodhyāma*, taking it firmly. The part of the verse is as follows: it begins "once upon a time." Prabhupāda translates: "Mahārāja Parīkṣit, while engaged in hunting in the forest with arrows and a bow..." and he goes on. But that’s my point: *ekadā*, "once upon a time." Or another example: Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Kṛṣṇa* book, Chapter 34; he writes, "Once upon a time, the cowherd men of Vṛndāvana, headed by Nanda Mahārāja, desired to go to Ambikāvana, the forest of Ambikāvana, to observe the Śivarātri ceremony." So I feel very comfortable today because it’s such an amazing pastime, a wondrous pastime actually. So I will begin.

Once upon a time, Kṛṣṇa appeared on this earth—just some basics here—as we know, in the prison of Kaṃsa in the city of Mathurā. But that same night, he was quickly taken by Vasudeva across the Yamunā to a particular area called Gokula. And there, Kṛṣṇa lived with Nanda and Yaśodā for three years and a few months until all of his family and the, you could say, the greater community of cowherd people, the cowherd people, they left Gokula for the safety of the nearby Vṛndāvana forest because, as we know, Kaṃsa was sending a demon every day to Gokula, so they decided to move.

Now, Brahma describes that this large congregation of devotees, and of course Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, arrived in the Vṛndāvana forest in the evening. It took some time to get there with their bullock carts, etc., and all their belongings. And they arrived in a particular part of the Vṛndāvana forest called Chāṭīkarā, where all these Brajavāsīs prepared to take rest for the night. And in time, the moon rose in the sky, and there was a cool, fragrant breeze blowing, and it is stated that the rustling of leaves created a soothing sound that quickly put all the Brajavāsīs to sleep. If you are a camper, you may know the sounds of nature can be very soothing; sometimes the wind and the rustling, they say they put the Brajavāsīs to sleep. And some of the Brajavāsīs, their first day in that part of Vṛndāvana, in that Vṛndāvana forest, they slept out in the open; others slept, I read, in tents, and others just slept in their bullock carts. But in truth, the ācāryas say the gopas and gopīs didn't sleep; rather, in the lap of their eternal mother, the Vṛndāvana forest, they entered into a deep mystic trance envied by the greatest of transcendentalists.

Let me recite that again: but in truth, the ācāryas say the gopas and gopīs didn't sleep; rather, in the lap of their eternal mother, the Vṛndāvana forest, they entered into a deep mystic trance envied by the greatest of transcendentalists. And what was that trance? Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa! So then, when all was silent, Viśvakarmā, the architect of the demigods, he suddenly appeared along with millions of—how is it described?—celestial carpenters, stone masons, blacksmiths, and craftsmen. They all appeared, all carrying their tools and dressed in heavenly garments, and they were ornamented with all kinds of gems and so forth. They all appeared very beautiful and very youthful. And then, approaching Kṛṣṇa's tent—Kṛṣṇa's daiting—a tent, Viśvakarmā bowed down to Kṛṣṇa outside the tent. He offered prayers, and then he went about his business of building this original Vṛndāvana town. He began by mobilizing this multitude of artisans, but all the work that was about to go on, it was unseen and unheard by the sleeping Brajavāsīs. And it is described that one celestial chariot after another arrived from Svargaloka in huge numbers, bearing all kinds of building equipment. It is written that understanding the needs of the Brajavāsīs as well as the desires of Kṛṣṇa, Viśvakarmā set about to build a city spread over five *krośas*—*Pañca-krośī* Vṛndāvana—and he intended it to be a city more opulent than the capital of Indra. In no time, he had all his helpers; they started working, and they began with homes. The homes that they constructed were made of stone, I was reading, with very charming arches, pillars, and domes that were luminous in the dark. This is not a fairy tale; this is absolute truth. We don’t need to go to certain movies and read certain books to get some description of an amazing place and amazing people. It’s all there in *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma*. These houses that Viśvakarmā and his helpers from Svargaloka built were luminous in the dark, and each house had a sunken courtyard surrounded by four to six rooms. The doors in those rooms were all made of sandalwood, and the walls were inlaid with precious gems. The courtyards were equipped with fountains and decorative pots in which very rare and luxurious flowering plants grew. The homes, the potential homes of these cowherd men and women, were complete, to avoid confusion, with an engraved plaque that Viśvakarmā placed on the front entrance so each family could know, when they woke up, which was their residence. Put a plaque there! And then Viśvakarmā mentally conceived a palace for Nanda Mahārāja and his family, which is described as actually being the eternal residence of Lord Kṛṣṇa manifesting itself within his mind. Of course, Nandagrāma, which was some distance away, where Kṛṣṇa would move eventually, is Kṛṣṇa's eternal residence, but while the Lord lived in the Vṛndāvana forest during this period before moving to Nandagrāma later, Viśvakarmā built a palace for the Lord in the forest. Now, the ācāryas say that "the opulences and sweetness of Nandagrāma appeared in a different form with Chāṭīkarā at its center." Nandagrāma, it’s very opulent, very sweet, but at this particular point it appeared in a different form, that eternal residence appeared in a different form in the Vṛndāvana forest at Chāṭīkarā.

The palace that Viśvakarmā built was surrounded by a very high wall, which in turn was surrounded by a moat and a flower garden, and that made the moat perfect for water sports. I was reading the moat was surrounded by flower gardens, so eventually when the Brajavāsīs woke up and lived there for a while, they would have water sports in that moat. And I was reading that two large gem-studded gates stood at the entrance to that palace, which contained four separate living accommodations, each one with one dozen rooms, each including bedrooms, kitchens, bathrooms, and so on. The pillars there were made of the finest marble, and the walls were decorated with ornamental designs made of gems so brilliant that the light reflected off of them. The light reflected off of them from a single lamp would illuminate an entire room at night; the gems were very, very brilliant. So the rooms—these rooms—were complete with varieties of ivory and gold furnishings said to be found only in the homes of exalted demigods. And what else? I was reading that everywhere hung fine silken draperies, curtains, festoons, and flags. And the floors were made of marble so translucent that walking on them felt like walking on water. The floors were made of marble—so translucent that when you were walking on them, you felt like you were walking on water. Śāstra says that the steps to and fro those marble floors looked like waves upon lakes of liquefied pure goodness. This is poetry, this is Vṛndāvana. The steps to and fro those marble floors looked like waves upon lakes of liquefied pure goodness.

And Viśvakarmā, who is described—I was reading it said he had transcendental intelligence—was himself amazed at this wonderful palace that he had created, like "Wow!" And with that transcendental intelligence, he understood that in reality it was Lord Kṛṣṇa's potencies who had created that town. And that Vṛndāvana town, *Pañca-krośī* Vṛndāvana, 15 kilometers in circumference, is described as undeniably the most beautiful of all towns or cities. It glowed in the dark like a beautiful sapphire. It’s all there! And then you step back, what does it look like to you? It’s glowing in the dark like a beautiful sapphire.

But that’s not the end of the story, because Viśvakarmā was not fully satisfied. He wanted to decorate the Vṛndāvana forest as well, knowing that in the future, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the cowherd boys, Balarāma, everybody would enjoy pastimes in the groves of the Vṛndāvana forest. So in particular for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Viśvakarmā began by building a *rāsa-maṇḍapa*, a circular dancing arena for the rāsa dance, in the forest. Then he filled the Vṛndāvana forest itself with five specific things: benches, lakes, ghāṭas, pavilions, and pathways. It’s written that Viśvakarmā then landscaped certain parts of the forest, you know, beautifying them with parks that "put to shame the Nandanandana gardens of the heavenly planets." Now, if you could hear about those gardens in Indraloka, you would be like, "Whoa!" I’ve read some descriptions, I think it was in the *Ṛg Veda*, but these beautiful parks and gardens that Viśvakarmā created in the Vṛndāvana forest put to shame the Nandanandana gardens. And all in all, Viśvakarmā created 30 such gardens and parks, of which one stood supreme above all others. This particular garden surrounded a secluded banyan tree, and nearby was a natural lake with a golden staircase leading into its clear blue waters—you are going to bathe in the lake, you walk down this golden staircase—and it was surrounded by a grove of campaka trees of seven different colors. And on the eastern side of the lake, Viśvakarmā built a very small, ornate palace for Rādhā-Śyāma which had entrances facing each of the eight directions, and a staircase of seven steps led to each entrance, and each step was made from different types of precious stones. And you could see mirrors and garlands and banners and flags were hung everywhere. And the palace's interior had furniture and decorations which even Viśvakarmā admitted far surpassed those which he had created for Brahmā. Apparently he did some construction for Brahmā too, but what he did there in Vṛndāvana for us far surpassed what he did for Lord Brahmā.

So before leaving, after all this was said and done, Viśvakarmā quickly toured his creation and he was—I was reading—instructing workers to make slight adjustments here and there. And finally, he had the entire place—the palace that he had constructed, and the homes that he has, and all these items in the Vṛndāvana forest—he had everything washed with water mixed with three things: sandalwood paste, *aguru* oil, and *kastūrī* (musk). And as dawn approached, Viśvakarmā toured this Vṛndāvana town in particular and its surrounding area. And after seeing everything, he was simply amazed that he had been able to create such wonders in so little time. And of course, Viśvakarmā, as we understand it, was simply an instrument of Yogamāyā, Mother Paurṇamāsī, and her dear helper friend, Vṛndā-devī, who make the daily arrangements for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes—you know, where they’ll meet, what the rāsa will be, what birds will be there, what they’ll be singing, what animals will come, what devotees will be there, what clothes. So really, this is all Yogamāyā. And therefore, he didn't really take any credit. Actually, śāstra says, one quote I read, "He and his workers, like other demigods, had been drawn into Kṛṣṇa's earthly pastimes for the purpose of their own purification." So then Viśvakarmā and all of these celestial beings, they gathered together up in the sky above where Kṛṣṇa was sleeping in his tent. They all offered prayers to the Lord, who, it’s written so nicely, "responded to their prayers by smiling in his sleep." Kṛṣṇa, he knows everything because he is present everywhere, so he knew what was going on. Even as a small child, he is always God. So all these devatās, you know, with Viśvakarmā, they completed their service of creating this original Vṛndāvana town. And they were all together, praying from their hearts to little Kṛṣṇa who was sleeping below, and Kṛṣṇa responded by smiling in his sleep. And then as the first rays of the rising sun rose on the horizon and roused the birds from sleep, the demigods returned to their heavenly abodes, taking all their leftover materials and their tools of trade with them. There was no sign that they had been there doing anything. And it’s described that this *Pañca-krośī* Vṛndāvana was exceedingly beautiful, far surpassing the great city of Dvārakā that Viśvakarmā would build some years later for Kṛṣṇa. It was the best of the best.

Now, when the Brajavāsīs finally awoke, they were amazed at what they saw. It’s described the only thing they could say was, "Astonishing! Astonishing! It’s all so astonishing!" So then the cowherd men, they approached Nanda Bābā, Nanda, and they asked, "Oh King, how did this happen? Please explain to us where these buildings and this palace come from? And look at the different Vṛndāvana forests, it’s so nicely decorated with so many facilities." So Nanda Mahārāja kind of had to think for a minute, then he remembered the words of Gargamuni, who had told him at Kṛṣṇa's naming ceremony; one thing he told him was that his son would be just like Lord Nārāyaṇa. So Nanda Mahārāja, he told the cowherd men—and I will quote here because he just says it perfectly—he says to the cowherd men: "Omniscient Garga Ṛṣi predicted that my son would bring all opulence to our families and cows, and now we are seeing for ourselves that his words are true. The Supreme Lord, who by the movement of his eyebrows creates and destroys the universes, is pleased with us due to our connection with Kṛṣṇa. And so he has built these homes for us. Why should we question our good fortune? It’s interesting, why should we question our good fortune? Rather, let us accept it and serve He who has blessed us. By taking care of Kṛṣṇa, the brāhmaṇas, and our cows, we can show Him, meaning Lord Nārāyaṇa, our gratitude." So cute! So then the cowherd men and women, they followed Mahārāja Nanda through the *Pañca-krośī* Vṛndāvana as he assigned them their residences according to those names that had been inscribed in these plaques upon their houses. "Now this, oh, this is your house, this is here, you can stay here." And then at an auspicious time, which was decided by saintly brāhmaṇas, Nanda Mahārāja himself entered his new palace along with his family and his servants. And then of course it’s mentioned—it’s very nicely mentioned—the cows, the bulls, and the calves were led to their respective barns, their residences, which I was reading opened up into lush green pastures. And seeing their cows, bulls, and calves happy, everyone in *Pañca-krośī* Vṛndāvana was perfectly satisfied—*santuṣṭi*—they were happy. The ācāryas actually say, it’s a very beautiful quote, "Their laughter, joyful voices, and playful moods confirmed that the Brajavāsīs had truly arrived at home." Their laughter, joyful voices, and playful moods confirmed that the Brajavāsīs had truly arrived at home. Hare Kṛṣṇa!

And of course, this, as I mentioned, this eternal Vṛndāvana, this *Pañca-krośī* Vṛndāvana, still exists and will forever exist in what we call Vṛndāvana town today. We just can't see it now. But *premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena*—when our eyes become covered with the salve of love or the ointment of love for Kṛṣṇa, by the mercy of our founder-ācārya, strictly and seriously following the instructions he has given us, in particular the constant chanting of the Mahāmantra, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, we will see more than just the bazaar, we will see Vṛndāvana town in all its glory in every detail that I shared with you today. And beyond that circumference of the *parikramā* marg, the 15 kilometers, we’ll also see the very simple and rural atmosphere of Braja-maṇḍala. Braja-maṇḍala means the greater area of Vṛndāvana itself, the forest of Vṛndāvana and Braja-maṇḍala. We’ll see that very simple rural atmosphere, God’s playground, or his sports with his friends and his gopīs and his parents and his cows. We’ll see it with its 12 forests and unlimited lakes and streams and Govardhana Hill stretching for as far as the eye can see. *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya!*

So yeah, that’s the town that’s mentioned there in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, and we were able to describe it by going deeper into our research that God's mercy revealed. So let us finish today. We can pray along with Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, who writes in—again in *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*—in his prayers, he writes how he wants to see this transcendental abode of Vṛndāvana with transcendental vision. We’ll finish with this verse: "May Vṛndāvana, where the astonishing cowherd boys such as Subala who are Kṛṣṇa's dear friends play with the gopīs of glowing *kiśora* age such as Lalitā, full of attraction for Rādhā, find pleasure; where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, attached to pastimes day and night, experience thirst for love through astonishing pastimes of Cupid—kindly manifest to me." Praying to Vṛndāvana, "where all the astonishing cowherd boys such as Subala, who are Kṛṣṇa's very dear friends, play with the gopīs who are of the very young age such as Lalitā, who is full of attraction for Rādhā, find pleasure; where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, attached to pastimes both in the day and the night, experience a thirst for love through astonishing pastimes of Cupid, please, that Vṛndāvana, kindly manifest to me." So we’ll keep that wonderful prayer of Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī in our hearts and we’ll nourish it through our different devotional activities, and hopefully develop a very intense desire to return home, back to Godhead, as Prabhupāda stated—back to Goloka, Vṛndāvana-dhāma. And Kṛṣṇa says in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, "Having once returned, we never come back here again." Thank God, so to speak, thank Kṛṣṇa! Thank you, and thank you to all of you again for this opportunity to share these valuable gems that we’re finding in the treasure chest of our bhakti-śāstras, Śrīla Prabhupāda's books. Have a wonderful day, we’ll be back again in a few days. Thank you. *Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya!*

*Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa!*""