"*00257*.*
"There is no difference between Māyāpur and Vṛndāvana, and there is no difference between the Vrajavāsīs and the Māyāpur-vāsīs, except for one difference: when we have kīrtana in Vṛndāvana, everyone dances. I don’t know why—maybe it’s too cold already, or this is a movement of chanting, dancing, and feasting. Actually, when we are dancing, it’s the soul that’s dancing. So, even if you don’t feel like dancing, you still have to dance because then your soul gets warmed up, it becomes very blissful, and you begin to dance naturally. I wanted to say this evening that by this chanting of the yuga-dharma, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, we can reach the goal of Kṛṣṇa consciousness as stated by our Śrīla Prabhupāda.

We can achieve prema; the goal is called in Sanskrit *sādhya*, and those who are practicing, or trying to achieve the goal, are called *sādhakas*. To get to that goal of love of God—love of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—there is *sādhana*, which means the process for achieving the goal, basically meaning following all the rules and regulations. So, it is a very simple process; even Prabhupāda went so far as to say there are no hard and fast rules. It may be so simple that we just become familiar with it, that we just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. But we are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa; it’s our life and soul, it is the be-all and end-all of our existence. It is non-different than Kṛṣṇa himself. Just like in the morning time, when we go to the greeting of the deities, suddenly the curtain opens and there are Rādhā and the aṣṭa-sakhīs and our heart skips a beat, isn't it? We're very excited before the kīrtana opens; everybody is moving, jostling for a good position as close as they can get to the altar, and then the conch shells blow, and our heart skips another beat. We are going to see Rādhā, and behind the curtain, the pūjārī purposefully waits another minute just so we become really anxious. The kīrtana reaches a certain peak and then our heart skips another beat, the curtain opens, and we hear Yamunā Devī's angelic voice.

And we look at Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—wow! So, Kṛṣṇa-avatāra, one of the avatars of Kṛṣṇa—non-different than all the other millions and billions of avatars—is Kṛṣṇa in the form of sound, not any ordinary sound. *Śabda-brahma* means transcendental sound. And he is just as present when we're chanting as he is on the altar as Kṛṣṇa next to Rādhā; the same, there's no difference. So, for millions and billions and trillions and godzillions of lives, we've been separated from our eternal lover. So when the kīrtana starts, our heart should start beating very quickly and we should jump up and dance: *O Govinda, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa...* We shouldn't sit and watch. Actually, the most important of all the rules and regulations is to chant. And just to make sure that we do that, the previous ācāryas and Śrīla Prabhupāda have given us, I guess what you could say is a step-by-step process to make progress; that's *sādhana*. It's all basically centered around chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, as stated by Śrīla Prabhupāda: if you've got time, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Of course, that's the general process. Sometimes, of course, we hear aspiring devotees, they may get some special mercy, like *guru-kṛpā* or *Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*, and in one moment they achieve perfection.

You know, those of you who listen to my lectures many times, we have referred to Toṭā-gopīnātha, the deity that Mahāprabhu found in the sands of Jagannātha Purī. Very special deity; he reciprocates with devotees' love. Bhakti is all about reciprocation—between two lovers, between Vaiṣṇavas, between the spiritual master and the disciple, and ultimately between the Lord and the devotee. It's all about love. So this very beautiful deity, Toṭā-gopīnātha, he was standing for some time, but one devotee whom Mahāprabhu had put in charge, Gadādhara Paṇḍita, he was serving that deity and he got so old he couldn't reach up any longer and put the garland around Toṭā-gopīnātha’s neck. Just like a little two-year-old child trying to put a garland on Rādhā-Mādhava here in Māyāpur; you can't reach that high. But Gadādhara Paṇḍita, he conquered the Lord with his bhakti, with his devotion. Gadādhara conquered the Lord with his devotion, and as he was attempting to put a garland on the deity, the deity sat down in a sitting position, then he could put the garland on. So when you go to Jagannātha Purī and you go to the Toṭā-gopīnātha temple, which is one of the principal temples in Jagannātha Purī, you'll see that Toṭā-gopīnātha, he's in a sitting position, ready to receive the love of his devotees.

A materialist can never explain how a deity carved from stone can suddenly be sitting; it's mystical. Neither can they understand how Sākṣī-gopāla walked from Vṛndāvana to Oḍiśā to stand as a witness for his devotee. Even the little boy who asked him to come stand as witness was surprised; he asked the Lord, "Lord, you have to come stand as my witness in Oḍiśā, will you come?" And the deity said, "Yes." This is when we're doing devotional service, we have to remember Kṛṣṇa. So when you're worshiping your household deities, you can remember this pastime, how the Lord spoke to his devotee; the deity spoke to his devotee. And your deity will speak to you when you are on the level of his love for you. You have the same prema, the same ātmiya-bhakti, selfless love that Kṛṣṇa has for you. If you have the same love, that reciprocal love, he'll also speak to you. There's no question, there's no doubt. The deity is not a representative of Kṛṣṇa, a symbol of Kṛṣṇa; he is Kṛṣṇa. People like to say "God is everywhere," he can also be in the deity. If he's everywhere, he's also in the deity. But the boy was a little covered by yoga-māyā, so he said to the deity, "But you're a deity, how can you walk to Oḍiśā?" So Sākṣī-gopāla, he said very clearly, "My dear little boy, if I can talk, I can also walk. So let's go."

Now, one special feature about this deity is that he can give prema to a sādhaka. Kṛṣṇa says quite frankly in the Bhagavad-gītā, after many, many verses, "My devotee fully surrenders to me." But Toṭā-gopīnātha, if he wants, he can give you prema. One second—I mentioned one time, I think here, that when I was in the 70s, we'd go with the brahmacārīs on pilgrimage in India around March, around Gaura-pūrṇimā, and we heard this, that Toṭā-gopīnātha can give prema to a sādhaka if he wants. But we have to have greed for that love, and we have to want that more than anything else in the whole wide world. Rūpa Gosvāmī says in Padyāvalī, "As young girls are attracted to young boys and young boys are attracted to young girls, with the same intensity, my Lord, let me fall in love with you in a transcendental way." So we were like seven or eight boys, like, "Who's going to get prema today? Who's going to show lobha? Who's going to show this intense greed?" As much as we wanted sense gratification in material life, to the same degree or more, we have to have lobha and greed to love Kṛṣṇa, to serve Kṛṣṇa. So we would always reserve one day in our Purī parikrama to chant all day in front of Toṭā-gopīnātha to show our eagerness for his mercy. The boys would dance and jump—hours, sometimes we'd go six, seven hours. We'd look at each other, "Did you get prema?" "No." "Did you get?" "No." "Okay, we have to be good sādhakas. Slow but steady wins the race."

And we also hear how Lord Caitanya cured a leper; his name was Vāsudeva. This devotee had a terrible disease—you know, leprosy. You don't see it so much now, but it's still out there. Leprosy—your fingers fall off, your toes fall off; it's a terrible disease. But the worst disease is forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa. If this disease falls upon you, you forget Kṛṣṇa, that means again birth. And Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, "For one who has taken birth, death is certain, and for one who has died, birth is certain." It just goes on and on. So Mahāprabhu touched this Vāsudeva; his leprosy went away. But by touching him, he gave him an even greater benediction: all illusion, all ignorance, all desires went away. He became a pure devotee of the Lord. So Lord Caitanya is not famous as a humanitarian who can cure material diseases; he is famous as *bhakti-amṛta-prada*, one to deliver the nectar of pure devotional service to the leper Vāsudeva. So we'd like to be like that—maybe your name is Rāmadāsa, but by begging for the creeper, the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you can one day become *rasāmṛta*, what to speak of Vāsudeva who was delivered by the nectar of Mahāprabhu.

So this Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā is there in our śāstras—what to speak of Toṭā-gopīnātha delivering a devotee or Mahāprabhu delivering a leper? Mahāprabhu delivered living entities who were subhuman—lions, tigers, and bears in the Jharikhanda forest—instantaneously they became pure devotees in his presence. But we should be satisfied, if it's the will of the Lord, to just go step-by-step. It's no harm; it's very nice, this process, living in the association of devotees. One time a devotee jokingly said to Prabhupāda, "But what if it's all not true, Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" Prabhupāda said, "Well, that's not so, but if it was, I'm satisfied just to live this wonderful life of a devotee. It's so wonderful, the way we live. You couldn't imagine a better way of dressing, a better way of eating, a better way of speaking, better places to live, better company, better philosophy. We have the best of the best of everything." So we can be patient in the process. They say patience is a virtue. Just be patient and stick to the straight and narrow, and one day you'll be home.

So what does "step-by-step" mean? When the alarm goes off in the darkness of night, one hour or earlier before Brahma-muhūrta, you wake up. Step one: take a shower. Some people don't take showers, you know. One time in Sanatana, many years ago—it was the early 70s in Detroit—I met a hippie and he smelled terrible. I tried to sell him a book. His clothes were dirty, there was just dirt crusted on his hands, he hadn't brushed his teeth, and I said, "When was the last time you took a bath?" He said, "I don't take baths." I said, "Why?" He said, "I like to keep life's experiences on me." This is called *tamas*, happiness in the mode of ignorance. So we rush to the bath; we want to be clean for Kṛṣṇa. And then if we have time, we do some japa. Then we go to the temple, and we go to the temple that we go to in our home, where our little altar is, and we have garlands for Śrīla Prabhupāda and our spiritual masters. We water Tulasī-mahārāṇī. Then we have the great privilege—there's 7 billion people on this planet; they don't know what is the greatest privilege—we get to sit and talk to God. Traditionally it's called the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, but it's more like a prayer: "O my Lord, O energy of the Lord, please pick me up from this world of death, fix me as an atom at your lotus feet in the spiritual world, never to take birth again." It comes from the heart. Then we get to give credit where credit is due; it's not about me, it's all about you. We get to glorify Śrīla Prabhupāda, the founder of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. And then we get to stimulate our intelligence; we get to hear the king of all scriptures. Then more and then prasādam; Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, "Food, even if it's vegetarian, that is not offered to me is only lumps of sin." Who would you imagine eating a lump of—I don't know what it looks like, but a lump of sin. We have many artists here, they can draw a lump of sin. No, so food not offered to Kṛṣṇa is a lump of sin; we don't have to eat. We eat the opposite, 180 degrees opposite; we eat prasādam. So this is step-by-step. Actually, this term "step-by-step," it's even there in one of the 700 verses in Bhagavad-gītā: "Gradually, step-by-step, one should become situated in trance by means of intelligence sustained by full conviction, and thus the mind should be fixed on the self alone and should think of nothing else." Let's give our translator some applause; she's doing excellent today.

And actually, we also have examples. We have devotees who set the example of step-by-step. Although they are liberated souls, out of their kindness, they associate with us, they live in our midst, and they show us this step-by-step process. There's a saying: "Example is higher than precept." We say example and precept are both important. Example is—sorry, there's a saying "Example is higher than theory," but no, both are important. The example of a devotee and the philosophy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, they're both important. Prabhupāda said, "If you can only have the example of a devotee, it's good enough. If you're cast away on an island, you just have a devotee—that's enough." But if you have both—the example, the spiritual preceptor, and the bhāgavatam—you're almost there. So all our teachers are the best example of how to be a devotee. Generally, a disciple has many choices of gurus, but the disciple chooses one of those personalities because they feel that he's the best example of how to practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The Lord inspires the devotee from within the heart: "My spiritual master is setting a perfect example; I trust him, I can follow his example." Great souls set the example: "Whatever a great man does, whatever example he's setting, the whole world pursues that." That can apply to mundane people, it can also apply to spiritual people. Look at the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana; they're all gopīs in the spiritual world, but when they came here, they set the perfect example. They didn't have to, but they did it for you and me, for everyone sitting here. They set the example for all of us. Śrīnivāsa Ācārya refers to their daily routine, their step-by-step, in his *Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭaka*. The Six Gosvāmīs chanted a fixed number of rounds every day, just like our Śrīla Prabhupāda; he chanted a fixed number of rounds every day. There are many photos, there are many pictures of Prabhupāda chanting japa in his room. And of course, many devotees had the opportunity to walk with Śrīla Prabhupāda in the morning and he would chant very clearly, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. So if it's good enough for them, it's good enough for us. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja in his Caitanya-caritāmṛta, he describes very clearly how Mahāprabhu used to count his, the number of names of Kṛṣṇa that he would chant on a knotted string around his waist. He had a knotted string around his waist; he would keep track, like we keep track on japa beads. He would keep track of how many names of Kṛṣṇa he chanted on this string with knots. Someone should do a painting, Mahāprabhu counting the names he's chanting on a knotted rope around his waist. No one's done that yet, but it's right there in shastra.

Actually, a couple of years ago I was doing Govardhana-parikrama and I always like to go up to the sādhu's and offer my respects. One sādhu was sitting outside, a real bhajana-kuṭīra like a grass hut; he was sitting out there in the morning sun, taking some sun, and he invited me into his little kuṭīra. He didn't speak English, I didn't speak whatever Hindi/Brajabhasha, so we just—I sat there. So one moment he said, "So..." I, you know, I feel unqualified, he renounced so much, you know, he was a Gaudiya. I know, "You, you..." He said, "You..." so I sang kīrtana. His head was like that. At the end, he said in Hindi, "Thank you." And I was looking around, kind of interested like how did he live, but I didn't see any japa beads. He was Gaudiya, had Gaudiya tilaka on, and a picture of his guru-mahārāja, but I didn't see any japa beads. So I said, "Bābā, japamālā, japamālā, where's your japamālā?" So he reached over on a little stand and he pulled out this, a string with knots on it, very nicely done. I mean a common string, but the knots were very prominent—108 knots and one big knot—and he started chanting, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa...* and he told me, "Japamālā." He was chanting on the string, the knotted string. I was like, "Wow, that's right out of... wow!" So time was going by, we chanted a few rounds. I was thinking, "I have to get back and go on parikrama there," but no, this bābā, he had real rasa, he was really chanting with feeling and taste, and I think, "I'd like to chant like that someday." So, eventually, he put his hand on my head like that. Then as I was going, he gave me the string with the knots in it as a gift. I took it very seriously. I've mentioned to you before, Prabhupāda gave me his cloth one time in 7 Bury Place, and he said, "A gift from a Vaiṣṇava is a very special thing." So I still have—this was years ago—I still have that knotted string, and sometimes I do my japa on it, remembering that sādhu and his kindness upon me, to give me association, to pat me on the head, and give me his japamālā. This is Vraja-vāsīs; they're very sweet, they have very soft hearts. We should become like that, even to strangers.

But the Gosvāmīs didn't only count their number of rounds and names. We hear how they counted how many times they did obeisances every day, they counted how many times they walked around Govardhana Hill, step-by-step. Their day was so organized in devotional practices; they only had two hours to sleep every night. No time for nonsense, there was always some devotional service. So though they are ācāryas and they teach us by example, we at the same time can't imitate them. But Prabhupāda said we can follow in their footsteps. We can be serious about the way Prabhupāda has introduced us to step-by-step hearing, chanting, bowing down, and remembering the Lord. We can follow that. And one important thing is that we should always be thinking how we can improve. We have to—how we can improve. There's a saying: "The race isn't over till it's over." So we can't rest easy till we cross the Virajā River, which divides the material world and the spiritual world. And even then, we don't want to become—we don't want to become necessarily attracted to the Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma; we want to go to the playground of God, Goloka Vṛndāvana. Then we can rest easy, but we won't rest easy because there'll be so many ways to serve Kṛṣṇa. There's always room for improvement. We should actually wake up each morning and think, "How can I improve my practice from the previous day?" That's a good rule. I can wake up and, "How can I do better today in the step-by-step process?" That's a positive thought. Even the night before, when you go to sleep, before you sleep: "I did this today, the quality of my rounds, I offered obeisances to some many devotees, I cooked an offering, I took care of the children, or I distributed books, or whatever—how am I going to do it better the next day?" There's—we have a saying in English, "Never greet the dawn without a map." I love that. It's not from our shastras, but it's nīti-śāstra—it's like that. "Never greet the dawn, the rising of the sun, without a map." What are you going to do today? If you make a plan how to improve each day, you'll be more productive than just leaving the day to chance. You have a road map, "I'm going to get there." You don't just get in the car and start driving. Your wife says, "Where are we going?" "I don't know, somewhere." There, use your imagination how to improve. The result will be you won't waste time; that's called *avya-kāla*, means that we waste time. Make a plan how to improve.

And there's four general areas that we can always improve on: the body, the mind, the intelligence, and the soul. These are areas that we can improve to make ourselves better devotees and better communities. Improve your body—that doesn't mean, you know, "I want to be muscles, very beautiful to attract other people." No, the body has been given to you, human form of life is very valuable. Proper use of this body, we can go back to Godhead. Take care of ourselves—yeah, like Prabhupāda would always write—when Prabhupāda would conclude a letter, he— "Your ever-well-wisher," but before that he would always say, "Hope this meets you in the best of health." Then he would say, "Your ever-well-wisher." So we're not the body, yes, but Prabhupāda said take care of your health. Our health is something, those of us who are growing older, by Nature's way, you know, try as hard as we can, by Nature's way health is deteriorating a little bit, and it's so frustrating because it impedes what is most dear to us, our service to Guru and Gaurāṅga. Something you have to tolerate when you get older, but if you're young, generally, hopefully, there's no excuse. If you eat properly, you exercise, you get enough sleep, sometimes you fast. Yamunā Devī, my illustrious godsister, she left a very valuable contribution to the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness for all time; she left a cookbook. Many of the recipes were taught to her by Prabhupāda, or they're recipes of our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition or Vedic culture. You eat healthy like that, you can live longer. Her book should be made—every devotee in ISKCON should read that book and devotees should master that book. That's a great contribution, and it's being forgotten for pizza. Sorry. The saying: "If you lose your money, you've lost nothing. If you lose your health, you've lost something. If you lose your Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you've lost everything."

So we've got to take care of our mind. There was the body, then there's the mind. How to take care of our mind? You can strengthen the mind and conviction by studying Śrīla Prabhupāda's books. You know, the mind encounters so many doubts, so many problems, so much anxiety, but the solution to all those problems is given in Prabhupāda's books, in his teachings. "Armed with knowledge, stand and fight." We're at war with the material energy in so many ways; material nature is throwing so many things, "Oh no, not again! Oh, not that!" Oh, so many things, that is, but with knowledge we can understand how to deal with these things and to the most part solve these problems. So Kṛṣṇa says, "Armed with knowledge, stand and fight." We have to study and read; we'll become strong. I've been speaking about a certain subject now for four, four and a half years, about Vṛndāvana, etc. I think many of you may watch those YouTube lectures, but I've—in my research, I've studied so many books of the Gosvāmīs and other ācāryas and sādhus and Sanskrit texts, and I've studied just so many, and I've come to realize that everything I'm studying is there in Prabhupāda's books. Maybe not some of the details or some of the līlās, but in essence, I've come to this realization that everything I've studied for the four-five years—this vast pool of knowledge, Upaniṣads, Purāṇas, itihāsas—it's given by Prabhupāda in a very tangible, appreciable way in his books. That's one way to control the mind. The mind could be the best friend or the worst enemy. Left alone, the mind can speculate—Gauḍīya boys should say, "Speculation..." You can speculate, you can doubt, you can... but if you're fixed on the truth, Absolute Truth, your mind has to follow. Oh, I've read Prabhupāda's books. Somebody, one devotee scholar told me, it actually takes 18 years to thoroughly study Prabhupāda's books. I said, "Can you explain that?" Two years to study all the 25 small books; two years to study and master the medium-sized books, *Kṛṣṇa* etc.; one year to study and learn Bhagavad-gītā; 10 years to study, memorize verses from and master the 18,000 ślokas [of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam]; and three years to read and know the [Caitanya-caritāmṛta]. So this is one way to tame the mind, to make the mind healthy: divine transcendental knowledge.

So the body, the mind, and then intelligence. How to have healthy intelligence? Well, after you've learned all this knowledge, you can write essays, you can write books, you can memorize songs, verses, passages from śāstra. Put what you've learned to use—use your intelligence to teach, you know how to do it. You can learn hundreds of food recipes from Yamunā's cookbook and cook for the devotees; they'll be so happy for you with you. Learn different things that can be used in Kṛṣṇa's service—sewing. I came to Māyāpur with lots of things to sew; I had a little—I have a jacket that needed sewing, and I needed a little, a little pouch I carry my Nṛsiṁha-śilā in. I needed it sewed; three or four, I was so happy to give it to the ladies who could sew very professionally. Or learn to play mṛdaṅga, like Vīra-vara did at the program last night, or sing like Vṛndā, his wife—she spoke so nicely, she sang so nicely, and her daughter was a spitting image of mother, such a wonderful family. Improve your family life! If you speak English, learn Russian, the main, the main language here, or if you're Russian, learn English like Ma—10 out of 10 translator! Prabhupāda said intelligence means to analyze things on the proper perspective.

Goals for the soul: How to improve the soul? The first thing I thought of is: chant Hare Kṛṣṇa without offenses, serve the guru, serve the Vaiṣṇavas, serve the cows. It's like you're watering a seed; you're watering the soul by these particular activities which are very dear to Kṛṣṇa. Of course, the general activities of book distribution and preaching, being compassionate to the fallen conditioned souls—this is why you get the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, which makes the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness much, much easier. See, these are just some guidelines; there's so many activities that you can engage in to be engaged 24 hours a day, not procrastinating and getting lazy. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā 18.56: "Though engaged in all kinds of activities, my pure devotee under my protection reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by my grace." The worst thing is to waste time. Time is so precious; we don't know how much time we have, we never know how much time we have. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says very nicely in 17.8, he says, "Friend, when will you die? Do you know? Not even infants—sometimes [they] die unexpectedly. With clear intelligence, without attachment to the body and senses, and without stopping to think, run to Vṛndāvana." That day will come; we're hoping it's some distance away, but that day will come when you won't see the next sunrise. Jonākī-pāṭha says if one moment of life cannot be regained for millions of gold coins, therefore what greater loss is there than time spent uselessly?

So let us follow in the footsteps of the Six Gosvāmīs who actually counted their rounds, counted their parikramas, counted their steps. They—that's the process. You keep count, as did Śrīla Prabhupāda. It doesn't have to be quick; the gradual process is also good, it's just steady. Everyone has their own pace in spiritual life, but the point is to keep moving forward. You know the famous story of the turtle and the rabbit. The rabbit was making fun of the turtle, "You slowpoke, you can't get anywhere!" And the turtle said, "We can have a race if you want." So the rabbit laughed, "I'll win this race, you stupid little slowpoke!" So some other animals said, "On your marks, get set, go!" And they started off. And the rabbit and the turtle... so the rabbit, you know, went almost to the finish line; the turtle's way behind. He said, "I'll just take a nap, this stupid turtle, have to wait for him." But the turtle didn't slow down; it just kept going at his pace, and eventually he passed the rabbit. And just as he was getting to the finish line, the rabbit woke up, "Oh no!" And he tried to run, but turtle crossed over the finish line and won the race. Slow but steady wins the race. So some amongst us in this International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness through the eons of time make it, *guru-kṛpā*, make it *Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*, we all reach the lotus feet. But we're very happy; slow but steady wins the race in this wonderful, blissful life of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. And if we follow the step-by-step process as Prabhupāda has given us, one day we'll reach the spiritual world, for sure, because Prabhupāda said we'll have our ishta in the spiritual world. So I look forward to seeing all of you there. If you get there before me, put in a good word for me. Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""