"*00463*.*
"Hi everyone, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* So today, we will continue with our little series on the glories of that holy place, Yāvat. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings in verse 12 of *Prārthanā*: "O Lord Hari, will this effort happen to me? That in the village of King Vṛṣabhānu, I will take birth as a gopī in the house of Ahira Gopāla. Living in Yāvat, I will serve the lotus feet of the intimate friend of Rādhā. Being merciful to me, she will engage me in serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. By attaining the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, my life will be successful, and all my desires will be fulfilled."

So, for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, this is the highest goal: to become a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is engaged in pastimes of *parakīya-rasa*, or unwedded love, with Kṛṣṇa. We touched on this the other day: Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are engaged in many loving affairs, but they are not married. What’s more, Rādhārāṇī is married to Abhimanyu. To non-devotees, it may appear immoral, but it is not. Devotees are quick to defend Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in this regard, and what’s more, actually glorify such loving pastimes. This very beautiful verse, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, 33rd Chapter, text 39: *bhaktyā paramayā bhagavati...* "Anyone who faithfully hears or describes the Lord’s playful affairs with the young gopīs of Vṛndāvana will attain the Lord’s pure devotional service; thus, he will quickly become sober and conquer lust, the disease of the heart." Actually, not only is Śrīrādhā married to Abhimanyu, but all her girlfriends are also married to their husbands. So, the essential question is: if all these girls are married, how can Kṛṣṇa intimately associate with them? Well, as we mentioned the other day, Kṛṣṇa is the source of everyone, and everything ultimately belongs to Kṛṣṇa. As described in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, in the absolute sense, no one is my wife, no one is my husband, no one is my child. Therefore, no one can fault Kṛṣṇa for His dealings with the gopīs because they are His very own. How Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in a purport in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 5.18.19: "Factually, the only real husband of all women is Kṛṣṇa, the supreme husband. Because the gopīs were liberated souls, they understood this fact; therefore, they rejected their material husbands and accepted Kṛṣṇa as their real husband." That is perfect.

The fact that the gopīs even have husbands in Vṛndāvana-līlā is really just to make their meeting with Kṛṣṇa more intense and more relishable. Now, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he offers a very interesting perspective in this regard. He writes that the gopīs always desired to have Kṛṣṇa as their husband, and they prayed to Goddess Kātyāyanī, an expansion of Durgā Devī, for an entire month in this regard. Their prayer is actually very famous amongst Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas: *kātyāyani mahāmāye mahā-yoginy adhiśvari...* "O great potency of the Lord, O possessor of great mystic power, and the mighty controller of all, please make the son of Nanda Mahārāja my husband." Now, it’s interesting; Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that the gopīs would add to that prayer, "Dearest Kātyāyanī, our connection with the son of Mahārāja Nanda, Kṛṣṇa, should be immediately arranged by you, not by her parents." And Kātyāyanī would reply, according to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, "Why?" And the gopīs would say, "Because we’re extremely anxious and we cannot wait any longer." Now, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he adds that the gopīs were not actually worshipping Mahāmāyā Durgā. He says rather they were worshipping Yogamāyā.

He writes, "This is very clear because the gopīs are all very exalted devotees of the Lord and would never have contact with the material energy." So finally, at the end of the month, Goddess Kātyāyanī reciprocated with the gopīs by appearing in each of their minds and saying, "My dear Vraja-gopī, very soon you will achieve Kṛṣṇa’s association." So Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he goes on to explain that during that one year in which Lord Brahmā stole away all the cowherd boys, Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself as the cows and the cowherd boys, and during that year, all the gopīs’ parents arranged to marry their daughters to those cowherd boys. So essentially, all the gopīs were actually married with Kṛṣṇa. 

And even Rādhārāṇī’s husband, Abhimanyu, he is described as the shadow of Kṛṣṇa. So it’s a very deep subject matter, of course, these amorous pastimes, but they have to be discussed. The līlā has to be there, and the *tattva*, the philosophy behind the līlā, must also be discussed, if only because there needs to be a concept of loving God beyond just being a servant of God. Of course, everyone must begin, as we are, with the understanding that we are all eternal servants of God. We quoted this following verse several classes ago: *jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya—kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’*. "It is the living entity’s constitutional position to be an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa because he is the marginal energy of Kṛṣṇa and a manifestation simultaneously one with and different from the Lord." And one can remain forever as a servant of the Lord in Vaikuṇṭha because that is the mood there—aiśvarya, everyone is seeing themselves as servants of Lord Nārāyaṇa, and that’s fine. However, we also understand that the nature of love is that it is always increasing—imperfectly in this world, but perfectly in the spiritual world. But we can understand love is always increasing; its maturing is a better word. And as such, the relationship of servant of God can mature into friendship with God, or one can have the mood of parental love for God as do Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja, or one can enter into a more intimate relationship with God like conjugal love, amorous pastimes. And although most religions are based solely on the servant-master relationship with God, there are hints in some of those religions of a deeper type of love for God. For example, in the Holy Bible, in Isaiah 54:5, we hear: "For your Maker is your husband, the Lord Almighty is His name; the Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer; He is called the God of all earth." So the first part is significant there in that quote from the Bible: "For your Maker is your husband."

But other than that, there’s no indication of a more intimate loving relationship with God in the Bible that I could find, or other major religions as far as I know. But there’s so much information in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, such an abundance. And for every philosophy, we require an example, and we know the best example of love of God, of Kṛṣṇa. *anayā rādhito nūnaṁ bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ...* Such an essential verse in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, from *Bhāgavatam*, Canto 10, Chapter 30, text 28: "Certainly this particular gopī has perfectly worshipped the all-powerful Personality of Godhead, Govinda, since He was so pleased with Her that He abandoned the rest of us and brought Her to a secluded place." This verse is spoken by the gopīs referring to Śrī Rādhā. 

Her name, Rādhā, comes from that particular phrase: *anayā rādhito*. "Certainly this particular gopī has perfectly worshipped the all-powerful Personality of Godhead, Govinda, since He was so pleased with Her that He abandoned the rest of us and brought Her to a secluded place." This shows the special nature of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Amongst all the other gopīs, She is supreme. Often in my travels, people ask me, "Who is the girl with Kṛṣṇa?" Maybe you also been asked that question, "Who is the girl with Kṛṣṇa?" And my answer is always that She is the Lord’s eternal consort; She is His most beloved. But technically, we as devotees know that She, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure potency. That’s called *hlādinī-śakti*. God expands Himself to enjoy; it makes sense, because no one likes to enjoy alone. When we think of enjoying, we think of one, two, three, or more of our friends. So for His supreme enjoyment, Kṛṣṇa expanded as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

*Hlādinī-śakti*, His pleasure potency personified, became Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And in the *Brahmā-vaivarta Purāṇa*, it’s described that one day Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were sitting together, and Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear Balarāma, you know, one day I took My flute and, standing under a very beautiful Kadamba tree in My threefold bending form, I saw My own reflection displayed on a golden platform decorated with jewels. Being enchanted by My own reflection, My heart filled with bliss. The nature of that bliss was divine love, capable of charming the entire world. And from that bliss manifested a goddess from My left side." And that goddess, supreme goddess of course, was Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Of course, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are eternal, as all of us are, but this is the līlā of Her appearance.

And as the Lord’s form is completely spiritual, being eternal, full of knowledge and bliss, so is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s spiritual form eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. There’s nothing material about either of their forms; therefore, there’s no question of any material lust in their relationship. And the same holds true for all of Śrīrādhā’s gopī girlfriends, because actually her intimate friends are all expansions of herself. Thus, Kṛṣṇa’s relationship with the gopīs and the gopīs’ relationships with Kṛṣṇa are all pure and transcendental. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, we also hear: *ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā—tāre ‘kāma’ bali, kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare ‘prema’ nāma.* "The desire to gratify one’s own senses is *kāma*, lust, but the desire to please the senses of Lord Kṛṣṇa is *prema*, love." So, therefore, real love—true love—means when one gives one’s heart solely to Kṛṣṇa. *tvayi dāsya-rase...* Really famous prayer, really the essence of love, divine love for the Lord: "O Lord of my life, as the Ganges forever flows to the sea without hindrance, let my attraction be constantly drawn unto You without being diverted to anyone else."

So, if Śrīrādhā’s intimate gopī girlfriends are expansions of herself, how then can we say as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas that we can aspire to become gopīs? Because of Rādhā’s girlfriends, her gopī girlfriends, are expansions of herself, then how do we as *jīvas* become gopīs? Well, it can be answered by the fact that a foundation of our philosophy is that we are servants of the servants of the servants of the servants of the gopīs. There’s that famous verse, *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 13.80: "I am not a brāhmaṇa, I am not a kṣatriya, I am not a vaiśya or a śūdra. Nor am I a brahmacārī, a householder, a vānaprastha, or a sannyāsī. I identify myself only as the servant of the servant of the servant of the lotus feet of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the maintainer of the gopīs." In other words, we aspire to become servants of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s gopīs, or more specifically, as a *mañjarī* or an associate of some gopī—that’s also gopī, but not a main gopī, let’s put it like that—we become *mañjarīs* or an associate of some gopī. And Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura makes that very clear in the opening verse, one of the opening verses, which we quoted today. Listen very carefully: "Living in Yāvat," he says, "I will serve the lotus feet of an intimate friend of Rādhā. Being merciful to me, she will engage me in serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." So yes, we aspire to be gopīs, but of the nature of serving these very intimate servants of Kṛṣṇa. Like that. 

Of course, the beauty of Vṛndāvana is the variety of loving relationships; so there’s cowherd boys, there’s cows, there’s deers, there’s even liberated souls who themselves are very happy to be trees in Śrī Vṛndāvana. We discussed that several months ago, so the variety is there. And Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas may also one day in their *siddha-svarūpa* serve the Lord of Vṛndāvana in that way, but all the *rasas* in Vṛndāvana are meant to facilitate the loving exchanges between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. That’s the essence. And as we learned two weeks ago, everyone is subservient to Śrī Rādhā as the queen of Vṛndāvana, even Kṛṣṇa. But it’s interesting that although Śrīrādhā herself—I was thinking like this—grows up in one majestic palace, Varṣāṇā, and later stays in another, Yāvat, She prefers to reside in Vraja’s forest groves tended by Vṛndā, or the caves that Govardhana Hill provides for Her and Kṛṣṇa. Obviously, She feels this way because She meets Kṛṣṇa in these places, not in the palaces of Varṣāṇā or Yāvat. She meets Kṛṣṇa in the *vana*, in the forest. She is also a very simple-hearted cowherd girl—yes, She’s queen, but She’s also a very simple-hearted cowherd girl who values the gifts of nature more than the opulences afforded by royal wealth. Śrīrādhā is the original *Śrī*, the goddess of fortune; Lakṣmī is actually an expansion from Her. So She is Śrī; She’s the original supreme goddess of fortune, and She distributes untold riches to those who worship Her, yet She personally rejoices in the natural beauty of Vraja’s hills, waters, gardens, and creatures, just like Her beloved Kṛṣṇa. You remember many months ago, we were quoting a particular verse from *Bhāgavatam* 10.24.24, speaking to His father: "My dear father, our home is not in the cities or towns or villages; being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills." So She is just like Kṛṣṇa, the divine couple, the two of them. One devotee has written, I read the other day: "As queen of Vraja’s six seasons, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī expands the influence of Her sweetness and opulence so that Vṛndāvana’s soil, topography, foliage, and creatures put Vaikuṇṭha’s heavenly luxuries to shame." I thought that was nice: "Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī expands the influence of Her sweetness and opulence so that Vṛndāvana’s soil, topography, foliage, and creatures put Vaikuṇṭha’s heavenly luxuries to shame." 

And devotees sometimes wonder why Vṛndāvana has a structured hierarchy of like groups amongst Kṛṣṇa’s friends and gopīs and cows, parrots, groves, and garden styles. There’s a structured hierarchy we see in Vṛndāvana, and the ācāryas say that this organization is attributed partly to Śrīrādhā, who is also called *Aṣṭapriyā*, *Aṣṭapriyā* meaning "one who likes things arranged in groups of eight." *Aṣṭa-priyā*, one who likes things arranged in groups of eight. Śrīrādhā has eight very dear friends, known as the *sakhīs*, each of whom has eight dear friends of their own, gopīs, and then they have eight assistants, and they have eight assistants, and they have eight assistants—like it goes down like that. So *Aṣṭapriyā*, one who likes things arranged in groups of eight. 

Now, despite Her pure, pristine nature, sometimes scandalous rumors about Śrī Rādhā circulate in Vṛndāvana—yes, rumors accusing Her of meeting with Kṛṣṇa at different times of the day or night. We’ve discussed this, but our ācāryas say that actually such rumors are the work of Kṛṣṇa’s pastime potency, coming from Yogamāyā, personified as Mother Pourṇamāsī. These rumors are the work of Kṛṣṇa’s pastime potency. Vṛndāvana wouldn’t be what it is without these rumors, which always strive to enrich—as scriptures describe—enrich Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s līlās with obstacles they must overcome. The ācāryas say, "Without obstacles to cross over, the pleasure and freshness of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s eventual meetings would be less flavorsome." So therefore, there are many obstacles presented, and the rumors are some of those obstacles I have to overcome. 

What’s even more interesting, I was reading, is that those ācāryas say that whoever plays the role of making impediments in Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is a very special servant of the Lord. Now you may appreciate from the last two lectures about Yāvat that Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā are two of the main personalities trying to stop Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s rendezvous; they’re big obstacles. At one point, I was reading, Jaṭilā even went so far as to call her daughter-in-law, Śrīrādhā, *kula-kaliṅkinī*. *Kula-kaliṅkinī*—it means "the disgrace of her family." *Kula-kaliṅkinī*, the disgrace of her family. And one consequence of Jaṭilā’s harsh criticism of Śrī Rādhā in that way, funny as it may sound, is that she and Kuṭilā think themselves to be the most qualified and chaste women in all of Vṛndāvana. 

So, we’re going to get into some līlā now—so *tattva* in the beginning and some līlā now—both are essential. So one day, Kṛṣṇa decided to silence all this criticism of Śrī Rādhā’s character that was going around and at the same time put Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā in their place—Nanda Mahārāja’s mother-in-law and her daughter, Jaṭilā’s daughter, Kuṭilā—and put them in their place. So what Kṛṣṇa did is He approached Pourṇamāsī, Yogamāyā, and they came up with a really interesting plan as follows: So one morning, Mother Yaśodā and Pourṇamāsī went together to wake up Kṛṣṇa as usual, at least as Mother Yaśodā used to do, but this time Mother Pourṇamāsī was accompanying her. But that morning, Kṛṣṇa barely stirred in response to their calls and their caresses. Instead, what He did is He pulled a blanket over His head and He moaned, "Maya, I feel so sick."

So it’s said that those three words struck Mother Yaśodā’s heart like three bolts of lightning, and she was unable to move. So Mother Pourṇamāsī, she felt Kṛṣṇa’s forehead and, taking His pulse, she announced, "Kṛṣṇa has a fever! Kṛṣṇa has a fever!" So immediately, Mother Yaśodā turned to one of her maidservants and, with a voice full of anxiety, she said, "Call the royal physician at once, the doctor at once." So very soon, Kṛṣṇa’s bedroom was crowded with friends, His parents, well-wishers, the royal physician, and I was reading every other doctor from the villages around Vṛndāvana, they all came. And as the morning went on, each doctor’s diagnosis was the same: high fever. But none of them could pinpoint the cause of Kṛṣṇa’s illness. 

As a result, Yaśodā was in tears, Nanda Mahārāja’s face was lined with worry, and boys like Madhumangala were frozen silent by helplessness. And I read that even the birds crowding the windowsill, birds that usually sing for Kṛṣṇa, they were silent, they were still. So after consulting amongst themselves, the doctors declared, "Unless this fever can be brought down, regardless of whether it was caused by poison, spells, or disease, we fear that Kṛṣṇa will not survive." So in the silence of the moments following that declaration by the doctors, Pourṇamāsī stepped forward as part of her plan—very Kṛṣṇa’s plan—she said, "I know mantras that will cure Kṛṣṇa." And at that point, all the Vrajabāsīs crowded around her to hear the cure. So she said, "Even if Kṛṣṇa’s suffering from a sorcerer’s curse, my austerities will save Him. However, the presiding deity of my mantras is the Sun God; my mantras will only be effective with His blessings and the blessings of His daughter, the Yamunā River, and His blessings—the Sun God’s blessings—will come through that water that I must sanctify with mantras and then rub over Kṛṣṇa’s body. I will know that the Sun God has blessed me if a perfectly chaste, married woman brings Yamunā-jala, Yamunā water, to me in a very special pot." So she said, "I know the Sun God is, you know, blessing me in this endeavor if a perfectly chaste, married woman brings Yamunā water to me in a very special pot." So then, turning to Nanda Mahārāja, she said, "Bring me the most chaste woman in Vraja." That was, you know, part of the remedy: a chaste woman should bring this water which she would bless with her mantras and rub all over Kṛṣṇa’s body to bring down that high fever. So, "Bring me the most chaste woman in Vraja." Since the news that Kṛṣṇa was deathly ill had already drawn most of Vṛndāvana’s residents to the palace, it’s described Nanda Mahārāja didn’t have to go far in search of chaste ladies. But the ācāryas say, because every woman in Vṛndāvana is chaste, who could say who was the purest of the pure?

So when Mother Yaśodā consulted the elder ladies, everyone had their own opinion. No one could agree who was the purest, most chaste woman in Vṛndāvana. So when Mother Pourṇamāsī finally came out of the palace, she was given a very long list of chaste women, all willing to bring Yamunā water for Kṛṣṇa in a special pot. So then Pourṇamāsī instructed Nanda Mahārāja to bring this special pot, and then she announced, "Now let all pure women accompany me to the bank of the Yamunā." And then she set out on the path that led to the Yamunā with all these gopīs, young and old, following her. And meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa’s close friends, the cowherd boys, they stayed behind to tend to Kṛṣṇa who was burning up with fever. So soon, all—you know, Pourṇamāsī and all these gopīs—they arrived at the bank of the Yamunā. Nanda Mahārāja had gone ahead, and he was already waiting at that place with the special pot. Now, just how special was this pot? Well, it was pure gold; it was a golden pot, but it had 100 holes in the pot. So you can imagine what a task this was going to be. So as Pourṇamāsī lifted this golden pot with a hundred holes in it in the air, she said, "Ladies, you are all chaste wives, but only the purest amongst you can carry this pot without spilling a drop. Through that person, the Sun God will bless my mantras." To demonstrate this unique pot, Pourṇamāsī dipped it into the Yamunā River, and when she lifted it up, as per her plan, water poured out of the holes in a hundred tiny streams, it’s described, in a hundred tiny streams. Then holding the pot out, she asked, "So, who will carry it?" But her question was met with nervous silence. I think that’s the best way to explain it—her question was met with nervous silence. And what happened next was that each lady, to avoid being embarrassed, volunteered someone else to put that pot in the river and carry it back. And those who were thus nominated, they deferred the honor to other ladies they insisted were more pure than themselves. So it went on like that: "I think she’s more pure," "No, I think she’s..." or "No, she’s more pure." And then, sure enough, the ācāryas say just as Pourṇamāsī and Kṛṣṇa had planned, when Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā were nominated, they accepted.

Of all the women of Vraja, only these two were vain enough and foolish enough to think that they were the purest, most chaste—remember earlier we talked about how they did think of themselves like that—and Kṛṣṇa wanted to put them in their place, Kṛṣṇa and Pourṇamāsī. So, taking the golden pot, Kuṭilā dipped it into the Yamunā with great confidence, as Śrīrādhā’s gopī friends were thinking, "What a fool, now she will learn a very well-deserved lesson." And sure enough, the golden pot spouted water the moment it was lifted above the Yamunā. But Kuṭilā was so sure of herself that she thought those leaks would stop once the pot was on her head. But as she placed the pot on her head, water poured out in a hundred different directions, and within moments the pot was empty and Kuṭilā was soaked. Now, the cowherd women present—I was reading—couldn’t restrain their laughter. And humiliated, Kuṭilā handed the pot to her mother, Jaṭilā. She said, "Mother, no doubt you are the purest of the two of us." So at this point, Jaṭilā couldn’t resist the opportunity to demonstrate her supreme chastity, so she too—she too dipped the pot into the Yamunā. And as I expected, Jaṭilā’s efforts brought the same result, you know; the water all leaked out, and soon both women, you know, stood side by side, soaking wet and humiliated by their foolishness.

So at that point, Pourṇamāsī—Yogamāyā—she addressed all the women of Vraja, and I quote here: "O Vraja-gopīs, consult amongst yourselves and quickly tell me who is the purest, lest Mahārāja Nanda’s son perish as a result of your humility." So with that, Lalitā Sakhī stepped forward and she declared, "Respected elder," speaking to Pourṇamāsī, "there’s no need for consultation, for we all know that King Vṛṣabhānu’s daughter, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, is the most chaste of all." And the reaction to this proposal, it’s described, was mixed. The village gossips shook their heads in disapproval, but those favorable to Śrīrādhā nodded their heads and approved Lalitā Sakhī’s words. So Mother Pourṇamāsī handed Śrīrādhā this special golden pot and said, "You are a high-born princess of spotless character; won’t you carry water for the welfare of Queen Yaśodā’s son?" So then Rādhā, lowering Her face and looking shyly at Pourṇamāsī’s feet, replied, "Whatever you order, I will do. Whatever you order, I will do." Then Śrīrādhā slowly dipped this special golden pot with 100 holes into the Yamunā and lifted it out of the water. And as the Vrajabāsīs looked on in wonder, She raised it onto Her head, and not a single drop of water escaped from that 100 holes! The ācāryas write: just as Kṛṣṇa had once made the water of the Yamunā solid by the sound of His flute, He now kept water in the pot by the power of His will. It sparkled through the pot’s walls, but it would not flow. For one magnificent moment, Śrīrādhā stood amidst the incredulous Vrajabāsīs, Her head held high, the golden pitcher glistening in the bright sun. She then followed Pourṇamāsī back to Nandagrām. Of all the women in Vraja, Śrīrādhā was the most chaste. The other gopīs were faithful to their husbands, but Śrīrādhā was faithful to Kṛṣṇa, the ultimate husband and the maintainer of every living entity.

Śrīrādhā transgressed conventional morality to serve Kṛṣṇa, Her eternal husband, in full pursuance of His order: *sarva-dharmān parityajya...* "Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." She had risked everything to serve Kṛṣṇa, and true to His promise, Kṛṣṇa personally protected Her from all sin or reaction. Moreover, He arranged this pastime just to exalt Her above all others. Thus spoke the ācāryas. Beautiful commentary, isn’t it? I hear ācāryas. So although the ladies’ reactions to Lalitā’s proposal had been mixed, when Śrīrādhā carried the pot back to Nandagrām without spilling a drop, they all thought the same thing: "The daughter of Kīrtidā is the most chaste! The daughter of Kīrtidā is the most chaste!" And those who were fond of spreading rumors about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they all felt ashamed of themselves, and in their minds they begged Rādhārāṇī’s forgiveness, especially for their nonsense, because they were advertising all over Vṛndāvana that She was unchaste. So now, in their minds, they begged Her forgiveness for their nonsense. And then Śrīrādhā’s friends crowded around Her and clapped their hands, it’s written, as they sang songs in praise of Kṛṣṇa, their faces beaming with pride; for after so much hardship, Rādhā’s name and reputation had been restored. Rādhā’s name and reputation had been restored.

And as the procession—this procession of gopīs—returned to Nandagrām, their voices rose up to Kṛṣṇa’s quarters, bringing anxious Yaśodā to the window. And I was reading, his Mother Yaśodā looked down, tears of happiness fell from her face as she thought, "My son will live! My son will live!" And when the entourage arrived at Kṛṣṇa’s bedroom, all the gopīs piled in behind Pourṇamāsī. And Pourṇamāsī didn’t waste a moment as she stood at the head of Kṛṣṇa’s bed and chanted mantras over the water and then gently spread it over Kṛṣṇa’s burning limbs. And as she did so, Yaśodā comforted her son by saying, "O Kṛṣṇa, now that Vraja’s holy mother and the chaste daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu are here, you will be cured; have no fear. O Kṛṣṇa, now that Vraja’s holy mother and the chaste daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu are here, you will be cured; have no fear." And the ācāryas say that upon hearing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s name, Kṛṣṇa opened His eyes.

And before Pourṇamāsī had finished her task, His fever—which was actually the fever of separation from Śrīrādhā, that’s how it’s written—what was His fever? His fever was actually the fever of separation from Śrīrādhā—began to subside. Then Pourṇamāsī, she announced, "By the purity of Princess Rādhā, the blessings of the Sun God are with us without doubt. That eye of the world has empowered my mantras, which will cure this boy within just a short time." And as she said that, Kṛṣṇa’s fever disappeared completely because Rādhā was there. So then—how is it written?—then while stealing glances at Śrī Rādhā who stood shyly in a corner, Kṛṣṇa sat up and said to His mother, "Maya, I’m hungry." Kṛṣṇa sat up and said to His mother, "Maya, I’m hungry." And these words brought cheers of *jaya* to everyone present.

And as all the cowherd boys embraced Kṛṣṇa, Yaśodā turned to some of the girls and said, "Quickly, take Śrīrādhā to the kitchen and prepare a feast to aid the recovery of my hungry son." And one ācārya has written, and what a feast it was. Now, outside the palace, news of Kṛṣṇa’s recovery and of Śrīrādhā’s supreme chastity spread like wildfire throughout the village of Vraja. People were saying, "The Sun God has personally attested to Śrīrādhā’s purity." Now, for some time thereafter, no one dared question Rādhā’s comings and goings. Everyone was thinking, "The Sun God has personally attested to Śrīrādhā’s purity." So for some time thereafter, no one dared question Rādhā’s comings and goings; Her meetings with Kṛṣṇa, it’s described, were easier to arrange with little anxiety. But then the plot thickens, as it often does in Vraja. Everything was going fairly easily until Pourṇamāsī—Yogamāyā—again exerted her power, her pastime potency. By her influence, the Vrajabāsīs gradually forgot the incident of the golden pot with 100 holes, and Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā and other villagers again became suspicious of Rādhā’s frequent visits into the forest. And once again, obstacles were placed in the way of the divine couple’s affections. But let us remember: obstacles that merely increased their desires, their desire for each other, and the sweetness of their eventual meetings. Obstacles that merely increased their desires for each other and the sweetness of their eventual meetings. *Hare Kṛṣṇa! Bhūmi Vṛndāvana-dhāma! Sundara! Madhura!*

So we will finish today with one verse from Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī’s *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*: "May the glorious young girl named Rādhā, expert in amorous arts within Vṛndāvana, who eclipses the fame of the material and spiritual worlds by Her fresh *rasa* of *prema*, and a full ocean of soft golden beauty and charm, resting on the lap of young Kṛṣṇa, remain victorious." All right.

So once again, prabhus, thank you. This was sheer bliss. The research, my humble delivery—that was all very wonderful. And thank you so much. And we’ve got some more pastimes for Yāvat, I think maybe two or maybe even three more classes. So give me a couple days and I’ll be back and share the nectar with all of you.

See you soon.""