"*00429*.*
"Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu Nityānanda Advaita Gadādhara Śrīvāsa-ādi Gaura-bhakta-vṛnda. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

Mother Kṛṣṇa Rūpa gave a very beautiful seminar this morning. I was fortunate to be able to attend some of it, not all of it because I was supposed to visit all of them, so hers was the first. And she asked everyone in the audience to raise their hand if they read *Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta*. And actually, not so many devotees—I don't know actually if any devotees—had actually read *Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta*. But if you ask me, I've been a devotee of sorts for 54 years, and I've read all the books available in the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust and more. My particular service was to dive into the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. So, I've covered a number of the Gosvāmī books: Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. But if you ask me the question, "What is my favorite śāstra?" I would immediately say it's *Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta*. Because as we often say—I've heard it three or four times here—none of us would be sitting here had it not been for our beloved Founder-Ācārya Śrīla Prabhupāda, who left India penniless, came to America, but miraculously was successful in spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. So, he's the closest thing we have to the absolute truth.

*Īśopaniṣad* says that Bhagavān, God, Kṛṣṇa, is very far away, but He's very near as well. And there are different explanations of that statement. He's very far away because He's in Vaikuṇṭha, and beyond Vaikuṇṭha, He's in Goloka in very wonderful, sweet Vraja-līlā. But He's present everywhere by His energies as well. *Abhinna-svarūpa* means that He's omnipresent, so therefore He knows everything. So, in one sense, He's very close. But still, Kṛṣṇa is very mysterious. We have to purify our hearts and awaken our bhakti, our love for Him. But actually, I would say the closest thing we have to Kṛṣṇa is Prabhupāda, because Prabhupāda is an eternal resident of Vṛndāvana. 

One time in the very beginning, or towards the beginning, Śrīla Prabhupāda cooked a feast. Can you imagine? Prabhupāda cooked a feast. Many times he cooked a feast for devotees, and then he would serve the feast, and then he would clean up afterwards. Can you imagine? This is Ācārya. He taught us everything—how to cook, how to serve, how to clean, what is the etiquette—everything he taught us. How to be Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs. So, on one occasion, Prabhupāda cooks samosas, and he spent some time in the kitchen actually cooking the samosas. And then he came out and he put on the plate of every devotee a samosa. And the devotees bit into those samosas, and it was like you had an entrance into Goloka Vṛndāvana. So, Tamāl Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī, Gosvāmī Mahārāja, my dear friend, he raised his hand, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, that was the most delicious samosa I ever ate in my life." And there's some moments where Prabhupāda would say something spectacular. It's like Jesus once said, "My cup runneth over with love." Sometimes the ecstasy in the heart of a pure devotee, it just overflows. And for that moment, we as mortals, we get to see it. 

Prabhupāda didn't exhibit ecstatic symptoms very often because he didn't want the general public to follow him for those ecstasies. He wanted the general public to follow him for the knowledge he was giving: how to get out of this darkness into light, how to get out of ignorance into truth, how to get out of this material world into the spiritual world. So, he tried to hold it back, but spirit is more powerful than matter. So, sometimes these emotions, Prabhupāda's love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and everything there is in this, it would spill over. A little transcendental tidbit would come out. So, when Tamāl Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja said that that was the best samosa I ever ate, Prabhupāda just, you know, nonchalantly, very casually, "Oh, yes, that's Mother Yaśodā's recipe." 

What? Everybody went silent. "Oh, yes, that's Mother Yaśodā's recipe." What does that mean? That means that Prabhupāda came from Goloka Vṛndāvana and he's intimate with all the residents of Vṛndāvana. So, he had tasted Mother Yaśodā's cooking and somehow he knew the recipe. Wow. Let's give a big round of applause for that. Where was I? I was on some flow there before I told that story. Anybody remember? No, before that. *Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta*. Thank you. They're good listeners. So, this is only one of the many of Śrīla Prabhupāda's pastimes. And those pastimes are just as amazing as Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, as Lord Caitanya's pastimes. In fact, they are Lord Caitanya's pastimes. They're the modern-day pastimes of the Saṅkīrtana movement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. They're the *Antya-līlā*, you could say. And it's said that this movement will go on for 10,000 years. This is the golden age of the dark age of Kali. And who's the master of the ship? Who's the Senāpati? Who's the general leading us forward? Śrīla A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, you must read that book, *Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta*. That's the foundation. Just like before you build a building, you dig a foundation. On the basis of that foundation, you build your house. You have to build your career in devotional service based on that book. First things first. So, please begin to read. I think there's one big volume; there's two volumes. I can't stop reading it. It's so ever-fresh, ever-fresh. 

So, I thought yesterday I told some Prabhupāda stories. I can tell some stories about Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu or I can tell some Prabhupāda stories. Both are nice, right? How many would like to hear a 3-hour lecture on Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu? You would. Okay, so here we go. Who would like to hear some more pastimes of Śrīla Prabhupāda? Okay, Hari Bol. 

I mentioned a number of Prabhupāda's pastimes yesterday. And Prabhupāda made a few visits to us in Europe, and a few visits to us in Paris. And I spoke about two, but there was a third visit, and it was a surprise visit. We all like surprises. I was on traveling saṅkīrtana in 1974 or something, '75, I can't remember. We were doing traveling saṅkīrtana, selling books, *Bhagavad-gītā en français*. *C'est le Bhagavad-gītā tel qu'il est*. *Tel qu'il est* means "as it is" in French. And we were really deep south. Actually, France is on the Mediterranean Sea. The furthest port south is Marseille. And then there's an island called Corsica. So, I always like to go to the places nobody ever went because I'd heard that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, if you went to some place where no one knew anything about Kṛṣṇa—Kṛṣṇa consciousness had never been there—if you went to that place, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura went with you. Now, there's no more places. I'm getting bored. I used to choose all those places nobody had gone because I knew I needed the mercy of this great pioneer of the Kṛṣṇa conscious movement. 

So we went to Corsica for the first time. And the Corsicans, they're a bit rebellious. They want their own country. They want to be independent from France. It's a bit different. They have their Corsican language and customs and everything. So when we went there, there was a kind of civil war going on. You know, the French against the Corsicans. There were bombs going off at night, machine guns, we could hear that, and assassinations. And they, you know—*Rākhe Kṛṣṇa māre ke, māre Kṛṣṇa rākhe ke*—if Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you; if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you. So we, naive brahmacārīs, we went to Corsica, and we were doing harināma through the streets, and you know, nobody was interested because the bullets were flying. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. 

And at one point we passed a yoga studio. In those days that was really rare. I don't think I'd seen any yoga studios even in Europe, even in America. Maybe a few. But this was a beautiful scenery. We looked in the window and there were some yoga mats and there was a deity of Gaṇeśa. Wow, Corsica? So I knocked on the door and a lady welcomed me in, as I was done seeing her and she was done seeing us. We became good friends within a few minutes. And she said, "How long are you here for?" I said, "About 10 days." She said, "Why don't you do your singing here in the yoga studio? I have a few students and they'll come and participate." I said, "Okay." So every afternoon we'd have this program there. And people would come by and look in the window like, "What is this? So strange. Who are those people singing and dancing?" 

And one day I was leading the kīrtana. This is, you know, long time ago. And I noticed there was a military man staring into the window. He was in full regalia. I learned later he was an admiral in the French Navy. He had all of his medals and he had his hat on and the whole thing, and he was looking for 45 minutes like this. So at one point I went, "Come on in. Come on in." So he came in. There were three admirals in the French Navy. He was one. We hadn't met any big people in those days. So he came in and he sat down, and I gave a lecture on *Bhagavad-gītā*. He listened very carefully. And the verse was: *tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā | upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattvadarśinaḥ* ("Just try to learn these truths by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service to him. The self-realized souls can give you knowledge because they are *tattvadarśī*—they've seen the truth.") 

So he, at that point, he raised his hand. He said, "This is very interesting. I come from a Christian background but I'm not satisfied. This knowledge seems very deep, and if I'm to understand it, I have to get a teacher?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Where can I find a spiritual master?" And I said, "Well, you know, it's not so easy." And suddenly the phone rang. We were using that phone connection while we were in Corsica. And the devotee went and answered the phone. And he came back. He said, "Indra"—because I wasn't a sannyāsī and I was married—"Indra, that was the temple president in Paris. He said, 'Śrīla Prabhupāda is making a surprise visit to the Paris temple in 3 days,' because he was in London and he heard about our saṅkīrtana. We were the biggest book distributors in Europe. So Prabhupāda wanted to inspire us." 

So I looked, I said, "What?" "Yes, Prabhupāda is coming in 3 days to Paris to spend a week with us." And I looked at the admiral and I said, "Sir, I think all your desires are going to be fulfilled. If you want to come with us to Paris..." Now, that's a long way. It's almost North Africa, just islands just off of North Africa, the Mediterranean Sea. So he said, "Oh, to meet a spiritual master I should come to Paris." He said, "How will I get there?" I said, "You follow us." We had a van. You know, just a kid, you know, talking to an admiral. "Just follow us." So he said, "Let me go home and speak to my wife." So he left the program and he came back 45 minutes later. He said, "Me and my wife are going to come with you to Paris to meet a spiritual master." 

I was thinking, "How fortunate is this person?" Right? *Brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva, guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja*. We're wandering through different universes, *brahmāṇḍas*, where different species of life, different bodies, and then *guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja*. Somehow we come in contact with the devotees, with the society of devotees, and within that society there's spiritual teachers. So that means our coming in contact—because what *adhikāra* do we have? We don't have any qualification for associating with saintly persons. No real qualification. So if we meet saintly persons, or we take birth in a devotee family like many of you, that's not destiny. That's *guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāda*. That's the mercy of Guru or Gaurāṅga. It's not destiny. You know, many devotees meet—when they first came—devotees on the street or at a rock concert, they get a book, or you know, this is the Lord intervening personally, like He did 5,000 years ago, or He sends His representative. We're not sitting here today by destiny. It's all *kṛpā*. It's all mercy. We should take it like that. 

So somehow that man—I don't know, somehow he looked in the window and it was always steamy because we had kīrtanas like that for 4 or 5 hours—the window got all steamy and he tried to look in. He saw something that, you know, ignited a spark within his heart. *Jīvera svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya-dāsa*. Like George Harrison said, everyone's a devotee of Kṛṣṇa; some know it and some don't. When you come in contact, that flame begins to burn somehow. So we got our van ready that very night. He had a car, he and his wife, and we had to take the boat from Corsica to Marseille and we had to drive 18 hours to Paris. He followed us the whole way in his uniform. What? He was very *pukka*, you know, he was very traditional. He had his uniform and we get out and stop for gas and everyone—many people knew him. He was a famous personality. Look at that. It's an admiral. This is Kṛṣṇa. 

And we got to Paris. And I put the admiral and his wife up in a hotel and Prabhupāda arrived that day. And then Prabhupāda asked, because that afternoon Prabhupāda was giving darśana. He wanted to give darśana to the Parisians, to the people of Paris. But the devotees hadn't arranged anyone to come see him because we were kind of greedy. We wanted to keep him all to ourselves. Prabhupāda said, "This is France." He said, "Where are the poets? Where are the politicians? Where are the musicians? Where is the *bourgeois*?" Means the higher echelon. He used the word "the *bourgeois*." He wanted to preach. He came to France to preach. He knew something about France. Actually, we, a little bit later—some, actually the next year—Prabhupāda saw that our temple in Paris was overflowing with devotees. We made many, many devotees. So he said, "We have to move out of the city, some of us, and go into the countryside and start a farming community so people can come and learn a simple life where they can think of Kṛṣṇa very peacefully." So Prabhupāda was so fired up. He got in the car and he drove devotees around France looking for a suitable farm. And he said, "I don't just want a farm. I want a castle." What, Prabhupāda? He wanted a castle. We call it *château* in French. You know, you've seen the French *châteaux*. I was thinking, "How are we going to do that? Going to a castle?" 'Cause he said, "If we just remain here in this little building"—we had a small building actually—"no one will be attracted. But if we have a *château* and we're chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, so many thousands of people will come." The value of a temple. I thought, "Prabhupāda's so brilliant, you know, so practical in this world." 

So, I remember on that trip looking for a castle, like a fairy tale castle. The party stopped for lunch and Prabhupāda went into the field. He sat in the grass and he wanted to have his *prasādam* there. So my Godbrother Yogeśvara was taking pictures of Prabhupāda like that. So one moment Prabhupāda said, "I'll stand up and you can take a picture of me. I'll be in the mood of Napoleon." So Prabhupāda stood up and he went like this. And that's the picture on the *Science of Self-Realization*. Kṛṣṇa Rūpa, remember that? The old *Science of Self-Realization*, there's Prabhupāda there and he's like this. He said, "Take the picture. You're looking like Napoleon." So he knew, he knew—Prabhupāda was quite worldly in the right sense. He knew history, etc., from Scottish Church College. 

So, Prabhupāda was getting upset because the devotees hadn't arranged any famous people to come. So, after we'd all got up the next morning, I came into the temple. The temple president said, "We have to find somebody really important because Prabhupāda wants to preach to somebody important. What do we do?" I said, "Problem solved." "What? You brought someone?" "Yes, I brought someone from Corsica." "Like, Corsica? All the revolutionaries?" "No, no. I brought the third-biggest admiral in the French Navy." "You did what?" "Yep. I got him in the hotel right next door." The temple president said, "Well, can you bring him?" I said, "Yes, I'll bring him." 

So then Prabhupāda had breakfast, and then this admiral, I brought him in to see Prabhupāda. And I said, "Admiral,"—that, you know, we were a little fanatic in those days—"when you come in, you have to do obeisances." He said, "Obeisances? *Qu'est-ce que c'est les obéissances*?" I said, "You got to bow down like this. Like bow down." I said, "Try it." We were so young. It's amazing that anything ever happened. So, he was kind of older and he bowed down, but he couldn't get up. So I had to help him up. And then we went in to see Prabhupāda. And Prabhupāda would often be sitting on a cushion with a desk there, and the Paris temple was, you know, we'd arranged it, it was very nice building, small but very nice. So Prabhupāda was sitting and the admiral came in and he paid obeisances. And I had to help him up. And he sat right in front of Śrīla Prabhupāda directly. And Prabhupāda said, "So, why have you come?" And the admiral said, "Well, in the *Bhagavad-gītā*—the *Bhagavad-gītā* where there's lots of knowledge—it says one has to have a teacher." He said to Prabhupāda, "Are you a teacher?" Prabhupāda, very humbly, said, "Yes," following the guru-paramparā. 

And they had a—the admiral asked questions for about an hour and a half. Usually Prabhupāda's darśanas were 15 or 20 minutes, but this went on for an hour and a half. And we sat there and there was a very nice discussion. And the admiral was fascinated by Prabhupāda. Who wouldn't be? He was otherworldly. Otherworldly. So, they spoke, and I remember the last question the admiral asked was, "Well, I want to continue understanding this." He said, "I know you always travel everywhere. So, how can I keep in touch with you?" And Prabhupāda took a *Bhagavad-gītā*. He said, "This is Lord Kṛṣṇa's teachings and I have given my purports to the verses." And he gave it to the admiral. Imagine getting a book from Prabhupāda—personally handed him. And Prabhupāda signed it. And the admiral was looking at it and he said, "Well, there's so many pages, so many chapters. What chapter should I focus on?" And Prabhupāda said, "The ninth chapter. The most confidential knowledge." He—I don't know. There was the admiral—somehow Prabhupāda gave him special mercy. Because he came all the way from some island in the Mediterranean just off the North African coast to find out who was a teacher. So Prabhupāda said, "You read the ninth chapter," which is the most confidential knowledge. He said, "You should read it every day. Read it every day. Will you?" And the admiral said, "Yes, sir." He got Prabhupāda's there. 'Cause in the military, we say, "Sir, yes, sir." Made it a little bit louder. He said, "Yes, sir." 

Then I said, "Pay obeisances." This was all within this span of like, you know, a day and a half. What is that? Causeless mercy. So, the admiral left. I gave him one of Prabhupāda's garlands. He wore it out and he had to go back next day to, you know, to Corsica. And that was it. You know, we didn't have WhatsApp. We didn't have Instagram. Everything was by mail. There wasn't even a fax machine. And there was just a telephone in one room. So, that was it. That was it. 

Many, many years later, I don't know, like 10 years later, I was doing book distribution in Paris. And I like to go to the rich places because I figured it out. I had a quota every day like $200. So I could either do it in the part of Pigalle—or is it called Pigalle?—I could do it in the *Marché aux Puces*. This is the flea market. You know, I'd go and there'd be like poor people or middle-class people, and I found after a day I'd get $200 for the books. So, I used to just try to go to the Champs-Élysées with the Arc de Triomphe. You've seen that in France, that big... I'd go there and go and try to get into the buildings. And, you know, sell four or five books and make $200 real quick. So I was going out one day. When I would go on saṅkīrtana, I'd go like this—of course, I was a gṛhastha, I had a dhoti, a white kurtā. I had white shoes and I'd shave my head every day before going out. I'd wear big tilaka like Rāmānuja tilaka. So, people would notice me. And I had a long śikhā in those days like about that long and real thick. So I'd wave in the... and I had big neck beads and I had a saṅkīrtana bag that was, maybe you've seen in Rajasthan, they have those mirrored bags. They had little mirrors on them. I had a big bag with mirrors and tons of incense coming out and lots of *Bhagavad-gītās*. 

So I'd walk around and people would go, "*Ooh la la! Qu'est-ce que c'est ça?* What is that?" "Hare Kṛṣṇa. Come on over," and I'd put the incense to their nose. They say, "*Bien, oui*," and they donate *quelque chose*, a money. They give enough money, I give them a book. That's how I did saṅkīrtana for years and years. So, the day I went that day when I went out, there was a military parade on the Champs-Élysées. That's that big avenue where all the fancy stores are and so much French history. And there was this big Arc de Triomphe. And I went there, but around the Arc de Triomphe, they were having this big military celebration. The army, the navy, the air force, all the big guys were there and there were speeches and there were thousands of people around that Arc de Triomphe. There was no traffic allowed. And I was on the outer ring, you know, trying to sell books. But then I thought, "Hey, if I can get inside, you know, under the fence, there's lots of VIPs sitting, hundreds and hundreds of VIPs in different sections." And I could see from a distance there were some big military guys giving speeches. So I'm thinking if I can get in there, but how can you get in there in a dhoti and a kurtā? And I also used to wear a big flower garland every day. I'd take the garland of Rādhā-Pārthasārathi after the maṅgala-ārati and I put it on. So I'd go everywhere to attract attention. But if you want to get in some private meeting like that, you can't look like that. 

But I did it. I crouched down like that and the people were like that and I crouched down and I'd walk crouched over so no one's... Of course, the people walking by could say, "Sir, *hé monsieur, qu'est-ce que c'est vous, qu'est-ce que quoi, ah!*" I'd go down. I said I'd walk in and I'd pop up. Try to sell some books. So I did it. I hunched down, you know, like this and I walked in and I got pretty far into... under the fence. I got into the crowd and I got close to the Arc de Triomphe. And as I stood up, I saw the military man giving the lecture was the admiral. I hadn't seen him in 10 years, but I recognized him. He even had more medals. There he was, the admiral. So I just CALLED OUT, "HARE KṚṢṆA!" And of course, I blew my cover. Everybody saw me. All the police came over to take me away. But THE ADMIRAL WENT, "NO!" Yeah. He said, "NO! Leave him alone." He said, "Leave him alone." What? The whole, you know—there's this, the band was playing in the background and he was giving his yearly speech or something. And all of a sudden the music stopped. People stopped and they all looked at me and the admiral said, "Leave him alone." Of course, the admiral of the Navy—even the police have to leave. And they backed off. And there I was, "Kṛṣṇa, what's happening?" It's a true story. People backed off. And the admiral came down the steps. You know, they had these big steps going up and you know, all fancy. He came down the steps. He stopped his speech. He said, "*Donnez-moi une minute.*" He said, "Give me a minute or two." And he came down. He stood in front of me and he embraced me. He embraced me. I got a lot of publicity from that. He embraced me and he said, "I am so glad to see you again." And I said, "Admiral, I—it's been many, many years." He said, "Yes, I've always wanted to come back to meet my master." 

So he called Prabhupāda his master. And he said, "How is my master?" And I had to say, "Admiral, Śrīla Prabhupāda, my spiritual master and your master, he passed away a few years ago. He departed this world and he went back to the spiritual world." And when I said that, he burst—like sometimes people, they start crying like that. He burst out crying. He said, "My master's gone? He's gone?" And he's crying in front of all these people. My master. And I was thinking I would like to have the devotion that he has for Śrīla Prabhupāda. You know, but I'd been a devotee a number of years and I'd had Prabhupāda's association. I'd been serving. But I saw that he had a genuine attachment to Śrīla Prabhupāda. And then he kind of got himself together. He said, "Excuse me. I'm sorry." And you know, his servant came and wiped his eyes with a white handkerchief and was standing there. And I said, "Wow, you remember Prabhupāda." He said, "Every day." He said, "I follow... He gave me the instruction every day I had to read the ninth chapter of the *Bhagavad-gītā*." He said, "I have followed that instruction." 

So I thought, "That's a devotee." You get whatever the instruction is. We have a number of instructions that Lord Caitanya and our disciplic successions feel that we need to become Kṛṣṇa—he got one instruction. But look how much he achieved. Just like there's nine processes: *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam | arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam* (hearing, chanting, remembering, serving the lotus feet, making friendship, giving...). So the ācāryas say you can take all of them, or even you can become perfect by one of them. So I thought, "Who is this admiral?" And he wasn't anyone special, but he had the sincerity looking through the steamy window, a little curiosity. He came in, philosophy sounded good, he heard the fourth chapter verse about a spiritual master, something in his heart, something happened, and he drove to Paris. He met a pure devotee. Talk about *sādhu-saṅga, sādhu-saṅga — sarva-śāstra kaya lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi hoy*. It also—within that statement is the quality of the sādhu—with due respect to all sādhus. But there's a special effect, like Prabhupāda said. The chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, one time he said, the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa is especially potent if heard from the lips of a pure devotee. That's why it's important we play Prabhupāda bhajans. We have so many favorite bhajan singers and rightfully so, and thankfully so. But you know in the beginning—Mother Kṛṣṇa Rūpa will confirm this—we just had a few tapes: *vande 'haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca*. It just brings it one with my heart. That bhajan of Prabhupāda was always *cintāmaṇi-pada-sāraṇā...* These bhajans that Prabhupāda recorded, they're from the heart of a pure devotee. They're directly from Vaikuṇṭha. *Gaurāloka-prema-dāna, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana*. 

So to hear from Śrīla Prabhupāda then and now is the same. Jayānanda, he left his body alone in his quarters in Los Angeles. There was just a tape of Prabhupāda singing Hare Kṛṣṇa. He heard that chanting and Prabhupāda said in his posthumous letter—which I shared with you the other day—Prabhupāda said, "Because you were hearing the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa when you died, I say you've gone to Kṛṣṇa-loka." This is the power of a pure devotee. He's just as present now as he was for us, whatever, 50, 60 years ago. You have the same access to him that we all had by reading his purports, hearing his lectures, and hearing his bhajans. *Lava-mātra*—just a moment's association. And if you—you know, if you—the quality of your *lobha* and your greed is to get out of this place and go back home—home is where the heart is—back home, back to Godhead, if that's your desire, then that spark will light a fire. Just like sometimes a spark lands on wet grass; sometimes a spark lands on straw, which is a little dry, and then some smoke comes; that spark lands on dry grass. So if you're ready for mercy, if you—you know, you're going through the process—*śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ kṛṣṇa-smaraṇaṁ*—you're going through the process and you're really eager, then when you come in contact with an advanced devotee, then you catch that good disease. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said Kṛṣṇa consciousness is something that we imbibe from another devotee. "Imbibe" is a very interesting word. You imbibe it by associating with that devotee, by hearing from that devotee, by serving that devotee, by walking with that devotee, by being on the same journey as that devotee: back home, back to Godhead. You imbibe that spirit of consciousness. And if you're really—I really want to go home, I really want to be with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma and the *kalpa-vṛkṣa* trees and the river Yamunā and that—then it'll be... 

So I don't know. And even if not, sometimes the association of such a devotee has such overwhelming, miraculous consequences. So yes, the admiral broke down, "My master's gone." I'll never forget that moment. And how he... you know, he just burst out crying and everyone looked at him. Because he'd followed that one instruction. Every day Prabhupāda said, "You read the ninth chapter of the Gītā." That takes some time, right? He's an admiral but he did it. So in this way, we can see Śrīla Prabhupāda as a *senāpati*. He's the great general going forward, and somehow we're swept up in this tsunami of his mercy. Like you heard about a tsunami; after that last tsunami, that big tsunami, I went to Sri Lanka and worked with Food for Life to distribute *prasādam* to hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people. The whole island was devastated. It was really bad. But this is a good tsunami. The tsunami of Prabhupāda's mercy, Lord Caitanya's mercy, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's mercy. We're just kind of somehow we got caught up in it. Like one time Prabhupāda said, "Lord Rāma, He conquered Laṅkā with monkeys and bears. And I'm conquering the world with my disciples." I'm thinking, "I'm a monkey, I'm a bear." But Prabhupāda can empower us to do that if we are pure at heart and have caught that good disease of Kṛṣṇa consciousness by the association of other members of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. 

So, I'll leave you with that. I have so many stories I can tell you. If they gave me the microphone, I could sit here all day from 4:00 in the morning till midnight and share wonderful stories with you. But again, just a drop of the ocean. We can understand what the whole ocean is like. So, pray that you can get some causeless mercy like the admiral. And one day, cry for something in Kṛṣṇa consciousness: the association of devotees, the association of your guru. One day, "*Oh Govinda, feeling your separation, I'm considering a moment to be like 12 years or more.*" When a newspaper reporter came to see my very dear Godbrother Gour Govinda Mahārāja, who's now with Śrīla Prabhupāda, he asked—you know, it was his first day on the job, that was in Bhubaneswar, and he wanted us to know what the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement was—so he came into Gour Govinda Mahārāja's room and he said, "Swamiji, can you just give me the essence of this ISKCON, this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement? What is the goal of this movement?" He's like 18 years old. So Gour Govinda Mahārāja, he went, "What is the purpose? What is the essence of this movement? What are we trying to achieve?" Crying, crying, crying. He said, "What is Hare Kṛṣṇa?" Crying, crying, crying. He's a very deep devotee. The newspaper reporter went, "Sh-sh-should I print that in the newspaper?" "Yes, crying, crying, crying. Come to our temple for crying, crying. We're not crying out of lamentation, but crying out of happiness." 

Even now, as young devotees, although we're green mangoes—we're not like the ripe mango—sometimes, you know, the mercy a little turbulent in our hearts and we can also shed a few tears as well. It's okay. Śrīla Prabhupāda kī! Bhakti Fest 2026, Australia on some island in a river somewhere kī! Gaur Premānande!""