"*00415*.*
"Hi Krishna, dear devotees, welcome back once again to our continued series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* So, today in our series about Govardhana Hill, I thought we would cover three things: the origin of Govardhana Hill in the spiritual world—I’m sure you’d like to hear about that—the origin of Govardhana Hill in the material world, and how Govardhana Hill came to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

First, I’d like to quote a very beautiful prayer to our beloved Girirāja that was composed by Nanda’s younger brother, Sunanda. It’s a prayer that many Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas chant when beginning their Govardhana parikramā, when they’re halfway through it, and when they conclude their Govardhana parikramā; that’s the tradition: *hantāyam adrir abalā hari-dāsa-varyo yad rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa-sparaśa-pramodaḥ*. My respectful obeisances to you, who are the crown of Goloka and who sits on Vṛndāvana’s lap. My respectful obeisances to Govardhana, the parasol of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

So, when we speak about the origins of Govardhana Hill in the spiritual world, it’s a very deep and esoteric pastime. And of course, there’s no question of Girirāja’s origin meaning a beginning, because anything and everything in the spiritual world is eternal. But for the purpose of rasa, it appears that there’s a beginning, a middle, and an end to the pastimes in the spiritual world; it just appears like that. So, once upon a time—because Prabhupāda used that term several times in his books—once upon a time in Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world, Kṛṣṇa, Rādhārāṇī, and the gopīs were resting in a very beautiful grove. Such groves are referred to as kuñjas; like we sing, *jaya rādhā-mādhava kuñja-bihārī gopī-jana-vallabha giri-vara-dhārī*. Bihārī means enjoyer; so, Rādhā and Mādhava enjoy together in the kuñjas. *Jaya rādhā-mādhava kuñja-bihārī*. Śrīla Prabhupāda once said that within this song, there’s everything in Vṛndāvana—all the personalities, all the places, all the moods. The song was actually composed by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and Prabhupāda made it a tradition that we sing that before our Bhāgavatam classes or any class that we’re giving.

In this particular grove wherein Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were resting, there were multi-colored umbrellas, strands of pearls, and flower awnings, and the air resonated with the sounds of the flute and the mṛdaṅgas, and the cuckoo birds were singing the fifth note. And after some time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, surrounded by her beautiful girlfriends, she cast a side-long glance at her beloved Śyāmasundara, and she said to him very affectionately, "My Lord, if you are pleased with me and our ever-present festival of dance—I like that part—and our ever-present festival of dance, then please fulfill this one desire that has been burning in my heart for a very long time." So, without a moment’s hesitation, Kṛṣṇa said, "My beloved, what is your desire? I’ll happily grant whatever you wish." So Rādhārāṇī leaned over and she whispered into Kṛṣṇa’s ear, "My beloved, somewhere in Vṛndāvana forest by the bank of the Yamunā, please create a very beautiful and very secluded place where we can hold our pastimes."

So then, Kṛṣṇa, he sat with half-closed eyes in meditation, searching in his heart for the most perfect fulfillment of Rādhārāṇī’s request. And then, as Rādhā and all the gopīs looked on in amazement, a golden droplet of pure love manifested from Kṛṣṇa’s heart. It lingered in the air for a few moments, and then it dropped to the ground, where it quickly transformed into a mountain. And it’s described that mountain had palatial caves, crystalline flowing streams, flowering trees, networks of vines, and many very beautiful, colorful, singing birds. Now, the ācāryas say that even Kṛṣṇa was amazed how his love had manifested as a golden drop and transformed into a beautiful mountain. And what’s just as amazing is that, moments later, the mountain expanded into 100 golden peaks that defeated the beauty of Lord Nārāyaṇa’s palaces in Vaikuṇṭha.

When this mountain manifested with 100 golden peaks, the Brajavāsīs welcomed it; they had a big kīrtana, actually, and then they began discussing what they could call this new arrival. So, some of the elder gopas/cowherd men, they suggested calling it Śataśṛṅga, the mountain with 100 majestic peaks. But finally, everyone decided to call it Govardhana, because it appeared an infallible shelter for their go—their cows. *Go* means cow, and *vardhana*—Govardhana-vardhana—means to nourish. So Govardhana is a place where the cows are nourished. Then suddenly, right before the Brajavāsīs’ eyes, Girirāja started expanding more and more and more and more. And it’s described, soon Girirāja was covering almost all of Vraja-maṇḍala. *Maṇḍala* means the greater area. We speak of Vṛndāvana, but Vraja-maṇḍala means when we’re speaking about the greater area of Vraja, which includes all the 60 billion holy places. So he was covering almost all of Vraja-maṇḍala.

Our ācāryas give a very rasika explanation why he covered everywhere. They say that because Girirāja came from the heart of Kṛṣṇa as a manifestation of his love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, therefore, the essence of Govardhana is prema. And because the nature of prema is that *ānandāmbu-vardhanam*—it’s always increasing—therefore, Girirāja expanded to the very limits of the maṇḍala. And they say there was no harm in Girirāja expanding like this, because he was, and I quote, "following the dictations of his heart." Following the dictations of his heart. Nowadays, you hear people say, "Just follow your heart," but don’t do that; don’t follow your heart until you’ve reached the stage of anartha-nivṛtti. Nivṛtti means when the heart is cleansed of all impurities, because if you follow a heart which is full of lust, anger, and greed, you’ll end up in hell. Therefore, follow the heart of pure souls like Girirāja Govardhana, because his heart is dictating to him how to find prema, the prema of love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

But at this point, Lord Balarāma, he spoke up. He said, "Gentlemen, we have a problem now, because here in Goloka Vṛndāvana, there’s no room for anything else but Girirāja everywhere." So Kṛṣṇa took that statement from Balarāma very seriously, and he stood there for a moment; he thought about this disturbance that his latest creation had caused, and he concluded that Girirāja had gone a little bit too far. So Kṛṣṇa chastised Girirāja. He said, "Girirāja, why did you expand to such an extent without considering the feelings and needs of others who reside here in Goloka Vṛndāvana?" Then he did something really interesting: he gave Girirāja a little slap, as described in the Garga-saṁhitā. He slapped Girirāja on his cheek, and as soon as he did that, Girirāja smiled and shrank back to his normal size, which is still quite big.

Now, once Girirāja had been corrected, Rādhārāṇī came forth to inspect this offering of love from the heart of her beloved Kṛṣṇa. Then she turned to Kṛṣṇa; she said, "Thank you, my dear one." Then she took the hand of her beloved Śyāmasundara and went to one of the many secluded places on Govardhana Hill to enjoy their transcendental pastimes. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who was the connoisseur of all these confidential pastimes, concludes that out of the many holy places in creation—this is, of course, I’m summarizing—out of the many holy places in creation, Vṛndāvana is the most auspicious, and out of the many holy places in Vṛndāvana, the most holy is Govardhana Hill, and the most holy places on Govardhana Hill are the two sacred kuṇḍas of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Oh yeah, that’s the origin of Girirāja Govardhana in the spiritual world.

So then, one might naturally wonder how such an amazing manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s love, Girirāja Govardhana, appeared in this place, the material world, which Kṛṣṇa himself describes as *duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*—a temporary place full of miseries—or *mṛtyu-loka*, the place of death. How did he come here? Well, again, it’s described in Garga-saṁhitā that one day, just before Kṛṣṇa was going to descend into this world to fulfill his promise of delivering the pious and annihilating the demons and reestablishing dharma, he approached Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and he said, "Oh beloved, oh frightened one"—because she was getting a little frightened because Kṛṣṇa was going to leave Vraja—so he said, "Oh beloved, oh frightened one, please come with me to the earth planet."

But Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī hesitated, and she said, most famously—I say famously because this is a very well-known statement that she made to her beloved, and I have the Sanskrit here—*yatra vṛndāvanaṁ nāsti na yatra yamunā nadī | yatra govardhano nāsti...* She said, "My heart cannot be happy in a place where there is no Vṛndāvana forest, no Yamunā river, and no Govardhana Hill." Very famous. And I think that applies to us as well, all of us devotees: my heart cannot be happy in a place where there is no Vṛndāvana forest, no Yamunā river, and no Govardhana Hill. So shastra says at that point, Lord Hari sent a 47-crośa portion of his own abode along with Govardhana and the Yamunā that was worshipped by all the worlds and filled with 24 forests that Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

And then, so now we know that Govardhana came with the Yamunā river and the Vṛndāvana forest to the earth planet. But a hint is given specifically about Govardhana Hill’s descent into the world, to this earth planet, to India, to Vraja, Bhārata-varṣa. In the middle of Śālmali-dvīpa, which means South India, Govardhana was born from the wife of Mount Droṇa. So we’re getting like a detailed description, a lot of detailed description, of the origin of Govardhana—why he appeared here, by the desire of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—and specifically where he first appeared. It appears he first appeared there in South India, as he was born from the wife of Mount Droṇa. So this mountain, Droṇa, he’s the father of Girirāja, and it’s stated that at the moment that Govardhana appeared, demigods showered flowers on Girirāja, and then all the sacred mountains in creation, headed by Himālaya and Sumeru, came to offer their respects. And they all said together, "Dearest Govardhana, in Goloka, which is filled with gopas, gopīs, and cows, you are the mountain of Lord Kṛṣṇa-candra, the original Personality of Godhead." They recognized him as such. Then they said, *yathā...* "You are named Govardhana, you are splendidly manifest in the world of Vṛndāvana, and you are the king of all mountains." And then the often-quoted verse—at least the Govardhana-bhaktas, they often quote this verse—*hantāyam adrir abalā hari-dāsa-varyo...* Obeisances to you, who are the crown of Goloka and who sit on Vṛndāvana’s lap; obeisances to Govardhana, the parasol of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We actually started our class with that verse.

Then all the sacred mountains returned to their, it’s described, their residences. I think that was—I thought that was an interesting way to describe it; they went back to where they were. Mountains, of course, these were the personifications of the mountains who came to see Girirāja. So all the sacred mountains returned to their sacred residences.

Now the question is, the next question is, how did Girirāja get from South India to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, which is very much north, actually, if you look at the map? Well, that’s explained in Garga-saṁhitā 3.1.11. There, it’s said that when Kṛṣṇa was trying to—earlier, when Kṛṣṇa was trying to convince the cowherd community, because we spoke about this before, to worship Govardhana Hill and not Lord Indra—Kṛṣṇa said, "The hill named Govardhana is the king of the kings of mountains. He was born from Lord Hari’s own chest. He has come here by the power of Pulastya Muni. By seeing him, one becomes free from having to take birth again in this material world." Well, this Kṛṣṇa’s statement—"The hill named Govardhana is the king of the kings of mountains. He was born from Lord Hari’s own chest"—Kṛṣṇa’s speaking about himself—"He has come here by the power of Pulastya Muni. By seeing him, one becomes freed from having to take birth again in this material world." So therein, when addressing the Brajavāsīs, encouraging them not to worship Indra but to worship Girirāja, Kṛṣṇa says that it was Pulastya Muni that brought Girirāja to Vṛndāvana. What more authority do we need? Who brought Girirāja to Vraja?

Now, many of us, we’ve heard of Pulastya Muni, but who is he exactly? When I was, you know, doing my research, I was thinking, "You know what? I’ve many times told the story how Pulastya Muni brought Girirāja to Vṛndāvana, but I never told anyone who Pulastya Muni was." So I did some research; it’s really interesting. He wasn’t just some sage. Sometimes, when the part where he, you know, puts Govardhana Hill down—going ahead here a little bit—he puts Govardhana Hill down in Vṛndāvana and then has to leave him there, and it’s kind of a humorous story, he kind of looks like he doesn’t know what he’s talking about—but actually, Pulastya Muni is a great sage. He was born from the ears of Brahmā, and he’s described as one of the nine principal ṛṣis in the universe. He’s known as an expert on all the holy places in creation. In fact, there’s a section in the scriptures that I found in which he tells Bhīṣmadeva just how to visit all the holy places on earth. And he was also amongst the sages present at Kurukṣetra when the solar eclipse brought Kṛṣṇa and the residents of Vṛndāvana together. We know that pastime. And I read that in the month of Mādhava, which in ancient India meant April-May, Pulastya serves on Vivasvān’s chariot as the solar sage in the month of April-May when the sun is going through the skies, taking the sun here and there; Pulastya serves as a solar sage.

The Rāmāyaṇa also mentions Pulastya. The Rāmāyaṇa says that he lived long ago on the slopes of Mount Meru, and there he constantly engaged in severe penances and austerities. And at that time, many apsarās, celestial maidens, they would come and sport in that very beautiful region where he lived. It was an apparently very beautiful celestial place, but he was doing his tapasya there, and they would sometimes disturb his meditations. So, one day, he became impatient with them and he said to them, "Girls, if I see any of you again disturbing my meditation here, making your noises and running here and there, you will immediately become pregnant." That was like a curse. So, from that time on, the girls carefully avoided Pulastya Muni’s āśrama. However, it’s described there was one girl, the daughter of a sage named Tṛṇabindu, who had not heard about this possible curse of Pulastya Muni. So one day, this girl, she ventured into that region—I think it’s described she was picking flowers in that area—and she came nearby where Pulastya could see her, and as soon as he saw her, she felt symptoms of being pregnant. And astonished and fearful, it’s described, she immediately ran home to her father, and she said, "Father, I cannot understand why I am suddenly appearing pregnant, as yet I have not had contact with any male in my lifetime." So her father, Tṛṇabindu, he sat in meditation, and by his mystic powers, he understood what had happened. So he went with his daughter to Pulastya, and he said to him, "Oh venerable sage, kindly accept my daughter as your wife. By your power, by your mystic power, she now carries a child. Please therefore take her hand in marriage; she will surely render you a very pleasing service." So Pulastya Muni, he agreed, he agreed, and he said to the girl, "Oh gentle one, you will give birth to a highly qualified son who shall be known as Viśravā." Viśravā.

Now, I also found out—this is also interesting, just to show us how powerful Pulastya Muni was, the one chosen to take Girirāja from the south to the north—I found in the Mahābhārata, Ādi-parva chapter 60, that Pulastya is the source of the rākṣasas; they have to come from somewhere. It says the six sons of Brahmā are known to be Marīci, Aṅgirā... all great and powerful sages. From Pulastya came rākṣasas, monkeys, and kinnaras. In fact, Pulastya Muni, he once stopped—I was reading—he once stopped the sage Parāśara Muni from performing a rākṣasa-killing yajña. You know, I read that Parāśara Muni was performing—he’s a great sage also—he was performing a rākṣasa-killing yajña. Well, we can understand... So Pulastya Muni, he came to that particular yajña and he said to Parāśara, Parāśari, he was described as the "tamer of the hostile." He said to him, "My dear son, will nothing stop you? Are you actually enjoying the murder of all these rākṣasas who have committed no crime against you and do not even know why they’re being killed? Parāśara, you’re a brāhmaṇa, a most educated man, and yet you are committing the most irreligious act by annihilating all of the progeny. I am... I myself created [them] as part of the Creator’s plan; he created them, but it was part of the Kṛṣṇa’s plan. Oh son of Śakti, you were engaged by providence to painfully destroy these rākṣasas in the fire of sacrifice, but now let it be finished. Give up this ceremony and you will be blessed." And with that, Parāśara, he ended the yajña. So now we know a little bit about Pulastya; we’ll take him more seriously.

So one day as Pulastya was traveling to holy places, because he knew—remember, he knew all the holy places—so he was traveling in South India, and he saw Mount Droṇa’s son, Govardhana, taken birth. Droṇa—Droṇa mountain, Droṇagiri—we also hear of Droṇa. Well, we know him specifically because he’s the father of Govardhana Hill, and he’s often called Droṇagiri. And this—let me say something about Droṇa, because it’s also interesting—all these personalities, all transcendental personalities, are just fascinating. No need to hear about any of the personalities in this world; why waste our time with the evening news? The mountain Droṇa is known for his, or it’s as you want to say, for his medicinal herbs. And it’s described in Padma Purāṇa, Part 5, Section 5, Chapter 44, it’s entitled, "Hanumān on the Droṇa Mountain." It’s described that when Lakṣmaṇa was injured by Indrajit in the final battle of Laṅkā—there was the great war between Rāmacandra and Rāvaṇa, and that the final battle took place in Laṅkā, and during that battle, Lakṣmaṇa was injured by Indrajit, one of Rāvaṇa’s soldiers, and severely injured Lakṣmaṇa—so the physician, Suṣeṇa, he sent Hanumān to find an herb known as Viśalya. Viśalya, it’s a special, like a sañjīvanī, it’s a life-giving and a life-restoring herb. Sañjīvanī, the elixir of life that the ancients were looking for all over Europe. Sañjīvanī, that herb is found in the Himālaya mountains, and that was the herb which could revive Lakṣmaṇa.

So, many of us know, isn’t it, that Hanumān went to the Himālayas looking for this herb quickly, because Lakṣmaṇa was so severely injured, and he chanced upon the Droṇa Mountain, which has all the medicinal herbs. But Hanumān, he couldn’t distinguish between which plant was the correct one; there were so many medicinal herbs. So he couldn’t figure out which was the correct one. So it’s described that he, in Padma Purāṇa, he uprooted a good portion of the mountain and he carried it back to South India. Sometimes we hear he took the whole mountain; this in this particular description, he took a good portion of the mountain and carried it back to South India where the herbs were extracted and sent to cure Lakṣmaṇa, which they did. And I was reading also that there’s still a village—this isn’t contemporary literature; I was reading there’s still a village on the side of what remains of Droṇa Mountain—and you wouldn’t notice that the mountain was split in half and nothing like that. I saw a picture of, actually, it’s a huge mountain, but what remains of Droṇa Mountain in the Himālayas, there’s a village there called Dunagiri. And it’s said that the villagers of Dunagiri, which sits on the side of that mountain, to this day, they have not forgiven Hanumān for defacing the mountain. They worship that mountain, and to this day the village has not forgiven Hanumān for defacing the mountain. And I was reading they hardly even mention his name in that area if you go there to that, because the Droṇa mountain’s there, you can go and see Himālayas, it’s a subtle area, and it’s said they don’t even mention Hanumān’s name to this day in those villages, and there’s no Hanumān temples or deities anywhere in the region. And in the yearly celebration of Rāmāyaṇa, when the villagers there perform theater, they perform it up to the point where Hanumān was asked to bring the herb, but then they don’t show the part where he goes to the Himālayas and he takes the Droṇa Mountain and, off of it and part of it, and brings it back for the herbs that are growing; they don’t show that part in their drama. I don’t know where they continue, but it’s certainly interesting, anyway.

That’s how the Droṇa mountain, which is the North Indian mountain, ended up in South India. But despite being a portion of the original, the Droṇa mountain which Pulastya saw, the father of Govardhana, Droṇa mountain, that mountain which Pulastya saw, was very large and very magnificent. Actually, there’s a description in Garga-saṁhitā of Droṇa mountain as Pulastya Muni saw it. I’ll repeat it for you: "The mountain was filled with flowering Mādhavī vines, heavy with the abundant fruits, filled with the sounds of gushing streams, peaceful, auspicious, with many caves suitable for performing austerities, filled with jewels, charming, wonderful, with many colorful minerals, beautiful with graceful slopes, filled with many birds, deer, and nectar trees, and decorated with peacock calls, and which gave liberation for those who yearn for it, and which gave liberation for those who yearn for it." That’s why many sages go to the Himālayas to become self-realized.

So Pulastya, at this point, he’s described as the tiger of sages. So he approaches Droṇagiri—we’ll get on with the story here, pastime—he approaches Droṇagiri and he says, "Oh Droṇa, you were the king of mountains, you were worshipped by all the demigods, you were filled with transcendental medicinal herbs, and thus you always restore the people’s lives. I come to you with a request. I am a great sage, I live in Kāśī, which means Vārāṇasī. Please give me your son, Govardhana. I do not wish anything else. I will take him to Vārāṇasī, where there are no hills or mountains." It’s very flat; that area, I’ve been there, the Vārāṇasī, after the Ganges flows there, many ancient temples, very mystical place, but there’s no mountains. So he was a sage; he said he needed a mountain to perform his penances on. "So I wish to take him to Vārāṇasī, where there’s no hills or mountains. I will perform austerities on your son, Govardhana, who was filled with trees and vines; that is my desire."

So, of course, Droṇa was very attached to his son, but you know, when a sage asks you for something, it’s described actually, when a sage comes to your home and asks for something, then the householder must give whatever the sage asks for, because he never asks for more than he can use, and he will use it properly in Kṛṣṇa’s service, and therefore the person who’s giving will also receive the benefit. But here’s, you know, Pulastya Muni asking for a son. So Droṇa, you know, he felt a little sad, but he turned to Govardhana and he said, "Oh son, go with the sage to beautiful Bhārata-varṣa in the North, where people attain the three goals of life and even liberation in a single moment." So Govardhana said to Pulastya, "Okay, my father said I can go with you, but how will you take me? I’m eight yojanas long, five yojanas wide, and two yojanas tall." So Pulastya Muni said, "My son, please sit in my hand, and I will carry you to Kāśī." Then Govardhana said, "I will stay where you—I will come with you, and I will stay where you eventually place me, and I will not leave that place. I promise you this." So Pulastya was happy that, you know, come stay forever there in Kāśī, Govardhana Hill. So Pulastya said, "As I take you from Śālmali-dvīpa to Kāśī, I will not put you down along the way. I promise you this." He’s keeping intact his desire to bring him all the way to Kāśī, to Vārāṇasī.

So with that, Govardhana bowed down to his father, Droṇa, before leaving, and then he climbed onto the sage’s hand. Then it’s written, carrying the mountain in his right hand, Pulastya Muni showed his great power to the people, moving very slowly, until he soon came over the sacred land of Vraja-maṇḍala. It’s interesting, because if you look at a map, there’s South India, and then there’s Vṛndāvana kind of like North-West India, and then Vārāṇasī is kind of more towards the East India, so it looks like he took a little bit of a detour instead of going straight in line, but anyway, that’s just my speculation. Vṛndāvana is a little bit off the course there, but by Kṛṣṇa’s desire, obviously. And when they got over Vraja-maṇḍala on their way to Kāśī, Govardhana looked down, and he thought to himself, "Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was the master of countless universes, will descend one day to this place, Vraja, and enjoy, enjoy childhood playing with the cowherd boys and with the young girls of Vṛndāvana. In this way he will spend his youth. For this reason, I should not leave this place where the Yamunā flows."

So Govardhana Hill, he immediately made himself very, very heavy in the sage’s hand. So heavy, so much so that Pulastya had to land in... well, where Girirāja is now, and he put Girirāja down in Vṛndāvana. And then he went to take a bath in the Yamunā, it’s described, and then Pulastya Muni came back and he said to Govardhana, "Okay, stand up, we’re going to continue on our way." Govardhana didn’t stand up. He didn’t stand up, even when the sage, by his mystic powers, tried to lift him up; he didn’t move an inch. And then Girirāja reminded the sage that, "You know, anywhere where you—I said anywhere where you put me I’ll stay there; I won’t move. So I’m not moving."

So Pulastya Muni became very angry and he cursed Govardhana. We know, many of us, we know that that curse is there. But here’s the Sanskrit from the Garga-saṁhitā: *śrī-girirāja uvāca...* "Oh arrogant mountain, you would not fulfill my desire. Therefore, every day you will become smaller by the size of a sesame seed." Sometimes we hear mustard seed or this seed, but little seed, tiny little seed—that was the curse. "Oh arrogant mountain, you would not fulfill my desire. Therefore, every day you will become smaller by the size of a sesame seed." And indeed, ever since then, Girirāja has been shrinking the size of a sesame seed every day. And unfortunate as that may be, he’s still there; he’ll be there for a while. And Garga-saṁhitā ends this līlā with an appropriate verse, a very beautiful, very beautiful śloka that we can take shelter of: *yāvad gaṅgā-nadī-tīre...* "As long as the Bhāgīrathī Ganges is present, and as long as Mount Govardhana is present, the power of Kali-yuga will not be present." As long as the Bhāgīrathī Ganges is present and as long as Mount Govardhana is present, the power of Kali-yuga will not be present.

So this is Kali-yuga, and we see Kali-yuga is becoming very much manifest, but we can understand this is nothing compared to what will be seen in the future. Let’s take it like that; this is over 400,000 years, 428,000 years, called the Yuga. So the Ganges River is present, and Govardhana is present. Another way we can understand that is that if we take shelter of these transcendental waters of the Ganges and rivers like the Yamunā, and we take advantage of the mercy of Govardhana Hill to come to Girirāja and do parikramā and pray for his mercy, pray to be a good devotee of Kṛṣṇa—Haridāsa-varya, like he is—or to worship him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and get his blessings in that sense, then the influence of Kali-yuga will not affect us. That’s the idea. Adore, he can remain transcendental even in this world by seriously practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So as long as the Bhāgīrathī Ganges is present and as long as Mount Govardhana is present, the power of Kali-yuga will not be present. And if Kali-yuga increases, then let’s take shelter of the Ganges and the Yamunā and Govardhana and the forests of Vṛndāvana and Prabhupāda and all the Vaiṣṇava devotees. And to the degree that we do that, we will not be influenced.

Now, before finishing, I’d like to mention that Rūpa Gosvāmī has given another version why Girirāja is shrinking, and this is my favorite version. This is, of course, Garga-saṁhitā says one thing; we must accept that. But this is my favorite version. He writes that after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs searched the whole Vraja-maṇḍala for Kṛṣṇa, thinking, "It couldn’t be true, he wouldn’t leave us." So as a last resort to find him, they came to Govardhana Hill, knowing that Govardhana Hill was one of Kṛṣṇa’s, or is one of Kṛṣṇa’s, favorite places of pastimes. So they went looking for Kṛṣṇa around Govardhana Hill; they did parikramā 12 times, asking every creeper, every bush, every tree, every śilā, every speck of dust, every animal: "Have you seen our Kṛṣṇa? Have you seen Kṛṣṇa?" They looked everywhere, but they couldn’t find their beloved Śyāmasundara.

So finally, Gosvāmī describes, they accepted the transcendental reality that Kṛṣṇa had left Vṛndāvana, and being such humble souls, they were thinking, "Maybe the ladies of Mathurā are showing deeper love for Kṛṣṇa than we do, and that fact has attracted him to Mathurā." And thinking in this way, they fell to the ground and they cried and they cried and they cried and they cried. All their tears made little puddles at the feet of Girirāja Govardhana, just next to his slopes. As they came down, so Girirāja, seeing this, out of compassion and out of sympathy for the Vraja-gopīs, he started shrinking. Just feeling so much compassion for them, he just started shrinking the size of one sesame seed every day. That is Girirāja.

And that, my devotees, is the love we see in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Such a special place. Our only desire should be to reside there, to become so serious about our practices, not become deviated for a moment. Nothing compares to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, to the Divine Couple, the cowherd boys, the gopīs, the elders, the cows, the peacocks, the trees, the dust of Vraja. And when we hear these pastimes, even in our neophyte stage, we can feel our hearts being pulled—if only because that was one of Prabhupāda’s favorite places. As we mentioned during a lecture a few weeks ago about Prabhupāda and Vṛndāvana, we see how much, we saw how much Prabhupāda loved Vṛndāvana. There he performed his final pastime, and there his sacred samādhi resides. So we have so many reasons to want to be in Vṛndāvana, and if we can’t be there physically, we can be there like this. Anyone can take up a Kṛṣṇa book and read about Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana pastimes. You can go into more detail reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and we have Caitanya Mahāprabhu, his pastimes—he’s the one that has given us the understanding of Vṛndāvana and Vraja; he brought that understanding to the world, he flooded the world with the understanding of Vraja-bhakti, which we can attain by chanting the mahā-mantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So we know, I often say, we know who we are, and we know where we’re going. So I’d like to finish today with some prayers glorifying Govardhana Hill. There’s many prayers glorifying Govardhana Hill; our Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has given us very beautiful prayers, but you may not know these prayers, so I thought I would share them. I would finish today with these particular prayers in glorification of Girirāja Govardhana, Garga-saṁhitā, Canto 3, Chapter 10: "Glorious Govardhana Hill, the king of mountains, is the personal form of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Simply by seeing it, a person attains the supreme goal of life. By seeing Govardhana Hill, one attains a pious result many millions of times greater than the result of a pilgrimage to Mount Gandhamādana. Oh brāhmaṇa, the same result one attains by performing austerities for 5,000 years on Mount Kedāra is attained by a single moment by Govardhana Hill. By staying one month near Govardhana Hill, one attains a pious result many millions of times greater than the result of giving in charity a mountain of gold in the Himālayas. Even though he has committed hundreds of sins, a person who on Mount Govardhana gives gold in charity attains a spiritual form like that of Lord Kṛṣṇa. The same result is attained simply by looking at Govardhana Hill. No other holy place is as sacred as Govardhana Hill. By going on pilgrimage to Govardhana Hill, one attains piety 10 million times greater than the piety he would attain by going on pilgrimage to Reva-caṇḍī or to Devagiri, Vṛṣabhā... the holy mountain in Devagiri, the mountains of the demigods. There was not, nor will there ever be, a holy place equal to Govardhana Hill." That’s the concluding statement: there was not, nor will there ever be, a holy place equal to Govardhana Hill.

Thank you so much, once again, for this special opportunity; it comes twice a week with our lectures. And I think we’ve concluded our little mini-series on Govardhana Hill. We will, I think next, next lecture, we’ll speak about... well, to be connected to Govardhana Hill, we’ll talk about Gopāla, the deity who appeared on Govardhana Hill and was discovered by Mādhavendra Purī, and we’ll discuss some of the glories of Mādhavendra Purī as well. Thank you, thank you, thank you. All glory to Śrīla Prabhupāda, Śrī Gaurāṅga-Nitāi kī jaya, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya, Śrī Śyāmasundara kī jaya, Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya. And as we always say, we must say: by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, let’s take ourselves and let’s take all the fallen conditioned souls and all the three worlds back home, back to Godhead, where every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there’s a wonderful festival every day. Hare Kṛṣṇa, see you soon.""