"*00225*.*

Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. I’m standing at a very, very sacred place here in West Bengal, the famous place of Pānihāṭi, just on the banks of the Ganges. Behind me, you can see this tree here, a very historic tree. One time, Lord Nityānanda was sitting there, and our beloved Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, wanting His darśana, came here. But he was very humble; he was standing some distance away, which is now the exact spot of our ISKCON temple here in Pānihāṭi. And Lord Nityānanda saw him, and he was hesitating, and Lord Nityānanda said to him, "You should have come forward. I can see you are a thief, so you come forward here." So he came for darśana with Lord Nityānanda, and at that time, Lord Nityānanda blessed him to have darśana of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So from here, after this program, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī went to Purī to meet Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

Calling him a thief in an interesting, humorous way—He knew he was quite wealthy—so He said, "Your service is to please all these Vaiṣṇavas with nice prasāda. You feed them a feast of chipped rice." So Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who had money because he came from a very wealthy family, fed everyone chipped rice. And that is celebrated here every year in Pānihāṭi. Of course, the real richness of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was his wealth of knowledge in vraja-bhakti. He is a prayojana-guru; he knows the deeper mellows of devotional service that he learned from Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Jagannātha. Of course, he is a resident of the spiritual world; he is a mañjarī there. These are the beautiful pastimes. So we came here with the group of devotees as beggars; all we really wanted was some chipped rice, but the devotees served us a 21-course feast, which included some chipped rice and very nice Bengali sweets. So we’re very satisfied. Now we’re going to leave until the next holy place. Hare...

Kṛṣṇa dāke nitāi-gaura bole, nitāi nitāi-gaura, nitāi kalpa-taru. Nitāi kalpa-taru, nitāi nitāi prema-dātā dayāla guru, ekla nitāi. Prema-dātā dayāla guru, ekla nitāi. Harinām diye jagat mātāle āmār, āmār ekla nitāi. Harinām diye jagat mātāle āmār, ekla nitāi, ekla nitāi, ekla nitāi, ekla nitāi, ekla nitāi, ekla nitāi, ekla nitāi, ekla nitāi. Harinām diye jagat mātāle āmār ekla nitāi. Harinām diye jagat mātāle āmār ekla nitāi. Harinām jagat mātāle āmār ekla nitāi. Harinām jagat mātāle āmār ekla nitāi.""