"*00393*.*
"### Paraphernalia for Cooking - Janmāṣṭamī Class

Kṛṣṇa’s birthday, or more specifically, His appearance day in this material world—it sounds like this microphone is much clearer. Maybe someone was looking into the matter. When Kṛṣṇa comes to the material world, He brings everything; He brings the whole spiritual world with Him. If we go somewhere, we leave our home and have to stay in someone else’s house, a hotel, or a campsite, but Kṛṣṇa brings His own home.

We can get an idea of this by visiting Vṛndāvana in India. 5,000 years ago, when Kṛṣṇa performed His pastimes, it looked the same, but as Kali-yuga progresses, we cannot see Vṛndāvana properly with our material eyes; we have to see it through our spiritual eyes. There is a saying that a saintly person sees with his ears, not with his eyes. Many of us will be going to Kārttika in a few months, but to actually see Vṛndāvana, we have to hear from the spiritual authorities who lived there in the past, like the Six Gosvāmīs and Śrīla Prabhupāda, or from their modern-day representatives like Dīna Bandhu Prabhu, who is my *parikramā* guru. There is enough information in our *śāstras*, especially from Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, that we get a really clear picture of what Vṛndāvana actually is, and it just makes us want to run to Vṛndāvana. 

There is a saying that "elegance is truth spoken concisely." We can get a nice understanding of Vṛndāvana in a very short statement by Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. The following words from Śrī Kṛṣṇa are very dear to my heart, and I am sure they will also be very dear to your heart because all of us eventually want to be not just Americans or Polish people; we want to be Vraja-vāsīs. We hear about Vṛndāvana and think, "That’s where I want to be eternally." You know there is that famous t-shirt that came out some years ago: "I left my heart in Vṛndāvana."

Listen to how little Kṛṣṇa—He was a little boy at this time—is speaking to His father. Listen to how He describes His playground, because He sees Vṛndāvana like a playground, not like the cities of Vaikuṇṭha, the official Kingdom of God. Vṛndāvana was a playground for boys and girls along with Kṛṣṇa. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, 24th Chapter, 24th verse:

$$na\ na\ grāme\ vasa\ tatra\ vana-\ gocharā\ vayam\\ vanāni\ ca\ girayaś\ ca\ sadā\ no\ jīvikā\ diśaḥ$$

"Our home is not in the cities or towns or villages. Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills." I want to say it again: "My dear father, our home is not in the cities or towns or villages. Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills."

This is the natural playground of Kṛṣṇa, where He spent most of His childhood herding cows with other cowherd boys. That’s what cowherds do; they herd those cows, actually calves. The boys would just play games all day; they’d only stop playing games for breakfast and lunch. Actually, one of their favorite pastimes was eating. Yeah, boys will be boys—frogs and snails and puppy dog tails, and the copies of sugar and spice and everything that’s nice. Yeah, boys like to eat, always like to eat, especially breakfast, lunch, dinner, and snacks in between. Even in this world, eating is one of the few pleasures of life. But I might point out eating together—you know, in society, people like to have family dinners; they like to have family dinners together, go out to a restaurant. There’s nothing like having a meal. Even business associates, when there’s some business to discuss, they discuss it over lunch. I remember when I was in France for so many years, the French had a saying: "First we eat, then we do everything else."

I remember my mother; my mother was half Irish, and she used to quote an Irish proverb: "Laughter is brightest in the place where food is." Isn’t it like when you’re sitting and talking, and then you’re laughing and joking while you’re eating? Laughter is the brightest in the place where food is. And my mother, bless her soul, she always used to say, "Vegetables are the food of the Earth, but fruits are the taste of Heaven." You know how much children like fruits. My point is that eating is a pleasure in this world, but as we’ve all learned, how much more does the act of eating bring satisfaction when we partake of food which is first offered to Kṛṣṇa? We like to eat, but we prefer to eat food that has first been offered to Kṛṣṇa, because Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā*, "Food that is not first offered to Me is verily sin." It is okay, because when we eat, we’re not just relishing the food, which we can, but because it is *prasādam*, we’re relishing mercy; we’re making advancement by eating.

Doing a program with Śrīla Prabhupāda in India, he was discussing the different paths of perfection—the yogīs, the jñānīs, the tyāgīs, the renunciates, the devotees. He was comparing these different spiritual paths, and he said, "All these other paths, there’s so much penance, there’s so much austerity you have to perform to be a yogī or a jñānī." Probably there is more kindness and austerity, but Prabhupāda said, "But we will go back to Godhead by eating sandwiches." Why? You know, take the seven-floor steps when you can take the elevator? It always takes the hard part, running up the steps and pushing this, but you know, why go up 12 flights of stairs when you can just take the elevator? So why go through so much penance and austerity? You can just eat *gulāb-jāmun* and go back to Godhead and then dance and chant.

Become a Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Impressive. You, dear Kṛṣṇa, are very kind and have given us such nice *prasādam* just to control the tongue. Let us take this *prasādam* into our full satisfaction and glorify Their Lordships Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and with love, call upon Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda. We say it every time we sit down to eat. So, we are relishing taking *prasādam* as aspiring devotees. Just imagine the happiness that the cowherd boys experience when taking *prasādam* with Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. For us—imagine taking *prasādam* with Kṛṣṇa now. We’re taking the remnants, and Kṛṣṇa is sleeping on the altar. Imagine sitting down and taking *prasādam* with the Supreme Personality of Godhead every day: breakfast, lunch, and sometimes dinner. Who wants to stay in the material world?

*Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Canto 10, Chapter 24, Text 23: "Assembling the Surabhi cows in one place, hand in hand, Kṛṣṇa’s friends playing jokes on them, the ocean of pure love has washed away the mud of awe and reverence in Kṛṣṇa’s presence. Let us all take shelter of those boys whose hearts, lives, and property are all placed at Lord Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet." *Rādhā-rāṇī kī jaya! Kṛṣṇa kī jaya!*

So, just how the cowherd boys take breakfast and lunch with Kṛṣṇa, it is described in *śāstra*. So if you want to take lunch with Kṛṣṇa, you have to learn how to do it from the cowherd boys. *Vaidhi* means devotional service, and *rāgānuga* means spontaneous devotional service. So we want to learn to be spontaneous, but first we have to practice. How are we going to sit down and take *prasādam* with Nanda Mahārāja and all the cowherd boys and Kṛṣṇa? You better learn it now. So, who here, on this auspicious day of Janmāṣṭamī, would like to learn how to take *prasādam* with Kṛṣṇa and His friends?

Okay, so they are playing and the cows are grazing. At that point, all the cowherd boys surround Kṛṣṇa, who sits in the center. You’ve seen the paintings—around His waist, Kṛṣṇa’s flute is tucked in, not on the left side at the back, but Kṛṣṇa’s flute is tucked into His side because He can grab it really quickly. He plays His flute there, and on the left side of His sash, there is His buffalo horn and a stick for driving cows. When you think of Kṛṣṇa, you can think like this, as authorized: His flute is here, buffalo horn, and a stick on the left side. So, as they are settling down to take *prasādam*, each boy looks at Kṛṣṇa, hoping that Kṛṣṇa will look back at him. They just want Kṛṣṇa to look at them. They don’t want money, name, fame; they don’t want to be the head of a universe like Lord Brahmā. They just want Kṛṣṇa to look at them. And then the boys, they run and get their plates. It’s like we’re going to have them later on—not midnight, but later on—and you’re all going to run and get your plates. Some of you have hidden plates here, I’ve seen under the benches and things. You’re the first ones in line for *prasādam*, very smart! But they’re running and getting their plates—different kinds of plates. Some boys, they use rocks—flat rocks as plates; some boys they gathered flowers and they used flowers as plates; some boys get big leaves and use them as plates; and some boys, they like to take the bark of trees and use that as plates. So think about it—when you’re there, which plate are you going to use? Flowers, bark, a leaf, a rock? I can think about it.

And all the boys, they take a lot of fun sharing the *prasādam* their mothers made for them. "I’ll give you this if you give me that. Okay, let’s switch. How about that? I’ll give you two of these. Nope, three. Okay, three." They’re boys; they’re trading. The whole atmosphere is surcharged with laughing and joking. This laughing and joking resounds throughout the entire Vṛndāvana forest. The Vṛndāvana forest is very big, so all the people on the other side of Vṛndāvana, they’re hearing the cowherd boys laugh and joke about the *prasādam*, playing tricks.

What *ācārya* describes it that the lunch pastime is like a mini-festival. Now, the demigods—because you know they’re always coming in their flower airplanes and checking out what’s happening in Vṛndāvana—when they see the boys eating like this, they’re like, "What is going on here? How is it that God, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who in our eyes eats only *bhoga*—sacrificial offerings—is very casually eating sweets and fruits and milk products with these cowherd boys? How can they treat Him like that? We’re offering Him *bhoga* in Vaikuṇṭha, and they’re playing with Him like an ordinary boy. What is this Vṛndāvana?"

Śrīla Prabhupāda was meditating on this pastime of Kṛṣṇa taking *prasādam* with His friends when he was having an evening massage. And then he spoke up, and the devotee was massaging him, and a few other devotees present, they were all ears because Prabhupāda started discussing this pastime. They would go into the forest and prepare a very nice lunch with *purī*, *halavā*, *kachorī*, and *laddū*—you’re drooling, just wait two more hours—*purī*, *halavā*, *kachorī*, and *laddū*. But the mothers of the other cowherd boys, they were not as wealthy as Mother Yaśodā, so they would prepare for their sons' lunch bags of *capātī*, rice, and *sabjī*, naturally, rice and *dāl*. So Prabhupāda said sometimes one of the cowherd boys would steal Kṛṣṇa’s lunch, and the boys would play—Prabhupāda called it "keep away." This is cute English. The boys would play "keep away." Keep away means that they would keep it from Kṛṣṇa and throw it to each other like that, and Kṛṣṇa tried to grab it. Prabhupāda calls this game "keep away," and that is the proper way—that’s the proper name we should always use: "Let’s play keep away."

Out of compassion, one of the boys would throw his lunch—rice, *dāl*, or *capātī*—to Kṛṣṇa, and then Kṛṣṇa would eat the *capātī*, rice, and *sabjī*. And all the boys would crowd around that tiffin, that plate that Kṛṣṇa had, and they would eat Kṛṣṇa’s lunch: *purī*, *halavā*, *kachorī*, *laddū*. But Kṛṣṇa didn’t care. This is the love of Vṛndāvana. By definition, He is the Supreme Controller, but in Gaudiya Vaiṣṇava philosophy, we understand that He is controlled by love. And then Prabhupāda said after lunch they take a nap, and then they go play in the forest. And then Prabhupāda concluded his little description of taking *prasādam* with Kṛṣṇa in the most amazing way. He said something that’s just going to melt your hearts. It’s coming from Prabhupāda’s heart; that’s all, and we want to follow you through the conclusion. You have to follow the fact that it is so.

There is another wonderful pastime of the residents of Vṛndāvana taking *prasādam* with Kṛṣṇa, and this time it’s the Gopīs. Yes, we have to train everybody up. Yes, so this pastime begins with the Gopīs looking everywhere, everywhere in Vṛndāvana for Kṛṣṇa. But sometimes they find Him, sometimes they don’t. On this day, they did not find Kṛṣṇa.

So, they were a little bit discouraged, but you know where they stopped? They noticed there were lots of beautiful, natural vegetables growing in the forest, and beautiful fruits on the trees. So they just kind of stopped and they said, "Okay, we can’t find Kṛṣṇa; let’s have a picnic." We can pick all this wild spinach and these different vegetables and fruits, and we’ll cook a feast. "How can we cook a feast with no utensils, no *ghī*, no spices? It’s impossible. Let’s just eat fruit from the trees." They didn’t like that idea. They said, "No, Rādhārāṇī, we have to cook a feast." She said, "How, girls? Be realistic, we don’t have anything to cook a feast. What are we going to do?" So you know what happened? Just at that very moment, the land of Vṛndāvana, the land of Vraja, suddenly and miraculously manifested all the paraphernalia for cooking. The forest did it! Wow, the spices are there, the cooking pots are there, the fire is there. Vṛndāvana forest manifested all these things for the Gopīs.

How can a forest—the land and rocks and trees—manifest all the paraphernalia for cooking? The answer is, as we’ve discussed many times, everything in Vṛndāvana is personal. Balarāma’s appearance states that the *Dhāma* is an expansion of Lord Balarāma; nothing is ordinary. Even the trees—these are all *kalpa-vṛkṣa* trees. Actually, if one is very lusty, he takes birth as a tree, and he can expose himself to everyone and no one’s going to complain. The *dhāma* devotees appear in Vṛndāvana as *kalpa-vṛkṣa* trees, meaning they are trees that facilitate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and the cowherd boys’ pastimes. By whatever you need to serve Kṛṣṇa, you can ask a tree in Vṛndāvana, and you can get oranges, apples, pears. You can get some wood for doing a *yajña*; you can get a new *dhotī*; you can get a necklace—whatever you need to serve Kṛṣṇa, you get it from a *kalpa-vṛkṣa* tree. So nothing is ordinary, including the *Dhāma*. So the *Dhāma* provided all this paraphernalia immediately.

So all the Gopīs, because they are innocent young girls, they looked around—they were shocked, "Where did all this paraphernalia come from?"—but they began very eagerly collecting forest vegetables and fruits and plenty of firewood, and very soon the whole area was crowded with cow-dung fires. The Gopīs were busy stirring these steaming pots, and they were singing songs while they did so about Kṛṣṇa, His name, His qualities, and pastimes.

They always sing when they cook. The girls, you should sing when you cook. And as each preparation came to completion, Rādhārāṇī would come with a *chānk*—spices fried in *ghī*—and She’d pour the *chānk* into the pots. And you know how good a cook She is! We must say something here at this point, but Rādhā and the Gopīs, they weren’t actually cooking for themselves. They never do anything for themselves; everything they do is for Kṛṣṇa. This is the Gopī: "I know no one but Kṛṣṇa as my Lord. He shall always remain so, even if He handles me roughly by His embrace or makes me broken-hearted by not being present before me. He is always my beloved Lord unconditionally." This is the Gopī: everything for Kṛṣṇa, nothing for me. This is pure love. So that cooking for themselves really isn’t happening.

So, as they’re cooking, they’re thinking, "But how are we going to offer this feast to Kṛṣṇa? Because we were looking for Him all day; we couldn’t find Him. What is the use of our cooking if we can’t first offer it to Kṛṣṇa?" And they began crying. All this food was cooked; it’s steaming in the pots, but they stop—they’re not going to eat it. They’re thinking, "Where is Kṛṣṇa?" This is not me; where is Kṛṣṇa? I want to meet Kṛṣṇa. So, what to do? All the pots are full.

Do you want to know what happened? Okay, what happened was that again, the *Dhāma* manifested a wonderful pastime—*līlā-nanda-kī*. The *Dhāma* manifested a soft breeze to carry the aroma of the Gopīs' cooking all over Vṛndāvana in order to attract Kṛṣṇa to come there and eat the food. Sometimes I’m in my room near the kitchen and I’m hungry, and I can smell the *prasādam*—they’re bringing it to you in the whatever. So the *Dhāma* again manifested the aroma of the cooking and spread it all over Vṛndāvana, just hoping Kṛṣṇa would be there somewhere. "Hmm, yum, yum, yum."

Now, by Balarāma’s arrangement, at that time Kṛṣṇa was grazing cows on the far side of Govardhana Hill with His friends, and He was discussing with Madhumangala, the funny Brāhmaṇa boy, where they would go the next day. Madhumangala grabbed Kṛṣṇa’s arm and said, "Kṛṣṇa, do you smell what I smell? Do you smell that heavenly aroma? That aroma has the signature only one person in our land could be responsible for. Do you smell it?" So of course, Kṛṣṇa smelled the breeze because that was the purpose of the pastime, and He said to him, "I smell the aroma, and what you say is true. Only one person can cook like this, and that is My Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. But how could She, Rādhā and Her friends, be cooking in the forest? They cook at home; they don’t cook in the forests." Madhumangala said, "Kṛṣṇa, I don’t know, but let’s follow this saintly breeze in hopes it will satisfy the yearning of our tongues and fill the emptiness of our bellies."

The Gopīs were delighted in their hearts to see them, but externally they showed indifference: "Oh, who are these two boys who have arrived?" Your heart is super happy, but, "Who are you guys?"

Covering her mouth, you know, her face, so they couldn’t see her, she smiled and said, "Here we are preparing a feast for the Sun God, but before we can even make the offering, these two arrive with their plates in hand." But Kṛṣṇa—somehow they convinced the girls to invite them for lunch, which eventually everyone enjoyed immensely. So, the question comes up: why did the Gopīs, who had such a strong desire to actually cook for Kṛṣṇa, speak in such a contrary way when Kṛṣṇa finally arrived? Emotions give a very nice answer: that shyness keeps the Gopīs from showing their love, which means to hide. The Gopīs, because of social customs, have to hide their love for Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the Gopīs very often express themselves through indirect means while hiding their true intent. Instead of running to Kṛṣṇa, they just glance at Him, and He glances back; that’s enough. They have to be a little cautious. So when Kṛṣṇa came, they were a little shy, but they couldn’t wait to serve Him *prasādam*.

It took place in Vṛndāvana, and it is said that one who visits this part of the Vṛndāvana forest can still smell the aroma of the Gopīs' cooking. I think, but I’m not sure, when I was there I smelled the aroma. Maybe it was just my mind, but someday when my senses are purified by the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I will go there with all of you, and we will smell this wonderful aroma of the Gopīs' cooking that attracted Kṛṣṇa to come. Who wants to go with me?

So, we can finish with the beautiful verse by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who mentions such aromas in his *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, Text 98:

"Filled with many large lakes, hills, and rivers, with many desire-trees and desire-creepers, and with many flowers invaded by a great army of bumblebees and intoxicated by sweet aromas, the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana are splendidly beautiful. I bow down to offer my respects at every moment to those 12 forests, which are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa."""