My friend, welcome to Bharatpur. Some of our ISKCON devotees may be aware of Bharatpur. It's a town that you cross through on the way from Vrindavan into Jaipur, but it is actually more than that. It is, in and of itself, a holy place because there are many beautiful temples here dedicated to Radha and Krishna.

Also, a very big temple, beautiful temple, dedicated to Ganga Devi. It's about an hour and a half drive from Vrindavan proper, which may be one reason not many devotees come here. About the same distance if you're going out to Kamavan.

It's just on the frontier of Braja Mandala. A very important town. This town was established by Suraj Mal Maharaja Mal, who was a king amongst the Jats. The Jats were a group of people, mainly they were known as farmers several hundred years ago, but when foreign invasions came into India, they rose up to protect their people and they developed, you could say, a martial class.

And one of the most famous kings of the Jats, Suraj Mal, he built this town of Bharatpur somewhere around 1773. And one interesting fact about this town is that it was never conquered, either by the Mughals, who were part of that foreign invasion, or by the British, who later on ruled India, because he was such a powerful Kshatriya.

The word Kshatriya means one who protects from hurt. So he was a very good administrator, a great warrior. Suraj Mal, he protected the people of his kingdom. Here, no one could conquer him. He was an expert fighter himself. He was the kind of ruler who led the charge onto the battlefield.

He wouldn't stay back home and send the troops out. He actually went out and encouraged his troops to fight. But historically, at least for Gaudiya Vaishnavas, more important is that he was a great devotee of Krishna.

He had his profession. You could say he was a government man, he was a king, but more than that, much more than that, he was a great devotee of Krishna, and that's what inspired him most.

Therefore, we see here in Bharatpur, unknown to many as Gaudiya Vaishnavas, actually many temples are there for Krishna.

The main temple is Radha Banke Bihari, very beautiful deity. And I think like in Jaipur, many people here in Bharatpur, their Vaishnava devotion, obviously they come to the temple in the morning to pray to the Lord for blessings. They go to work, they come home in the evening.

Before they go home in the evening, they stop by the temple, and they, they feast their eyes on the beautiful divine form of Radha and Krishna.

He established many temples, Madan Mohan and other temples as well. So because he himself was so Krishna conscious and he ruled in such a way as to inspire his people to become Krishna conscious, that tradition carries on.

And he's famous for building two monuments. Most, many political leaders, they build monuments to themselves or some political history of the country. But Suraj Mal Maharaja Mal, he built the beautiful dwellings, the palatial buildings we see at Lohagarh. Lohagarh, over at the foot of Grover Hill.

It's a beautiful, almost like a palace there, beautiful dwellings. He built those in honor of one of Krishna's pastimes out there.

And he also built the palace that killed Kesi. When we do Vrindavan parikrama, we're walking around Vrindavan parikrama, we come to the Yamuna River, and then we walk on these steps that go down to the Yamuna. On the right-hand side, there's a big, beautiful palace.

Unfortunately, we can't go into it anymore, but it's a palatial building. And he built that in honor of the pastimes of Krishna killing the Kesi demon.

The Kesi demon was a special demon. Many demons came, Krishna sent many demons to Vrindavan every day to kill Krishna.

But the Shastra says that by the time Aristasura was killed by Krishna, Kamsa said, "That's it.

I don't have any more demons." He said, "I'm just going to keep one demon in reserve. Wait a little while and send him to Vrindavan and try to kill Krishna." So he waited for one year.

And during that time, there was no opposition. So Krishna was enjoying with his cowherd boyfriends, and to go.

Rupa Goswami says, Krishna was thinking, "This is just like Goloka." Because in Goloka Vrindavan, there are no demons.

Only here in the material world. But eventually, Kamsa sent Kesi, the horse demon. And Krishna killed him.

It was a very wonderful pastime. The Kesi demon actually got liberation. He merged into the form of the Lord. Such a kind, so that beautiful pastime, which was recited by the saints and the sages, whether in Vrindavan, over and over again, to honor that pastime, this great king built that beautiful monument, that beautiful palace there in Kesi Ghat.

So these are two very special things that we can still take advantage of. And as pilgrims, we can come to Bharatpur. I know it's not on the way for most of our pilgrims during Kartik and Vrindavan, but I would encourage devotees, when you come to Madhavan's, this is also part of Vrindavan.

It's as much as Vrindavan and as any other place within this Braja Mandala. Very nice. Come see the beautiful palaces here. There's a museum. There are different temples of Radha and Krishna.

And it very much reminds me of Vrindavan in the early 1970s, when things were a little bit more simple and not so congested and not so developed, kind of like Vrindavan in the '70s. And the mood of the people here is very wonderful.

We feel very, we're quote-unquote foreigners, but we feel like this is our home. That people are welcoming us, they're darling, darling us, they're giving us prasadam, they're welcoming us. We're just about to begin a huge Hari Nama through the city.

The city officials are so happy that the foreigners have come here chanting Hari Krishna with a police escort, and for official permission, going Hari Nama anywhere and everywhere within the city, contributing to the auspiciousness of this wonderful town of Bharatpur.

How to Krishna?

For qualified key.