Hare Krishna, everyone.

A warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Thank you for being with us. Bhaktivedanta. So, in our last two lectures, we touched on the pastimes of two of Vṛndāvana's very famous personalities, Lalitā-sakī and Viśākhā-sakī, who of course are part of the, uh, larger group of sakhīs, including, uh, Campakal-latā, Dhṛḍ-latā, Citrā, Tuṅgāvidyā, and Sudevī.

They are known as the Aṣṭa-sakīs. And these sakhīs are, um, really, they're, uh, direct expansions of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī Herself. She expands Herself to enhance the amount of pleasure She gives to Her beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa. And we've already discussed most of these eight sakhīs in our lecture series during the year, but naturally, as one reads more and more and more, we come across new information.

So, I thought today I would share with you a very beautiful pastime of Citrā-sakī, Citrā-sakī, which I came across in my work at the Vṛndāvana Research Institute.

But before that, a brief reminder of who is Citrā-sakī. We discussed last year that she's actually one of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's closest friends. She lives in the village of Chicholi near Tāvarśanā. Her complexion is golden with a soft saffron glow, and her clothes are the color of crystal.

She's a, a month younger than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and she's described as the most mild-mannered amongst all of the eight sakhīs. It's also described that she's very expert in astrology and botanical sciences. She knows many languages, and she's expert in the art of composing riddles and speaking in double meanings.

For example, uh, once when Kṛṣṇa and the Gopis were observing the natural beauty of Vṛndāvana's forests, Citrā-sakī pointed to a swarm of bees.

They were flying around a Bandhujīva flower. A Bandhujīva, I had to look that up, that's a moon flower, a moon flower. So, all these bees were, you know, a swarm of bees were flying around this flower. So, Citrā-sakī pointed to it and she said, "Quote: These bees have the same luster as Kṛṣṇa, they sing on the fifth note like His flute, and they collect honey from only one of many flowers, just as Kṛṣṇa favors the love of only one of many Gopis." Śrī Rādhā, there's a double meaning.

One time Kṛṣṇa asked Śrī Rādhā, quote, "My dear Rādhā, who is expert in making ornaments and pictures, is very mild, does not tolerate pride, and gives us joy?" So, Rādhā answered immediately, "Ah, that is Citrā-sakī." So then Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they cast loving glances towards Citrā-sakī, who, um, true to her character, she shyly lowered her head without saying a word.

Now, um, Citrā is very famous for her artistic skills. She likes to use natural pigments to paint, um, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes on silk, and sometimes she draws beautiful designs on His, uh, cloud-like body. It is written she's most famous for painting portraits that look as if the person is present in the painting.

And in addition to being a gifted artist, Citrā-sakī is also a very skilled cook, who, and this is really interesting, can understand the taste of foods merely by glancing at them. Who can understand the taste of foods merely by glancing at them?

And like all the Gopis, she's, uh, an expert musician. Her favorite instrument is the vīṇā, which, we know in, in the West, we call that the lute, actually, but she can also play music by striking pots filled with different amounts of water.

And sometimes she recites mantras in perfect rhythm with Kṛṣṇa's dancing. And although, Citrā-sakī is very mild-mannered, as we mentioned, sometimes she becomes very annoyed with Kṛṣṇa. On one occasion, she said to Rādhārāṇī, quite strong words, she said to Śrī Rādhā, "My dear Rādhā, you cast loving glances at Kṛṣṇa and you glorify Him, but give up this politeness, dear girl, and show your true feelings.

Show Him your anger, Rādhā." So, it may seem out of character for a loving servant of Rādhārāṇī to speak so harshly, but the ācāryas say that even qualities like lust or anger or greed or pride, or in this case, harshness in the Gopis, these qualities are actually worshipable by us.

They are worshipable. How could that be?

Well, um, all these dealings, these words, and different activities between the Gopis and Kṛṣṇa, etc., ultimately they just bring forth more loving sentiments. It's on the transcendental platform. And Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, he explains this quite clearly in a verse.

He, he writes a verse at the beginning of his commentary on Dhana-keli-kaumudī, a very beautiful verse, really interesting. He says, "I worship the lust, greed, deceit, pride, and falsities of Rādhā and Madhava, who have lost all sense of worldly religiosity while displaying their loving quarrels in the pastime of exacting doṇa, or tax." Unquote.

So, that's clear. So, um, now for the pastime. The pastime we recently discovered, this pastime of, uh, Citrā-sakī in the institute, in a, in a book written in Bhaṣā language, the local language here in Vṛndāvana, Rājabhaṣā, and it's called Snehā-līlā.

Snehā-līlā. It means pastimes of affection by one well-known, uh, Vaiṣṇava poet, Rasa Karadāsa. Now, the Sanskrit term for affection is sneha, but in Rājabhaṣā, we say "sneha." So, he wrote it in Rājabhaṣā. So, Pastimes of Affection by Rasa Karadāsa.

And therein it's described that once upon a time, to quote Prabhupāda, actually in several instances in this book, once upon a time, Kṛṣṇa asked His mother, "Mother, please tell me, who do you love the most?" So, Yaśodā replied, "Of course, you, my beloved son." Then Kṛṣṇa asked, "And Mother, how much do you love me?" And Yaśodā replied, "There's no limit, my beloved son." So then Kṛṣṇa said, "Then, Mother, may I ask you for something?" So, Mother Yaśodā said, "Yes, of course, my beloved." So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Quote: My dear Mother, my friend Śrīdhām cries when he goes home without me.

He feels so much separation from me, so much separation. He cannot even sleep the whole night. So, I would like to give him a drawing or a painting of myself which will comfort him when we are apart." Unquote. So, Mother Yaśodā, she replied, "All right, my son.

Let me find someone to paint, um, to make a painting of you." So, a short while later, Mother Yaśodā met Sudevī-sakī, who told her that Citrā-sakī, our heroine today, once received a boon from the Goddess Sarasvatī, who is the Goddess of art and learning, or wisdom.

And this boon that she received from Sarasvatī enabled her to make beautiful paintings with anyone in creation within just a few minutes. So, Mother was thinking, I found the person. So, Mother Yaśodā called for Citrā-sakī to come to Nanda-grāma.

And when she arrived, uh, Mother Yaśodā greeted her and introduced her to her Lālā, to her, to her son Kṛṣṇa, saying to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, come. Citrā-sakī has come to do a painting of you, so stand up straight so she can see how to compose her work." But Kṛṣṇa had a little cheeky smile.

He said, "Mother, you know, I prefer to stand in a three-fold bending form. I don't want to stand straight. I prefer to stand in tri-bhaṅga-sundar, this beautiful three-fold bending form." And taking that stance, Kṛṣṇa stood before Citrā-sakī with the beautiful flute to His lips and a peacock feather in His hair.

Now, Citrā-sakī was mesmerized by this, I guess you could say, darśana of Kṛṣṇa, and she just stood staring at Him for the longest time. It's described, even without blinking. And then she turned to Mother Yaśodā and she said, "I will try my best to do this painting." So, that evening, Citrā-sakī sat at her home and began her painting of Kṛṣṇa.

And remembering His beautiful three-fold bending form, His unique features, His enchanting smile, her painting began to take shape. In fact, a host of demigods and demigoddesses hovered above her painting easel, transfixed by the Lord of all creation, who, it appeared to be, He was manifesting on the canvas.

But at one point, Citrā-sakī, she called out in frustration, "I am at a loss to understand the true color of Kṛṣṇa's body and complexion. I am at a loss to understand the true color of Kṛṣṇa's body and complexion." So, she put her paintbrush down and in desperation, she prayed to Goddess Sarasvatī for help, because Sarasvatī had helped her before.

So, she's in a crisis here. She doesn't, what is the true color of Kṛṣṇa's body, His complexion?

So, um, devotees of the Lord may pray to demigods for boons to improve their service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. That's allowed. Like, for example, the Gopis, they prayed to Kātyāyanī, "Kātyāyanī mahāyogini, Adhīśvara nandagopa-sutaṁ devi, O great potency of the Lord, O possessor of great mystic power and mighty controller of all, please make the son of Nanda Mahārāja my husband." That's such a beautiful prayer, so famous.

And then, um, the other day, I was reading Chaitanya Bhāgavata. So, in Chaitanya Bhāgavata, chapter nine, we hear Lord Caitanya order Kolavecha Śrīdhara to offer Him some prayers. Mahaprabhu said, "You offered me some prayers, but Kolavecha, you fed me." And "I have no ability to offer any prayers." Then the author of Vṛndāvana Dāsa Ṭhākura, he writes, "Prabhupāda proves by the order of the Lord, Sarasvatī, the mother of the universe, appeared on Śrīdhara's tongue, and Śrīdhara began to offer prayers." By the order of the Lord, Sarasvatī, the mother of the universe, appeared on Śrīdhara's tongue, and he began to offer prayers.

So, when Citrā-sakī put down her brush and prayed to the Goddess Sarasvatī to help her finish her painting of Kṛṣṇa, Sarasvatī immediately appeared, and she asked Citrā-sakī, "What is the matter, my daughter?" So, Citrā-sakī said, "My dear Sarasvatī, please give me the boon that, um, I, I can paint the, you have given me the boon that I can paint anyone's picture within a few minutes, but I have failed in painting Kṛṣṇa's portrait because I am unable to understand the exact color of His complexion.

You've given me a nice boon, yes, but in this case, I failed in painting Kṛṣṇa's portrait because I, I don't, I can't understand, I can't realize what's the exact color of His body, of His complexion." So, Sarasvatī smiled and she said, "Chitrā, even I, the Goddess of art and learning, have difficulty in duplicating the color of Kṛṣṇa's body because His complexion is simply mystical.

Even if one mixes each and every color in the creation in an infinite variety of ways, one cannot duplicate the exact color of Kṛṣṇa's transcendental form. I think to understand the true color of Kṛṣṇa, you have to go to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the queen of all wisdom and art.

She will bless you. Only then can you finish your work for Mother Yaśodā." So, Citrā-sakī went to see Her queen, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, to explain her dilemma. And as she entered the kuñja where Rādhārāṇī was sitting surrounded by Her effulgent maidservants, Citrā-sakī came forward and explained her problem.

At that point, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī smiled and said, "Quote: My beloved Citrā-sakī, you have all my blessings. Now, please look deep into my eyes. Now, please look deep into my eyes." So, when Citrā-sakī looked into Śrī Rādhā's eyes, she saw the most beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa smiling while standing in a mango tree grove.

Citrā-sakī was amazed to see this form of Kṛṣṇa, and while carefully meditating on Him in the eyes of Śrī Rādhā, she suddenly realized the true color and complexion of Kṛṣṇa. She was ecstatic, thinking, "Now I can complete my service to Mother Yaśodā." And as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī slowly closed Her eyes, Sudevī-sakī spoke up.

She said, "It's very significant. Quote: Dearest Citrā-sakī, the secret to your success in realizing the true color of Kṛṣṇa's body is solely by the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. No one can actually understand Kṛṣṇa without the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

That is the lesson to be learned today." So true. So then Citrā-sakī went back to her home in Chicholi and she completed her painting with the proper colors of Kṛṣṇa's body as revealed through the eyes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And after making some finishing touches on the painting, she went to, uh, back to Nanda-grāma, presented the painting to Mother Yaśodā, who upon seeing it, started crying in great happiness.

Then Mother Yaśodā called Kṛṣṇa, and she said, "My darling son, please come quickly to see what Citrā-sakī has brought for you." So Kṛṣṇa came, and He climbed up on the lap of Mother Yaśodā, and she showed Him the painting of, of Him.

And He said something really interesting. He said, "Mother, why are you showing me a mirror?" Remember the expertise of Citrā-sakī, that she could paint in such a way that it appeared that person was actually present in the painting.

Kṛṣṇa said, "Why are you showing me a mirror?" So, Mother Yaśodā said, "Lālā, this is not a mirror.

This is a painting of you. It is so perfectly done that we can even see the true color of your beautiful form, so dear to all of us. You can now give this painting to your friend Śrīdhām, so that he will never feel any separation from you." And then Yaśodā turned to Citrā-sakī and said, "Dearest Citrā-sakī, how can I pay you for this beautiful painting?" So, Citrā-sakī replied, "Just with your blessings, elder Yashoda.

Just with your blessings, elder Yashoda." So, Yaśodā said, "Yes, of course, but ask for something, whatever you desire." So, Citrā-sakī, she smiled and said with a touch of humor, "Well, you can give me your son." But those words, Mother Yaśodā, just hearing those words, she was like in shock.

And she said, "Quote: I can give up everything for Kṛṣṇa, but I cannot give Kṛṣṇa away for anything." Profound. "I can give up everything for Kṛṣṇa, but I cannot give Kṛṣṇa away for anything." And even Kṛṣṇa was shaken. He spoke up also.

He said, "And I, and I cannot live without my Mother. We are inseparable like water and wetness, or the sun and its warmth. And I cannot live without my Mother. We are inseparable like water and wetness, or the sun and its warmth." So, then turning to, uh, Citrā-sakī, Kṛṣṇa said, "But I promise you, my dear Citrā-sakī, that from now on, every day as I pass through your village, I will visit your home and give you my darśana." And Citrā-sakī, of course, she was most pleased with this promise of Kṛṣṇa.

Daisy Rādhā, today, we see the Aṣṭa-sakīs of Vṛndāvana.

That's a sweet pastime. And there's so many, actually, there's unlimited. So, in conclusion today, I would like to share a portion of, um, Śrīla Prabhupāda's lecture on Rādhāṣṭamī, September 5th, 1973, in London.

It's very appropriate to understanding how we need to approach Rādhārāṇī in order to get Kṛṣṇa's mercy, to be His servants. So, Prabhupāda, he, he said in the lecture, "Quote: First, you have to worship Rādhārāṇī.

Therefore, in Vṛndāvana, you will see all devotees, they will address one another, one another, 'Jaya Rādhā!' Anyone who comes before Rādhārāṇī to serve Kṛṣṇa, she becomes very pleased.

Oh, here is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and she immediately recommends Kṛṣṇa, 'Here is a devotee. He's better than me.' So, Kṛṣṇa is not independent. Kṛṣṇa is Rādhārāṇī's property. So, you have to approach Kṛṣṇa through Rādhārāṇī." All right. Kṛṣṇa. Wow.

So, uh, yeah, a very jewel, a jewel of a pastime. And of course, we have a treasure chest of pastimes, uh, revealed to us by great devotees of the Lord. And well, I'll continue going through the treasure chest and I'll be back in a couple of days with, um, some more nectar.

Thank you so much. Śrī Śrī Rādhā, today.