"*00148*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back again to our continued series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. Happy to be with you. *Viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale*... So today, we will continue with our little series on Govardhana Hill. Actually, it's not so little anymore; we've been giving quite a few lectures on Girirāja. But we'll discuss two very special pastimes: one which happened in preparation for worshipping Govardhana Hill and one that happened just after Kṛṣṇa put Govardhana back down on the ground. Both are very similar pastimes actually, and sometimes the two narrations are combined into one by the storyteller or the pastime-teller. But the order of events surrounding these pastimes shows that they are actually two separate pastimes.

What are these two similar but distinctly different *līlās*? Well, they are two of the most popular *līlās* amongst *vraja-vāsīs*, both past and present, and they are the famous Pearl Pastimes. The first Pearl Pastime took place as the *vraja-vāsīs* were preparing to worship Govardhana Hill, and that pastime is described in detail by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his famous work, *Mukta-caritra*. The second Pearl Pastime took place soon after Kṛṣṇa put the Govardhana Hill down, and it’s described in *Garga-saṁhitā*, Canto Three, chapters five and six. This pastime took place at Muktākuṇḍa near Nandagrāma.

We will begin by describing that pastime, the one in *Garga-saṁhitā*. Therein, it is stated that one day King Vṛṣabhānu came up with this desire to marry his daughter, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, to Kṛṣṇa, and he decided to send a proposal along with a gift to Nanda Mahārāja and Mother Yaśodā in Nandagrāma. Now, King Vṛṣabhānu was very wealthy, so he could afford to send a nice gift. He was very wealthy, and naturally so, because his daughter, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—well, she's the original goddess of fortune. We often think of Lakṣmī-devī as the goddess of fortune, and she is, but actually she is an expansion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the original goddess of fortune. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Kṛṣṇa Book*, Chapter 47, and I quote: "According to expert opinion, Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, is a subordinate expansion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. As Kṛṣṇa has numerous expansions of Viṣṇu-mūrtis, so His pleasure potency, Rādhikā, also has innumerable expansions of goddesses of fortune."

A similar thing is stated in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā 4.74:
*kṛṣṇa-kāntā-gaṇa dekhi nānā-prakāra
eka lakṣmī-gaṇa, pura-mahiṣī-gaṇa āra*
The beloved consorts of Lord Kṛṣṇa are of three kinds: the goddesses of fortune, the queens, and the milkmaids of Vraja, who are the foremost of all these consorts—all proceed from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So Rādhikā is often referred to as *Sarva-lakṣmī*, meaning the original Lakṣmī. So, that's one reason that King Vṛṣabhānu was extremely wealthy. Actually, cowherd men said that to him one time. It's described in *Garga-saṁhitā*, they said to King Vṛṣabhānu, "Your daughter must be the goddess of fortune. What other explanation could there be for your unlimited wealth and heavenly opulence? You are the lord of unlimited numbers of intoxicated elephants, restless horses, golden chariots, and beautiful palanquins. You possess millions of cows, each beautifully decorated with bejeweled ornaments, embroidered blankets, and gold-plated horns, and your pleasure palaces, lit by jewel lamps and decorated with silk-lace curtains, shame even King Kaṁsa's capital."

With his desire that his daughter marry Kṛṣṇa, King Vṛṣabhānu went to his treasury, and he took necklace after necklace of giant pearls. Each pearl was equal in value to a king's crown. Necklace after necklace of giant pearls, and he placed them all in jeweled containers. Then he instructed one of his ministers, accompanied by a group of soldiers, to carry this priceless treasure to Nanda Mahārāja in Nandagrāma, along with the proposal for Rādhārāṇī's marriage to Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa getting married—I think it's important to note here that although this pastime conveys the idea that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa might marry, later Yogamāyā Pourṇamāsī, in the pastime, shall convince King Vṛṣabhānu that Rādhārāṇī should be given to another person. So the proposed wedding of Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa never took place. It is described thus: the mood of unwedded love, *parakīya-bhāva*, between Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā remained intact in Vṛndāvana. This is a predominating mood in Vṛndāvana—that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are not married, so they have to meet secretly, and different arrangements are made for their meetings. Because of the long separation, they're feeling so much intense love for each other. So *parakīya-bhāva* reigns supreme in Vṛndāvana. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa don't marry. Of course, there's an unofficial marriage ceremony of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa performed by Lord Brahmā—I think better than "official" is to say it was just for fun, like young children sometimes play house, but they never marry. But this is a nice *līlā* from *Garga-saṁhitā*.

Sometime later, King Vṛṣabhānu's minister entered the assembly hall of Nanda Mahārāja, where he bowed down before the king and presented the marriage proposal along with these precious gifts. The minister said—very officially now—"His daughter, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is more splendid than the moon and whose eyes are like new lotus flowers, is of marital age. King Vṛṣabhānu has given thought to who should be her husband. His conclusion, dear Nanda Bābā, is that your son, who is as charming as Cupid himself and whose powerful arm lifted Govardhana Hill, is the most qualified boy in the community of cowherds. O King, please accept this proposal of King Vṛṣabhānu, along with this gift of pearls, and act according to our respected tradition."

When Nanda Mahārāja examined the gifts, he was struck with wonder at their great value, and immediately he had his servants take them to a room for safe-keeping. Then he turned to Mother Yaśodā and said, "If we do not reciprocate with a suitable gift, we will be embarrassed before everyone, and our son will lose a most qualified bride. What should we do?" The idea being that he should reciprocate with this proposal not only by saying yes, but with a suitable gift. This is etiquette. Now, although Nanda Mahārāja and King Vṛṣabhānu were really good friends, Nanda Mahārāja was not anywhere near as wealthy as King Vṛṣabhānu. But fortunately, little Kṛṣṇa overheard the discussion between Nanda and Yaśodā. It's described that He decided to save them from any ridicule that might come from someone who said, "Well, you didn't give an equal gift back to your friend." So Kṛṣṇa wanted to save His parents from any ridicule.

Kṛṣṇa very carefully snuck into the room where the pearls were being kept and took 100 pearl necklaces from the box that King Vṛṣabhānu had sent. Then Kṛṣṇa left the palace and went outside into what is described as the palace gardens, without anyone seeing Him. After carefully disassembling the valuable necklaces, He planted each and every pearl in the ground, one by one, just as a farmer would sow seeds. It's very close to a small lake called Muktākuṇḍa. For a few days, He watered the pearls. After a few days, Nanda Mahārāja discovered the missing pearl necklaces that King Vṛṣabhānu had sent, and he began to wonder who in his household could have possibly taken them. So he had a little talk with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; he said, "Boys, do you know anything about this theft?" When questioned, Kṛṣṇa smiled and said, "Dear Father, in the way that farmers sow seeds, I have planted some pearls in the field a few days ago."

Hearing this, Nanda Mahārāja chastised his son: "You took those valuable pearls and what did you do? You planted them and you're watering them? What can come from that? Take me to where they are." So Kṛṣṇa took his father there, near Muktākuṇḍa. When they arrived at the site, Nanda Mahārāja was stunned. He saw hundreds of beautiful, tall, green-leaved pearl trees, each having hundreds of bunches of pearls. Everywhere he looked, he saw millions of pearls all shining like stars in the sky. Most significantly, these pearls were even bigger and more beautiful than the ones his friend King Vṛṣabhānu had sent. With tears in his eyes, Nanda Mahārāja looked at his son and embraced Him to his chest, knowing that he had something to reciprocate in love with his friend King Vṛṣabhānu. Nanda Mahārāja sent for his men to collect cartloads of pearls, even more than he had received from Vṛṣabhānu, and he presented these treasures to King Vṛṣabhānu's chief minister along with the letter accepting King Vṛṣabhānu's marriage proposal: "Yes, your daughter and my son will get married." In this way, it's described that Kṛṣṇa saved the dignity of His father and, what's more, provided a very sweet episode and insight into *vātsalya-rasa*. So, although the marriage didn't take place, we are relishing here something very extraordinary about *vātsalya-rasa*—meaning that when one has Kṛṣṇa as his son, there's a very sweet, loving, transcendental exchange.

It's said that if one gives a single pearl in charity at this place, Muktākuṇḍa, where Kṛṣṇa grew these pearls, one will receive the same benefit that comes from distributing 100,000 pearls at some other place. That's the first Pearl Pastime.

Now, as I mentioned, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's account of the other Pearl Pastime, which may be perhaps more well-known, is described in his *Mukta-caritra*. Now, this *Mukta-caritra* is a very important, very popular scripture in Vṛndāvana, and it's mentioned in another scripture called *Bhakti-ratnākara*. It's glorified there: "Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who was the friend of both Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, has written three books: *Stavamālā* (which is now called *Stava-vallī*), *Śrī Dāna-carita* (which is known as *Dāna-keli-cintāmaṇi*), and *Mukta-caritra*. One hears these sweet books, even the greatest suffering goes far away." We hear that again and again, that people are suffering and there are so many remedial measures for suffering which are all temporary, but even the greatest suffering goes away when you hear this *harī-kṛṣṇa-kathā*, because this *kṛṣṇa-kathā* purifies one of all sinful reactions, does away with material desires, awakens *kṛṣṇa-prema*, and that's our visa back to the spiritual world where there's no suffering. So let us continue to hear again and again these wonderful *līlās*.

In Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's *Mukta-caritra*, the story begins when the Gopīs were stringing not flower garlands, but they were stringing pearl necklaces for worshipping their cows as part of the Govardhana Pūjā celebrations—meaning they were going to worship Govardhana Hill; we are going back that far. They're going to worship Girirāja, and here are these young Vraja Gopīs; they're stringing pearl necklaces near Rādhā-kuṇḍa, near another little lake called Māli-hāra-kuṇḍa—very famous because that's what they did there. There was one parrot watching; this parrot's name was Vicakṣaṇa. The parrots, they not only deliver messages between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys and so forth and so on, but they also report what's happening in Vṛndāvana. So this parrot, he's looking, and he's very curious; these girls are stringing pearls. So he quickly flew to where Kṛṣṇa was. Kṛṣṇa was at that time herding His cows near Govardhana Hill. So Vicakṣaṇa came and whispered, "You know, this is an amazing pastime taking place; the Vraja Gopīs are stringing pearls." So Kṛṣṇa got very curious. He made an excuse to the boys that He was going to go find a lost calf or something, and He went to this lake near Rādhā-kuṇḍa and hid behind some trees to observe the Gopīs as they strung one pearl necklace after another. He's watching and watching, and finally He clears His throat, makes His presence known: "Here I am," and He steps out from the forest. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī writes that the Gopīs were not caught by surprise because their spies had already informed them that Kṛṣṇa was there. So, pretending to be unmoved by His presence, they continued their work.

Seeing this, Kṛṣṇa felt a little slighted that nobody noticed Him; He felt their indifference. He was especially upset because Rādhārāṇī refused to look in His direction. But He retained His composure, and He came and sat down amongst the girls. He's kind of sitting there, no one's taking notice of Him, and He speaks up: "Friends, could you spare a few pearls so that I can decorate my two favorite cows, Haṁsī and Hariṇī?" Those are Kṛṣṇa's two favorite cows; if you are going to start a *gośālā* sometime and you have some new cows, call the first two Haṁsī and Hariṇī. But even then, the girls ignored Him. Although He asked them several times, the only thing He received was a little teasing from the Gopīs, and one tiny broken pearl from Lalitā-devī. After that humiliating gesture, that was the final straw for Kṛṣṇa. He stood up suddenly, His face red with anger, and He said, "Girls, you are the owners of a vast treasure house of pearls, but you couldn't find it in your hearts to grant me, your most dear one, the loan of a few pearls. If that's your attitude, then don't call me a miser. If fate somehow turns the tables on you and you end up begging me for pearls, don't doubt it—your stingy ways will soon lead you into poverty and ruin."

What do the Gopīs do? They just burst out laughing, everyone except Lalitā. One ācārya comments that she recognized Kṛṣṇa's words as prophetic and "expected a pastime that would soon enrich the mellows of Vraja." At that point, Kṛṣṇa was frustrated and He left. On the way back to Nandagrāma, He came up with this plan that "would invoke His creative potencies and solicit the cooperation of Vṛndāvana's mystic soil." What is Vṛndāvana's mystic soil? We heard a little bit about that in the previous pearl pastime. It is *raja-reṇu*—it's one of the five personalities who grant entrance and residence into Śrī Vṛndāvana. It's *cintāmaṇi*.

So when Kṛṣṇa arrived at Nandagrāma, He snuck into His father's treasury and He took all the pearls that He could find there, including two very special pearl necklaces that His father and mother were wearing most days. Then He came out of the palace, walked down Nandīśvara Hill, and He sowed those pearls in the earth—rather, He planted those pearls in the earth. In the days that followed, He tended His pearl field, like we heard in the other pastime, engaging His friends in watering, weeding, and policing His garden. Not knowing what He was up to, His parents and His friends were very curious: "What are you doing, Kṛṣṇa? We see you every day watering a garden, and what did you plant there, and why are you watering it?" Then one day, beautiful pearls began to sprout on golden vines; it's described that they sagged under the weight of enormous pearl fruit. Seeing His success, Kṛṣṇa called all the Gopīs, whom you know wouldn't have given Him a real pearl before—only a broken pearl. He called them and showed them how successful He was in harvesting all these beautiful pearls. Needless to say, the Gopīs were stunned, and within a few days Nanda Mahārāja's treasury was overflowing with pearls, and Kṛṣṇa was decorating Himself, His friends, the cows, and the buffaloes. Even the monkeys of Vraja were covered with these pearls.

So the plot thickens, because the Gopīs, seeing this, were thinking, "Wow, we had a few pearls we were making necklaces with, but Kṛṣṇa has unlimited pearls now." So they decided to do the same thing. All the Gopīs went to their own family treasuries, took all the wealth there—all the pearls—took them outside, and planted them in their own gardens. They began watering them with milk and water, etc. It was very mystical. Well, like Kṛṣṇa's field of pearls, in a few days some plants started to grow. They were very enthusiastic: "Oh, we're gonna have so many pearls!" But as soon as those plants grew and started to produce something, they turned out to be thorn bushes. Instead of pearls, they yielded burrs—burrs are like nothing very valuable. At the end of the stems of the plants or trees were burrs, and the Gopīs were devastated. It's described that the entire wealth of their families had been reduced to thorns and burrs. Then, out of fear of their husbands and in-laws, they swallowed their pride and did what for them would be unthinkable: they decided, "Well, maybe we're going to have to go ask for some pearls from Kṛṣṇa, or a lot of pearls from Kṛṣṇa, to replenish our family's treasuries."

Now, Kṛṣṇa would sit at the entrance of His beautiful pearl field every day and make a show of counting and recounting His pearl harvest. So, one day, the Gopīs came, and they were sitting there and saying, "You know, Kṛṣṇa, do you think you could give us some pearls?" Kṛṣṇa said, "You remember when I asked you for a few pearls and you gave me, Lalitā, you gave me one broken pearl? No way." And they were saying, "Come on, Kṛṣṇa, we'll just... okay, we'll buy some, we'll buy some." But Kṛṣṇa, He demanded an impossible price even for a single pearl. The Gopīs didn't get very far; Kṛṣṇa was getting His revenge—that's the idea—and He was enjoying it. So finally, after a whole day of bartering like that, Rādhārāṇī and her friends just got up and they marched off; they didn't get one pearl. But it's described that all the Gopīs, although they had failed to procure pearls from Kṛṣṇa to replenish their family treasuries, they felt greatly enriched nonetheless, having shared such a wonderful pastime with their beloved. So again, finally, Kṛṣṇa foretold He would get His revenge, and He did. But satisfied with His beloved Vraja Gopīs, He sat down before a large basket of the finest pearls that He had grown, and He selected the very best. With the help of His friends, He began making a number of very gorgeous and beautiful pearl necklaces. The first one He made was for Rādhā; the second one He made with His own hands was for Lalitā; the third one was for Viśākhā; then all the boys, everyone, started making them for all the Gopīs.

Then, placing each gift for each particular Gopī in its own specially labeled, ornate box, Kṛṣṇa collected a large basket of unstrung pearls, and entrusting everything to His intimate friends Subala and Madhumaṅgala, He sent them back to that Māli-hāra-kuṇḍa where the Gopīs had originally been stringing the pearls. They were all there; their garlands had all been done—they'd finished all their garlands—and no pearls were left. They were all there blissfully recounting their day-long bartering with Kṛṣṇa. When they saw the cowherd boys come with these gifts, they were very happy. They graciously accepted the gifts and excitedly opened their individual boxes, immersed in the happiness of knowing that each pearl ornament was a reflection of Kṛṣṇa's love for them. That's how it's described: they opened the box, and there was a pearl necklace for each of them. So they were immersed in the happiness of knowing that each pearl ornament was a reflection of Kṛṣṇa's love for them. Then, in return for these gifts, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī told the boys, "Take back this freshly made jasmine garland for my beloved."

After the boys had gone, the Gopīs started laughing at how they had purchased untold wealth for a handful of flowers. Lalitā said, "It seems that we could not agree with Kṛṣṇa on a fair price for the pearls today, but it's clear that He felt sorry for our plight; just see, He has given us much more than we lost." Then Viśākhā interrupted, "Do you think Kṛṣṇa would be satisfied with a flower garland as payment for these treasures? If you think about it, the only real item of comparable value that we possess is our dear friend, Śrī Rādhā." And all the Gopīs laughed. Now that Rādhā—it's described—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she erupted in laughter and she covered her face with her veil and hit Viśākhā with a lotus flower to conceal her blushing cheeks. Anyway, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī says that that night, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa met on the banks of the Yamunā and decorated each other with beautiful pearls. It is said that ever since that time, the water where these pastimes took place has possessed the sweet flavor of those loving exchanges between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Ever since these pastimes there, the water of that lake, Māli-hāra-kuṇḍa, has possessed the sweet flavor of the loving exchanges of the Gopīs and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and the surrounding area is known as the "Place of Pearls." Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī concludes—actually, it's a verse in the beginning, but it summarizes the pastime—in *Mukta-caritra* he writes: "I praise the divine couple, playful Rādhā and Mādhava, who became immersed in the ocean of buying and selling pearls, each displaying transcendental eagerness to defeat the other in this barter." *Śrī Mukta-caritra kī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī kī jaya!*

Sweet nectar! Now, when ācāryas such as Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī share these very rare and special *līlās* with us, their hope is that these pastimes will create *laulya*, or a greed, or a longing in our hearts to one day join those pastimes, because they don't just happen once; they happen continually, over and over and ever fresh in both Gokula and in Goloka Vṛndāvana. They're a constant reminder of what we're meant to achieve in this lifetime or where we want to go. We have to have full faith that these ācāryas are giving us the real deal because they can see—they can see these pastimes. This is how we're meant to see the world; what we see in the world is not the real picture, because Prabhupāda described the material world at best as a perverted reflection.

Now, when something's a reflection of something, it can't compare to the real thing. Like you take the sun, the sun's reflected in the lake; so yes, it's impressive—the sun, it's shiny, it's brilliant, it's bright—but it doesn't compare to the original sun. The reflection, what to speak of a perverted reflection? So this world's a perverted reflection, and so we want to see it as it is, and what's more, we want to see the reality of the spiritual world. For that, we see through the eyes of our ācāryas. But it's said that one sees through his ears, not through his eyes, so by hearing from them we get the real picture of what's going on.

Just as the sun's rays in the sky are extended to the mundane vision, so in the same way the wise and learned devotees always see the supreme abode of Lord Viṣṇu, because as highly praiseworthy and spiritually awake brāhmaṇas are able to see the spiritual world, they are also able to reveal that supreme abode of Lord Viṣṇu. They see it, and they can reveal it (*Ṛg Veda* 1.22.20). By God's grace, there are many such authorized souls today. We heard from Śrīla Prabhupāda, daily we are hearing from Śrīla Prabhupāda, but there are so many souls—thank God there are so many souls, both past and present, whom we can hear from and become enlivened in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. All we need to do is follow them. It's nicely described in the *Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad*, verses 92 and 94. I quote: "If one boldly learns to follow the path of great souls, one can look and see the path splendidly manifest in the footsteps of those great souls who traverse the slopes of Govardhana Hill." Wow, those great souls who traverse the slopes of Govardhana Hill! It's the *vraja-vāsīs*. By performing Govardhana *parikramā* as great souls have done, one will achieve the secret goal of life that these *mahājans* keep carefully locked up in their hearts: love for Kṛṣṇa.

Let us mention these great souls who traverse the slopes of Govardhana Hill. So we're not meant to walk on Govardhana Hill, but what we're talking about is the *vraja-vāsīs*, because we hear how the cowherd boys, they take the cows on Govardhana Hill and they eat the soft grasses there, and Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī and the cowherd boys, they have pastimes in the caves. But that's for those *nitya-siddha* liberated souls. But eventually, we're meant to follow in the footsteps of the *vraja-vāsīs* in order to get back home, back to Godhead. We can hear from them; we can hear from the ācāryas, hear from our spiritual masters how to achieve that exalted goal.

Just yesterday when I was reading, I came across a special personality who very much inspired me in my attempts in *bhakti*. Her name is Śabarī. Some of you may know her, some of you may not have heard of her, but I'd like to close today's talk by briefly sharing her story, so you have another devotee in whose footsteps you can follow, because we need all the help we can get. Śabarī is a very interesting person; she's mentioned in the *Padma Purāṇa*, 6.242, text 267 and 270, and she's mentioned in the *Rāmāyaṇa*, *Araṇyakāṇḍa*, verses 73-74. Such an inspiring pastime, such an inspiring devotee! Her pastimes are amazing, and we can relate to them. Śabarī was the daughter of a hunter who belonged to the Niṣāda tribal community. They maintained themselves by hunting and selling meat, and very early in her life she objected to her father's trade, to this killing of animals. In fact, one day she just stood up and said, "I'm going to be vegetarian," just a little girl! This created an uproar in the house and the whole community: "You can't do different than we do; we're providing meat to the communities." So she was almost ostracized, but she was very young, so they couldn't do it. When she was of marital age, her father married her to a man who unfortunately turned out to be a drunkard and a thief. But all this culminated in her developing a deep sense of renunciation, which led to a desire to take shelter of God.

Eventually, she ran away from home; she renounced the world in general to find a spiritual master, and she journeyed up into the Himalayas at the foot of a mountain called Ṛṣyamūka Mountain. Must be an amazing place. There she met a renowned sage named Matanga, and after observing him and hearing from him for some time, she accepted him as her guru and she served him with so much devotion because she was very determined. Many, many years later, she was actually an old woman, and when Matanga was about to leave his body, she said to him that she wanted to attain the same destination as him in the spiritual world. I think that's the natural desire of every disciple: to follow their spiritual master out of material existence into the spiritual world. So she was saying this to him as he was leaving his body, and he very much appreciated her service in the ashram. During her lifetime, she did everything with so much devotion, and Matanga was a great mystic, so he foretold that by *janma-bhakti*, the Supreme Lord Rāmacandra would in time give her *darśana*. Saying that, he left the world.

So, anticipating her future *darśana* with Lord Rāma because her guru had said it would happen, she really started preparing herself. Every day, Śabarī would go out of the ashram, and with the help of a walking stick because she was very old, she would pick berries for Lord Rāma. She was practicing *bhakti*, devotional service, in practice. So she would practice every day different devotional services and do it with as much devotion as she could. Every day she'd go out and pick berries for Lord Rāma, and she would pluck the fruit—it's interesting—and then she would first taste it to see if it was sweet enough for Rāma. If it was, she put it in her basket, and she would discard any bitter berries. Now, you know, this is interesting because we're taught not to do that. We pick the fruit, we wash it, we offer it to the deity. But what's really critical here, what's really interesting, what's important, is her devotion. In her mind, it was important that Rāma would get the best. So if she didn't know better, she would taste the fruit: "Ah, this is very good, Rāma would love this," let's put it in her basket. Then she'd come back to the ashram and she'd offer the berries to Lord Rāma. The thought never came to her that she shouldn't taste the berries before offering them to the deity. Anyway, she did this for many years, patiently and eagerly anticipating Lord Rāma's arrival. She waited a long time. Actually, the name "Śabarī" is commonly used as a metaphor for an endless wait for God—an endless wait. Śabarī means that someone's waiting a long time for God to appear.

All during this time, Lord Rāmacandra was actually in the forest with Sītā and His brother Lakṣmaṇa during their 14-year exile. But at this point, Sītā had been captured by Rāvaṇa, so Rāma was going everywhere with Lakṣmaṇa and Hanumān and others looking for Sītā. One day, it was announced in this area at the foot of the mountain that Lord Rāma would be passing through their area. So hundreds of ṛṣis and yogīs and mystics came out of their hermitages, their caves, and their ashrams and dwellings; they were all living individually or in small groups, and all of them came together to receive Lord Rāma. When Rāma actually came into that dwelling, the Supreme Personality of Godhead came into their midst, He bypassed all the ṛṣis, the yogīs, and the ascetics, and He went straight for the ashram Śabarī was in, and He entered inside. Amongst themselves, some of the *sādhus* they complained: "The Lord was going to show favor to a person who was born in a low-caste family of hunters, a woman who had abandoned her husband," (because at one point she actually abandoned her husband because he was such a rascal), "and it was rumored that she was tasting food before offering it to the deity."

So, when Rāma entered the ashram, Śabarī was there. She became ecstatic and she said, "My Lord, there were so many exalted yogīs waiting for You for Your *darśana*, but You have come to this unworthy devotee. This clearly shows that You neither see whether a devotee lives in a palace or a humble hut, whether he is erudite or ignorant; neither do You see caste or color. But I did not have anything to offer You other than my heart, my Lord, and the few berries that I collected for You each day. So please accept those that I have collected this morning; may they please You, my Lord." So saying that, Śabarī offered the fruits she had meticulously collected and tasted to Lord Rāma, and Lord Rāma, He happily accepted them. While He was eating them, Lakṣmaṇa spoke up; he expressed concern that Śabarī had already tasted them. He said, "They're unworthy of eating, Rāma." And Rāma said, as He was enjoying the berries, to Lakṣmaṇa, "Lakṣmaṇa, of all the many types of food I have tasted in my life, nothing can equal these berry fruits offered with such devotion. My dear Lakṣmaṇa, taste them, and only then you will know." Then He said to Lakṣmaṇa, "What matters not is the object offered, but the devotion with which it is offered." So there you go.

Then Lord Rāma said that to attain the state of love that Śabarī had for Him, spiritual seekers should accept the path of *nava-vidhā bhakti*. He made this proclamation there at the foot of that mountain. He said if someone wants to attain the state of devotion that Śabarī had for Him, they should follow the path of *nava-vidhā bhakti*. *Nava* means nine. So these are nine practices that Rāma gave for His followers or for anyone on the path of *bhakti*. They are very similar to the nine practices of devotional service that we follow as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas: we follow *śravaṇam, kīrtanam, viṣṇu-smaraṇam, pādasevanam, arcanam, vandanam, dāsyam, sakhyam, ātma-nivedanam*. You'll hear now these nine processes that Lord Rāma recommended:
1. Keep association with love-intoxicated devotees (I love that one).
2. Develop a taste for hearing His pastimes.
3. Render faithful service to one's guru.
4. Be engaged in constant singing of the holy names, which are as numerous as waves on the ocean.
5. Practice *japa*, a repetition of His names on beads of sacred wood.
6. Strictly adhere to the rules and regulations of *śāstra*.
7. Serve Him, Rāma, in the form of His deity.
8. Never criticize those who have dedicated their lives in pursuance of the absolute truth.
9. Surrender wholeheartedly and without personal motive always to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Having said this, He left the ashram; He left that dwelling, that area, in His search for Sītā. When He continued on His way, soon after that, Śabarī left her body and attained *yojana*—one of the many great souls who can inspire us on the path back home, back to the spiritual sky. These and all the subjects we've been discussing for many months now, they're very high and exalted subject matters, but again, we can and we must join those great souls in their *nitya-līlās*, those souls who are taking us on this path. There's no secret how to do so; we just heard some very relevant instructions from Lord Rāma. I would like to close today with an instruction from Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura that reveals to us how we can attain that transcendental abode of Goloka, because really, we cannot attain that goal without the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Lord Nityānanda, and the Pañca-tattva. That we have to understand. To develop *vraja-bhakti*, we need the mercy of Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, and our *ācāryas* are always making this very clear. So I thought it's important that we constantly tie in the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu with our aspirations to become *vraja-vāsīs*. It's essential.

So let us conclude in that mood today, hearing some passages from *Prārthanā* by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. It makes a perfect mix, and I conclude today: "Anyone who has accepted the lotus feet of Śrī Gaurāṅga can understand the true essence of devotional service. If one wants to take part in the *madhurya-līlā* of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as it was distributed by Śrī Gaurāṅga, he must first cleanse his heart by hearing about the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one takes the name of Gaurāṅga, *prema* will arise in his heart; at that time he will say, 'Jaya Balīhāri,' this is super excellent. If one appreciates the merciful pastimes of Śrī Gaurāṅga and feels ecstasy and sometimes cries, this process will soon help him to understand the *nitya-līlā* of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. By realizing the qualities of Lord Gaurāṅga, one will be allowed entrance into the *nitya-līlā* of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa."

We end today and we'll continue again in a few days. Thank you again for this opportunity. I really like describing the pearl pastimes; they're very, very, very sweet and very, very deep. So dear devotees, see you soon with more of Vraja-*līlā*. *Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvanesvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya!* Hare Kṛṣṇa.""