My question is, so our Parikrama party, on our way to the Jarikanda forest in a different part of Bihar than we are now, we've come to, uh, Bodh Gaya. Bodh Gaya is the place where Lord Buddha attained enlightenment when he was a young man.

I believe around 17 years of age, he had some deep realization about the futility of material life. So he came to this, what was previously a forested area, and he sat under a particular tree and attained enlightenment. That tree actually still exists, and his followers have built a huge complex here over many centuries.

Actually, the main temple is 1400 years old. It's an amazing complex, different complex, different stupas. They say that in Buddhism, different shrines and different samadhis of, you know, their saints going back, you know, a thousand years or more. It's a very overwhelming experience here actually.

And, um, there's a particular big function going on now. There are Buddhist monks from all over the world here. We happen to come on an auspicious day for them and for us as well, because we know that, um, from Srimad-Bhagavatam, that Lord Buddha is one of the Dasavataras, or one of the ten incarnations of Krishna.

One of the avatars of Krishna.

Krishna is the avatari, He is the source of all the avatars, and each of the avatars, they come to this world and, us, in their particular way, encourage people in spiritual life.

So Lord Buddha's message, one of his main messages was that of non-violence, ahimsa. Because at that time in the history of the world, he appeared 2500 years ago, people were misusing the Vedic scriptures in the sense that there are some injunctions in the Vedic scriptures for, uh, killing animals and eating them, but for lower class people with the idea that, um, by regulated eating, you'll come to your senses and give it up.

The Sanskrit word for meat is mamsa. Mamsa means "meat you." So, a person who eats meat, the idea is that in, in this lifetime, well, they would actually chant the mantra into the ear of the animal before killing it and then eating it.

And the mantra was included the word mamsa, which means "in this life, I kill you and I will eat you." Mamsa. But in the next life, you will kill me and eat me. So it doesn't make sense. So that regulated, you know, injunctions brought a person to his senses, and they became vegetarian.

But 2500 years ago, the priests and even the Brahmanas were misusing that little injunction in the Vedas to, with a mass slaughter of animals. So, um, Buddha appeared to, to stop that. Animal slaughter. He preached non-violence. And violence is sometimes required.

We know that dharma has to be protected. So there's a class of men, kshatriyas, they protect dharma. But in general, people hope for non-violence, a peaceful life. But that can be achieved when we understand our common identity. Nowadays, especially people want peace, but peace can be achieved when we understand we have a common identity.

And what is that?

That we're all part and parcel of Krishna.

Krishna says in the Bhagavad-gita that He is the seed-giving father of all living entities.

It means every created being, regardless of what body they're in now, was created by Krishna.

So essentially, we all have the same father, and we're all brothers and sisters. And that, that will help us to understand, or how to develop peace, because what, there's a saying, "blood is thicker than water." People love their families, but the greater family of man, the greater family of all created beings, is that we're all sons and daughters of Krishna.

So this is, um, ISKCON's message of peace. Lord Buddha preached non-violence 2,500 years ago. Years ago, the same concept is going on under the direction of our spiritual master, that we can achieve peace by respecting each other, not as these bodies, but as spirit souls, part and parcel of Krishna.

So here we've come to take shelter of Lord Buddha. He's an incarnation of, incarnation of Krishna.

We can embody his renunciation, simplicity in his life, his determined dedication for chanting mantras and reading scriptures, etc., and as the monks are doing here. So we've come here to be inspired in our own, uh, path of Krishna consciousness.

Very unique experience. I don't think many devotees come here to Bodh Gaya, but it's a very cultural experience because you see this temple 1400 years old, all these different structures, and all the chanting of the mantras and so forth and so on.

It's very exhilarating. And again, Buddha is an incarnation of Krishna.

So if you can make it part of your curriculum when you come here to India. Hari Krishna.

All glory to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

All right.