Hare Krishna, Prabhu, wow. We're at the Vishnu temple here in Gaya, where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as Nimāi Paṇḍit, bonded. Actually, he was only 24 years at the time. He received his initiation from Īśvara Purī, from a spiritual master whom he met here.

Actually, Īśvara Purī took him into this beautiful Vishnu temple, maybe 20 meters from me, and he gave him his *dīkṣā* mantras. And as soon as the 24-year-old Paṇḍit got those mantras, he experienced transcendental ecstasy for the first time. And so then Īśvara Purī told him to come over here, just a few meters from where I'm standing, where there's a very ancient deity of Lord Nṛsiṃha Dev, actually, who is killing Hiraṇyakaśipu.

And he told him to chant his first mantra, his first *gāyatrī* mantras there. So this is what Mahāprabhu did. He sat inside this little temple and chanted his first *dīkṣā* mantras in front of Lord Nṛsiṃha. So we're just going to take you very quickly because there's no photography here.

We're going to run in and just show you very quickly that deity before which you sat. So this very deity, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu chanted his first *gāyatrī* mantras, which he received from—causeless mercy. Only by the mercy of Prabhupāda are we able to have *darśana* of this deity.

Remember this wonderful past of Mahāprabhu. It was at this specific place that Nimāi Paṇḍit, when he came to Gaya, he offered the *piṇḍadāna* for his father, Jagannātha Miśra. And in doing so, one also prays for one's ancestors. Of course, we can understand that, you know, Jagannātha Miśra is an eternally liberated soul, but just to show how a devotee is concerned about the welfare of everyone, we want everyone to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So it's just a small ritual, but it could help one's ancestors advance beyond wherever they are. But of course, we know that in the Seventh Canto of *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam*, Lord Nṛsiṃha Dev tells Prahlāda Mahārāja, "Because you're a pure devotee of the Lord, then 10 generations before you and 10 generations after you will all be liberated." So this is our deeper understanding of the *piṇḍadāna*.

We don't necessarily have to do it because if we become devotees, then all our relatives benefit, even our parents and our grandparents. Somehow or other, they'll benefit because that is the instruction of Lord Nṛsiṃha Dev to Prahlāda Mahārāja. So although devotees may sometimes do these types of rituals, really, just becoming a pure devotee is enough.

And how to become a pure devotee... All auspiciousness comes from that. All the different Vedic rituals, whatever benefit is there, is also there in the *mahā-mantra*. But the ultimate benefit is there. That not only one gets *mokṣa*, but one gets *prema*, by which one can go back home, back to Godhead.

But still, it's very interesting to follow in the footsteps of Caitanya Mahāprabhu to all these various holy places he came. And his secret desire, of course, as I mentioned earlier, was to come here and point out the importance of associating with saintly persons.

And most important, Caitanya Mahāprabhu demonstrated a very essential instruction on the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness: that one must accept a bona fide spiritual master and surrender to him. So that Mahāprabhu did here with his illustrious Īśvara Purī. But this is the place of the pastime where he offered *piṇḍadāna* for the deliverance of his father, Jagannātha.

It's a very beautiful *kuṇḍa*. It's called Suryakund, and it's very nicely maintained by the *pujārīs* here. Another holy spot here in Gaya, actually, again, following the instructions of Bhaktivedanta Svāmī Prabhupāda to visit those places that Mahāprabhu visited.

And Śrīla Prabhupāda underscores this, you know, in a purport in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, in *Ādi-līlā*, quoting the purport in that way.

He writes or he quotes, "May I visit all the holy places associated with the *līlās* of Lord Caitanya and His devotees." And then Prabhupāda instructs us.

He says, "A devotee should make a point of visiting all the places where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu performed His pastimes. Indeed, pure devotees of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu even want to see the places He simply visited for a few hours or a few minutes." That's how special is Lord Caitanya and the places that He visited, that He went to.

So here in Gaya, there are a number of holy places associated with Lord Caitanya. And this, where we are right now, this was presently a temple. This is where Lord Caitanya stayed when He was in Gaya. He stayed in this structure.

There's a very ancient deity of Vishnu which Mahāprabhu was taking *darśana* of. And actually, Mahāprabhu, when He was here, He cooked for Himself. This is traditional in Vedic culture. A *brāhmaṇa* cooks for himself, gently, very simply. So Mahāprabhu would cook for Himself here.

And not far from here is the Vishnu temple where He met His future spiritual master, Īśvara Purī. And after meeting, Mahāprabhu came back to His residence here, and very soon after, He began cooking for Himself. And very soon after that, Īśvara Purī showed up at the door, described exhibiting all ecstatic feelings of love of God, the eight ecstatic symptoms of God, that's how He appeared at the door.

So Lord Caitanya invited Him in. And with the *prasādam* that He had cooked for Himself, He served that to His spiritual master, Īśvara Purī, demonstrating how a servant of the master should serve in a menial way, in this way, to receive the blessings of the master.

Of course, these are all pastimes of Lord Caitanya, teaching us how to be good devotees and achieve Kṛṣṇa *prema* within this lifetime. *tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā*—that one should approach a spiritual master, inquire from him submissively, and serve Him.

That inquiry and that service, that combination is very dynamic. It brings realization, Kṛṣṇa consciousness realization. So Mahāprabhu was so kind. He demonstrated or He showed us the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness from *śraddhā* to *prema*. So we're feeling very fortunate, very blessed to be in the residence of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

His kitchen's just over there. We're going to see where He cooked for Himself while He stayed here and where He cooked for His spiritual master, Īśvara Purī. Just, we're just relishing unfathomable bliss by the mercy of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and following the instructions of Bhaktivedanta Svāmī Prabhupāda to go to those places where Mahāprabhu visited.

And even just for a few moments or a few minutes, go to those places as well. So, Hari Kṛṣṇa. Bhaktivedanta Svāmī. So. You.