So once again our purikuma party has come to Gaya, and we're discovering so many holy places. This is actually the glory of this great country, that there are so many holy places because Krishna chose to come here in many incarnations.

He is the source of so many incarnations who come to this earth, this blessed earth, at different times in the history of the human race, which actually goes back many millions of years. So everywhere you go in India, you'll find some temples, some shrines, some sacred lakes, other special bodies of water, and saints and sages, etc.

So that's very true here in Gaya. We mentioned earlier this morning pastimes going back to Satya Yuga here. We're climbing to the top of this hill; it's like a little mountain, actually. A little over 375 steps. Why are we going to so much trouble?

Because at the top of this hill is a beautiful temple of Lord Shiva. Shiva is very popular in this part of India, as he is all over India. We know him as the greatest devotee of Krishna or Vishnu.

So the devotees of Lord Shiva, they climb, and we also climb to take his blessings to become better devotees of Lord Krishna.

But the Purana history shows us that during the time of Lord Ramachandra, Rama came here to, uh, to Gaya to perform the pinda ceremony for his father, Dasharatha. King Dasharatha, who had passed away. So while he was here, Lord Rama climbed these steps, these 375 steps, to have the darshan of Lord Shiva.

So for the Shiva bhaktas, that confirms that Rama is the servant of Shiva, that Shiva is superior. But our understanding is a little better, a little deeper, actually. Just as the devotee wants to see Krishna, Krishna also wants to see his devotee.

So really, the purpose of Lord Rama's coming up these steps was to see his greatest devotee, Lord Shiva. That's how we understand it. It's very clear, actually. At that point where Lord Ramachandra was fighting Ravana in Lanka, the great battle that ended in Ravana's death, finally, um, the battle was getting very intense, and, uh, Lord Rama, he took his bow, and he took his arrow, and finally he was about to do away with this big demon Ravana, a ten-headed demon Ravana.

His name means he who makes the, the universe scream. So we won't go into detail; we all know Ravana. But just about as Rama was to shoot that bow and arrow into the heart of Ravana, up on the higher planetary systems, Shiva was sitting with his wife Parvati.

Parvati was on his lap, as we often see. And, um, Parvati said to, to, to Lord Shiva, "Your devotee Ravana is about to be killed. You should do something. Stop Rama from killing him." Because Ravana was a great devotee of Shiva.

That's where he got his powers, actually. So she said, "Your devotee is about to be killed. You should protect him from Rama." So Shiva said, "Krishna mari ke, marti Krishnaraki.

If Krishna wants to kill someone, no one can save him.

And if Krishna wants to save someone, no one can kill him." Which for us indicates that actually Lord Rama, or Krishna, Bhagavan Shri Krishna and his incarnations are supreme, and Lord Shiva is the very happy servant of Lord Rama, the very happy servant of Lord Krishna, the very happy servant of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

Nothing wrong with being a servant if you're the servant of a glorious master. That's the highest position we can attain, and we're very happy to do that. So when Ramachandra came up the mountain and Shiva saw him, they embraced.

They embraced. And as Lord Shiva's footprints are up there, Lord Shiva said to Rama, "People will come to so much trouble to come and see me. They should also see your footprints. So you also leave your footprints here. Someone can also see the footprints of Shiva and Lord Ramachandra." At the top of this, this mountain, what's very, very significant is that 500 years ago, when Lord Chaitanya came here to offer pinda for his departed father, Jagannath Mishra, he took initiation from Ishvara Puri.

And Guru and disciple, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, who was only 24 years old at the time, and Ishvara Puri, they also climbed these steps. It's a little difficult, especially at our age, but we're doing it because Chaitanya Mahaprabhu walked here with Ishvara Puri, and they went to have darshan of Lord Shiva and the footprints of Ramachandra.

So we'll follow. Always, we're following in the footsteps of the Lord and his great devotees. This is the safest way to get back home, back to Godhead, without deviating even an inch. We just follow very carefully. And for us, we're following their representative, Shrila Prabhupada, who's our guide here in Gaya.

And every step of the way, we make back to the spiritual world. All glories to Shri Krishna.