"*00380*.*
"We read from the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, the 11 questions of the sages: *oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya*.

"O virtuous one, we think that we met you by the will of providence to elect you as the captain of the ship on which are those who wish to cross the ocean of Kali, which deprives a person of all good qualities."

You know, I worked at the university at that time; I was married, so my ex-wife and I saw a group of shining devotees. We approached them, and one special devotee caught my eye, and later I learned that his name was Viṣṇujana. Just a moment before that, we were at an art exhibition where there were paintings of Kṛṣṇa, and we were very attracted to Him. Kṛṣṇa looked simply wonderful, and we asked the cleaner who worked in the art gallery, “Who is that blue one in the painting?” To which he replied, “It is written that this is Kṛṣṇa in paradise; it seems that this is Paradise.” I also want to be in such a paradise to dance with all the beautiful girls. That’s what the cleaner answered us. That was my first acquaintance—Kṛṣṇa is not quite according to *śāstra*. But coming out of the picture gallery, we heard this beautiful *kīrtana*. And until then, we had never seen devotees. At the moment when the *kīrtana* ended, the Mahārāja began to speak. All the students who were in the clearing at that moment got up and left and sighed so much, “What nonsense!” The Mahārāja turned to me and my ex-wife and asked, “Are you two left? Do you have any questions?” In my head, I connected everything that the cleaner told us, the paintings of Kṛṣṇa, with what Mahārāja said. I said, “Yes, of course, I have a question.” I can tell you half like this. I asked why. He said, “Young man, come here. Please sit down. First of all, I will tell you about my spiritual teacher; only through him can we understand who Kṛṣṇa is.” So, for a whole hour, he told me about the *paramparā*. At the end, he asked, “Do you have any more questions?” I said, “Yes, I have one question.” He said, “What is your vow?”

I said, “Can Prabhupāda be my guru, too?” He said, “Yes, but you need to do service.” I asked, “Okay, where are you guys staying today?” There were three of them at the bus stop. I said, “Please stay.” My building where we lived was slated for demolition, but I had an apartment there and a vacant apartment next to us. I invited them to stay there. The rest is history. So here are the comments about this very verse that came up: "Let me tell you about my spiritual teacher." He told us this verse, and to this day, his words and the way he read this verse in Sanskrit sound in my heart. It took four *sannyāsīs* to lead me to my spiritual life. It writes: "The age of Kali is very dangerous for a person. Life is given to a person exclusively for self-awareness, but under the influence of this dangerous age, people have completely forgotten about the purpose of their life. Life expectancy in this age will gradually decrease; people will lose memory, sublime feelings, strength, and their best qualities. A list of anomalies of our age is given in the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*." This age is very difficult for those who want to devote their lives to self-awareness. People are so busy satisfying the senses that they have completely forgotten consciousness itself, not understanding that this short life is only a moment on our great path to self-awareness. In their madness, they frankly say that there is no need of self-realization; the educational system is aimed at sense gratification. If an intelligent person thinks about this, he will understand that the children of this age are deliberately sent to the slaughterhouse of so-called education. Therefore, enlightened people in this age should be careful; if they want to cross the ocean of Kali, they should follow the example of the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya: accept a guru or his bona fide representative as the captain of the ship.

*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.* Today we are accepting her and, on a more personal level, we can say that we are accepting her into our family, namely into our International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. And Prabhupāda said that this society is his body. This is a very auspicious day for her; today's ceremony is auspicious for her, it is auspicious for the whole society of devotees, and also it is auspicious for the whole world. It is auspicious because today she is taking second initiation. For our community, this ceremony is auspicious because our strength lies in our numbers; this is the strength of *sādhu-saṅga*. But how is this ceremony favorable for the whole world? No one even knows that this ceremony is taking place now; everyone is watching the Olympic Games in Paris. Why is this ceremony favorable for the whole world? He writes in the *Teachings of Lord Caitanya* that there are only two main instructions: Develop a taste for the holy names of Vāsudeva and be compassionate to all fallen souls. This is exactly how this initiation ceremony today is very favorable for the whole world. Bhakti-lata and her husband are exemplary devotees. Her husband distributes books, he distributes a lot of them, and she also helps him in this service. If you want to know how America should become "Great" again, then it will become so thanks to these two devotees; they will bring glory to America and to all of our society. 

This initiation ceremony can be very simple or very complex. Today we are conducting a simple ceremony. We will conduct a large, complex ceremony on the day of Balarāma Pūrṇimā with all the *śālagrāmas* and a large fire, and today we are conducting a simple ceremony that we quickly organized here because tomorrow they are returning back to America to make it "Great" again. But a simple ceremony is also good. If by chance or by great luck a person can accept a Guru, it does not matter where he is, in the temple or in the forest. If the spiritual teacher agrees and is ready to accept a disciple, a person must take initiation at that moment without delay and not wait for a suitable time or place, and such a time as Balarāma Pūrṇimā, for example. 

But there is also a more complex, multi-stage initiation ceremony which Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī describes in his book *Sat-kriyā-sāra-dīpikā*. I don’t know—I think most of you probably haven’t heard of this book. It hasn’t been published yet, but for scientists it is available. This book is authoritative because Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was a very close devotee of Lord Caitanya 500 years ago, and he was the very devotee whom Lord Caitanya sent to serve and be the *pūjārī* for the Govinda deity. As soon as this deity was installed, he is the Gosvāmī who roamed through the forests of Vṛndāvana, discovering new holy places; he writes books about the science of devotion. He is very busy, but at some point, he opens the Govinda deity and begins to worship Him. You know that worshiping a deity takes a lot of time and attention, and how can one simple *sādhu* cope with such a magnificent worship of a large Govinda? At that moment, he wrote a letter to Lord Caitanya in Purī. He asked to send him devotees to help in the *pūjā*, and so Mahāprabhu sent Kṛṣṇadāsa, to which he said, “I am here serving the Supreme Incarnation of the Lord. Why should I leave? I don’t want to.” And He said, “Go and serve the Supreme Lord Govinda in Vṛndāvana. I will miss you.” Reading, Mahāprabhu said, “Okay, okay.” He worshiped the deity of Kṛṣṇa, and he decided to give it away and said, “Now you can go.” So, in the process of worshiping this deity, he wrote a book so that a person could receive initiation properly and worship the deity. And I have access to this book, and yesterday evening, we read it, and I will share with you a very multi-step and complex process of initiation that he describes in this book. In the book—perhaps on the day of Balarāma Pūrṇimā—we will try to recreate such an initiation ceremony. Such a ceremony will take place over the course of 48 hours. You will be hungry at this time. No, he was such a wonderful *prema*-bhakta that even Jīva Gosvāmī was inspired by him and wrote a book about the Gāyatrī mantra. 

What I will tell you now is very profound. And when I read this, I thought about a spiritual brother. He is a devotee. He is a special soul who comes directly from the spiritual world to us to preach. He describes that there are two *svarūpas* or two forms of a spiritual teacher. One of them is called *pratyakṣa*. What does it mean? The Guru who is in this world is the one from whom we take initiation. *Pratyakṣa* literally means "before the eyes." This means you see the guru or the form of the Guru in front of you. *Pratyakṣa*—before the eyes. The other form of the Guru is called *vibhū*, and it means "magnanimous." The *vibhū* form is the form of the Guru when he is in Goloka Vṛndāvana. This is his form in Goloka Vṛndāvana. The Guru listens to all prayers, problems, or glorification of his disciple. We meditate on this form after the Guru leaves this world. These are the two forms of the spiritual teacher. What does it mean—before the eyes and *vibhū*—when the Guru is in the spiritual world and at the same time he continues to interact with us, listening to our prayers of glorification and trying to help us in our difficulties? The Guru is the form of *pratyakṣa* when he is present in the physical world, as today. He gives initiation, and such a one never shows all his powers and superpowers. But they are the same as at the moment when the guru leaves for the spiritual world and continues to interact with the student and tries to lead him along the path of devotional service. 

The Guru never shows all his powers. Of course, the devotee is very humble, but when he leaves for the spiritual world, he manifests all these powers, and he manifests this by protecting his student. *Pratyakṣa*-guru, who is in this world and accepts spiritual initiation, he accepts students. He is compared to the insect *sāmṭi* by Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and I read this and thought, “How one can compare the efforts of a guru with an insect? And what kind of insect *sāmṭi* is this?” But I understood the meaning of this when I continued reading. He describes that the insect *sāmṭi* gives birth to 100 insects at a time. It is described that all these 100 little insects, after birth, they suck the mother insect and suck her blood. This continues for a long time until they gain enough strength to take off and fly. This causes the mother insect unbearable pain, but she still does it for the sake of her children. It is described that just as a mother takes these insects on her back, she also takes them so that they can easily spread their wings and fly to the spiritual world. Just as a mother gives her blood to her insect children, this gives them the strength to fly to the spiritual world. In the same way, the Guru takes away karma so that you can fly easily to Goloka Vṛndāvana. So fly, why are you sitting here? How does the Guru deal with all this karma? By chanting the glories of the Name. By chanting Kṛṣṇa, our heart is freed. From chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, our heart becomes free from material desires which cause karma. So the Holy Name is all-powerful. It's the solution to everything. The spiritual master has great faith in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and spends time chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*.

And how does the Guru cope with the karma of all his disciples? For this, he needs to chant a lot and have strong faith in the holy names, because karma burns up—all sinful reactions burn up in the process of chanting the Holy Name. Therefore, the Guru must do a lot of chanting, having strong faith, just like last night we had such an amazing long *kīrtana*, and the people who participated in it were amazing, and there were children with their teacher; they danced much better than you. What does it mean when the Guru frees us from material existence? It means that the Guru gives us tools, using which we can become free. This means that we must use what the Guru teaches us in order to free ourselves from material existence, like when you are in the dark and the Guru turns on the light, and in the illumination you can see where you are going and you continue to go. The Guru does not drag you; you are forced to go in the light yourself. And of course, we owe everything to him, because if he had not turned on the light, we would have remained in darkness forever. And this light of knowledge, the spiritual teacher illuminates our path. He points out the obstacle and shows us where we should go, just like he said about Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: “Now, run to Vṛndāvana, your path is sanctified by knowledge. Run!” And it is our responsibility to use all the knowledge that the Guru gives us. Kṛṣṇa gave so many instructions to Arjuna on the battlefield, after which He said to Arjuna, “Now, accept My instructions and act.” But if you refuse these instructions and decide to act from a false perspective, or under the influence of material energy, you will be lost. You are familiar with this famous analogy: when Mother Yaśodā pledged herself to Kṛṣṇa with a rope, and the rope is always two fingers short—these two fingers represent Kṛṣṇa's mercy and our own efforts. Yes, you have all the mercy, but you also need to make efforts. Today you are receiving initiation, and this is the first step. You cannot sit and think, “Well, I received initiation, everything will be fine.” No, this is only the beginning. And since the spiritual teacher liberates us from this terrible, scary material world, the disciple has great respect for his spiritual teacher. Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī describes the *tattva* of the spiritual teacher as follows:

When I read the words of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, I remembered the incident when I stood in front of the *guru* and you all know this story. I carried his suitcase up the stairs. I went into his room; Prabhupāda had just received a massage, so he stood in one loincloth. I saw his form and offered my obeisances. But seeing the *guru*, seeing how he shone like the sun, I experienced the same feeling that is described while reading each of these lines. I said, “Yes, yes, yes, the glory of the spiritual teacher is the only source of satisfaction of the disciple.”

"The eyes of the Guru are the treasury of all the secrets of all three worlds for the disciple; the nose of the Guru is the pride of knowledge for the disciple; the lips of the Guru are the gates of knowledge; the tongue of the Guru is a jug of nectar; the neck of the Guru is renunciation of the material world; the shoulders of the Guru are the elegance of a devoted life; the chest of the Guru is the place where the divine couple lives; the hands of the Guru are the source of all blessings; the middle part of the body of the Guru is the ocean of bliss; the back of the Guru is the power of *bhakti*; the lotus feet of the Guru are the precious stones of *cintāmaṇi*; the toes of the Guru are the millions of pilgrimages; the nails on the feet of the Guru are the moonlight of love for Kṛṣṇa; the shadow of the Guru is the eternal protection of the disciple; the dust from the feet of the Guru is the treasure of all these worlds; the remains of the Guru's *prasādam* are the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips; the cloth which the Guru uses is the great treasure of the disciple; the words of the Guru are the only refuge of the disciple." And Gopāla Bhaṭṭa concludes: "Without the Guru, a person is like a young girl without a husband, without the sun, without the eyes, and a heart that does not beat."

Then he describes the beautiful multi-stage initiation ceremony, which we will also conduct here on Balarāma Pūrṇimā. He begins by saying that the disciple needs to bathe in the *brahma-muhūrta* in the holy Yamunā, Gangā, or *mānasa-gaṅgā*. If this is not possible, then the disciple should bathe in the raindrops he collected, or in a clean river or well, or on the shore of the Baltic Sea. Then he chants the mantra that we recited earlier, and then a person needs to dress beautifully in unstitched clothes, preferably white clothes. A wonderful young girl here, she is dressed in all white. In the same way, for your initiation, you wear such clothes. What is *brahmacārī* clothing? Gopāla Bhaṭṭa describes that a week before their initiation, disciples make a hole in the ground of Vṛndāvana and bury their clothes for initiation in it. Who of you has done this? A week later, the disciple takes out his clothes and dries them in the sun in these clothes. He comes to his initiation. No ironing for you, no makeup for you, some beautiful *dhoti*, that's how it is. Girls, we dress for the initiation. One of the reasons why a person may not wear white clothes but wear *brahmacārī* clothes is that white clothes indicate a person’s well-being, and we come to the initiation ceremony more humble. So when a person rolls up clothes and digs them up, they acquire a calmer, brown, blissful shade. So, whoever receives initiation, please accept—here on the street, dig yourself a hole, bury it, dig it up. But in fact, this is a very complex ceremony.

He then describes that after he dresses, a person must place *tilaka* in 12 places on his body, and before the ceremony begins, a person must approach the Guru and offer prostrations 12 times. Then the disciple worships Tulasī Devī, offers flowers and incense. Then we must approach the spiritual teacher, touch his feet, and offer our respects to him. And then, in a humble state of mind, the disciple takes a blade of grass in his mouth, holding it in his teeth. He sits with folded hands and listens to his spiritual teacher who gives instructions on the importance of initiation. This means that we must be attentive to this. The essence of this is that the student then stands before the spiritual teacher, pronounces his vows, and receives a new name and his rosary. And then he writes something very interesting that I have not heard of before: some time after initiation, the Guru gives his own rosary to the students and allows them to chant on them. Isn't that interesting? Can he give his rosary to the student so that he can chant on them for some time? Can you imagine if we follow, our rosary would be wonderful, but in any case, this is what it costs to say. For example, this young beautiful girl, at her initiation, let her chant on the rosary that I had before. Once, the *sādhu* gave me these rosaries, I chanted on them, and then passed them on to her [laughter]. After that, everyone will ask you, “Please let me read on your rosary.” 

After which it is described that the priest must approach the spiritual teacher, and around his hand, tie a protective thread that will protect him from the consequences of the student's karma. And again, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa is what we resort to if we can't follow all the rules; yes, in deity worship if we make some mistake we can chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. There is even more; it is further described that after the fire sacrifice, the disciple must give a donation to all the *brāhmaṇas* present and also distribute sweets to all the guests. And then the disciple will go around the village from door to door and ask for donations to serve his Guru; the disciple must ask for donations from parents, friends, relatives, enemies—if he is humble—and kings, and also avoid asking for donations from *bājīs* and other sages. Having collected the donation within 12 hours, a person must come and give them all to his spiritual master, which for her means that she will collect the donation until 2 a.m., and then the disciple comes to the *sādhu* in front of him with folded hands and says the following prayer:

"My dear spiritual master, you are my only refuge. Without receiving any support in this material world, I kept falling in the ocean of spirit or suffering. You took my hand and took me on board the ship which is going to Vṛndāvana, where one finds the divine couple of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. My dear spiritual master, you are my only savior. Please occupy me in every possible way; let my body be your *vṛndāvana*, my hands will be your instruments, and all my senses will be engaged in serving your mission. Please destroy my false pride and all my material desires; help me, do not control my feelings, destroy my failures, and lead me to the son of Mahārāja Nanda. I offer you my respects time after time; you are my dearest spiritual teacher." 

And when the disciple leaves the ceremony and goes back to this world, he should not forget his Guru. It is said that we should remember the spiritual teacher at least three times a day, and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa offers us a beautiful meditation that should visit your mind from time to time; this meditation is meant to think about the spiritual teacher. And secretly in this room, I can say that this is the only spiritual teacher. There are many spiritual paths and different Gurus who teach you different stages of yoga as well as merging with *brahmaṇ* and other spiritual paths, but they are all secondary and they are like steps on a ladder that leads to the highest stage, which is *prema*. He teaches us *prema*, and there are of course other Gauḍīya *sampradāyas*, but this is ours, the main *sampradāya*, and in this meditation we learn to see the Guru in this light. This meditation is called meditation on the Guru:

Sitting on an elevated *āsana* made of *śveta* white clothes, white fabric which are decorated with round pillows, the Guru sits in his full glory and my mind longs for the moment when I will wave his *cāmara* behind his back. And the Guru walks through the forests of Vṛndāvana wearing luminous clothes and he walks like an elephant with pride, and my mind longs to clean his floor, sweep the floor before he steps on it. And here we are not talking about worldly pride, but the pride of being a disciple of such an exalted spiritual teacher like my godbrother Bhūṣaṇa describes in his book. He dances and his clothes flutter in the air, there are tears in his eyes. Oh my mind, please thirst to protect him on his path and try the taste of his tears; he speaks about the science of devotional service, his voice breaks in ecstasy. Oh my mind, please serve him with a jug of water. Oh my mind, please serve him with your speech, body, and heart; he is the deity worshiped by all the demigods. This is very deep, what the true heart of a disciple is. In the world of our growth in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we learn to see things in the true light, so this is what these verses describe, how to see the Guru in the true light. We want to see the Guru and Kṛṣṇa.

I was a little hesitant before giving this lecture because from some side it may seem like I'm saying all this about myself, but in fact, no. I'm just a small soul that Rūpa liberated. I'm talking about the instructions of the spiritual teacher that come with the strength to fulfill them. So I hope that by the grace of Rādhā, one day I will be able to become an example of what Gopāla Bhaṭṭa describes in his verse, and one day I will take you by the hand to the spiritual world, I will go to the master at whose feet all spiritual teachers sit. And such a lecture is authoritative because we are simply conveying the words of the *śāstra* and Prabhupāda—*guru-paramparā*. *Kṛṣṇa! Bhakti!* All with Jai!""