"*00435*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Thank you so much for inviting me to this, what I always call an august assembly of devotees. You all deserve that term. "August" means the topmost in society, just like in mundane society we always hear about "the 1%," those who are most famous, most prosperous, and have all the wealth. But that is nothing compared to a Vaiṣṇava or a Vaiṣṇavī, because a Vaiṣṇava or a Vaiṣṇavī is aspiring for the *parama-dhāma*, the highest goal of life, and is living a holy life. So, they are special persons. You may not always recognize them walking down the street, or shopping for groceries, or whatever, but they are recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because each and every Vaiṣṇava and Vaiṣṇavī is calling out to Kṛṣṇa every day: "My dear Lord, my dear energy of the Lord, please pick me up from this ocean of death and fix me safely as an atom at Your lotus feet."

We know that the spiritual world is so far away that Prabhupāda gave a wonderful analogy, because sometimes philosophical concepts may be a little difficult to comprehend, so analogies are given to make them more easily understandable. He said the spiritual world is so far away that even if you could travel at the speed of the mind for a million years, you wouldn't reach it. How far away is that? It is so far away that even if you traveled at the speed of the mind for a million years, you wouldn't reach it. Now, how fast is the speed of the mind? We have speeding cars, we have bullet trains—I take bullet trains in China when I am visiting China, something like 500 kilometers an hour—we have supersonic jets, we have satellites, but that's nothing compared to the speed of the mind. For example, we are here right now and maybe your grandmother's in London; you think of her, boom, you're there. Someone is very far away in Hong Kong, you think of them, boom, you're there. That's the speed of the mind—instant. I can't think of anything material that's faster than the speed of the mind. But even with this, if you could travel, let's just say theoretically, at the speed of the mind for a million years, you couldn't reach Vaikuṇṭha. It's so far, so far, far away. Actually, one time Prabhupāda said there are more universes in this material creation than there are grains of sand on this earth planet. You've been to the Durban beachfront Rathayātrā; you get some grains of sand in your shoes. So, Vaikuṇṭha is very far away, but that's our *parama-dhāma*, that's our goal. And why is it our goal? Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is waiting for us. Kṛṣṇa wants us to go back to the spiritual world more than we want to go back to the spiritual world. Just like you have children; you want your children to go to school more than they want to go to school. So, Kṛṣṇa has our real interest, our heart's desire. Kṛṣṇa knows our real heart's desire to reestablish our loving relationship with Him. He understands, just like parents know the desires of their children as they mature, more than the children are aware. Children just want to watch cartoons, but you know that you can't watch cartoons your whole life; you have to get serious. So, you go to school: today, no playing, do your homework, don't procrastinate. But we, as *jīvas*, lost souls, we left the spiritual world to come to the material world to try to enjoy. We give our spiritual lives kind of a backseat. With all due respect, you know, in the Christian tradition they go to church on Sunday, or our Muslim brothers and sisters, they go to the mosque on Friday—I don't know when the Jewish people go or whatever—but you know, there's something there, but it's not enough to get back to the spiritual world. So, in our tradition, our Gauḍīya tradition, Prabhupāda said, "If you have time, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare."

One time, one of my god-sisters was before Śrīla Prabhupāda for her initiation into the chanting of the holy names. She came before Prabhupāda; there was a long line of devotees. She came up, and Prabhupāda said, "So, what are the four rules and regulations?" So, she got it right because she had a little piece of paper there. You know, you get nervous in front of your Guru. I've had disciples who are PhDs, two master's degrees, they come before me, and they get a little nervous. So, she was a little nervous. It's good to be nervous in front of our spiritual authorities because it's a sign of respect, and that's good because when they say something, you'll take it to heart because you respect them. So, when my disciples come for initiation, I fill in for them: "No meat-eating," "No," "Yes, good." So, Prabhupāda said, "And how many rounds of this Mahā-mantra will you chant every day?" So, she gave the right answer. She said, "16 rounds minimum every day." I thought, "Very nice, she remembers it's the minimum." She said, "16 rounds minimum." It was reverberating through the hall: "Minimum." Oh, Prabhupāda took it a little differently because "Guru" means heavy, so he leaned over and said, "Why minimum 16 rounds? Why not more?" Anyway, your name is... because although Kṛṣṇa is very far away, He's also near as well. That's what we hear in the *Īśopaniṣad*, one of the first books that Prabhupāda translated and introduced into the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. It's *sāram*—summary, elegance, truth spoken concisely. Those verses are so important, and one of those verses states: yes, Kṛṣṇa is very far away, but He's very near as well. There are many ways He's very near. He's in our hearts. I remember one time Prabhupāda gave a lecture in Geneva and he said that the Supersoul in the heart and the *jīva* are "this close" together. It was like a mudrā. I remember it's very clear in my mind. Prabhupāda—I never saw Prabhupāda do something like that—he said, "They're this close together." I thought, "Wow, that's like an embrace, or a loving embrace or something." You know, they're this close together. So, God is very close, and He's directing us as we hear in the *Bhagavad-gītā*. If you want a material life, Kṛṣṇa says, "Go for it." How could He be so cruel? Because "once burnt, twice shy." Once you experience the real nature of this world, it's not all that it is made out to be, despite the advertising, the billboards, etc. It's a world of duality. So, we get that bitter taste, and with that bitter taste, we look for an alternative. And the only alternative is spiritual life. And in this age, the only real alternative in spiritual life is to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, the Supersoul and the *jīva* are "this close" together. And what is the Supersoul doing? He's just watching. He's watching and He's waiting for that moment that we become tired of the bitter fruits of material life. The *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* describes it very nicely. Another analogy—analogies are so important—another analogy: there are two birds sitting in a tree. One bird is eating the fruits and berries, like you see birds do; they eat the fruits and berries. And there's one bird watching, not even closing his eyes. And paraphrasing you a little bit, but you know, Jagannātha, when He goes out on His famous Rathayātrā parade, why does He come out of His temple? He's very comfortable there; He gets 52 offerings a day in Jagannātha Purī, so many garlands, so many prayers, and rightfully so because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and we are all His loving servants. But He leaves that comfortable position, He comes on a rocky chariot—it's all got wooden wheels, there's hardly any proper suspension—but He comes out. Why does He come out? To see us. We are looking forward to seeing Lord Jagannātha when He comes on the Rathayātrā, because in the *Bhakti-ratnākara* it says that anyone, even a *mleccha*, a *yavana*, a *caṇḍāla*, if the cart goes by—Rūpa Gosvāmī writes—and out of some spirit of appreciation or even curiosity somebody stands up to receive the Rathayātrā cart as it goes by, Rūpa Gosvāmī classifies that person as an eternal associate of Viṣṇu. And there's no exaggeration in Kṛṣṇa consciousness; it's all true, we just haven't experienced it yet. We're still infants in spiritual life. Anyone who stands up to receive Jagannātha as He comes by, he is to be classified as an eternal associate of Viṣṇu. But Jagannātha, we're looking at Jagannātha, but Jagannātha is also looking at you. If we get the glance, if we get the glance of God, we're purified. Rathayātrā. You heard in Lord Śiva's prayers to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, very famous, Lord Śiva's prayer to Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, which we often chant when we go to Vṛndāvana and we bathe in the *kuṇḍa*, we repeat the prayers of Lord Śiva to Rādhārāṇī. At the end of each verse he's saying: "Please, sadā, cast your merciful glance upon me." So, that means something. Just like I remember when we were with Śrīla Prabhupāda, it was difficult to get close to Prabhupāda because there were so many bumblebees around him waiting for the nectar, the honey of Prabhupāda's association. But Prabhupāda had thousands of followers, so we felt it sufficient that if we were in Prabhupāda's presence, he would just look at us. I remember one time we were—Prabhupāda was giving *darśana* at New Mayapur in France, our farm community there. We had a chateau, beautiful community, huge *gurukula*, cow protection, hundreds of devotees. So, Prabhupāda came and he gave *darśana* on the lawn one evening, and at the end of the *darśana* he said, "So, any questions?" And nobody raised their hand. So, I thought, "You know, there's a crowd of 100 devotees, if I ask a question, Prabhupāda's going to see me. They don't know that I'm his disciple. That's all I want, I just want my spiritual master to know that I've given my life to him." So, I raised my hand. Prabhupāda said, "Yes." And I went blank, because I had no question. I just wanted to be—I just wanted him—he's looking at me, going, "So, he said, any question?" Um, so I had to think of—I tried to think, "I'm going to get a really, really good question here." So, in my *darśana*, Prabhupāda was speaking about how a pure devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere, everywhere. A pure devotee, he sees Kṛṣṇa in everything and everyone. Okay. So, I started saying, "You're saying a pure devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere, but Lord Caitanya, the Yuga-avatāra who appeared in the mood of a devotee in order to try to experience Rādhārāṇī's love for Kṛṣṇa—it's another topic, we won't go into great detail—but you know, Lord Caitanya, who's in the mood of a devotee, He says He's not seeing Kṛṣṇa anywhere: *o śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me*. Feeling Her separation, 'I'm considering a moment to be like 12 years, and more tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents, Govinda-viraheṇa me.' Kṛṣṇa, I'm feeling so vacant in the world in Your absence." I said, "Prabhupāda, it appears to be contradictory. You're saying that a devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere; Lord Caitanya, 'I don't see You anywhere, I'm missing You.'" It's a very deep subject matter. Being separated from Kṛṣṇa increases our love for Kṛṣṇa. Separation makes the heart grow fonder. So, Prabhupāda, he looked at me very carefully, and then I got the glance I wanted. But Prabhupāda said, "This is a very deep subject matter, young man. You will understand it one day when you're very advanced." I went, "Wow, Prabhupāda said I'm going to understand it someday. My spiritual master said I am." I took it like that, it's a general instruction to everyone; he said one day I'll understand that when I'm very advanced, and I was very happy. Oh, I just got a little glance from my spiritual master! I can—even the question was too advanced for me to even ask, but it kind of made sense. So, just his glance was enough. For Śiva, just a glance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is enough. So, Jagannātha, He comes out of the temple, this big parade, "O Lord of the universe, kindly be visible unto us." And He's visible. But what's happening? Love is a two-way street; love is reciprocal. So, as we're looking to Jagannātha for mercy—because most of our practice, we'll just be quite frank here—you know, we're making our attempts, you know, *maṅgala-ārati*, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, mind wandering, relishing *prasādam* because it tastes good, and you know, we're making our efforts, that really our progress depends upon the mercy of Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas. And this is a movement of mercy, and that's how we make our attempts, like a little child starting to walk and, "Oh good! Oh, that's so nice!" Their parents, like Prabhupāda—there's a picture of Prabhupāda in one of the *Līlāmṛtas* where, you know, he was staying at Sally Agarwal's house and the first day their little son, Braja, took his first step. There's a photo, Prabhupāda, "Oh, very nice, this kid just taking his first step." Prabhupāda so appreciated him. So, any effort we make to serve Kṛṣṇa, after millions of years of rebellion, Kṛṣṇa's so pleased with us.

So, here's a cart going down, and we're looking at Jagannātha, and Jagannātha's looking at us. He's giving His glance to the millions of people in Jagannātha Purī who come for that festival. He's so eager to glance, to see, because glancing means giving mercy. When we speak about *sādhu* or the Supreme Lord Himself, it's not an ordinary glance; everything about Kṛṣṇa is divine. So, His glance—"You remember me?" I left the spiritual world a billion years ago. So, He's going down the path; He's so eager to give His mercy by His glance. He doesn't blink. The *gopīs* cursed Brahmā, the creator of this universe, under the direction of the Supreme Lord. They curse the *gopīs*, sweet innocent cowherd girls, they curse the Creator. "Hello, Brahmā, with four heads, all-powerful, created the 14 worlds in the universe, little village girls, we curse you, Brahmā." Like, "Why are you cursing me?" "Because you make eyes which have to blink, so we can't see our Kānha, our lovable Kṛṣṇa, for a moment. We have to almost forget Him from a blink. I can't see Him, open! You make eyes that blink." So, Lord Jagannātha is so kind, and so merciful, and wanting us to come back to Godhead more than we want to come back to Godhead, He doesn't blink. Have you ever seen Jagannātha blink? Subhadrā blink? Balarāma blink? "Oh, it's just a wooden statue painted, so how can it blink?" No, my dear Lord, You are not a statue. You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda. The brāhmaṇa little boy came back to Vṛndāvana to ask Sākṣī-gopāla to stand as witness when he was back in Orissa, so that the brāhmaṇa who had promised his daughter to that younger brāhmaṇa in front of the deity—"I promise I'll give my daughter to you when we get back because you've done nice service"—when he got back, he said, "I forget that promise." So, the boy came all the way to Vṛndāvana, back to Vṛndāvana, and came before the deity with full conviction: "Lord, can You stand as a witness at my... at my... so I can... that young girl can be my wife?" So, the deity—you can even visit that deity, He's in Vṛndāvana now—He said, "Yes, my young boy." What? The deity spoke? He spoke. The deity spoke! The boy said, "Oh, wow." And the deity said, "I will follow you, I'll walk behind you to Orissa and stand as your witness." So, the boy, he's kind of naive, pure devotee, little naive, he said, "Well, You're a deity, how will You walk? How will You walk behind me to stand as my witness in Jagannātha Purī?" So, the deity said, "Little boy, if I can talk, I can walk." And walking in—and Prabhupāda said at the installation of the little Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the Laguna Temple, California, Los Angeles, and very early in the movement, he installed brass little *aṣṭa-dhātu* brass Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, very cute deities. And Prabhupāda said to all the devotees assembled, "If you think these deities are brass, they'll remain brass to you forever. But if you worship them with *bhakti*, if you worship them with love, as much love as you can muster... but some love is there, otherwise why have you joined this movement? If you worship them with the proper rules and regulations with as much devotion as you can..." Sometimes when the little baby says, "Mommy, I love you"—the little girl I'm staying with, she comes up to me all the time, she says, "Mahārāja, do you need anything?" She's six or seven, all the time she's coming up, "Mahārāja, do you need anything?" "Yeah, I'm okay." "I mean, your dad's here, your mom, do you need anything?" She looks so concerned: "Do you need anything?" It melts your heart. So, Prabhupāda said, "If you worship these deities with as much devotion as you can muster, then one day these deities will speak to you." So, when this happened, this little boy, this—to the little brāhmaṇa—when the deity spoke to him and said He'd follow him, he said his conclusion was very famous: "My dear Lord, You are not a statue, You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda." Sometimes I told this story in public and the Christians, with all due respect, Christians were, "You're idol worshippers, you worship God in some material form, you're idol worshippers." I say, "Young man, I've read the Bible many times, I've read the Quran three times, I've read the lotus of Buddha, I've read the Torah, I've read them all. And when I read *Bhagavad-gītā*, that's my book—perfect questions, perfect answers. But with all due respect to other spiritual traditions, I say in the Bible, you know, Moses"—and I always fold my hands—"Moses, the Lord spoke to Moses in the form of a burning bush. I don't know how many of you converted from Christianity to Hinduism, but that's a fact. Moses appeared—the Lord appeared to Moses as a form of a burning bush, and spoke to Moses. It's right there in the Bible. So, I say if we're idol worshippers, you're bush worshippers!" And it shuts him up, because Lord—I said the Lord's present everywhere. Everyone can agree, every religion knows the Lord's everywhere. "He can't be in the form of the deity." "No? Well, you say He's everywhere." They go, "Hmm." So, Jagannātha on the chariot going down the Rathayātrā to Gambhīra Temple, while He'll reside for a week and then the parade will come back, He's not even blinking. He's looking at us, getting His... we're getting His favorable glance. Same principle is there when you go to the temple. We go to the temple to see Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi, and we're looking at Them; that's *darśana*. But *darśana*—*darśana* means the Lord's also looking at us. What's He doing up there on the altar? Why is He there? Why has the Lord come in the form of the deity? Prabhupāda said, "Deity worship, that's *arcā-vigraha*." He said, "That's the most merciful form of Kṛṣṇa." I said, "What? The deity is the most worship—the most merciful form of Kṛṣṇa?" And Prabhupāda said, "Yes, because Kṛṣṇa comes and Kṛṣṇa goes, but the deity stays." Kṛṣṇa was 125 years on this planet, Mahāprabhu was 48 years on this planet, Nṛsiṁhadeva was 10 minutes on this planet—one incarnation for one devotee. That's how kind God is. When Nṛsiṁhadeva came, did He deliver anybody else? No, He came and did His surgery. He probably displayed His surgery by—I don't know if Śrīla Mahārāja, after an operation, he takes the operation and where is it? So, where are you, ENT specialist? You don't—the doctor doesn't take, you know, the organs and display them. Nṛsiṁhadeva was so proud of prahlāda, my pure devotee, "You were fearless." He took the entrails of Hiraṇyakaśipu, wore them like a flower garland, and then what did He do? Went back to Vaikuṇṭha. One incarnation for one! Who can say God is not kind? "There's so much suffering in this world, how can there be God?" Hey, He's coming every day! It's described in *Gītā*, He comes once in the day of Brahmā. And generally scholars, Vedic scholars, they calculate time by the time of the demigods because they're more elevated than us. What is our time compared to the time of this elevated society on higher planets? Like, who cares about ants' time? Ants' time is insignificant to us. So, the demigods' time—our time is insignificant to them. So, therein we hear that Kṛṣṇa comes once in a day of Brahmā. And what does He do? Knocks on the door: "Hello, who's in there?" This is the Yuga-dharma. In Satya-yuga, you do meditation, concentrate. In Treta-yuga... "Hello, everybody, open the door!" The process in this age is ritualistic activities. In Dvāpara-yuga, and He comes into the... in His original form, "Everybody, come watch My pastimes and be inspired to come home." And then Kali-yuga: "All you fools and rascals, I don't care how fallen you are, you're in the prison house of material existence. You can be reformed and get special blessings to get out. You'll be forgiven if you just take these three words and decorate your tongue: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa..." One time in Rome, Prabhupāda was speaking something like this, and he kind of stopped, and he said, "Who would not take to this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" They're saying we're crazy; we're saying they're crazy because they're not accepting this very simple and sublime process for getting freed from *duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*. Kṛṣṇa summarizes the material world with all its phantasmagoria, from the highest planet down to the lowest planet; He put it all in a few words. Give me a summary, not a long-winded lecture, just get straight—cut to the chase, what is it? The quick—what is it? *Duḥkhālayam*—what does that mean? A temporary place full of suffering.

Prabhupāda said, "This material world is no place for a lady or gentleman." So here we have the opportunity, Hare chanting, and it's made very wonderful because it's congregational chanting. It means you come together and you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa hears because it's loud, and there's a lot of *bhakti*. And every assembly of devotees, there's advanced devotees, there's *madhyamā-adhikārīs* who are well on the way, and there's neophytes, and there's newcomers—"wide open," "What's happening here?" But altogether... Previously, those in our line, they were *bābājīs*. Sometimes we think badly of *bābājīs*, but no, *Gauḍīya-bābājīs*, *bhajakās*, *bhajakās*—they turn their backs on material existence, and they were just chanting 192 rounds a day, living in very austere conditions. But Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he wanted congregational chanting. So, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, taking that clue, he started this—getting even just the people off the street to come in the *kīrtana* party or come to the festivals and participate and understand how nice this process is. And we're better off like that. Let's say the city has some complaint about something—some—there's too much traffic in the city, so only people with these last three letters in their license plate can come into the city on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays; the others, numbers, they have to come in, you know, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays—something like that. They do that, like in London now, only certain... So, people, "Hey, no, I want to come with my car any time!" So, you're upset with the city hall, you come outside the city hall, and you start screaming. They're having a meeting—all the the mayor and all of his cabinet—they're talking about something you don't like, this new law. So, you come out, say, "Hey, you guys, open the window! I want to make a complaint. I want to drive my car into London any day I want!" Window is a little open, mayor comes close to the window, "Just who—what's that? Some guy yelling outside?" But if hundreds or thousands of people in London don't like this new law and they go outside the city hall and they all raise one voice, "Hello, open the window!" They've got placards, they're screaming, they're yelling, so the mayor sends down a representative: "Find out what's happening." "Well, they have a complaint." "So, send four or five of them, we'll discuss it." "You come up for a discussion." "We want every day for everyone." "No, you go back down and tell the crowd they don't agree." Finally, tens of thousands of people come, the mayor, "All right, okay, okay, cool down, cool down, we heard you!" So, in the same way, we have made—we have our appeal. We have our 16 rounds minimum: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. That's good. Kṛṣṇa's in your heart, He can feel the vibration. "My dear Lord, my dear Sītā-pati, please pick me up from this ocean of death." That's okay. But when He hears a large festival like this, where many devotees come together, at the top of their lungs they chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Lord Caitanya recommends that's the best congregational chanting. So, these events are so important because we may be who we are, you know, a new *bhakta* and a new *bhaktin*, we may be not so advanced because we have so many distractions in this world. So, it's good to come to these festivals and chant and dance very loudly because Kṛṣṇa will hear. He's in the city hall in the spiritual world and He hears this loud commotion: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, we're safest—our strength is in our numbers. If there's one stick trying to hold something up, it's very weak; you put many sticks together, it can hold something up. Our strength is in numbers because in the association of devotees like this, we can hear from our superiors, we can make strong friendships, because we need friends—a friend in need is a friend indeed. We really need to go back to Godhead, so we have Godbrothers and Godsisters on the same level; we can come together and share Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And there's always devotees less advanced than us; we can be kind and compassionate upon them, give a hand and pull them up to our level. This is Vaiṣṇava society. These gatherings of *sādhu-saṅga* are so important, because when we chant here, although Kṛṣṇa is very far away, His—here's His—His eyes and ears are everywhere. Kṛṣṇa is omnipresent to both the spiritual and material creations and beings, so He knows everything that's happening everywhere. So, we make a combined effort through a festival like this to chant Kṛṣṇa; we can be sure that we're responding to Kṛṣṇa's knock every day. He comes to this material world and He's knocking, and we're opening the door saying, "Yes, dear Lord, what is it?" My instruction says this chanting has come from the spiritual world: *kṛṣṇa-nāma-avatāra*. The sound of Kṛṣṇa's name is an avatāra in this age; it's come. And in the age of Kali, He doesn't just come like Nṛsiṁhadeva for a few minutes or... with all due respect, Kṛṣṇa comes, 125 years, He comes as a constant reminder, a constant plea: "Please, come back home, back to Godhead. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa." So, we come to these festivals primarily to gain faith in the holy names. That's why we come, because that is the singular process for this age for becoming purified and awakening our love of God. That verse, *Kṛṣṇa-nāma-avatāra*—Kṛṣṇa has come. Yes, He's very, very far away, but He's come in the form of His holy name. If you want His intimate loving association beyond *ācārya-darśana*, if you want Kṛṣṇa as Your dear-most friend, if you want Him in the mood of a parent, if you want Him as your lover, He's available in that mantra. So that mantra is our be-all and end-all of existence, that mantra. And the more we come together and hear the glories of the holy name, our faith in this process of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, it increases, and it increases, and it increases. And therefore, Prabhupāda's instruction to that young girl—because when the spiritual master gives an instruction, it's actually meant for all of his followers and all of humanity. So, we're kind of laughing at that young girl, "A minimum of 16 rounds." Prabhupāda, Prabhupāda said, "Why minimum?" Because life is short, and then you die. You don't know how much time you have. So, we should chant as much as we can. So, when we leave a festival like this of this caliber, so many advanced devotees, so many friends, and so many—we're welcoming newcomers—we should leave this festival purified with more faith in the holy name, so starting tomorrow, when we chant our *japa*, it's of a different quality, and maybe a different quantity. I remember in Durban, Mahārāja told that story, that said, "Why minimum?" So, I'm going to start chanting 17, 18. Yes. When you go to a house of God—it's a house of God, the Lord is present there as the cross, as the name of Allah—God is present in the words; His name is not different than Him. Allah. If you go to the synagogue, if you go to the Temple of Buddha, these are places where God is especially there, He's especially there. Just like a man, he has a big family, a social activity, but he's got his business, so he spends most of his time at the office. That's his driving passion, the office. He's present everywhere in so many ways, but he's really present in his office because that's his heart, how he maintains his family, becomes famous, and gets lots of money. So, Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, but He's especially in the house where we go to worship Him, He's present. Like when I'm traveling around the world and I'm in places like Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, I make sure when I have some time I'll visit a mosque. There's no temples. Sometimes I went to Samarkand. Samarkand was the old pilgrimage sites, even before Mecca. Samarkand was a beautiful poem about Samarkand—I think this was in Dushanbe or, yeah, before Dushanbe, I was traveling with Śrīla Prabhupāda, going through all the Muslim countries, Hare Kṛṣṇa, not in public, in private homes, sneaking a book into somebody's grocery bag or something. Those are the exciting days, the golden age. So, went to Samarkand, oh, beautiful old, old mosque, almost deserted, and we'd go there and we'd read a little bit of the Quran, then we'd chant around, Hare Kṛṣṇa, inspired. And when I'm in Europe, my favorite place is to spend time with the Franciscan monks. They're very renounced, they're all celibate, and they spend most of their day just praying to Jesus. And their diet is very simple, even more simple than my present diet. I just have quinoa and avocado for nine months now. I was a big fat Swāmī, and I had to, for health, I had to slim down a little bit. So, you know, just so frustrating for the cooks: "Swāmī, come to our house and have something to eat, we can cook 108 preparations." "No, quinoa and avocado, sorry ladies." So, when you visit the Franciscan monks, breakfast is apple and a piece of bread, no butter, no honey. Lunch is apple, piece of bread, and a bowl of soup. Dinner is an apple. So, I go to associate with my Christian brothers—not for too long—you can't really say—you can't really say it with so enthusiasm, you're looking at an old apple and some soup and stale piece of bread. God bless them, the renunciation is so inspiring! But I go, and I go to the prayers. And when I was living in France for almost 20 years, every day going on *harināma-saṅkīrtana*—there was only one temple, Hare Kṛṣṇa temple outside the city—so when we had lunch, we'd always—they'd bring lunch from the temple in these big pots, you know, rice, *dahl*, *subjī*, *halavā*, simply wonderful. I stayed in France a long time because as a young man the *prasādam* was always really good, the French cooks, the cuisine, the French cuisine. So, the ladies would join, they become very expert. So, we were doing *harināma-saṅkīrtana* every day on the street, nine hours a day, chanting, dancing, no microphones, no harmoniums, no accordions, just a couple pairs of karatālas and a drum. We were dancing all over the city. When it came time for lunch, they bring the pots, and where were we going to eat? So, we'd always find a local church and we'd sneak in with the pots, and we'd sit down in the church, in front of Jesus on the cross, and we say some holy prayer: "My dear Lord, we thank You for this grace today that You've given us this food, and please, Lord Jesus, You bless us." And then we eat. In the house of God, because there was just something stimulating being in a place of worship of our Lord. So, like that, when we're in a house of God, there's something special. So, we have here in South Africa beautiful centers. We're all coming together from different centers, in Johannesburg we have our most beautiful Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi, in Durban our ISKCON, and Cape Town, I think, and—I don't know of it. When you go into a house of God, you should come out a different person. You shouldn't go in there just to socialize: "Hey man, how you doing? How you keeping? Um, you know, yeah, what's the news? Did you hear this about that person?" No, we don't come like—in some churches in America, old ladies come on Sunday to play Bingo or dominoes. Of course, you know, they need association, but we come to a house of God to pray for mercy. We come to pray for mercy. So, we should come in a... it's joyful, but it's a serious endeavor to visit a temple of the Lord. And this is a temple today; a temple is wherever God's present, and God is present today fully. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. So, just like after a shower, you get out of a shower and you feel refreshed, isn't it? When it's hot weather in India, we take three showers a day. It's refreshing, you feel refreshed. So, when you come to a program like this, you're cleansing the heart—lust, anger, and greed, and all the obstacles in the path of pure devotion to Rādhā-Śyāma. So, we should come with a serious mood. "I'm going to—I'm not going to be a wallflower, and just—" there's no walls here. "I'm not—I'm not going to just watch the *kīrtana*, I'm going to dance in the *kīrtana*." "Oh, but I'm... I'm old." So was Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī; he had—he had a beard, he was old, he was dancing. So was Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī, he was carried to the suspected place of Lord Caitanya's appearance to confirm, "Is this where... or this is rather, is this where Nityānanda took birth? Is that the neem tree?" Because he knew his Guru would confirm it. And by that time, Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī, he was over 100 years old, he couldn't see, the skin had come down over his eyes; if he wanted to see something, he had to go like this. So old! When he came to that place to confirm it was the appearance site of Lord Caitanya, he jumped out of that palanquin and started dancing like a 16-year-old boy! So, age is no consideration. We should come to these programs for the primary purpose of—not hearing too long a lecture, Swāmī—but to be inspired to chant and dance while singing these holy names of Kṛṣṇa, so that if I'm not so advanced, but there's other advanced devotees here, Kṛṣṇa's listening and He'll shower His mercy. Every day will be like Rathayātrā, every day Kṛṣṇa will come in the form of His name, He'll look into our hearts, He'll glance at us. If we get that glance, that day is successful. So, we're doing it every day with our *japa*, but we need like a big burst to get free from the influence of this material energy. Just like a rocket ship, when it goes up, the real challenge is to get beyond the law of gravity, because as soon as you break through that law of gravity which is encircling the earth planet, you go into space, it just floats like that. That's why they have those boosters, the satellite; it breaks through the law of gravity, it's free. So, we are still under the control of the modes of nature, so we need a booster shot to get through that influence. So, we come, and this is a festival, we break through the law—"Break On Through to the Other Side," old song from the 60s—break on through to the other side—and then we're free spirits, free to go back home, back to Godhead. So, in conclusion, let's have *kīrtana*. Thank you very much, Hare Kṛṣṇa.""