
"Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Welcome to Kṛṣṇa’s Village of Peace at the great Woodstock Festival here in Kostrzyn, Poland. Actually, the festival has been renamed Pol’and’Rock. This festival has been going on for 24 years; we’ve been here since its inception with our village, and we’re an integral part of the festival. Actually, our contribution to the festival is to give people a taste of the spiritual world, to give them an impetus to begin their spiritual lives in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And what better way to do that than this beautiful prasādam that we have here? Here’s a plate of the prasādam we distribute. We are expecting to distribute about 150,000 full plates of prasādam like this in just over 72 hours at a nominal fee. Actually, Śrīla Prabhupāda once described prasādam as Lord Caitanya’s secret weapon, but it’s no secret here. Actually, people come to this festival—many of them come to this festival to be with us, and especially because the prasādam is so nice. We’ve just opened up the tent now; we have 8 different stalls here where people can come in and get their plates. And as the festival builds up—we’re still a few days actually before Woodstock—you’ll see long lines here, sometimes, you know, 50 yards, even a hundred yards long. The long lines; Kṛṣṇa’s prasādam is very, very attractive at this event. We’re going to cook—the cook told me—about 42 tons of bhoga. That’s a lot of bhoga! And we’ve rented seven schools in this area that have kitchens, and we have about 200 devotees cooking full-time. Actually, they cook in shifts because they want them to participate in all the various activities that go on here at Kṛṣṇa’s Village of Peace. Also, the boys and girls who distribute the prasādam only come in shifts. We have devotees from many different countries; over 700 devotees have come to join us this year, from Eastern Europe, from Russia, from Ukraine, as far away as Australia, Canada, America. It’s a big mahā-mahā-mahā-utsava, and I’m thinking perhaps even the demigods are watching this event because they like the yajña, the yajña of Lord Viṣṇu.

And of course, central to our Kṛṣṇa’s Village of Peace here is our Ratha-yātrā. The organizers of this Pol’and’Rock festival, they told me that they’re expecting anywhere between one and a half and two million people this year, and all the kids come. It’s a free event, actually. The organizer, Mr. Jurek Owsiak, he’s a philanthropist, entrepreneur; he does a big fundraiser for children’s hospitals here in Poland every January 1st. He raises quite a lot of money, and the youth of this country, they assist and they help him in raising that money for the children’s hospitals. As a thank you, he puts on this big Woodstock Festival, Pol’and’Rock festival. So they come, and it’s a very large area, and there they set up their tents. It’s free; you can set up your tent anywhere you want. Somehow, by Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement, we find ourselves now, after 24 years of being here, right in the center of the action. So we’re very happy; this gives us the opportunity to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with these mostly young people. And you know, young people are inquisitive, they’re enquiring about many things, including spiritual life. So we’re here to facilitate, we’re here to serve them, and yeah, this is our program. We have a big tent behind us where we have different bands who play—famous bands in Poland, Germany, France come in and play. We allow them to play on our stage: no bad words, no wrong messages, nothing vulgar. They play, and they attract tens of thousands of young people; tens of thousands of them come through. And after the concert is over, they come and take prasādam, they buy the books, they listen to the questions and answers, and a lot of them go on the Ratha-yātrā with us. About the festival: so we’re going to be going in Ratha-yātrā; we have carte blanche. It means the organizers like us so much. Their motto is no violence, no drugs, so they know our culture, they know our philosophy, they know our way of life. So when the kids have something to do here at the village, people are happy, they’re peaceful. In my 24 years here at this great event, I’ve never seen any violence. Actually, a part of that formula is Kṛṣṇa’s Village of Peace. So we’re very happy to be here, and yeah, it starts in a couple of days, but already people are arriving and we’re facilitating them with this delicious prasādam, kīrtana and our mantra yoga tents, questions and answers, Ratha-yātrā, etc., etc.""