I was a little nervous because I had to go to Intel College and hung over in the fall apart because the act, and then after some time there was Europe before he decided to send me, another devotee, to France.

I was a very young 19-year-old boy. I didn't know how well I would do because there were many difficulties in France, but the mop was served, he seriously counted on us, and rightly so, we will substitute Concorde Longo tanks hack.

She's naughty with alcohol and sanded her throat, so how difficult are the stains. eBay proportions can only faction how to make this creation. George Anton again to our guru, but a few years later I heard one of Śrīla's lectures about the fall into tracing paper, which he said that along with the instructions of the spiritual teacher comes the power to fulfill them for the life of creatures.

Show provocation with an eagle and dance vacancies driver. You received this action, and since I reflected on this instruction, I never hesitated about accepting serious responsibility, although sometimes it seemed that the service that was expected of me was impossible, but I understood that with instruction comes authority, and so I took on the task of soup while ducks in such a telescope.

The group called me to his apartment, and I thought, why he called me. Knitting and all the wires, sat at a low table like this, and he repeated japa on the call. We give birth, maritime became a dad, and you, chalet chop.

And this was the first time, and after that, I saw more than once how the whole group repeats the launch of the office. Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Rama, Rama, Hare Krishna, she, Obama.

When he repeated the first part of the mahā-mantra, he forgave the bead, and during the second part of the mahā-mantra, he simply held it motionless. Opa, chirp, cookies, and gathered, he began to preach to me for another match. I don't remember everything.

I would like to have all this. General Monk. Stories of people can have chances. My boxing people, you can arrange your phone, sailed to the horse, flight, but when the camp, emergency mass order, the super show. All Bremen, just some gates at home, challenges, insolence, and I remember that he said, "Go to France and preach.

Find among the French devotees those who can translate my books, those who can do management, those who can worship deities, but learn to delegate authority in service." I thought that my spiritual teacher, although he is a resident of the spiritual world, perfectly knows everything about how to organize the activities of Krishna consciousness.

Here, then, he saved. Then he paused. I was thinking what to do: offer worship, go out, or wait for. My double cheese. And although I was talking about Upada, sometimes very easily, he even joked. I was very careful not to cross the line.

I understand that he is my spiritual mentor, spiritual teacher, I am his disciple and servant of the garden. You are with the well, daddy pig, daddy pig. And when the mop, Upada, paused, I waited for what he would say next.

He leaned over the table and looked at me. He looked me straight in the eyes and said, Indra, the anthem about victory and boldly. And has I take the holy name, I thought he says, life is on fader. You came, give clearly Vladislav against Hammer.

My life, creation. Supervising from ecology, of course, of course. They fought for you, congresses, you sleep, none of us, harvest, change, Vader, my space and games, give water, different. And here he is, Jeju, life time out, step 3 cm.

Saxons fell, breed complements. And I always dreamed before this of receiving some personal instruction from Śrīla Prabhupāda because I knew that he built his whole life around the personal instructions given to him by his spiritual teacher, Bhakti Siddhanta Sarasvati.

And now my dream has come true. I lost a very important personal instruction. So all the rest of the time, Krishna consciousness, I tried and am trying to very boldly preach even in the most dangerous conditions and sing the holy name so that my faith in this process would strengthen.

I hope that Śiva, disappearing, even if this happens in a few lives will be stones merciful and this corridor. And then began to disappear. Opened his closet and took out his own vest and gave it to me. I melted from the office.

Class report from the eyes on the dollar. Clear and set a gift molding. Although from a material point of view it was not a very expensive gift, just a piece of cloth, but it was special for me because it was the thing of a pure devotee.

And gathered said, yes, gift buy again. This is a very special thing, cucumber dark love. I worshiped and for years. Class, this although I bothered with it at that time, I was a househusband, wore white until, until I turned 23, 29 years old, but I wrapped myself in this myself.

Crane here the goal of the game, gas and heating, and it disappeared. Busy and Zirkans gurukripa decided at home, expanded to Jocasta hive, June software tigers and. When I wore this, although until, until the end was not worn out, some of the sannyasi leaders approached me and talked about the tiger hasta, what you wear on yourself, France, what you allow yourself.

Now we'll take this saffron off you. I was looking for it. Try to take it off. They were so surprised and asked where you got it from. I said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I'll give it to you." I didn't give it to them.

By then, their objections had disappeared. Judging by the order, they started to lay boards in the yard of the house. And when this one, although it had begun to wear out completely, I thought that since it was a personal property, it would be better to save it and give it to museums.

And when he was in Europe, I gave her this one, although it was so that she could place it in a museum. Propane and.