Hare Krishna, by the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we find ourselves in Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

After eight months of preaching in different parts of the world, we've come here, actually, again, on Prabhupāda's invitation.

One time, in my apartment, Prabhupāda gave a class and he said that all of his disciples should come to the holy dhāmas, meaning Vṛndāvana, Māyāpura, every year, as part of the festivities.

These spiritual festivities. Afterwards, some of the GBC members asked Prabhupāda, they said, "Really?

It's going to be very expensive. Some of the preaching will stop." And Prabhupāda said, "No, it's so important to come to the dhāmas to become inspired, to become purified, and to become inspired so that we can go back and do our preaching work, which takes great effort.

It's almost against the grain, trying to push a spiritual movement in the material world." And as we know from reading *Nectar of Devotion*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says that there are four principal activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness that nourish our *bhakti-latā-bīja*, our devotion: beginning with chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, associating with Vaiṣṇavas, and living in a holy place like Śrī Vṛndāvana.

And if we can't live here, then at least we should try to come as often as possible. I mean, for many devotees, of course, they're working, have families, many responsibilities, but we should try to organize in such a way that we can come here.

Because this is a very, very special place. Vṛndāvana, according to our ācāryas, this Vṛndāvana, Gokula, is nondifferent than Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Goloka Vṛndāvana is the topmost planet in the spiritual world, but this Vṛndāvana is actually nondifferent.

And by coming here and performing devotional service, we can make, you could say, quantum leap, quantum leaps in spiritual life. One time Prabhupāda said any devotional activity performed here, whatever it may be, chanting, or just walking on parikramā, or taking prasādam, or rendering some service to the dhāma, the results of that activity are magnified.

The benefits of that activity are manifest a thousand times. So life is short and we're meant to become pure devotees. It's not only that Prabhupāda wanted us to spread the movement, but he also wanted us to become pure devotees and go back home, back to Godhead.

So it's important to come here. So every year, myself and some of my assistants and helpers, we organize this parikramā where we go to specific holy places. We sit down, we have the kirtan, we talk about that particular place, which one of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes took place there or His devotees' pastimes took place there.

And then we chant, we have wonderful kirtans. Great kirtaneers like Hari Prabhu, who comes every year, Mādhava Prabhu sometimes joins our kirtan parties like this, and we have kirtan for hours and hours. Because these things are very easy here in the dhāma: *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ* – hearing, chanting, remembering Kṛṣṇa.

It's very easy to perform here. So this is our parikramā for, what, one month?

We just go out to the holy places, we hear, we chant, remember Kṛṣṇa, discuss the, the pastimes, following in the footsteps of our ācāryas. Prabhupāda in the beginning, when he brought the devotees to Vṛndāvana, he would take them out to, to visit various holy places.

And his Guru Mahārāja, our grandfather Guru Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, he's famous for taking thousands and thousands and thousands of disciples every year in Vṛndāvana for parikramā, and also in, in Māyāpura.

So following in their footsteps, on the advice of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we're here.

Preparing, actually. Right now, we're just going out to visit a few of the holy places that we'll be going with the, with our team. We're going to have about three or four hundred devotees on our parikramā this year. And we're just kind of going out and feeling it, seeing, you know, how to get to those holy places where we can have our kirtan, where we can have *Purushottam* like that.

And this is the best way possible to observe this auspicious month of Kartik, which is just one week away. Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda, for inviting us here to Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

We're also going to be visiting Māyāpura this year with our parikramā party. A little bit of change: two weeks here, and two weeks in Māyāpura. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Prabhupāda ki Jaya. Śrīla Prabhupāda ki Jaya.

Govinda Jaya Jaya. Jaya Śrī Rādhe. Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda ki Jaya.

Jaya Jaya Śrī Rādhe. Jaya Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Jaya Jaya Śrī Rādhe.