Hare Krishna, everyone!

With the auspicious month of Kartik, officially known as Dama-dharma, starting in one week, I thought to make a short video to prepare us all to take full advantage of this most auspicious of all months. Our setting for this video presentation, as you can see, is the most auspicious of all places in creation, the very bathing place of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Why here?

Because in <u>Śrīla</u> Prabhupāda's Kartika-devi, the goddess of Kartik, she is the goddess of Kartik because, well, there are many reasons, but one very important reason is that she fulfills the <em>vratas</em>, or vows, that devotees traditionally take during this auspicious month.

The month of Kartik is famous as the month of Urja-vrata, special vows we take to increase our devotion. And Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī herself is known as Urjeśvarī, the Empress of all power and strength, who gives us the strength to complete our vows during this month and, by doing so, awaken our love for the Divine Couple.

In Utkalikā Vallari, the vine of longings, verse 20, praises this special mercy of Śrīla-vrata during the month of Kartik. He writes, "O Rādhikā, the goddess of the Kartik month, I pitifully pray to You for this benediction: May the killer of Bakāsura be as merciful to me as You." Then, in verse 11, he praises her. Śrīla writes again, "O Kṛṣṇa, You delight the world with Your flute, by singing the glories of Kartika-devi, Rādhā, the topmost form of pure love." So, this is the month that devotees, in many ways, focus their attention on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

For being the greatest lover of Kṛṣṇa, and being the greatest lover of Kṛṣṇa, she's in charge of devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda once said that when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sees a sincere, aspiring devotee, even a new devotee, she recommends that devotee to Kṛṣṇa. "O Kṛṣṇa, there is a nice devotee trying his best to serve You.

Please accept him." So, we are going to Rādhākuṇḍa today to pray to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī for her special mercy during this month of Kartik. The month of Kartik is especially favorable for spiritual practices. Just as the hour before sunrise is the most auspicious time of the day for spiritual practices, so in the yearly cycle of 12 months, the month of Kartik is the most favorable of all months for spiritual practices.

This is confirmed. I was reading in Hari-bhakta Vilāsa, which is quoting a Purāṇa. It says there, and this is really interesting: "There is no month equal to Kartik, no Yuga equal to Satya Yuga, no śāstra equal to the Vedas, and no holy river equal to the Ganges." The śāstras also say that just as the result of giving ten thousand cows in charity can be obtained simply by offering one Tulasī leaf to the Lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, so the result of taking a bath in all the holy places of creation can be achieved simply by taking one bath on one morning in the month of Kartik.

And the Padma Purāṇa also has something to say about the auspicious month of Kartik. It says, "The Lord may offer liberation or even material happiness to a devotee, but once one has rendered devotional service in Vṛndāvana, particularly in the month of Kartik, such a devotee ends up hankering only for pure devotional service." All glories to the month of Kartik!

By observing Kartik, devotees can purify themselves, first of all, of sin for reactions, and then mature in pure devotion and eventually qualify themselves for returning back home, back to Godhead. Now, as we mentioned earlier, another name for the month of Kartik is the month of Damodara, Damodara-māsa.

This month is called Damodara, actually, for two reasons. One is that every month in our Vedic calendar has a worshipable deity. Like, one month the worshipable deity is Kṛṣṇa, so it's called the month of Kṛṣṇa. The next month the worshipable deity is Nārāyaṇa, so it's the month of Nārāyaṇa, like that.

So, the last month of the year, the worshipable deity's name is Damodara, so it becomes Damodara-māsa. Now, the second reason is more rustic. The second reason is because of the famous pastime of mother Yaśodā tying Kṛṣṇa to the grinding mortar with the rope.

That took place in the month of Damodara. In Sanskrit, a rope is called <em>dhāma</em>, and a belly is called <em>udara</em>. So, a person who has a rope <em>dhāma</em> on his belly <em>udara</em> is called Damodara. So, the pastime of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, being bound to the grinding mortar took place when He was a small child living in Gokul.

Our <em>ācāryas</em> have described three phases of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana: <em>kaumāra</em> pastimes when He was a baby or child, <em>paudā</em> when He's a young boy, and <em>kaiśora</em> when He's a teenager.

He doesn't grow up beyond that. He's eternally sixteen years old at that age because of His transcendental form. We know Kṛṣṇa was born or appeared in Mathurā, but that very night, as we discussed many times, His father Vasudeva brought Him to Vṛndāvana, specifically to Gokul.

And Kṛṣṇa stayed three years and four months there. And while in Gokul, as a baby, He demonstrated His, I would just say, full-fledged godhood by killing numerous demons like Pūtanā, Aghāsura, the Kart demon, etc. But one day, Kṛṣṇa broke open the storehouse, the transcendental chest of transcendental love, by performing His famous pastime and being tied with the ropes of mother Yaśodā's affection.

You could say it's the crest jewel of pastimes of <em>vatsalya-rasa</em>, or the <em>rasa</em> of parenthood. And we'll be discussing in detail every Friday during Kartik this Damodara-līlā in our Vṛndāvana lecture series on YouTube.

So, in the upcoming months, we will all be singing daily the famous Damodara-ṣṭakam. It's a favorite of devotees. And in doing so, we'll be praising both Kṛṣṇa and His childhood pastimes with mother Yaśodā, as well as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is Kartika-devī, the Empress of the month of Kartik.

And this is made very clear in the last verse of the Damodara-ṣṭakam. "I offer my obeisances unto Your beloved Rādhikā, and unto Your unlimited pastimes." "I offer my obeisances unto Your beloved Rādhikā, and unto Your unlimited pastimes." So, have a wonderful Kartik.

I hope this video has helped you prepare for this most auspicious month. All glories!