On the banks of the Sacred Ganges River, at the base of the Himalayan mountains, this is a place where for millennia, yogis, rishis, and saintly persons have come to practice Hatha Yoga or Ashtanga Yoga, in particular, to realize the Supersoul within the heart.

That's actually the goal of Hatha Yoga, to realize the Supreme Lord within the heart. The Vedic literatures explain that the Absolute Truth appears before us in three features: as Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, the Original Personality of Godhead, from whom the two other features of the Lord manifest, namely the Brahman effulgence – the Lord is very effulgent – the Brahman effulgence, and as the Supersoul in the heart of every living entity.

So, the impersonalists, the jñānīs, they desire to merge into that effulgence, and the yogis, they want to see that Supersoul within their hearts. So, they come here to this particular place, Ṛṣikesh, and they live a very austere life. Kṛṣṇa describes the life of the yogi in the Bhagavad-gītā as quite austere.

They don't eat too much, they don't eat too little; they don't sleep too much, they don't sleep too little. Basically, they're sitting in their asanas practically 24 hours a day, trying to realize the Supersoul within the heart, becoming detached from this material world.

So, that's very attractive to people now in the West. They want to practice yoga, perhaps for health reasons or whatever, but some of them are going a little deeper, they want to see the Lord within the heart. So, they come here to Ṛṣikesh by the thousands, especially at this time of year.

They come here by the thousands. There are so many yoga schools where they practice yoga, etc. So, we've also come, the Hare Kṛṣṇa devotees have also come.

I brought a crew of 80 devotees, very talented devotees, and we're going to have a kīrtana Fest every morning and every night, with workshops during the day for the Westerners to come into contact with what we would say is the topmost yoga: realizing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, from whom the Brahman effulgence is coming and to whom He goes into the heart of every living entity.

We've come here for that particular purpose. We've rented a very beautiful āśrama; we have fantastic cooks, some of the best kīrtaners in the world. So, we're going to be going out every day for a month, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa on the streets, and inviting them with invitations, etc., to come to our āśrama in the morning for kīrtana, at noon for workshops, and in the evening for five hours of kīrtana.

In this way, we want to share the complete process of yoga, the topmost yoga of bhakti, whereby one can awaken his or her eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa. So, we're really excited. We're very excited because, well, we've got a good audience; people have come here specifically for spiritual life, and we want to give them the very best.

So, yes, please stick with us. Our videographer, Hunter, and Vṛndāvana, our photographer, he'll be sharing our experience with all of you for the next three weeks, maybe it'll even go a week longer, for one month.

But I'm very happy to be here; it's a very transcendental atmosphere, the Ganges River. The perk is, one of the perks is we get to bathe in the Ganges every day and walk into the foothills and see the caves where the yogis meditated, become inspired by their determination.

So, yes, our Ṛṣikesh Kīrtana Fest 2023. Please give us your blessings. All glories. Okay. Gangnam Chicago. God.