I would not request his holiness until you must vow meeting to kindly share his thoughts. I'd like to begin by first offering that respect to which Raj drew. I just met for the first time this afternoon, and I hope that we have a long friendship in serving the people and serving the Supreme Lord as well.

My respect while the distinguished guests here this evening, and to the press, to the public as well. You have to forgive me that although I've been visiting your country regularly for the last 40 years, I definitely spend more time in your country than my country.

I don't speak Hindi, but as a charge he was speaking, I did hear the term "noble cause" on several occasions. And this is actually what has drawn me. Nowadays, India is accented and punctuated with indeed with the English phrases.

I see "so noble cause." This is actually what has attracted me to participate in this event. I realize that for the city of Bombay, which is, you could say, practically my favorite city in the whole world. As I travel the whole world, I love the cosmopolitan nature of this city.

So many different ethnic groups, so many different social causes, so many different religions. It's Julia, as it was saying, a melting pot of different cultures. I appreciate it for that, and we're going to have a great fest. I've been going through the book here, and I've seen all different types of entertainment.

That's another thing, but it wasn't the Bollywood that attracted me as a sannyasi to this event, but rather it is the underlying theme of this vessel of bringing different cultures together. And this is not the first time that I've worked on such an initiative, and this is probably why I'm here because my good friend, Dr. if you note how, so we worked on a similar cause in the great country of South Africa many years ago.

I was invited to lunch one day to the presidential palace of Nelson Mandela. He appreciated our movement in South Africa, and she loved her food. He loved their to Tyrion Hari Krishna food.

He'd often come to our temples, that we became close friends, and one day he sat down with me, he said, Swamiji, I'm doing everything I can to try to stop my people from fighting, but they fight. We've abolished apartheid, but still the people are fighting.

Do you have any suggestion from your culture, your Vedic culture that you're following from India, how we could stop our people from fighting?

So I thought for a moment, I said, Mr. President, I think that if all the peoples, the ethnic groups, the blacks, the whites, the Afrikaans, the Chinese, that attempt to come together under one roof and show their culture, this would bring down barriers.

And he said, why does that?

I said, because culture is the best thing that any society can offer it. It's the best. It's the music, the dance, the poetry, the food, the love exchange between people. So let's have a festival where the black people, the white people, with the brown people, the yellow people, they all come together and show their culture.

He said, Swami, let's try it. We did. We had a major festival. Hundreds of thousands of people came. It was organized also with Dr. V. no hassle. I think that's one reason it was a success. And the result was that after that, the president called me.

He said, that festival probably was the best attempt we've had at social cohesion in our country since apartheid. It worked very well. And we were sitting there during the program, and he said, this is so nice. I can see people are pushing each other's culture.

It's breaking down barriers. He said, that is there anything else we can do?

I said, yes, actually, the way that we can really bring peace and goodwill to not only the country of South Africa, but to the whole world, is to understand our common bond. We have many differences. There's no harm with that.

Variety is the spice of life. But if you really want peace in the world, we have to find what we have in common. And I said, Mr. President, you and I have two different colored skins. That's not going to be our skin color.

May not be our religion. It may not be our nationality. It may not be our language. You said, what is it, Ammaji?

I said, is that we're all children of God. We all come from from one source, Supreme Lord. I said, in my culture, we call him Krishna.

Krishna means the all-attractive Personality of Godhead.

Other religions call him Allah. Some call him Jehovah. Some call them Yahweh. He's the same person. But in our block, the ether Krishna says, aham, ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā.

That he is the seed-giving father of all living entities. So that means actually, all of us are brothers and sisters. We have the same father. We're all brothers and sister. I said, that is the message of India to the world for world peace.

I said, they India actually is meant to be the sphere of spiritual beacon for the whole world. West from the West, we can get science and technology and so many things. They make life a little bit comfortable. They don't solve the real problems of life.

This is a material world, after all. Our attempt should be to become self-realized and go back to the kingdom of God, back to the spiritual world. I said, India has the best food, the best philosophy, the best dance, the best music, the best philosophers, has best everything.

So not only should we share this message in South Africa, I said, we should share this message all over the world. So as we were going away from that festive, which was a great event, Nelson, my President Mandela turned to me and said, Swamiji, this was the very best day of my dying.

He loved very much this message of India, how we can unite together on a spiritual platform. So that's my contribution here. I'm also going to come and see some of the entertainment that's Mumbai. It's a thriving community. You got the best entertainment.

It's going to be wonderful. But let's get together and share this common bond. They, they're all without distinction, part of one spiritual family. That is a message of India for peace. Let it be a message not only for India, but the whole world.

Thank you very much. Yeah, actually, as a footnote, I have one pro. He's been traveling for 40 years around the world to almost every major city in the world. It's called Discover India. We share your culture. Although we're just your adopted children, I wasn't born in your culture, in their land, but you adopted me very kindly.

Thank you as your adopted sons and daughters for 14 different countries where we have a festival tour around the world. We will be introduced the theatrical productions of the Ramayana, Sita, Rama, Lakshmana, Hanuman, the Mahabharata. We introduced Kathak, Odissi dancing.

I give an hour-and-a-half lecture on the Bhagavad-Gita. Everywhere we go, we show some martial arts and puppet shows. We just finished a program in America. We went to Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Columbia University, Rutgers, all the big universities. We showed your culture.

The result was every program, we had a standing ovation. People love you. So I'm bringing that group from Russia and Ukraine and Moldova, and bringing that group to this wave festival to share with you. I think so that needs a big round of applause.

Without Vadas, Maura is bringing nearly 90 performers from all over Europe to be a part of the Mumbai distressing Indian culture.