"*00215*.*
"### Lecture Transcript: SB 10.24.17

All right, question everyone. Welcome, so on this very, very auspicious day—the disappearance day of three great personalities very dear to all of our hearts, our ācāryas. It’s the disappearance day of Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. I am very honored that I’ve been asked to speak on this auspicious day; they’ve given me a verse from 10.24.17.

"Material bodies, high and low class, the conditioned living entity... where the reactions of this material activities... the neutral party, karma—material work—in spiritualness." Translation by His Divine Grace: "Because it is karma, it causes the conditioned living entity to accept and then give up different high and low-grade material bodies. This karma is his enemy, friend, and neutral witness, his spiritual master, and controlling Lord." Purport: "Even the demigods are bound and limited by the laws of karma, and Indra himself is subordinate to the laws of karma, as is explicitly stated in the purāṇas. The Supreme Lord, Govinda, awards all creatures the appropriate results of their work. This is as true for mighty Indra, the Lord in the heavenly kingdoms, as it is for the germ... Bhagavad-gītā 7.20 also states: 'Only those who have lost their intelligence because of various material desires surrender them to demigods rather than worship the Supreme Lord.' In fact, the demigods cannot award benefits to anyone independently, as stated by Lord Kṛṣṇa in the Gītā: all benefits are ultimately issued by the Lord himself. Thus, it is not altogether incorrect to say that demigod worship is useless, since even the demigods are under the laws of karma. In fact, this is the case, but Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Absolute Truth, is not subordinate to the laws of karma; rather, he can independently offer or withhold favor. This is confirmed in the verse from the Purāṇa I quoted above, the third line of which is, 'The Lord burns up all the accumulated karma of those engaged in His service.' Not only is Lord Kṛṣṇa above the laws of material reaction, but He can immediately dissolve these laws for anyone who satisfies Him through loving service. Thus, the Almighty God is supreme and absolute; by surrendering to Him, one can escape the bonds of karma and stop accepting their dismal rule."

So, the subject matter of the verse today, quite simply, is karma. Interestingly enough, of all the many hundreds of thousands or more words in the Sanskrit dictionary, the *Amarakośa*, the word "karma" is probably the most familiar to people in the West. The Vedic literature is very vast; there are hundreds, say millions, of words. But in Western countries now, mainly due to the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, people are becoming familiar with this literature by Prabhupāda’s grace through the medium of his books and his representatives. If there is any word in this with which people are familiar, it is "karma." Nowadays, it is somewhat understood. I remember preaching in the 1970s; people didn't know this word "karma." Now they know, and it's—you could say it's somewhat understood. Elegance is truth spoken concisely. In Australia, they know karma; they say, "What goes around comes around." In summary, karma puts to rest the perennial question that people often ask: "Why do good things happen to bad people, and why do bad things happen to good people?" There is some interest, some understanding, but that being said, the concept of karma actually is very, very deep and extremely difficult to understand—extremely difficult. "But Mahārāja, you know, what goes around comes around. For every action there is an opposite reaction. What’s the difficulty?" No, it’s very complex. It’s very difficult; even the most astute minds can hardly comprehend it. How do we know that? 

Because Kṛṣṇa says in 4.17: "The intricacies of karma are very difficult to understand. We may think we understand, but the intricacies of karma are very difficult." It goes on: "Even the intelligent are bewildered in understanding karma." Nevertheless, it’s a subject matter that we have to contend with; we have to grapple with it. It’s very difficult to understand, but each and every one of us has to recognize it and grapple with it because it controls our life from the cradle to the grave. Karma alone is why we suffer in this world and why we, quote-unquote, "enjoy." (I mean, enjoyment is just another type of suffering, but we’ll talk about that later.) And not just in this life, but in many lifetimes together. According to their karma, all living entities are wandering throughout the entire universe; some of them are elevated to upper planetary systems, and some are going down, down, down into the lower planetary systems, repeatedly, over and over and over and over, since time immemorial. In other words, this karma, it stays with us. It’s not like, you know, "Last night the mosquitoes were on my arm, go away." No, it’s very difficult to erase. This karma sits in the heart; the heart is only this big, but it can accommodate billions of sinful reactions. This is the mystery of karma. 

When the body dies, as we know, the soul moves on, and we’re forced to leave everything behind: family, house, career, money, name, fame—but not your karma. That’s the baggage that we take with us, and it builds up life after life after life. Like, unfortunately, you see here in India—I left to go to the European summer for some time, and as I was going out of Vṛndāvana, I saw, unfortunately, a garbage dump, and when I came back a few weeks ago, it was huge. So karma’s like that; it accumulates. And this means, let us be frank, not only bad karma but good karma. You know, our life’s a mixture of the good, the bad, and the ugly. So we do good deeds, and we do bad deeds, and we do really bad deeds. So, you know, we have some good karma as well. So someone can say, "Well, then it's not so bad. I can tolerate the bad karma, but you know, I get some good karma. I can tolerate." But from the absolute point of view, comparing with the spiritual world—where every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there’s a festival every day for the flute—it’s the constant companion. From the absolute point of view, good karma is not good. We can speak frankly; we’re in a class for the devotees, and in *Bhagavad-gītā* classes for introducing... let me be very frank here: hard talk. Hard talk. 

[Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī], whose disappearance day we’re celebrating today, he writes quite frankly, because a *sādhu*—the name *sādhu* means that when he speaks, he cuts material attachments. Don’t go to a lecture by a Vaiṣṇava *sādhu* if you’re not prepared to cut your material attachments and in great desperation grab onto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. What does he say? He’s saying that in the material world, conceptions of good and bad, it’s all mental speculation. Therefore, saying "this is good" and "this is bad," he said, it’s a mistake. His summary: it’s all bad. Welcome to the material world. I mean, first impressions are the most important, right? So what’s our first impression? You know, we come out of the womb, come into our life, and because we need oxygen in our lungs, the doctor takes us by the feet and slaps us on the backside, and we go, "Welcome to the material world." First impressions. So, but there’s some good? No, he said it’s all bad. So how is good karma bad? Well, bad in the sense that good karma buys one a good birth and, in a pious country (if there’s any left), wealth, you become beautiful, become famous, etc. But when you get attached to that, you get a sense of comfort. Probably this is the problem with the mode of goodness: that one has a sense of, "You know, things are okay, I’m comfortable, there’s no need to take up spiritual life." The first verse of *Vedānta-sūtra*: Now that you’ve come to the human form of life, what’s your business? Consciousness: understand who you are, who is God, and what is your intimate relationship with God. That’s the purpose of life, not "eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die." That was the mantra, quote-unquote, of the gladiators—"eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die"—that’s become the mood of modern society. So things are kind of going okay, because if you have good karma, what’s the need to go to the church? You’re not suffering. Why go to the temple? Why go to the mosque? So this was the problem with good karma: we don’t understand what is the real purpose. 

"Struggle for existence, the human race, the only hope is divine grace." So now, somebody else, our *ācāryas*. He says, "My heart is always burning in the fire of material existence, and I have made no provisions for getting out. I remain here trying to enjoy this holocaust." I remember from the early years, "Here I am trying to enjoy myself in a holocaust." We won’t go into detail; we know this word is very powerful, very potent from World War II—Holocaust. So an intelligent man and woman, they’ll inquire how to get out of this blazing fire of material existence. And if they’re fortunate enough to come in contact with this movement, above all, the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, if they’re fortunate to come in contact with this movement, they’ll find their way out, because this movement will introduce you to Kṛṣṇa. 

This is on the tongue, my—all of my godbrothers here—especially our relationship with Śrīla Prabhupāda—stored in hand, intelligent men cut through the binding knots of reactionary work, karma, we’re finding the positive alternative now by remembering the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, who would not pay attention to his message? And if people are not so fortunate to, you know, come to the temple or go to the restaurant or search us out, the mood of this movement is: we will go to them. This is International: we will go to them. If Muhammad does not go to the mountain, the mountain will come to Muhammad. "There is no God but God and Muhammad is His prophet," fine. So if Muhammad doesn't go to the mountain, the mountain goes to him. So if the people don’t come to us, Prabhupāda said the temples are bases for preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We go out into *saṅkīrtana*, book distribution, festivals, restaurants; we’ll come to them with great pleasure. This is our real pleasure, and this phenomenon of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness and its founder, Śrīla Prabhupāda, this was predicted 500 years ago. Prabhus, we are part of a prophecy; we’re part of a prediction. We are the prediction. We have no qualification other than Prabhupāda’s causeless mercy. Like he said one time in a humorous way here in Vṛndāvana, I heard him say: "Just as Rāma conquered Laṅkā with monkeys and bears, so I am conquering the world with my disciples." 

Thank you. We’re part of this prediction, following the prediction. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 10.2.37, it’s one of my favorite verses. Every devotee who knows verses, they have their favorite verses. What are the favorite verses by Bhaktivinoda? It’s a collection of those verses which he held very near and dear, and therefore we also hold *Padyāvalī* very near and dear. So this is one of my, you know, my humble self, this was one of my favorite all-time verses: "From the moment that the holy name of Hari appeared on the Earth, Vaiṣṇavas became manifest everywhere, adorned with faultless tilaka and neck beads and equipped with the Mahā-mantra. In the midst of the age of Kali, they purify the atmosphere, chanting 'Hari! Hari!'" Indeed, it came to pass. See, the Rāmāyaṇa—so indeed it came to pass, it was meant to happen, a great challenge. So when you have a great challenge, you take your best man to lead the forces. So Prabhupāda is the Lord’s chosen son who brought this movement to the West. So, again, as we were explaining, but Bhāgavatam was explaining the way to destroy this karma—this karma that is just lingering on in our hearts—sword in hand, intelligent men cut through the binding knots of reactionary work, karma, by remembering the Lord. How do we remember the Lord? And by studying Vedic scriptures as presented to us. And this is in accordance with the verse from *Brahma-saṁhitā* 5.54, which is quoted in today’s purport: that the Supreme Lord burns up all accumulated karma of those engaged in His devotional service. And if there’s a solution—perfect questions, perfect answers—how to get free of karma? The Supreme Lord burns up all the accumulated karma of those engaged in His service. And the purport today by Prabhupāda’s disciples stresses the same. I think it must have been a *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* day if he wrote: "Lord Kṛṣṇa can immediately dissolve these laws of karma for anyone who satisfies Him through loving devotional service." 

So that is the key, like if the door is locked, you need your key. So this mysterious, difficult-to-understand, very complex karma—don’t worry about it, just destroy it. Just destroy it. Destroy those nasty seeds. I’ll cover their "festering"—this is a good word—festering for many births in our heart. You know, if you get, you know, like an infection, you want to take care of it immediately. If you’ve got pimples, you want to get rid of it immediately. You’ve got gallstones... so why aren't we just, you know, with a sense of urgency trying to get rid of the karmic which for us is an obstacle to pure devotion to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa? This is our selfish desires. 

So it’s festering—told the doctor, like, sometimes we hear that for a festering wound... when I was in the Amazon jungle many years ago on a preaching mission, as we were floating down the Amazon River, I inadvertently cut my arm—a big cut here—on a nail on the boat, a rusty nail. And because we didn’t have any proper medicine, we did not... we didn’t have any medicine, it started festering over time; the cut, like, costs of different colors. And one day I woke up, there were worms there from the jungle. So I went to the shaman in the, you know, one of the villages in the jungle; he immediately took a knife without me even noticing. And all this festering wound came out. And he took some leaves and kind of plant, gribble plant from the jungle, squished it and put it in there and wrapped it up. Five days, it was gone. Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā, He’s the healing herb; no antibiotics, just Nature’s cure. So I use this word "festering" with some... with some realization. So karma’s festering in our hearts, but Lord—Lord Kṛṣṇa can immediately dissolve these laws of karma for anyone who satisfies Him through the process of devotional service. Pick one or two or three or all, and gradually the karma goes with the material desires though. And what’s underneath is very nice. Underneath is very nice; that’s the seed, the *bhakti-latā-bīja*, and in that now-fertile ground, without any weeds, that *bhakti-latā-bīja* can grow and mature very nicely. So how does Kṛṣṇa do this? How does He deliver us this golden opportunity of *sevā*, of service to His lotus feet, by which the heart becomes purified? Well, unless He’s on the Earth like He was 5,000 years ago, or as recently in cosmic time 500 years ago, and one is fortunate enough to meet Him. Because the Lord was surrounded by His associates in the spiritual world; the gopīs became... took male forms and assisted Him in various ways in the *saṅkīrtana* movement. But it also—Mahāprabhu’s causeless mercy—was that the common man could come in contact with Him. Not only the common man, but the sinful man, like Jagāi and Mādhāi, they could also approach the Lord. 

Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa... in the spiritual world, when he first saw Caitanya Mahāprabhu, was in Rāmकेलī; he was there with Sanātana Gosvāmī serving the Nawab. And Sanātana... they’re forced into service. Mahāprabhu was on His way to Vṛndāvana, He took a detour like this to see His eternal associates, came into the village. Some distance away, Sanātana was doing his job there, and around the corner through the jungle appeared Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He’s very effulgent, seven feet tall, effulgence, beautiful, full of prayer, and immediately when he saw Him, he realized... and this verse came from the lotus mouth: "Who is this person? Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He’s the most munificent incarnation of the Lord ever." Why? Because He’s giving the simple process of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa to who? The most fallen. And what is the result? Brother’s prayer. This is it. Possible to understand how to calculate *vraja-prema*? It’s the highest part of the tree; He’s giving it to the lowest. This is Prabhupāda. So if He’s on the Earth, hey, run and find Him. 

But if we’re not so fortunate—you know, we’re not fortunate, we didn’t—we weren’t there; if we were there, we wouldn’t be here today—so the Lord works in mysterious ways. Because Kṛṣṇa-dāsa Kavirāja said one time in Geneva, I was there, he said, "The Lord wants us to come back to the spiritual world more than we want to go back." So His ways are mysterious to guide us to His lotus feet. So He appears in other ways when He’s not personally present. *Avatāra* in the age of Kali: Kṛṣṇa, the Mahā-mantra, is the incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Simply by chanting this holy name, one associates with the Lord directly. Anyone who does this is certainly delivered. Another way is that the Lord arranges for us to take up devotional service as the Supersoul within our hearts. When He sees our ignorance, our eagerness, our desperation for spiritual life, He arranges that we come in contact with a spiritual institution like ISKCON. He arranges that your coming in contact with this movement was not based on your karma; it was based on *guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāda*. Guru, Kṛṣṇa, and His representatives, they intervened: "Stop your nonsense. Here is Kṛṣṇa. Take Him." They intervene. We have no qualification, but other compassion; they just stop—"Who are you? Stop, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa!" Like that. And the third way—there’s many ways, but another way that Lord mysteriously gets us to take up devotional service is when He pushes us in touch with His representative, the spiritual master. I remember the philosopher’s offering, one of Śivarāma Swami’s disciples, Gaurāngī-dāsī, it really touched my heart. She wrote in her offering some years ago, "Guru Mahārāja, it took you so long to find me; please never kick me away." However, it resonates, right? Generally, we think of the disciple as searching for the spiritual master, but in the age of Kali, the spiritual master goes searching for the disciple. You know? "So Guru Mahārāja, it took you so long to find me, please never kick me away." But in all these cases that I’ve mentioned, how the Lord acts mysteriously to bring us to His lotus feet, we must show our desperate need to be freed from this festering karma and material desires. We have to show the Lord, as I’m always saying, we have to chant from the heart; our service must be done with some feeling. If we don’t have *prema*, at least we can have appreciation; that’ll turn into affection, and that will turn into love. 

We have to pray like Rūpa Gosvāmī; we have to really want to get out of here. We have to pray like he prays in *Stava-mālā*, text 60: "I am drowning in the painful, fathomless whirlpool of birth and death, O Lord, O friend of those who have no shelter. O friend of those who have no shelter, O effulgent moon of mercy, please, just this one time, extend your hand to save me." So does that mean that we see this long arm of, you know, coming in? It’s just poetry. Poetry brings forth certain emotions. What is the use of the hunter’s arrow unless it pierces the heart? What is the use of poetry unless it pierces the heart and awakens spiritual emotions? That’s real poetry. "So just this one time, extend your hand to save me." So what is that? That’s the spiritual master. So when such a spiritual master appears in our life, for all practical purposes, this dilemma of karma, it’s resolved, because the spiritual master is so kind that he absorbs the karma of his disciples. So at least that obstacle to spiritual life is removed. A little more serious is the material desires, but it’s good to have that festering wound cleaned up. Took me one week at the moment of initiation—in one minute Prabhupāda said, "Clean slate." 

So how can we ever repay this? And Śrīla Prabhupāda said that it is for this reason that sometimes the spiritual master becomes ill, or at the very least, sometimes he has to have a bad dream. 8.4.15—I’ll recite; I wrote it down because it’s important: "A devotee sometimes accepts a sinful person as his disciple, and to counteract the sinful reactions he accepts from the disciple, he has to see a bad dream. Nonetheless, the spiritual master is so kind that in spite of having bad dreams due to the sinful disciple, he accepts this troublesome business for the deliverance of the victims of Kali-yuga. After initiation, therefore, disciples should be extremely careful not to commit again any sinful act that might cause difficulties for himself and the spiritual master." So, you know, we’re meant to always be questioning—questions, questions on my mind, it’s an old song. In this time, so how does the spiritual master deal with the karma of 10 disciples, 20 disciples, or a thousand disciples, 10,000 disciples? Hey, you know, we’re talking about the festering karma within our heart; what if you accept the karma of 50,000 disciples? Like, how does this work? We would think this means that the Guru is going to be sick all the time. How does he deal with it? He does so through the medium of chanting the holy names. 

I love this verse: "The chanting of the holy names of the Lord is able to uproot even the reactions of the greatest sins. Therefore, the chanting of the *saṅkīrtana* movement is the most auspicious activity in the universe. Please try to understand it so that others will take it seriously." Hari! One recitation of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is so powerful that all sinful reactions run to a distant place. So in our ISKCON, but we have, you know, written what are the qualifications for a guru, what are the qualifications of a disciple; it’s all written. But one very obvious qualification of the spiritual master is he must have unflinching faith in the holy names of the Lord. Prabhupāda told me one time in London, "Preach boldly and have faith in the holy names." That’s like etched in my heart: "Preach boldly and have faith in the holy names." We—I’m still trying; I’ll be very honest with you, I’m still aspiring to fulfill that instruction. But Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written, *nāmākṣara bahirāya, nāma-nāhī haya*: "Merely reciting the external syllables of the holy name does not mean that one’s actually chanting the holy name." So therefore, the spiritual master, he has to become a faithful chanter of Kṛṣṇa’s holy name; he must have faith. *Śraddhā* is the word. Simply by chanting the holy names of Hari, a sinful person can counteract the reactions of more sins than he is able to commit. So this is the gift of the spiritual master which we officially receive. You have to—you have to be initiated into it, into the chanting of the holy names, that at the time of initiation, if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, you can get free of karma and give up material desires. But to get *prema*, our real goal in life, that you have to be initiated into the mantra by a bona fide Vaiṣṇava. So we should be very eager for initiation, very... it should be like a burning desire. 

*Śaraṇāgati*, another one of my favorites: "If by chance, by good fortune, one gets a guru, it doesn’t matter whether one is in the temple or the forest. If the spiritual master agrees, one should take initiation immediately, without waiting for a suitable time or place." Of course, there’s a price you have to pay for that; you have to give up *danam*, at least the desire to give up wealth, you know, attachment to material wealth, inappropriate association with the opposite sex, and the desire to become famous. A devotee one time—a disciple—asked Prabhupāda, said, "This is your... Prabhupāda, treat... Prabhupāda, I’m being very honest with you, what if I don’t have the desire to give up sense gratification?" That’s honesty; that’s being straightforward. Said Prabhupāda, "What if I don’t have this desire?" So Prabhupāda simply said, "Then just desire to desire." At least that has to be there. One time a disciple came to his guru, he said, "Gurujī, good evening, I can’t give up māyā." So the guru said, "Why is that?" The disciple said, "Well, I—I have a good excuse; māyā won’t let go of me." So the guru became very grave and he said, "Then come back to see me tomorrow morning over there under that fig tree." The disciple said, "All right, what’s—what’s going on?" So the next morning, the guru, the disciple arrived at the meeting place and he saw his guru was hugging the tree—the fig tree. So he said, "Guru Mahārāja, why are you hugging the tree?" So the guru replied, "I’m not hugging the tree; the tree’s hugging me." So the disciple said with all my humility, "That’s ridiculous, the tree’s not hugging you, you’re hugging the tree! Just let go." So at that point, the guru spun around; he said, "Yes, in the same way, māyā is not holding on to you; you’re holding on to māyā. Let go." 

So we have to be prepared to give up sense gratification, and old habits die hard. The very thought of giving up all that is near and dear to us is—sometimes it can be horrifying. Let’s just be honest. One time Prabhupāda shared that several times, after the departure of... in his dreams, he was a householder, and Prabhupāda said, "He was beckoning me, telling us, telling us..." and Prabhupāda said, "I was already... I was fine." He said, "His English is, 'Hardy-fy.'" Of course, Prabhupāda, he had no fear having taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, but this was his pastime to teach us how difficult it is to give up the world. And if one can do it, he’ll be blessed to make further progress. When the famous personality took a vow, "I will not marry in this lifetime, I will remain celibate," the demigods called out, "How horrible!" Like, you know, we want a nice spiritual name from our Guru, *visa* means horrible, "How horrible!" Because for materialistic people—with all due respect to the demigods or their devotions—mixed giving up sex life is like going to hell. But if one experiences a higher taste of Kṛṣṇa consciousness—there’s a simple method introduced by Mahāprabhu—*viṣayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥ*. The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the taste for sense objects remains, but ceasing such engagements by experiencing higher taste is fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So one should ask for initiation when they’re convinced of the futility of sense gratification, ready to sacrifice it, the higher taste of devotional service. Once there was another aspired disciple, not the same fellow, it wasn’t so serious about spiritual life, you know, to follow all the rules and regulations. So nevertheless, he approached the spiritual master and said, "Gurujī, I think I—I’m kind of in it, kind of ready for initiation, I mean, you know, it’s a pretty good chance of all the rules, I mean, I think—I think I want to be initiated." So the guru said, "Follow me down to the river." "Oh, okay." Went down to the river, and they went waist-deep, and then the guru took the śikhā of the disciple, plunged it into the river water. You know, you can last 4 minutes and 37 seconds without air. So at 4 minutes and 35 seconds, he pulled his head out. He said, "How much did you want air?" "I wanted air like life itself!" He said, the guru said, "When you want initiation with the same intensity, then you come and see me." 

And if one is serious, he takes up the process, it’s—it’s absolutely 100 percent certain that a transformation will take place. I love that verse: "As bell metal can be turned into gold when treated with mercury, a disciple initiated by a bona fide guru immediately attains the position of a brāhmaṇa, and from that you can go to *śuddha-bhakti*, the transcendence." Of course, taking initiation into the chanting of the holy names, again, it’s not just about getting free from karma; it’s more about getting free of material desires and then again awakening our love for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. And altogether, that may sound like a challenge. Whoa, that festering wound and those unlimited nasty desires. I reported one time in Rome; he was talking to one of my godbrothers. He said, "If I showed you how many material desires you have in your heart, you’d faint." And hearing that, that godbrother almost fainted, he sat down actually. So that’s—that’s all of this, actually. So it’s a challenge: get rid of the festering wound, get rid of the material desires, somehow awaken *prema*. It’s—it’s a great challenge. But Bhakti-tīrtha Swami gave me 10 minutes more, so bear with me. It’s a challenge even now, as many devotees in my generation are living in the twilight of our years. I just asked Catur-ātmā, my bosom buddy, "How old are you?" He said, "70." "Wait a minute, I think of him as 55 or 60, you know." Okay, I’m 73 going on 74, like what? It’s true: birth, disease, old age. So many devotees in my generation are living in the twilight of our years, and we actually wonder, this is a huge challenge, "What hope is there for us?" The goal, as I said many times, is pure devotion, *prema*, but many of us, as yet—especially myself—we haven’t achieved it here. 

53 years, and I haven't achieved it here; shame on me. But I feel there’s hope, there’s genuine hope. And what is the hope? My scripture, actually, of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness: Mahāprabhu is the most merciful incarnation of the Lord, and all of His members are this kind. We have the right to say, "Śrīla Prabhupāda’s most merciful representative." If we tried to practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness as it was done 500 years ago in Jagannātha Purī with Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we couldn’t do it. The ladies couldn’t come within a hundred yards of Mahāprabhu, He would sleep on the ground; we couldn’t do so. Prabhupāda was so expert, so innovative in his ways that he adjusted everything so that anyone and everyone can take up the process. So he’s our deliverer. It’s by his mercy that one day we will be delivered from material existence to the kingdom of God. We may be who we are, we may feel feeble in our attempts to really represent Prabhupāda and carry on his mission as quickly as possible, as he wanted it. But if we try our best, and throughout our whole lives—because these men sitting here, they gave their youth to Prabhupāda, they gave their middle age to Prabhupāda, and now they’re giving their old age to Prabhupāda—this is something we could admire of this first generation. Youth, middle age, and just that enough, that’s something. But we have to stick to the straight and narrow, and as many speakers are saying, I was so impressed through the day with the lecture of... We should share a good portion with the people of the world. Who else will do it? And if we do that, Prabhupāda will deliver us, for he has written that he will take responsibility for our deliverance. We can’t abuse that, but he has said if we serve him—meaning that we’re serving Kṛṣṇa because that’s the connection—he will take responsibility. Just serve as best you can, be a good devotee, and share a good portion with others. This is the essence of ISKCON. Prabhupāda wanted us to be competent devotees, and how to do that by sharing a good fortune. Take some... some service in the *saṅkīrtana* movement and then Prabhupāda will take responsibility. You don’t have to worry about being delivered... in the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* we hear Nārada Muni say to the hunter, Mṛgāri: *māyā-mṛga-māyā...* "My dear hunter, if you follow my instructions, I shall find a way that we shall be delivered." He’s a hunter, Mṛgāri, killer of the soul, killing animals, killing the souls, chances for self-realization. "I’m a great... and then," and then Nārada says, "If you follow these instructions: stop that, sit there, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, I shall find a way." We are trying our best, but really we make progress by blessings. Śrīla Prabhupāda says in the purport to that essential verse, "This is the secret of success: if one has unflinching faith in Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master, the result is that all the conclusions of the revealed scriptures will be open to such a person." A pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa can make the same demands that Nārada Muni is making: "If you follow my instructions, then I shall take responsibility." Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jai! Just like one time Śrīla... Kamal Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī, because he was complaining—not complaining, but he was revealing his mind to Śrīla Prabhupāda—said, "Prabhupāda, here I am in Vṛndāvana, the birthplace and the land of Kṛṣṇa. I’m not going to *parikramā*, I don’t even bathe in the Yamunā. I’m just sitting here in this construction zone with the bricks around me and the dust and the heat, you know, making sure the materials are of good quality, making sure we don’t get cheated. I’m busy with bank transfers. How am I going to make it back to Godhead?" Prabhupāda said, "That’s okay, you just keep working like this and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda will incarnate in your mind at the moment of death, take it back home, back to Godhead." 

So in conclusion: be strict, straight, narrow, follow the rules, regulations. Another instruction: Prabhupāda says, "Cooperate together, because many hands make small work," and have this burning desire. Because you know the burning desire to get rid of the festering wound, it’s gone, it’s gone. So now what? Show the same compassion for others. This is the real heart; it’s been cleansed. The heart of a Vaiṣṇava, that’s all in his purports to... he writes, "So important, in the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, there are only two principle instructions: develop a taste for chanting the holy names and display compassion for fallen souls." How wonderful! In the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, there’s only two principle instructions: develop a taste, get some numbers, chant attentively of all the syllables, focus from the heart, and then go out and preach, or support the preaching, or make bead bags for the *saṅkīrtana* devotees, or raise children to become generals in the *saṅkīrtana* movement—that the mothers stay home, they’re always inside, they’re cooking, diapers, they’re raising those boys and those girls to take over from where we left off. We must honor those mothers. So if we do that, Śrīla Prabhupāda will be kind upon us and we will meet him in the spiritual sky, as it’s all so wonderful to be here, you know, serving together under his guidance. It will be wonderful to be together there as we assist him in his service to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. 

I’ll conclude with something that my dear, very dear godbrother Dhananjaya Prabhu, who did so much *sevā* here at the Kṛṣṇa Mandir to make it what it is today—he’s in England and he’s not well at this point—but I went to see him, and he shared something that just, as I say, touched my heart but it melted my heart, and I’ll finish with this. Prabhupāda told him in a moment of intimacy in Rome, 1974: "When we get back to the spiritual world, we will all recognize each other." Wow, I love that. "We get back to the spiritual world, we’ll all recognize each other," and Prabhupāda said, "You’ll recognize me too, but I won’t be like this—an old man—I’ll be a young boy internally." 

Thank you.""