Practically, she says goodbye, and they are empty. He and his penis, little here, tongue leaked. Practically, the expense of happiness. Okay, club. And logically, it will be that happiness. It relates to spiritual nature. Has a spiritual nature. The same as in this material world in which you and I live.

Also, present parts. Of course, this is not all the happiness. That people with free you are counting on to hope for. This is a world of duality, up and down, two channels, black and white, car, yes and no, boy, girl, happiness, and unhappiness.

Can last for a long time. Sometimes we have more happiness and less unhappiness. And sometimes, on the contrary, more unhappiness, less happiness. Will bring demand for your contract, will be. But this happiness and unhappiness, they come from our contact with this mother of the world, with attempts to enjoy this material world.

Therefore, for example, we are happy when we got a new car, and we are very worried, suffer when the car hits. We say fate, and this is all connected with the relationship with this material world, body from them to the gods.

Soon reached. And when we talk about thousands to seek happiness inside, this means that we must open to our soul. Ours are listed on us. Feast on J. The soul is not some kind of energy or some kind of light.

The soul is a person. And Sasha will begin in the city. We ask, this is the supreme personality of God himself. He is not some kind of light. He is the supreme personality. He is very great, and we are very small.

On the tissue swell. And this small particle is in our body, in the area of the heart. This is the place where the soul is. In the area of the heart. As he has for the flash file manager. The same thing when you turn to some stranger, and we say, I want to say now.

You do not point to the ear, said, or I could. And we say, I, I said, I am turning to you. Are you already watching show business?

This is the place where the soul is back on the stage. And when we talk about happiness inside, it all relates to which spiritual particle of the soul from the path of dried cranberries. And what type of happiness the soul longs for, seeks it.

And many different happinesses in this world can be seen. But the highest happiness is love. This is the greatest happiness. If you have everything in this world but you have no one to share it with, then you will be unhappy.

But if you have nothing but you have someone you can love, then you will be happy. True happiness is not represented by some material things. To your question, even in this material world, true happiness brings love. This is the way.

The same applies to spiritual ones, but it is much higher and much deeper than anywhere else. Chocolate towers and us, even the highest relationships, for example, Romeo and Juliet, they always have an end, paper. And to the extent that you were deeply in love, and if something happens, either death or divorce, then up to 100.

Yes, this is the same degree you experience pain. Sasha, music, glory, and spiritual happiness also means to love. But to love whom, we will encrypt the noise. We ask you to love above the personality from hundreds of elusive chinchillas is initially and love relationships.

We came into this world 1050 or 70 years ago, and we have love relationships with others here too. We then collect, but our original relationship with the Creator from above, the personality, they exist from the very beginning of creation.

Having pulled out and Gordon, we simply forgot about them. The main thing for you, young Voloshin Shibaeva, is the service. God never calls us to not forget our love relationships, but we can forget them. And true happiness comes when we restore our relationship with the personality who is the most worthy object of love.

Machines Kolchanov. If, after us, Western culture, we have such ideas about God: He is the one who created, who judges us from the tuned, he is the master, I am his servant. Yes, this is such a spectrum. Manganese mechanism impress you in my life shop.

On a deeper aspect of God: that he is a loving personality, that he is very kind, and that he is ready to hug you. Lenin is good. Fear of love. And here, down to culture, we turn to God not out of fear, but out of love for my spies.

And the closer you get to him, the more you can experience this love. Yes, he is very far from the maker for life, and even if you travel at the speed of thought, you still cannot reach this place. Commissions and sports in a fly are more important, but in his mystical ability, he appeared here in this material world in the form of his holy name, a citizen.

They have freedom, there are many names, a form for ours, one God, but with different names, not that different religions have different gods. They must have a district. God has no one to compete with. He will always go to Ansan alone.

The same thing as one son in English. We speak with yours, and in Russian, we speak with two sons. And we found a royal secular language to speak differently. He went to French, so it played a long time, big, sat down, and us, authorities, so it sounds like that explosion on change, character, you will break out of Atlantis.

Is it French or Spanish or another dream?

But for me, something SN1, what about friendship?

Ingar, choice back, buffer, John Datsyuk, and the same thing. One side, but different peoples have different names, and that's normal. But you have an example. There are three mini fashions. It's important for me to have died, and on the surname, grain quality, nickname, and the difference is that we are not present in our name, absolut, but God is absolute.

Money, and then, of course, and in India, they say he is called Krishna.

In Central Asia, they call him because he was basic, seething, and so on. And often we have fun precisely in it. We should still have Dante's towel and all his trendy copper names, they are full of his energy and the light, and can't be shown in China.

Our God, so we only impose the supreme. This is how we can connect with him, connect with the supreme. Watch the night. I'm no less successful, but the Canadian NGA promotion, and if you turn to take off or repeat his names, in your tradition, which you know, this means you have established a connection with them.

You put on makeup, folding, less, generally, laws, I bring in a cup of tea, but we don't know. Here comes the smoke. The back pocket of the matchmakers is located in the skin, and since Yiddish literature describes it as the source of all happiness and bliss, then by coming into contact with it, you receive the same happiness and bliss, and you can easily give up everything else.

So-called happiness of location at the end of the mass on the windowsill. Ask questions. The border of the ominous world goes to be. I say, and if this happiness that arises from contact with the supreme, there would be no more happiness that we can get from contact with matter, then how could the great saints and other people, they could spend their entire lives in order to find this happiness?

Found metallic plots of our some kind of bardin garden-vegetable garden Sean procession. His when called these saints, they can feel happiness, warmth, love within themselves, and they have no need. And therefore, on the world and exploit the earth, to use blue resources in the wrong way.

No, he just takes what is necessary, and he is happy. This in Sanskrit is called Shantou city. My whole presentation was about this. Has. Lacquered, do you hear that everything is enough in this?

There is no need to take more than we don't need in the world. And even if only two people remain on the planet, it still won't be enough for them to enjoy this world. In a couple of hundred, the big one goes to strangers, hide the best Mr.

Dobbins services. When the cabaret marimba and vice versa. If 20 billion people live on the planet and everyone is satisfied inside, then there will be no competition, and they can live happily on the entire planet and not use its resources.

Something with we are voicing poked a jeep with a shaft. And therefore, the real solution to all and the galactic heated problems is a spiritual solution. Now, I am now, it's summer, and now it's 40 degrees outside, anything and a sword, and what is the name of God and repeating Hare Krishna, and we repeat here.

Hare Krishna, super.

This is a way to appeal to the Supreme Personality of our channel and please this prayer appeal means take me from this temporary world of death. Beat me into the spiritual world, which is full of eternity, of knowledge and bliss.

Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, we repeat this prayer.

Let's repeat this mantra. Hare Krishna.

Our exalted, dear audience can repeat any names of God. Data by common cold to the world and smoke. No need to become a monk or about the kidnapping of com as I or others report. Your entire life in my review is your soul.

You can simply add your life to this chanting of names, and you will immediately see a better change for the better in your life. I hope this answer satisfies you. Fatima, a. Very interesting voice came out to ask you a person.

Deacon traditions, a person in order to find parts of the question. Ours, listen. [Music] Let me translate this question, Maharaja, and now he will repeat it in English. I have been coming to Russia since 1989. Russia is my home, from which I will give now.

We are looking for more ways. He is a blooper. Yes, that is the question: Why, being a Westerner, did you choose the Eastern tradition?

I would like to say that religion is not just Western, southern, eastern, or some other. Putin, in the end, our religion comes from the spiritual world. And it appears in different countries, different places, among different peoples according to place and time.

They are resting, the channel, and the saints who come during this period can speak about religion according to the level of understanding that can accommodate you. Those people are the same message. The human form of life is intended for self-awareness, to restore one's relationship with God.

And it will be better, according to the test, more on the principle of sport life. Clothing may differ. Language may differ. Ritual may differ, but the essence remains the same. Do you keep up with love?

We rode with a knife on that Khan, so she. They don't need personalities. They always look at the audience and ask themselves how much the audience can understand and contain, and it's at this level that they share knowledge. It's like in mathematics, when you explain to a student that one plus one equals two, two plus two equals four, and he'll have a chance.

Faction, when you move on through classes with pain, would already be about learning multiplication and division by three and monument stress tax at university, in and higher mathematics, study statistics, Sims, an object and the same subject is very common in Armenian, but a teacher can impart knowledge to the extent that the audience is ready to perceive.

We've been absorbing spiritual life since the past, it's the same. There always exists some kind of spiritual message on this planet, however, and it appears at a certain historical moment in accordance with the level of how much humanity is ready to perceive.

If you conduct a comparative analysis of religion and teaching, you can see that some contain a very simple message, some a little, or in some it's still complex, and in some there is very profound work. George went through some people have a very special interest in spiritual life.

Some have shown themselves a little, they have sat on my more and more knowledge. Because without knowledge, our faith will be like sentiment will be sentimental for us. It will start less, young, until we have a firm faith, it will all be on an emotional level.

To order points on it, very little molar. The same as a person who is thirsty, he needs more and more water. Dog behind. And why did I choose?

And not that this is a wonderful, beautiful country with beautiful beaches and which palm trees. Akim burst read, I came here in search of spiritual knowledge, and I found a reservoir of this knowledge here. Because the history of India dates back 10,000 years.

Decades, thousands of years ago. Anger, any question related to spiritual life, here you can find the answer to it. Also, my dear. Natural does not mean that I would like to be discriminated against. Discrimination of other religions is not at all.

I have very deep relationships with my spiritual brothers, Christians, all over the world. Well, for now, he will say to the machines of the year. I have deep philosophical discussions with my Muslim brothers, and you will be of any tradition, up to the square, old man, the chance has passed, but here I found the highest candidate's science, the highest knowledge about the soul, who I am and where I came from, for a cover on the principles of specifically what happens at the moment of death, and the demand for what the spiritual world looks like, in my opinion, and what God looks like.

It's not enough to just believe it, but you cannot love someone. You don't know. There is a lot of information, knowledge about God, about Krishna, to introduce to literature, and it is very easy to fall in love with him.

Describes his form, his clothing, his activities. His devotee is also described. And. Is the reason why I accepted, and studying even more, realized that there is no monopoly on this knowledge. My need is bored. It's not that my religion is better online.

It's true. Someone asked. They all elevate on the path to the spiritual world. Insulin, and classes, and I found this path very convenient for myself because it is surrounded by a spiritual culture of access, and also discipline. Flattened the work of the menu, because pancake troops, this spiritual path does not mean that you take a pill, some medicine, you realize God, or you once read a book on other shores, in a dream, something appeared.

This is an authoritative process, and it requires discipline. As I said earlier, that we cannot achieve anything even in this world without discipline. What to say about the highest goal?

Therefore, we are strict vegetarians, and take no intoxicants, to do to no vodka, but there was no his, no guilt, no drugs, lard, after father. Let's stick to celibacy. No gambling. And between would be true. So you suffer. No, we always dance on the floor, and we are always happy.

No one pays us to smile, as you can sometimes see when they advertise toothpaste, and a big wide smile on these billboards. File, maybe even pierced by highway shooters, tires. And following these prohibitions and restrictions is necessary. In any tradition, we can easily follow this because we feel inside deep this warmth and happiness inside our heart.

Exceeded our time limits. You must stop us because we. We know that we have other speakers as well.