"So it is our extreme good fortune that today we are visiting the most sacred abode of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī has given a praṇāma-mantra for Rādhā-kuṇḍa in his famous *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa*, Chapter 4, Verse 1, where he writes: "O Rādhā-kuṇḍa, playground of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, O beautiful Śrī-kuṇḍa, you are able to give all good fortune; I offer my respectful obeisances unto you." 

And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī famously says in *Upadeśāmṛta* that the holy place of Mathurā is spiritually superior to Vaikuṇṭha because Kṛṣṇa took birth or appeared there. Superior to Mathurā is the forest of Vṛndāvana because Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā pastimes took place there. Superior to the forest of Vṛndāvana is Govardhana Hill because Kṛṣṇa raised the hill with His own divine hand and had loving pastimes there with His cows, friends, and gopīs. But above Govardhana Hill, above Vṛndāvana forest, above Mathurā, and above Vaikuṇṭha or any other place for that matter, is the most sacred place of all: Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Rūpa Gosvāmī mentions that great devotees like Nārada, Lord Śiva, etc., rarely even get to see Rādhā-kuṇḍa because of its elevated status.

One may wonder then, how we, as members of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, are allowed to visit here. Of course, it is only by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda. And how have we obtained his mercy? Frankly, by our humble service and helping him spread the saṅkīrtana movement of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī makes this very clear in his *Caitanya-candrāmṛta* text: to the degree that we surrender to the Lord’s service, to that degree we acquire qualification for service to Rādhā-kuṇḍa’s lotus feet in Vraja.

So, as we know, the original Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa exist in the spiritual world, but they became manifest here on Earth during the time of Kṛṣṇa’s descent 5,000 years ago. So that was 5,000 years ago, but in due course of time, the two sacred lakes disappeared from everyone's vision. Fortunately, they were rediscovered by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu when He visited Vṛndāvana 500 years ago. But for Lord Caitanya, simply rediscovering Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa was not enough; He actually desired the lakes be excavated so that in future, pilgrims like us who came to Rādhā-kuṇḍa could take full advantage of them. And He left that service—that sevā—to one of His dearest followers. And who was that? The great saint Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is our prayojana-guru. *Prayojana* means the ultimate goal of life: attaining pure love of God, specifically vraja-bhakti or the love of the residents of Vṛndāvana for the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

The entire life of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is a study in excellence. He was the first of the six Gosvāmīs to meet Śrī Mahāprabhu. He lived for 40 years on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. No doubt, it wasn't easy; it was at best a basic existence. But the joy of service to the lotus feet of Vṛṣabhānunandinī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, far exceeded the difficulties he encountered. He himself has written in his *Stavāvalī*, *Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa-aṣṭakam*, verse 13: "On the strength of the service I have done to the pollen of Rūpa Gosvāmī's lotus feet, I am able to reside, even in times of trouble, by the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa at the base of Govardhana Hill. Protected by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s friends and associates, I chant and hear the holy names of Śrī Rādhā and Mukunda, which distribute the sweetest nectar. I pray that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī will always protect me.""