All right everyone, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vrndāvana, Viṣṇupada, Kṛṣṇa-bhūtalaya, Śrīmatī Bhaktivedānta Nāmine. Namaste. So we are continuing with our series on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's spring pastimes in Vrndāvana. And amongst the many pastimes in which Kṛṣṇa enjoys in spring is the famous festival of Holi, the festival of colors.

The Holi festival actually is so prominent in Vrndāvana that the ācāryas say that both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have special names connected to Holi. For example, Śrī Rādhā, she has these following names: Gandharvikā, Gandhavā, Viṣṇupitā, Bālā, Śaṅkarajudāhri, she was expert at singing, dancing, and playing musical instruments, who surprised Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma at the Holi festival, who is the beloved of Śaṅkaracūḍa's enemy, is the crowning garland of all the Gopis.

Jaya Śrī Rādhā. And for Kṛṣṇa, yā pūrvam near nāme, he who celebrated the Holi festival and he who killed the yakṣa Śaṅkaracūḍa. So, um, there are so many pastimes in the spring, it's hard to know where to begin in recounting, um, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes of Holi.

Especially some are known and some are lesser known. Uh, there's one pastime that I was reading the other night in the Garga Saṁhitā, Kṛṣṇa-kāṇḍa, Chapter 12. And there, and it mentions, um, nine cowherd men, they're called the Upanandas. Their names are Vituhotra, Agnibhak, Śamba, Śikhara, Pavana, and Śānta.

And these rāja-vāsi men, they were all said to be well-off, good-looking, learned, noble, virtuous, charitable, and fathers to many children. And each of these vāsi gopas, they each had a daughter. And one time, all of these rāja Gopis, all nine of them, were sitting and talking together when they saw Kṛṣṇa was preparing to leave his home to play Holi.

And they, they wanted to join in. So Garga Saṁhitā describes that most of these girls had previously been, uh, demigoddesses in their previous lives, but they had performed austerities and many pious activities to become Gopis, more specifically, they desired to be family members of Kṛṣṇa and even more specifically, friends of Śrī Rādhā.

So, being partial to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, they hurried to her home, hoping to take her with them. But when they arrived, they found Śrī Rādhā was in *mana* (anger). Doesn't mention, but obviously something Kṛṣṇa had done or said to her.

She was pouting, she was angry. So, hoping to dispel her anger, each of her friends appealed to her personally. One Gopi said, "O moon-faced, honey-sweet Rādhā, listen, the ornament of Braja is leaving to celebrate Holi." I love that, "the ornament of Braja is leaving to celebrate Holi." "The distress you feel now will become but a grain of sand in the vast desert of misery.

We will all be forced to aimlessly wander if we miss this chance to paint Braja and its prince with the colors of love." So beautiful. Then another Gopi spoke up and she said, "Devī Rādhā, you should have seen Kṛṣṇa's eyes rolling under the intoxicating influence of youth, his black locks resting on his cheeks, and his yellow shawl draped over his shoulders.

His most wonderful..." Another, another Gopi excitedly added, "Śrī Rādhā, as he walked, the anklets on his feet and the bangles on his wrist tinkled like cooing doves. His earrings illuminated his cheeks, and his crown glistened just like the rising sun." So then it goes on to say that a third Gopi whispered to Śrī Rādhā, "Śrī Rādhā, while walking along the road, bodies smeared with kuṅkuma, siṛiñji in hand, friends surrounding him, handsome Kṛṣṇa repeatedly looked about to see if you were coming." So they're trying to appease Rādhā, who's in *mana*, you know, "give up your anger and let's go have Holi." Then, pulling her hands, and it's described pushing her shoulders, the girls cheered Rādhā on.

They all said together, "Our dear queen, queen of Braja, please give up your anger, celebrate Holi!

Look, your maids are already bringing water mixed with dye paste and flower pollen." So finally, Śrīmatī Rādhā relented. And it's described, leaping to her feet, she quickly dressed for the occasion, and she went with her friends to celebrate spring, to the festival of colors.

And for the celebration, these, uh, rāja Gopis, they, it's described, they wore colorful dresses, flashing ornaments, and they carried jewel siṛiñjis, you know, like, you know, the colored dye comes out. And their servants followed them with pots of water mixed with, um, agar, musk, turmeric, and kuṅkuma.

Oh, yeah, and the essence of sandalwood. Now, Garga Saṁhitā describes that as these rāja Gopis walk through the village streets, they managed to restrain themselves, you know. But once on the forest path outside the village, their hands already red with dye, they started gossiping and laughing and singing songs about Holi.

You know, in the village, they have to be careful, they can't give it away that they're going out to have Holi with Śrī Rādhā and with, with Kṛṣṇa. So they're very reserved. But once they got out of the precincts of the village, they started talking and laughing like, you know, young girls do, and singing songs about Holi.

And then the śāstra describes, as they proceeded there, the word is used, "merry-making." Their merry-making electrified everyone and everything, causing, uh, how is it described?

The creepers, trees, birds, and forest animals to dance and sing along with them. To dance and sing along with them. Other Gopis are coming past, and then all the, the, the creepers, the trees, the birds, forest animals, everyone's dancing and singing along with them.

It's described as turning all of Braja into a moving festival, a moving festival. Now, Garga Saṁhitā doesn't reveal exactly what song they were singing, what Holi song they were singing. But, um, in, in the great Vaiṣṇava poet Govinda Dāsa Ṭhākura's *Pada-valī*, one of his books, *Pada-valī*.

He's a famous Vaiṣṇava poet. Govinda Dāsa Ṭhākura, in his *Pada-valī*, we find the following song. In Vasantarāga, rāga means a particular type of musical composition. This is the rāga for spring. It is, uh, *Pada-valī*. This song is sung in Vasantarāga.

This song is number 87 in *Pada-valī*, and it begins with the phrase: "R̥tu-pati biharati nagara-śikhamani, rādhā-raṅgiṇī saṅgini." "Um, with beautiful, playful Rādhā on his left, the dark hero Kṛṣṇa enjoys pastimes in the springtime, the king of all seasons." And then the different parts of the song come: "Their limbs are covered with sandal water, powder, and kuṅkuma by gaze-nārakācārya Kṛṣṇa, who is more enchanting than a thousand kāmadevas.

Hundreds of young Gopis are overcome with loving desire, inspiring them to sing graceful songs in the Holi festival." So the poet goes on: "For a change of dress, after playing, some Gopis bring fresh clothes, others bring flower necklaces, and yet still, still others bring rings for musical accompaniment.

Some Gopis bring flutes, and whether from near or afar, they all sing songs of Holi, brimming over with bliss. What a poet!" Well, brimming over with bliss.

Then he concludes his song, our poet, he writes: "As the unlimitedly talented Gopis play graceful rhythms, Govinda Dāsa's master, the crown jewel of all dancers and dances, even as girls spray him with dye. Wow." Such a wonderful description of Holi.

Very much different than the way people around the world play Holi these days. All right. Kṛṣṇa describes that after singing songs about Holi, the Gopis became inspired. They became, we would say in modern terminology, and ISKCON, fired up. And they began throwing fistfuls, big fistfuls of red powder on each other, which it describes then rose up into the sky like a cloud, blanketing the earth and the trees.

And as a result, the trees became crimson in color, and this cloud, this cloud hovered over the horizon. The trees became crimson color, and that cloud just hovered over the horizon. And it describes that in time, that cloud became so thick that only a flurry of reddish fists could be seen throwing fragrant red powder in all directions.

Just try to imagine in your mind's eye, they're throwing this dye, but it becomes so thick, this cloud, that if you looked at it closely, all you'd see was a flurry of reddish fists throwing this, uh, fragrant red powder in all directions.

This is another difference between Holi festivals now, not in our, uh, in ISKCON and other spiritual organizations, but, you know, people are having these festivals. But the diff, one difference is that the powder that the Gopis threw was fragrant.

It was fragrant. So it hit you, you got color, but you smelled this beautiful fragrance. So this was being thrown in all directions, and as a result of this phantasmagoria, only the sounds of singing and music could be heard amidst joyful shouts.

Only the sounds of singing and music. So many things are going on around, perhaps, but all you can hear is singing and music amongst joyful shouts. The Gopis were throwing at each other. This is the real Holi. So, in this way, it's described, the billowing cloud of red powder slowly moved through the forest.

They're throwing at each other, just the Gopis become a huge cloud, and it's described in Garga Saṁhitā, it slowly moved through the forest until it reached Kṛṣṇa. That was the plan, until it reached Kṛṣṇa, who, what the śāstra describes, he simply stared at this spectacle, like, what?

He's in the forest, suddenly this red cloud of colored fragrant powder comes, and then suddenly, without warning, um, the cloud of, it's described, the cloud of color attacked Kṛṣṇa like a snake lunges at its prey. Wow. Comes the cloud into the kuñja, and then all of a sudden, that colorful cloud attacked Kṛṣṇa like a snake lunges at its prey, and before he could run away or even, um, call his friends for help, the Gopis surrounded him, restraining him with their hands.

Now, you can't move. How?

So it said, like a monsoon-clouded sunset surrounded by lightning bolts, Kṛṣṇa was encompassed by Gopis who relentlessly smeared his face and limbs with red powder while holding on to him and drenching his body with colored liquid, and drenching his body, the siṛiñjis, colored liquid, all the colors of the rainbow.

So, it all happened so fast, Mahārāja Garga Saṁhitā describes. So finally, Kṛṣṇa, uh, called out to his friends, but the cloud of powder was so dense and the Gopis so, how would you say, vigilant in guarding him, that he couldn't escape, nor could his boys rescue him.

He couldn't escape, but neither could the boys come and rescue him. So, with no other resort, it's described, no other resort than his mystic power, Kṛṣṇa expanded himself into as many forms as there were Gopis, and he attacked each girl with balls of this, uh, colored dye, this powder, and separate siṛiñjis full of liquid.

He expanded, as he does, to be with each Gopi, and then throwing the colors at them, and then he had his siṛiñjis. So, to make the most of the occasion, to make the most of the occasion, Kṛṣṇa then pulled Śrī Rādhā to the center of the, how would we say, the skirmish, and covered head to toe in brightly colored powder.

The two of them celebrated spring by dancing with each other. He pulled Śrī Rādhā into the center of the skirmish, and both of them were covered head to toe with brightly colored powder, and how did they celebrate spring?

They started to dance with each other, all covered with these beautiful powdered dyes. Holi!

This is the origin of Holi. Now, the śāstra describes that the, the cowherd boys, they were bewildered, without their leader, and confused what to do. And seeing this, the Gopis pelted them with powder and liquid, completely embarrassing the boys because they were unprepared, and causing them to run away.

So, one ācārya poses the question here: Exactly how long did this transcendental melee last?

This whole spectacle, how long did it last?

But then they answered, this ācārya answers the question. He says, "It's difficult to say how long this transcendental phenomena lasted." He says, "For time has no influence on Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, and even if it did, it would not be able to penetrate the billowing clouds of red powder." Wow. "Time has no influence on Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, and in this case, even if it did, it would not be able to penetrate the billowing clouds of red powder." Transcendental pastimes.

Nevertheless, śāstra describes, like all good things, the Holi festival came to an end. After all, and finally, the, the gopas and the Gopis, they all headed to different parts of the Yamunā, the Yamunā River, to bathe. And while doing so, the, the colored dyes came off, and they were, it's described so beautifully how they were swirling in the Yamunā like, like rainbow colors, you know, swirling in the Yamunā as she, uh, proceeded on.

All these assorted colors came off their bodies and mixed with the flowing of the Yamunā, creating a very beautiful scene. And then these gopas and Gopis, in different parts of the river, they are changed into fresh clothes. And it says, quote: "And fully anointed with the sweetness of loving exchanges, and fully anointed with the sweetness of loving exchanges, Rādhā and her friends then returned to their homes, and Kṛṣṇa and his friends to theirs.

All of them were anointed with the sweetness of loving exchanges." And as they walked along the road, the, the boys and the girls, they sang Holi songs. However, when they reached the outskirts of their various villages, they stopped singing out of fear that the elders would disapprove. "What is this?

Where have you been?

What are you covered like that?

What happened?" So as not to attract too much attention, they stopped singing the Holi songs.

All right. Kṛṣṇa. Oh, the springtime pastimes of Vrindavan are so sweet and colorful. So let us finish today with another, uh, of the poet Govinda Dāsa's poems from his *Pada-valī*. Govinda Dāsa Ṭhākura, this time it's, um, song 88. Previously we recited song 87, this is 88.

Very beautiful. We can finish today like this. He writes: "He who is like a moon shining in Braja's forest and who is filled with Cupid's desires, enjoys pastimes of throwing red powder. At the center of a circle of beautiful Gopis, flows a blissful, reddish, wave-filled river of spiritual love.

She who is the great heroine of amorous pastimes, showers red powder on him, and he who is the king of amorous pastimes, kisses her face. Her moon-faced Gopi friends are filled with wonder, gathering together, they come to rescue her, and then they attack Kṛṣṇa.

Trembling from the excitement induced by Cupid, the fearless Gopis run to Kṛṣṇa, snatch his flute, and fleeing into the cloud of powder, the din of the cartels, *balai balai* is overwhelming, mixed with that sound of the Gopis' cries of 'Ho ho Holi!

Ho ho Holi!'" "In the land, the air, or in the water, whether moving, unmoving, or otherwise, everything is one color.

Red seems to be the prominent color in the Holi festival." So concluding his song, our dear poet, he writes: "The water is red, the lotuses are red, and even Govinda Dāsa's heart is covered now in red, which we know is the color of love in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava literature." Thank you so much.

There's more, uh, spring springtime pastimes which we will discover in our, in our readings, and, uh, yeah, we'll be back in a couple of days to, to share more nectar with you. Springtime in Vrindavan ki jaya ho!

Thank you very much. You.