"*00505*.*
"All right, everyone, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Nama oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve...* 

So, we are continuing with our discussions on the spring season in Vṛndāvana. Once again, it is the king of all seasons in Braja. Very often, people think or they write of spring as a time of romance. For example, Shakespeare writes in his play *The Two Gentlemen of Verona*, “Oh, how this spring of love resembleth the uncertain glory of an April day, which now shows all the beauty of the sun, and by and by a cloud takes all away.” And the writer Octavian Paula writes, “A life without love is like a year without spring.” And the famous author E.E. Cummings, he takes it so far as to write, “In spring everyone's in love and flowers just pick themselves.” By the way, I’m wearing a very beautiful yellow spring garland today—spring’s just around the corner. But as we all know, real love is the pure, selfless love that is found in the spiritual world between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Their devotees, which, as we’ve been hearing, blooms very nicely in the season of spring. And that is very nicely described by Śrīla Jayadeva Gosvāmī in his *Gīta-govinda*, text 35. He writes: “Śrī Jayadeva sings of the beauty of the springtime forest, imbued with Śrī Rādhā’s love for Hari. May His auspicious song, woven together with sentiments of divine love, awaken remembrance of Śrī Hari’s lotus feet.” *Jayadeva Gosvāmī kī jaya!*

So, there is a beautiful pastime, very famous here in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, which reveals the superiority of divine love over mundane love. There is a sacred place here in Braja called Ādi-badri—I was reading it's sometimes referred to as 'Asaitu-khaṇḍara' as well in scripture—which is situated in a very beautiful forested valley called Tapovan. And it’s famous as the place where Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi resides eternally, performing austerities. Even today, as we all know, He is an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. So, long, long ago, King Indra, lord of heaven, Svargaloka, being unaware of Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi’s transcendental position as an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was anxious that Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi would, by dint of His austerities, be able to seize the heavenly kingdom. We’ve heard many times how Lord Indra gets anxious when he sees ṛṣis or yogīs getting too powerful in their austerities—he thinks, "They may take over my kingdom." So, one day, Lord Indra sent Cupid, the demigod of love in this world, to Tapovan, where the ācāryas say Cupid evoked the romantic mood of springtime. Cupid manifested before Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi many very beautiful girls, who, the ācāryas say, made poses before the Lord that would have bewildered even Lord Brahmā. But the Lord, rather than being tempted by the girls who were surrounding Him, very calmly and very politely welcomed Cupid and all the apsarās, all these heavenly denizens, into His āśrama.

Where, with their heads hung low in shame, it’s described they were trembling in fear before Him. So then, these heavenly personalities offered their prayers to Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi, who at that point, śāstra reminds us, is “always beyond the influence of lust, anger, and greed,” as are devotees who live under His protection. Then, a very amazing thing happened. As His guests were praising Him, the Lord suddenly generated from His transcendental form many women who were, it’s described, astonishingly gorgeous, finely dressed, opulently ornamented, and faithfully engaged in His service—I like that part, “faithfully engaged in His service.” It’s described that the fascinating beauty and enchanting fragrance of those ladies bewildered the minds of Cupid’s followers, both male and female, because their heavenly opulence paled in comparison.

And as the demigods and apsarās bowed down before Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi, the Lord offered them any one of the women He had created. He said, “Of all these ladies that have manifested from My transcendental form, you take one with you.” It’s interesting, so the demigods chose Urvaśī as the best of all those ladies—although they’re all the best, they chose Urvaśī—and she became known as the best of the apsarās, and then they took her and they returned to heaven. Now, this particular pastime actually reveals the special nature, the divine nature, of this famous celestial girl, Urvaśī. Now, we should take a special note here that just as Lord Nārāyaṇa was not attracted by the apsarās, the damsels of heaven, the Gopīs—the greatest lovers of Kṛṣṇa, the original Personality of Godhead—are not attracted to Lord Nārāyaṇa. How is that? Because Lord Nārāyaṇa is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa, and although He—śāstra says—possesses 60 transcendental qualities, our Kṛṣṇa, because Prabhupāda would sometimes in his lectures say like that, our Kṛṣṇa has four extraordinary transcendental qualities that Lord Nārāyaṇa does not. And what are they? Well, number one, Kṛṣṇa is able to manifest wonderful pastimes; He’s expert at transcendental flute playing; He’s surrounded by loving devotees; and number four, He possesses unparalleled personal beauty.

Thus, Kṛṣṇa has 64 transcendental qualities. And we should also note here that Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, She has 25 transcendental qualities in which we know She controls Kṛṣṇa, or mahābhāva. *Hare Kṛṣṇa.* So, there’s another famous spring pastime that we touched on last year—or actually, it was almost two years ago, I think—that demonstrates the superiority of Kṛṣṇa over Lord Nārāyaṇa. It’s the līlā where Kṛṣṇa leaves the spring rāsa dance with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī but later abandons Her in the forest. Now, it may seem cruel that Kṛṣṇa abandoned His most beloved, but He had a deeper purpose in doing so. The ācāryas write that He did so to "confirm Śrī Rādhā’s preeminence amongst all the other Gopīs." And that purpose played out in the following way: on that day that He left the rāsa dance with Śrī Rādhā, the Gopīs—you remember the Gopīs, described in *Kṛṣṇa* book—the Gopīs followed His footprints from the dance arena to a very beautiful kuñja, a very beautiful grove, where, lo and behold, they came upon Lord Nārāyaṇa standing very regally under a tree. Of course, actually, it was Kṛṣṇa who was manifesting His four-armed form. Now, seeing Lord Nārāyaṇa, the Gopīs respectfully offered Him their obeisances, and then they asked Lord Nārāyaṇa if He could help them to find Kṛṣṇa. So, the ācāryas say that this shows that Kṛṣṇa is more attractive than Nārāyaṇa. Now, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Prabhupāda writes, “Kṛṣṇa attracts the mind of the Goddess of Fortune, but Nārāyaṇa fails to attract the minds of the Gopīs.” Therefore, he concludes Kṛṣṇa is the original Lord, Bhagavān. We say Kṛṣṇa is the original Lord, and Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī quotes the Vedic verse:

$$kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam$$

That the original feature of the Supreme Absolute Truth is His human-like form with His two hands playing His veṇu, His flute. So, moments after the Gopīs left looking for Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā arrived at the same place also looking for Kṛṣṇa—remember that Kṛṣṇa had abandoned Her—but as She appeared before the four-armed form of Nārāyaṇa, driven by His love for Her, Kṛṣṇa resumed His two-armed form, which the ācāryas say firmly established the preeminence of Śrī Rādhā above all the other Gopīs. In other words, Kṛṣṇa was able to remain disguised as Lord Nārāyaṇa in the presence of the Gopīs, but not in the presence of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Consequently, Her love for Him is superior to the love of all others.

In conclusion, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s ecstatic feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa were so strong, and Her desire to see Him so intense, that Kṛṣṇa was unable to maintain His four-armed form in Her presence. Now, it’s interesting to note also that 500 years ago, Caitanya Mahāprabhu enacted a similar pastime with a deity of the name Alālanātha in Brahmagiri, which is just south of Jagannātha Purī. I wanted to mention this pastime because in the last class we also tied in some Gauḍa-līlā with Kṛṣṇa, and we’ll see why. So, just as Rādhā and the Gopīs searched after Kṛṣṇa in the forest of Vṛndāvana, so it’s written Caitanya Mahāprabhu went in search of Lord Jagannātha in the forest near the shore near Purī before the Ratha-yātrā festival. Because at that particular time, Lord Jagannātha, you know, it’s mentioned that He gets ill, He takes special herbal medicines to get better before the Ratha-yātrā festival. So, Mahāprabhu went searching for Him, and just as the cowherd girls found Lord Nārāyaṇa instead of Kṛṣṇa hiding in a grove in Vṛndāvana, Lord Caitanya found the four-armed deity of Lord Alālanātha hiding in the famous temple at Brahmagiri. Now, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī...

He was forced to reveal His two-handed form because He had four arms, but He was forced to reveal His two-handed form of Kṛṣṇa to Lord Caitanya, just as Kṛṣṇa was forced to reveal His two-armed form to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Now, upon having this vision, Lord Caitanya fainted in ecstasy, and He actually fell unconscious on the ground, melting a rock formation that He was standing on and leaving an impression of His body there. I remember in the early 70s that temple was still open to Westerners; I don’t know if it is, I heard it wasn’t anymore, but I’m not exactly sure. But we went into that temple and we saw the impression of the Lord on the rock in the ground. I remember we sat there with the boys and we chanted 32 rounds and just meditating on that transcendental phenomenon. So, in this way, we see many similarities in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes 5,000 years ago and Lord Caitanya’s 500 years ago. How to explain this very simply? *Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nahi*—that Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu is a combination of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So, that the spring season played an important role both in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and Lord Caitanya’s pastimes is evident in the *Bhakti-ratnākara*, Chapter 12, by Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura, wherein it’s described—this is really beautiful—that all the six seasons, which we’ve been discussing, present in Vṛndāvana, are also present in eternal Śrī Māyāpura. Because we know, we’ve heard so many times, there’s no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura. So, as the six seasons are present in Braja, they’re also present in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura. So, Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura reveals this in a wonderful way. He describes there in Chapter 12 of *Bhakti-ratnākara* that one time all six seasons personified were discussing together in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura. Personified seasons, they’re all discussing together in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, and one of them says to the others, “Did you know that Śrī Kṛṣṇa-candra will appear one day in Nāḍiyā?” So another season personified said, “Yes, and He will perform wonderful sporting pastimes here to increase our happiness little by little.” So another of the six seasons said, “When Brajendra-nandana Gaurahari comes, He will reveal Himself for our happiness.” Then another of the six seasons spoke up and said, “Yes, Śrī Nārada Muni has announced everywhere that He will be the incarnation for the first half of Kali-yuga.” Nārada Muni has announced, he said, “He will be the incarnation for the first half of Kali-yuga.” Then yet another season asked, “Oh, and when will Mahāprabhu appear?” Then one of the seasons replied, “Ah, in spring season.” And how fortunate spring will be! Ah, spring season. Now, of course, the spring season is standing there with the group personally, and it’s described that at that moment, spring personified became very glad, and he began to thank his own good fortune. I thought that was beautiful, “Oh, He’s going to appear in my season!” So he began to thank his good fortune. Then all together the six seasons began to worship Mahāprabhu with, it’s described, great hope in their minds. Just as we also, as members of ISKCON, we also worship Mahāprabhu under Śrīla Prabhupāda’s directions with great hope in our mind, that that yuga-dharma that He’s brought, the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, that we can get some nāma-ruci, some taste for that holy name, and become purified and go back home, back to Godhead. Now, in Navadvīpa-dhāma...

He describes that there are nine islands in Māyāpura-dhāma, and one of those islands is Ṛtu-dvīpa. And Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura goes on to explain how one time Lord Nityānanda came to Ṛtu-dvīpa with the big *saṅkīrtana* party, and upon arriving, He told the devotees, “Oh, now we have come to Ṛtu-dvīpa! This place is extremely attractive; it’s just like spring. Look, the trees are bending their heads down in respect, the breeze is blowing very gently, and the flowers, the flowers are blooming everywhere. The humming of bees and the fragrance of flowers can intoxicate any traveler who comes here.” As He was saying this, Nitāi, He’s Avadhūta, He became like a madman, and He suddenly shouted out—remember that Lord Balarāma appears in Dvāpara-yuga and He appears again in Kali-yuga as Lord Nityānanda—so here He begins shouting, “Quickly! Bring my horn, my buffalo horn! The calves have gone far off and Kṛṣṇa is fast asleep! Where’s Subala? Where is Dāmā? All alone, I can’t go and herd the cows!” Kind of like in the mood of Balarāma. So, seeing Him in this state, the *saṅkīrtana* party, the devotees, they said, “Our dear Nityānanda, Your brother Gauracandra is no longer here. He’s taken sannyāsa and He’s gone to Nīlācala, leaving us as poor beggars.” So hearing those words, Lord Nityānanda, He fell to the ground crying, saying, “You have brought us so much sorrow. Kānāi, my brother, You’ve taken sannyāsa and left us to go to Nīlācala! I will not continue my life.”

So saying this, He lost consciousness, and the devotees became very alarmed, and they began to chant the holy names. But after two hours, Nitāi was still unconscious. So finally, they came up with another plan: they began chanting “Gaurāṅga! Gaurāṅga! Gaurāṅga!” and Nitāi woke up and, rising up, He said with a very loud voice, “This place is non-different than Rādhā-kuṇḍa in Vṛndāvana! Whoever lives here will get love of God, which will soothe the burning fire of material life.” *Hare Kṛṣṇa.* So, from this pastime again, we can understand that there’s no difference between Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura, and as the spring pastimes happen in Vṛndāvana, the spring pastimes also happen in Māyāpura. And there, it’s a great source of joy, because that’s where—during that season—that’s when Lord Caitanya appears.

So today we’ll finish with an appropriate verse from *Navadvīpa-śatakam* by the illustrious—just says here, in Vṛndāvana we have *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* written by Prabhupāda Sarasvatī; the Māyāpurvāsīs, those who live in Māyāpura, they relive hearing from him about the glories of Māyāpura, Navadvīpa, in his *Navadvīpa-śatakam*. So, this is an appropriate verse because, and again, it ties in Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura, but with a little special twist. It focuses on the importance of Māyāpura as the place where Lord Caitanya appeared, and being the yuga-avatāra, His prominence in Kali-yuga is very, very important. Actually, you could say as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas in this age, we’re really Gaura-bhaktas, because without the mercy of Lord Caitanya, without the mercy of Gaura-Nitāi, Pañca-tattva, we can’t really understand the deep pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So, it’s a good verse to conclude with today, it’s verse 78: “If the nine forests”—referring to the nine islands of Navadvīpa—“are worshiped by you, then the forest of Braja is yours. If the nine forests, the nine islands of Navadvīpa, are not worshiped by you, then the same Braja forest stays far away. If the son of the brāhmaṇa”—meaning Jagannātha Miśra—“if the son of the brāhmaṇa, Gaurāṅga—He’s the son of Jagannātha Miśra—is worshiped by you, then the expert lover of Braja, Kṛṣṇa, is yours. If the son of the brāhmaṇa, Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, is not worshiped by you, then Kṛṣṇa will never be yours.” *Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu!*

So, I’ve been very happy today wearing my yellow garland, which will indicate spring very soon here in Vṛndāvana. Very happy to have shared these very beautiful pastimes with everyone. And actually, there’s quite a lot of pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in spring, and perhaps we’ll also find some more about Lord Caitanya; we’ll tie them all together and we’ll be back in a couple of days to share that with all of you. Thank you so much! All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

Thank you, Prabhupāda!""