"*00520*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prabhu-nityānanda-śrī-advaita-gadādhara-śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda*. So, we are continuing with our series on springtime in Vṛndāvana. 

In our last lecture, we told a pastime of Holī, the festival of colors, and mentioned that it is one of the main pastimes that take place in Vṛndāvana's spring. In fact, it doesn't happen at any other time of the year. However, there are numerous celebrations of Holī during Vṛndāvana spring in different parts of Braja and involving different groups and different personalities, which we will discuss today. And like all pastimes in Vṛndāvana, the performance of Holī is an eternal pastime, yet it has its origins as well. It has its first time, surprisingly, during the pastimes of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. It's really interesting; we'll discuss that. But how to understand something is eternal but has an origin? Well, a very simple analogy is the moon. We're all aware of the moon's existence; no one thinks there's no moon, but nevertheless, it makes a fresh appearance each night. And there's a nice verse to this effect in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Canto 10, Chapter 3, verse number 8, and I'll quote here: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, who is eternally situated in the core of everyone's heart, appeared from the heart of Devakī in the dense darkness of night like the full moon rising on the eastern horizon, because Devakī was in the same category as Kṛṣṇa."

So now, how does the origin of the Holī festival fit into the pastimes of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva? Well, we described this nearly two years ago, so we'll just summarize it here. As we all know, in Satya-yuga, Hiraṇyakaśipu was the king of demons, and he spent much of his time—most of his time—terrorizing the devotees of the Lord. Unfortunately, or fortunately for him, his own son, Prahlāda Mahārāja, was the greatest of the suras, or the devotees of the Lord. As a result, Hiraṇyakaśipu tried to kill Prahlāda Mahārāja in so many ways, but being unsuccessful in every way that he tried, he finally turned to his sister. Hiraṇyakaśipu had a sister whose name was Holikā, to help him kill Prahlāda. Now, Holikā had a blessing from Lord Brahmā that she could never be burned by fire. This was the blessing of Brahmā; she could never be burned by fire. So as a last resort, Hiraṇyakaśipu ordered his sister to kill Prahlāda by sitting in the center of a huge bonfire with Prahlāda on her lap, so the fire would devour him, not her. However, as we all know, Prahlāda Mahārāja survived the fire because he was fully protected by Kṛṣṇa, whereas Holikā perished in the fire. How was that? The ācāryas say that because her boon—her blessing from Lord Brahmā—was annulled, it was canceled because of her offense to a pure devotee of the Lord, Prahlāda Mahārāja. That's how serious it is to blaspheme or criticize a devotee of the Lord. Her boon was just canceled. She had, you could say, the greatest asset life can provide: the association of a saintly devotee. But instead of using it, she abused it.

Śrī Nārāyaṇa Paṇḍita says in *Hitopadeśa*, verses 146 and 147—this is the first verse: "The poisonous tree of the material world yields only two succulent fruits: nectarian literature and saintly association." So beautiful. Then he says, *satsaṅga-bhaktir-gaṅgāmbu-nimajjanam aśeṣa-kṛt-triṇi*. "In this useless world, there are only three valuable things: saintly association, devotion to Kṛṣṇa, and bathing in the Gaṅgā." So, saintly association is so important. If we can take advantage of it, we can perfect our life, and if we abuse that association, if we're offensive to saintly persons, our destination is the lower planets. So ultimately, Holī is celebrated to commemorate the death of the evil Holikā. That's what Holī is—it's called Holī to commemorate the death of Holikā—and also for Prahlāda to glorify his devotion and his faith in Lord Viṣṇu and Kṛṣṇa. That's the higher principle; Holī is celebrated as a recognition of Prahlāda's deep faith, one of the twelve mahājanas. So, different reasons that we celebrate Holī.

Now, as we mentioned in a previous lecture, the Brajabāsīs, they celebrate the Holī festival from Pañcamī—the first day of spring—actually, I'm speaking today on the first day of spring in Orissa, until a few days after Phālguna-pūrṇimā. And during that particular period of which Holī is celebrated, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma are given leave from cow herding. I thought that was really interesting when I read that—Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were given leave to not herd the cows, just play Holī. Also, Holī is played on various days in various towns. For example, in Varṣāṇā, Holī—where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī lives—Holī is played on the ninth day from the full moon. Then Holī is played in Nandagrāma, where Kṛṣṇa lives, on the tenth day from the full moon. And in Vṛndāvana proper, Holī is celebrated on the 11th to the 15th days from the full moon. Nice transcendental facts.

And I was reading that during the Holī festival season, the children of Braja are allowed to play Holī in the forest every day, but they can only play in the towns and villages on scheduled days. Interesting. During the Holī festival season, the children of Braja, they're allowed to play Holī in any forest every day, but they could only play Holī in towns and villages on scheduled days, and that's when the adults join in the fun. So one spring, the Brajabāsīs made plans for a particularly grand festival of Holī, and this, of course, meant it required lots of colored dyes and colored powders and colored liquids, etc. So the gopīs started collecting all of this. So where did they get all this colored dye and colored liquids? You see the pictures, there's so much being thrown, where did they get it all? It's very interesting. The śāstras describe they collected these items from three sources: from their parents, from Vṛndā-devī's storehouses—we spoke on that many months ago; she has storehouses around Braja for various purposes—and the third place they got all the paraphernalia for Holī was from the desire trees of Vṛndāvana. Wow.

As all of this was going on, the gopīs were getting ready to play Holī, the cowherd boys, they had a meeting where they—I would just say they hatched a plan to attack the gopīs with colors first. Now, their plan was that Madhumaṅgala would very calmly approach the girls and ask for a sweet; they were used to that, just kind of casually approach them and ask for sweets, kind of to put them off guard. And when that time came, he walked up to them and said, "Dear girls, you are all vicious, and you now have a very distinguished brāhmaṇa in your midst, so you should all get very busy and prepare some sweets for me." Trying to put them off guard, you know? They didn't know the boys were going to come. But Lalitā interrupted him and said, "You rascal Madhumaṅgala, we know what you boys are planning!" And she turned to all the gopīs and said, "Get him, girls!" The boys had a different plan, but the girls, they had a better plan. "Get him, girls!"

So the girls, as we were discussing, they were ready and armed with huge—it's described, huge pots of red and purple dyes. So all these gopīs, they ran forward and they poured those huge vats of dye all over Madhumaṅgala, the cowherd boy. And it was only with great difficulty that Madhumaṅgala managed to call out, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, save me! I have been captured, I am now blinded by fragrant powders and dyes, and I cannot escape from these shameless girls! Kṛṣṇa, help!"

Hearing, Kṛṣṇa was some distance away, but hearing him, Kṛṣṇa turned to the cowherd boys and he pointed in that direction and he said, "Charge!" That's the famous pastime of the charge. So the cowherd boys, with their own dyes and liquids and sprays and powders, started running towards the gopīs. And it's described, very soon there were two great armies facing each other: thousands of cowherd boys and thousands of cowherd girls. And with the sounds of bugles and horns—sounding bugles and horns were sounded—both sides started shooting dyes with their syringes and throwing colored powders. It's mentioned that streams of colored liquids filled the air, coloring the land, the sky, and the waters of Braja. And then there's a fine line there, as well as all the gopas and the gopīs too, everything got covered. And after everyone had used all their liquid dyes—because they started with these syringes, you see sometimes in the *pichwai* paintings from Rajasthan, they're syringes—at that point, Plan B came in. They started throwing this powdered dye, which we mentioned the other day, is fragrance. Actually, each dye is a particular color—the real Holī, the original Holī. So it's mentioned that very soon, everyone had created this huge cloud of colored dust that blocked the rays of the sun, similar to a pastime we told in our last lecture. And as a result, everyone got confused and started throwing the powders not only on the enemy but also on their friends. So much, they couldn't see. So, inflicting the powders on their friends—"friendly fire," we call that in the military.

So what happened is that it's such a joyful, loving pastime that everyone got intoxicated by the bliss, and they began calling out, as we hear in Holī in Vṛndāvana—I've been on a number of occasions—you hear the people, they call out, "Ho ho Holī! Ho ho Holī!" And finally, in the midst of this transcendental chaos, Madhumaṅgala stood up and he said, "Kṛṣṇa, your vaṁśī! Your flute, your flute!" So, although Kṛṣṇa couldn't see even an inch in front of him, he managed to pull his flute out from his belt, where he keeps it, and place it to his lips. And as soon as he blew into it, this huge cloud of powders settled, and everyone could see each other. Kṛṣṇa said, "Śānti, śānti." Now, that's fine, but by clearing the air, he made himself an open target for Śrī Rādhā. So she signaled to the gopīs and she said, "Girls, surround him! Get him, girls! Surround him, get him!" So suddenly, all those thousands—actually, I was reading tens of thousands of gopīs—surrounded Kṛṣṇa and covered him from head to foot with streams of sandalwood-scented water and a variety of colors. The ācāryas described this battle between the gopas and the gopīs, between the cowherd boys and the girls; they described it as a fierce exchange of love and a colorful way to show affection and receive affection. Because friends, it's always all about love. There are some complicated pastimes and there's intrigue, but it's all meant to accent the loving exchanges between the devotees and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the devotees' love reigns supreme in Vṛndāvana, in the spiritual world.

After enjoying in this way for some time, the gopas and the gopīs headed to different parts of the Yamunā to bathe, and as they did so, the dye from their bodies swirled in assorted colors in the Yamunā's waters, making it look like a moving rainbow. This is a detail I think we mentioned in another lecture as well; they're so beautiful. As they were taking that, the dye from their bodies swirled in assorted colors in Yamunā's waters, making it look like a moving rainbow. *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya!*

And on yet another occasion, while playing Holī during spring, the gopīs on one side were evenly matched by gopas on the other—against another battle. They lined up like that and they were pretty, you know, the number was pretty equal. And as a result, it's mentioned, neither side could gain a decisive victory over their opponents. And eventually, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she became fatigued from over-exertion, and she sat down on a golden throne. And it's written that soon after, a breathless Kṛṣṇa soon joined her, and together they rooted for their respective followers. They're sitting on this golden throne, right? And Kṛṣṇa was rooting for the boys and Rādhā was rooting, cheering on the girls. So that really inspired the gopas and the gopīs, and they really got into throwing big balls of red powder. It's mentioned that either exploded on their targets or burst in the air before getting there. And as a result, all this colored dye, it settled on the trees and the vines and the grass, as well as on the faces and the limbs and the clothes of all the combatants. That's how it's described.

And Madhumaṅgala, that funny little cowherd boy, he would run to the front lines and incite the girls by dancing around, and when the gopīs charged, throwing these balls of powder or squirting liquid color, he would retreat to hide behind the boys. Fun and games. But on the transcendental platform, the playground of God—Vṛndāvana is the playground of God—so it's described that most of the children threw colors, but some played instruments. It's described like that, most of the children took colors, but some played instruments and others sang. In your mind's eye, you can see this big battle going on, some boys and some girls are egging it on by playing instruments or singing. And I was also reading that excited birds, like the peacocks and the cuckoos, they would then add their calls to the music, circling above the battlefield, intoxicated by the fun. So interesting.

Eventually, some gopīs decided to play a trick on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and they're sitting on the throne, right? So these cowherd boys and cowherd girls—actually, gopīs—decided to play a trick on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And approaching them from behind, the girls tied the divine couple's outer garments together in a knot. And then from the front, both the boys and the girls suddenly attacked the divine couple, dousing them so completely with colored powders that the ācāryas say they looked like two vermilion Hanumān deities—you know, Hanumān is covered with that orange dye. The murtis here, the deities—so this was a vermilion color—so the divine couple had so much of this powder on they looked like two vermilion Hanumān deities. So naturally, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they tried to escape the surprise attack, but when they tried to flee, they were restrained by the knot. Their cloth was tied together in a knot. Thus, they couldn't avoid being pelted by the colorful dyes of Holī. And it's mentioned, humiliated, they ran together for shelter in a particular kuñja, in a particular grove.

And there, Kṛṣṇa was able to use the pointed end of his syringe to untie the knot. So then, both He and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī returned to the golden throne they were previously sitting on. And as they did so, the whole Holī battle subsided. And then once again, this time with the divine couple's acknowledgement, their clothes were knotted again—a playful pastime—as the cowherd boys and girls sang wedding songs to them. It's a playful pastime, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they got a little embarrassed, they actually got flustered by these new developments. So they rose from their places but were unable to part ways; they wanted to be together.

So once the fun had subsided, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa spent some time together, and once all the fun had subsided, Kṛṣṇa sent the boys home, and He and the gopīs, they bathed in a nearby lake called Gulāl Kuṇḍa. It means the lake of colored dye. They bathed there in the lake of colored dye, which washed the color from their transcendental bodies, from the bodies of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā. And then again, they were dressed in fresh clothes and ornaments. And I was reading that it said that even today, sometimes during the spring season, colored dyes become visible in the waters of the Yamunā there, where that lake—there's a lake connected to the Yamunā—colored dyes become visible in that lake attached to the Yamunā. And one can hear sounds of unseen children playing Holī; this permeates the air, you can hear the children playing. And sometimes you can look around and the trees are dusted with colored powders.

So one day we can all go to Gulāl Kuṇḍa, on the lake of colored dye, where the divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, bathed and then dressed. And maybe we'll be fortunate during the spring season to see the colored dyes become visible in the waters of that lake, and we can hear the sounds of unseen children playing Holī. That sound will permeate the air and we'll look around and the trees will be dusted with colored powders. It's all possible by Prabhupāda's mercy. Just like Kṛṣṇa said to Arjuna, "Now I give you divine eyes by which you can see this universal form." So our progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, our residence in Vṛndāvana, our ability to one day see the divine couple, to see Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, to see the original Kalpa-vṛkṣa trees, the Yamunā, Girirāja, that will come from Kṛṣṇa's representative, Śrīla Prabhupāda. So we can pray to him like that, that we can one day see this eternal festival of Holī being played in eternal Vṛndāvana. Jaya! 

Though I think we have enough material for maybe two more classes on spring. So sweet. Thank you so much for this opportunity and we'll be back in a couple of days. 

*Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Sundara kī jaya!*""