"*00453*.*
"All right, everyone, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guruḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* .

So, in our last lecture on springtime in Vṛndāvana, we concluded by saying that it was the final in the series. Well, it turns out that’s not the case because I found a number of references actually to Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s observance of Holī during the month of spring that I hadn’t previously mentioned. You may remember how in one class we quoted Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī, where he describes how the six seasons personified met and discussed how Lord Caitanya would soon appear in Nadia in spring. Remember how upon hearing this, spring became glad and thanked her good fortune.

Well, the other day I was reading Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra—it’s a wonderful book because, you know, Phālguna is coming up—and I came across a beautiful description of how springtime personified prepared herself to actually meet Lord Caitanya upon his birth, his appearance in Navadvīpa, Māyāpur. In one book we hear how spring transforms, and in another book we hear—kind of taking off from where one left off—we hear how she actually prepared for Mahāprabhu to take birth in her season in Nadia. Therein, Kavi Karṇapūra describes in his literature that spring was thinking, "Oh, the Lord will come soon," then he says she smiled, and that smile maddened the cuckoo birds in Nadia and made them coo very sweetly and very playfully. She was beginning to prepare for the Lord's arrival, and then it is described that her smile also made flowers bloom and filled them with sweetness and honey. Then it is described that springtime personified—it’s a little esoteric—tied the sweetness of the tamāla tree forest that was her hair into braids and made the black bees and blossoming vines that were her eyebrows dance with joy.

Then, to receive the Lord, she made a crown with new lavaṅga flowers, and she built a cottage for Mahāprabhu with lotus stems—nice preparations! Then Kavi Karṇapūra says that the ten directions became clear and pure, the sky became clear and pure, all waters in the district of Nadia became clear and pure, and last but not least, everyone’s heart became clear and pure. Spring was providing some nice preparations for the Lord’s arrival. Then he writes that springtime carefully arranged for the exact day that Mahāprabhu would appear by "happily embracing that day while again and again kissing the face of the eastern horizon." I like that part—"happily embracing that day while again and again kissing the face of the eastern horizon." And then she caused the full moon to shine with great splendor, and as the cuckoos sang the word, "Glory! Glory! Glory!", it’s described that bees danced gracefully and a soft breeze came in from the south. Then, with the powers invested in her, springtime made the entire world peaceful and pure, and Kavi Karṇapūra says that at that auspicious moment, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the yuga-avatāra, made his appearance in this world from the womb of Mother Śacī. Kavi Karṇapūra concludes that section by saying: "And with his transcendental power, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu thus defeated the darkness of this world." That was the first Gaura Pūrṇimā—so nice, two authors introducing the appearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this world.

Now that’s not all. At this point, we can hear from another author who describes the yearly ceremony, the celebration of Gaura Pūrṇimā or the appearance of Lord Caitanya in this world. He describes actually how Mother Śacī would celebrate each year her son’s "birthday." Now that author, his name is Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who writes about these pastimes in his *Gadādhara Bhaṭṭajī Ke Vānī*. 

Now, I checked, as I often do, with the GBC Śāstra Committee, and they researched and they gave their approval of this book; it is in line with our culture, with our philosophy, with our history. Now, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, I found out, was a direct disciple of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and he is famous for continuing the tradition of reading and preaching the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam after the departure of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. You remember we had a full lecture on Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and we were mentioning his deity was the Bhāgavatam, and every day he would read and every day he would speak on the Bhāgavatam. This was the service that Mahāprabhu gave him. So his disciple—one of his disciples—was Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and he continued that tradition on behalf of his Guru Mahārāja. So he wrote this book, *Gadādhara Bhaṭṭajī Ke Vānī*, and I was reading it; it’s actually a series of poems. I had a translation written in Brajabhāṣā—or we say, the Braja language—very beautiful. 

Now, therein, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī begins by explaining that on the occasion of observing her son’s seventh birthday, or let us say his appearance day, Lord Caitanya’s mother, Śacīmātā, she began the day by dressing Nimāi in a new outfit, which consisted of a white dhoti and a white cādara, and it’s mentioned that the white cādara had yellow printings of sandalwood paste all over it. So then Śacīmātā decorated Nimāi’s young—his young hair—she decorated his long, curly hair with white malatī flowers and strings of white pearls. It just comes right before your vision when you hear this transcendental knowledge. And after that, she put collyrium or kājala on his eyes, she decorated his ears with earrings, and she put on a waistband that consisted of a—I said his waistband was a tight golden belt, that’s how it’s described; his waistband was a tight golden belt. Then she decorated Nimāi’s fingers with rings on his seventh birthday, and she put on his wrists golden bangles. And then it’s described in detail by the author that she called all of her friends, householders, into her home to watch her husband worship the Śālagrāma-śilā, particularly because they were worshiping the Śālagrāma-śilā that day for the well-being of their son.

Then it’s written that she organized a feast, a big feast, and she invited 64 brāhmaṇas to come and eat in her home for the purpose of giving blessings to her son, Nimāi. And at that time, everyone in attendance offered garlands to the seven-year-old Nimāi, and they gave him gifts. And oh yeah, after that, brāhmaṇas performed Vedic rituals specifically for the long life of Nimāi. Then Śacīmātā put her son Nimāi on an āsana and she had an elderly brāhmaṇa sit next to him and perform what’s called *aṣṭa-ciranjīvī pūjā*, which is a ritual of worshiping eight eternally long-living personalities, and they’re described as Bali Mahārāja, Vedavyāsa, and the sage Mārkaṇḍeya; they live a long time, so this ritual was in honor of them. So then she had Nimāi also worship these eight eternal personalities with specific mantras, and then she had him offer his respects to a group of brāhmaṇas as they sang the glories of his lineage, meaning mother and father, grandmother and grandfather, great-grandfather, going way back. It’s all very interesting—our Vedic culture, how they did things; we can embrace many of these things to facilitate our progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So then, astrologers came forward and they described the different positions and the state of Nimāi’s planetary system, and they predicted—it’s understandable—they predicted extraordinary things for him in the future because he’s the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then the group of brāhmaṇas came forward again, and they chanted what’s written as svasti-mantras, and they showered Nimāi with yellow turmeric rice as a blessing. Of course, in a Western concept, this is not the way we or they celebrate birthdays; this is a more cultured way. This is the way that we celebrate, ultimately, the Lord’s appearance in this world as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the yuga-avatāra. Then it’s described that she did—as she did every year on Nimāi’s birthday—she offered him three neem leaves and miśrī, a sweet preparation, to eat, so that all the bitterness in his life would go away and his life would be filled with sweetness. This is really motherly love.

Then I found this very interesting: she tied seven knots in her sārī—seven knots in her sārī—to remember how old Nimāi had become this year. And then what did she do? She embraced her son with the warmth of love, motherly love. She embraced her son with the warmth of transcendental motherly love. Then Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī writes that Śacīmātā, whose life and soul, day and night, sorrow and happiness, pain and pleasure, were all about Nimāi, she stopped looking at him and she said, "My love, if I stare at you in love, my evil eyes will hurt you," and became overwhelmed. Her humility! So, hearing her words, seven-year-old Nimāi sat on her lap, and he said, "It’s so sweet, oh mother. The biggest punishment for a son is to be far from his mother. This world is like a forest of thorns, but the love of a mother is a garden of blossoming flowers of spring. The touch of a mother takes away all anxiety and stress and brings eternal joy. Oh mother, I am most fortunate to have you as my mother. Even the demigods are devoid of motherly love; therefore, they incarnate themselves as little sons to taste the vātsalya-rasa of mother’s affection on earth."

Now, this is very interesting. Lord Caitanya says that the demigods are devoid of motherly love, and how is that? Because I was reading that on the heavenly planets, when a child is born, they immediately appear as 16 years old. They’re not babies; you don’t have to go through all that difficulty of growing up—infancy, childhood, teenager. No, in the heavenly planets, when your mother gives birth, the process is you’re 16 years old. So that may sound convenient, but it means that mothers miss the natural loving exchanges of young babies. So Mahāprabhu said to Śacīmātā, "Even the demigods are devoid of motherly love; therefore, they incarnate themselves as little sons to taste *vātsalya-rasa* of mother’s affection." That’s interesting. 

So Śacīmātā then spoke, "Oh my son, you speak so sweetly, you are so knowledgeable, and whatever you have said, it’s very true. But the real truth is that I am so fortunate to have you as my son. I do not know what pious activities I must have performed in previous lives that Lord Nārāyaṇa has given you to me." The whole of Navadvīpa comes to my door every day to see you. And the next thing she said will just melt your heart: she said, "O star of my eyes, O moon of my life, O lamp of my house, I pray to Lord Nārāyaṇa that he will place you far away from all problems." Oh, star of my eyes, O moon of my life, O lamp of my house! Oh, this is real poetry. There’s that verse—I can’t quote it exactly—but what is the use of a bowman’s arrow unless it pierces the heart, and what is the use of poetry unless it melts the heart? This is pure poetry.

Then she said to him, "Nimāi, now take this cloth bag, for your friends are waiting for you to play Holī. But before you go, let me put a black dot of collyrium on the back of your ears; otherwise, you’ll attract so many evil eyes, my Nimāi." So she gave him a bag to go and play Holī, full of things to protect him. Then Śacīmātā, with a silk cloth containing an extra supply of colored powder and saffron for Holī—for Holī, remember, we’re discussing spring pastimes and we discussed several lectures about Holī in Vṛndāvana, but *Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Rādhā Kṛṣṇa nahe anya*—who is Caitanya Mahāprabhu? He’s the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and his method of happiness is to enjoy in this way with his devotees, throwing the colors. So then she gave him a golden syringe, and then she massaged his limbs with fragrant oil. You know, you might say, "Mā, I want to go out and play." "All right, you go now." 

But by the time—it’s written by the time that Nimāi came out of his house, the sky was already red with color. Everyone was playing Holī, and it’s also mentioned, being spring, that the fields were a nice backdrop of green and yellow with spring flowers. This contrast is there—the red dust, the red-colored powdered dyes hovering in the air, and the background was green and yellow with spring flowers. So men and women were playing Holī together, and it’s described they were all wishing each other "Happy New Year." January 1st is not the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava’s New Year. We go to bed early, like we do on most days, to get up early and chant our rounds. Our New Year is the birthplace, the birth time of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And what kind of party do we have? Saṅkīrtana party—mass congregational chanting of the holy names. Of course, we also go out on January 1st, or the evening before New Year’s Eve, to chant in the streets of London and Paris and Sydney and Moscow for the benefit of the fallen, conditioned souls, because they’re out there partying and we’re showing them what’s a real party. A real party is saṅkīrtana, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, it writes that as Nimāi came out and the Holī festival was going on, he writes everyone was visiting their elders and touching their feet. Not only that, they were putting colored powder on their elders' feet, and to their friends, it mentions they were putting colored powder on their hands and their cheeks—you know, they dab it there amongst the family members. And Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī writes, it’s very beautiful: Nimāi, the lover of Holī, went to Advaita Ācārya, who was happily showering everyone with fragrant saffron water, and he writes that Nimāi felt blessed having saffron water showered on him by Advaita Ācārya.

Now during all this, the Gandharvas in heaven they played huge *bṛhat-mṛdaṅgas*, *dundubhis*—I had to look up what’s a *dundubhi*; a *dundubhi* is a huge, trumpet-like instrument—and everyone was playing karatalas, and it also mentions "magical instruments." I couldn’t find out what were the magical instruments; I guess we have to wait and see if we can join Mahāprabhu’s eternal līlā. So now, as the tempo of the Holī celebration increased, Nimāi was just dancing like mad and throwing colors with this hand and that hand. And then his friends like Jagadānanda and Murāri, it’s mentioned, started throwing sandalwood paste on him, and in return, Nimāi started spraying kuṅkuma water on them from his golden syringe that his mother had given him. At that point, Dāmodara and Narahari started singing—means literally joyful songs—about Holī. When we were reading, or we were discussing Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s Holī pastimes in Vṛndāvana, we often heard about these songs; it wasn’t everyone was just throwing colors, remember, on the side there were devotees singing about Holī and there were devotees playing musical instruments. This type of celebration. At one point, it’s mentioned Nimāi rushed towards a devotee named Puruṣottama to play Holī, but Puruṣottama ran away—it’s described—because he was afraid of being splashed with colors. Seeing this, all the ladies and men who witnessed this whole thing, they started laughing and joking.

So then Gadādhara describes—and I’ll quote here—"By afternoon time, everyone started feeling very hungry, so Mother Śacī and others fed their children a feast of different varieties of food." And then all the boys went with Nimāi to the Gaṅgā for *jala-keli* pastimes (*jala* means water and *keli* means playful, so for playful water pastimes), and there they all scrubbed away the colors from their bodies and then rested under a kadamba tree. And that, our illustrious author, concludes: "I am overwhelmed beholding the beauty, Kṛṣṇa sleeping under the shadow of the tree. I am overwhelmed beholding the beauty, meaning Kṛṣṇa, sleeping under the shadow of a tree." All right, Kṛṣṇa.

Now, we can keep going when these pastimes are unlimited, so we also have detailed information—how our Śrīla Prabhupāda would sometimes say, "our Kṛṣṇa"—it just makes you feel like part of the team. We also have information how our Lord Caitanya played Holī when he grew a little older and was surrounded by a number of associates including his beloved Lord Nityānanda. Now that information I found in the book called the *Sportive Battle of Gaura-Gadādhara*. The *Sportive Battle of Gaura-Gadādhara*—it’s written by a Vaiṣṇava saint named Mohan Das. So I thought, if I’m going to quote Mohan Das, they better figure out who he is, and if he’s connected to our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava lineage. He must be, because he’s describing the sportive battle of Gaura-Gadādhara. But I was very, very happy to find out that he was a very dear—perhaps the closest—friend of Śrī Govinda Kavirāja. Govinda Kavirāja, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* Ādi-līlā 12.51, in the purport, Prabhupāda writes that Govinda Kavirāja was a disciple of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. Of course, we all know him as the author of the song *Bhaja Hū Re Mana Śrī*. Every new devotee learns that song: "O mind, just worship the lotus feet of the son of Nanda, which makes one fearless. Having obtained this rare human birth, cross over this ocean of worldly existence to the association of saintly persons." This just brings back memories to me of the early 70s, you know, we would sing this song all the time. I was reading that after Śrī Govinda Kavirāja wrote *Bhaja Hū Re Mana*, he sent it to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī for approval, and when Jīva Gosvāmī had that bhajana sung for him, he appreciated it so much that he wrote back—he wrote back to Govinda Kavirāja, and I’m quoting Jīva Gosvāmī here: "The letter: Please continue to compose kīrtanas like these. You are very qualified, so you should compose more and send them to me here in Vṛndāvana." The very words of Jīva Gosvāmī. So anyway, I think I can safely say our Mohan Das was the best friend to Kavirāja. Birds of a feather stick together, let’s put it like that—not the best analogy, but you know, they’re tight. 

So he wrote this—you could say a long poem, actually—called the *Sportive Battle of Gaura-Gadādhara*, wherein we get insight into Lord Caitanya’s Holī pastimes in spring in his later youth. Now I’ll just recite directly from his writings; I won’t quote the maṅgalācaraṇa, but I’ll just recite the translations for all of us. He writes: "Just see, just see the delightful pastime of Gaurāṅga in the spring season along with all his dear associates. He went to the banks of the ocean. On one side, in a team, is Gadādhara along with Svarūpa Dāmodara, Vāsu Ghoṣa, Govinda, etc. On another hand are Gaurī Dāsa, etc. With Mahāprabhu, Mahāprabhu’s teams take *picakārī*—like those water guns made out of sandalwood—and shower Gadādhara’s body with water. Now on the other team headed by Gadādhara, Svarūpa Dāmodara along with all associates took gulāla powder in their hands and threw it profusely at Gaurāṅga Raya, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, while playing in this way. Gaurī Dāsa, who was on the side of Mahāprabhu, clapped and said, 'Gaurāṅga has won! Gaurāṅga has won!' that is ran in joy. Then, angry at this, Svarūpa Dāmodara said, 'No! Gaurāṅga Raya has lost! Lord Caitanya has lost! Our Gadādhara has won!' At that point, some devotees made sounds by slapping their upper arms with their palms, while others sang and danced with raised hands. All this is immensely attractive to the mind of Mohan Das."

Oh boy, so now we’ll finally conclude our lectures on springtime in both Vṛndāvana and Māyāpur with the following poem by a devotee named Nayananda Miśra. It’s entitled *Phulavane Doleta Gaurakiśora*. Now Nayananda Miśra was also an exalted devotee; he was a nephew and, more important, he was a disciple of our famous Gadādhara Paṇḍita. He himself was a well-known composer of Vaiṣṇava Padāvalī songs. So yes, we can conclude with his devotion in describing this particular pastime, Lord Caitanya playing Holī. He writes: "What can I say of the bliss being manifested today? The adolescent, youthful Gaura is dancing to and fro in the forest full of flowers. He is there along with Nityānanda and Gadādhara. The Lord of Śāntipura, Advaita Ācārya, sings in merriment, bringing along his intimate associates and colors to play Holī. Śrī Gaura sings, hearing him with love; all the people become enlivened. The wonderful beat sounds on with the names of Hari being sung, whilst Nayananda is enraptured with bliss."

Hare Kṛṣṇa. I think we all have to thank those wonderful Vaiṣṇavas for the wonderful poems and songs that they wrote for all of us and future generations so we can get a glimpse of what it was like for Lord Caitanya and his associates to play Holī during springtime. So we finished our springtime pastimes, our lectures on the springtime pastimes, and we’ll move on to the summer pastimes in the next lecture. Each season has its unique flavor and unique pastimes, loving pastimes of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and the associates of their associates in Vṛndāvana, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and his associates in Navadvīpa, Māyāpur. So looking forward to that. Thank you so much, prabhus.

Oh glorious, our Prabhupāda, *Jaya!*""