"*00479*.*
"# Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's Spring Pastimes - Part 1

Hari Kṛṣṇa, everyone. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana dhāma. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvam, sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca.* 

So, we recently finished a lecture series on winter in Vṛndāvana, and as everyone knows, spring is the season that follows winter. Surely, after a cold winter, the warmth, the colors, and the new opportunities that spring brings are very much welcomed by people. A Canadian author, L.M. Montgomery, wrote: "That is one good thing about this world, there are always sure to be more springs." And the English author Bernard Williams wrote: "The day the Lord created hope was probably the same day He created spring." And The Beatles, they sang: "Little darling, it's been a long, cold, lonely winter. Little darling, it feels like years since it's been here. Here comes the sun, here comes the sun, and I say it's all right." Spring! 

But of course, spring in eternal Vṛndāvana is a completely different matter, being like everything in Kṛṣṇa consciousness: eternal, full of knowledge, and endless bliss. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī gives a little glimpse of eternal spring in his *Govinda-līlāmṛta*, Chapter 8, Verse 24. He writes: "Oh my friend, this springtime sweetness bears the mark of all beauty and opulence. This sweetness is filled with hordes of chubby bumblebees drawn to the nectars of various blooming flowers. This springtime sweetness reverberates with the charming conversations of the cuckoos. This springtime sweetness awakens the loving desire of the young Gopīs of Vraja." So nice.

So, because the atmosphere of spring, perhaps more than any other season, is so conducive for the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, it is called *vasanta*. We mentioned this in the previous lecture: spring is the king of all seasons. And as we mentioned in a previous lecture, Kṛṣṇa Himself glorifies spring in the immortal wisdom of *Bhagavad-gītā* 10.35, where He says: "Of the hymns in the Sāma Veda I am the Bṛhat-sāma, and of poetry I am the Gāyatrī. Of months I am Mārgaśīrṣa (November-December), and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring." 

And also, I was reading our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī glorifies Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys spring pastimes, in his work *Stavamālā*. He writes: *jaya jaya sundara-nanda-kumāra śrī-vṛndāvana-vihita-vasanta-vihāra*. He writes: "O handsome son of Nanda, O Lord who enjoys springtime pastimes in the fragrant forest of Vṛndāvana, all glorious to you, all glorious to you!" So here in Vṛndāvana, the first day of spring, which is just around the corner, is celebrated as Vasanta. And it usually takes place during the months of January or February. And Vasanta Pañcamī is celebrated in a really big way here in Vṛndāvana. It's like an explosion of festivity, of colors and activities, and you know, they just really welcome spring here because the winters are pretty cold in Vṛndāvana. All the temple deities in Vraja on that day, the first day of spring, are dressed and decorated in beautiful yellow clothes, and their *śṛṅgāra* is also very elaborate, but the predominating color in the temples is yellow. And the Vrajavāsīs, the wonderful Vrajavāsīs themselves, they all dress in various shades of yellow or green on that day.

And Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas take a special interest in the arrival of spring because it's the season that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in this world. There's a quote in the *Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma: A Pilgrim's Guide*, and I quote: "King Vasanta, the personification of the spring season, heard that Lord Gaurāṅga would appear in the flower-bearing spring and he became jubilant and ecstatic and began to dance with his five brothers who represent the other five seasons." And we also know that Lord Caitanya Himself, He liked the spring season; that's confirmed in *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, Antya-khaṇḍa 19, verse 83, where we hear about Lord Caitanya entering into the Jagannātha-vallabha garden in Jagannātha Purī: "The six seasons, especially spring, seemed present there. Seeing the garden, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was very happy." Again: "The six seasons, especially spring, seemed present there. Seeing the garden, Mahāprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was very happy." 

Furthermore, the first day of spring is important to Lord Caitanya's followers because we celebrate Viṣṇupriyā’s appearance day on the first day of spring, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s disappearance day, Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi’s appearance day, Raghunandana Ṭhākura’s appearance day, and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s appearance day. Wow, it’s coming up; a lot of celebrations coming now. There are a number of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes that took place 5,000 years ago in Vṛndāvana during spring. Of course, they continue to take place down to the present day in *aprakata*, meaning unmanifest pastimes. If you have the spiritual vision, you can, by the grace of guru and Gaurāṅga, see Kṛṣṇa's pastimes even today here in Śrī Vṛndāvana. 

But many pastimes occurred during the spring season. For instance, one day during spring, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was married to Abhimanyu at the time and living in Yāvat, was visiting her parents in Varṣāṇā. Ācāryas write that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī would leave Yāvat to go to Varṣāṇā three times of the year: during the spring festival, on her own birthday or appearance day, and during Durgā Pūjā. That's interesting; a note: she would leave Yāvat to go with her parents during the spring festival, on her appearance day, and on Durgā Pūjā. And the ācāryas say that she would stay for a few days, or sometimes she would spend a few months in Varṣāṇā with her parents. And when Śrī Rādhā would visit her parents, all her girlfriends, sakīs, and mañjarīs, they would also leave their in-laws and move to their parental families as well. And because all these Gopīs were out from under the, how would you say, the watchful eyes of their in-laws, they were freer to move about and meet Kṛṣṇa. This is especially true for Śrī Rādhā, for while in Varṣāṇā, she didn't have to worry about, you know, Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā looking for her as they do when she's in Yāvat. But still, she had to be careful because there were always rumors floating around Vṛndāvana: how she's meeting Kṛṣṇa here, and her reputation is tarnished. So she had to be very careful even when she was in Varṣāṇā. 

But I was reading, it's interesting, when she was very young and hadn't yet met Kṛṣṇa, there were already rumors that they had met because people had seen them glancing at each other. You know, Kṛṣṇa goes to the forest to herd the cows and the Gopīs are doing their household chores, perhaps on the balcony of their homes, and Kṛṣṇa walks by and they glance at each other—these sidelong glances. So this started some rumors that, you know, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had met. So I found it very interesting in my studies that one time Vṛndāvana-īśvarī actually prayed that such rumors would spread. 

Rādhārāṇī prayed that these rumors would spread! I was reading that it said if one sees the moon on the *caturthī*, the fourth night of *śukla-pakṣa*, the bright fortnight in the month of Bhādra, one will get ill repute. If you go outside, be careful, and you see the moon on the *caturthī*, the fourth night of the *pakṣa*, the bright fortnight of the month of Bhādra, one will get ill repute. Therefore, it's advised in scripture: don't go out and see the moon that night. However, one night, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī went out and said to the moon: "O beloved of the stars, O moon of the fourth night in the month of Bhādra, O Lord, O moon making tidal waves in the ocean of loving desires, I respectfully offer arghya water to you and I bow down before you. I pray that by your mercy, false rumors of my love affair with Kṛṣṇa will spread, and by the spreading of such rumors, I will attain the fulfillment of my desires. I pray that by your mercy, false rumors of my love affair with Kṛṣṇa will spread, and by the spreading of such rumors, I will attain the fulfillment of my desires." 

This prayer is actually found in Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Padyāvalī*, it's verse number 180. She prayed like that. So the natural question is: why is Śrī Rādhā praying for such rumors to spread? Well, it's quite deep. The ācāryas say that at that time, when she's little, Śrī Rādhā had a type of love for Kṛṣṇa called *pūrvarāga*. It means that she'd seen Kṛṣṇa, she'd exchanged some glances, but she'd not actually met Him yet because society wouldn't allow that. That's called *pūrvarāga*. One ācārya puts it very nicely; he writes: "The stage of budding love where two lovers want to meet but are prevented by social norms, that's *pūrvarāga*. You can't meet, but the love is there." However, Rādhārāṇī prayed to the moon, thinking, "Let there be rumors, let there be rumors." She's thinking, "Let there be rumors, so at least on the pretext of false rumors, my name will become associated with Kṛṣṇa, and when that happens, He will automatically come and speak to me in order to ask me what's going on, and that will be the beginning of our relationship." That's pretty deep. I don't know, why he's praying like that, and that will be the beginning of our relationship. No rumors, rumors, rumors! 

But back to our story, our pastime, where Śrī Rādhā is visiting her family in Varṣāṇā, giving her possibilities there to meet with Kṛṣṇa because she's not in Yāvat. And on this occasion, knowing that Śrī Rādhā was there on one of those visits from Yāvat to Varṣāṇā, Kṛṣṇa, wanting to meet her, he disguised himself, because he has to come in a disguise so no one notices, especially the family members. So on this occasion in spring, Kṛṣṇa dressed himself up as a Gopī who was learned in astrology, yoga, mantra, and tantra. Immediately, he had this—it was identified like that—this learned Gopī; she knows astrology, yoga, mantra, and tantra. And after learning from his parrot spies that Rādhārāṇī was walking just outside Varṣāṇā palace, Kṛṣṇa appeared on the footpath before her. Now, Śrī Rādhā immediately saw through Kṛṣṇa's disguise, but to humor him, as described, to humor him, she asked: "O great astrologer, knower of all things, what place of residence gives supreme bliss?" 

So Kṛṣṇa, in this disguise as a Gopī, said: "The cowherd pastures of Kṛṣṇa." 
Then Rādhā asked: "And what is the essence of life for all beings?" 
And Kṛṣṇa replied in a sweet voice: "Oh, singing songs about Kṛṣṇa." 
So then Rādhā asked: "And my dearest relative, what bestows incomparable auspiciousness?" 
Kṛṣṇa replied: "The desire to obtain Kṛṣṇa." 
Then Śrī Rādhā asked: "And my dear female astrologer, what is the most enjoyable thing?" 
And Kṛṣṇa, in a feminine voice, he said: "What is the most enjoyable thing? The beauty of Kṛṣṇa." 
So finally, Śrī Rādhā asked: "My dear astrologer, what is the ultimate attainment in this creation?" 
Kṛṣṇa smiled and said: "The company of Śrī Kṛṣṇa." 
That was their pastime that morning. 

Now, on another occasion in spring, Kṛṣṇa appeared at Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's doorstep at Varṣāṇā disguised as a female doctor. Now, he employs this disguise and this pastime often; it's repeated in different places with different varieties of that—it's the variegatedness of the pastime. But on this particular occasion in spring, he appeared at Varṣāṇā, and his disguise was that of a female doctor. It's easier to get closer to the Gopīs in the disguise of a lady, a Gopī. So the ācāryas say that on this occasion, "In a melodious voice that hypnotized the Gopīs, this female doctor offered a complimentary consultation for Varṣāṇā's princess." That was appropriate, because at that particular time, Śrī Rādhā happened to be suffering from a high fever caused by what? Anguish of separation from Kṛṣṇa. That was her high fever; it was caused by the anguish of separation from Kṛṣṇa. And so, this female doctor was taken by the servants to Śrī Rādhā's inner chambers, where she—Kṛṣṇa disguised as a female doctor—greeted her patient, Śrī Rādhā, by touching her feet. 

So the doctor was told that Rādhā was suffering from lover's heartache, so the doctor, she proceeded to take Rādhārāṇī's pulse. Meanwhile, the doctor sent the Gopīs out to bring certain items, you know, for this visit, like she needed damp towels and sandalwood paste. So while the Gopīs were running about trying to find these items, they heard all of a sudden Śrī Rādhā call out in alarm: "Oh, my friends, this doctor should be taking my pulse to prescribe medicine for my love-torn heart, but alas, she is not only touching my wrist; she is touching all my other limbs as well! Help!" So the Gopīs, you know, they all quickly rushed back into Rādhā's room to find their queen completely cured by the new doctor's treatment! Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

Actually, there are unlimited spring pastimes. Now, there's another famous *māna* pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that took place one time in spring. I don't know how many lectures we're going to be able to have—so many—because spring is just full of pastimes. Now, *māna*, of course, refers to when Rādhārāṇī becomes angry with Kṛṣṇa. So, one time in the Vṛndāvana forest called Vihāravan—remember, the Vṛndāvana forest is divided into many sub-forests—Kṛṣṇa one day played a special melody on his flute, calling Śrī Rādhā to join him there, specifically Śrī Rādhā. Now, in time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī arrived with Rūpa Mañjarī and a few maidservants, and after the divine couple greeted each other with kind words, they just described flowering spring blossoms from the trees—you know, they picked the spring blossoms from the trees and they presented them as gifts to each other. They sat down in a very beautiful flowering grove. Springtime was when the flowers come, so they sat down in a beautiful grove. The ācāryas write: "The spring forest felt honored to host Kṛṣṇa and his consort, and so it displayed all of its sweetness and opulence in a humble effort to serve the divine couple, who are the embodiments of all natural beauty." So beautiful. 

So the ācāryas go on to say that at that time, in that particular garden—let's say *kuñja*, that's our terminology, let's go to Vaiṣṇavas—in that *kuñja*, flowers' fragrance rode upon gentle breezes, as it's described. The fragrance of flowers rode upon gentle breezes, the humming of bees filled that *kuñja*, and the songs of the cuckoos were the lead singers in an orchestra that resounded with the words, "Jai Śyām, Jai Śyām, Jai Śyām." It was an orchestra, and the cuckoos were the leaders in that orchestra of different personalities glorifying God, in Kṛṣṇa. And this chorus resounded with the words, "Jai Śyām, Jai Śyām, Jai Śyām." Maybe one day be part of that orchestra. 

Now, at that point, it's really interesting, at that point, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's combined auras—you know, the aura, like the effulgence that comes from divine personalities—at that point, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's combined auras lit up the grove with an emerald glow, as a sign of their gratitude for the forest's service, filling the eyes of their maidservants and the forest creatures with bliss. Everything became illuminated with this beautiful aura, like an emerald glow. But just then, by the arrangement of Pourṇamāsī, who along with Vṛndā Devī arranges all these intricate pastimes in various ways, by the arrangement of Pourṇamāsī, something went wrong, quote-unquote. Kṛṣṇa's effulgence, like a mirror, showed Rādhā her reflection.""