What else can compare with the beauty and splendor of Radha Kunda?

How many beautiful dreams, epithets, has it collected in its address?

Has it gathered its troops?

Only Radha Kunda can compete with it. How Radha Kunda is both liquid and straight. This is Samara Mata and Radharani, and this is personified. I am Maya Devi, and this is Krodha Vasini of all the heart. This is the receptacle of everything beautiful and intimate.

Our group came here. We settled on the banks of the lake Kunda, and after some time, in its midst, all of us, O Ananda Maharaj, and Govinda Maharaj, went to the stream. Comments are a large short lecture by Narottam Das Thakur, who is organizing this lecture.

Kartam Das Thakur, he is a disciple of our Gurudev and the executive director of this entire event. Everywhere, if you listen carefully, the springs can be heard ringing bells. One way or another, there are many temples nearby where the battery is used for morning services.

Behind this small Kunda is located on the other side. The side is located where Yamuna Devi is separated by literally some strip of two or three meters wide. What we now see was recently lost sight of and practically disappeared from the face of the planet.

God did not find this Kunda when he found it. Glad to Kunda, but they did not represent two small lakes. It is very difficult to even call them lakes because in the center there were two small puddles with a total area of each about three to four square meters.

Local peasants who made their fields in the vicinity, there are now houses there. They were terribly surprised when Lord Chaitanya, in ecstasy, in a foreign land, found dancing in these most secret places, and you are now just literally some 500 years old.

We have these two beautiful Kundas that attract and enchant the minds and hearts of everyone. Thousands of pilgrims gather on the banks of one of these two sacred reservoirs and plunge into the liquid pleasure of love, devotion, and Krishna.

Local residents who live here ideally are in a more fortunate position than all these pilgrims who came by the grace of the spiritual teacher. Some knew personally to accept here. The locals vegetate and experience every day the amazing beneficial effect that Radha Kunda can have on conditioned fallen souls.

Moreover, all the holy churches always came and filled this Kunda with their powers, asking for the removal of Mother Yasoda and Radharani and asking them to stay here forever. As the Vaisnavas describe, "Threads with you" and books, "Radha Kunda" in 1949, these churches, and sometimes manifest a personal tirade.

Kunda can manifest, for example, a milk drunk, and then the water in Radha Kunda turns white. Devotees who take this water simply in a bottle or jar, insert it, then under the sun. One sees how this water, like milk, simply sours, separating the milky part.

Last year, I myself witnessed how the water of Kunda gushes with multicolored springs. You can see different streaks along the shore. It once gave Mundi a slightly greenish color, but you can see how next to the shore there is another completely different color, a beautiful white river.

They did not explain what this key and the milky ocean that is located here is. Do not be rude, sacred rivers, different in color from each other, flow to the surface, each of the Kundas to the habits. Try to bring a little on the camera.

This is an order on the crosses with you on the road, far away, near Ingush, their distant tundra, distant steppes of Arabia, for example, like these pilgrims who came here from Chukotka or the far north. Please tell me, do you have a license to photograph Radha Kunda?

Don't go today. I already bought it. Fry it, dressed in sixteen circles of toadstools, and until five in the morning, very pleasant for the check that is performed. The morning duty decorates their bodies. Tell me, in one of the holy scriptures it is said that the body, if not decorated, becomes a body in such a place of pilgrimage, the raven.

Go like this is the best decoration that a person can come up with. A check decorates his heifer with clay from the city of Kunda. A friend, you are already simply accepting Odessa Mata, not every resident who lives on childbirth.

Her life begins. We will build in this and also stuck in this in order to perform his morning rituals. He healed the lamp, she took over the ablutions, she expressed almost no joy. But no holy place can do without assistants, just like in any temple, any spirit, there are beans, there is soy, and there is a pacifier, which are ready to show you the most interesting places, but a small and modest donation is enough.

So here he came along, apparently, he is trying to explain by this that they should not leave him any donation in exchange for his services to be guides for their Kunda people. Learn that he approached the Hindus, he went back.

For the locals of the Kunda clan, this life is the purest, the most valuable thing in all creation. Many of them come here not only to perform their morning ceremony but also to simply clean its banks, pull out the midges that float here, some garbage that monkeys throw.

For example, like this elderly woman, even within 20-30 minutes, it is performed at the game, not the ceremony. They just go to the banks of the Kunda and clean up all that they swim in it and all that somehow defiles the view with their faces and pleasant appearance.

But let's return to our conversation about the pandits of the teacher. The number of people to the water and the Russian pilgrim exceeds all, let's say, ethical standards. They attract local residents, especially those pilgrims who live on the banks of a number of rooms for whom Radha Kunda is not only a place of offering them service but also a place to receive a livelihood.

By approaching the devotees, they explain to them what and how will happen in life and how well and successfully it will turn out if they and only they conduct these amazing ceremonies, rituals that will help everyone who is here, one way or another, gain the grace of God, simple fame, all the other wealth that you wish for yourself.

Such a floor as Kazan cheeks or such as they call it does not like milk in the mountains. Dude zero still does not part with his camera and takes pictures of everything that is illuminated about his will. Eat grandfather models are unlikely that these are either those who came to report or widowed women who live off what they are given as a sacrifice, not pilgrims.

Solution view again to get communication, it was not successful and Krishna prays for benefit and against him to give him mercy to get communication.

A bunch of births we have this very, very sacred place. Film that place where you are uninhibited and a feeling of spiritual treatment with this respect. And when we approach this place for ablution, then naturally a woman will go one way, men with a friend, and also when we approach the place, there are local priests who stock what you do and so that.

But the priest who is here and other priests with scissors and they will want to cut your pockets and you must order that you already have a priest here. This is the Kunda side, be patient. You need to collect this place where it was written all four directions.

And although I'm not sure as far as I remember, it was also written here that she told me that very dacha taste appeared after several hundred years. Each phenomenon here, where to throw?

I'm joking. Conclusion, and many said that thanks to his mood, he is the embodiment of the press. Rub faded to. Monitoring pants. Well, your description helped people of the world understand the mood of transcendental love. Therefore, he was among the greatest acharyas.

Every day we sing *Karva Chauth*. It is written, we also rotate the bed, and so, hurray!

He wrote one wonderful work, *Krishna Bhajan Vritta*.

All the wires write in the source of eternal pleasure that those who want to understand the depth of loving relationships, Radha and Krishna should study a work similar to *Sri Krishna Bhajan Vritti*.

Here is the girl's shoe, the bed and extrusion. My day we had one like a small one, here after yes, with you we saw x, the work of Das Goswami protects from the scorching sun. All mothers in advance, and Krishna drives away tigers from him.

They once limited that he made himself a *bhajan* path for you, la-la-la. From drive on, and he was the first, and who had his own path. Since then, many saints come to live in these places, and as we explained, Śrīla Haridas Thakur, thanks to his powerful prayer, realized his inner spiritual form as Rati Manjari, and in this place, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī accepted him as an eternal servant.

On this side, for those who approached, is located on a thinner pier board in a row of Goswami. Note that this is an old, already departed tree. Nearby stands another ancient, departed, but still living green tree. As I explained, these are the very trees that live eternally here.

Peter Pan represents the queen. E5. Bandhu paid the price. In this, all five fell, incarnated in this last green tree. The ablution will be held here again before devoting oneself to Krishna's games.

Now, suitable vision is happening so that one loves. There were three beginnings of smell, but for this, you need the master of this Radha Kunda. Brought it closer, there were few, that fire, this well where they started. Howard's language to this place is called there, all the la majem couture.

Here, in this someone's not fond of a wig, comes to me to a small cave that unites the commander of the Kunda. Diving between these houses, go down literally 10 meters down. We find ourselves at the very edge of the water.

Pilgrims make 10 steps down and find themselves right in the water of a small temple to which she shouts at the place where, in general, all pilgrims accept this skill because, according to the standard, you must first take ablution in Radha Kunda, then in the waters of Yamuna Kunda, and then again three times swear by this Kunda.

The mindset laid down by visits is so deeply submitted to him, the spiritual teacher, who allowed them to do this, and observing all the rules and regulations in front of those around, some to dive with saw in this liquid ocean of nectar.

From here you can see that temple from where we just were. Trees that were before the five Pandava brothers, there are two dried-up trees, and just a stone fence preventing you from seeing the small green tree that the Pandavas have now embodied at all costs.

You can notice that there are chains here so you can safely descend without slipping or falling. I'll be glad. The Huns are like jumping into the water, and this can be done very smoothly. I saw a picture during the flood, this is a complete house...