"*00436*.*
"Dear devotees, welcome back again to our continued series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca*. By Kṛṣṇa’s special grace, I find myself back in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, most likely for an extended stay. By Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s special grace, when I went for darśana in our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple yesterday and saw our most beautiful deities there, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, I also remembered two sets of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities that are very dear to my heart, especially because they were the first pair of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities I saw in my life as a devotee, and that is Rādhā-London-īśvara. 

I remember them; they are both unique in our movement, actually, due to the fact that both Rādhārāṇīs are not in the, you could say, the usual pose of most of our Rādhārāṇīs in our temples today. If you look carefully, you’ll see that many of ISKCON’s Rādhārāṇīs are in a dancing pose. It has become very popular the last three decades. I was told by the sādhus here in Vraja that when Śrī Rādhā is in the dancing pose, Kṛṣṇa will never leave her. But actually, there are a number of poses of Rādhārāṇī as a deity next to Kṛṣṇa mentioned in *Govinda-līlāmṛta*. Then there is what I found from some research: the traditional pose where her two hands are closed in front of her like this. I don't think we have any deities of Śrī Rādhā in ISKCON like this, but this is her traditional pose in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, where she is holding two bunches of flowers. You’ll see her in this pose in Navadvīpa, the Yoga-pīṭha where Caitanya Mahāprabhu made His appearance. There are beautiful deities there established by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī in Māyāpura, and there she is like that.

But the pose of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in London and Paris is very, very, very special. In those two temples, you will see her standing with her right hand giving a blessing and her left hand—or actually her whole arm—is down, holding the lotus flower. There is a very, very beautiful pastime that I researched and found, described by one Vaiṣṇava saint named Yadunandana. He was a disciple of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, and he wrote a book called *Mañjarī-śṛṅgāra-rahasya*, explaining why Rādhārāṇī has this particular pose with the lotus flower in her left hand down and her right hand giving blessings. Very beautiful. So, I will share that with you. 

One time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was paying special attention to dressing and ornamenting herself, hoping to meet Kṛṣṇa that day. Now, ornaments are called *śṛṅgāra*, but the whole dress—the way of dressing—is called *veśa*. But in particular, do we refer to ornaments as *śṛṅgāra*? And there is a whole devotional art behind the way that She, Kṛṣṇa, and the various Vraja-vāsīs dress with such ornaments. And as significant is the fact that these ornaments pass a special message. As we all know, because of social customs, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are not allowed to speak to each other in public. Even though they may be present together at some public function, they are not allowed to communicate with their eyes, with their mouths, or even with their gestures—so strict. But Yadunandana describes that they communicate through dressing and ornaments. And how is that? Well, for example, when Śrī Rādhā wears a half-moon ornament on her forehead, it’s a signal to Kṛṣṇa to meet when the moon is half-full. 

And when there are eight dots on one side of her face—we call them "gopī dots" these days—when there’s eight beautiful dots on one side of her face, it’s a signal to Kṛṣṇa that she will come to their meeting with eight of her girlfriends. And when she wears eight dots on the other side of her face, it means she will meet Kṛṣṇa with 16 gopīs. Now, at the end of the gopī dots, when there are peacocks drawn on both sides, it means, "Kṛṣṇa, do you remember when we were talking about peacocks in that particular kuñja? So we will meet in that same kuñja where we were talking about those peacocks the other day." Different signals. Now, I was reading that when those peacocks that are drawn on her face are facing each other on her cheeks, it means to Kṛṣṇa that we can meet and we’ll be able to be close to each other. But when the peacocks are facing away from each other on her cheeks, it means that we’ll have to keep some distance because so many of your cowherd boyfriends will be there. 

And when there are three dots on her chin, it means, "Kṛṣṇa, you may bring three cowherd boys with you." Now, these particular cowherd boys, they’re called *priya-narma-sakhās*. There are different groups we discussed before; you remember there are different groups of cowherd boys, and you know, generally they’re not interested in being with the girls. But there is a certain group of cowherd boys; they’re allowed to facilitate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. They’re called *priya-narma-sakhās*. So when there’s three dots, you can bring three *priya-narma-sakhās*. Now, the chief—I was reading—the chief *priya-narma-sakhā* is actually Madhu Maṅgala, that funny brāhmaṇa cowherd boy. He’s the chief *priya-narma-sakhā*, and he’s the only one who has ever seen Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa dance with the gopīs. All these boys are allowed to facilitate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, but not too close. But the chief amongst the *priya-narma-sakhās*, Madhu Maṅgala, he’s the only one who’s ever seen Rāsa-līlā. Nice details, isn't it? Now, of course, if there’s only one dot, it means just bring Madhu Maṅgala. And if there’s no dot, of course, it means Rādhārāṇī is saying, "Come alone to meet me." 

What else? Oh yeah, when Rādhārāṇī wears kadamba flowers in her hair, it signals to Kṛṣṇa to meet her under the shade of a kadamba tree. And when she wears campā flowers in her hair, it means to meet her under the shadow of a campaka tree. Apparently, there’s some difference between the shade and the shadow. And when she wears one earring with two more earrings hanging from that one, it signifies the time of the meeting that she’s suggesting. So, how is that? Because one earring signifies one *daṇḍa*, which is 24 minutes. So if she’s wearing three earrings, it means three *daṇḍas*—24 plus 24 plus 24. In other words, "Kṛṣṇa, meet me in 72 minutes." This is the science of *śṛṅgāra*, Kṛṣṇa. 

So on this particular occasion, as Rādhārāṇī was dressing in various ways to signal Kṛṣṇa when and where to meet, Lalitā—of course, she’s always being helped by her sakhīs to dress and ornament—so Lalitā-sakhī spoke up and said, "Dearest Rādhārāṇī, today we will also ornament you in shark-shaped earrings, earrings in the shape of a shark." She said, "Because Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa is like a shark and your ear holes are like the ocean. And as the shark cannot live without the ocean, so Kṛṣṇa is not able to live without you. And whenever Kṛṣṇa sees these shark-shaped earrings, he will remember that his life is nothing without you." This is the advice of Lalitā. And she continued and she said, "Dearest Rādhā, I am putting collyrium in your eyes because this is the darkness of love, and love matures best in darkness." 

So in this way, Śrī Rādhā started her day with great hopes of encountering Kṛṣṇa, and by Paurṇamāsī’s—Yogamāyā’s—grace, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa did cross paths later that morning. And by studying Śrī Rādhā’s *śṛṅgāra*, by studying her ornaments and dress, Kṛṣṇa could understand everything about when and where to meet her later that day. But as we’ve discussed many times the last few months, it often happens that Kṛṣṇa is late for the rendezvous for various reasons. And on this particular occasion, Rādhārāṇī became very upset; actually, she became angry. And anger—this transcendental quality—anger in Sanskrit is called *māna*. And of course, Kṛṣṇa tried as hard as he could to pacify her, as he often does, but he wasn't successful. So as he often does, he went to Lalitā and asked her to intervene. And fortunately, Lalitā was able to calm Śrī Rādhā down, but afterwards, Lalitā found Kṛṣṇa and she strongly chastised him, telling him, "Don’t you ever make Rādhā angry again." 

Now, a few days later, as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were sitting very happily together, talking and discussing and laughing in a particular forest grove, Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear Rādhārāṇī, what do you think if we switch roles and I do *māna* once?" So Rādhārāṇī smiled and she said, "Yes, that might be fun. Switch roles! Kṛṣṇa will become angry and then Rādhārāṇī will have to appease him." So Kṛṣṇa, he kind of joked, and he said, "But watch out, it will not be easy to pacify me." So Śrī Rādhā said, "Don’t be so sure of that, Kṛṣṇa; you know the strength of my love, my prayer for you, which is so true." 

So right then and there, Kṛṣṇa went into *māna*. He became angry on the banks of the Yamunā. It’s described, I became very upset, angry with Śrī Rādhā. And as much as Śrī Rādhā tried to pacify Kṛṣṇa, she wasn't successful. Actually, the śāstra says she tried her best for three days and three nights. And then, like Kṛṣṇa did when she’s angry with him, she went to ask Lalitā for help. But even then, she was unable to appease Kṛṣṇa’s *māna* as he sulked on the banks of the Yamunā river. So then Śrī Rādhā turned to Viśākhā—Viśākhā, we always see that Lalitā is on one side of Rādhā and Viśākhā is on the other side of Rādhā, they’re the two main sakhīs—but even Viśākhā, she was not successful in pacifying pouting Kṛṣṇa, described pouting Kṛṣṇa. 

So then the śāstra says Lalitā and Viśākhā, they employed, or they went to get 108 gopīs. They were called forth to try to pacify Kṛṣṇa, and even that failed. So then Rādhārāṇī just broke down crying. Now as she did so, her tears flowed into the Yamunā river, and soon the river began overflowing its banks with her tears. And when that happened, Yamunā Devī herself personified appeared before Śrī Rādhā and she said so sweetly, "Dearest Śrī Rādhā, your tears are causing me great pain. Please give me an order that I can pacify Kṛṣṇa on your behalf." 

So at that point, she asked for a blessing, so at that point she offered a blessing to Yamunā Devī to be able to do that. So Yamunā Devī, it’s described, she went into a nearby grove for some time, and afterwards she reappeared looking exactly like Kṛṣṇa. We know that well, that’s possible in the sense that she has a similar dark complexion to Kṛṣṇa. When we were discussing Yamunā Devī’s personality and pastime some months ago or last year, we mentioned that she has a dark complexion, *śyāma*. Actually, when we say *śyāma*, we refer to Kṛṣṇa, it means the color of clouds in the evening. This is the Sanskrit definition I came across in my studies—not black like night, but Kṛṣṇa’s *śyāma*—he’s the color of clouds in the evening. Sometimes we say "bluish-black" like a monsoon cloud, there’s that blue in there, that kind of aśana color mix. So he’s *śyāma* means that—like the color of clouds in the evening. That’s the actual definition: *śyāma*. 

So she has exactly the same color, but not only that, she had expertly manifested all the beautiful features of Kṛṣṇa as well, even to the point where she was wearing the same skirt like Kṛṣṇa wears—tight pants—the same necklace, the same crown just like Kṛṣṇa. And she was also holding a lotus flower in one hand, and in her other, her right hand, it wasn’t in the pose of lifting Govardhana Hill, so she had a lotus flower, and her other hand was in the pose of lifting Govardhana Hill. It looked like Kṛṣṇa. This pose of Yamunā Devī, she came out of the kuñja, I found, is very nicely described by another Vaiṣṇava saint. His name is… how am I finding all this? Well, you know, recently I had the rare opportunity, the privilege to work with the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, which holds 32,000 scriptures. A good portion of them are from our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition; mainly, all our six Gosvāmīs’ writings are there. And Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura’s, the original hand-scriptures are there as well as many copies. And I’m helping them now because they’re lacking a staff, they don’t have much facility, Lakṣmī, etc. 

So my hope is to be able to preserve, for example, the other day I saw the original handwriting of Rūpa Gosvāmī, *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. I saw the original *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, holding it in my hands, and but it’s falling apart. So I thought that nice service, because I’m not able to do my traveling and my programs and my festivals, I thought a service which would be equal in significance, important, was to help preserve these scriptures. So I’m looking into the whole technique of how to preserve this old paper and you know, keep the atmosphere within the rooms proper so nothing deteriorates. I’m looking for help on that; if you know anything you can let me know. So I have access to all these scriptures like, you know, a dream come true. 

So we came across one saint, his name is Yogī Gopīśvara, and he wrote a book called *Anubhāṣya-raśmi*, and in that book, he describes this beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa that Yamunā Devī assumed. And he writes that, quote: "The form of Lord Kṛṣṇa which He manifests to please His devotees was manifested by Yamunā Devī. Her right hand was raised upwards with her fist contracted and her left hand was facing towards the ground. This form of Yamunā Devī as Kṛṣṇa was never seen before; was manifested by her own desire and was seen as the paramount of her expertise to disguise herself." So why—I was wondering—why did she assume, you know, it’s a disguise obviously, but why did she disguise herself like Kṛṣṇa? 

Then I went on reading the previous śāstra that I referred to. What did she do? She pacified Kṛṣṇa, who was pouting on the, you know, angry—so he’s pouting on the banks of her river—and when Kṛṣṇa saw her looking identical to Him in every way, it’s described He became attracted to His own form. This is one definition that Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive; it’s written He became attracted to His own form. So Kṛṣṇa said to Yamunā, disguised as Him, "Dear one, please tell me who you are; I would very much like to embrace you." So Yamunā Devī, looking like Kṛṣṇa, said, "Dear Kṛṣṇa, if you would like to attain me—she says—if you would like to attain me, then you must first give up your *māna*, give up your anger, and then take full shelter of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet." So that’s what Kṛṣṇa did. He immediately agreed, and giving up his *māna*, his anger, he bowed down to Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet. 

So in this particular līlā, by the arrangement of Paurṇamāsī, Yogamāyā, Yamunā Devī accomplished what Lalitā and Viśākhā and you could say in one sense, what Śrī Rādhā had been unable to do. So because Yamunā was successful in pacifying Kṛṣṇa, and Rādhārāṇī won, Rādhārāṇī very kindly gave her a most beautiful blessing. And here’s the blessing that Śrī Rādhā gave to Yamunā: She said, "My dear Yamunā, as you are dear to me, so the lotus flowers that constantly decorate your waters are also dear to me. So from this day forth, I shall always hold one of your lotus flowers in my left hand, and I will bless you and others with my right hand." There you go. And it is for this reason, dear prabhus, that we see Rādhā with Kṛṣṇa in both London and Paris in the pose of holding a lotus flower in her left hand. She’s—her hand is down, she’s holding the lotus flower, and her right hand is raised in blessing to Yamunā and to all others who are blessed to see that divine form of Vṛndāvanesvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. 

Those of you who are serving Rādhā-London-īśvara, I’m sure you’ll love to hear this pastime today. And those of you who are serving our beloved Rādhā-Pārthasārathi in Paris, this will have special meaning to you. And of course, let us remember that both these sets of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities, Rādhā-London-īśvara and Rādhā-Pārthasārathi, they were personally installed by our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. So we’re going to finish here today. I actually have an appointment over at the institute. I’m going to discuss with the director how we’ll proceed, how I can engage various ISKCON devotees in this new project that I’m picking up. 

For many years it wasn’t possible. I remember when I passed that prestigious institute, which received these sacred scriptures from various sources like the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple 60 years ago and different saints, and those who had these scriptures, you know, entrusted them there. Previously we weren’t allowed in there, you know? Only big scholars could go in and see these scriptures and so forth and so on. But recently the leadership has changed there, and they’re very favorable to our participation. So I’m looking forward now; I have a service in Vraja. I’ve been glorifying Vraja for 18 months now and I finally get some service to Rādhā-Śyāmasundara’s lotus feet. And I’m sure Prabhupāda would be very pleased to know that there’s an interest to preserve all these ancient scriptures and go through them. 

I’ve actually seen that some scriptures of Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī, and also Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, they’ve not been published. They’re there, but because there’s so many of them and however history unfolded, some of those scriptures are unpublished. And we know they’re authorized because there’s a whole technique that you can see if this scripture is authorized—because the writing that we have, say we have the, we know the original or the original... that’s Narottama, *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* by Rūpa Gosvāmī. We know these are originals and then we compare them to other writings that are said to be done by these ācāryas. And if the writing is exactly the same and the ink looks exactly the same, and the dating of the paper can be determined, you know it’s original. But it takes a lot of research. 

So they asked me, "Mahārāja, can you help with the research?" What? Oh yes, of course I can touch those manuscripts, of course with gloves. The first time I held the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* the other day, they took it out and put it in my hands. You know, I was turning the pages, and some of the ink, just a little bit of the ink, you know, came onto my fingers, very lightly smudged like that. After a half an hour of going through these scriptures, so then I’m looking at my fingers; this is the ink used by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the Jīva Gosvāmī. So then I put—I got a glass of water like this, I put my fingers in there for a little bit and then it became a little gray, and then with some other devotees I was with, we drank that water, the writings of the Gosvāmīs. But of course, we have to be very careful how we handle these scriptures. So one of my plans is that we put them in a particular environment, like a glass box, where the environment—the temperature and the humidity—is all controlled there so nothing changes. 

Anyway, I’m getting a little off the subject here. So we’ll finish here, and yeah, I have to go over to the Vṛndāvana Research Institute and begin the services there. And it is from these various scriptures that we’re learning of all these wonderful pastimes which we can feel are nourishing our devotion. Because as we’ve said many times through the months, *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ* brings Viṣṇu. And the ultimate rule in devotional service is to always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him. And how do we not forget Him? We know of all His name, His fame, form, His pastimes. These are the things that the mind contemplates on. So we’re very grateful for such… as Prabhupāda called the paintings of our ISKCON artists "windows to the spiritual world." We can also say that these scriptures are windows to the spiritual world, so we’re very indebted to the saints. 

I came across a beautiful verse that I’ll share with you about how we’re getting the association of the saints through these scriptures: 
*candanaṁ śītalaṁ loke, candanād api candramāḥ*
*candracandanayor madhye, sādhu-saṅgaḥ śubhāśubhaḥ*
(On this planet, the intrinsic nature of sandalwood is that it’s very cooling. Amongst other refrigerants, more cooling than sandalwood is the moon, and even more cooling than sandalwood and the moon is the association of a sādhu.) Right, Kṛṣṇa? So the sādhus give us the scriptures. So these two things—the Bhāgavata and the person-Bhāgavata, the Bhāgavatam and the person who exemplifies the Bhāgavatam, who teaches the Bhāgavatam—they’re very important to us. 

So I think it’d be nice to finish today by glorifying the person-Bhāgavata and the Bhāgavatam itself and some beautiful prayers that Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī gives to us in his *Kṛṣṇa-līlā-stava*. Towards the end of that scripture, he writes: 
"O life-heir of all the supreme Lord’s devotees! O master, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam! You are the sun rising in the darkness of Kali. You are the exact image of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I bow down to you, who are supremely blissful. To read your every syllable pours down a flood of prema. You can always be served by everyone. You are Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, my only friend, my constant companion, my spiritual master, my great wealth, my savior, my good fortune, my source of ecstasy. I bow down to you. O bestower of saintliness to the unsaintly, O exalter of the most fallen, please never leave me! Always appear in my heart and my voice with pure love." 

*Bhāgavatam go-premāmṛta*. So I’ll take your leave to go to the institute, and I’ll come back with more nectar about our beloved Twelve Forests in Vṛndāvana and all the personalities who lived there and wrote all these scriptures for our benefit. Thank you from Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Pārthasārathi kī jaya! Śrī Rādhā-London-īśvara kī jaya! Let’s take all the fallen conditioned souls with us—that will give so much pleasure to our ācāryas. *Gaura-premanande, hari-haribol!* See you soon.""