"*00518*.*
"# Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's Spring Pastimes - Part 4

Hi, everyone. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Bhaktivedānta Svāmī, namine namaste sārasvate deve...* 

So today, we are continuing with our series on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's spring pastimes in Vṛndāvana, and I’d like to focus today on how the temples of Vṛndāvana celebrate Vasanta Pañcamī, the first day of spring, and more specifically, how the devotees in those temples worship their Deities on that special day. 

We’ve been discussing how much Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa love the spring season, as it naturally awakens their loving sentiments for each other. And because Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are ever-present in Their Deity forms in Vṛndāvana, the Brajavasis go to great lengths to facilitate the Divine Couple's loving exchanges in Their Deity forms on the first day of spring. 

I’m often asked, "What is the most important rule or regulation in Deity worship? Is there a most important rule or regulation?" I generally reply that you could say the golden rule in Deity worship is to always remember that the Deity is a person—not only a person, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And being fully conscious as a person, the Deity can reciprocate with our service, because there is that famous saying, "Love is reciprocal." 

Śrīla Prabhupāda said in a lecture in Bombay, December 4th, 1974:
> "Kṛṣṇa is ready to talk with you. He has come, He has descended in arcā-mūrti to talk with you, to be visible by you. Now, make yourself ready and fit to talk with Kṛṣṇa, then He will exchange conversation. This is possible."

This is possible, Prabhupāda said. Now, as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, we recognize seven principal temples in Vṛndāvana—temples established by our previous ācāryas. These ācāryas, as we’ve been discussing through the months, they found and worshipped Deities in Vṛndāvana that became their very life and soul. We hear of their devotion in that popular Bengali bhajan, *Jaya Rādha Kṛṣṇa Gīti*. It means, "All glories to Rādhā and Govinda, the treasure of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s heart," or "Jaya, the treasure of Sanātana’s heart." Like that, it is a beautiful song. 

So, on Vasanta Pañcamī, all the Deities in Vṛndāvana—probably there are 5,000 temples, and I think there are 10,000 now—all these Deities are served in a variety of wonderful ways on the arrival of spring. 

In the famous Rādhā-ramaṇa temple, very popular with ISKCON devotees, Rādhā-ramaṇa wears on this particular day—the first day of spring—a greenish-yellow colored dress. And from that first day of spring until the last day of Holi—everyone knows that Holi is the festival of colors—you throw the colors. From the first day of spring until the last day of Holi, which is a period of 14 days to be exact, the pujārīs in the Rādhā-ramaṇa temple offer Rādhā-ramaṇa brightly colored powders, which they call *gulāl*. After the *rāja-bhoga-ārati*—*rāja-bhoga-ārati* means the noon offering—they dab a little bit of color on His face, on His chin, and palms. They don't just throw the colors; they dab these colors on the Deity after the noon offering. And while they’re making this noon offering, the pujārīs also sing songs about Holi accompanied by a *ḍuph-vādan*. 

A *ḍuph-vādan* is a tambourine without bells. Sometimes you see tambourines have bells, sometimes they don't; so *ḍuph-vādan* is a tambourine without bells. While the Deity is eating, they sing these songs and they play this tambourine specific to the Rādhā-ramaṇa temple. And during those 14 days in the evenings, Rādhā-ramaṇa sits on a golden throne, and for His evening offering, the *bhoga* is very special. They offer saffron-scented fudge, *barfī*, and the sweets in those clay pots. Many times we go to the temple of Rādhā-ramaṇa and the pujārīs very kindly offer the pilgrims the little sweet pots; they’re called *kuliyā*. If you are going next time, you can ask for *kuliyā*. 

Part of sweets, and then they also have a very special *utsava-ārati*. *Utsava* means festival. So, during those 14 days, the ārati is a special ārati, a very festive ārati for Rādhā-ramaṇa.

On Vasanta Pañcamī, the whole temple of Rādhā-vallabha—we’ve spoken about Rādhā-vallabha a few times the last few months—very beautiful Deity; I mentioned He has very dark eyes made out of jewels, and He is one of the best dressers in Vṛndāvana as far as I’ve seen—the whole temple of Vallabha on the first day of spring and continuously is decorated with yellow and orange marigold flowers. And as for Rādhā-vallabha Himself, on that first day of spring, His pujārīs remove His winter attire. Remember, we talked about the winter attire for the Vṛndāvana Deities? Specifically, they remove His gloves and all the warm blankets that we talked about a few weeks ago, along with many different ornaments. And also on that day, the Vallabha devotees come to the temple dressed in a variety of bright colors, because spring is a time of colors. That’s why we have the Holi festival; nature comes alive, so many flowers come in the spring. 

So after being bathed in the morning, Rādhā-vallabha is placed on a lemon-yellow colored swing called a *hīndoḷa*, and that swing is decorated with all kinds of different colored roses and other types of flowers as well. And Rādhā-vallabha’s noon offering consists of *mālpuās*, *keshara-laḍḍūs*, *pulāi*, and *kachorīs*, and other savories as well, all of which are colored yellow. I like that—all those sweets look yellow, and the savories, they all look yellow. In the evening, the pujārīs are singing songs to Rādhā-vallabha describing that the festival of Holi, the festival of colors, is just around the corner. You know, when they throw the powder dyes, they sing songs telling Him, "Ah, the festival of colors is just about to begin."

Now, in Rādhā-Gopīnātha—Gopīnātha is the Deity found by Madhu Paṇḍita, actually—in Vṛndāvana, in the Rādhā-Gopīnātha temple, because we know that Rādhā-Gopīnātha were moved there hundreds of years ago when the temple in Vṛndāvana was attacked by Aurangzeb. So, in both the temple here in Vṛndāvana and in Jaipur, it’s a tradition that on the day of Vasanta Pañcamī, the pujārīs for Rādhā-Gopīnātha play a big *mṛdaṅga*. A big *mṛdaṅga*—that’s a unique thing that happens in that temple. It’s actually more like a drum; I’ve seen it, it’s ginormous here in Vṛndāvana, and they play that during the *rāja-bhoga-ārati* specifically to welcome the spring festival. 

Now, in the Madana-mohana temple in Karauli, Rajasthan—because we know the Deity of Madana-mohana was taken from Vṛndāvana to Jaipur, and later Madana-mohana went to Karauli; there’s a whole *līlā* that we told about that, but He is present in Karauli now—so in the Madana-mohana temple in Karauli, in Rajasthan, the King of Karauli himself comes to the temple in the morning on the first day of spring and begins the celebrations by first offering colored powdered dyes to the Deities. Again, a little dab here, like that. 

And oh yeah, Govindajī. On the first day of spring in Govindajī’s temple in Jaipur, Govindajī—although it’s generally still a little cold; I mean spring has sprung but it’s still a little cold—they do an *abhiṣeka*. *Abhiṣeka* means the Deity comes out and is bathed. But because it’s still a little cool, they bathe Govindajī; they do an *abhiṣeka* with saffron milk. Now, that *abhiṣeka* actually celebrates the appearance of Govindajī. It was on the first day of spring that Rūpa Gosvāmī found Govindajī at Yogapīṭha. Remember how he found Him on that mound, that hill there, and found His topknot and brought Him out with the villagers? That happened on the first day of spring. Then, after doing this *abhiṣeka* for Govindajī, the pujārīs worship Sarasvatī in the temple as well, because *śāstra* says that Pañcamī is her appearance day as well. 

Now afterwards, there’s a grand procession from Govindajī’s temple down to downtown Jaipur, close to the City Palace. Many of you may have been there; you know the City Palace is actually downtown. So, there’s a big procession; they go and they have kīrtana and dance in honor of this Govindajī’s appearance on the first day of spring. It’s a special, special day for them. And afterwards, Govindajī’s servants, after the parade is over, they distribute sweets and *laḍḍūs* all over Jaipur, and it’s all sponsored by the King of Jaipur. You can see the celebration here in Braj and in Jaipur, Karauli. 

And on Vasanta Pañcamī, in the Rādhā-Śyāmasundara temple—it’s one of the seven main temples in Vṛndāvana—Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, they celebrate the day with a big festival in honor also of the appearance of a small Deity of Śyāmasundara. We have the big Deities in temples and we also have smaller Deities, who often receive the *abhiṣekas* and the particular worship, and sometimes they’re put on palanquins and paraded around the temple; *utsava* Deities. So, there’s a small Deity of Śyāmasundara in that temple that stands next to the larger Deity of Śyāmasundara in the temple of Rādhā-Śyāmasundara. 

Now, this smaller Deity of Śyāmasundara, He appeared on the Pañcamī 400 years ago. 400 years ago! He’s the first Deity, even before the big Deity of Śyāmasundara. And it’s a very beautiful pastime how He appeared in this world. He actually appeared to Śrīla Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita. Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita—we spoke about him months ago—Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita, of the famous trio: Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. It makes your heart beat faster. And Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita; they’re my heroes. They were the original, you could say, second generation in that, after Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Nityānanda, and the Pañca-tattva wound up Their pastimes on this planet and went back to the spiritual world, the next generation took up the preaching, the mantle of preaching. Śrīnivāsa and their exploits are famous amongst Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. 

So, Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita, once when Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita was in Braj, in the school of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, learning more about Kṛṣṇa consciousness—Jīva Gosvāmī opened a school, and many of the ācāryas had passed away already—he opened up a school, and Narottama, Śrīnivāsa, and Śyāmānanda, they studied in that school for a number of years before going out on a preaching mission. So, once while Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita was in Braj, one time he was sweeping the famous grove of Seva-kuñja in Vṛndāvana. We mentioned the other day, Seva-kuñja is where one of the *rāsa-līlās* takes place. So he was doing that sweeping, and while he was sweeping, Lalitā-sakhī appeared to him, gave him darśana, and she said during that exchange that she would be very happy to give him darśana of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So he eagerly agreed, and she immediately transformed him into a *rādhā-gopī*, and together they entered *aprakata* pastimes. It means here in Vṛndāvana, *aprakata* means the unmanifest pastimes. At any time here in Braj, the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs and the cowherd boys and Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā, they’re still going on—we’ve discussed this—but they’re not manifest to materialized vision; *aprakata* pastimes. 

Lalitā and Śyāmānanda, they entered into those *aprakata* pastimes, and actually, we told the story in great detail last year, so we won’t go into too much detail—it’s quite an extensive pastime—but Lalitā took Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita to meet Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Now, after Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita had darśana with Śrī Rādhā, she requested him to return to Seva-kuñja grove on the mortal plane and to share his good fortune with others. However, the prospect of impending separation from Śrī Rādhā caused Śyāmānanda, after that short darśana, to start crying uncontrollably. "I have to leave You now and go back to the mortal plane." So with tears in his eyes, Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita begged not to be sent back to the material world and deprived of service to Her lotus feet. 

It’s written that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s heart melted with pity, and to relieve Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita’s distress—and this is the most amazing thing—she manifested a beautiful Deity of Śyāmasundara, of Kṛṣṇa, directly from Her heart and gave it to Śyāmānanda. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī manifested a Deity of Kṛṣṇa directly from Her heart and gave it to Śyāmānanda. Then she said to him, "My dear Śyāmānanda, as long as you live in the mortal world, you should keep yourself engaged in the loving service and worship of this Deity. In this way, you will not suffer due to separation from Me, and after that, you’ll come back to My eternal service in this eternal abode." 

Now again, this all happened on Vasanta Pañcamī in the year 1578. So, Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita, with Lalitā-sakhī’s help, woke up in Seva-kuñja and he was holding this Deity of Śyāmasundara—can you imagine?—and he began worshipping that Deity from that day forward with so much love and devotion. 

Now as time went on, one day this Deity of Śyāmasundara appeared to Śyāmānanda in a dream, and the Deity said, "My dear Śyāmānanda, My Rādhārāṇī has appeared as a self-manifested Deity in the treasury of the palace of the King of Bharatpur. Bharatpur is not far from Braj, it’s a half-hour drive. My Rādhārāṇī has appeared as a self-manifested Deity in the treasury of the palace of the King of Bharatpur. You go there, get Her, and unite Us in marriage." 

So Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita woke up the next morning, went to the palace of the King of Bharatpur, went to his treasury—and these kings in those days had huge treasuries—and in the treasury, standing atop all the valuable jewels and gold and silver, was the most valuable thing: the *arcā-vigraha* of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So he retrieved that Deity in the King’s treasury, and then after that, per the instruction of his Deity in his dream, in the presence of a large group of dignitaries, he held a marriage ceremony for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Śyāmasundara. 

And after that marriage, the King of Bharatpur built the present Rādhā-Śyāmasundara temple in Vṛndāvana. Now you know, when you come to Vṛndāvana, you know a little bit of the history behind that temple, right? Downtown near Loi Bazaar is the Rādhā-Śyāmasundara temple, and you can go there, you can see the little Deity there and the ḍokrā. So the King, he built that present temple. Not only that, but he gave the village of Chatikara for the worship of Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, in the sense that there’s some tax; you know, the leaders in those days, the kings, they would tax the village, and the village—that money would be used for the *sevā* of the Deity. So the King gave the temple of Rādhā-Śyāmasundara the village of Chatikara for the worship of Śyāmasundara. This is the real history of the world; other history we don’t care about so much. 

Now also, each year on Vasanta Pañcamī, there’s a celebration in the Rādhā-Śyāmasundara temple. They have a lot of celebrations on that day in honor of the day in 1798 when the great Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa—another one of our heroes—he installed the big Deities of Śyāmasundara there. This is a little over—I think over 300 years, well over 300 years—so he installed the big Deities there. A very auspicious and important day in the Rādhā-Śyāmasundara temple, where they celebrate these three glorious events in the history of their temple. 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So these are some of the ways in which the temples of Vṛndāvana celebrate Vasanta Pañcamī, the first day of spring in Vṛndāvana. All right, Kṛṣṇa, what nectar, what wonderful things we find here in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. So today we’ll finish with a beautiful springtime verse from Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *Vidagdha-mādhava* 1.62, and I quote with great pleasure:

> "O Kṛṣṇa, You who are the springtime that makes the *mālatī-mādhavī* vine of Rādhā blossom with happiness, may those persons in whose heart devotion for You has already sprouted and who open their ears to and worship drops of the pure and splendid nectarean ocean of Your loving pastimes in Braj attain that kingdom of transcendental sweetness and swim in its waves of pure love."

Please allow me to recite that again, it’s just so wonderful:
> "O Kṛṣṇa, You who are the springtime that makes the *mālatī-mādhavī* vine of Rādhā blossom with happiness, may those persons in whose heart devotion for You has already sprouted and who open their ears to and worship drops of the pure and splendid nectarean ocean of Your loving pastimes in Braj attain that kingdom of transcendental sweetness and swim in its waves of pure love."

All right, all glories to the springtime pastimes of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa here in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Thank you, everybody. As we always say, we’ll be back; I think we have two more classes, at least two more classes, about springtime in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

*Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!* 

*Hare Kṛṣṇa.*""