"*00233*.*
"Of course, the desire of the devotees is always to be sharing their good fortune with others. So, we have been very fortunate for the last 28 years in our festival program here in Poland that we have pretty much had good weather. Actually, we have only been rained out, I think, two, maximum three times in 28 years; it is actually quite astounding. So, we are not used to something like this today, where it has been raining from the morning all through the afternoon, and the gale wind is blowing, and we are trying to keep our tents up and the ratha-yātrā chariot from blowing away, and so forth and so on. So, nobody is coming, and it is really devastating not to be able to share this wonderful process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness with the people as we would like to. 

I can only think—I mean, the ways of the Lord are mysterious—so how is this happening? Of course, it is material nature, and you would expect things like this to happen, but we don't experience these things; Kṛṣṇa is always protecting us. So, I am trying to think, what is the Lord trying to teach us? Maybe He is just taking something away from us for a day or two so that we can better appreciate the good fortune we have in sharing our good fortune with others; that is my only explanation. 

My heart goes out to the devotees who have been working so hard for the last 24 hours setting this event up. It is a major endeavor to put the tents up and get all the sound equipment ready, and all the prasādam here, and go out on harināma and advertise, and then come back and it is just pouring, pouring, pouring rain. So, we just can depend on Kṛṣṇa and try to learn the lesson that we have a very special blessing to be able to put this event on. We are praying for fair weather; we are praying for good weather, and we hope the demigods will hear our plea—they are all devotees of the Lord as well—and they will cooperate and bring us back sunny weather so we can introduce people to the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.""