"*00511*.*
"Dear guests, we thank you for joining this wonderful event. We are here to participate in this wonderful festival to see wonderful, beautiful faces. How are you all? You are joining us, and you can see that this process becomes especially wonderful when we constantly chant the holy names. You can experience joy. In fact, Kṛṣṇa has many names. God is one, but He has different names. Can you speak louder? No, it's just like the sun. It is one in the sky, but in different parts of the world, we call it differently. If you are in Spain, then you say *sol*, and if you come to France, they say *soleil*. In America, we usually say "the sun," in Russian we say *solntse*. Think for yourself: Are we talking about different suns? No, we are talking about one sun. So God is one, but in different parts of the world, He is called by different names. If you come to India and ask, "What is the name of God?" they say Kṛṣṇa. In fact, this is a very popular name of God and the most appropriate. Kṛṣṇa means "one who is the most attractive." In fact, everything comes from God—all beauty in this world. We can observe many beautiful things, imagine, however, the beauty of the Lord Himself. And Kṛṣṇa means "all-attracting." Therefore, in Russia, people easily call God Kṛṣṇa because He welcomes everyone, and they say that the Lord is so powerful that He is present directly in His sound.

For example, if I say your name, in your name you are not present; your name is different from you as a person. For example, I say, "Water, water, water," and what do you think? Will I quench my thirst? No. But this does not happen when we talk about the name of God. He is so powerful, He is so merciful that He is present in the sound of His name. Therefore, when you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, this means you directly communicate with God Himself. And they say about God that He is the storehouse, the source of all happiness. Therefore, when we sing Hare Kṛṣṇa, you can become happy. Just look at these boys and girls; they are so happy. And why are they so happy? Because they communicate with the source of happiness, Kṛṣṇa. This is the only way in this world we can find complete happiness. Therefore, if you want to always be happy, constantly chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. In the material world, everything we enjoy eventually brings suffering. Why? Because happiness passes. For example, you bought ice cream, you start eating it, everything is great, then it ends. And when you go to the cinema, you are happy, but then you spend it, the happiness is gone. Or you meet the young man of your dreams, but he leaves with another girl. In any case, the happiness that we receive in the material world has a beginning and, unfortunately, the end.

But spiritual happiness has a different nature. When at some point you experience this happiness, it begins to increase, increase, increase. And what happens to these young men and women happens. You can repeat the Kṛṣṇa mantra all your life and you will never get tired of it. Why does this happen? Because this song comes from the spiritual world and it represents Kṛṣṇa in this world. The spiritual world is eternal. It is full of knowledge and full of bliss. And all this is present in the sound when we repeat Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. So we have been repeating the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra for 45 years now. The same mantra. This is an unusual song. You know, this is not like a folk hit or some kind of pop music; there is no spiritual heaven there, and it is full of happiness. If you take your favorite song in this world and sing it for 45 years, you will become crazy. Imagine that you have a favorite band; you constantly buy a new one, and for weeks you enjoy life. Ten years pass, you get tired of this. These names that you repeat, the names of God, they can never bring you complete satisfaction, you will never get tired of this. And I repeat, "Kṛṣṇa," what happens? Your heart is cleansed of all sorts of unfavorable things; everything that keeps you separate from God, everything that interferes with your relationship with God leaves you—such things as lust, greed, envy, anger. And you know what's interesting? What happens when all these things that interfere with you leave your heart? Love begins to blossom. Love for God, who lives eternally in your heart. And this love gives you complete happiness.

We are so happy to repeat this holy name that we came to you today. Throughout all these days, for me and Śrī, we did a lot so that people join us and so that we can share this happiness with you. In half an hour in our village, our peaceful village, we will begin a wonderful program for all of you. Well, come to us; we will wait for you. For a few hours, we can spend a wonderful time with you singing. And maybe when you come to this village, suddenly an unusual feeling will come to you; this is what you were looking for at this festival. You are welcome. If you try to repeat these holy names, you have nothing to lose and everything to gain. So I want to give you one song of two words at the same time, and each of you can repeat after me these two words. Are you ready?

*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.*

The girl smiles so beautifully; this is the biggest smile I have seen all day. Let's continue.

*(Chanting continues)*

I'll show you how to dance. This is what we do and what they do in the spiritual world. Look, just place your feet like this in a straight line. Raise your hands up like this, wide. Put your first right leg forward, then back. Then put your left leg in front of you, then back. So very simple. We will sing a song now and we will dance when we sing. So raise your hands, start!

*(Musical performance and chanting)*

With your permission, we want to tell you a little more about chanting. Let's go, because it's an amazing thing. When so many people sing and dance, it may look a little strange. So, you don't know me, I don't know you; I'm from America, someone else is from Japan. Let's all dance together without enmity, without any fear. How is this even possible? In fact, we are one family. We have nothing to divide because we all come from one source. We come from God; He created everything. And we have one Father. Therefore, if we have one Father, then we are brothers and sisters. God created us, which means He is the Father, and we are all brothers, and we must not forget this. 

Because we are very attached to the body, the first step in spiritual life—since you are all seekers, you are trying to find the answer in spiritual life—the first step is self-awareness, which means that we are not this body. In meditation, ultimately, you will come to the conclusion that you are not this body. This is the very first thing in spiritual life: "I am not the body, I live in this body; I am the soul." The bodies are all different, but the souls are all one—qualitatively one. As we consider ourselves bodies, we spend our lives trying to satisfy the feelings of this body; we experience disappointment. Even if we are rich and famous, we cannot reach the true personality, the soul inside this body. A bird in a cage: you spend your whole life decorating this cage, but don't feed the bird like that. Analogy: In a similar way, we are not these bodies, we are like this bird in the body. Ultimately, we feel disappointed—beautiful and not so beautiful, rich and poor, famous and infamous—in the end, we only polish, clean this cage, but we don't feed the bird. We polish the car and forget to feed the driver. We look in the mirror and see something, but in fact, we don't understand what it is. If you don't know who you are, you won't be able to live in a way that will give you true satisfaction. And this chanting is extremely important because it gives us a spiritual experience that surpasses any material experience; it doesn't have to satisfy the senses of this body, it satisfies the soul. This washing releases happiness from within. Christianity says that the kingdom of God is within us; in India, they say the same thing. True happiness is on the spiritual platform, or it is within. 

And when you are all chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, you get the deepest spiritual experience of your life. Why? Because this chanting connects you with God, and He is the most Blessed, the happiest. In the West, God is represented as an old man, but in Eastern religions, He is an eternally young, very handsome young man. Everyone has deep loving relationships. The highest happiness is love. To love—you will not be happy if you have nothing, but you have a beloved. You can be happy; therefore, even in this world, love is the highest happiness. As in this world, even love has an end; it is either a divorce or you wither and die. So love in this world is also not perfect, but it is perfect in the spiritual world because your relationship with God is eternal; it is a very intimate, deep love relationship. Waiting for this divine love in our hearts, this allows us to return home, back to God. What will happen if at the end of this life you do not return home to God and will have to be born again? When the cage gets old, it wears out, what do we do? We buy a new cage and put the bird in it again. The car gets old, you sell it and buy a new one. Similarly, when the body gets old and dies—but you do not die—if you still have some material attachments, you get a new car, a new cage, you get a new body. This is life after death. 

Who of you believes in reincarnation? Raise your hands, please. That you... all spiritual people are all around us, a spiritual festival. The idea is not to be born again, but there is a place where there is perfect happiness—this is the spiritual world—and people come there in order to remind us of this. And there are many examples in history; people come from there to awaken us. Such personalities, avatars—the Lord—He appeared in India not so long ago, and He predicted that soon this mantra will sound in every city in the world, thanks to chanting. This is intended for everyone, not only for people from India. Someone said, "This is not a Russian thing." Well, spaghetti and so on, other Italian dishes, this is all not from Russia, but it has become part of Russian culture. And jeans—they also come from the West. Now everyone in Russia has a pair of jeans. So if you find something good in the culture of another people, it can become a part of your culture. And here is something from India. India actually has a lot to give the world. If you analyze all spiritual cultures, Indian spiritual culture is probably the most advanced. Just like the West exports technology, India also exports spirituality. Take advantage of this benefit because it will give us peace, which we lack, satisfaction, which we also lack, and happiness, which we crave. All this is to be extracted from the heart, not from the body. We are now under the influence of the intoxication of this body. 

A boy loves a girl, yes, and he says, "I love you," but all that is not deeper than the level of the heart. You like beautiful kidneys, stomach? Yes. Brains are very artificial. The body is clothes. The soul is beautiful; in fact, it is the most beautiful because it was created by God. Indian yogis say that the enlightened soul shines brighter than 10,000 setting suns on the horizon, and it is also more beautiful. And all this we learn in the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement. This is amazing knowledge, but we did not invent all this; all this is the source of ancient sacred scriptures. We do not read newspapers or any news sites; we are not very interested in temporary things in this world. We are interested in this knowledge. In order to comprehend this knowledge, we live a very pure way of life. It is impossible to know God if you live a godless life. And so, there are four principles of spirituality that we follow that purify our hearts:

*   We are vegetarians. We don't believe in causing violence. For meat to appear, you will be killed. If you do good, this good comes back to you. If you do bad things, it comes back. We respect all living beings, even the ants on the ground; I'm going, "Forgive me, ant, I'm crossing. Get out of the way."
*   We respect all brothers and sisters.
*   We don't take poisonous substances. We don't drink vodka, we don't smoke marijuana, and so on. Because all this has a very bad effect on the body, mind, and soul. Although we are not bodies, the body is a very valuable tool with which you can understand the soul, so we take care of it.
*   We don't have sex outside of marriage. Someone told me that's not normal. Guys, you live in the past. That's how it was 100 years ago. We're not saying that sex is bad; sex is very good, but for its purpose. And what is it? What is the purpose? To conceive children. This is what it is intended for. And if the end result of sex is that you raise an exalted soul that will become a saint, this is real sex. The benefits of this are: firstly, we are not threatened by venereal diseases; also, diseases of the mind associated with sex. We don't do that. In fact, all the songs now are so-called "love" or about sex, but people forget about true divine love. We think more about ourselves and forget about God.
*   We also do not gamble.

Games, yes. The life of the Kṛṣṇaites is continuous asceticism, very difficult—wait a minute, I'm here, I'm walking down the street and the Kṛṣṇaites dance and sing in Sanskrit all the time. We get the highest taste. The highest taste—it is easy to leave something if you get something better in return. Therefore, we give up this activity which is considered unfavorable for spiritual life, but we feel happiness being devoted. For the sake of this happiness, what is good for us is also good for you. Maybe we have different bodies, we speak different languages, we have different political systems, some different films, we watch TV programs, but this is all on the physical level. We are all one; we are all children of God, and we all have a common interest in loving God. Therefore, we can all be happy together if we live this way. To unite the nations of the spiritual world, please come and see. You can achieve all the results that yogis achieved thousands of millions of years ago, simply thanks to this. This is actually an ancient culture. Great spiritual people lived here. They spoke about the world, and their message... so, this Kṛṣṇa movement is not something new. What we are doing here now is the same as what yogis did here 5,000 years ago. In this way, we are restoring the original culture of this place. You see, completely different people and groups of people become happy. This is how you can make the whole world happy. We are not trying to deceive you or cheat you in any way. We just want to share with you something very deep and highly spiritual. You have a great advantage because you are all spiritual people; you can easily comprehend the message of the scriptures. Now we will go back to our village to dance. We will say a few more words. We invite you, please follow us and come to our village, once for one family. Let's go. Jai!""