So, we'd like to take this opportunity to welcome all of you for the beginning of the Woodstock Festival. Of course, essentially the Woodstock Festival starts on the main stage here at the festival on Thursday, and today is Tuesday. So, what's happening?

Well, there's a saying in English, "May not be the most appropriate, but the early bird gets the worm." There are so many wonderful people who have come here looking for happiness, and we wanted to start a little bit earlier to give them a taste of what is the highest happiness.

Of course, you're all devotees, you know what that is; it's the chanting of the Mahamantra. So, two days earlier, we're beginning our Hare Krishna Sankirtan.

It's going to evolve eventually into a Ratha Yatra parade every day. So, we're going to start out small and get big. It's really hot; it's about 103 degrees Fahrenheit right now, but as we often say, "The show must go on," rain or shine.

Those of you who have been part of our Polish tour on the Baltic Sea coast, we've hardly seen a ray of sunshine the whole summer, but I think Sri Balaram is appreciating our efforts to spread the glories of the Holy Name, so He is shining like never before today.

We're going to start. There are lots of the youth of Poland here, Germany, Hungary, other parts of Europe as well, and because there's so much traffic and there's so much security this year, my group, I think all of you actually, walked to the festival.

We all walked here, and the most common thing I heard was, "Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna." So, they're all chanting Hare Krishna.

The fruits of being here with Krishna's Village of Peace for 23 years, they all know the mantra.

And the other thing I heard a lot was the questions people are asking is, "When are you going to open up your village so we can come and eat with you?" And we're always ready to fulfill the spiritual desires of the public.

If they have material desires, we're not so interested, but their spiritual desires, we're more than willing to help. So, we've prepared lots of nice prasadam today. Several different schools, they've been cooking, they've been cooking like a subji and rice and halava and papadums.

Our cooks have told me that they're ready. They have both bhoga, they have 26 tons of bhoga to cook. One interesting fact I heard was there are two tons of bananas. Are we going to use the bananas in the halava?

This is our reputation here at Krishna's Village of Peace.

Not only are we distributing food, of course, we call it prasadam, but it's first-class, it's very tasty. So, we're going to go out and we're going to distribute invitations, we're going to chant, and we're going to open up the gates to our village.

They're going to flood in. And in essence, the great Woodstock Festival has begun. So, please bear with us if it's hot, that's what can we do?

It's either too cold or too hot; you never get the perfect temperature, but we're always happy if we're engaged in sharing Krishna consciousness with others.

And you may see that our Christian brothers and sisters this year, they set up a ginormous, a huge tent on the other side of Woodstock, and they're going to also distribute food. I think they have some bread and some vegetables or something, and they're also singing the glories of the Lord in Jesus Christ on their stage, and they also have a sort of Hare Krishna party.

So, when we pass by and you see them, you can smile, you can wave, no animosity. It's actually saying that imitation is the highest form of flattery. According to the teachings, the only thing really missing in this world, really missing, is Krishna consciousness, or you could say in a better sense, God consciousness.

So, we'll be happy to see them on Harinam as well. Okay, so the invitations are arriving in 10 minutes. Jam is bringing them in his car. This is a great opportunity, a great Mahamantra, a great yuga. Let us take it that these are golden days.

When you're older, you'll look back on these days and say, "Ah, Woodstock 2017, that was awesome, Krishna's Village of Peace with Woodstock 2017."