Hare Krishna, by the mercy of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, we find ourselves in a very wonderful forest here in Vrindavan.

Previously, Vṛndāvana was for us, but through the years, those forests have been cut down for agricultural land.

But we come to a forest like this, Tapovan, which is still very much like it was many years ago, and we get an idea of what Vrindavan was like. We visited many forests during our parikramā in Vrindavan this year, Kartik month.

We visited Madhuvan, which was the forest of honey; Talavan, the forest of palm trees; Kumudavana, the forest of jasmine flowers; Bahulavana, the forest of enjoyment; and Kamavan, the forest of desire, where all of one's spiritual desires can be fulfilled.

And now we're in Tapovan. Tapas means austerity, and again, vana means forest. So, this is the forest of austerity, and this is the place where the Rāja Gopis came to perform austerities to get the mercy from Katyāyanī to have Kṛṣṇa as their husband.

A few weeks ago, we were at Cheer Ghat, and Cheer Ghat is the actual place where the Gopis were bathing, and they got there, and Kṛṣṇa climbed the big Kadamba tree and stole their clothes and climbed a big Kadamba tree.

So that's a very, very famous place, the pastime where He stole the clothes of the Gopis. But before that, for a month, the Gopis came here to Tapovan and performed austerities. It is mentioned by Śukadeva Gosvāmī in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam that one big part of their austerity was they just ate something similar to kitchari every day without salt, without spices, and they would bathe early in the morning in Gopi Ghāt, which is part of Tapovan.

Actually, the Yamunā River used to run right along here, so they would bathe there in Gopi Ghāt, and they would bathe in the early morning, and their vrata took place during the first month of winter. Kṛṣṇa mentions in Bhagavad-gītā that He is of seasons, He is that November/December season.

So the ācāryas say that because Kṛṣṇa says He is that particular month, the Gopis decided to do their vrata in that month because it's connected to Kṛṣṇa. Everything the devotees, the Gopis do, was connected to Kṛṣṇa for His pleasure.

So, for one month, they would come here and they would bathe very early in the morning, and they would just eat that, that like kitchari once a day, and they would take the soft sand of the Yamunā River and they would make a beautiful murti of Katyāyanī and they would worship her with sandalwood pulp and flowers and so many different items, and they had to offer āratī like that.

So that went on for quite some time, and when they've, when they've fulfilled that vrata for one month, they went to Cheer Ghat and there they took their baths. And at that time, Kṛṣṇa again, Kṛṣṇa appeared, He stole the clothes and went in the tree, and they came out fully surrendered souls.

And by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa accepted them, accepted their desire like that. It's all very deep, it's all on the madhurya-rasa, the conjugal rasa, āmoda-rasa, actually, everything, all the rasas, that are all the relationships with Kṛṣṇa as a friend, as when we have Kṛṣṇa as one's child, or all the relationships here, they all facilitate the amorous pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the madhurya-rasa, the kānta-rasa.

It's all-pervading, it's beyond aspiring devotees like myself, but by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the Six Gosvāmīs, is that we're aware of it.

We know what is the parakīya-rasa, we know who we are, and we know who is Kṛṣṇa, and we know that we have an eternal loving relationship with Him. And Vrindavan is the perfect place for awakening that relationship. We have a long way to go, we're works in progress.

Adāśu catuḥ-sadhu-saṅga, bhajana-kṛtya, arjuna, kṛṣṇa, yato, rādhā, nāma. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī said one time, real love begins when one is free from material desires. So, we have a way to go, but we're very content that we know what the goal is, and we know that by coming here to Śrī Vrindavan Dhām, visiting these different forests, visiting Tapovan, where the Gopis performed their tapasya, we're getting extra mercy.

It is stated that any devotional service done in Vrindavan, the result is magnified a thousand times. So we have that song we sing every morning, "Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava, kuñja-bihārī, gopī-jana-vallabha, giri-vara-dhārī." Śrīla Prabhupāda said that's the perfect description of Vrindavan.

But actually, previously in, for example, in Gauḍa-maṇḍala, that wasn't sung because the authorities felt it was too intimate. Yes, but again, it helps us remember the goal. And our goal is to go back home, back to Śrī Vrindavan Dhām.

Of all holy places, Vrindavan is the highest, and the deepest love for Kṛṣṇa is exhibited by the Gopis of Vrindavan. We worship from a distance. We come in here, we roll on the dust, we take the water of sacred lakes and rivers and we put it on our head, and we pray one day that we can become qualified to serve our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, in his relationship with the residents of Vrindavan.

We are servants of the servants of the servants. Coming to a conclusion now, our Kartik parikramā has been here almost one month. We have many memories to take back with us. I pray that these memories don't fade in the material world.

Everything deteriorates in time, so memories do fade. But we're all praying that these memories will stay in our hearts. And if we can remember just one of them when we leave this mortal frame, then our, our own deliverance is guaranteed.

So, thank you, Prabhupāda, for inviting us here and telling us we can wander and visit all these amazing holy places in the forests of Vrindavan.

Hari Krishna.