"*00301*.*
"Thank you all very much for coming. This is a ceremony that no one would want to miss, especially those who are receiving initiation, and those who came to support them and give their blessings. We just gave a lecture on the importance of those holidays that are in the Vaiṣṇava calendar. Today is called Akṣaya Tṛtīyā, when restoration, business, conception of a child, the beginning of a journey, or buying land—we do the most important thing. The goal is to be knowledgeable Kṛṣṇa devotees, and today is a very good day for Kṛṣṇa consciousness and very good for the beginning of a journey. 

Of course, all those devotees who are sitting today have been practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness for a long time; this is their next step in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is something new. But this new accomplishment or new commitment is like a new contract, an agreement that you sign. The student signs a contract that he agrees to go on board the ship, and the spiritual master signs a contract that he undertakes to lead this ship. Any contract, you think before you put your signature, and when you have made this signature, you are then already completely immersed in this great responsibility. 

The student undertakes to chant a certain number of rounds every day and strictly follow certain principles, and we are happy to follow these principles. Because if you ask people about the project and ask them to follow, they will be scared. But for the devotees who receive initiation, it is not difficult because they receive the highest taste and eliminate the lower one; they are confident that they can easily follow these principles because this process gives the highest taste and gets rid of the lower taste. Why do we stay in the movement for so long? Because we receive nectar and we know that there is a lot of nectar ahead, so that as a result of this, we can take vows on this day. 

I often quote how this world is arranged and how to live in this world in the most reasonable way. For example, if I have 1,000 rupees and you have 10 rupees and I suggest, "Let's exchange," you agree. Yes, of course, there are no problems at all, and we can easily give up the sinful life that we have led for many years, not only because of the knowledge but because of the realization that we have received. Unlike a genius, in practice, we can get a taste in a week simply by engaging in devotional service, and we can maintain our spiritual determination to return to the spiritual world if we continue to chant the holy names. If we stop chanting the holy names, then we can again be attracted by the material beauty of the material world, and material desires can again return to us. 

Once, devotees left the society, and I devotedly asked why the path disappeared and how they left the movement if they repeated. The answer he gave was: "They never repeated." How so? Chanting is not some mechanical process of just moving the lips. *Hare Kṛṣṇa*, you must focus, concentrate, and repeat all 32 syllables. We consciously repeat with the purpose—in the beginning, the goal is purification. Love will come, the same as a child grows up and becomes a doctor or a businessman; it will come directly, but in the beginning, we must focus on our *sādhanā*, on chanting the main part of our day. Our tongue is blessed by the fact that the holy name sits on it because the holy name is not different from Him. 

The same as the deities are not different from Kṛṣṇa, when greeting the deities, when the curtain has not yet opened, we are in excitement because now Kṛṣṇa will appear. Why can we have the same mood when we begin? Because Kṛṣṇa is fully manifested and present in His name. It is the same with chanting the holy names. We may not see Him, but we can exhibit the same mood: that the Lord in His form appears to me. I should not be distracted by anything. When you get your phone out, our mind wanders somewhere; but because the deities are so beautiful and attractive, the mind is completely immersed in Them, and we should try to behave the same way when we chant. It happens very easily when there is a big kīrtana. I have not seen anyone distracted by the phone when there is a big kīrtana; maybe they are recording, but they are not talking to someone from Australia. And therefore, our process is joint chanting, and therefore the Lord is considered Prabhu. He created this joint society because our strength is in our numbers. 

And when kīrtana occurs, there is loud chanting, and when loud chanting occurs, then through our ears, directly into the heart, the holy name enters. Therefore, it is very important that we give vows; we promise to chant the holy name. Because when we chant the holy names, we will always get benefits—the same thing when we go out into the street and the sun is shining, everyone gets benefits from the sun. Today we get benefits in the absence of the sun, because today it is not 44 degrees here on the veranda, and I don’t know, it just happened today. It is a cool day; it hides behind the clouds so that there is a cool ceremony and we can communicate as much as possible with the holy name. We will receive the greatest benefit. 

I told this story hundreds of times in my lectures. I am sure you have already heard: the spiritual sister took vows. Why limit? We have faith in the spiritual teacher, we believe in the disappearance of the Vaiṣṇavas, we understand that the holy name is present, that Kṛṣṇa is present, and that I am a fool; I must continue to chant. Otherwise, how do *sādhus* exist in Vṛndāvana? I know those who chant 192 rounds a day; how do they do it? And they are not stupid. It is not nice to ask, "Who were you before you became Kṛṣṇa conscious?" It is not ethical. But I asked them. One said, "I was the Supreme Court in India," sometimes the answer was, "I was a billionaire," or, "I owned a diamond mine." You can see a *bābā* sitting with his hair down; he only has a *gamcha* and a *lota*. I ask, "Bābā, who were you?" "I was a professor of mathematics at the Delhi Institute." 

I ask, "Have you always been like this?" She says, "No, I used to be very beautiful; all men wanted to marry me." I ask, "What did you do? You were beautiful, young, you danced well, what did you do?" She says, "I chant *harināma*, I chant the holy names." And at that moment, she became my guru. "How much per day do you chant?" she answered, "I am very good at it, only 192 rounds a day. You know how long it takes to chant, but this time is enough to perform ablution and have a little *prasāda*." This was in '73 or '74, and I am sure that she returned home back. It is obvious that something is contained in the name. An intelligent woman, intelligent men, successful, but some change in the heart happened and they began to chant. I did not come to that moment where this is the only thing they do, and therefore we must repeat as much as possible. I need to invent so much service for you, otherwise it would be possible to just sit and repeat the whole day, and we are still impure, so we cannot do this. And also we have a duty to preach. This is our *dharma*, this is our duty. Each of us, to the best of our ability, can make some contribution to the spread.

[Regarding a devotee from] Bengal, he repeated 16 rounds and after 9 years he got his initiation. It does not matter how old you are; it matters how many realizations you have. Mahā-mantra is a good guy, he is my good servant. At 11 years old he is completely focused on consciousness, and the children of Mahāpāla, they are also completely focused on consciousness. She is like a second mother for her brothers and sisters. And this is an exceptional example of Mahāpāla, as she is the elder sister and she takes care of her two younger brothers and sister; they accept her. This is just an amazing example of how the eldest daughter helps her mother. And here is my dog, she wants to come to the lecture, it’s normal to stay outside, the best thing is to eat cookies. It doesn’t matter how old you are, 9 or 15. The most important thing is to understand that everything is contained in the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*. You need to surrender to the holy name and repeat without missing. 

You can see this devotion to mother in children, in a little boy, and everyone present here who receives initiation from them also came to this understanding that, "Yes, I am serious, I will chant, and I am finishing with this world." If any material attachments remain in my heart, I am ashamed of them; therefore, one is always humble, but I am in full mode. If I achieve the spiritual world in this life, and when you grow up and become older, you value Kṛṣṇa consciousness even more. You become even more serious. I would spend less time on spiritual practice; don't waste time on the Internet. 

And when you grow old or become older, she is simply a fanatic of *japa*, a very good scholar, and a wife or husband is a good companion. A mother, wife, and student is... look. For example, Mandakini has her children. They are completely happy; she has three. How can one girl take care of two boys? We have the best videographer; he is the best because I continue to teach him. His wonderful servants spend most of the time listening. It is the duty of the spiritual teacher to scold the students, because those heavy hands are very difficult to scold the students. For example, Kortamysh, I scold him all the time and he accepts and tries to change because he has a short memory. I constantly need to scold him, but he has a good memory for good *rasika-ślokas*. She has mystical abilities; she can find everything that was lost, everything that was not lost, she can find. There is a Vedic tradition: if you learn it, you can find everything that you have lost. She doesn't like it when I talk about it, but if you suddenly lose something, you can approach her and she will find it very quickly. Everyone has something and everyone loses something.

Thanks to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we are trying to get rid of everything unnecessary and get everything we need. In Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to get rid of lust, anger, greed—this may take a lifetime—and develop complete faith in the spiritual master. Today it begins. So today we will do this, we make such a dinner, or we are serious that I leave all ties with the material world and return to the spiritual world. Initiation means that I am very serious about chanting the holy names. I repeat as much as possible and thanks to the fact that I realize that I am so blessed by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I want to share this happiness of joy with others and this is what our life consists of. It is said that our task is to develop a taste for the holy names and share this taste with others. That is what we are doing. What a wonderful day. And gradually it becomes.""