"*00224*.*
""Oh, that’s the goal of my life. I live for this. Śrīla Prabhupāda told me, 'Preach boldly and have faith in the holy names.' And here we are in R̥ṣikeśa, the banks of the Ganges; the Himalayan mountains are behind us. So, we came into this āśrama; it looked like the perfect spot, big patio, lots of rooms. Sādhus were living here, but they weren't very much inclined because it was just for sādhus. They didn’t want too much association with the people of the West, etc. But I came in in my sannyāsa dress, and I spoke some Sanskrit verses, and I shared the vision of Śrīla Prabhupāda that this message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is for the whole world.

Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that He is the seed-giving father of all created beings. So, that means ultimately we’re all brothers and sisters, and we need to hear that. We’re one big spiritual family. We don’t belong in the material world. Our family belongs in the spiritual world. And the sādhus, they agreed, they accepted that. And for the last five years, we’ve been coming here for a month and a half or two months, opening up the gates, welcoming them into the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness—the spiritual world. In summary, it’s described in the scriptures that in the spiritual world, all walking is dancing, all talking is singing, and there’s a festival every day. That’s a summary. You don’t actually have to go to the spiritual world to experience and understand it. Just like the ocean: you don’t have to drink the whole ocean to understand what the ocean is like. You simply take a drop—the ocean is salty. So, here you get a little drop of the spiritual world, and that encourages you to go further.

That’s what they feel when they come here. It’s a very simple formula. Material life is very complicated. Spiritual life is very simple by the mercy of Lord Caitanya and Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, they come in and immediately they’re singing. They can’t help but dance. They hear a little philosophy, and then there’s the feast. Singing, dancing, feasting—it’s just as if they’re in the spiritual world. And they say, 'It’s all for free?' I say, 'Yes, this is your birthright to become spiritually enlightened. So, why should we charge you for it?' It’s a bold approach, but it’s successful. I think now I’ve done some service for my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and I hope he’s pleased."""