"*00274*.*
"### Rishikesh Lecture Transcript

Initially, I provided the idea that Govinda Mahārāja provided food; Indian food has been going on for millenniums. They have a beautiful pūjā of the Ganges and everything. Now, a year ago, let's go to the pūjā on the beach—if you put it in the guide—they have the same thing in Vṛndāvana. They have the Yamunā pūjā tonight; it’s a site to see as much as any, though there’s a crowd. At sunset, are you gonna be buggered? Govinda Mahārāja came through here a few years ago with this Gaṅgā Safari. He’s got businesses and other complications, but it’s been sustained. Govinda Mahārāja’s Hari-nāma saṅkīrtana shows that they have the famous conclusion. I mean, they have a big Gaṅgā pūjā, and they have cute animals. You need too much complicated equipment, so you send representatives of our group down there. The main city is in Delhi, but they agreed to have a fair time after they finish the project. 

Besides the garages across the region, is this new... it’s analogous to spirituality. I was there last night; you maybe didn't get the difference. You come a little late, you must come—a big crowd of people, lots of Westerners, don't know which mood is up with everyone. In a mood of our differences, in ocean tsunami, [we] want to sustain your Krishna consciousness. In Yamunā, they have a big book of Gaṅgā-stotra from some local, or attended by my śiṣya. Well, as it is, go! Call a magical music, chant mantras, any type of... there’s a fire, yeah. I just drive away, sitting on your pūjā, pūjā, and then they have a first-time anybody bhajana, so it's between 5:30 and 6:30. So, from 6:30 to 7:30, we have the same spot. We’re going to use their sound equipment, and Govinda Mahārāja is going to lead us in one of his very heavenly kīrtanas that touch the hearts of all the people present. I thought this valuable, consistently, [for] our pūjā. Flash up, get ready to perform; I need officially what was the positive power system. This is about to be a reading assignment, would it be seen as a small, additional building? So we can see popular shots of it. It’s nice to come with a big heap of Western devotees and do this. This isn't your traditional [service]; the bus schedule was up last night. We were just five or six devotees who were sitting, and people asked us questions—no way from which we can—and we were chanting. So, we’re going to leave at 4:00. So walk over the bridge. What if you don't use it? Mostly going to take taxis because it’s quite [far]. We walked into the house, you see; in the past, you were with the sheepish fool, not as if it is intimately felt. Had to go by the thighs in the back seat, and the taxi costs five rupees. Access to it, basically, is charity; you still have five rupees.

Shopping is a shame because I was serving under you, and so far there is a precipitous tax; it will be waiting and then flies with respect. That’s what this booster [is]. It is an ambitious plan, but it requires that everyone cooperates and is on time. On assignment, it’s a losing battle. We’re going to do Hari-nāma from the taxi stand to the temple where they have the pūjā, so we’re going to end up being carried onto the streets, and probably want to know—really astounded by the crowd. Remember sitting by the Gaṅgā? We all did. You study the [scriptures]. We were walking; many people were saying, "Rādhē, Rādhē!" And I see everybody, but I didn't know that we Westerners are staring with big eyes. As I’ve alluded to, it’s official, the permission is still a sweet kīrtana, and then we’re just observers for the hour. We’re not conducting, just being very respectful and watching what they do, and then as soon as they are over, within seconds we move in. 

It’s very nice to come to a holy place like this for our own spiritual purification and progress, and it’s also nice to add the element of preaching. It’s kind of like putting a cherry on top of the cake. Tomorrow, Mahārāja has given us all the information to explore. We’re all going to take an underground together. We’re going to have to slaughter the [schedule]—just wonderful to present. You should rest. It’s not definite exactly at 4:00. 

Over here, we’ll probably be hearing a lot of "Pavitra, Pavitra." He’s doing wonderful things. When Lord Caitanya went to Benares, He met His devotees there—Candrasekhara and Tapana Miśra. They told Lord Caitanya, "We don't like it over here. Candrasekhara’s idea was finished." And Lord Caitanya was teasing him, "Why, go nowhere, do you hear Hare Krishna?" But there’s the season, you can provide accreditation, but you just hear the holy name. Actually, this was Lord Caitanya’s mission—to flood the world with the love of God. I’ve never guessed what Lord Caitanya is. In Benares, He had a meeting with the chief of all the impersonal philosophers of Benares, especially the sannyāsīs, and by Lord Caitanya’s discussion, all of those, the chief and all of his followers, they all became Krishna conscious. Is that like a video you see? He converted 60,000 Māyāvādīs. And then later, the Māyāvādīs said, "He came to Him," and they said, "Yes, but we should go to the Sannyāsīs." And they said, "He’s a very real something, he’s the venom." But I teach the quiz was not about innovation. We never really believed that. We just... you know, when you get initiated into something, you become real proud of your initiation, and you don't like to give it up. But it is nice to use the quotation [of the] ācāryas. You search for the truth; you show the boys, but we never really believed in it. I did it to us, within the community, and you come here and you’ve spoken and you distributed the Holy Name. Therefore, we can say, I think your soul is belly—as why you must manifest—specifically made. 

So we come over here to each occasion. The primary yoga place... yes, the specialty and probably the predominant philosophy would be Advaita-vāda, or the oneness in impersonalism. But Krishna is all-attractive. Even an impersonal philosopher, if they have the opportunity to become a contact with devotional service, their hearts can change. They can become attractive as well. There’s a famous verse in the Bhāgavatam: *ātmārāmāś ca munayo*—which in essence means in every variety of dharma, a self-satisfied person can become attracted to Krishna. So this is a very holy place. While we’re here, we will chant Hare Krishna very nicely, we’ll take our bath in the holy river, and if you can watch your ownership of the spiritual business, would be pretty much amazing. And tomorrow, we hope that you’ll have time for hearing some scripture together. But we also want to take the opportunity to distribute the Holy Names of Krishna. A lot of folks here are here for yoga; they may not have like a fixed spiritual direction. But if they will experience the nectar of chanting the Holy Names of the Lord, then their hearts can become overwhelmed. 

There’s a verse in the Bhagavad-gītā: it says that under all circumstances, we should tolerate things. Whether it’s too hot, if it’s too cold, whether you’re getting honor or dishonor, whatever that happens, that all pertains particularly to the body, but not to the soul. So, whatever does that, then we should try to tolerate. Lord Caitanya said you should tolerate everything like trees. So we would like to beg the forgiveness of the devotees [for] any difficult situations. And if there’s any situation that’s really too difficult, we will try to make some adjustment for that. We have to beg everyone, please try to tolerate. We should begin just like those little birds. Don't let that get under your skin too much and let it take your mind too much from Krishna. For any inconveniences which would come up while getting to Rishikesh, please just tolerate it. 

You know, this morning I woke up and I went to the bathroom, and I turned the tap, and no water came out. And then I wanted to start using all of my great, that [Renounced Order] works—I’m a sannyāsī, I’m a GBC man, I’m a guru, there should be water in my tap! But then I calmed down. Because you can get so agitated. Tonight, the sun is going to set in the same way that it always sets. And tomorrow morning, the sun is going to come up at the right time. And the water of the Gaṅgā is going to continue to flow, and the bells are going to continue to ring, and the breeze is going to continue to blow. So take it easy. 

This is like down in Vṛndāvana; everything is really intense because there’s *rasa* going on at all times. A bird doesn't have any relationship problems. But in Vṛndāvana, so much relationship is going on; it turns into a platform. Krishna, His mother, just clinging to the boy, the cowherd boys, I just want to get out of the village as quick as possible, Krishna, so we can use all the bad words they know and act like a bunch of monkeys. So much relationship! But then the yogis come over here. They’re supposed to be serene, they’re supposed to be peaceful. They look at the mountain, it makes you peaceful. Look at the river, it makes your life peaceful. Do you understand? And it’s not too hot. This morning was a little chilly, but you just come, chant. I’m gonna have much more fun, but it’s just the situation for yoga. So, let’s be real peaceful over here. 

One time, many, many years ago, I came here, and I was really relishing the atmosphere. I was sitting at Har-ki-Pauri. And one man came up and sat down next to me, and I was chanting on my beads. And finally, I started getting a little nervous. So I folded my beads and I said, "May I do something for you?" And he said, "Are you in a hurry? Are you in a hurry to go to *hari-dvāra*?" And I said, "What is *hari-dvāra*?" He said, "*Hari* means God, *dvāra* means gate. So if it’s *Hari-dvāra*, you go to the gate." And when you go to Haridwar, it’s about that; you go to *Hari*, that is your gate. He said, "Actually, this is a gate, and I’ll put it back: what will you get if you go through this way?" He said that you have this type of tilaka, and you have this type of śikhā, and you’re wearing these beads, and you’re doing mantra, "Hare Krishna." We want to go to the gate that way, rather than the middle part of the material world. I go to the gate the other way, and then you enter into the delicious *rasa*—the Krishna *rasa*.

All of our great saints and predecessors came here. Madhvācārya came up here through this area. The Pāṇḍavas came through here, and on one of these hills somewhere around here is where Dhṛtarāṣṭra came. He slipped out of the palace at night, knowing that he was going, and he came over here, and he sat down in yoga trance. And in yoga trance, he set himself on fire and burnt himself up. And down in Haridwar, the *dakṣa-yajña* took place. So it’s a very sacred, holy place. On the other side, you’ll see so many very, very old āśramas that have been there for hundreds of years where saintly souls have done tapasya. So, it’s a very serene, it’s a very peaceful, sacred place. We should take shelter of that. While we’re over here, we can share Hare Krishna. 

What makes this area more sacred is that in 1977, when Śrīla Prabhupāda was ill, he came over here for some rest. It’s a very wonderful place. I will stop talking since people can grab their things quickly. If you walk to the other side of the bridge, we’ll all have a Gaṅgā-saṅga together. Naturally, the ladies and the gents, they shouldn't be mixing up over there. I would like for some of the ladies to be looking for a nice place where they can have that bath. The men will have their bath together. The men will go a little further, with the big damages to my money, on the ridge. 

Gāṅgā-mātā is completely pure, transcendental, very merciful. Just by bathing in her sacred waters, all at once, sinful reactions are cleansed from the heart. That’s why Prabhupāda said people specifically live on the bank of the Ganges and take bath there every day for a specific purpose. Before entering the Gaṅgā—just like we do it with the Yamunā—you have to pay your respects, bow down, offer your prayers, and take three drops on your head before your feet touch her water. You can swim around and everything, but always treat her with respect. It’s cold, but you get used to it after a while. Some of the boys, I know, want to swim out there, but be careful because once you get out in the center, the current is quite fast; you can't see it, but it’s quite fast and it can carry you away. With all due respect, please use your common sense in your bathing. It’s always good to have a swimming partner. 

One last thing: one time, a devotee told me—I’m not exactly sure if it was his poetic sense or his *bhāvana*—he said, "So many years I’ve been praying to the Yamunā that the Yamunā would give me her mercy so I could become a servant of Rādhārāṇī. But Yamunā is always ignoring me." But Gaṅgā is the big sister of the Yamunā, so the big sister orders the younger, and the younger sister must obey. So you can pray to the Gaṅgā, "Please get Yamunā to listen to my prayers," so that I can become Rādhārāṇī’s maidservant. Okay, to the bath, everybody!""