Above her name, a day Christmas party. I wish you were here with us right now. The atmosphere, the sun is setting here in Rishikesh. This flower garland is smelling so beautiful. The Ganga is flowing just down the hill from us, and people are gathering here for another night of incredible festivities.

Kirtan, dancing, saris, and Gopi dots in a real festival, and then a big feast of prasadam. The only thing missing is you. As Indradyumna Swami says so many times, "This is what we do." He is quoting Śrīla Prabhupāda, "This is what we do," and this is the process that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave for this age.

You know, if you read the news today, it's like an unlimited ocean of difficulties, like whether it's diseases, or war, or pollution. It's like, oh my, at some point, you're like, what am I supposed to do?

But this is the same situation in this age of Kali, all the time. This is the same situation that Lord Chaitanya and His associates, they looked at their world and they thought, "What can we do to help the suffering world?" And so this process is actually given by Krishna, who came as Lord Chaitanya.

This is the process for those of us born in the age of Kali, of difficulty, of darkness. It says that our hearts will open when the Holy Name shines like the moon. And we're seeing it each night. Hundreds of people are gathering, celebrating, bringing their friends, creating new friendships, and really, this is the highest form of yoga because it engages the soul fully, all the senses fully engaged in serving and loving the Lord.

This is what the Vedas called samadhi, and it's just achieved in the age of Kali by the Holy Name. Anyone, we just pull people in off the street. "Hello sir, would you like to come chant, dance, and feast with us?" And people come in and they enter into samadhi by the power of Lord Chaitanya and the Holy Name.

We have an incredible team of devotees and friends, some who have been serving for, you know, decades or more. Together, best cooks, best dancers, best musicians, and kirtaniyas, and the deities are dressed beautifully. It's been like a continuing festival every moment, and it's such an honor to be part of it with all these incredible devotees.

This is the Rishikesh Kirtan Festival, and it's becoming a staple here in the sacred land. So we hope that this video gives you a little glimpse into how much fun we're having and what's the appetite for you to also fully bathe in the Holy Name, just like when we go down to the Ganga, we're going.

When the day starts to warm up a little bit, going down to the Ganga, bathing in the water, it's like an emerald gem. That's all. Let's take out the one. Bye Krishna.

What love is. I'm here in Rishikesh. This is my second day. I didn't know about the Hare Krishna Festival taking place.

I heard about it through the grapevine, and I'm so, so happy I came here. It's just such a beautiful and a warm and United experience. So many people from all over the world, and everybody's dressed in their saris and got their face painting done, and it's just really beautiful and wholesome.

The dancing was lovely, the chanting was beautiful. Um, yeah, I'm so happy to be here and I'm going to be coming back tomorrow. And maybe every day. So yeah, if you are in Rishikesh next year, definitely come to this.

You won't regret it. My name is Madhava. I was born on an island called Mauritius. And since I was five years old, my parents gave me this wonderful drum. It's called the mridanga, and I grew up playing this drum.

Basically, being in touch with kirtan since I was five years old. And when I was 18, I decided to go to, uh, the holy land of Vrindavan and join the 24-hour kirtan there. And I had this amazing training under my kirtan guru, Indradyumna Swami.

My service was to do six hours of kirtan every day for six years. And he taught me a lot of, uh, little tips and little secrets about kirtan, especially, you know, how to try and be humble because by being humble, we attract the heart of the Lord.

This is the mood of chanting. And, uh, one of his last instructions, he told me, "Wherever you go, chant the Holy Names of the Lord, even, even if you have to chant to the four walls." So I've been trying to follow his instructions.

And now we travel 25 to 30 countries every year, doing, you know, these wonderful festivals, trying to purify my own heart by chanting the Holy Names of the Lord, and trying to give this love, share this love with the people.

Hare Krishna.

My name is Pramanjali. I'm 22, and I grew up in a beautiful community known as New Govardhan in Australia. From a very young age, I loved singing, and I started to learn kirtan from as early as five years old, but I never took it too seriously.

And actually, to be honest, I was not much of a singer, even though I loved it. My teacher used to take me out of the class and, you know, make me sing on my own because I could never follow with a group.

But somehow, I felt determined, and I felt, you know, so inspired to, to try and keep chanting and singing. And really, as I grew older, I found that kirtan was really what gave me the purpose, um, to sharing my voice and to being able to sing, and it connected me with so many wonderful individuals.

So I continued to sing and chant, and when I was a teenager, I started traveling the world more and connecting with this international kirtan community, and it just, it really changed my life. It made me the person I am, and it's taken me from, you know, point A to point B in so many ways.

So I'm so, so grateful for that, and and so happy to be here and to be chanting with everyone. Merry Krishna.

My name is Harikirtan Das. I'm from Germany, and I've been a musician all my life. I've grown up as a devotee of Lord Krishna in the bhakti tradition.

And being a musician, I've tried to explore many different types of music, but in all honesty, kirtan is the most satisfying place to be for me as a musician. And anything I've learned as a musician, I've been able to offer in kirtan for the pleasure of all of you and for the pleasure of the Lord.

Namaste. Hare Krishna to everybody.

My name is Tarana Chaitanya. I am based in Croatia, and I travel all over the world to spread the message of kirtan. So my idea of kirtan is there is the service to humanity, service to God, and service for me means loving action.

So what I want to do is just share this loving action with all the world. So we show our love through the actions to everyone. I'm really grateful and blessed to do this service, and very grateful to be here in Rishikesh to do this Kirtan Fest.

Please next time, join us and let us chant together for a better world. Namaste. I'm Śrī Prahlad, and I'm here at Kirtan Fest in Rishikesh. And I have had the honor and privilege of sharing kirtan with people over the past 30 days.

And I do this because it brings me the greatest satisfaction and fulfillment when I see other people happy, taking the Holy Name. And there are hundreds and hundreds coming each day, and we can see how their hearts are moved, and that just gives my life fulfillment and a sense of purpose.

Years ago, actually, I reflected on my life and I thought about, what are my happiest moments?

And I realized, just looking back at my life, that my happiest moments were when I was sharing kirtan with others. And so I always feel grateful when I have that privilege and opportunity to share in that way. All right Krishna.

My name is Bhakti Caru Swami. And I've been doing kirtan now for 48 years by the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda and the devotees.

I was introduced to this wonderful world of kirtan and the Holy Name, and I discovered something wonderful that this, this kirtan opened my heart, exposed me to a new world. And I do my kirtan actually mainly, although it's a service, sometimes we lead, sometimes thousands of people in chanting.

It's a great mercy to have such a service, but I also do it for myself, just to cleanse my heart and to make another step forward on the spiritual path. And I'm always praying to Krishna that I can continue doing this service, yeah, in a pure way, and maybe in a humble way.

Thank you. Wow. Each night we've met new guests who come, friends, new friends. Some come back night after night. I remember a friend, a new friend from Germany, her name is Sandra. She had completely different plans. She came the first night and she said, "Oh, unfortunately, I'm not going to be here.

I have, I'm in India, I have a limited time, I'm traveling." And I said, "You know, I think you should change your plan. Just come every night." And she said, "Okay." And she came the next night, and then the next night.

And then finally, she put on a sari, she painted her face, and now she's dancing every night, dancing right in the front, dancing next to me. There are other friends, a couple, uh, from a big city in India. They're like a professional couple.

And they came to Rishikesh not sure what they were looking for, but they said, "We came to your festival, and this is what we were looking for. We didn't know we came for this." So they've been coming night after night, sitting in front, fully immersed in the Holy Name.

It's like it's like a big family reunion, but no one knew they were family before we came together. So I came here. I was staying at a music ashram, and my friend invited me to come to the kirtan Fest.

And I just wanted to come chant and dance and chant and dance and feast. And I've been feeling really good now that I've been in Rishikesh for only a day or two, and I'm just delighted to be here. I feel like a, like a prism with light shining rainbows through it.

So that is probably the best description of how I feel. Yes, Hare Krishna.

So we hope that you can also bathe in this video and the names that you hear and take part even virtually. We wish you were here with us, and we're all joined together as we know, like a garland circling the globe of the Holy Name.

See you soon. Love from the sacred mountains of the Himalayas. Love from Rishikesh. Whatever.