"*00208*.*
"I will be speaking about Mahāprabhu’s journey to Vṛndāvana from Jagannātha Purī over the next couple of weeks. But as is customary, as is traditional, and as we desire from our hearts, we want to give—as we say in English—credit where credit is due. I would like to first offer my obeisances to my spiritual masters. We all have our favorite prayers; he collected his favorite prayers—actually, by other authors, some by himself, in his illustrious life—so everyone has their favorite prayers because, by prayer, we express our devotion. That is a very important question: it is all about emotion, spiritual emotion, devotion. But for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is the number one way of offering prayers.

Some of the most favorite prayers I have are from my favorite devotee. I found a very beautiful prayer a couple of years ago by a Vaiṣṇava poet whose name was Sūradāsa. He has, as a follower of Vallabhācārya, been very devoted to his spiritual master. He was a very famous poet, but almost every poem he wrote, he gave credit to his Guru. So, I often like to repeat this prayer he wrote in glorification of his spiritual master:

"I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master, who gave me beautiful kaṇṭhī-mālā, a fortunate tilaka, the beautiful form of a devotee, and who offered me his shelter. In one of his hands, he is holding my hand, and with his other hand, he is holding the lamp of knowledge, which helps me to cross over the dark ocean of the material world. He deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue me in the blinking of an eye. I bow down to him again and again."

So again, during this visit, I’d like to speak about Lord Caitanya’s pastimes in Vṛndāvana, beginning with how he got to Vṛndāvana. You are certainly well-acquainted with Mahāprabhu’s pastimes here in Māyāpura. He is here today because He is the *avatāra* for the age; as we’ve discussed many times, the Lord comes in each age to deliver the pious and annihilate the miscreants and re-establish religious principles. So, in the age of Kali, Kṛṣṇa comes as Mahāprabhu, the Yuga-avatāra. I can imagine here in Māyāpura that much of the conversation, much of the discussion, many of the classes are about Mahāprabhu. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja was a very close associate of Lord Caitanya; he wrote a book called *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—it is one of my favorites—and he wrote in verse 76 of this phenomenal work that devotees just love to discuss about Kṛṣṇa and about Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He writes as follows:

"Incessantly they discuss the narrations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with one another and recite the names of Kṛṣṇa which bestow pure devotion. Overwhelmed with ecstasy, they preach the Mahā-mantra throughout the earth when Śrī Gaura descends to destroy the sins of Kali-yuga."

Forgive me if I recite verses two or three times; it is something like when you get your first bite of a *gulab jamun*, very quickly you want to bite into it again. So I think this encapsulates what Prabhupāda wanted ISKCON to be.

As simple as it may sound, Mahāprabhu going from place to place, from Purī to Vṛndāvana, actually, everything the Lord does is quite deep. His motivation is always the highest or the deepest devotion to Kṛṣṇa. So we will be discussing a little historical context, but also a little deep into some philosophy—*rasa-tattva*. I just like to make it authorized by sharing with you where I got this knowledge, which scriptures, because when speaking in Gauḍīya circles, you always have to back up what you say with a *śāstra* quote. 

[The speaker mentions a poet] who lived during the times of Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura; he was a contemporary poet of Narottama Ṭhākura, and he resided in Gava, which is Lalitā’s village, and he was initiated into the line of the Pañca-tattva. I often come across his poetry, which is still sung today, particularly in the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple in Vṛndāvana and also in the Rādhā-Govinda temple in Jaipur. When I first heard these songs, I couldn't understand them. Then I found out it wasn't Sanskrit, it wasn't Bengali; it was the language that the village people in Vṛndāvana speak even today—Brajabhasha. It is very, very beautiful—many, many words, many, many expressions for glorifying Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It is the best language.

One time, [Śrīla Prabhupāda] said you can judge a class—how good it is—by how many times the speaker says the name "Kṛṣṇa." So many books recorded will begin with the book which was really the favorite book of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He had his favorites—we are all individuals—but on the transcendental platform, he just loved *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*; that was the book he loved the most. So let's hear several verses from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* about Mahāprabhu’s initial desire to go to Vṛndāvana. 

"Chapter 17, verses 3, 4, and 5: When autumn arrived, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu decided to go to Vṛndāvana. In a solitary place, He consulted with Rāmānanda Rāya and Govinda Gosvāmī. 'I shall leave early in the morning and go incognito, meaning alone, taking the road to the forest. I shall go alone. I shall not take anyone with me.'"

So here in these verses, we can see that Mahāprabhu is expressing a very strong desire to go to Vṛndāvana. Where is this desire coming from? He appeared in Bengal. If you look at the terrain of Vṛndāvana and you look at the terrain of Māyāpura, it’s very different. It’s more like a desert in the area of Vṛndāvana nowadays, and here it is very jungly, lots of rivers. It’s very different; people look different, they talk different. Why would someone who appeared in Bengal want to go to Vṛndāvana?

Where did Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have their pastimes? Actually, when the time came in this Yuga, in this Kali-yuga, for the Lord to descend—because He descends in every age—Kṛṣṇa went to Śrī Rādhā and said, "Will you come with me?" Because they are actually inseparable. One of Rādhā’s names is *Anapāyinī*, meaning she’s never separated from Kṛṣṇa, ever—maybe sometimes physically, but in her heart, she is always attached to Kṛṣṇa. She thought for a moment, "Go to the earth planet? You know, where are we going to end up, London? New York?" She thought, "I’ll go with you if we take Vṛndāvana with us. We have to have the Yamunā River, we have to have Govardhana Hill, we have to have all these essential items, the paraphernalia of our service." The atmosphere where you live is very conducive to how you think. So she said, "I’ll go if we take Vṛndāvana." So by the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, we have Vṛndāvana on this earth. Gokula is a manifestation of Goloka from the spiritual world; they are identical.

Because the devotees tricked Him, that’s the whole story, but then Advaita Ācārya said, "Wherever you are, that is Vṛndāvana. You don't need to go. Come back and stay with us." And He came back because He is controlled by the love of His devotees. So as we hear from the verses today, He is in Jagannātha Purī, and again, He says to His associates, "I want to go to Vṛndāvana." 

Such devotees cannot bear this separation from the Lord. As much as you are attached to something, when you lose it, to that degree you feel the loss. If you lose your sock, okay, but if you lose your *kaśmīra-cādar* that you are attached to, then you feel the pain. So we often say that pure devotees with the Lord, they love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone has ever been loved before. So when Kṛṣṇa goes away, even for a second, as we hear, it feels like a million years. "Where is He? How long has He been gone? Like five seconds? Oh, you choose the brevity."

From other scriptures that we mentioned earlier in the beginning of the class, when Mahāprabhu expressed a desire to leave Purī and go to Vṛndāvana this time, devotees also spoke up. They had their different reasons why Mahāprabhu shouldn't go to Braja. They said, "My dear Lord, it’s not the time to visit Vṛndāvana. It is not the right time." So, if you want to go to the Himalayas during the winter, maybe you go in the summer. "I’m going to go in the winter—it’s not the right time." Planning a trip to, you know, Chennai in the summer—it’s not the right time. "Go north, young man"—they are really saying from their hearts, "There is no time to go to Vṛndāvana. You should never go to Vṛndāvana; you should never be separate but should always stay with us." This is the love of the pure devotee for the Lord. "You are in front of the Lord here; on top of that, please consider that there is no difference between Vṛndāvana and Nīlācala. There is no need to go." So like this, different excuses were given, and Lord Caitanya, actually, it’s described, He hesitated at that moment to go to Vṛndāvana.

But later on, that urge came again very strong in His heart. After one evening, during the annual Ratha-yātrā festival, Mahāprabhu visited the temple of Jagannātha, and after hearing a devotee sing a beautiful song about Vṛndāvana, He ran out of the temple all the way to the Gambhīrā temple and called for Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya and the Śrīka Brahmacārī. "I want to speak to you, gentlemen. I’ve got a very strong desire now to go to Vṛndāvana because I heard a song about Goloka."

Just like sometimes we get a glimpse of some ecstatic Kṛṣṇa consciousness—we may sing, *Jaya Rādhe, Jaya Kṛṣṇa, Jaya Vṛndāvana, Śrī Govinda, Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana*. Oh, Vraja! We also feel that, isn't it? That’s the nature of these songs; they purify the heart. Underneath is this volcano of *bhakti*, or devotion, for Kṛṣṇa; sometimes we feel that lava. So Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya and the Śrīka Brahmacārī, they came, and when they arrived, Mahāprabhu said, "Get me some maps and show me how to follow the map to get to Vṛndāvana." 

Wait a minute, it means that He is being the Supreme Personality of Godhead, of course in the form of a devotee in the age of Kali, but being the Lord, the beginning of *svatantra* means that He is present everywhere by His energies and He knows everything. Why does He need a map? He needs a map because we need service. Every day we are chanting, "Basically, give me service. I’ve been disconnected from you for millions of lifetimes. Please give me some sevā." So the Lord acts like this; He says, "Bring me a map," so that those two devotees can do some sevā. It’s all about sevā, because sevā, service, is the way we express our love. We never think of sevā as work. You know, "We have to go to work today," "I have to do some sevā"—no, sevā is the way that you express your love. Like a boy says to a girl, "I love you," she says, "Prove it. Go buy me a flower, buy me some jewelry, if you take me somewhere, prove your love." We prove our love for Kṛṣṇa by service. The service is different because we’re doing it in a mood of devotion: "This is for you, the Vaiṣṇava," "This is for you, my Guru," "This is for you, Kṛṣṇa." This is sevā. Just thank God that He gives us service to do. He could do it all Himself, but He gives us the chance to do the service. We should be grateful for any service we can do.

Morning walks with Prabhupāda: Why did he just spread the movement in one second all over the world, Kṛṣṇa? It’s a question I mentioned, you know, just to place the living entities into the *mahātattva*, into the material creation, all Kṛṣṇa had to do was just glance; we all ended up here. That glance is Śiva, who you could say is Kṛṣṇa in one sense. So in one minute, but Prabhupāda stopped, put his cane in the sand, and he stood and he looked up and he said, "Why didn't Mahāprabhu spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world? Because He wanted me to do it." Meaning that Prabhupāda, being the pure devotee, was begging for service at every moment. So because he’s who he is—the chosen one—he got that service of spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. Kṛṣṇa gives the service to devotees. 

How do we know if God recognized us? How do we know if we’re blessed? If we have service. If you get service, it’s not because of your karma or your destiny; it’s grace. It’s mercy, which comes of its own accord. Even the littlest service, like putting out the maps for the program, that’s something very special. There’s now eight billion people—I’ve read today, eight billion people on this planet. How many have the opportunity to revive their Kṛṣṇa consciousness by doing some sevā? We are blessed. Never take it for granted, even the smallest of service.

They were *sādhus*; they didn't have any, they didn't have maps. Why would they have a map? They don't have things like that. So they approached the King of Purī, Mahārāja Pratāparudra, who, because he was also very attached to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he reluctantly—very, very reluctantly—sent a map of how to walk from Purī to Vṛndāvana to Mahāprabhu. It described it was about a three-month journey. And you can imagine, it wasn't the Yamunā Expressway; it wasn't this beautiful highway that you have from Calcutta to Māyāpura. It was just these little trails going through, you know, toll stations and tigers and bandits. There was a little map, and he sent it to Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

He was hiding himself from the general populace, but those who were very close to him, he couldn't fool them. They’re all His eternal associates; they all knew who He was. Mahārāja Pratāparudra knew He is God. So the etiquette would be that he is subservient—although he’s the king, he is subservient—to Mahāprabhu. Why didn't he go and deliver the map? No, he sent a soldier named Antar-ḍvīpa-vijaya. He didn't go himself because he was unable to bear the pain even thinking that Mahāprabhu would leave Jagannātha Purī. What to speak, it was actually leaving; he couldn't even bear thinking that maybe Mahāprabhu, who was the sole object of his love, would leave Purī, just like the Gopīs; they couldn't comprehend how Kṛṣṇa would leave Vṛndāvana. It was a very emotional scene when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana. Entire books have been written about it. It’s nicely summarized: "Feeling your separation, I am considering a moment to be like twelve years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain." That we can’t comprehend, maybe one day we will, but at least we have the philosophical data there.

He fainted many times on the way: "How can I do this? How can I give this map so that Mahāprabhu will leave Purī?" Much like the barber who cut Nimāi’s long beautiful hair when He took *sannyāsa*; he fainted also. He gave up that work. Once he cut Mahāprabhu’s hair, he gave up that work; he never touched anyone’s hair again because it always reminded him. He had to cut the beautiful hair of Nimāi to become a *sannyāsī*. "How can I facilitate the Lord, who is the Supreme Enjoyer, to take up a position of renunciation?" This is the dilemma facing these pure devotees. He fell down unconscious; no one could revive him. They executed the order of the Lord, but kind of indirectly, because it was too painful for them. Of course, don't think it’s like the pain we feel when we have an operation or we bang our head; it’s a different type of pain, it’s transcendental, and it actually increases our attachment for the Lord, which is the best for us. Separation makes the heart grow fonder. Oh, beautiful pastimes!

So then, after Sārvabhauma Brahmacārī had left, Mahāprabhu called for... we’re churning the ocean of the *Nectar of Devotion*. He came into the room. He called out, "Hey, Gaurāṅga! Oh, ocean of mercy! Oh, *mahābhāva rasarāja-mūrti*!" What a beautiful name for Mahāprabhu: "Oh, *mahābhāva rasarāja-mūrti*." What better way could you address? Because there’s only three persons who understand this deepest love for Kṛṣṇa, which is way beyond us, but at least we have this information: that’s Mahāprabhu, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and Mādhavendra Purī. So rightfully, He called out "Mahābhāva rasarāja-mūrti"—you are the King of Rasa, you are the form of rasa, *mūrti*. I gave that name to one disciple; he fainted. 

So now, there was no practical reason that Mahāprabhu had called for Gadādhara; it was more deep. "You please sit with me; I want to reveal my heart to you." It’s very interesting—what’s that phrase? "Seek and ye shall find." It’s, I think, from the Bible. I found in those *śāstras* that I mentioned that Mahāprabhu had been having dreams, and He wanted to share His dreams over several nights with Gadādhara Paṇḍita.

So this is what Mahāprabhu said to Gadādhara: "It’s very instructive. My attachment to Vṛndāvana has grown day by day. Now it is at the point of intense separation. I simply must go to Vraja. I’m having the most intense nectarean dreams that I am in Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Last night, I saw Kuñja-nikuñja"—there’s a good name, right? Your name is Kuñja-nikuñja—"a special grove of *pīlu* trees near the Yamunā River, and I saw the Gopis, plus Kṛṣṇa was standing nearby under a kadamba tree, shooting arrows of love from His eyes into the hearts of Śrī Rādhā and her maidservants." 

And as Lord Caitanya described this scene that He saw in His dream, suddenly He became ecstatic, as He often did when He was in the Gambhīrā, as we read in detail in *Antya-līlā* of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. And standing up, He started dancing like a mad elephant as tears poured forth from His eyes like torrents of rain. An elephant is a big being; it’s—you know, he walks down the road, people step aside. Imagine if He becomes like a mad elephant. The logicians, they describe a mad elephant. An elephant becomes mad during mating season; the male elephant, he secretes a liquid from the top of his head which eventually culminates and turns into a pearl. You can get the pearl from the head of an elephant. When this astrological combination—the rain hits the ocean at a certain time astrologically—those raindrops turn into pearls, and pearls can also come from clams, oysters. So when that liquid comes from the elephant, he becomes mad; he starts fighting other male elephants to win over the female elephant. But you know, no one goes near when that happens; they can crush the whole forest in their fight. And elephants also become mad—they’re given drugs before battle, because in previous days they didn't fight with tanks and airplanes. You see old paintings, lithographs around India; you see elephants were used in battle, and they became fearless by giving them a certain drug. They could just charge the enemy and kill hundreds of soldiers just by running. So this is a depiction of a mad elephant. Mahāprabhu was dancing like a mad elephant. This Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is chanting, dancing, and feasting to the upteenth degree. So Mahāprabhu set the standard for eating; He accepted so many invitations when He was traveling to Rāmā’s house, dancing like a mad elephant.

But there’s a difference between our chanting, dancing, and feasting and Lord Caitanya’s chanting, dancing, and feasting, isn't there? You have to have that *lobha*; you have to have that intense greed to get out of this nasty place. You actually have to realize this is a nasty place, to have a very strong desire to go back home, back to Godhead, just to experience—science—we can understand, "I want to get out of here." And by hearing, *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ*, Kṛṣṇa comes to remembrance of Kṛṣṇa, which is the impetus for going back home, back to Godhead. So we have to do a lot of *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ* so we have that *smaraṇaṁ*, remembrance of Kṛṣṇa. Now Prabhupāda said, "If you’ve got time, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." He won't leave; He’s attracted. He’s in ecstasy. This is an ecstatic path.

Everything is there in the Mahā-mantra. All auspiciousness, whatever we want—whatever we really desire, we don't even know it—but whatever we really desire, that will be accomplished through the strict and determined chanting of the Mahā-mantra every day. Now, why did Mahāprabhu reveal His heart to this particular devotee? There’s so many devotees. He could have, you know, "Sārvabhauma, get me a map." Why Gadādhara? He wanted to reveal the strong desire to go to Vṛndāvana. Why this particular devotee? Well, I’ll tell you, I’ll just quote to you from one of the books I was reading: "He perfectly understood Mahāprabhu’s mood, Kṛṣṇa’s mood, and how memories of His previous līlās in Dvāpara-yuga were arising in His heart." He was remembering His Vṛndāvana pastimes, and He wanted to go to that place. Like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says to us, even in our conditioned static state, "Run to Vṛndāvana."

Now, Prabhupāda often described Kṛṣṇa consciousness as scientific; we go through different stages of purification, then different levels of spiritual advancement. After that, it’s scientific. Yes. So the ācāryas have also analyzed Mahāprabhu’s progression in His desire to go to Vṛndāvana—that’s what we’re speaking about tonight, you know, very practically how it happened, and the emotions that are being felt. It’s just a wonderful study of *bhakti*. The ācāryas analyze Mahāprabhu’s initial interest and then His strong desire, then His determination to go to Vṛndāvana. They did a whole study on it; it’s a little technical, but I’ll share it with you. It’s also quite deep. Beyond this, but these things we should—now often say—we know who we are and we know where we’re going and we know how to get there. So these things should be discussed from time to time.

So here is how the ācāryas describe Mahāprabhu’s progression in His desire to go to Braja. First came *yoga*—*vilāsa-yoga*—by *yoga* they mean attachment. *Yoga*, the type of separation, initial separation; then came *saṁyoga*—meeting; and then finally *vipralambha*, which means the intense pain of love and separation. So remember that we were hearing how Mahāprabhu visited the temple, heard this song—a song about Vṛndāvana. They say—the ācāryas say—that was the *yoga*, that was the attachment, the awakening of His desire again, reviving that desire to go to Vṛndāvana. He heard a song about Hari-Harā and Vṛndāvana—"Oh yeah, I want to go, I know, I remember now, I want to go to Braja." That happened in the temple. So that’s *yoga*; the attachment was revived. But then He realized He never can get there; every time He tries to go, it doesn't happen. So that brought on *viyoga*, separation from Kṛṣṇa. "I want to go there, I want to see Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa," because He’s in the mood of a devotee, remember. So He said, "I want to go to Vṛndāvana and see Kṛṣṇa." So then, this is the *viyoga*, the separation from Kṛṣṇa. 

And what about *saṁyoga*? Remember: *yoga*, *viyoga*, then *saṁyoga*. The meeting, the fulfilling, fulfillment of His desire—that happened in His dreams. He was dreaming about Vṛndāvana where He saw in His dream the Divine Couple and Their assistants. So it worked as *saṁyoga*; He felt something there, there was some meeting there. *Saṁyoga*. So this *yoga*, *viyoga*, attachment, separating, and meeting, it just worked within His heart, just, you know, just churning in His heart all these spiritual emotions. Which, the ācāryas said, it all erupted as *vipralambha-bhāva*, or intense separation from Vṛndāvana, causing Him to blurt out to Gadādhara, "Now I must go to Vṛndāvana. This is the point: now I must go to Vṛndāvana." Isn't it so nicely, scientifically explained, the progression of His emotions? 

Just like all our material desires culminate in some action when we get entangled; we have a desire, we act on the desire, we get entangled. Here is a spiritual desire; it’s erupting like a volcano, and "Now I will go to Vṛndāvana." So He whispered to Śrī Gadādhara, He said, "But no one can enter, no one, without the expressed blessings of the Queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." *Rādhe, Rādhe*. Another instruction: "It’s such a sacred place, my personal, specific place. There’s personalities who live here, have their pastimes. You have to have an invitation to come." You know, RSVP to the invitation. And we have our invitation because it’s very clear many times in Prabhupāda’s books: he writes that he’s inviting us to Vṛndāvana. He built the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir; he said for his followers, for the public, to come and learn about the loving affairs of Kṛṣṇa. It’s very clear, Prabhupāda is the one who invited us to these transcendental līlās, and we should never forget that for a minute. We are here by his grace alone.

"I can't go there without getting Rādhārāṇī’s blessings because she’s the Queen of Vṛndāvana." So I have to ask Her permission. Just like the day we were in Jaipur and we wanted to go to a very special place in the eyes of the people of Jaipur, with some samādhi somewhere, we had to get permission from the Queen. I actually sent a text to the Queen of Jaipur: "You know, we’re from ISKCON, where we love this culture, you know, our beloved deities Govinda, Gopīnātha, Dāmodara here. We want to pay our respects to the saints. Please give us permission to go to that garden." You couldn't get it without the Queen’s permission; she hardly ever gives it, and she didn't give it in ten years. She wrote back, "You have my blessings to go." By the Queen’s blessings, I have to get Her blessing. 

So what did He do? He turned to Gadādhara. He said, "You please give your blessings." Because Śrī Gadādhara is the pleasurable potency of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, formerly known as Vṛndāvana-īśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, is now personified in the form of Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita in the pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There you go.

[The speaker addresses an audience member] "Yes, she just wants to hear the same thing twice. She’s a devotee, right? You’re actually better than me, she’s a girl, she’s a Gopi. Thank you. You see, you’re sitting on the Bhāgavatam—that’s amazing. She’s definitely a devotee." 

After that, so we need Rādhārāṇī’s blessings to go to Braja. And why do we go to Braja? We go to Braja to awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda, it’s very clear in—we find a śloka, it’s called *Śrī Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma*. It’s—this verse is given a name by the—by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura; such an important verse about how we can enter into... He writes:

"Without worshipping the pollen of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, without taking shelter of Vṛndāvana which bears Her footprints, and without respectfully greeting the great souls whose hearts are filled with deep love for Her, how will one be able to plunge into the nectar ocean of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa?"

Why are we doing everything we do in the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement? From when we wake up until we go to sleep at night, what’s the purpose of everything we do? To awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa. That’s the purpose of this movement, because that’s the purpose of life. Never forget why you joined this movement. The singular purpose to join this movement is love for God, love for Kṛṣṇa. You can't forget that. So therefore, knowing that, when you chant—even though we’re not so advanced—we can still chant with some feeling. And to get that love, we need the mercy of Rādhā. Therefore, we chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. We’re appealing to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, "Please, you’re in charge of love, give me love for Kṛṣṇa." This is the science of *bhakti*. 

So how to awaken the love? Here it is: "Without worshipping the pollen of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, without taking shelter of Vṛndāvana which bears Her footprints, and without respectfully greeting the great souls whose hearts are filled with deep love for Her, like Prabhupāda, how will one be able to plunge into the nectarean ocean of love for Kṛṣṇa?" Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and you have Her standing prominently on your altar here in Māyāpura. She’s so beautiful, merciful. 

That’s very interesting, just as Mahāprabhu gave specific instructions to the Six Gosvāmīs—how to revive Vṛndāvana—He also gave specific instructions to other devotees as well. He gave [Gadādhara] three instructions: number one, be the authoritative teacher on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; formal initiation on behalf of Mahāprabhu to devotees who are aspiring like us on the path of pure devotion; and worship the deity of Śrī Gopīnātha along with His eternal consort, Śrī Rādhā, in Jagannātha Purī. So He never left Jagannātha Purī. 

There’s no way you’re going to stop Him now; He’s gone, He’s already there. But they were worried He was going alone. They’re saying, "You have to take somebody with you." "No, I’m going alone. I just depend on God." "No, you have to take someone with you. It’s dangerous, there’s lions and tigers and bears, oh my!" So after Gadādhara Paṇḍita left, the next part of this, you know, evolution of the whole scene, the whole pastime evolves. Another devotee walked into the room who was Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya. He just came to offer his respects, but listen to what Mahāprabhu said to him: "I want to go to Vṛndāvana alone, but as per the King’s and others' request, I have decided to take you with me. So get ready, we’re leaving quickly." "What? Um, yeah, sure, okay, let’s go." "Why do we have to leave so quickly?" So it’s very interesting, Mahāprabhu’s reply. He said, "Because my heart is heavy and filled with *rasa* and love." 

So finally, you know, it’s going on in Māyāpura, He arranged for, you know, legal documents—we’re being practical here—legal documents to pass through different states in India. Money: you had to pay the toll taxes. Lots of money had to be given, because in those days India was ruled by the Mughals, by the Muslims, and they weren't very favorable and they had taxes for Hindus who were going from place to place. So Mahārāja Pratāparudra gave a big bag of coins to pay the tax collectors. This is some practical insight into Mahāprabhu’s daily life. But He didn't take the money, He took the money because Mahāprabhu wouldn't touch money. 

But that’s not the only reason that Mahārāja Pratāparudra didn't put the bag of money in Mahāprabhu’s hands. There’s another reason; it’s because Mahāprabhu was fully immersed in transcendental affairs, like chanting and dancing and glorifying the Supreme Lord and encouraging others to do that. That’s just how He was absorbed. He wasn't going to take the money and pay the toll director. His samādhi was just relishing Kṛṣṇa consciousness and sharing it with others and encouraging others to do the same. Just like Prabhupāda—he was very practical, but he was always absorbed: "How to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" and he was encouraging us in the same way: "Distribute books, distribute books, distribute books." It was just always instructing others. We see very clearly in verse 75 of *Śrī Śloka-śatakam*, "How wonderful is the character of Śrī Gaura-hari! By His instructions to chant the holy names, men become connected to devotional service to Śrī Hari and take shelter of Śrī Hari. They dance for Śrī Hari, they sing for Śrī Hari, and they weep for Śrī Hari. Thus they proclaim the true interest of the self." What a beautiful verse. "How wonderful is the character of Śrī Gaura-hari! By His instructions to chant the holy names, men become connected to devotional service to Śrī Hari and take shelter of Śrī Hari. They dance for Śrī Hari, they sing for Śrī Hari, and they weep for Śrī Hari. Thus they proclaim the true interest of the self."

So this was His absorption. Therefore, the money was given to Bhaṭṭācārya because everyone had determined that for handling all of Mahārāja’s—Mahāprabhu’s—practical affairs, he was the best one. Also because Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya was reading—he’d already traveled three times, three times to from Purī to Vṛndāvana and back, one, two... he knew the road. Another thing, another interesting point, is [he was] famous for knowing which way to go, finding directions by looking at the sun or the moon’s shadow and water bodies. I can’t explain that, but he can figure out where to go by looking at the sun or the moon’s shadow on bodies of water. This way, all over, this way, he was the perfect servant to accompany Mahāprabhu. 

Now, on the day of the departure, Mahāprabhu embraced Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita, who had given Him permission to go. And because of this, because His entire body—Mahāprabhu’s entire body—was smeared with sandalwood paste, He left His bodily impression. Wow! What if Mahāprabhu embraced you and He had the wet sandalwood paste, and His impression would be on you! Like there’s a temple—I forget what is [the name of the] temple in Purī—Mahāprabhu paid obeisances to the deity, and because He was in ecstasy, the ground melted, the rock melted. And even today, you can go there and see the form of Mahāprabhu. In Purī, you can see His, you know, He’s seven feet, His feet were big like this, you could see everything there. Some special mercy.

I said all that, so as they turned to leave—we’re going to conclude here—as they turned to leave, Mahāprabhu was walking barefoot, as Balabhadra followed behind, holding Mahāprabhu’s only possession, which was His *kamaṇḍalu*, His water pot. That’s the only possession Mahāprabhu had. 

So we’ll conclude with that particular poet I mentioned earlier in the very beginning, Lalit Kiśora. He writes, very significantly, "May my heart sing the glories of Śrī Mahāprabhu, which are not revealed even in the Vedas. Such glories are hidden in the hearts of rasika devotees and revealed in the hearts of all sincere devotees who hear them." I offer my respects to my Guru, who is the source of all devotional arts and who is full of love for Śrī Gaurahari. I pay respects to Sūradāsa, Dāmodara, and Rāmānanda Rāya, who are the bees that drink the nectar of the lotus face of Śrī Mahāprabhu at every moment. Śrī Nadīyā-rasika Caitanya—another nice name—Śrī Nadīyā-rasika. Mahāprabhu had the desire to go to Vṛndāvana and behold the beauty of the groves of that transcendental abode, along with the beautiful Yamunā River, the great Govardhana Hill, the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana, and Braja-raja—the dust of Vraja.

So we’ll continue the day after tomorrow. We’re going to have lectures every other day, so we’ll continue the day after tomorrow evening. Like this, we’ll continue with Mahāprabhu’s journey from Jagannātha Purī to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. I look forward to it because you are my peers, and everything about Mahāprabhu is very dear to you, and to all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.""