"*00421*.*
"### Rupa Goswami Finds Govindaji - Kartika Parikrama 2022

Before I begin, I'd like to acknowledge the presence of a senior god-brother, a very beloved god-brother of mine, His Holiness Indradyumna Swami. He is, without doubt, my favorite speaker in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. I often say that if he comes up against some debate or opposition, no one can defeat him; so, in this way, he is the guardian of the faith, you could say. I'm sure that Śrīla Prabhupāda is very pleased with him, and I feel as such the roles should be reversed this morning—I should be sitting there, and you should be sitting here, but anyways. 

So, in this auspicious month of Kārttika, we are actually at the conclusion of our Vṛndāvana parikramas, but we're on the eve of our Jaipur parikrama. Looking back on all the wonderful programs we've had—so many līlā-sthānas we visited, so many lectures, so many kīrtanas—it's a little sad that it's coming to an end, but on the other hand, it's very joyful that tomorrow we'll be going on to the City of Victory. What is the City of Victory? Jaipur. Actually, Jaipur translates as: *pur* means city, and *jai* means victory, so it's the City of Victory. 

Sometimes the British called it the Pink City, and that city was planned and constructed by one of my heroes, a Rāja-ṛṣi king named Jai Singh II. There, he gave shelter and protection—actually, they gave shelter and protection to him, but he built that city for the deities of Govinda, Gopīnātha, and Madana-mohana—Vṛndāvana deities. One could easily say that Govinda Deva is the principal deity of Jaipur, only because of the intense love that the people of Jaipur show Him. We've discussed before why the deities went there, because Vṛndāvana was attacked by a tyrant, a Muslim tyrant called Aurangzeb, so the devotees took the deities to Jaipur hundreds of years ago, but they never came back.

And they were worshiped there. See, we think of something natural, that after the war, so to speak, they would come right back. But as we've discussed, in many ways and many angles of vision, as we are visiting different līlā-sthānas, we know that Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the love of His devotees. So, my educated guess—or uneducated guess—is that those deities have never left Jaipur because the people love Them so much. And this you will witness when we go to Jaipur over the next week. We'll be visiting these deities; you'll see the *bhakti*, you'll see the devotion that the people of Jaipur have for Them, so the deities just can't leave; they're controlled by that love. A good lesson for all of us.

This is perhaps most evident in the temple of Govinda Deva, and we can appreciate this especially as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, because Govinda Deva is the Lord of the life of Indradyumna Swami. So, I thought today I would speak a little something about the history of Govinda Deva to prepare ourselves for His evening darśana tomorrow night. When we get to Jaipur, we're going to settle in our hotels and then, in the evening, we're going to go for this amazing darśana, evening darśana of Govindajī, the personal deity of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. I can already see the hair on your arms is already standing up. Myself, when I first went to Govinda Deva's temple, I think it was 1974, when I walked in there were thousands of people singing very beautifully. It was one of the most touching experiences I've had in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to see that *bhakti* of the Jaipur people. Yes, how many of you are going with us for the first time?

I'm just going to watch your faces as they open the curtain and Govinda Deva is standing there with Rādhā. So, it will be more of a summary, but we'll discuss about Govinda Deva. But I think the proper etiquette is first to glorify Him.

For purification of my physical body, I bathe regularly using water; however, for the complete purification of myself and my existence, I bathe in the nectarean words of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

*Eternal peace incarnate, identical in mood to Sanātana, his elder brother, and whose younger brother was Śrī Vallabha—he is the means of my success and the good fortune for all jīvas.* That beautiful prayer was written by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. The following verse is one of my favorites; it's from the *Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana-stotra*. It's a combination of verses 21, 24, and 28; it'll melt your heart: *Who on this Earth could ever understand the pure essence of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, perceive the sweetness of Vṛndāvana, or inspire anyone else to speak of it? And who could bring the mind to meditate on the son of Nanda's most wondrous beauty without the blessings of the most merciful and virtuous Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and his associates? No one could have ever done this.*

Now, with his blessings, we'll go on to glorify Govinda Deva. *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 1, Verse 19. Rūpa Gosvāmī writes very beautifully about Govindajī and the two other principal deities of Vṛndāvana in Bengali: *tīni-mūrti āra*. These three deities have absorbed the heart and soul of all the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. I worship their lotus feet, for they are the Lords of my heart. *From His very heart, in a forest of desire trees known as Vṛndāvana, is a golden mansion, and in its midst is the jeweled throne at the place called Yoga-pīṭha. Seated thereupon is Śrī Govinda Deva, a veritable Cupid incarnate. He is served there as King, bedecked with divine clothes, ornaments, and other paraphernalia, served incessantly by thousands of devotees.*

And, of course, we know that Lord Brahmā, he also glorifies Govindajī, as He is affectionately known, in his famous treatise, the *Brahma-saṁhitā*: *I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor who is tending the cows, yielding all desire, in abodes built with spiritual gems, surrounded by millions of kalpa-trees, perpetually served with great reverence and affection by hundreds of thousands of Lakṣmīs or Gopīs.*

Now, as we've heard a number of times, Govinda Deva was ordered to be carved 5,000 years ago by Vajranābha, the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa. But as a side note, it was under the supervision of Uttarā, who was the mother, as you know, of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. But like many of the Vṛndāvana deities, it was lost with the progress of time. So, we'll discuss this particular pastime in detail; it's very nectarean. The pastime actually begins, you could say, in Mathurā, which is of course very close to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. According to local narrations, about 500 years ago, from seven brāhmaṇa houses every day in Mathurā...

It's interesting because we know the tradition amongst renunciants in Vṛndāvana: they go to four houses every day for their sustenance; *madhukarī* it is called. They go to four places; whatever food they get from that household, that's what they eat for that day. But it's described they would go to seven houses. You can think, "Oh, maybe they want to eat more?" No, they wanted to preach more. They go to beg on the pretext of sharing their realizations with the householders. I was reading in a detailed account in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute that after this, you know, procedure, that they would take, Rūpa Gosvāmī would go on Vṛndāvana parikrama. Especially when they first arrived in Vṛndāvana, Rūpa Gosvāmī would go on parikrama, hoping to find his worshipable deity of Kṛṣṇa. 

As we know, Lord Caitanya, one of His principal instructions was to go to Vṛndāvana and establish deity worship—in other words, have temples constructed and deities installed so the people could come and see the Lord in His own playground, you could say. Vṛndāvana is the playground of God; Vaikuṇṭha is the official kingdom of God, but this is the Lord's playground. And Mahāprabhu was teaching this *bhakti*, so He wanted people to come and see Kṛṣṇa in His beautiful form as the arcā-vigraha.

Of course, He also told the Gosvāmīs to write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and discover the lost līlā-sthānas, the places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. But we'll focus on this one instruction, that they should establish deities. And actually, when I was studying in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I came across a very wonderful authorized scripture called *Śrī Caitanya-candrāmṛta* or *Śrī Caitanya-dīpikā*. In Chapter 8, we hear Caitanya Mahāprabhu's actual instructions to Rūpa Gosvāmī in this regard. It says in the Bible, "Seek and ye shall find." Wonderful detail here is Mahāprabhu's instructions to Rūpa Gosvāmī about establishing the universe. He said to him, "Go to Vṛndāvana and reveal the enchanting service of Govinda." He didn't just say establish a deity; "Go to Vṛndāvana and reveal the enchanting service of Govinda." And then Mahāprabhu continued, "By the mere sight and perception of the Lord, wrapped now in the state of silence, people and all other living beings will attain pure love of God." That's like poetry. What is the use of the bowman's arrow unless it pierces the heart of the enemy? What is the use of poetry unless it enters the heart and awakens prema for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? All their poetry is useless. 

"Wrapped now in the state of silence" because He hasn't been found yet—what a wonderful way to say the Lord is sleeping. "Wrapped now in the state of silence, people and all other living beings will attain pure love of God." That means when you go and you see Govinda Deva, you have the opportunity, the chance to develop love of God by that darśana, to see His form. 

So earlier on, of course, Rūpa Gosvāmī had found his worshipable deity Madana-mohana. Eventually, so Rūpa Gosvāmī was always wondering when the Lord of his heart, Govinda Deva, would make His appearance, because we think we find the Lord, but really the Lord finds us. Who are we to find the Lord? We don't even know what we're looking for, but the Lord finds us. 

What's the śāstric evidence for that? *We foolish souls were wandering from one brahmāṇḍa, one universe to the next, once species of life to the next, one body to the next, but guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde*—the Lord, if He's present, or more usually His representative, they intervene: "Stop your nonsense, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Yes, it happens like that, but you can't refuse the order of a pure devotee; it's so powerful, it overwhelms you, and you take up the process. It's just like I've shared with you on several occasions, Gurangi Dasi, a very nice disciple of Śivarāma Swami. I was present at his Vyāsa-pūjā one year, and she spoke something that really touched my heart. She had quite a long offering, but one sentence really took me. She said, "It took you so long to find me, please don't ever kick me away." "It took you so long to find me, please don't kick me away." Rūpa Gosvāmī was wondering when the Lord of his heart, Govinda Deva, would make His appearance. So one day, I was reading, he was doing Vṛndāvana parikrama when suddenly he felt like great separation in his search for Kṛṣṇa. He was feeling separation from Caitanya. This says a lot to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, that we cannot actually approach Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, what to speak of have Their divine service, without the mercy of the Yuga-avatāra, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. If we want to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, we must go through Nityānanda-tattva, through the Pañca-tattva. 

Hardly anyone yet knew Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Important, because Prabhupāda said one time when many instructions are given, the last instruction is the most relevant. So all the respected avatāras, they have all come with their instructions according to time, place, and circumstance, but Mahāprabhu, repeating the Upaniṣads... He's a combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

And he's thinking to himself, "For many years now, I have not seen Caitanya Mahāprabhu. I have not even received any letters from him." I thought that was significant. Yes, at that time in history, I was reading there was a constant flow of letters back and forth from Jagannātha Purī to Vṛndāvana. Caitanya Mahāprabhu actually wrote a letter one time to Rūpa Gosvāmī when he was staying in Rām-keli, saying, "You know, we don't have your association, and we're busy with all these affairs in management. How do we remember you in the midst of all this business we're doing here with the Muslims? We'll get arrested. So how do we remember you in the midst of our busy lives?" Rūpa knew how to do that, but he's taking our position because we're also quite busy. How do we remember the Lord? He wrote a letter with his own hand and sent it to Rām-keli. Gave an analogy, because analogies make complex philosophical things easier to understand for the common man like you and me: "Just like a woman who has a paramour—it means she's married but she has a boyfriend outside—she carries on her duties so her husband doesn't become suspicious, but in her mind she's thinking of her lover." When she was churning the yogurt to make butter, because butter comes from yogurt, she's churning to make the butter for Kṛṣṇa, she's singing. "Butter is ready." It says, "How am I associating with Kṛṣṇa when I'm chanting His name?" Because Prabhupāda said when you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is dancing on the tip of your tongue. 

I didn't even get any letters; the last letter I got was Rām-keli. Yeah, so just listen to the nature, the quality of his love. He couldn't walk anymore. These spiritual emotions are not meant for a gross, you know, nasty-ridden material body; they're meant for our spiritual forms. Like Jesus said, "My cup runneth over with love." He was feeling so much separation. You know, these pure souls, they get eight symptoms of love of Godhead—not to be imitated by practitioners, but just to understand their exalted nature. They experience these symptoms and they just stop having any contact with the world, and he just sat down, he couldn't go on any longer. I remember, I think it was 1974, the Māyāpur festival, many devotees had come from all over the world. Prabhupāda was speaking from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. At one point, he just was feeling so much love for Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he couldn't speak any longer and he just was there like shaking. And we were all very silent, and at one point Prabhupāda came out of that ecstasy and he's a little shy, he said, "All right." 

So we were able to see these things with our own eyes; we saw Śrīla Prabhupāda. That solidified my faith 100% in this process, being so fortunate to see a resident of Vṛndāvana in this world show their love in a humble way for Kṛṣṇa or Mahāprabhu. These are advanced subject matters, but we can touch on them from time to time so we know what is the goal, we know who we are, and we know where we're going. This is Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism; this is Prabhupāda's gift to the world. Now, it was at that particular time, I was reading, that Caitanya Mahāprabhu, while he was sitting in that intense moment, he wrote his *Prārthana Caitanya-aṣṭakam*, which we find in his famous book *Stavamālā*. And the *Stavamālā*, we find these prayers about Mahāprabhu, *Prārthana Caitanya*. And that he wrote it then, he could write in the forest; that's what he did. The Gosvāmīs were living in the forest, so he penned that book glorifying Mahāprabhu. We get to see the heart of Rūpa Gosvāmī, what his love for Mahāprabhu was like, and this will encourage us to love Mahāprabhu too.

Now, because I've had some opportunity to do saṅkīrtana by the cause of mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda in this lifetime, those prayers are very dear to my heart. I love to read those eight prayers, and this is my favorite of those: *The holy name dancing on his tongue as he counts the number of recitations on a beautiful knotted string held in his effulgent hand, his eyes are large and his long arms bend down to his knees as he performs his pastimes; will he ever again become visible before the path of my eyes?*

Rūpa sat there, feeling such intense separation from Mahāprabhu. A cowherd man, a cowherd man, his name was Govinda Das, who took care of Rūpa Gosvāmī's 500 cows, came to see him and was sad to see that Rūpa Gosvāmī was crying. "Why are you crying?" We know why he's crying. One time a newspaper reporter—just a small newspaper somewhere, I don't know, in America somewhere—they came to do an interview with my illustrious god-brother, Gour Govinda Swami, and he was kind of in a hurry, the newspaper reporter, you know? He asked, "Mahārāja, could you summarize in a few sentences what is this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement?" He was a wonderful devotee, he just replied, "He is crying, crying, crying, crying." Well, the newspaper reporter said, "You want me to print that?" "Yes, of course." When we hear that, we think, "When, when will that day be mine?" That through my strict adherence to the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, following the four regulative principles, chanting my 16 rounds, doing some sevā, not criticizing devotees, or something like this, then that little seed of devotion which is within our heart, it will grow, and one day we can come to that stage.

Because we're not thinking that we'll get to that stage and we'll enjoy Kṛṣṇa consciousness more—that's not the idea. We're thinking by coming to that stage, our anarthas—where all the bad things in the heart are gone—and some genuine love for Kṛṣṇa is there, we can be better instruments in the service of our spiritual master. That is our goal. We're always thinking that our highest goal is to become the servant of a glorious master; that's all we want. We just want to serve Śrīla Prabhupāda, and whatever happens, how he engages us in this world or that world, that's up to him. We just want to be the servant of a glorious master. Yes.

Is everything okay now? It may come as a surprise to many devotees that Rūpa Gosvāmī had 500 cows. We always hear how renounced he was, even sleeping under a different tree every night, but I read that Lord Caitanya had instructed him in a letter that when he came to Vṛndāvana, he should be prepared to take care of the Vrajabāsīs. He liked to go village to village and just, you know, chat with the families; it's, you know, "How's everything going? How's the wife? How are your crops doing?" Okay, and then they just loved him, so when he spoke Kṛṣṇa-kathā, it was absorbed in their heart without any doubt.

Is that, as you know, he had amassed a lot of wealth when he was serving the Nawab Hussein Shah in Rām-keli, had a lot of wealth, and he distributed that wealth in various ways when he left for Vṛndāvana. But he had kept some, and when he came to Vṛndāvana he used some of that money to protect a herd of cows, which provided milk for the sādhu-saṅga. So when speaking in learned circles, you always have to like back up your statements with guru, śāstra, and sādhu. Research Institute, a lot of research, historical, and I found that at that time in history, there was a Muslim emperor, his name was Humayun. Humayun, and he had his palace in modern-day Delhi. And we found a government decree—this was going way back in time—that he heard the glories of this sādhu, Rūpa, so he granted him permission that he could graze his cows anywhere and everywhere around Vṛndāvana, and he didn't have to pay any tax for that. 

Literally crying in meditation, separation from Lord Caitanya, he brought him out of his meditation by sharing with him what he felt was some really good news. We all like to hear good news because generally there's just bad news—this material world is a temporary place full of suffering—so when you get some good news, you breathe a little bit of fresh air. In material society, bad news travels faster than good news, but in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, good news travels faster than bad news; at least that's how it should be. "One of your—one of your cows daily is pouring all of its milk on top of a nearby hill and continuously she cries there for hours." Have you ever heard a cow cry? 

One time we were having—I'll just tell this story because it came from Śrīla Prabhupāda. In Gurukula, we had a big herd of cows, so Prabhupāda was giving Bhāgavatam class one morning. So Prabhupāda said, "What is that noise?" "That's one of our cows, she's crying." Said, "Then you get her a bull!" In the material world, a man wants a woman and a woman wants a man, but I was surprised how Prabhupāda was so practical. In this world, practitioners—so he said, "One of your cows is pouring its milk on top of a nearby hill and she's continuously crying." This was an indication that suddenly Govinda Deva was about to appear before him. A cow pouring milk on top of a hill, and she's crying—like, how does Rūpa Gosvāmī assume that Govinda Deva is going to appear to him? Well, the ācāryas say that because in Brajabhāṣā language, *go* means cow, and by hearing that word, his *vṛnda*—I mean, meaning his meditation on Lord Caitanya—was broken. Therefore, Rūpa concluded that he would soon have darśana of Govinda, literally the Lord maintained by the cows of Vraja. 

This, now I found a very beautiful verse describing that very moment in the *Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana-stotra*, it's verse 17: *Begging for alms in the houses of devotee brāhmaṇas in Mathurā, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who was more humble than a blade of grass and more tolerant than a tree, sat under a tree while holding a clay pot and wearing a black woolen chādara on his shoulder. There he envisioned his beloved Govinda Deva while crying in happiness and singing beautiful songs about the pastimes of the Lord of Rādhikā.*

So immediately, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī made an announcement that all the strong men and able boys in Vṛndāvana should come to the hill that Govinda Das was indicating. And as soon as everyone arrived, they began digging with picks and shovels, and even their bare hands, in that hole where the cow had been delivering her milk. Actually, it's described that she was delivering her milk there for many years. Now here's an interesting fact, I was reading that the work progressed very quickly due to the muddy nature of the earth caused by the constant pouring of milk on that hole; it was just like you go like that. And I found three śāstric references that the villagers, they dug down five levels before coming to the topknot of Govinda. I don't know what the level actually was, but whatever, five levels and then Govinda Deva's topknot—it's written, *situated in the earth*.

So with the news that Rūpa Gosvāmī had found his Govindajī, every Vrajabāsī in Vṛndāvana came running to what we now call Yoga-pīṭha. Yoga-pīṭha means where the Lord appeared—Mahāprabhu appeared not far from our complex; that's the Yoga-pīṭha. So that's what a Yoga-pīṭha is, where Kṛṣṇa appears, or in Sanskrit it can mean where the Lord sits down, or it can also mean where the Lord stands permanently. Is that interesting? 

And they ran there, and the sound of their bells could be heard everywhere, big and small, and arriving at that sacred spot they laid down together and it's described, "cuddled in the soft dust of Vṛndāvana." Wow, I want to go to Vṛndāvana, cuddle with the cows and the soft dust of Vṛndāvana. It's right here. Jai.""