"*00434*.*
"All of my very dear and beloved Russian disciples, thank you for being present today for this annual Vyāsa-pūjā ceremony. I carry with me in my heart so many wonderful memories from last year’s Vyāsa-pūjā ceremony, and that’s interesting because this is a rather unusual way to do the Vyāsa-pūjā ceremony. Certainly, in the centuries before us, it was never held in this way. The spiritual master would be with a group of his disciples somewhere, and the other disciples in different parts of—well, it would be India, obviously—they would hold the ceremony maybe with a photo, but before there was photography, there wasn't even a photo. So, in one sense, by the grace of science and technology, we have a unique opportunity here to be together. I really do miss the big events, you know, like I would go to Ukraine, to Dnipro, and then I would go to Moscow, then I would go to Saint Petersburg, to Yekaterinburg, sometimes Omsk, sometimes Vladivostok—those were such sweet ceremonies.

Where we’re all personally together, but mysteriously, or I could say mystically, in some ways I feel closer to all of you today because I can see so many of you and so many of you can see me, even though it’s a Zoom, or whatever they call it. It’s a special, unique, historical opportunity, and I appreciate that so many of you can speak today and tomorrow. I extended it—I heard it was only one day, but I have so many thousands of Russian disciples, let’s make it two days. It was, "Oh, goodie, you’re going to get tired." I don’t get tired; if you know me, if you’ve ever been a personal servant or participated in one of my programs, I don’t really get so tired. And I’m going to be the ripe old age of 72, but I don’t feel 72. I feel, by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace, I feel like an eternal spirit soul. So, I said I have no problem; we can go on three hours, four hours, five hours, six hours, because this is so important that we’re able to express what is really the essence of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There are so many aspects of our movement, but what is the essence? The essence is love; it’s a heart connection. And that genuine heart connection—not like something in this world, not like love of this world, but a selfless love—we experience in three ways. We experience an awakening of love, genuine, spiritual, selfless love, which one day will mature into prema-bhakti for the divine couple, Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. That’s first awakened in the association of the devotees. If you ask the devotees, "Who is your best friend?" that person will not say somebody from their past, although they may retain some affection for that person, but really, when we talk about our friends, they’re all dāsas and dāsīs. So many dāsas and dāsīs. So that’s a type of love.

Then we have a love for our spiritual master as Kṛṣṇa’s representative, the one who is performing the miraculous task of leading us out of the forest of illusion. I don’t know if you’ve ever been lost in a forest, but it can be quite a scary thing. When we were in the Amazon jungle many years ago, I remember that we had gone from our big boat, we took a small boat to the shore of the Amazon River, and I went to collect some kind of flowers, I think for the pūjā—there were lots of interesting flowers in the Amazon jungle—so I kept going. I picked one there, and I picked one there, and I picked one there, and then one hour later I turned around and I looked at this jungle; I didn’t have a clue how to get back to the riverside, to the boat. I didn’t have an idea because I was wandering in the forest of illusion. And I actually got a little scared because Amazon means wild animals, poisonous frogs, snakes—it wasn't Disneyland, it was the real thing—so I experienced some fright.

So, I remembered that I was supposed to chant Kṛṣṇa’s names, so I did, but I chanted fairly loud because I wanted the devotees to hear me, and then I called out to the captain of the boat, "Capitán! Help!" And it took them about 45 minutes to find me, and as we were walking out of the jungle, such a relief. So the spiritual master is the one—his first business is to convince us of the futility of material existence and to help decrease our attachments for the illusory things of this world. And when we do that, when we let go of those attachments, which are really a source of stress and anxiety and pain and ultimately birth and death, when you can actually get a spirit of renunciation—which is required, we’re not tyāgīs, we’re not just renunciates living in the Himalayas, but renunciation is an important quality.

Because you have to let go of the material energy to take hold of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. In the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī summarized in his *Nectar of Devotion*, he said actually the first sign that one has taken up the authentic path of bhakti, or devotional service—and it’s interesting, it’s not love—Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī says the first sign that you’re making advancement is you get a relief from the pressure of material existence, from the pain of material existence. This is the first thing. It’s interesting because you let go of the live wire; you know, there’s a storm and that telephone wire comes down, it’s live, and you grab it. You let go—a sense of relief. So we’re indebted, first of all, to our spiritual master for relieving us from suffering, because there’s so many ways you can suffer in this world. How many ways can you enjoy? Maybe two, maybe a few little ways you can enjoy. How many ways can you suffer? Like your hand—how many ways can your hand enjoy? Oh, you take the gulab jamun, you put it in the mouth, you say, "How many ways can the hand enjoy?" Really, how many ways can the hand suffer? 

You can hit it with a hammer, you can burn it in fire, you can freeze it in the snow, you can cut it. I don’t want to give a sad talk here, but the hands—so that’s pretty much what material existence is. Prabhupāda said that happiness in the material world means that someone’s banging on your head and they stop—"Oh, ecstasy." Excuse me, that’s not ecstasy, when someone stops bumping your head. So the spiritual master teaches us how to avoid difficulty by stopping this futile attempt to try to enjoy through our senses. No, use your senses in Kṛṣṇa’s service; that’s the natural way. We’re created to serve Kṛṣṇa, so when our senses are engaged in His service, that’s the most natural thing and we feel peaceful. But then what is the ultimate gift the spiritual master gives us? Service to Kṛṣṇa. And it begins really from day one: you wash the pots, you clean the floor, you stamp the invitations, you open the kitchen, then you go out on saṅkīrtana, and then you dress the deities—and that’s where the real bliss comes from. So we’re indebted to our spiritual master; both those things are remarkable. We become detached from this world because it’s not an easy thing to become detached after having been attached for millions and millions of lifetimes. It’s hard to break old habits which we carry with us birth after birth after birth. So yes, we are indebted to our guru for that, and we have faith that what he’s saying will come true because whatever he’s told us up to this point, it has come true. We’re maybe A, B, C, D, E, F, G along the alphabet, we’re not X, Y, Z, we’re beginners, A, B, C, D, but every A, B, C, and D has proved to be absolutely true.

So therefore, we can, with our intelligence, understand that there is a spiritual world where every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there’s a festival every day. When Kṛṣṇa comes back from the forest with His cowherd boyfriends after a day of wrestling and playing in the sands of Ramaṇa Reti, and taking prasādam with Kṛṣṇa together, so many pastimes... and Kṛṣṇa sneaks off to meet the Gopīs and the cowherd boys think, "Is He really just looking for a stray calf, or is something else going on here?" Kṛṣṇa comes back blushing, and then it’s time to go home. And then 900,000 cows, all the cowherd boys, Kṛṣṇa covered with the dust of Vṛndāvana, and Balarāma and the cowherd boys, they can’t wait to get home to tell their parents which demon Kṛṣṇa killed that day, how they won the wrestling match with Kṛṣṇa, and how they saw Kṛṣṇa with the Gopīs. They can’t wait to get home and tell their parents. So everyone’s waiting down by the Yamunā for Kṛṣṇa to come back. The whole village comes, not just the gopas and the Gopīs, but the older cows, calves who don’t go out to the fields, but the peacocks, the cuckoos, and the parrots and the bumblebees and the butterflies—and everyone comes to the Yaśodā-kuṇḍa where they saw Kṛṣṇa off that morning. And there’s this tumultuous kīrtana of chanting Kṛṣṇa’s holy names, and trumpets are blowing, and flags are waving, and here comes Kṛṣṇa. They see His peacock feather through the dust clouds raised by the cows, they see His peacock feather, everyone starts experiencing the eight symptoms of ecstatic love of God. And that’s the festival we hear about—a festival every day. What is the festival? Kṛṣṇa’s coming back into our hearts.

That’s how the Vrajavāsīs feel, because He’s been gone a long time. You know, the mathematics of the spiritual world—when Kṛṣṇa is gone for a moment, it’s like He’s been gone for a millennium. So you total up so many moments in the day, how many millenniums is that? And Kṛṣṇa’s coming home—whoa! What a festival they have, and it happens every day. And because of the potency of Yoga-māyā and mostly Vṛndā-devī, it seems like the first time it’s ever fresh. Just like now for us, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is ever fresh; we’re just like a baby just opening our eyes and experiencing the world for the first time. We also get an impression, so that’s why we have faith that that world exists, because if we sincerely followed our spiritual master’s instructions, then we’ll have faith that whatever he has said, whatever he’s passed on from his guru—let’s put it like that, whatever Prabhupāda has told us—we have faith, and we’re so indebted to our spiritual master for leading us out of the Amazon jungle and taking us back to Vṛndāvana. So that’s an awakening of love. And of course, that day will come when we chant Kṛṣṇa’s holy name, we’ll come to the point of—beyond just purification—that there will be a dawning of love in our hearts. And we will, when we chant Kṛṣṇa’s name, which is a way of meeting Him because He’s non-different than His holy name, that won’t just be a philosophical point, it will be a real experience. Just like prasādam tastes real, just like you feel relief bathing in the Yamunā or the Ganges, you feel satisfaction dancing with your godbrothers and godsisters, and that’s real. So there’ll be a time when you get to this point of awakening love for Kṛṣṇa, then some tears will come from the eyes. Prabhupāda talks about—it’s not *sahajiyā*, Prabhupāda talks about it—he said one has to learn the art of crying for Kṛṣṇa. So we have some way to go, but that’s waiting for us. So therefore, really, our spiritual master is our best friend.

A friend in need is a friend indeed; he takes us out of the Amazon, he takes us to Vṛndāvana, like that. And then that love for Kṛṣṇa comes. So these loving relationships are so important, and we experience it every day with our godbrothers and godsisters, and this is a nice opportunity to exchange loving sentiments today between guru and disciple. I can say honestly, I have unadulterated love for all of my disciples here, regardless of what stage they’re at in devotional service. Just like a mother—just like one of my disciples, Śyāma-vallabhī, she’s from Saint Petersburg, she gave birth to a healthy baby boy yesterday in Macedonia, very healthy babe, big boy, took her seven hours to deliver him. And I was the first one, I got the call from her in the hospital; she’s a strong Russian girl, she was like ready to jump out and leave the hospital. But it was so nice, but what does the baby understand in the beginning? Very, very little. But still, the mother loves the baby. Mother’s love—Prabhupāda said the closest thing we can see to what spiritual love, Vṛndāvana love, is in this world is the love of a mother for her baby. It’s a selfless love; sometimes mothers sacrifice their lives for their children. So, even though the baby is young, there’s so much love. So even if my disciples just got their praṇāma-mantra—"Gurudeva, will you be my spiritual master?"—immediately I make the connection, like the mother makes the connection with the baby. In my heart, I make that connection to my disciple. And I often tell you that at the moment of initiation, that I’m ready to come back for all of you as many times as necessary. I’m ready; I don’t mind coming back to this world, as nasty as it is, as bad as it is, because this is my Prabhupāda-deśa, this is the place where I serve my spiritual master. And the place I serve my spiritual master, that’s my Vṛndāvana. Because without Prabhupāda, I have no clue who is Kṛṣṇa, what is devotional service, how to learn the 64 arts that are required for serving Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world. So wherever he is, then I will be there. I don’t mind; you can make it easier for me by going home in this lifetime, but until each and every one of you are back in the spiritual world, I’ll come for whosoever is still here. I can say that, and I know my spiritual master is listening, that I will come back. We say in English, "Last man standing."

Sometimes on the battlefield there’s a battle going on, and then on one side there’s one soldier left, serving his country to the utmost degree. So I don’t mind to be the last man standing if it’s required to take you back, because that’s my Prabhupāda. That’s how serious I take it; this is the meaning of *guru*. Guru is heavy. It doesn’t necessarily mean that because he gets so much more prasādam he puts weight on, or that sometimes he gives some heavy instructions and he chastises us. Guru is heavy with responsibility. They say that the crown of the king is heavy; I don’t mind, because where am I getting my strength? From my spiritual master. 

That’s where I’m getting my strength. So I feel really strong. I’m 72, you know; I should maybe be walking with a cane and not eating very much and losing my memory, I don’t know, but I’m not. I’m ready to get out on saṅkīrtana and roar—just roar the holy names on the streets of Kali-yuga. And I want to do it with all of you. I’m just praying this coronavirus just goes away, we can be back traveling and meeting you and going on harināma and doing our big festivals all over the world. So you mean the most to me. I have so many services—I think even in my astrology chart there’s some big times ahead—but really, for me, my most important service is you. 

Because there will come a day when I will be limited by my age, probably by the time I’m 80. I’ve got a good nine years left; it might be difficult to dance down the streets and twirl and travel. So you will take my love for the people because I love the people—I know it sounds crazy, he loves the *karmīs*? I do! I don’t know, I just do, I always have. I don’t see them in a demoniac way; I mean, I understand they are demoniac, but I see them all as brothers and sisters, the lost sheep, and I’m really concerned about them as well. So when I get really old, then you will carry on for me. So the years that I have left, I want to really impress upon your hearts the importance of continuing Prabhupāda’s mission, which—whoever he is in the spiritual world, we don’t know, but someone very intimate with Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa—but in this world, he’s a preacher, and he gave his life for us to distribute Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So that’s my life, and I expect that to be your life as well, in whatever way you can. Many hands make light work; whatever you can contribute, even if it’s just a donation or backup service, or in your lifetimes—you’re all much younger than me—you will, Kṛṣṇa will, Mahāprabhu will reveal to you so many ways that you can serve Him according to time, place, and circumstance. Just like now, my godbrother Vaiśeṣika Prabhu, so hard to distribute books, what did he do? He envisioned an internet marathon, and in six weeks they distributed 200,000 *Bhagavad-gītās*.

Six weeks! So that’s the mood that I imbibed from Prabhupāda, who imbibed that from Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, and even Gaurakiśora dāsa Bābājī and all our previous Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. So that’s the mood, and I’m hoping to stay around many more years to impress that upon you, and you can all be good representatives of your spiritual master and share your good fortune with others. So therefore, you’re most important to me. You’re most important because you’re my sons and you’re my daughters, and naturally a father has a deep affection, proud of his sons and proud of his daughters for your continued service all these years and what you can achieve in the future. So what’s most dear to me is all of you, and I just wish I could make you pure devotees overnight.

One time, one of my godbrothers was sleeping in a room next to Prabhupāda and got up at 1:30 in the morning to do his translation work—I think it was Śrutakīrti—and Prabhupāda came into the room where Śrutakīrti was sleeping and he kicked him with his lotus foot. "Why are you sleeping?" [He] looked at his watch, he said, "Prabhupāda, it’s 1:30 in the morning." "Why are you sleeping? I’m not a pure devotee!" And Prabhupāda kicked him again. "Why aren't you a pure devotee? Why? Why aren't we pure devotees?" We have a golden opportunity to be pure devotees. We have the opportunity; Mahāprabhu will give it to you in one life. Why not? "Oh, you know, I have some things to do," and "Sometimes I get distracted," "No, I don’t chant my rounds like I used to," "No, you know, I don’t offer my food." No, get serious! Go home, back to the spiritual world. I’ll stop here because, like Śyāmasundara said, you know, he wanted to hear all the offerings and I also want to hear the offerings. I want to hear from you; if you appreciate the service I’m doing for you—this is a service I’m doing for you, I love all of you more than you can actually know. It’s, you know, I’ve been a devotee for 55 years or something, so maybe some purification has come, so I know more than all of you, and you don’t know how much I actually care about you. I worry about you; my hair is going gray. I have a great secret now: I think about you. When you have problems, I get stressed out and I’m very sorry that all of you have to undergo this whole pandemic, and we’ve lost a lot of wonderful devotees, so it’s a sad situation. So I do worry about you. So therefore I say, chant Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.

And I know you’re safe, I know Śrī Kṛṣṇa will watch over and protect you, and any difficulties you go through, Balarāma will give you the spiritual strength to maintain and go forward. Know that. But I just wanted to tell you all, you mean a lot to me, and you’re all Mahāprabhu’s soldiers and I want you to carry on this movement in the years to come, and you inspire the next generation as well to do the same. And Prabhupāda said we will have our ISKCON in the spiritual world; wouldn’t that be great news? We’ll all be together. And Gargamuni, he asked Prabhupāda, "When we get back to the spiritual world, are we going to recognize each other?" And Prabhupāda said, "Yes. We won’t look the same because we’ll have shed these nasty bodies like a snake sheds its skin once a year. So we’ll have shed the ignorance of these bodies, but by Kṛṣṇa’s grace, we will recognize." And what type of meeting that will be!

We have such a bright future ahead of us, such a bright future. But we have to persevere. Chant your rounds, chant your Gāyatrī, read Prabhupāda’s books, associate with devotees as much as you can, do some service; these are the simple requirements and we’ll all be together for many more years serving Prabhupāda’s mission. And one day we’ll be back in Goloka Vṛndāvana. And if you want to know what Goloka Vṛndāvana is, please continue attending the lectures that we’re giving about the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana. I’ve got lots more to say, got a huge library, and I’ve got some very enlightened godbrothers and godsisters, so I’m really enjoying this service. This is our connection now, the main connection with the spiritual master is through sound, through sound vibration, through knowledge. So in one way, this pandemic has had a silver lining in that, you know, I used to travel all the time and maybe read three or four purports a day and then give my A-B-C lectures, and now I study 10 hours a day. Govinda-dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja said in Jerusalem, "10 years we lived in the āśrama, 40 years we traveled; why lament the last 10-15 years of your life? You can retire like they do in Vṛndāvana, be a bābājī, study bhakti-śāstra." So that’s what I did, but I couldn’t keep it to myself. It’s so nectarian—the twelve forests and the sub-forests and the sub-sub-forests and all the different personalities in Vṛndāvana and all the pastimes—it’s like I discovered this treasure chest. I opened it up, "Oh my God!"

But I can’t keep it; I have to share it with all of you by the grace of the Six Goswāmīs and our previous ācāryas and Śrīla Prabhupāda. I love this service, I can’t wait to get in front of the camera: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees, my dear Russian disciples, welcome back for another chapter," and then I go. I just would like to give the lecture for four hours, but Ananta says I can’t do that; he says I can only go an hour and a half. But I treasure that service, and I hope that you’re trusting me, because by that *ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam*, that little seed of bhakti is beginning to germinate and grow. So isn’t it? This is the real connection we have. So in one sense we are all closer than ever, and that’s why my love for you, I think, has deepened exponentially because we’re reciprocating on a true transcendental platform by discussing Vraja. How does it get better than that? In the midst of the worst time in the world, it doesn’t get better than this—discussing Vṛndāvana-līlā. So I want to thank all of you for helping me serve my spiritual master. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, and I look forward to seeing you every Tuesday and every Friday for many years to come online. And I do look forward to the day—I can’t imagine what it’s going to be like when I fly into Moscow—whoa!—after such a time. And I get off the plane and I come into the gate, and there’s this big kīrtana, you’re all there with garlands here, I get tiny garlands, I come in, there’s all the garlands, and you’re there. It’s going to be an ocean of tears; we’re going to flood the airport with tears when we meet again. Can you imagine? I walk out and you’re there—what is that going to be like? Separation makes the heart... I can’t even imagine in my mind. And then Saint Petersburg, and then Omsk, and then...

See, I don’t forget the names. I can’t remember the names of the cities in my country, but I remember all the cities in Russia. So thank you. I’ve talked too long, but I wanted to pour my heart out—how much I love all of you and appreciate your service to Mahāprabhu’s movement. And if you’d like to say something to me, I’ll take it, I’ll try to listen. I don’t feel qualified, I never think that what you said, I deserve it, but I always take it that, "Yes, what you’re going to say in the next few hours, that’s the person I would like to be so that I can render better service to Śrīla Prabhupāda." So thank you.

Guru-paramparā-kī-jaya! Rādhā-Śyāmasundara-kī-jaya!""