"*00409*.*
"I would like to thank you very much for giving a very nice, very potent talk. There, we often say that elegance is truth spoken concisely, and in this way, the audience can remain focused and absorb whatever instruction is there, and then with great enthusiasm execute those instructions. So again, I am called upon to speak. I was thinking the other day when I was young, I was quite shy, and in order to overcome my shyness in high school, I took a class on public speaking. But the problem was that every time I was called upon to speak, I was too shy to speak, so I failed the course. But here is an example that by the mercy of Guru and Gaurāṅga, one can overcome one’s deficiencies—all deficiencies: lust, anger, and greed—even in spiritual life, in order to be a proper representative of the spiritual master. So now, I am speaking every day.

I was thinking that this Vyāsa-pūjā celebration, in India in general, it is done on Guru-pūrṇimā. Guru-pūrṇimā is one day of the year where all the disciples, specifically on the appearance day of our Guru Mahārāja, our spiritual masters, celebrate. There is a GBC directive that it should be held once a day; the guru should have that ceremony on the day of his birth, his appearance in the eyes of the disciple, with whoever is there in that particular city or region that he is in. But it has changed now; not only myself, but many of my illustrious godbrothers, they have several Vyāsa-pūjā ceremonies. It hasn't come into question yet, and I don't think it should, because this really, perhaps more than anything else, nourishes the faith in the disciples and their spiritual master by seeing him on this day and hearing him speak, and also hearing all their godbrothers and godsisters speak. It also nourishes the *bhakti-latā-bīja*, which again begins with *guru-niṣṭhā*. That is because our first step is worshipping our godbrothers and godsisters, and the second is to worship our spiritual master, then Kṛṣṇa. This is a very nourishing ceremony—very nourishing, *bhakti*-nourishing, watering the seed of devotional service.

Particularly now, in these times of darkness with a pandemic like never before—previously there was a Black Plague in the Middle Ages, and of course it killed more people than now, but it was more localized in Europe and other places—but this pandemic has affected the lives of, you could say, every single person on this planet, seven and a half billion people, in one way or another. Directly or indirectly, this virus has affected everyone. It is especially painful for Vaiṣṇavas because, number one, they cannot get out and preach, although we are finding novel ways to do that. And number two, very significantly, we are separated from each other. As several devotees have pointed out, there is nothing more painful in this world, according to Rāmānanda Rāya, than to be separated from the Vaiṣṇavas. The guru, in the eyes of the disciple, is the best example of a disciple. That is why we choose our spiritual master, because it is Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement within our heart that we find a particular person who inspires us by their actions and by their words. So that is the meaning of Kṛṣṇa’s representative, our spiritual master: he inspires us by his words, and he inspires us by putting those words into action. He is *ācārya* in the sense that he is setting an example. So in the eyes of the disciple, their guru is the best devotee. Of course, the best of the best for all of us is Śrīla Prabhupāda, but that goes without saying; he is the *ācārya* of ISKCON. But someone who imbibes Prabhupāda’s mood and serves Prabhupāda’s mission as best they can, that is so inspiring to the disciple.

So the disciples are always hankering after the association of guru, and therefore disciples look forward to this day again because it is very nourishing. So, therefore, we are doing it more than once. And I see on the screen that some devotees who have already spoken, or who may not be able to speak, or even devotees of other gurus watching in—because the whole principle of Vyāsa-pūjā is so inspiring—we are all coming back again and again and again for this nectar. It is nectar. I think it is like a quantum leap. There is that saying "quantum leap"; you can take a step, but then there is a—I guess it is a mathematical or in physics term—a quantum leap. It is a huge step forward. Days like this, the *Brahma-saṃhitā* says that we make advancement in small increments. "Increments" is an English word; it means like this: little step, little step, little step, little step. Because we live in the material world and to make spiritual advancement under the modes of nature is not an easy thing. Of course, it is easier by Prabhupāda’s and Mahāprabhu’s mercy, but you know, still, we haven't cried when we are chanting, so we have a challenge ahead of us. But days like this, it is a big leap forward, like Hanumān: he leapt from the shores of India to Laṅkā, one big, big jump. Days like this, we experience progress in our spiritual lives because everything is based on faith, trust, and love, and that is what is nourished on this day.

You may remember—Americans remember—when we first landed on the moon, I think his name was Neil Armstrong, he was the first human being—there are lots of *devas* up there, but they didn't see them—but they landed on the moon, and he stepped out of the rocket ship or the satellite or the spaceship, whatever, on a ladder down to step on the surface of the moon, and he said something significant for that event. But also, I turned it into another "dovetailed," as we say in ISKCON; he said, "A small step for man, but a huge step forward for mankind." Brilliant: "A small step for man, but a big step for mankind." You know, going forward to the stars, whatever. So I consider certain events that we have during the year—Janmāṣṭamī, Rādhāṣṭamī, Prabhupāda’s appearance day, his disappearance day, Nṛsiṃha-deva’s appearance day, festivals—you know, like we have in Ukraine, we have in Russia the big yātrā festivals, Woodstock, Polish Woodstock, Kṛṣṇa’s Village of Peace—these are monumental milestones in ISKCON. And they are like that great step forward, that Hanumān leap to Laṅkā. We make so much advancement.

So, therefore, I am in favor—I don't know what eventually our authorities will decide about having several Vyāsa-pūjās. We are calling them "disciple meetings," we will kind of get away with it. But let's be clear: these are the occasions, and I think it is all right because *phala-pariṇata*—get rid of that—*phala-pariṇata* means you judge something by the results. There may be so many considerations, but you judge something by the results, and the result is we develop faith in *guru-paramparā*. Not only do we develop faith in our spiritual master, we develop faith in Śrīla Prabhupāda because he is empowering our spiritual master. It all goes back to Prabhupāda; all roads lead to Rome. So no one can take any credit. Even if he is a master in front of Prabhupāda, he is an "itsy-bitsy-teensy-weensy" master. That is okay; small jewels all together on the table make up something significant.

But it is important—another reason we can say that, well, I am offering that it is okay—is because this is a worldwide movement now. It is a different time, place, and circumstance. In Vedic India, you lived in the *āśrama* of the guru; that was the tradition. You lived in the *āśrama* of your *gurukula*, of your guru, and you served him from there. And if you were a lady, you also served the *āśrama*; you cooked for the *āśrama*, you sent things, necessities, to the *āśrama* in various ways. The village supported the *āśrama*. And you had a lot of association with your guru, and then one day of the year, you had Vyāsa-pūjā. And in our Gauḍīya tradition, we see that during the time of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, they were packed up tight in Bhārata; his disciples were, let us say, mainly in Vṛndāvana or Bengal or Orissa, traveling, opening centers. But it wasn't a big thing to have the association of guru, and on his Vyāsa-pūjā you could come; everyone could come and go to your *matha*. And it was required; you could get association. Nowadays, especially nowadays, in the last year and a half, let us say, there is so much separation. We cannot be with our guru, so we praise science and technology for giving us the opportunity to have Zoom, Zoom, Zoom. And we are—because it is such a worldwide movement—we can be with our guru on Vyāsa-pūjā all together several times. You know, we have one for Vyāsa-pūjā for the American devotees, for the Russian devotees, the Ukrainian devotees, the Baltic—you know—but some of you are coming again and again and again. You are just filling up with the nectar, hearing the realizations of your godbrothers and godsisters, which is so important for advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So I think it is okay because Vyāsa-pūjā is really a nourisher. And they may say, "Oh, it can go to the head of the guru if he is worshipped day after day after day after day." But you know, as spiritual masters in ISKCON, we are being worshipped by disciples in different parts of the world, and the secret is to never take credit. To always give credit where credit is due; to be honest. One quality of the devotees is they are straightforward, which could also be taken to be honest, and it is a quality of a brāhmaṇa. So those who have positions of any responsibility in ISKCON, whereby you will get respect, we have to always remain humble and never forget that whatever we are spiritually—whatever we are materially, that’s our fault, it is your fault—but whatever we are spiritually, that is all the blessings of the spiritual master. So we should learn this technique; rather, it is an affair of the heart, that whatever credit we get is immediately given to our spiritual master and to our senior godbrothers and senior godsisters or anyone who is so kind to encourage us in spiritual life. Immediately we give the credit to them.

We don't want to be—I told a story one time about a king who was sitting and giving, you could say, *darśana* in the sense of a king giving counsel to his subjects, and they were saying like we say in French, *Long live the king, long live the king*. You know, okay, the king is our protector, protecting us from conquering enemies, and by taxing he is providing wealth for building roads and keeping up the military and opening hospitals. So, okay, if you feel that, well... Prabhupāda said one time there was a mosquito, a mosquito was flying around. This is a tiny insect, and he happened to land on the knee of the king when everyone was saying, "Long live the king." And this ignorant insect, he was sitting on the knee of the king, and he was taking it that they were all glorifying him. Somehow, like sometimes we take it, "People are glorifying me! Yes, I have done this!" This little king, or this little insect—what Prabhupāda would say, "poor fund of knowledge." It is an ISKCON term; you never hear that in a classroom in university. In the world, they never say you are "guilty of a poor fund of knowledge." It is a cute saying by Prabhupāda; he has so many wonderful sayings like that which just make Kṛṣṇa consciousness so interesting. So this mosquito, he had a poor fund of knowledge, a poor fund of knowledge, and he was thinking, "Yes, yes, you see I have flown from there to here, and I have a family of 25 mosquito children, and I have defeated, you know, my opponent in a mosquito battle," whatever. It all went to his head, and he was sitting on the knee: "Yes, yes, viva me, me, more and more and more and more!" And he got so excited that his stinger came out from his underside into the knee of the king. He got so excited, "Ah!" and the king went like that—mosquito finished. So we don't want to be like that, the mosquito.

Prabhupāda said even a beggar can be proud of his penny or his pence or his ruby, whatever. It is not, you know, just that the big wigs in ISKCON; even a poor man can be proud of his penny. So how do we avoid this? We avoid this by always glorifying others. We always glorify others, and even if we do it mechanically, eventually the purification will come and we will do it with realization. This is a Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava doesn't criticize others; he is only... if we criticize someone, if we see something in them we don't like, we can only see it because we have it in ourselves. Like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira: he was such a great soul, he saw everyone equally. Therefore, it is said that Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira’s enemy was never born. He may have had enemies, but he didn't see them as enemies. He was a Kṛṣṇa *bhakta*; he saw them as—of course, when a tiger comes, you know, you don't embrace the tiger; you realize he is a tiger, you love the tiger, but you don't embrace him. So you have to fight to protect dharma, but he saw the true equality of all living beings. So a devotee never criticizes; he thinks that if someone has a fault or is doing something wrong, he has faith the Holy Name will purify that devotee in time, or that through the proper channels, that devotee will be corrected. Not that we have to publicly say, "All these injustices, all that he has done," that—no. Through proper authority, one can be corrected. In all our devotional careers, we need correction. So a devotee has this vision of equality like this, and he tries to see everyone equally, and he is very appreciative of any counsel that he may get.

And so, the spiritual master, when he sees in the disciples—he sees the good qualities, he magnifies them. And if—this is the duty of the spiritual master—if he sees some quality that is not good, then that is his position to correct the disciples. Prabhupāda said his own spiritual master, he said, "My Guru Mahārāja was always chopping—chop, chop, chop—you are doing this wrong, you are doing that wrong, you are doing this wrong." And sometimes the disciples complain of their spiritual master’s chopping technique, but it is always done in love, like "spare the rod, spoil the child," like that. So as the relationship with the spiritual master grows through time, we appreciate his—like I said, Lord Caitanya, sometimes He was strong like a thunderbolt and sometimes soft like a rose, but the combination is that we become purified. And in a purified state, we begin to see the Vaiṣṇavas more clearly, we begin to understand the spiritual master more clearly, we begin to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead more clearly. So these sessions are very important, these Vyāsa-pūjās, and therefore I am happy to sit here. But whatever you say nice about me, I appreciate that—that is your duty as disciples—but you should know that where does it all end up? At the lotus feet of Prabhupāda. That is where it all ends up. And that is wonderful. Like I said yesterday, all roads lead to Rome.

So, ultimately, as a society of gurus and disciples and cooks and saṅkīrtana devotees and artists and teachers and, you know, the most important Vyāsa-pūjā of the year is Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Vyāsa-pūjā, where all of us turn as a collective society—the big, the small, the intelligent, the not-so-intelligent, the beautiful, perhaps not so beautiful, but it doesn't make any difference, those who have done big service, those the little service, pot washers and TPs, whatever—on that one day, like you see a crowd, just everyone turns at the same time with their hands and offers praise to whoever is there. So we, as a society, that day of the year, Prabhupāda’s Vyāsa-pūjā, we all turn and we acknowledge him as the Founder-Ācārya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, who is giving mercy to each and every one of us in this movement, accordingly as much as we want, as much as we have let go of our material desires and plans and attachments and opened our hearts to Prabhupāda and Rādhā-Mādhava, Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, Nitāi—all together, one big offering. That is the best Vyāsa-pūjā. But this is a good step in the right direction, because the disciple feels that we can learn about Prabhupāda from our spiritual master; that is the process, because everything comes down to disciplic succession. So what I know of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, Śrīla Prabhupāda talked about this—bābājī—so in the same way, there is a special generation of Prabhupāda disciples, and that won't be there forever. That is just—you know—"hard talk." We say there is a television program in America called "Hard Talk," where, you know, no sentiment, just the hard facts: what is going to happen? So the day will come when Prabhupāda’s disciples won't be here, and I tell you frankly that something will be missing. Just like when Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī left, things fell into chaos; when Prabhupāda left, there was some chaos, but of course our GBC pulled together. So similarly, when Prabhupāda’s disciples pass away one day, something will—it will be made up by the next generation and the glories of their devotional service and how they carry on the movement, sticking closely to tradition but innovating at the same time to push forward Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But you know, it is like when a great Vaiṣṇava passes away, it is never the same.

The world is not the same now that Panka-jaṅghri Prabhu left. You can say, "Yes, but he was one devotee," but one devotee is worth, you know, a million demigods. I think I can get away with saying that. One devotee, one Vaiṣṇava, whose only desire is to save humanity—nothing personal—is worth a million demigods. And Panka-jaṅghri was instrumental in increasing our faith, in being a disciple, being a *pūjārī*, being a humble devotee, like that. So it is like the world is just total darkness, and the real candles that light up this world with knowledge are Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs. And it is so dark that if one candle goes out, the world becomes a little darker. So it is imperative that we make more devotees, with lots of candles. But when this generation passes away—not that we are anything special—there is something to be said about this generation for all our mistakes, what we did with the enthusiasm that we gained from Prabhupāda’s coming. I remember in the temples, something like the cowherds coming back from the forest—I would equate it to that, I don't know if that is *śāstric*, but in my heart, what do I know about Kṛṣṇa without Prabhupāda? So in the temples, I remember there was a special flavor: "Prabhupāda is coming to the temple!" You know, he would come once a year to the major temples. "Prabhupāda is coming! Prabhupāda is coming!" And Prabhupāda would come, and all of us, regardless of who we were, how hard our hearts were, everyone would cry. Everyone would cry. *Yaki*, you actually say in Polish, "a river of tears." So yeah, those were special times, and there is a special touch there, and that touch can be given to others. And that is the duty of the present Prabhupāda disciples, to give that. If they realize something special in Prabhupāda, then they should give it to others. That is our culture: whatever we have, we share equally and unequivocally. We give everything—everything that we have—we give to our disciples. And will we be left empty? No, because the mercy of Mahāprabhu is He fills up the pot of mercy again. So I feel one of my most important services to all of you is to give you Śrīla Prabhupāda as I know him and knew him and want to come close to him again.

And when I—if and when I get the qualification to be with Prabhupāda again—I will make sure that all the little ducklings are with me, all my disciples. You know, like a mother goes somewhere with 10 children, you know, "Where are they? Come, come on!" like that. So my promise to my disciples is that when I, if and when Prabhupāda thinks that I am qualified to have his *darśana* again, then I will make sure that under my wings are all of you, and we will stand together in front of Śrīla Prabhupāda, equally—although you will think, "Here is my guru"—still, both sides were just *jīvas* who lost the way and we are coming home. So we will all stand before Śrīla Prabhupāda with clean hearts. Our hearts will—all these nasty desires go away, "Be gone with you!" like Pūtanā has said to Kṛṣṇa, "Be gone!" So all the material stuff, go away, and then quickly as possible, water that *bhakti-latā-bīja*, because life is short and then you die. I just lost another dear godbrother two days ago, Mahā-śiva Prabhu. He was once a *sannyāsī* in ISKCON, a very nice devotee. He had a preaching spirit. He died of COVID two days ago in a hospital, alone in a hospital in Jaipur. It was Sunday; no one could come. But I knew him well, and I knew that he was chanting; if he wasn't conscious, his soul was crying out to Prabhupāda. He was a very nice devotee. So life is short and then you die. So do we have time to waste on anything else? No. We want to stand before—like they say, "stand naked before God." What does that mean? No material clothes, no material attachments. We want to be able to stand before our guru naked, as Bhakti Tirtha Swami said, "Die before you die." That is not a bad thing, but then wake up—the living soul—stand before Prabhupāda: "I want to be a cowherd boy, I want to be a cowherd girl, I want Kṛṣṇa as my son, I want to be a tree and give my fruits to Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma as They come by, I want to roll in the dust of Ramaṇa-reti, I want to bathe in liquid *prema* in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa." That is what—before we die, that is what we wanted. No one should think they are ready to die yet, because when we chant there are no tears coming. So the tears have to come; that is a science. Tears have to come, so we have a lot of work to do. We don't have much time.

So let’s just absorb ourselves in these type of activities, these Vyāsa-pūjās, even if we do them again and again and again. I think it is okay, because whatever nourishes the *bhakti-latā-bīja* creeper, the end result is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is okay. Not all year—I think these Vyāsa-pūjās are going for 12 weeks or something—but I am going to be there because I love to hear all of you. Because I see, year after year, by hearing your realizations, I realize, "Yes, this process is authentic. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is authorized." And what is the proof of its being authorized? All of you are making nice progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all making nice progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So for me, that is most satisfying, because that means I can say to my Guru Mahārāja, "I think I am doing a good job. I hope you are satisfied, that all these young boys and girls are, under my humble—very humble—direction, are making progress." You just sleep outside, this nice boy here, you please accept him. See this nice girl here, I think today we also have—are you, Isha, here? You are with us behind you, looks like there is Govardhana Hill. Yeah, you are almost nine, you are almost nine, and you are making so much progress. You have the best attention span of all the devotees because I can see their photos, and sometimes they are looking, going here, but you are fixed. So I don't know who you are, but I am glad that I am here to help you. Yesterday she made a cake for me, and I got to see it after the *pūjā* ceremony, and she also made a very nice drawing for me. So I told her I would send her some beads from Rādhā-kuṇḍa carved by—by a monk out there, a sādhu brought them, her name on each bead—and I told her one day I would take her to Vṛndāvana. She is almost nine, but in many ways she is more progressive than a lot of us.

So let’s continue. Now I am just going to sit here and very humbly, whatever I hear, it is like duck—water off a duck's back—or water on the lotus flowers, it is just going to go straight to Prabhupāda’s heart, where all glorification belongs. So thank you everyone, and I am sorry if I spoke too long, but you know I love all of you more than you’ll ever know. Actually, I love all of you so much, and I just want to tell you that and tell you how seriously I take this responsibility. I really do. Even if you kind of forget, even if you go off, I will find you and drag you back by the hair. That is my job. *Guru* is heavy—just to remind you that I am not going to let you go ever. We are going to take you and tie you around the lotus feet of the Divine Couple. All right, Kṛṣṇa, Jai Kṛṣṇa.""