"*00383*.*
"# Sacred Bonds: The Power of Devotee Association

Dear devotees, we are enjoying each other’s association so much here in the presence of the Lord. I would like to talk today about the association between devotees. The association of devotees is so important for the progress of spiritual life. Rūpa Gosvāmī mentions it as one of the five main principles in devotional service in a famous verse in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. The meaning of this famous verse is that a person should associate with the devotees, chant the holy names of the Lord, listen to the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, reside in Mathurā, and worship the deities with faith and veneration.

So, there are these five main practices in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and the association with the devotees is so important that *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* states: the value of a moment’s association with a devotee of the Lord cannot even be compared to the attainment of heaven, liberation from matter, or what to speak of worldly benedictions in the form of material prosperity, which are meant for those who are about to die.

Sūta Gosvāmī answers these sages: the meaning of this verse is that even for those who are twice-born, or all Brāhmaṇas, by serving people who are completely free from vices and rendering them great service, a person can gain the taste for listening to the message of Vāsudeva. 500 years ago, Lord Caitanya also mentioned this other verse, which is not very well known but is still an authorized text and one of my favorite verses: the service of the Lord is the remedy in this age of discord for the fallen souls who have been bitten by the serpent of *saṃsāra*—the holy name of the Supreme Lord and performing humble service to the Vaiṣṇavas.

Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself emphasizes the importance of association, as we are doing this weekend, and therefore the verse states that the verdict of all the revealed scriptures is that even by just a moment of association with a pure devotee—*lava-mātra*—a person can achieve all successes. There are many verses that talk about the association with devotees; we could make a book about it. In particular, Rūpa Gosvāmī underlines its importance and mentions it as one of the important services in the process of bhakti. We could even go so far as to say that among these five principles for bhakti, the association with devotees is perhaps the most essential. They are all essential, but this is perhaps the most essential. 

We certainly do not want to diminish the importance of the other four activities. For example, regarding the holy places, Śrīla Prabhupāda says that Mathurā is perfect in all respects. Who can argue? They are all perfect, but he actually says that Mathurā is more perfect because it depends on the relationships that one has in these places. All these places are imbued with love for Kṛṣṇa in various forms, but there are different qualities of love. For example, as with the *gopīs*, there can be nine kinds of bhakti, twelve, twenty-two.

He said you women should know about gold, for example, 9 carat vs 24 carat. If one says to the husband, "I would like a gold ornament," and he replies, "Can I buy you something of 9 carats?" and she says, "No, I want 24 carats," that is a lesson. So the Lord is the supreme in each of these places, but there are differences between Mathurā and Vṛndāvana. The quality of love—especially of the *gopīs*—is unique. For example, once I heard that love means giving more than you receive. The other night he was talking about different types of love of the devotees for Kṛṣṇa, and then at a certain point, he started talking about the love of the *gopīs* for Kṛṣṇa. They have never asked anything from Kṛṣṇa, and saying this, he got emotional and the lesson ended. So, "perfect, more perfect, most perfect," and therefore we have these five aspects of devotional service, but the most essential is precisely the association with the devotees.

Let’s try to explore this topic a little here, because we like to go and explore, discover new things, new wonders, because Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not ordinary; it is extraordinary. It is important to remember that without the association with the devotees, we cannot even perfect the four other practices, even the *yama* of chanting and serving Kṛṣṇa. For this, we need the association with the devotees, especially in this age, because we are so fallen.

There is a verse in which the Lord appears, but we recognize Him because He is always surrounded by devotees who chant the holy names. We were talking about this yesterday: for example, by pronouncing the word "Rāma," one can purify the heart of the person who sings it. This is written in the Sixth Canto, Second Chapter, 14th verse of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Therefore, in this verse, the *Bhāgavatam* says that if a person sings the holy name of the Lord, he is immediately freed from the reactions of unlimited sins, even if he sings indirectly—for example, referring to something else in a joking way, if he sings for musical entertainment, or negligently. This is accepted by all the scriptures.

Such is the merciful holy name, and therefore, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Antya-līlā 1.99), our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda quotes the poet: "The name of Kṛṣṇa is the sweetest of all sweet things; it is the most auspicious of all auspicious things. It is the transcendental fruit of the vine of Vedic literature, and it is sung even just once, whether with faith or with contempt; it can free the one who sings it." 

Do you remember any other example of someone who was freed by an unaware chanting of the holy name? If they ask me, "You have to prove these statements of yours," what do you think you remember? Ajāmila, on his deathbed, was ready to be taken to hell. He called for his son, Nārāyaṇa. He didn't mean to invoke the Lord; he meant to call the name of his son, but he invoked the name of the Lord. They say that immediately all his reactions to his sins disappeared. 

Four Viṣṇudūtas appeared with their four arms each and shouted to the Yamadūtas, "Stop it, you can't touch him!" So they said, "How can you say this? This is a materialistic person full of sins!" They replied, "Because he sang the name of our Lord, so you can't take him with you." So, this is the unaware chanting which, in any case, gives a benefit. When I did *saṅkīrtana* for many years around the streets, I suggested to people to buy a book or to take some *prasāda*. If they didn't want to, I said, "Please, you can at least say Hare Kṛṣṇa." And they said, "Ok, ok, Kṛṣṇa, bye bye, I have to go, thank you." They said it exactly like I said now, and therefore, also thanks to this unconscious chanting, one is freed from sin. But remember that one didn't immediately return to the spiritual realm; one had to perfect himself a little more in his life and then return to Kṛṣṇa because one hadn't chanted the name in a pure way.

Another example that I found in the scriptures is that of some thieves who lived in the forests, who obtained liberation by unconsciously pronouncing the name of the Lord. These people lived in the forest because they had been banished from the cities; they would have been punished and they were very proud. "We live in the forests," and they obtained liberation because they had unconsciously chanted the names of Rāma. Therefore, if you go to India now, since they have recently installed an Ayodhyā temple, everyone greets you by saying "Rāma." Some even say "Death to Rāvaṇa." 

How is it possible that these thieves have been freed? What happened? The *śāstras* say that very proudly they said the following: "We go into the forests, we plunder people, we cross rivers effortlessly, we do not know fear." So the conclusion is that even the inhabitants of the forest, the thieves, can obtain liberation thanks to constant contact with the name "Rāma." Yesterday, I was approached by a woman with her child who asked me, "Please, Mahārāja, can you give a name to my son?" And he said, "Yes, call him Rāmadāsa," and she said, "Okay, just like that." And he says, "Yes, but this name is everything. If you say Rāma, Rāma all day, you can return to Ayodhyā."

You move from "unaware chanting" to "perfection in chanting," which is not just liberation from matter, but *prema*—love of God—which is the ticket back to Vaikuṇṭha. One has to get initiated into the holy names of God, the Kṛṣṇa mantra, by a bona fide spiritual master, a devotee. Again, a devotee. So it is important to remember that our goal is not only liberation from sin, but it is love for Kṛṣṇa, *prema*. And therefore, to have this ticket to return to the spiritual world, we must take initiation into the holy name from a devotee, and here again, the importance of association with perfect devotees emerges. 

Why are we involved in this movement? To obtain *prema*, that is, pure love for Kṛṣṇa. And how do we obtain it? Through initiation, which is not simply receiving a new spiritual name, but also being able to have the opportunity to perfect our chanting and obtain *prema*. Therefore, in another verse, it glorifies the initiation of the devotees: "I must be able to teach them to chant the name." The translation of this verse is that since the holy name of Hari appears in the hearts of the Vaiṣṇavas, it becomes manifest wherever they adorn themselves with impeccable *tilaka* and necklaces and are equipped with the *mahā-mantra*. In the midst of this age of Kali, they are the purified ones. This is what will happen, and you are the example. 

Reading that verse in the scriptures, I immediately thought that it referred to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. It was like a prophecy that came 500 years ago and already saw all these *kīrtana melas*, all the glories to the devotees of the Lord. So it is essential to make them listen. But this listening must be done by listening to a devotee. Very often before the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* lessons, this verse is read: "By regularly attending classes, lessons on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and rendering service to the pure devotees, all the problems of the heart are practically completely destroyed, and loving service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is established in the heart."

Very often in India, reference is made to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, but it is important that it is commented on by Prabhupāda, and therefore again, the importance of the pure devotee who conveys the message to us. Once, a poet, Jagannātha, went to visit Lord Caitanya, but he could not directly approach Him; he had to go through His secretary. So, the poet said to the secretary, "I would like to show and tell the Lord about this book I wrote." The secretary said, "OK, try to let me hear some verses from your book first, so that I can understand if it is appropriate to present it to the Lord." So, this is a bit technical; you have to listen very carefully. The poet said, "Lord Jagannātha has the most beautiful body, and Lord Caitanya is the owner of this body." He replied, "No, it is not true that He is the owner of the body of Jagannātha. Lord Caitanya is not different from Jagannātha Himself." And therefore, you cannot see the Lord [without a guide]. He concludes with a sentence that, in relation to the lesson we are doing now, is crucial: if you want to understand Kṛṣṇa, you have to approach a realized Vaiṣṇava and listen to him. And so, again, the association with a Vaiṣṇava is perfection.

Do you remember every now and then there is this Kumbha Mela, this great association of devotees? I was young, I was curious—in English it is said that "curiosity killed the cat"—and I left the field of ISKCON to explore other parts of the Kumbha Mela. In particular, the one dedicated to the Śaṅkarācāryas. The leader of the Śaṅkarācārya movement was giving a lesson, and he was talking about the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* ten-verse chant. He was describing Kṛṣṇa in a very wonderful way; he described it so well, saying that He had flowing curls, red lips, these three folds in His body, playing the flute. 

I was fascinated by this story, but at a certain point, the Śaṅkarācārya said, "But you yourselves are this person, you are Kṛṣṇa." How offensive is this statement! And then he said, "But barefoot..." Then a person arrived who took me away from the *pandal* and threw me to the ground. I said, "Yes, ok, you are still rascals," because he was very strong against the impersonalists. And therefore, as his spiritual children, we must represent and tell the truth. 

We have spoken about Him as the absolute, but in my experience, I have noticed that many people misunderstand the role of the holy places. Every now and then, Prabhupāda quoted this verse and said, "The people who live in Calcutta, where the Ganges flows, think that they have to go to Hardwar, which is thousands of kilometers away, to take a purifying bath in the Ganges. But this does not make sense because the Ganges is always pure." So, people want to go to the sacred places, and this is fine, but the real wealth of these places are the holy people who live there. Only by seeing how they live, their pure vision, can we see the holy place. 

I was once describing the beauties of a place; my heart was melting beautifully. But when I look around, I see pigs, dogs fighting, cheating. So, Prabhupāda was singing a very sweet song about Vṛndāvana, describing it wonderfully. A devotee at a certain point raised his hand and said, "But Prabhupāda, you describe Vṛndāvana so well, but when I look around, I only see pigs, dogs fighting each other, garbage. I don't see how you see." He wasn't challenging Prabhupāda; he was just revealing his heart. Prabhupāda replied, "Yes, you see like this because there is something in your eyes." So, the devotee—who was, like all of us when we were young—took off his glasses and began to rub his eyes to remove this "something." Prabhupāda said, "No, not like that. The speck in your eye is not material; it is linked to your desire for material gratification. When you remove it, you will be able to see Vṛndāvana."

So, what are the glasses? The words. The words of the spiritual master and the revealed scriptures. When we go to these places, it is essential to have the association with these devotees. For example, Dīna Bandhu is my *parikramā* guru in Vṛndāvana, and other devotees have revealed Vṛndāvana to me. Now, even when there are all these horns, this hellish chaos, I say, "I love Vṛndāvana." People say, "You are going somewhere for a program, the smell of the petrol, the fumes," and they say, "Oh, that's horrible." I say, "It's a sweet sugar for me." "Are you crazy, Mahārāja? Petrol?" "It reminds me of *saṅkīrtana*. We spend our lives on the streets." I said, "My temple is the streets." Recently, I found myself in London, in Piccadilly Circus, a lot of traffic. I could really smell the petrol, the diesel. A person told me, "But it's really a hellish place here." I said, "Wow, I love it. This is my temple, because the temple of *saṅkīrtana*—for many years I have done *saṅkīrtana* in the streets, on the street corners, distributing books, and this smell reminds me of Caitanya's mission."

So, when we go to Vṛndāvana, we can visit the temples, we can also go out to Govardhana and all the others, but we can see them only if we have the eyes of pure devotees who allow us to be able to see them. 

Finally, we talk about serving the deities. In accordance with Kṛṣṇa, He expands—as explained in Canto 11, Chapter 27—in four principal forms. Therefore, it is not made of matter like our body, but of eternity, happiness, and knowledge. The first expansion is the *arcā-vigraha*... then there are the 24 expansions of Nārāyaṇa who preside over the Vaikuṇṭha planets. Then Kṛṣṇa expands as Paramātmā inside the heart of every living entity, and then He expands as deities made of material elements. When every now and then I preach to Catholic people, Christians, I tell them, "If God is everywhere, can He also be in these deities?" And they say, "Well, yes." But they say, "But you worship idols, material forms." And I reply, "But I studied the Bible, and the Lord appeared to me." 

[There is the story] of a young Brāhmaṇa who had brought the deities with him to testify before the other older Brāhmaṇas and said, "You are not a statue, you are the Supreme Lord." This young Brāhmaṇa, who was a pure devotee, very innocently had asked the Lord in the form of the deity, "Please, can you accompany me to Bengal to testify?" The deity replied, "Yes, I will come." When Prabhupāda was installing the Los Angeles deities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, he said, "If you see them as made of matter, no process will take place. But if you worship them with love and devotion, one day these deities will speak to you." That is what is happening here in your temple, because the standard you have with these deities is the highest in the world. 

The deity asked, "Yes, ok, but how can I come with you?" And the young Brāhmaṇa replied, "Well, sir, if you can talk, you can also walk." So, seriously, the worship of deities is something very serious, deep. The deities are not different from Kṛṣṇa Himself. In *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* (1.2.239), Rūpa Gosvāmī says, "Oh my dear friend, if you want to enjoy material nature with your friends and relatives, then don't look at the form of the Lord called Govinda, who wanders near Keśī-ghāṭa on the banks of the Yamunā, because He has a slight smile on His face, with that form folded in three parts in the body; His eyes move incessantly, He has a flute resting on His red bud-lips, and He is shining gloriously with His peacock feather. Because if you look at this form, you will leave all the nonsense of material nature. You will become devotees of Kṛṣṇa in Italy."

Therefore, to sum up, if you look at the form of the Lord even in the deity, you will completely detach yourself from the love for material nature and you will fall in love with the Lord instead. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* confirms it. For example, in a lesson of 15 August 1972, Prabhupāda says the idea is that if you once see Kṛṣṇa, then you will forget all this nonsense of material entertainment. So, what is the meaning of *darśana*? It is that we go in front of the deities to see them, but since love is mutual, they also see us. That is why the great devotees do not just look at how well-dressed the deities are and go away; they stay there for a long time to carry out this exchange. 

[One verse] explains how one should stand in front of the deities: "My dear Lord, I am so fortunate to be able to stand in front of You; please accept my humble obeisances. You have a navel like a lotus flower, and You wear lotus garlands, and You also have flowers like lotus, and You have lotus feet. I am so fortunate to see You, because You give joy to my eyes; when my eyes receive this sight of You, they become pleasantly fresh." Wow, it's beautiful, right?

And so, the most important thing is that it is the devotees who explain to us how we can be there. Without their representatives, we would not be able to worship the deities. The importance of the devotees in these five processes of devotional service emerges again. The spiritual master is always engaged in the veneration of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and also involves his disciples in this worship; they dress the deities with beautiful clothes and ornaments, clean the temple, and do worship to the Lord. So all these five limbs of devotional service are based on the association with the devotees. 

We are so blessed to be able to be in association in this festival. Do what the devotees usually do with each other: mainly chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Your company is as precious as them in Vedic culture. I conclude with the verse: "The value of a moment of association with a devotee of the Lord cannot be compared to any success, even that of obtaining the celestial planets or liberation from matter, and what to say about all the material blessings, prosperity, riches, which are only for people who are destined for death."

And then we will quote one last verse of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* because our high note is what this pure devotee of the Lord said: "The medicinal herb for those who are absorbed in sensory gratification is the service offered to the Lord and the Guru with faith, and the remnants of the Vaiṣṇavas."

Thank you very much.""