Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, my [unintelligible] my.

Hari Krishna.

We often hear in our Hare Krishna Movement how the chanting of Hare Krishna is the yuga-dharma, or the process of self-realization for the age in which we live, unfortunately Kali Yuga.

So devotees are always eager to chant. We wake up in the morning very eager to grab our beads and chant sixteen rounds. We're grateful to come into the temple room and chant as a congregation with devotees. We take great pleasure in going on the streets and chanting Hare Krishna very loudly so the people can hear, because we know the effects of that chanting.

It destroys the sinful reactions that are within our hearts. It uproots our material desires, and most important, it gives us that frame of that love of God eventually. So, any opportunity we have, we we want to chant. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmi Prabhupāda writes that whenever he hears the chiming of the kartāls and the beat of the mṛdaṅga, he says his joy knows no bounds.

Well, this is Krishna consciousness movement.

Our main process is chanting. And how is it so attractive to us?

Because Krishna is present in His name.

The Mahā-mantra, Hari Krishna, Hari Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hari Hari, Hari Rama, Hari Rama, Rama Rama, Hari Hari.

And Krishna, amongst many of His wonderful qualities, He's all-attractive and He's a reservoir of pleasure.

So when you chant, you get that higher pleasure. So devotees look forward to these kirtan melas. They become very popular now, all over the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, because it is again, that is the, when we speak of yuga-dharma, we mean that we meant to come together to chant Hare Krishna.

So much more benefit comes when you're chanting with like-minded devotees. This business. Hare Krishna.

So we've been looking forward to this event, the Fourth Annual Sacred Sounds Kirtan Retreat, for many, many months. And I know that devotees here at the New Govardhan community in Mudgee, Australia, I know how hard they've been working just to set the stage so everything so we can just sit and just focus on chanting the holy names, chant from the heart in each other's association.

Very often, where you are, the atmosphere you're in affects your consciousness. So what better place to come and chant Hare Krishna than here at New Govardhan?

And we have devotees from all over the country. My dream eventually is this will become a yātrā event, not just local devotees here and there, but devotees come from Perth, and Adelaide, and Melbourne, and Sydney, and all over the country and chant together.

And maybe even become an international event because this is a beautiful subtropical atmosphere and the beautiful weather we have now. And excellent cooks here. Delicious. Puruṣottama. And another added feature is that His Holiness Bhakti Vigaṁsa Swami Maharaja, he is going to be doing a seminar, or he's doing a seminar on Śrīmad Bhāgavatam.

So what I thought, what a wonderful way to spend the Easter weekend. Easter weekend is, it's a holiday. Some people don't actually celebrate it in such a spiritual way, unfortunately. But in the mood of our Christian brothers and sisters who are celebrating the resurrection of Jesus Christ, we've come together for the good of chanting, dancing, feasting, according to the formula of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

So this is a wonderful event on a wonderful weekend and a wonderful project. And by chanting like this, not only do we benefit the local community benefits, but somehow imperceptibly, the whole world benefits when devotees come together and loudly chant, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

Fourth Annual Sacred Sounds Kirtan Retreat. His Grace Rādhā-dāmodara Prabhu ki jai! Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jai!

Hare Krishna all. [Unintelligible] it's like a second.

But if it's not a kiss like a Saiga said I didn't put it out. Can I.