Hare Krishna, and welcome to the Sacred Sounds Festival here in Mulumba, New South Wales, Australia at our community New Govardhan.

This is our third year running. Each year it gets bigger and better. That’s a spiritual principle: in Krishna consciousness and spiritual life, things just get better.

In material life, everything deteriorates, but in spiritual life, things get better. So, our third year running, we have probably doubled the devotees we had last year, and a lot of that is due to the organization of my disciple Birju Bala Devi Dasi, who tragically passed away in a car accident some months ago.

She was, you could say, the main organizer of this event. So the theme here is we're remembering Birju Bala Devi and all the wonderful work she did for this festival, and for the New Govardhan community, and the Australian yatra as well.

And also a very dear Godbrother of mine, Vaiṣṇava Gopala Prabhu. He was one of the first public initiated disciples here in the country. He joined in the early years. Like many senior devotees, he had many services through the years in Australia.

He was a sankirtana leader, he was a temple president, he was a book distributor, and some years ago he came here and he settled down, he got married, and was really, if you say, a staple of this community, always preaching to the devotees.

And in the last few years, he was taking care of the cows. So there’s that saying we have in English: Lest we forget. So during this event, where we're chanting and we're dancing in the hundreds and relishing Purushottam and enjoying each other's association, we give credit where credit is due.

We remember those devotees and how they facilitated this event and this wonderful community and the Australian yatra. Sacred Sounds, this is the title we've given this event, and I think it's appropriate because these kirtan Melas have become very popular all over the world.

In the old days, you know, our chanting meant kirtan in the temple and going out on the streets and chanting Hari Krishna.

Through the years, the devotees have developed some *nāma-ruci*, they've developed some genuine taste for the Holy Names, so they want to refine that. And Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura wrote, and I'm paraphrasing that, from time to time, a devotee should detach himself or herself from their normal duties and just go someplace and focus on chanting the Holy Names, the Hari Krishna mantra specifically.

Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare, Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare.

So we've arranged the festival, and that concept that the different temples around Australia, devotees can come here and have kirtans for five hours in the morning and five hours in the evening and sit around and discuss and meet and take *prasādam*.

But basically, it's all centered around the Holy Names of Krishna, and this is really what makes a kirtan Mela, a festival, special because it's the chanting of the Holy Names.

Sacred Sound means it's not a sound that comes from this world. You can't pinpoint it, you know, where did the Hare Krishna Maha-mantra come from?

Of course, it has its origins in the pastimes of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but it comes from the spiritual sky. And that we understand from the poem or a song by Narottama Dasa Thakura, he says, *goloka-sthitaṁ hari-nāma-saṅkīrtanam*. That this chanting of Hari Krishna has come from Goloka Vrindavan.

And what is the nature of Goloka Vrindavan?

Every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there's a festival every day. That wonderful spiritual atmosphere. So we recreate, you could say, that atmosphere here on the planet Earth by having these kirtan Melas, by having these festivals where we just focus on chanting Hari Krishna.

In fact, we're even encouraging the participants to stay in the tent. You know, the tendency is to go outside and socialize and walk around and so forth. That's nice, but if we can spend time focusing on the chanting, chanting from the heart, as my dear friend Loka-nātha Swami was always saying, chanting from the heart and chanting in the mood of prayer.

It's not just some, it's not a mechanical process. It's devotion. *Bhakti* means from the heart for Krishna.

So if we're chanting for Krishna, then the atmosphere becomes just like the spiritual world, just like the spiritual world.

I would like to quote Yamuna Devi Dasi, my God-sister. She said, from time to time in Krishna consciousness, there's some divine intervention in our lives, and the mercy of Guru and Krishna, and something little miraculous happens.

She called it the magic moment. So as I'm sitting in the tent, chanting with all the devotees and hearing the kirtans, it's Bhakta Vatsala, Govinda Mahārāja, Bhakta Hari, Sitaram Prabhu, and I take with great pleasure and also looking at the faces of the devotees and how much this kirtan is purifying the heart, removing anarthas, and awakening devotional service.

Bhakti really works. And you see that in the faces. They say the faces are the index of the mind. And it's particularly satisfying to me to see the newcomers here at New Govardhan. They have a wonderful program where people can come and work in the community and get room and board.

They have maybe a hundred or 200, they're called "woofers" up here, and they're naturally drawn into the activities of the devotees here, morning program, evening program, reading the books. It just, transcendentally, they get addicted, and they're really enjoying this Sacred Sounds 2018.

They're really enjoying it. They're actually in the front, and I'm looking at them sometimes, I'm thinking, you know, I wish I could chat with that relative because there's some special mercy when you first come in contact with devotees of the Lord.

There's some special mercy to give you an impetus to continue to advance in Krishna consciousness.

Also to see the spiritual awakening in the hearts of these hundreds of, you know, young people who have come here to work and who take up a little bit of the process, to see them really chanting from the heart, like Madhava Prabhu has said, for me, this is the essence of the festival, to get that time.

So sacred sounds, a sound which comes from the transcendental world. Life is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. And as long as we're chanting, chanting, chanting, either alone or with our devotees, or in this sense, with hundreds and hundreds of people, the spirit is simply wonderful.

And we thank Śrīla Prabhupāda for giving us this opportunity.

Sacred Sounds, New Govardhan 2018. Hare Krishna.

Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda.