"*00551*.*
"### Transcript: Sacred Vibes

*Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.*

*Jaya Śrī-Kṛṣṇa-Caitanya Prabhu-Nityānanda Advaita Gadādhara Śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.*

Ladies and gentlemen, it is with great pleasure that I find myself sitting before you this evening at this great event. I am very grateful to Gauravāṇī, Acyuta, Viśvambhara, Bṛndā, my dear God-brother Badra-Hari Prabhu, and others for giving me the opportunity to speak a few words at this intermission.

I think it is noteworthy that the very first performance this evening was a very beautiful Indian dancer—I imagine a local girl—and she performed the Daśāvatāra dance. It was very beautifully done, where she depicted the pastimes of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His ten incarnations. Then, just as noteworthy was that when Gauravāṇī and Acyuta began their part of the program, they very nicely introduced and spoke about the personality of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

Why is this noteworthy? Why is this important? Because in this great country of India, this great land of Bharat, practically everyone—irrespective of their religion, certainly the Hindus, but also our Muslim brothers and sisters, our Christian brothers and sisters, our Sikh brothers and sisters, Jains, etc.—everyone has heard of the ten incarnations and how, out of His compassion for the fallen conditioned souls struggling in this material world birth after birth, the Lord comes in various forms to rescue us. *Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata*; He states in the Gītā, whenever and wherever there is a decline in religion or *dharma*, spirituality, He comes to set things straight. 

So we know of the ten avatars; they are depicted in dance, they are depicted in music, they are depicted in paintings, they are depicted in various sculpting, even deities—*mūrtis*—throughout the country. People have their chosen Lord whom they worship. But very few people, to this particular moment, know about the appearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is most important. Of course, all of the avatars are important; they have come down through the ages and are all important. But for us now, this present time, place, and circumstance, the most important avatar is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

One time, my spiritual master said that if many instructions are given, the last instruction is the most important. Many instructions may be given, but the last instruction is the most important. Therefore, each time the Lord comes, He reveals as much knowledge as the people of that time can understand. In Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, He enlightens people with *divya-jñāna*, transcendental knowledge. All of those instructions are important, but the last instruction is always the most important. Therefore, the last instruction amongst the avatars was given by this personality, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

He is an incarnation of the Lord who appeared 500 years ago in West Bengal. It is stated in *śāstra*—in spiritual circles, when you are speaking, if you say something, you have to be able to back it up with *śāstra*; that makes it authoritative. It is our *śāstras* that make our movement and make our *dharma*; they make our religion in this country authentic. So, where is this personality, Śrī Caitanya, whom Gauravāṇī Prabhu and the group were presenting so nicely—singing His names and recounting some of His pastimes—where is this incarnation spoken about, and what is His particular message to all of us in this present day? 

Well, He is mentioned in Scripture, just as Varāha, Narasiṁha, Kūrma, Matsya—all these different incarnations are mentioned, Mahāprabhu was also mentioned:

$$kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam$$
$$yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ$$

In the Eleventh Canto of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, it is mentioned that that person, that divine personality Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa who appeared 5,000 years ago at the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, has again appeared in Kali-yuga. This is most amazing. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa comes in Satya-yuga, He comes in Tretā-yuga, He comes in Dvāpara-yuga in His original transcendental form from whom the other avatars are coming. But many people do not know that He also comes in Kali-yuga. This verse says that that same person who appeared in Dvāpara-yuga, bluish-black like a monsoon cloud, playing His flute and enchanting the hearts of all His devotees, has now appeared in Kali-yuga in the form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the golden avatar. 

How can He be recognized? How do we recognize the incarnation of God in this age? What does He look like? What does He do? He is of a golden color and is always dancing in *kīrtana* along with His associates, chanting the *yuga-dharma*, the process for spiritual enlightenment in this age. And what is this beautiful golden avatar singing? *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.*

In Satya-yuga, people became spiritually enlightened by meditation. In Tretā-yuga, people became spiritually enlightened by *agnihotra*. In Dvāpara-yuga, our ancestors became spiritually enlightened by visiting the temple. But in Kali-yuga, which is described as a miserable age, a materialistic age, an age of quarrel and hypocrisy—I don't need to speak about Kali-yuga; you can simply read *The Times of India*, that will tell you about Kali-yuga—but in Kali-yuga, these other processes, although they were valid in previous ages, they are not so valid in this age because we are so fallen. 

So Kṛṣṇa, in His form as this golden avatar dancing with His devotees, has brought a process which is very simple and very easy to perform for spiritual enlightenment. The same result that was achieved by our ancestors in Satya-yuga by meditating for 100,000 years, the same result that our ancestors achieved by the *agnihotra* in Tretā-yuga or visiting the temple in Dvāpara-yuga, that same result can be achieved in this age by taking wholeheartedly to this process of singing and dancing to the *maha-mantra*—some philosophy so that we understand the value of what we have—and the partaking of *prasāda*, food which has been offered to the Lord. 

So essentially, this is what we are doing this evening. We are following the instructions of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We are chanting the names of God, and we can see the immediate effect: that everyone within the hall becomes transcendentally enlivened. So many of you are singing and dancing in great happiness. How is this mantra, this simple thirty-two syllables, three words—Hare, Kṛṣṇa, and Rāma—how is this so powerful that the fallen people of this age can all become saintly persons, perfected persons, *siddhas*, irregardless of what country they are born in, what race they are born in, what religion they practice, or whatever their condition is? How is it that the whole world can achieve perfection? Not only India, but the whole world can achieve perfection through this simple mantra. 

It is very easy to understand in a beautiful verse of our Vedas: *nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktiḥ*. That means there is no difference between the name of God and God Himself. So when you are chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*, our spiritual master said in a very poetic way: "The Lord is dancing on the tip of your tongue." How beautiful a statement! When your tongue is vibrating sacred vibes, sacred vibrations—the motto of this festival—when you are doing the sacred vibe, the *maha-mantra*, the Lord in the form of sound is dancing on the tip of your tongue. He is present in the sound of His name. 

This is interesting. In the material world, the name of an object and the object, they are different. For example, if I become thirsty and I want to quench my thirst, if I say "water, water," will I quench my thirst? No, because water and the name "water" are different. But one of the great mysteries of spiritual life is that in the spiritual world, far beyond this material creation, *kāraḥ-tasma-tu bhāvan yo vyakta-avyakta-sanātana*, in that eternal realm, the object and the name of the object are identical. So God, Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa, He is non-different than His name. 

So how powerful is God? We often hear He has six opulences: strength, fame, wealth, knowledge, intelligence, and renunciation. Who would not want to meet such a personality who possesses all beauty, all intelligence, all knowledge, all renunciation? You can meet Him; you just take your tongue and you chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. 

*Kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā.* The great sage Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī says in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* that in this miserable, horrible age of Kali-yuga—sometimes the *sādhus*, they won't even say "Kali-yuga"; they won't even say it, it's so demeaning, so impure to the mind of a *sādhu*—but in this age, the chanting overrides the ill effects of this age. 

*Kaler doṣa-nidhe rājan asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ / kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet.* A *sādhu* is speaking to a king: "My dear King, this age of Kali is an ocean of inauspiciousness." Imagine—not far we have the Malabar Coast and Arabian Sea, an ocean of salt—imagine an ocean of inauspiciousness. That is Kali-yuga. But the *sādhu* says, "Still, there is one good thing left in this age, and what is that? *Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet*." Just by chanting this mantra, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*, one can achieve all perfection. 

One time my spiritual master said, "Understanding this fact, understanding this knowledge, hearing these verses from *śāstra*, what intelligent man would not take up the process of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa?" Especially because it is so blissful, it is so joyful, it is so happy. We sometimes think of spiritual life as something very austere, difficult to perform—studying the four Vedas, traveling to distant holy places, fasting from food and water—we think of spiritual life as something very difficult. So, understanding our mentality, Mahāprabhu says, "Yes, so therefore just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." 

The Lord is so kind; He has made the process of spiritual life more enjoyable than material life. Material life is made to look like you can enjoy—the billboards, the television, the radio—they make it look nice, but it is all fictitious. We don't have time to speak about that, but it is made to look nice. Nothing compares! You take the whole happiness of this material world, you put it on one side of the scale, and you take one of Gauravāṇī Prabhu’s and Viśvambhara’s and Bṛndā Devi’s programs, their *kīrtanas*, and you place it on the other side of the scale of happiness: what will happen? Boom! The *kīrtana* of the holy name is performed by these devotees; it outweighs all the happiness in this material world. 

How is that possible? How is that possible? Because the Lord is present in the sound of His name. And besides being everything that He is, He is a reservoir of all pleasure. Kṛṣṇa, whenever you see Kṛṣṇa, you see that He is always enjoying. He is dancing with His devotees, He is talking intimately in loving pastimes with His devotees, He is herding His cows, He is playing pranks in the Vṛndāvana village, running from His mother in childhood naughtiness. Our Kṛṣṇa, He is so attractive! 

Our spiritual master told a story one time: that one man wanted to worship God, but he didn't know who was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He from whom even the *devatās*, the powerful demigods, are coming. So he went to the different temples to try to figure out who is God. He went to the temple of Lord Brahmā and he saw Brahmā was very busy in the process of creation, making something, creating this particular universe in which we live; for that he needed four heads, this universe is so complicated. Then he went to the next temple and he saw the deity of Indra, and Indra was very busy with the rain, making sure that the rain came so the grains would grow and people could eat. Then he went to the temple of Agni-deva, and he saw Agni, the fire. Then Vāyu, the wind. Then Śiva; Śiva is very powerful, but when it comes time, he is in charge of destruction, working very hard. 

Then he happened to go to a temple of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and he saw Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They were not working very hard—all these things are going on by Kṛṣṇa's will, not a blade of grass moves without the desire of the Supreme—and he saw Kṛṣṇa was just dancing with Rādhā, playing His flute. He inquired from the priest, "What are the pastimes of this God?" 

"Oh, He is the Supreme Enjoyer. *Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān*." He is fulfilling everyone else's desire while simultaneously having loving pastimes with His devotees in Vṛndāvana. 

He said, "That is the God I want to worship! That must be God, because God is the supreme enjoyer." 

So if we are looking for happiness—and we are looking for happiness, aren't we?—this is the age of Kali. Quite the age of Kali. There is so much disagreement between family members, between neighbors, between counties, between states, between countries. One day we may see interplanetary, intergalactic wars; who knows? This is Kali-yuga. We even fight within our own minds and hearts. But this is one thing that we can all agree on here, regardless—American, Canadian, Indian, Chinese, black, white, brown, yellow, green from Mars, Jewish, Sikh, Hindu, Muslim, Christian—there is one thing we can all agree on: we want to be happy. 

Your life is not producing that happiness for us. Something is there, but not enough to satisfy the hankering of the soul. Where do we find that happiness? In God's association, in our loving relationship with God. That is the highest happiness. 

So, if you are seeking—a sincere seeker of happiness—my humble request: those of you visiting us for the first time, take this mantra, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. You need look no further than chanting this mantra in the association of the Lord's devotees. 

*Saṁsāra-sarpa-dṛṣṭānāṁ viṣa-nāśana-oṣadhīḥ / kalau yuge asad-dharma-nāśanaṁ śrīmad-vaiṣṇava-sevanam.* In this miserable age of Kali, those who have been bitten by the serpent of Kali-yuga, they shall get relief, Bhagavān, by chanting the names of Bhagavān, Śrīmad-vaiṣṇava, even in the association of the Lord's devotees, particularly coming together like this—many hearts together singing, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. 

There is example and there is precept. In English, we say that example is higher than precept, but in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we say both are important: the Bhāgavatam and the person-Bhāgavatam. So we have the philosophy and we have the people who demonstrate that philosophy by studying this great philosophy, by living in the association of devotees, and performing a *yuga-dharma*—the process for spiritual enlightenment in this age to achieve love of God. We just have to sit with this harmonium, that drum, pair of kartāls, and the beautiful example of that little girl dancing and singing, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. 

And if you are doubting anything I say, if some doubts are lingering in your mind, then I say to you: the proof of the pudding is in the eating. If I tell you, "I have one very nice preparation here, some sweet rice," and you say, "No, no, I don't know, maybe," you can't make a definite decision until you taste the sweet rice. So anyone who has any lingering doubts, unfortunately, about this *yuga-dharma*, this process of developing love of God for becoming happy, before you give up, you have to chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. 

And I guarantee you, once you start chanting, you will never stop, because it is so nice, it is so wonderful. Especially when it is presented by such devotees as Gauravāṇī. You are all blessed this evening. He is one of my favorite *kīrtanīyas*, and Viśvambhara and Badra-Hari and Bṛndā and the little girl. You don't know how fortunate you are. His—Gauravāṇī’s—melodies, his way of, his stage presence, his way of speaking, his intelligence in presenting the philosophy, and just his countenance, his demeanor... what person in the association of such devotees would not take up the chanting of *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*? 

So what is the conclusion? The conclusion is that we will now chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. I thank all of you for your attention. I won't speak too long because the evening is drawing to a close, and tomorrow we are going to have another program at the temple where we will also be speaking some more philosophy, but mainly we will be chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa*. Badra-Hari Prabhu, myself, Gauravāṇī, Viśvambhara will all be chanting. So if you have time, eleven o'clock until three or four o'clock in the afternoon, we will be having *kīrtana*. 

Now you have heard a little bit of the philosophy; that is enough. You don't have to hear more than that. Who is the *yuga-avatāra*? What is the *yuga-dharma* He is presenting? And what is the goal? Happiness and love of God. You don't need to know more than that. I could go on a long-winded lecture for four hours. My dear God-brother, Radhanath Swami, he can speak for four hours; I can also speak for four hours. But one time I heard Prabhupāda say in London, "Philosophy is for fools. Philosophy is meant to convince us to take up the authorized process and spend as much time as we can chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*."""