All right, everyone, welcome to Sada Sangha Retreat 2023. This year, we're holding it in Dallas, Texas, here in America. You can feel the atmosphere surcharged with excitement. Everyone's very excited. We are expecting over 3,000 people to be here. We've rented a big facility, the Marriott hotel, with a big convention hall and so forth and so on.

Three thousand people!

I was just thinking that the cooks, we have to cook 9,000 plates of prasadam every day. That's a big feat, 9,000 plates of prasadam every day. We have many special guests coming. I could consider everyone who comes to this festival to be a special guest.

They're all Vaishnavas and Vaishnavis, very wonderful devotees, of course, mostly from here in America. And this is the whole principle of this festival. It's a kirtan festival, of course, with a lot of prasadam, but the main theme is sadhu-sanga, associating with devotees.

We learn from Chaitanya Charitamrita and other scriptures there are five primary activities in Krishna consciousness: chanting Hare Krishna, studying or hearing Srimad Bhagavatam, worshiping the deity, living or visiting a holy place like Vrindavan or Mayapur, and associating with devotees.

And of course, chanting Hare Krishna is a Yuga Dharma.

It's the principal activity for becoming self-realized, developing a love for Krishna.

But really, without devotees, it really wouldn't be possible. One time, Srila Prabhupada said, "Anyone who thinks that he can become Krishna conscious living outside the association of devotees is living in a hallucination." It's so important.

You just consider, like chanting Hare Krishna, actually, in this age, the process of chanting Hare Krishna is congregational chanting.

That's what Lord Chaitanya introduced, not bhajana alone, although that's helpful, but chanting in the association of devotees. Hearing Srimad Bhagavatam, we have to hear Bhagavatam from a Vaishnava, a devotee, a representative of Krishna.

Living in a holy place, when we go to a holy place, we want to associate with the devotees who are there so we can understand the glories of the dhama. And worshiping the deity, our favorite devotee, our Founder-Acharya, our spiritual master, what we know about deity worship.

So, sadhu-sanga is so important. So, devotees have been waiting a long time for this festival because of the pandemic in the years before, etc. They're really looking forward to it. Yes, we've got devotees coming from all over the country.

Probably one of the biggest festivals outside of our New York Rathayatra in this country, all for the purpose of sadhu-sanga. Classes every day, kirtan all day, prasadam. It's such a big, big event. You could see some of the videos here, how the preparations are going.

It's massive. And one time, Prabhupada said that Krishna consciousness is nice when it's expanding.

So, this is our 10th anniversary. It's our biggest. It's expanding, and I hope it brings pleasure to Srila Prabhupada to see all of his disciples and grand-disciples and great-grand-disciples, his followers, enjoying this event focused on devotee association, which is crucial to our advancement in devotional service.

So please enjoy the videos that come out of this event and chant Hare Krishna, and your life will be sublime in the association of wonderful devotees.

Well, glorious. Presence. Today. [Kirtan] Hare Krishna.

Hi. And specifically, we chant this Hare Krishna mantra in any situation in life, at any time.

We can feel the presence of God. We can be in the presence of God through this transcendental sound vibration. And in that presence, there is shelter. And as we seek shelter according to the sincerity of our heart, we can actually be connected with the beauty, with the grace, and the love of God.

And this is the goal of chanting. By cultivating this state of mind, we could realize that God, the value of associating with sincere devotees, the value of chanting the holy names of the Lord, hearing the glories of the Lord, and rendering selfless service to the Lord – that's the real treasure of life.

The world is full of distractions. We come on sacred pilgrimages like the Sadhu Sangha Retreat, fill our minds, fill our hearts, and fill our lives with an experience of what is really important. We should prioritize in our life. And then to apply that gift we have received to our choices every day, to be happy always.

Thank you. Pleasure to Krishna.

It makes me happy. It makes Krishna happy.

It makes... Oh my goodness. I tend to be happy. Chanting connects me with the Supreme Lord Krishna.

Once I start chanting, I forget everything in this material world. I am trying to be happy. I really love it. I just want to get that taste of love for Krishna.

Trying to be happy because I love it. I'm exposed to Krishna as possible.

I guess it makes me happy. It's good for the soul. It makes me happy for sure because it fits my soul. Makes me feel happy. It's the best feeling in the whole world for love, for happiness. The true Prabhupada said it best: "We chant Hare Krishna to be able to chant more Hare Krishna."