Hare Krishna,

The sadhu sanga retreat has evolved into a major event in America which attracts many devotees not only from America but from all over the world. Imagine, after we opened the registration, eight minutes within eight minutes all the accommodations on the site were booked out.

Now we have two thousand plus participants in the retreat and the numbers are gradually and steadily increasing. We have to ask ourselves, what is the magic that works here?

What is the attractive force?

I can say it's a buffet, many things which His Holiness Indradyumna Swami Maharaja has expertly put together. The center is chanting the holy name with so many devotees, like-minded devotees who have come just to do that. We know when there's group petition, Lord Krishna is more inclined to come and appear.

So when many people come together and sing the holy names in kirtan, that reaches the ears of the Lord, and He responds. He responds by coming and being present in a few ways. One is, He purifies the heart in His form as the holy name.

The second is, so many devotees when they come together, rise in consciousness because they have Krishna and Krishna's holy name as the foundation.

So they talk on high spiritual subjects, they encourage each other. "I have given up sense gratification," a place you can also do it. They will encourage each other to do the next step in their spiritual life. Another aspect is there are many senior devotees who are invited, and there's so many.

Not everyone can give a lecture, but this every morning after the morning program, a Bhagavatam class by one who has something really important to say to his audience. In many ways, because of the many elements which come together, the center is the whole.

The center, the Holy Name, devotees who rise together to a high level of consciousness, and senior devotees who share their realizations with the devotees, and many other elements. For instance, first-class prasadam. Therefore, there is a buffet here in sadhu sanga, which nourishes everyone who comes, a pilgrim, wanderer, but also a person who has heard about kirtan in the many yoga programs and is a newcomer.

Everyone is nourished at this buffet of sadhu sanga. There's one last point which I would like to make. You can practice bhakti at home, you can read sacred scriptures, you can chant japa, you can also do kirtan with a few friends, you could cook prasadam, you can practice many or most of the items of *panchanga-bhakti*, but there's one thing which you cannot do at home.

You cannot fit 2,000 people in your apartment and see when they sing how they share that total consciousness with each other and increment to the step by step lift each other. In this way, sadhu sanga is not only a nourishing meal, now it is also a powerful elevator in which 2,000 and more people fit, which together are raised on the spiritual platform.

I really want to request all of you who see this sadhu sanga program online, on Facebook or wherever, so really come here because there's a difference looking at it from a computer or hearing about it from friends as opposed to being there, feeling the atmosphere, the rise, and experiencing how bhakti increases in your heart and how you are lifted to a spiritual platform.

So please everyone come to the next sadhu sanga and make a plan and be with us.