"*00304*.*
"Everybody, hear.

This festival principle gives, like you could say, a quantum leap—a quantum leap in one's spiritual life. You know, we’re going day by day in our spiritual lives, but in the association of so many devotees, with so much kīrtana, so many amazing kīrtanīyas, such delicious prasādam, such a nice place—it's the best of the best of the best, and we need that from time to time.

There’s that verse that a moment’s association with a devotee can begin one on the path of perfection. What to speak if you have so many thousands of devotees? We had 4,000 devotees this year here at this event and in a wonderful place. This is a huge resort with full facilities. Everyone had nice rooms. We had a beautiful auditorium for kīrtana. The prasādam was out of this world, as it is every time we do Sādhu-saṅga retreat.

I first attended the Sādhu-saṅga festival in 2019. I was getting interested in yoga, meditation, and music, and kīrtana is where all three of these really converge. I vividly remember meeting some of the most kind, generous, and spiritually deep people I had ever encountered in my life, and to this day, many of them remain my good friends and spiritual mentors. After that festival, I continued attending bhakti events around the world and really deepened my practice and started chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa as a daily spiritual practice.

This is my first time at Sādhu-saṅga. Sādhu-saṅga by far has been so wonderful. You can do literally anything. There’s a pool here. There’s wonderful kīrtana. You meet with wonderful people, your friends, dancing, singing, chanting. Literally amazing. I cannot recommend anything more than this.

For the prasādam, there’s a lot of different options. Like yesterday night, we had Mexican dinner with a lot of stuff, and every single meal is different.

I love coming to Sādhu-saṅga for the service. Getting to serve devotees is something that is really important to me. This year, I feel really lucky. I got to help be an MC with His Holiness Indradyumna Swami Mahārāja. That was a really fun and new experience for me. But most of all, it's really wonderful to see such a diverse collection of devotees, getting to know them, talk to them, hear their stories. There’s really no other event like it, and that’s something that I appreciate.

I’ve been coming to this festival since the beginning, you know, when it was with two or 300 people in Austin, Texas. And now we have about 3,000 to 4,000 people that come to this festival. It’s one of the best kīrtana festivals in North America, and I would highly recommend that you bring your friends, family, and all the people that you love to share this kīrtana with everybody.

It’s my first time at Sādhu-saṅga festival and I am absolutely amazed at how many people showed up for all the devotees who came to do kīrtana here. It was just absolute bliss, and I personally feel it was a life-transforming experience because just a week before I came, I had no idea I was going to make it, but the organizers very kindly personally helped me. The devotees are so helpful, and the kīrtanas are ecstatic. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Here in America, Memorial Day weekend means remembering all the soldiers who served in the military for so many years and gave their lives. But this festival is giving us life—remembering all the great souls who brought this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra to us, especially Śrīla Prabhupāda.

The Sādhu-saṅga event is what’s known in Sanskrit as *yajña*. *Yajña* means to do something to give of yourself to the Supreme. It takes a long time to set up. It takes a long time to dismantle. But inside, there’s a kernel. And when you can take that kernel, the essence of spirituality, and ingest it at one time, it systemically changes your whole life. So that’s what takes place here, in the matter of especially what’s called the *yuga-dharma*, or the prime practice for the age, which is the chanting of the names of the Supreme. In this case, we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. It is wonderful to see you here for one of the events. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So join us each year. It’s been many years. Some of the devotees coming here have been coming for many, many years. It’s a deep experience. Let me say it’s a deep experience even for the people who come for the first time because it’s very powerful. Congregational chanting of the holy names is the *yuga-dharma* for this age. And here we have 4,000 hearts singing out to Kṛṣṇa, seeking His blessings. So please come Memorial Day weekend. Spend your weekend with us and relish Kṛṣṇa consciousness in a big way and make big progress back home, back to Godhead. Thank you. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""