This festival, in a way, is a manifestation of His Holiness's heart. You can see here what he has been doing for over 50 years, chanting Hare Krishna.

Now, more and more people have come to join us at the festival, and the location is no longer the streets or big festivals in Europe. The location is a place like this, which we have rented only for this purpose, for nothing else.

The devotees can come together, friends can join, people from outside can come and sing the Hare Krishna Mahamantra.

These gatherings, this wonderful location, chanting and dancing with thousands of other people—it is the most wonderful experience. It is enlivening, it is uplifting, it is like a comfort blanket for the soul. So when we come to these places and we see these extraordinary gatherings with so many people and majestic scenery, we get that much closer to feeling the presence of our divine Supreme best friend.

These are our near and dear ones. Because now, when you have a sangha, it means like the coming together of rivers. And the sangha is for what?

Sadhu sangha. The name of this festival is Holy Association, or the sacred coming together to remind each other of who we are. I am not Indian, I am not American, I am not Australian. I am the soul. And I have an eternal relationship with my eternal beloved source.

And this practice of kirtan, or japa chanting on beads, or chanting with love, with melody and music—these are all ways for reawakening the soul's identity, eternal identity, in relationship with the divine. Serving the guru or serving Krishna, serving the deity is as important as it is.

Because Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura says in one of his songs, this is a dynamic combination: these three things—serving the Vaiṣṇavas, serving the spiritual master, and serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It brings forth this bhakti-latā-bīja, the seed of devotion, in the seat of the heart.

And we have been bereft of that for two and a half or three years because of the pandemic. It's been very painful. And there's another saying that separation makes the heart grow fonder. So what is most dear to Vaiṣṇavas are you, Guru, and Vaiṣṇava.

So we were missing these, especially the association of the Vaiṣṇavas. We were missing that so much. So I've been seeing here, on the first day of the festival, as devotees are arriving, I'm seeing devotees who haven't seen each other in years but are very close and very dear friends because we're serving the same purpose, Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

They're running up to each other and embracing, and their tears are flowing, and families that have been, you know, separated, they're coming together. So this, this is, I feel, this is the predominant mood here: Vaiṣṇava sangha, Vaiṣṇava association. It's an important ingredient in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and especially when it's been missing for so long, it's just, ah, it's hard to put into words.

But I think, you know, what I'm talking about, and that's happening here. Fifteen hundred devotees, many senior devotees again, many good kirtan leaders. And what does a festival mean?

Festival means kirtan, classes, and delicious prasādam. And I think this festival, this, um, sadhu-sangha retreat, that's the hallmark of this festival. It's famous for these things, for the kirtans, for the association, for the dancing, for the singing, and, and the prasādam.

We have prasādam three times a day. One of the top cooks in our movement, he's here cooking for the devotees. So everything's set to go. With a beautiful, again, this temple is a beautiful surrounding. It's kind of like being in Vṛndāvana, being in Vṛndāvana where Kṛṣṇa had His festive atmosphere as well, dancing with His Gopis and playing with His friends and eating prasādam with His friends.

So this is all devotional service and practice.