Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

But first, the revealer of the Dham. So today we will finish our series on the samādhis of our ācāryas. It's always difficult to finish a series, but this will be lecture number ten. And it will be a brief description about Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

We spoke about him extensively last year, along with his *saṅkīrtan* sung by his followers each year on his glorious disappearance day festival. Afterwards, we will conclude with a summary of the entire series. So, of course, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is one of the six Gosvāmīs glorified in the *Ṣaṭ-gosvāmī-aṣṭakam* by Śrīnivāsācārya. "I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī." In the spiritual world, we know that Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is Rati-mañjarī.

And in the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu 500 years ago, he was a very intimate associate of the Lord. And by the order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī actually remained a lifelong *brahmacārī*. His service to the *saṅkīrtana* mission was the constant chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa and reading, and even more so, reciting Śrīmad Bhāgavatam to the devotees in Vṛndāvana and in Jagannātha Purī.

He satisfied Lord Caitanya by his exceptional cooking. He was a very good cook. And his *kīrtana* performances, when he was singing *kīrtana*, which won him the title, I read that, as *kīrtana-ācārya*. I read that. And when he came to Vṛndāvana on the order of Mahāprabhu, Vaiṣṇavas on the level of Śrīla Rūpa and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī would regularly come and hear his lectures on the Bhāgavatam.

It is described that his recitation of Bhāgavatam was unparalleled. And, well, partly because when he would sing the verses, he could sing them in four different beautiful melodies. It's described as sweet as a cuckoo. It is said he was so absorbed in Kṛṣṇa-kathā that he never heard or spoke of worldly topics.

And then it says, "What to speak of criticizing devotees?" He believed that all Vaiṣṇavas are sincerely serving the Lord according to their realizations, and therefore one should overlook their faults.

This was his vision. We also know that through his inspiration, a wealthy disciple built the famous Govindajī temple, or Radha-Govinda temple, in Vṛndāvana.

It is described he was a scholar in all subjects, although interestingly enough, he didn't write any books like the other Gosvāmīs. And when he departed this world in the year 1579, fearing that Muslims might desecrate his sacred form, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī had his body cremated, and his ashes were placed in two *samādhis*: one at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and another in that famous area of Vṛndāvana called 64 *samādhis* area.

So his ashes were put in two different places, two different *samādhis*. His *saṅkīrtana* *kīrtana* sung each year on his disappearance day actually goes into more details about his illustrious qualities. So, like the other ācāryas we discussed in the series, we'll recite his *kīrtana*.

It goes like this: "Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was always absorbed in remembering the transcendental qualities and pastimes of Rādhā-Mādhava, thus he didn't know whether it was day or night. There is no comparison to the strength of his *bhajana*. He was a beloved disciple of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

He lived in Vārāṇasī with his father, Tapan Miśra. Lord Gorācaṅda once visited his home. Feeling intense happiness, Raghunātha served the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya for two weeks while living at home. Raghunātha helped his father and constantly chanted the names of Lord Caitanya.

After his father's disappearance, he came to Nīlācala-dhāma, Jagannātha Purī, to take shelter of Godha-hari's lotus feet. Then Mahāprabhu sent him to Vṛndāvana after showering his mercy and blessings upon him.

Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa embraced the teachings of Lord Caitanya fully within his heart. He met Śrīla Rūpa and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī in Rādhā-dhāma. Seeing Raghunātha, the Gosvāmīs felt overjoyed, floating in the nectar ocean of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa *prema-rasa*. Together they relished Kṛṣṇa-kathā and tasted spiritual sentiments.

Sometimes they showed ecstatic symptoms such as crying, shivering, and hair standing on end. All the devotees would meet on the banks of the Yamunā, feeling the happiness of pure love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They would laugh and joke regularly.

Raghunātha recited Śrīmad Bhāgavatam. His words sounded just like nectar. Gosvāmī displayed the topmost example of renunciation. He was completely pure and overflowing with *prema*. Melodious and pleasing words always decorated his speech. Birds and beasts would shiver in bliss and stones would melt upon hearing his nectarian Bhāgavata-kathā.

Both Gopāla Bhaṭṭa and Raghunātha worshiped Śrīla Rūpa and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīs. This brought up Baladeva Dāsa, the author says, 'I am drowning in the sea of sense gratification. Please, O Bhaṭṭa Raghunātha, be kind, accept me, and give me the shelter of your lotus feet.'" Wow.

So, in summary, this series, in summary of this series, *samādhis* that contain the bodies of great saints are, we could say, like temples where devotees can pray, to worship, and remember the Lord's associates, and in doing so, advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

That we've all understood, I think. A *samādhi* is a tomb that contains the remains of the great Vaiṣṇava, and therefore it's a place of intense spiritual potency, almost like, you could say, a juncture between the material and spiritual worlds.

So we, as members of this society, should regularly visit the *samādhis* of our ācāryas and saints that we discussed in the series when we're in Vṛndāvana or Māyāpura, or in the case of Jagannātha Purī, the *samādhi*, but including, first and foremost, I would say the *samādhi* of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda here in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

I think one of the lectures in this series I said that's the most sacred place in creation for members of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. Doing so, we can emulate the example of Śrīnivāsācārya. I was reading *Bhakti-ratnākara*, 500 years ago, when Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī requested Śrīnivāsācārya, Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, and Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita, heroes, to take the books of the Six Gosvāmīs to Bengal.

Famous pastime. Śrīnivāsācārya visited first the various deities of Vṛndāvana to pay his respects and to beg for their blessings.

It's also stated that he visited several of the *samādhis* of the Gosvāmīs, beginning with Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī's *samādhi*, whereupon visiting that *samādhi*, he fell on the ground and with great emotion, he famously called out, "O Prabhu Sanātana!

Offender!

The fallen and unfortunate!" He said like that.

Actually, I was reading that Śrīnivāsācārya was deeply attached to Sanātana Gosvāmī. Lord Caitanya respectfully referred to him as the "greatest scholar" and would often call him his "favorite devotee." Like that, as the greatest scholar and his favorite devotee. And there's a reference for that, *Bhakti-ratnākara* 6.273–275.

It's interesting. So, while they're at the *samādhi*-mandir of Sanātana Gosvāmī, it's described that Śrīnivās remembered the prayer that Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī had composed to glorify Sanātana Gosvāmī, a famous prayer by Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī. That prayer is as follows: "He remembered this prayer: 'I was unwilling to drink the nectar of devotional service possessed of renunciation, but Sanātana Gosvāmī, out of his causeless mercy, made me drink it, even though I was otherwise unable to do so.

Therefore, he is an ocean of mercy. He is very compassionate to fallen souls like me, and thus it is my duty to offer my respectful obeisances unto his lotus feet.' Just so, Sanātana Gosvāmī." Now it's described that sitting beside Sanātana Gosvāmī's *samādhi*, Śrīnivāsācārya lost control of himself, and he cried incessantly, preparing himself to go to Bengal.

This is all happening. And only after some time, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī was able to pacify him. So, Śrīnivās then continued on to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's *samādhi*, where he offered his respects again and again. This time being careful to control his emotions, but I was reading, when he bowed down before the *samādhi*, tears again fell from his eyes as he remembered the wonderful characteristics of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

It is said that his heart melted just like wax melts in fire. So poetic. His heart melted at the *samādhi*-mandir of Rūpa Gosvāmī, just like wax melts in fire. You can imagine wax melting in fire. There, he offered a prayer composed by Kavi Karṇapūra, a beautiful prayer.

I'll also recite that prayer glorifying Rūpa Gosvāmī: "Indeed, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, whose dear friend was the exact replica of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and he was very, very dear to the Lord, being the embodiment of Mahāprabhu's ecstatic love. Rūpa Gosvāmī was naturally very beautiful.

He very carefully followed the principles enunciated by the Lord, and he was a competent person to explain properly the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu expanded his mercy to Rūpa Gosvāmī, just so he could render service by writing transcendental literatures." It's described his side, and he said, "O Śrī Rūpa, when will you give me the shelter of your lotus feet?

When will you give me the shelter of your lotus feet?" Then Śrīnivās thought, "This is really beautiful.

What he was thinking?

Had Rūpa Gosvāmī not been born in Kali Yuga, who would be inspired to distribute Kṛṣṇa consciousness throughout the world?

Who would renounce all pleasures, worship Vṛndāvana, and discuss books on devotional service?

Who could understand Kṛṣṇa's Vṛndāvana pastimes?

And who could explain the loving exchanges between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa?" Then Śrīnivās prayed: "All glories to Śrī Rūpa, the jewel of all ascetics!

Lord Caitanya's gift to the world!

That great soul whose devotion to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa was unflinching, and who, upon giving up all worldly pleasures, sang the glories of the Groves of Vṛndāvana.

In his absence, I have become an orphan." This is all so much nectar. So *Bhakti-ratnākara* says that after completing worship of Rūpa Gosvāmī's *samādhi*, Śrīnivāsācārya received Śrī Rūpa's mercy. After completing the worship of Rūpa Gosvāmī's *samādhi*, Śrīnivāsācārya received Śrī Rūpa's mercy.

And by following Śrīnivās's example, we too can be recipients of all these ācāryas' mercy by visiting the *samādhis* in the mood in which he did, and reciting beautiful prayers like that. So that's why we did this series on the *samādhis*.

So much can be gained. One can make so much progress by visiting these *samādhis*. Now, it's recommended that after offering praise and prayers at a *samādhi*, devotees should also do some menial service at that *samādhi*. It's our tradition, like sweeping or cleaning the *samādhi* or the surrounding area.

And if one desires, he can assist with the *samādhi*'s ongoing maintenance and beautification by giving some donation. I think it also goes without saying that if one is in the proximity of an ācārya *samādhi*, like if one's in Vṛndāvana or Māyāpura, then one should definitely try and visit that ācārya on either his appearance or disappearance day.

Other than the appearance and disappearance days, Vaiṣṇavas celebrate the disappearance day more elaborately. We discussed this in a previous class, actually. The reason is that by the time a great soul leaves this world, his accomplishments and purity have been made obvious by the passage of time.

Therefore, in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava calendar, we see that the appearance days of all ācāryas may not be recorded. There are many ācāryas, and you know, some of them, their appearance days are not recorded, although their disappearance days are always recorded.

I checked it. The disappearance day of the ācārya is always recorded, although their appearance days may not be recorded, because so much emphasis is given to the disappearance day. And according to our means, we should observe these disappearance days with great festivals.

Of course, if one doesn't have, you know, the finances to do so or the facilities to do so, that's okay. It's just the mood, the *bhāva*, in which one observes the disappearance day. And the following is found in *Jaiva Dharma* by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, a practical example of how simple such a festival can be.

And we'll conclude today's lecture and the series with this simple example, how even, you know, in the privacy of your own home, somewhere in the world, you can nicely observe the festival in a simple but loving way. And here I am, and I'm quoting: "He writes, 'Once Gaura-śo bhāba Babājī announced to his servant Bihārī, Bihārī, this afternoon we will observe a great festival to honor Sanātana Gosvāmī's passing.' Bihārī replied, 'But Babājī Mahārāja, we have no ingredients with which to prepare a festival.' Babājī Mahārāja raised his hands and said, 'We have the main ingredient for a festival.

We don't need anything else. We will simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and fast, and in that way, enjoy a great celebration.'" Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Well, thank you. It's been wonderful researching and studying and delivering these lectures about these *samādhis* of our ācāryas. I hope that you've appreciated and benefited, and when you come to Vṛndāvana or Māyāpura or Jagannātha Purī, you'll remember and visit these *samādhis* accordingly, as we discussed.

So, we'll finish here, and, um, I'll think of another series this week and be back again next Friday. We're back in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

We just came from Ṛṣikeśa, preparing a festival there we'll be doing in March, but it's always good to go home and, um, and share it with you. See you next Friday. Back home, Back to Godhead. Hey, Cāndāla!

All glories!