Dear devotees, a warm welcome back again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. We are continuing with our series on the samādhis of the ācāryas, and this will be part six. In our last lecture, we discussed *sūcaka-kīrtanas*—specific kīrtanas glorifying a departed ācārya which are sung each year on his departure day. In that lecture, we read at the end the *sūcaka-kīrtana*, almost like a poem you could say, that is sung in Vṛndāvana and Bengal on the disappearance day of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. We’ve discussed many times how Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī was and is very dear to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, but so was his elder brother, as we know, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. In Vṛndāvana it is said, *rupa-sanatana pyaro jaiso devi dashrath dularo*, which means that the two brothers, Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana, are as famous as the two darlings of Dasharatha, the two darlings of Dasharatha meaning Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa.

Now, regarding Lord Caitanya’s pastimes, there is a famous poem also in Vṛndāvana written by an anonymous poet about these two transcendental brothers, Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. The poet writes—it’s so beautiful—"Two doves are flying over the nectarian ocean of love for Lord Gorācandra. Their feathers make the sounds of kīrtana everywhere in the sky. Placing the message of love in their beaks, they roam about intoxicated. The softness in their nature melts the stone-like material world in the same way that wax melts. They were bound up in the cage of divine love for Gorā, but that merciful Gorā had them fly away from his tender hands to spread the message. The two doves are none other than the two brothers Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana, who are now dancing in ecstasy in Śrī Vṛndāvana. This servant pays all attention to their actions, words, service, and scriptures." We thank that anonymous poet, whoever he was, but actually, many Vṛndāvana poets have expressed their love for Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. I found a quote by the poet Vyāsa Dāsa, previously in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, wherein he writes—it’s also extraordinary—he writes, "Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana are two gems embedded in the golden pendant of Śrī Rādhā. I pray they will be the jewels in my devotional crown."

So, during their time in Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī used to send his writings for proofreading—you could say for editing—to Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. But despite being very busy with that service, Sanātana Gosvāmī, as we know, he used to do Govardhana-parikramā every day. He also used to visit the residents of Vṛndāvana to inquire how they were doing. He would go everywhere, you know; he was very social like that. He’d visit the families and he’d sit with them and, you know, inquire, "How are you doing? How are the finances? How are your crops growing? Would you like a name for your new child? Any problems?" Like that. So all the Vrajavāsīs or Vraja-bāsīs were very attached to him, and he would go actually everywhere in Vṛndāvana. It’s described, carrying an earthen pot in one hand and a stick in the other. So the Vrajavāsīs, I was reading, they used to call him *baḍa bābā*, which means the elevated sādhu, and the older ladies of Vraja, they would feed him and treat him with love like he was their own son. And we discussed before, I think last year, when he was becoming very old, he had to stop his Girirāja-parikramā, so Kṛṣṇa himself famously gave him a large Govardhana-śilā, which he could circumambulate every day. Kṛṣṇa came from that śilā. Now, it’s difficult to discuss, but the day in which he departed this world at Govardhana Hill at Mānasa-gaṅgā Lake, it’s known as Guru Pūrṇimā in India. Traditionally, it’s the day that the people in India offer special worship to their gurus.

In Vṛndāvana, they say that when Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī departed, it’s also a very beautiful quote: "One of the two stars in Mahāprabhu’s lotus eyes disappeared from this world." One of the two stars in Mahāprabhu’s lotus eyes disappeared from this world. And as the news spread around Vraja that day, people began gathering at Vraja-aditya-ṭīlā—that’s the hill where Sanātana Gosvāmī established the Madana-mohana temple—and it’s said that such a crowd was never seen before in Vṛndāvana and has never been seen since. Just imagine, it’s said that such a crowd was never seen before in Vṛndāvana and hasn't been seen since. So many people, even today, whenever old Vrajavāsīs see a big crowd in Vṛndāvana, they say, "Muḍiyā."

Which means, "Oh, a crowd like on Muḍiyā-pūno." Muḍiyā-pūno is the disappearance day of Sanātana Gosvāmī. Now, all the Vrajavāsīs came that day with their families to show the love and the care that Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī had shown towards them. And in Vedic culture, there’s a tradition that when the father dies, then his sons and grandsons, they shave their heads and beards. Therefore, all the men in Vraja and the older boys, they shaved their heads on that disappearance day of Sanātana Gosvāmī, indicating that the father of the holy Vraja had passed away. Because he was like a father; besides all his other duties—editing Rūpa Gosvāmī, going on Govardhana-parikramā, and so many other things—he was like the father. So shaving in the language is called *muḍiyā*, and the day that Sanātana Gosvāmī disappeared was the day of Pūrṇimā, Guru Pūrṇimā, the full moon, which in Vrajavāsī language is called *pūno*. Therefore, in Vṛndāvana, that day of his disappearance is known as Muḍiyā-pūno. Nice details, Muḍiyā-pūno. Now, on that day, you know, approximately 500 years ago, in which Sanātana Gosvāmī departed the world,

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī organized the samādhi ceremony, and again, these things are done quite quickly. Jīva Gosvāmī organized the samādhi ceremony for Sanātana Gosvāmī, of course again, near to the Madana-mohana temple in Vraja. Now, I was able to find some more details about this samādhi ceremony. The samādhi was not dug very deep because it was near the banks of the Yamunā. In those days, the Yamunā River ran very close to that hill where Madana-mohana temple is. Actually, where the river once ran is now the parikramā-mārga around Vṛndāvana; we’re walking down the parikramā-mārga, that’s where the river used to flow. So, the samādhi was not dug very deep. The idea was that the deeper one digs near the banks of the Yamunā, the more water it will find; it’s the nature of a river. If you dig deep next to the river, you’re going to find the river there underneath. So therefore, the samādhi pit was actually only dug two and a half meters deep. Two and a half meters deep, and after Jīva Gosvāmī had Sanātana Gosvāmī placed in samādhi, he then placed garlands from the iṣṭa-dev of Sanātana Gosvāmī, Madana-mohana—a beautiful deity—around Sanātana Gosvāmī’s sacred body. And all the Vrajavāsīs in attendance, they threw coins into the samādhi; I was reading, I could just say, as a gesture of respect and homage, they threw coins in. Now, after the samādhi ceremony, everyone took a bath in the Yamunā. Now, remember how many people were present on that day? It had never been seen before, you know, in that area or anywhere in Vraja. And they all took a bath in the Yamunā, and then they all participated in a 24-hour Harināma-saṅkīrtana around Vṛndāvana. It’s described as both very joyful and very sad; sometimes there’s different emotions mixing in deep Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So they were very sad, of course, because their spiritual father had passed away. I mean, I can imagine there must have also been a river of tears, but of course, they were joyful that Sanātana Gosvāmī went back to his nitya-sevā as a Mañjarī in the spiritual world. So, 24-hour Harināma-kīrtana, and after that, a delicious feast was served. You can imagine how many cooks there had to be, how many fires were burning, and that feast was—I read—first served to the brāhmaṇas of Mathurā and then to the assembled devotees. Such culture. Later, a rich businessman made a small white marble pillar-like monument, I think we discussed that last year, over the samādhi of Sanātana Gosvāmī, and years later, the larger samādhi which we see today, of course, was constructed.

Now, a tradition began soon after Sanātana Gosvāmī departed, where the residents of Vṛndāvana and Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Bengal, Orissa, and greater Uttar Pradesh, they would all come to Govardhana and do parikramā around Girirāja on that day, Guru Pūrṇimā, as a tribute to Sanātana Gosvāmī on his disappearance day. Now these days, I’ve seen that the crowd going around Govardhana on Guru Pūrṇimā each year in Vṛndāvana, it’s massive. Unfortunately, most of the pilgrims have forgotten about the original reason for doing parikramā around Girirāja on that particular day; they just take it as an old tradition or perhaps, you know, they’re doing it in remembrance of their guru who’s passed away. That’s fine, but it all started after the disappearance of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. It was a way that everyone remembered and honored and embraced him to their hearts by doing like he did; he would go every day around Girirāja. So nice. So sometime later, after the departure of all the Ṣaḍ-Gosvāmīs, all the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, including Jīva Gosvāmī, a disciple of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya—but still going back quite some time—a disciple of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya whose name was Rādhā-ballabha Dāsa, he wrote a very beautiful and heartfelt *sūcaka-kīrtana* in the Bengali language for Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī. And I would like to finish my lecture today with that, as we recited the *sūcaka-kīrtana* in our last lecture for Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. So I’d like to recite the *sūcaka-kīrtana* by that wonderful poet. Of course, it’s in Bengali and it’s long, it’s many verses, so I’ll just recite it in English. But I’ve, you know, maybe someday devotees will print these lectures, and so I’ll give whoever does that, I’ll give the text to them so you can read it. Actually, it would be nice, wouldn’t it, if ISKCON devotees could also learn this kīrtana and sing it when we too observe the disappearance day of Sanātana Gosvāmī on Guru Pūrṇimā. Actually, it falls in the month of Āṣāḍha, which means June/July in the western calendar. So I’ll recite this beautiful *sūcaka-kīrtana*; it’s just full of nectar. 

"When Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī accepted the renounced order of life," the author writes, "Sanātana Gosvāmī was in prison, greatly distressed. He thought within his mind, 'Gorāhari has mercifully delivered Śrī Rūpa, but He has neglected this fallen one. I am bound hand and neck by the sinful reactions of my previous karma, and this has locked me in this prison with the rope of Your mercy. O Gorā, please firmly tie up my hair and drag me to Your lotus feet. Behind me is a sea of unlimited depth, on both sides is fire, and before me stands a hunter with his arrow aimed. In this way, a she-deer is entrapped in great danger and is crying in grief. O Lord, please save me from this disaster. You effortlessly liberated Jagāi and Mādhāi, just as Vāsudeva liberated Ajāmila. At least with the shadow of Your mercy, give me the shelter of Your lotus feet, which are just like a boat. Then the whole world will glorify Your merciful deeds. Kindly lift me out of this deep ocean of suffering; no one else can free me from this state.'" And then the author says, right after receiving a confidential letter from his brother Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana was thinking like this. Thus he felt inspired remembering Lord Gaurāṅga. This Rādhā-ballabha Dāsa says after reading Rūpa’s letter, Sanātana felt pleased, but he kept the letter a secret. Now it’s no longer a secret. We thank you, wherever you are, no doubt in the spiritual world, for sharing that nectar with us.

So we’ll finish here. It’s a little short, but after the Polish tour, our summer Tour Festival of India, we immediately went on tour of Europe. And right now I find myself in Germany, our beautiful community here in southeastern Germany, Simhachalam. Many wonderful devotees here; it’s a big property and the presiding deity is Prahlāda-Nṛsiṁha. I’m especially happy to be here. They are keeping us really engaged with lots of kīrtanas, classes, and the tour of the farm. And we went on Harināma yesterday. I brought 30 devotees with me, 30 devotees, so they said, "Let’s go on Harināma, you can teach us how you do Harināma on the Polish tour." So with another 30 devotees who have come from other places, we had about 60 or 70 devotees and we went to this town—not such a big town, I forget the name in German—but nearby. And it was wonderful, and the people loved it. And I saw that the formula of a well-organized, colorful, festive Harināma party, it just melts the hearts of anyone anywhere in the world. And the German people were dancing with us, the men and the women; they were dancing in circles. And this formula that Mahāprabhu brought, it’s perfect and complete. 

So we’ve been here for a few days, and then we’re traveling by train; we’re taking a train tomorrow to Budapest, about a six-hour journey. And then we’re taking a bus to New Vraja-dhāma, Śrī Rūpa’s wonderful community in the southern part of Hungary. We’ll be there for a few days, and then from there we fly from Budapest to Paris, France. We’re going to do Harināma. Right now I’m in Paris like the old days in the early 70s, and yeah, and then we take a bus down to New Māyāpur. I haven’t been there in 36 years, but to see my beloved godbrothers and god-sisters and all the wonderful devotees there. And then after that, we fly to Warsaw, stay one day, next day I fly back home, back to Śrī Vṛndāvana. Of course, we consider everywhere home because, you know, home is where the heart is, and our heart is with the saṅkīrtana movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, so everywhere it’s like home. But Vraja is special, of course. We’ll continue with our lectures there, this Vṛndāvana series, and also we’ll be going out and planning every day for Kārtika-parikramā. This year, we’re going to do all new places, all the places we’ve been describing for the last two and a half years in this series. We’re going to take devotees there, and four or five hundred devotees, so that’ll also take a lot of preparation. So I’ll be preparing for that, and then we’ll see where we go after that. So, let you know what we’re doing. 

So thank you. We’ll be back next Friday; I think we’ll speak on Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s samādhi ceremony. So thank you for being with us. 

Śrī Śrī... take all the fallen souls with us. All glorious to you.