Hare Krishna!

Very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vrṛndāvana. So, we have been discussing the subject of our ācāryas and other great devotees' samādhis in Śrī Vrṛndāvana. Dawn. Actually, I was reading the other day that in the past, some renowned sādhus, out of humility, actually told their followers not to place them in samādhi when they departed, because they didn't want people to worship them after their death, just like they didn't desire worship when they were alive.

Another reason is that some devotees might come to the samādhi and ask them for some material boon, and that ācārya or sādhū in samādhi, who was serving the Lord in His eternal līlā, would get disturbed in His service. Hare Krishna!

Such humility. So now let's discuss about the different rituals in placing ācāryas and devotees in samādhi in previous times. Big temples would own, uh, palanquins, big hollowenings, which the head of the temple, the mahanta, would use to go around Vrṛndāvana to have darśana of deities in different temples.

And, you know, meat sādhus. And if any other big sādhū came from outside Vrṛndāvana, he could rent that palanquins for the same purpose. Now, it was also used for taking an ācārya on his, uh, final parikramā around Vrṛndāvana after his departure.

Now, the tradition in India is that if someone dies during the day, they must be cremated before sunset. And if they die at night, they must be cremated as the sun rises. However, if a saint or advanced devotee passes away, a different procedure is observed.

Traditionally, uh, they are placed on the palanquin, which we mentioned, and taken on parikramā to visit the seven main temples in Vrṛndāvana before being placed in samādhi. And in preparation for this, the body of such a sādhū is, is bound with, um, soft cotton ropes.

First of all, one around his legs, one around his waist or his chest, and one around his head or sometimes his neck. Then a red or white sheet with no border, it's described no border, is placed over the palanquin.

Then the sādhū's body is bathed and turmeric is spread all over his body. Then his, uh, body is marked with sandalwood paste, with various names of the Lord, on his chest, his forehead, arms, and, and neck. And then wet Tulasi leaves are placed on his forehead.

Wet because they, they stick there on his forehead. Now, according to Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī and his Saṅkāra Dīpikā, the following mantra at that time should be written on the sādhū's body: "Om Klim." These are the, the bīja mantras.

And the translation is: "I offer my body to this resting place in the ground made out of a mixture of salt and mud. I offer my body to this resting place in the ground made out of a mixture of salt and mud." So then, a small amount of sandalwood paste is placed on, on both of the sādhū's closed eyes, on his body.

And then fragrant water, such as rose water, amber, or karpūra water, is sprinkled on the, on the sādhū's body. And after that, a garland is placed on him. And then, um, he can be placed on the palanquin, which we mentioned.

He's placed in the, uh, padmāsana pose. This is that's the, you said like this, the padmāsana pose, the yogic pose. And then when he's, um, sitting on that palanquin, more water is sprinkled on him from a, uh, copper cup while chanting various names of Kṛṣṇa.

And then the procession begins. The, the parikramā begins with a devotee walking in front with a burning torch in one hand, and on his other hand or his arm is a hanging an earthen pot with smoke billowing out. And as the procession moves towards the seven temples, a big crowd of devotees, a group of devotees are having kīrtana as the procession moves along to those seven temples: Mukunda temple, Rādhā Damodara temple, Rādhā Rāmeśvara temple, Brahmā temple, Rādhā Govinda temple, Rādhā Kulananda temple, and Rādhā Gopinātha temple, the seven major temples in Vrṛndāvana.

Now, when reaching these temples, this palanquin with the sādhū is placed at least five meters, five meters away from the main gate, where at that time the head priest or sometimes an associate of the priests brings the Lord's mahā-garlands for the departed sādhū.

They place it around the departed sādhū's body. And that takes some time, of course, visiting the seven temples. But after visiting the seven temples, the procession arrives at the specific place where the sādhū's body will be buried or placed in samādhi.

Before the body arrives, śāstra says a hole should be dug in the ground. And that hole, specifically, can be either seven meters deep, five meters deep, or two and a half meters deep. And the base of that square-shaped hole should be covered with green leaves of mango trees and banana trees.

And on the boundaries at the base, there should be rice flour with turmeric. And then the following items should first be placed in that large hole: a small picture of the Lord, very small, drop beads with a bead bag, a flower, a small stick, a handkerchief, and a pot of water.

After this, um, a wooden asana, a wooden asana should be, a nice asana should be placed at the bottom of the samādhi with an eight-petaled lotus flower made from kuṅkuma or vermillion on the, on the asana. And then the sādhū is placed on a, a wooden frame, a fairly large wooden frame, which facilitates lowering his body into the samādhi.

Then, with the loud sound of bells and drums and clapping and kīrtana, the sādhū was lowered into the samādhi and placed on that samādhi asana that I mentioned earlier. Then an arghya is performed. Flowers are offered. And then salt is put all over his body to preserve it, beginning with his lotus feet first.

Salt is placed on his lotus feet, then on his shoulders, then on his head. And finally, the whole body is actually covered in salt. It's just, actually, pour the salt in so it reaches the top of his head. And then, um, sometimes, I was reading, gold paraphernalia and silver coins are also thrown into the to the samādhi.

And then large amounts of dirt, you know, are are put into the samādhi up to the level of the ground where devotees are standing. This covers, or all the dirt comes in and fills up the entire samādhi hole there.

And generally, that's done by hand, many devotees together. They take the dirt and they put it into the samādhi up to the level of the ground, of course. Well, that's the traditional way, traditional way which we observe samādhis for great souls.

But of course, um, we hear of a more simple version of placing a great soul in samādhi. Beginning with verse 62, a very famous pastime. Beginning with verse 62, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu danced for some time, and then Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī informed Him of other rituals for the body of Ṭhākur Haridāsa.

The body of Haridāsa Ṭhākur was then raised onto a carrier that resembled an airship and taken to the sea, accompanied by congregational chanting. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu danced in front of the procession, and Vakreśvara Paṇḍita, along with the other devotees, danced and chanted behind Him. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu bathed the body of Haridāsa Ṭhākur in the sea and then declared, "From this day on, the sea has become a great pilgrimage site." Everyone drank the water that had touched the lotus feet of Haridāsa Ṭhākur, and then they smeared remnants of Lord Jagannātha's sandalwood pulp over the body of Haridāsa Ṭhākur.

After a hole was dug in the sand, the body of Haridāsa Ṭhākur was placed into it. Remnants from Lord Jagannātha, such as silken ropes, sandalwood pulp, food, and cloth, were placed on the body. All around the body, the devotees performed congregational chanting and Vṛndāvana danced in jubilation with His transcendental hands. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu personally covered the body of Haridāsa Ṭhākur, where it was sand, chanting Haribol, Haribol.

The devotees covered the body of Haridāsa Ṭhākur with sand and then constructed a platform upon the site. The platform was protected all around by fencing. Mahāprabhu danced and chanted all around that platform, and as the holy name of Kṛṣṇa roared tumultuously, the whole universe became filled with the vibration.

After saṅkīrtana, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu bathed in the sea with His devotees, swimming and playing in the water in great jubilation. Of course, that samādhi is there on the seashore of Jagannātha Purī, and it's one of the main places that our devotees go when they go to Jagannātha Purī to take darśana of.

Now, in the beginning of this class, I mentioned that some sādhus don't want a samādhi out of humility, but sometimes, I was reading, their followers out of great love and devotion for them, place them in samādhi anyway. And one example is the samādhi of a sādhū named Bihārī Dāsa Bābājī, a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Bābājī.

He was a highly respected devotee living in Vrṛndāvana some hundreds of years ago. And I learned about him from his present-day admirers or followers in Bihār, where there's a very beautiful gośālā. So this Bihārī Dāsa Bābājī, he used to herd, uh, cows all day long, his herd of cows.

And one day, a certain cow in his herd started giving blood instead of milk when he was milking her. Blood was coming out instead of milk. So, very concerned, Bihārī Dāsa Bābājī, he went to another sādhū whose service at that time was to take care of sick cows.

And when he informed that sādhū that one of his cows was giving blood instead of milk, that sādhū replied, "This is a sign. She will soon die because her time is over." So Bihārī Dāsa Bābājī, he thought for a moment, then he said, "I can't bear to see a cow of my Lord Govinda die in front of my eyes.

Better I give whatever heartbeats I have left in my body to this cow so that she will live longer and serve the vrajavasis by giving them her milk." Wow. So the next day, after herding his cows in the morning, he drank a few drops of that cow's urine.

And he said, uh, addressing, well, he said, "O Mother of the world, please accept the offering of this life of your useless son and live a long life serving the vrajavasis." He was addressing her as Mother of the world because a cow is one of our seven mothers. "O Mother of the world, please accept the offering of this life of your useless son and live a long life serving the vrajavasis." He was giving his life in exchange for hers.

At that very moment, he left his body. And as soon as he did, all the cows present, because there were many cows present, surrounded his body. And many of the vrajavasis actually wanted to come in and take his body, but those cows were so aggressive, they wouldn't let anyone approach.

They were protecting that Bābājī. So after a few hours, those cows became a little peaceful, and the cow who was bleeding before came and poured her milk, now milk on the face of Bihārī Dāsa Bābājī. And later, the vrajavasis came and they took his body, and they made a full samādhi for him.

His father made a full, beautiful samādhi, and they named him Gopremī Bābājī. They gave him that name, Gopremī Bābājī, which means "the lover of cows." And that cow who exchanged his life for, she lived a very long life. All right, Kṛṣṇa.

So this is how our beloved Vrṛndāvana devotees remember the pastimes of sādhus and place them in samādhis. So in that mood, in that light, I'd like to finish today with a, a poem, a very beautiful poem written by a vrajavasi poet named Vasudeva Datta on the occasion of the departure of such a great sādhū, who was actually his spiritual master.

He wrote very lovingly: "Dear brother, look, the sky is red today. The Lord is welcoming my dear spiritual master with open hands and tears in His eyes. It is a long-awaited day for both the Lord and His devotee. My spiritual master, demigods are playing musical instruments, and the air is flowing with tiny droplets in the light of love as my spiritual master meets the Lord.

O brother, what a wonderful day. Don't lament for my spiritual master's body. Be happy for the sweet loving meeting of the Lord and His devotee." Thank you very much. That person. So we conclude here, and, um, we have more in the series.

We'll be back, um, next Friday. Hari Kṛṣṇa! Śrī Jagannātha ki! Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarāma ki! Śrī Rādhā Sundara ki!

Vrṛndāvaneshvarī ki!

Thank you.