"*00559*.*
"All right, Krishna, very dear devotees. A warm welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Vṛndāvana. We are continuing with our mini-series on the samādhis of our ācāryas, and this will be part two. Today, we will discuss in detail the samādhis themselves: their history, their purpose, as well as their different shapes and sizes, etc.

Now, to begin with, one interesting fact is that the samādhis that we construct for our ācāryas and saints are not common in other Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas, such as that of Vallabha. The tradition of placing ācāryas and other great devotees in samādhi is seen and celebrated mainly in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, and the principal reason for this is that Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself placed Nāmācārya Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura in samādhi along the seashore in Jagannātha Purī 500 years ago. From that day, official permission for giving samādhi to Vaiṣṇava ācāryas was granted by Mahāprabhu Himself. In time, it became popular to say that samādhis are more than temples built by Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas; samādhis are more than temples built by Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

The reason behind this was to give respect to the exalted Vaiṣṇavas in their samādhis, by whose mercy we become attached and develop our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. In their temples, the tradition was—and you could say to a certain extent still is—for one to offer respects to an ācārya at his samādhi and then go to see the temple and deity that he established. For example, previously one would go to Rūpa Gosvāmī’s samādhi first and then go to Jaipur to have darśana of Govindajī. Similarly, one would take darśana of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his samādhi and then offer respects to his deities of Rādhā-Dāmodara. So, first the devotee of the Lord and then the Lord Himself.

In the Ādi Purāṇa, there is the following statement by Lord Kṛṣṇa to Arjuna: *ye me bhakta-janāḥ pārtha*. My dear Pārtha, one who claims to be My devotee is not so; only a person who claims to be the devotee of My devotee is actually My devotee. That tradition is there in our sampradāya because if one goes directly to see the Lord, the Lord may or may not recognize the devotee because of his level of śraddhā or devotion; it may not be great enough to attract Kṛṣṇa’s attention. But if we go first to the personality who manifested the Lord, who asked the Lord to appear in that deity form, that personality—that devotee—may kindly recommend us to the Lord, and then the Lord in that deity form will accept us. That is a basic principle in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism. Śrīla Prabhupāda said of Kṛṣṇa’s favorite devotee, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, in a lecture on September 5th, 1973, and I quote: "Anyone who comes before Rādhārāṇī to serve Kṛṣṇa, she becomes so pleased: 'Oh, here is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa.' She immediately recommends to Kṛṣṇa, 'Oh, here is a devotee; he’s better than me.'" So we owe everything to our ācāryas who, as Śrī Caitanya’s representatives, recommend us to Kṛṣṇa.

Now, this is particularly applicable to members of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, who are completely dependent on our Founder-Ācārya Śrīla Prabhupāda to deliver us to the lotus feet of Rādhā-Mādhava and Kṛṣṇa. The Vaiṣṇava poet Kiśora Śaraṇa, one of my favorites, writes lovingly about our ācāryas who underwent great austerities on our behalf in Vṛndāvana in the past several hundred years—particularly 500 years ago—to give us Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It’s very beautiful what he writes, dear devotees. He begins: "Behold the beauty of the dust of Vṛndāvana, which hides the footprints of the barefoot-walking ācāryas. Behold the vines and groves of Vṛndāvana, where the Gosvāmīs rested for a few minutes and chanted the names of Kṛṣṇa while feeling tired. Look at Śrī Yamunājī, where countless times the Gosvāmīs took holy baths. Oh brother, the fortunate sun’s rays touched the lotus feet of these ācāryas, which had swelled from circumambulating Girirāja Govardhana." Poor Kiśora Śaraṇa now sees Vṛndāvana, which was once a *vihāra*—a place of playful pastimes—as *tapasthalī*—a place of penance—due to the austerities of our ācāryas. 

Wow, so we owe so much to all the ācāryas in our line. So, when in Vṛndāvana, or even within our minds, let us visit the samādhis of our ācāryas and other great souls to show our gratitude, and then visit their *prāṇa-dhana*. *Prāṇa-dhana* means the "lords of their hearts," their deities. There’s that popular bhajan: *jaya rādhā-govinda rādhā-govinda rūpa-gosvāmī prāṇa-dhana*. The "lords of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s life." That bhajan is pointing out that Rādhā-Govinda are the lords of his life, *prāṇa-dhana*. Actually, after a year of preaching in the West, each year when I come to Vṛndāvana, I make it a point to visit Śrīla Prabhupāda’s samādhi and give him a report of my services throughout the year. Then I take his permission to have darśana of Gaur-Nitāi, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and his beloved Rādhā-Śyāmasundara at our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir. 

Now, when visiting samādhis in Vṛndāvana, we will see that some are 500 years old, others are two, three, or four hundred years old, while others were established in recent decades. Now, during these periods—well, going back 500 years to begin with—there was a constant change in the samādhi styles and shapes. For example, 500 years ago, I was reading that the samādhis of Rūpa Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī, and Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī were originally very simple, basically just a small platform—a small platform over which they were interred, almost like a little platform for sitting; very small. Now, one might question why such a simple dais or platform was made for such big ācāryas in our tradition, why so small? The answer is because in those days there was always the constant threat of attacks by Mughals and other invaders. If the devotees at that time were to have made a big, beautiful structure, then surely the invaders would have broken it in the same way they damaged many temples in Vṛndāvana and elsewhere. Therefore, to distract, or you could say avoid, an attack on the ācārya samādhis, only a small raised platform was used over their grave where they were interred. Now, of course, other additions to the samādhis were made later, as we see the samādhis today, but those small platforms can still be seen inside the expanded samādhis today.

In the same light, near the Madana-mohana temple in Vṛndāvana is the sacred samādhi of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. That’s one of my favorite places. From a distance, the shape of his samādhi is like a small pillar with a conical or like-umbrella decoration on top, and it was made in such a way so that the invaders would think it was something insignificant—a little pillar, a little carving. But for the Vaiṣṇavas, the samādhi mandira of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī is the most sacred place where their hearts, you could say, resonate in love and devotion for Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī.

Sometime after the departure of the six Gosvāmīs, the tradition of making more elaborate structures began, actually by utilizing the style of a marble, umbrella-like dome, but much larger, of course, with four beautifully carved pillars holding it up. If you look at the samādhis these days, you can envision it’s kind of like an umbrella—you know, shaped like an umbrella, marble, and then there’s four pillars to support it there. This addition actually came from the Rajput kings in Rajasthan who developed this style when building memorials. The Vaiṣṇavas in Vṛndāvana saw that and they adopted that same style for making the samādhis. When you go to Jaipur, you can see many structures like that—different shrines; we have that kind of umbrella marble and then the four pillars there. It’s really interesting in Jaipur. 

So, a wonderful example of that adapted style of Rajasthani architecture is there in the samādhi of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura; his samādhi is situated in the area of the temple. But Rajasthani architecture wasn’t the only architecture that influenced the embellishment of the simplicity of the original samādhis. The samādhi of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is also in this Rajasthani architecture. But the samādhi of Rūpa Gosvāmī, which was of course constructed later, is in typical Bengali architecture. The samādhi of Madhu Paṇḍita is in the Orissan architecture style. The samādhi of Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī is in the style of Bengal-Assam architecture—I read Bengal-Assam architecture. The samādhi of a great devotee of Mahāprabhu, Gopāla Guru, near the Yamunā, is in the style of Madhya Pradesh mixed with Rajasthani architecture—I like to visit that samādhi—and the samādhi of Narahari Cakravartī near Rādhā-kuṇḍa is actually in the style of Mughal architecture. Interesting.

Now, unfortunately, in Vṛndāvana, there are a number of incidents in which the land where the samādhis of great souls were situated was eventually sold for development, like apartment buildings and factories and things like that, and those samādhis themselves were demolished and covered over with these buildings. The divine forms of many great souls rest under those buildings; it’s actually very sad. 

Now, throughout history and even at present, ladies are not allowed to physically touch samādhis. However, it’s accepted that they can cover their hands with their saris or duppaṭṭas and then reverentially touch the samādhis; that’s allowed. I was reading this is because it’s considered that the ācārya is still present in the samādhi and ladies should not directly touch the renunciates or ācāryas directly. 

In the samādhis of the ācāryas and saints, mostly renounced sādhus performed the required services there to maintain not only the samādhi but to keep the worship going for those great souls in their samādhis. The tradition in Vṛndāvana is that the Gosvāmīs and their families serve the deities in the temples, where renounced sādhus served the ācāryas in their samādhis. Actually, such sādhus do many services—many services—while taking care of the ācārya’s samādhis. In the early morning, they begin by placing a walking stick next to that small dais, that small platform inside under which the ācārya is interred. Then they place a water pot made from clay called *koraḷa* before the platform. Then they place a big bowl made out of bell metal for offering prasādam before that little platform. Then they offer a handkerchief or a towel, and it’s really interesting—two bolster cushions, known as *masnad*, for support of one’s back while chanting japa. I was reading that to have a bolster behind the back during japa in meditation is considered a spiritual luxury for the ācāryas. Then, this is all early morning—they offer a flower garland, beads to chant japa with, and a hand fan; this is all placed on top of the small platform. Now, these articles that I mentioned are considered as essentials for any samādhi. In some samādhis, there’s also a tradition of placing a hand-painted picture of the ācārya who is interred in any particular samādhi, and a cloth is used as a border around the frame, and the painting is decorated with candana (sandalwood paste) dots on the glass covering the painting, and those dots are placed around the head of the ācārya.

In olden days, marble footprints of the ācārya were made and placed in front of the platform inside, and those marble footprints were actually the main object of worship for those who came to pay their respects to the ācāryas; they would worship those lotus feet of the ācārya—marble like that. Also interesting is that in some samādhis, the previous ācāryas' beads are displayed, but they’re covered in a stitched cloth; it looks like a garland, actually. I’ve seen that—they take the japa-mālā and they tie around a cloth, they stitch a cloth like that. Now, it looks like a garland, and because the tradition is that after the disappearance of an ācārya, his mālā should not be displayed openly; it can be there, but it’s covered. However, we are fortunate because there is a beautiful pair of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s japa beads in his house, in his home, in his quarters at the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir in that small museum that’s been built for him; we can see and have darśana of different paraphernalia of Prabhupāda. I think there’s actually two sets of japa beads in there; they’re not covered—we can see them firsthand, some special mercy. 

Another tradition in the samādhis of our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas is that at the base of the samādhi one can see a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tilaka mark as well as the names of Nitāi-Gaur; that’s the tradition, written in Bengali. Or sometimes the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are also written at the base. So, we can see that such samādhis are, let’s say, an essential part of past and present Vṛndāvana. And as we mentioned several times, we should visit them and pray for mercy. There’s a special place in Vṛndāvana where there’s 64 samādhis—64 samādhis—and many great, great ācāryas are interred there. I’ve been there several times; it’s a very mystical experience to walk amongst those samādhi mandiras and have kīrtana and pray and glorify all the great souls. 

So, when in Vṛndāvana, one should visit samādhis. And those of us who are members of ISKCON, we should first, when we get to Vṛndāvana, go to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s samādhi and ask his blessings to enter into Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma and ask his blessings to one day reside eternally in Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world. So, everything we do in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is for that purpose of going back home, back to Goloka Vṛndāvana. By Lord Brahmā’s grace, we have detailed information of Goloka Vṛndāvana, that topmost planet in the spiritual sky, and I today I’d like to close with Lord Brahmā’s words in this regard from his Brahma-saṁhitā, just to remind us of where we’re going, what we want to achieve; his words should, how could you say, make our hearts flutter and increase our lobha—our greed—for going back home, back to Godhead. 

He has spoken, it has been written: "This transcendental land of Vṛndāvana is populated by goddesses of fortune who manifest as milkmaids and love Kṛṣṇa above everything. The trees there fulfill all desires, and the waters of immortality flow through land made of philosopher’s stone. Here all speech is song, all walking is dancing, and the flute is the constant companion. Cows flood the land with abundant milk, and everything is self-luminous like the sun. Since every moment in Vṛndāvana is spent in loving service to Kṛṣṇa, there is no past, present, or future." *Śrī-vṛndāvana-dhāma-kī jaya*. And by the mercy of these ācāryas, we will one day attain that goal. 

So, that’s enough for today. I think actually we’re going to have about maybe six or seven lectures on the samādhis of our ācāryas in Vṛndāvana; it’s so nice to research it, so nice to present it, and I’m hoping that you’re all enjoying it as much as well. So again, from all of us here on the Baltic Sea coast in Poland, where we’re having a festival every day, we send all of you our regards, and I look forward to being with you again next Friday. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dhāma. Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya!""