Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

Om Viṣṇupāda Paramahaṁsa Parivrājakācārya Aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja Ki Jaya!

So today we're continuing with our series on the samādhis of our ācāryas, and this will be part nine. Part nine. And this week, I would like to speak about Śrīla Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, something about his life and his teachings and the final rites that were performed as he was placed in samādhi after his departure.

And we'll finish, of course, with the stuti-kīrtana that Vaiṣṇavas sing annually on the day of his departure each year. So, Śrīla Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī appeared in Śrīraṅgam, South India, that holy place, as the son of Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, who was a Śrīvaiṣṇava brāhmaṇa, meaning he was a follower of the Śrī Sampradāya, a follower of Rāmānuja Ācārya.

And as many of you know, Lord Caitanya once stayed in the house of Veṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa for four months. When Gopāl Bhaṭṭa, he was in the Gosvāmī at that time, but Gopāl Bhaṭṭa was a young boy, actually. And Lord Caitanya converted the entire family to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism.

Um, because Gopāl Bhaṭṭa was just a boy at this time, he was able to personally serve Lord Caitanya, who, we read in śāstras, treated Gopāl Bhaṭṭa very affectionately. Even one time, giving the young boy remnants of prasādam from his own plates.

Mahāprabhu gave his prasādam to the young boy. You can just imagine. And then, later in his late teens, Gopāl Bhaṭṭa went to Vṛndāvana, where, amongst many other things, he became a very dear friend of Śrīla Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs.

We're summarizing here. One day, he had a dream in which Lord Caitanya appeared to him and said, "Go to the Kālin̄dī [Yamunā] River and find Śrī Hari," which means the śālagrāma śīla form of the Lord. So, on the order of Mahāprabhu, Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī underwent the arduous journey of traveling to the Kālin̄dī [Yamunā] River in Nepal, where he found, as we know, twelve śālagrāma śīlas in that sacred river.

And back in Vṛndāvana, one of those śīlas, actually a dhāma śīla, later manifested himself as the most beautiful deity of Rādhā Ramaṇa.

Rādhā Ramaṇa, everyone knows that pastime. I was reading, however, that after Rādhā Ramaṇa appeared, many incredible loving exchanges took place between Gopāl Bhaṭṭa and his now worshipable deity, Ramaṇa. Actually, it's described in the Bhakti-ratnākara 4.334 that once Rādhā Ramaṇa called Gopāl Bhaṭṭa and revealed himself as Gopāl attending cows, surrounded by cowherd boys.

It's right there in the Bhakti-ratnākara. And in the Bhakti-ratnākara 4.335 to 348, it describes that on another occasion, Gopāl Bhaṭṭa was feeling very intense separation from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And so, Rādhā Ramaṇa manifested himself as Lord Caitanya in the freshness of youth.

He was dressed as a brāhmaṇa boy. And for a moment, I was reading, Gopāl Bhaṭṭa just stood and stared at this very enchanting form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Then, overcome with bliss, he called out, "What have I seen?

What have I seen?" and he fell to the ground unconscious.

So, the Bhakti-ratnākara also makes a very profound statement about the relationship between Gopāl Bhaṭṭa and Rādhā Ramaṇa. This is Bhakti-ratnākara 4.349, there it's written, "But it once satisfied whatever desire found a place in the heart of Gopāl Bhaṭṭa." Bhakti-ratnākara: "Rādhā Ramaṇa what at once satisfied whatever desire found a place in the heart of Gopāl Bhaṭṭa." Such an intimate relationship he had with the, with the deity.

So such is the bond between the Lord and his devotee. Just like Prabhupāda at one time, when he was installing the Chota Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the small Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, very early in the movement in Los Angeles, after installing the deity, he gave a lecture and he said in the lecture that, "If you worship this deity or these deities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa according to all the proper rules and regulations that I've given you," he said, "one day these deities will speak to you." Prabhupāda said that one day these deities will speak to you.

So, historically, Rādhā Ramaṇa manifested in the year 1542, and that worship is still to this day so perfect and so complete that Śrīla Prabhupāda had once said that we, as members of ISKCON, we should inquire and study the worship of Rādhā Ramaṇa in order to learn deity worship.

You can go to the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple and inquire from the pujārīs, observe the worship, and in this way, we can learn how to do deity worship. He gave that instruction, actually. Now, in collaboration with Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, also compiled the famous Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, a book explaining the rituals and devotional practices within our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya.

We've discussed many of these things in the previous class, a more complete class about his life last year, I think. He also wrote Śrī-kṛṣṇa-dīpikā and he also wrote, Outlines. Now, in time, Lord Caitanya and a number of associates began to depart this world.

And after the disappearance of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, as well as Gopāl Bhaṭṭa's uncle, you could say his instructing spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhodhananda Sarasvatī, Śrīla Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was just devastated, just devastated. It is said he used to pray to Rādhā Ramaṇa, "Please take me back to the spiritual world where I can meet the Divine Couple along with my beloved Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs." We've discussed this, how deep is the separation when these different personalities leave the world in the hearts of advanced devotees.

It's incomprehensible. So therefore, as all these great, as Mahāprabhu and all these great devotees began to depart, Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, in preparation for his future departure from this world, he began training up one of his disciples. That disciple's name was Gopinātha Paṇḍita.

He was a brahmacārī from birth and a very sweet devotee, very dedicated to Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. So he was trained up in the worship of Rādhā Ramaṇa. Also trained Gopinātha's brother, his name was Dāmodara, and he was a householder in the worship as well.

So two brothers, one's a brahmacārī, one's a householder, they worked together to worship. Then, finally, on the day of Śrāvaṇa śukla pañcamī, it's the bright fifth day of the month of on the bright day of the fifth month of Śrāvaṇa in the year 1578, departed this world to go back home to the to the local Vṛndāvana.

He was actually 75 years old at the time. And on that day, Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was placed in samādhi near to a tree where Rādhā Ramaṇa had appeared from the śālagrāma śīla. He was being worshiped among other śīlas near to a tree there in Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

So they placed Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī in samādhi next to that tree. Actually, a well-known Vaiṣṇava poet wrote about this disappearance of Śrīla Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. It's a famous passage. He he wrote: "On the bright fortnight of the month of Śrāvaṇa, with rain in the clouds, the sakhīs played mṛdaṅgas loudly.

With that sound of the mṛdaṅga, ḍo ḍo, Guṇamañjarī meaning Svāmī entered into the eternal pastimes of Śrī Rādhā Ramaṇa." It's interesting, he describes it with rain in the clouds, the sakhīs are playing mṛdaṅgas loudly, and with the sound of that mṛdaṅga, ḍo ḍo, Mañjarī meaning Svāmī entered into the eternal pastimes of Śrī Rādhā Ramaṇa in the spiritual world.

So, since then, every year, the followers of Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī hold a festival in his honor in the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple. It's called the Ḍoḍo Utsava Festival. So they got the name ḍoḍo, like the drum sounding, the sakhīs are playing, and this drum sounds.

So, Ḍoḍo Utsava Festival, a special name of his disappearance day festival. Ḍoḍo Utsava Festival. And on that occasion, the Rādhā Ramaṇa Gosvāmīs, they actually organize a three-day non-stop festival. It's not just one day. For many of our ācāryas, their disappearance day is celebrated one day, but for Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, it's the observance is a three-day festival, and this has been held without stop for all these centuries.

So, for 500 years ago. And the sequence of events for that festival were very interesting, and I'll share them with you. That on the day before his disappearance day, all the Gosvāmīs come together at the temple and they sing the ādivāsa kīrtana during the night.

It's the first kīrtana song. Ādivāsa means like an auspicious kīrtana before a big event begins. So on the day before his disappearance, Gosvāmīs come together and they do ādivāsa kīrtana, actually during the night time. And the next morning, on the day marking the disappearance of Svāmī, all the Gosvāmīs, because the Gosvāmī families who are worshiping in the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple, they come from their homes with mahāprasādam that they've been given from Rādhā Ramaṇa, the temple Rādhā Ramaṇa, and they offer that mahāprasādam to Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī in a special ceremony.

And on that day, Rādhā Ramaṇa, he actually sits on a sacred sanctum of gold and a gold and silver throne outside of the altar. He usually sits in, as you know, sometimes we go to the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple and he's not inside the, the temple area there, but it's just outside on a platform before the devotees.

The devotees can come and see him more closely. So on that day, Rādhā Ramaṇa comes out of his little temple room where he's in a little bit forward, and he's on a gold and silver throne, very beautiful, massive gold and silver throne to celebrate that day, day of celebration.

So later, many kulīyās, many kulīyās, it's a special type of thick, pure sweet milk, are offered to Rādhā Ramaṇa and then distributed to the devotees. This actually goes on every day in the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple. If you go there, those little clay pots, that's thick, pure sweet milk, it's called kaliya, kaliya.

So on that day also, it's distributed in mass to everyone who comes to observe that, that day. And then later in the morning, all the Gosvāmīs they gather to discuss the pastimes of Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. And then in the evening, the wives and daughters of those Gosvāmīs, they meet in the temple for the same purpose.

In the morning, the men meet, they talk about Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, they sing his glories. In the evening, the wives and daughters of the Gosvāmīs, they come to the same place for the same purpose. It's interesting, isn't it?

Um, at midday, after worship at the samādhi, everyone sits together and sings the stuti-kīrtana, which was composed for Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. And then, uh, the third day. So the celebrations continue the next day on the third day, where devotees have a 24-hour kīrtana in the samādhi itself.

And afterwards, a large feast is distributed. So on the third day, everyone comes together and, you know, in the temple, and there's a 24-hour kīrtana, 24-hour kīrtana in the samādhi. And afterwards, a massive feast is distributed to all who were there, and all who come afterwards as well.

And I noted on one of my many visits to the samādhi mandir, Gosvāmī, which is just next to the temple, there are many, uh, small samādhis inside his samādhi mandir. Little, like about this big, little samādhis this big, of various ācāryas and Gosvāmīs who had served in that family, serving Gopāl, serving Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī and serving Rādhā Ramaṇa.

Um, there they have this little, like, little shrines where their ashes are. And, um, their presence, like little dome-like structures around and throughout the samādhi mandir of Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. And therefore, when, when pilgrims visit the samādhi of Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, they do three parikramās around his samādhi, which include the samādhis of all the previous saints as well.

So I would like to end today's lecture with the stuti-kīrtana of Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. It was written by a Bengali poet in the disciplic succession of the Rādhā Ramaṇa Gosvāmīs. He wrote very beautifully as follows. And of course, I'll just give the English translation, but you can listen carefully.

In this way, we can absorb ourselves in the great personality, Gosvāmī. He wrote, "Whenever I see the beautiful lotus feet of Śrī Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Prabhu, my eyes flood with tears." He called him Prabhu because that's also a very affectionate way to address someone.

So he said, "Whenever I see the beautiful lotus feet of Śrī Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Prabhu, my eyes flood with tears. One becomes free from the cycle of birth and death by hearing about your [Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī's] unlimited qualities. Being attracted by your moonlight face and lips, which radiate like the rising of the sun, I can't be pierced by Cupid's ten golden arrows.

Your beautiful teeth resemble a string of pearls. Your joyful words are saturated with sweet nectar. The Gosvāmīs, Śrīla Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Rāghava Paṇḍita, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, Lokanātha Gosvāmī, all of them are your life and soul, and your deepest soul is your worship of Rādhā Ramaṇajī.

With your body full of love, you offer obeisances. So Lord Caitanya, and like a honeybee, you're very attached to His lotus feet. You also kindly gave shelter to Śrīnivāsācārya. He actually initiated Śrīnivāsā Ācārya. Your only engagement is associated with Purity, Vows, relishing rasa, and tasting the divine madness of gopī-bhāva.

The pastimes of Rādhā Ramaṇa flow through your mind like the celestial Ganges. You were the crest jewel of Rācik Vaiṣṇavas, relishing prema-rasa. You become overwhelmed very often with ecstatic emotions. O ocean of spontaneous love for Rādhā Ramaṇa, you are the friend of the fallen, and your fame spreads throughout the universe.

Oh, your form is most sweet and full of mercy, and your unlimited qualities are just like a touchstone. Just once, O Master, let me see your lotus feet, the essence of all sweetness. After many, many births, I have attained the rare fortune of serving the servants of Your eternal associates.

Because of bad karma, I have wasted my life enjoying sense gratification. I am full of offenses, but my only hope is that you, being full of merciful qualities, will finally deliver this fallen soul. Although my mind is fickle, and I am greedy and sinful, still this Manohara Dāsa, this is the author, still this Manohara Dāsa calls out to you, please, please don't neglect me." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Such nectar. Yes, so, um, Vṛndāvana and all the eternal residents of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma, we can only pray over and over that Śrīla Prabhupāda will grant us eternal residence in the divine abode of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

So thank you. Um, you know, we'll be back next week, next Friday, with a discussion on another one of our great ācāryas. So I look forward to seeing you at that time. All glories to the revealer of the Dhāma for me.

Kṛṣṇa.