"*00354*.*
"### Samādhis of the Ācāryas (Part 5)

Hare Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We are continuing with our series on our ācāryas' samādhis in Vṛndāvana, and this will be part five. In previous lectures, we learned of the criteria for a sādhu to be placed in samādhi. Devotees in general are usually cremated, but ācāryas or sādhus who are advanced or who have contributed significantly to the practice and the spreading of Kṛṣṇa consciousness are placed in samādhi. Just as there is a general criteria for Vaiṣṇavas to be placed in samādhi, traditionally in olden days there were—and there still are in some maṭhas—criteria for who can give samādhi to such great souls and who can participate in the ceremony. That criteria is very interesting; it is as follows: such a devotee who oversees placing the ācārya in samādhi should be chanting at least three lakh names every day—that is 300,000 names of Kṛṣṇa a day.

That is 192 rounds. That devotee had to come from a brāhmaṇa family background, he had to be very humble with others, he had to be respected in the devotee community, and he had to be a very dear disciple of the ācārya that was being put into samādhi, preferably as the organizer of the event. He had to be a sannyāsī or a brahmacārī, and it is stated if not a brahmacārī, he had to have been in the brahmacarya-āśrama in his earlier years. These last two criteria played a very important part in establishing the samādhi of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja.

As concerning the samādhi of Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī, as we know, Śrīla Gaura Kiśora was the spiritual master of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. Actually, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī was his only disciple. When Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī passed away in Navadvīpa, various very questionable devotees and maṭhas wanted to immediately claim his body for the purpose of building a samādhi on their lands with the intention, eventually, of collecting money from those who in the future would come to visit the samādhi. They were arguing amongst themselves at that time over the dead body of Bābājī Mahārāja. When this news reached Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, who was in Māyāpura at the time on the Māyāpura side of the Ganges, he crossed the Ganges River over to Navadvīpa in a boat. It is described that he came running to the spot where these pundits, bābājīs, and vairāgīs were arguing about who would take Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī's sacred body. 

Seeing him coming, many of the questionable persons there started decrying Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. They knew why he had come, and they were saying, "He is not a sannyāsī, he doesn't have a maṭha, he doesn't have a temple," so he wasn't qualified to take away the body of Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī. But at that point, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī became like a lion. We hear in his preaching he was sometimes described as the "Lion Guru." He came up directly in front of the assembly of these pundits, bābājīs, and vairāgīs, and he openly challenged them. Very famously, he said, "Anyone of you who has not had illicit sex with a woman in the last six months, you can come forward and take the divine body of my spiritual master and place him in samādhi." No one came forward. Then he said, "Any one of you who has not had illicit sex with a woman in the last three months, come and take the divine body of my spiritual master." No one came forward. Then he paused and said, "And if any of you have not had illicit sex with a woman in the last three days, any one of you who has not had illicit sex with a woman in the last three days, you come forward and take the divine body of my spiritual master." No one came forward. At that point, all the pundits, these bābās, and these vairāgīs turned around, and it is described that with their heads lowered, they left that place. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī alone picked up the divine body of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora and carried him back across the river to Māyāpura, where he established a samādhi for his Guru Mahārāja. Of course, many ISKCON devotees have visited that sacred place. So, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī fulfilled the two most important qualifications for putting a saintly person into samādhi: he was a loyal and dear disciple, and he was celibate—he was a brahmacārī who later became a sannyāsī.

Now, śāstra goes on to explain that the main person who performs the samādhi ceremony should wear white cloth while performing the samādhi rituals. We covered most of those rituals in a previous class—how to put someone in samādhi. Then, the day after giving samādhi, this person should shave his head and facial hair and take a bath three times in the Yamunā. Then, he should feed sādhus, cows, crows, and dogs because they are all Vrajavāsīs; some of them are unfortunate. So, that was part of the ritual. 

Now, there are certain other procedures prescribed for departed souls that don't apply to ācāryas or advanced devotees. Such rites and rituals are known as karma, or perhaps better known as piṇḍa-dāna. But for ācāryas and great devotees, no such tradition of doing karma and piṇḍa-dāna is required. It is said in śāstra that these rites are done for a soul who doesn't achieve liberation after death and resides in lower planets after his departure, but ācāryas and sādhus are the source of liberation in and of themselves because they preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, what is the need of doing such rituals for sādhus? The piṇḍa-dāna-sādhu's activities in this material world are all divine, and therefore karma doesn't bind them up again after death. For them, going back home, back to Godhead, is certain. So, we don't perform such rituals for ācāryas or advanced devotees after their departure. 

It is interesting that there is also a special period of 15 days in the month of September which is known as Pitṛ-pakṣa, which is also dedicated to the ancestors. During these 15 days in India, people perform these śrāddha-karma rituals, the Pitṛ-pakṣa, for their ancestors' liberation, for release from lower births and attainment of higher planets. So, during these 15 days in September, it is traditional in India that people don't purchase goods, they don't go shopping, they don't celebrate any occasion, they don't wear jewelry, and they are not even supposed to leave home. However, this is not the case in our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. There is a famous saying: "Every day is a festival in Vṛndāvana." 

So, what do the Vrajavāsīs do in these 15 days of Pitṛ-pakṣa when the whole of India is very somber? Well, because every day is a festival in Vṛndāvana, during those 15 days they celebrate the festival of Sañjī-utsava with great joy and pomp by singing and dancing and making beautiful, colorful designs inside their homes and in the temples of Vṛndāvana. I believe we gave a whole class on this Sañjī festival. While the whole of India is wearing pale clothes and is in a very somber mood during that time, the Vrajavāsīs recreate the divine pastimes of the Lord in their homes and temples with vibrant colors by making these beautiful designs on the floor. 

In a deeper sense, Vrajavāsīs celebrate Sañjī because during that time it allows for the meeting of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. How is that? Again, during these 15 days of Pitṛ-pakṣa, people are not allowed to leave home. Therefore, in Kṛṣṇa-līlā—Kṛṣṇa's pastimes 5,000 years ago—this was an opportune time for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to meet somewhere because everyone is home; Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can sneak out, and by the arrangement of Vṛndā Devī and Paurnamāsī, they can have their meetings. So, how do Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet during Pitṛ-pakṣa? Well, once Śrī Rādhā said to Lalitā, "My mother-in-law, Jaṭilā, told me that I could not leave my room during Pitṛ-pakṣa, but how will I survive 15 days separated from my beloved Śyāmasundara?" Out of deep love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Lalitā immediately came up with a plan to unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

Lalitā's idea was that in order to make the Sañjī designs, which all the Gopis are doing during that period, flowers are required. They are dried and made into colorful powders for making these designs on the ground in the houses and temples. So, Lalitā suggested to Jaṭilā that Rādhā be allowed to leave her quarters at Yāvat for this most important service of collecting flowers for Sañjī. Jaṭilā agreed because that was the tradition. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was allowed to go out and pick flowers to make powdered dyes for the Sañjī, but needless to say, while picking flowers, Yogamāyā arranged again for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to meet. So, while the mood around India is very somber during these 15 days, it is, as always, a very joyous time in Vṛndāvana because Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are meeting. Everything is orchestrated so nicely by Paurnamāsī. 

In fact, even the departure of an ācārya and advanced sādhu is also celebrated in Vṛndāvana. We touched on this in a previous class as well, even if just for the simple reason that the ācārya has achieved the fruit of his bhajana and has gone back home, back to Godhead. Actually, yearly, on the day of celebrating the departure of any particular ācārya, Vrajavāsīs observe the day by singing the glories of that sādhu in a special traditional way known as *sūcaka-kīrtana*. *Sūcaka* means to literally declare or to make a declaration on an important day of the year. On such a day, Vrajavāsīs celebrating the departure of an ācārya sing different melodious songs written by various Bengali and Vrajavāsī poets for that departed ācārya or sādhu. 

The tradition of singing these kīrtans became famous during the time of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. The reason being that during that period, many of the associates of Lord Caitanya were slowly departing this world. I was reading there was a flood of sorrow in those days as news of the disappearance of various ācāryas and wonderful Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs spread; everyone was in a flood of sorrow in Vṛndāvana and Bengal. Thus, in lamentation for our ācāryas, poets with, you could say, exceptional talent, expressed the emptiness of their hearts and their misfortune in not being able to witness these ācāryas' pastimes in the material world anymore. So what they did was write these *sūcaka-kīrtanas*—like poems, but to be sung. Such kīrtanas first described the departed ācārya's esteemed character, then the kīrtana went on to describe their various achievements and pastimes, and finally their efforts to deliver the conditioned souls of this world, because that is a Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava is concerned with the spiritual welfare of the whole world. 

The climax of this singing ended with deep lamentation for the ācārya, where the poet expresses his unbearable feelings of pain and sorrow. As part of these *sūcakas*, two teams of devotees would sit in groups facing each other, with an empty space in between them. One line of the *sūcaka-kīrtana* was sung by one group, and another line was sung by the other group. It went on like this—it continued this way with the beating of drums; specifically, without the sound of kartālas or bells, only drums were used. At that time, all the devotees wore white dhotis and uttarīyas (upper cloths) and opened their śikhās as a sign of mourning. Not just after the departure of an ācārya, but every year this was celebrated. Every year they would have this festival. This tradition of singing *sūcaka-kīrtanas* is still famous and it can be seen in Vṛndāvana, Oḍiśā, and Bengal. We will discuss the *sūcakas* of different ācāryas in our next classes. We will take each ācārya and sing—well, I won't sing, but we will repeat the beautiful verses composed by these poets in the past. 

Just to give you a glimpse of *sūcaka-kīrtanas*, I will recite the *sūcaka-kīrtana* that was written for Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, because his disappearance day was just a week or ten days ago. So, I thought just to give you an idea of where we are going in our series, I will recite a bit of his kīrtana. There are many verses, of course; I will just recite a few just to set the mood. 

*(Recitation in Bengali follows)*

There are more verses, but just to set the mood there. And the translation: "Whoever was the poet who wrote this, we offer him our most humble obeisances, prostrated at his lotus feet for glorifying our Rūpa Gosvāmī, our Rasācārya." This is the *sūcaka-kīrtana* written for Rūpa Gosvāmī, which is recited by followers in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya on his disappearance day:

"In Vraja, your presentation of the devotional mellows of Lord Śrī Gauracandra is unparalleled. In the eternal spiritual world of Vṛndāvana, which is matchless and supreme, the source of all avatāras sports as Nanda Mahārāja's son, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He always enjoys with thousands of Gopis, and especially with his most beloved and best worshiper, Śrī Rādhikā. Śrī Rūpa, you mercifully reveal the path of rāgānugā-bhakti. By adopting this path, anyone can attain the spontaneous love the Gopis have for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Dear brother, nowhere will you find such kindness; just meditate upon the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Receiving Mahāprabhu's order, you thoroughly studied the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and extracted the essence of prema-bhakti, pure devotional service. Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote many books which give love of God and fulfill everyone's desires. On the platform of parakīya-rasa, pure paramour love, Rādhā and Govinda enact intimate pastimes full of singing, dancing, and playing. After tasting the honey-sweet nectar of these pastimes and understanding the mood of Lord Caitanya, you revealed this parakīya-rasa to the world. Feeling extreme separation from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and suffering unlimited miseries, I speak like a madman and lament. My dear brother, when I, Dāsa-dāsa, try to express all these things, I feel great distress and wish to give up my life."

Thank you, Dāsa-dāsa, for that wonderful poem, that wonderful kīrtana, which we also as members of ISKCON can sing on the disappearance day of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. I think perhaps I will publish the entire work somewhere in the next few days. So, thank you so much, Prabhus. We will continue with our series next week. Quite busy here on a Festival of India tour on the Baltic Sea coast here in Poland. We are coming to the conclusion of our summer here. The festivals have been extraordinary; many thousands and thousands of people have come and relished their introduction to the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, we are also lamenting that it is almost over, but of course, for all devotees, the future is very bright. So, we are looking forward to our next service. Thank you. I will see you next time, next Friday. 

Śrī Śrī Gaura Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarāma kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! 

Glorious to you.""