"*00356*.*
"# Samādhis of the Ācāryas: Part 3

Hi, Kṛṣṇa. Very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. We are continuing with our series on the samādhis of our ācāryas, and this will be part three. As we all know, in our tradition, when an ācārya departs this world, we place his body in a samādhi, or you could say a samādhi mandir. When doing this, it’s understood that the ācārya eternally resides in his samādhi. 

Actually, I was reading that such ācāryas eternally reside in five things. It is interesting: they reside in the knowledge or jñāna given in their lectures or books; they reside with their prāṇadhana, meaning the deities that they established or worshiped, that were and are their life and soul; they reside where they performed their pastimes, like their baiṭhak, meaning their sitting place, or their bhajan-kuṭīr; they reside in the articles or tadīya that they used; and they reside in their samādhis. Regarding residing in the books that they’ve written, we worship such manuscripts or scriptures written by them which encapsulate the knowledge given to us by them, because they contain the vāṇī or the instructions of such an ācārya, which you could say are, in essence, non-different from an ācārya. 

My dear godbrother, Cāru Prabhu, recalled in his memories of Śrīla Prabhupāda that he was present in a temple when a reporter asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, "Sir, what’s going to happen to the movement after you die?" Meaning our movement. And before he’d even finished the sentence, Prabhupāda said, "I will never die." Then he paused and said, "I will live forever in my books." Of his own spiritual master, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta, he lives forever by his divine instructions, and the follower lives with him. We also worship our ācāryas along with their deities when we sing bhajans like "Jaya Rādhā-Govinda, Rādhā-Govinda Rūpa-Gosvāmī prāṇadhana," meaning Rādhā and Govinda are the life and soul of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. We offer our respects to the room or rooms or the place of the ācārya’s bhajan in the mood that they still reside in that room and do their bhajan and their sādhana there. 

In Māyāpur, we’re building a most significant temple, the Temple of the Vedic Planetarium, and we expect millions of people will come to see it. But Śrīla Prabhupāda’s simple bhajan-kuṭīr, where he stayed there in the very early days of the Māyāpur project, it’s still there and it attracts the same love and devotion from devotees as does the T.O.V.P. project, because Śrīla Prabhupāda lived and breathed there. We worship the ācārya’s personal articles like their pādukas—the wooden shoes—japa beads, clothes, etc., because they used these articles, so the potency of their sādhana, their energy, and their ābhā reside in these articles. When Śrīla Prabhupāda kindly gave me his saffron dhoti in London in 1907 [sic], when I was on my way to preach in France, he said to me, "A gift from a Vaiṣṇava is a very special thing." 

And finally, when our ācāryas are placed in samādhi, it’s considered a most sacred place because, again, they’re personally present there. Proof of that is that sometimes they actually reveal their presence there. An example is shortly after his cremation, Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī appeared to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, and he instructed Jīva Gosvāmī to place his ashes in a samādhi at the Rādhā-Gopīnātha temple at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Another example is that one time Śrīla Prabhupāda told the disciple who was his personal servant at the time that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī once appeared to him while he was living at the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple in Vṛndāvana. After taking sannyāsa in those early years, Śrīla Prabhupāda, we know, would often pray to Rādhā-Dāmodara and the Six Gosvāmīs while honoring mahāprasādam in that kitchen room. One day, he was looking out the window of his room at the samādhi of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, when suddenly Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī appeared before Śrīla Prabhupāda, as he told the pastime to his disciple, and spoke the following amazing words to our beloved Prabhupāda: "Mahārāja, don’t worry about anything. Go ahead and travel to the West and preach. Just preach the message of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, and you’ll be successful. I guarantee, because I will be right with you all the time."

Some deep insights there. So, who, after hearing this, would not make it a point to visit the samādhis of our ācāryas in Vṛndāvana and Māyāpur? An amazing thing is that even those ācāryas whose samādhis we visit themselves would visit the samādhis of previous ācāryas; this is our tradition. The *Bhakti-ratnākara* describes that after visiting Vṛndāvana and before returning to Navadvīpa, Jāhnavā Mātā said goodbye to all the Vrajavāsīs. Then it’s described she visited all the major temples like Govindajī, Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana, Rādhā-vinoda, Rādhā-Dāmodara, etc., and then she offered prayers to Gopīśvara Mahādeva, Lord Śiva, and Vṛndā Devī. Afterwards, before leaving, she visited four samādhis: those of Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Kaśīśvara Paṇḍita, Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. And while visiting those samādhis, *Bhakti-ratnākara* says she felt a deep sorrow and cried a Ganges river of tears. She felt deep sorrow and cried a Ganges river of tears. And then *Bhakti-ratnākara* also recounts that upon arriving in Jagannātha Purī one time, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, one of our heroes, quickly ran to the samādhi of Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura, where he fell down and offered obeisances and deep prayers.

So now we’ll discuss in detail the various types of samādhis in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya. It’s so interesting; I really enjoyed researching this and sharing what I found with you. When a Vaiṣṇavācārya or a saintly person departs this world, his body is entered in the ground where a samādhi structure is built over it. Now, that type of samādhi where the full body of the saintly person is interred, it’s called a *deha samādhi*, literally meaning a full samādhi. For example, the samādhi of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda at the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir in Vṛndāvana is a *deha samādhi*. 

Another type of samādhi is called a *nāma samādhi*. It’s when the saintly person’s body is cremated and his followers place his ashes in the ground along with a silver or gold plate in which they have engraved his name; a samādhi mandir is built over that site. Small such samādhis, I was reading, are mostly made inside the temples because the full-bodied samādhis of an ācārya are always outside the temple. But these *nāma samādhis*, they can be inside a temple, and an example of this is the samādhi of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, which is inside a small temple on the property of the Madana-mohana temple—Sanātana Gosvāmī’s temple in Vṛndāvana. It’s called the Bhaṭṭa-jī temple. There is the main temple of Madana-mohana, and there’s a few constructions there, and one is this Bhaṭṭa-jī temple. 

So another type of samādhi is known as an *aṅga samādhi*. It’s a samādhi built with a bodily part of an ācārya or saintly person, like some hair of the ācārya, or his tooth, or one of his bones, or perhaps one of his nails like that—interesting. For example, there is the famous *keśa samādhi* or hair samādhi of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Kaṭvā, or there’s the *danta samādhi*, the tooth samādhi of Gadādhara Paṇḍita in Vṛndāvana. I visited that temple many times; the whole temple is built around the tooth, for the worship and glorification of a tooth of Gadādhara Paṇḍita. There’s also a *nakha samādhi* or a nail samādhi of Murāri Gupta in Vṛndāvana. Now, all of these are part of the *aṅga samādhis*, or samādhis built over the bodily parts of a sacred person. I was recently in Cyprus, in the Mediterranean Sea, where many of the early Christian saints are buried or entombed. In one of the older monasteries that I visited, I saw some of their bodily parts very well preserved and displayed in various ways, in glass cases, etc., and some of the items like their teeth, their bones, and their hair were said to be over 1,500 years old.

Now another type of samādhi is called a *smṛti samādhi*, or you could say a memorial samādhi—memorial in the sense that the ācārya or saintly person’s body was not available for placing in samādhi because he may have perished while traveling in a dangerous forest, or he was eaten by a wild animal, or he drowned in a flood and his body could not be retrieved. So, in olden days, Vaiṣṇavas would make a memorial samādhi of marble or bricks in memory of that saint or sādhu. And I discovered that a number of these samādhis can be seen near various kuṇḍas or sacred lakes in Vṛndāvana, also at Govardhana Hill, and sometimes in the backyards of old temples in Vraja.

Another samādhi is called a *dhūli samādhi* or a dust samādhi. Again, in previous times, when an exalted Vaiṣṇava passed away, the dust from his lotus feet, the dust from his kuṭīr where he did bhajan, or even the dust from the village where he was born, was placed in a silver box—or I was reading, sometimes a round marble box—and buried in the ground, and then a samādhi mandir was built on top of that. This was a *dhūli* or a dust samādhi. 

We can move on; there’s lots of samādhis. Another type of samādhi is when a sādhu or an ācārya was cremated after dying, and devotees would search for a particular bone in his ashes called an *ātmārām*. It’s a particular bone that survives the burning of the body, and it’s located in the ribcage, very close to the heart. It actually has the shape much like a sādhu sitting in padmāsana, meaning a classic yogic posture. It looks like that; it’s a good-sized bone which is considered the house of the ātmā, the house of the soul. And after finding that particular bone in the ashes of the saint, it was placed in a silver or sometimes a gold box and buried in the ground with five or seven silver coins. Getting some details here; it was buried in the ground with five or seven silver coins. And on top of that, devotees would make the samādhi mandir. 

Yet another type of samādhi is when flowers from the last flower garland worn by the ācārya were placed in a samādhi mandir. We’re familiar with this in ISKCON; I believe this is referred to as a *puṣpa samādhi*. 

Then there is a *tadīya samādhi*. It’s a samādhi of the ācāryas or a saintly person’s personal articles. *Tadīya* comes from the Sanskrit word *tadīyam*, which literally means belongings or things—how is it said—things used by the skin or body. So *tadīya samādhi* means the samādhi of the personal belongings of an ācārya or a sādhu. For example, devotees would place in such a samādhi the ācārya’s japa-mālā, his kaupīna or his loincloth, his neck beads, or his water pot, a black blanket or *kaṇḍhā*, or his stick, and other such articles that were personally used by him. One might think that when the ācārya passes away, such important articles would better be distributed to disciples or well-wishers, which sometimes they are. I know many of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s articles were distributed to faithful and loyal disciples. But in those days, there was always the fear that such items would be lost or misplaced in time. We have to consider that in the past, when our ācāryas were living in the Vṛndāvana forest, there was no security, no locks or safes there in the forest, and there was always the fear that animals in the forest would take these things, or that such items would be affected by Vṛndāvana’s extreme climate. There was also concern that disciples might quarrel or fight over possessing such items, so it was thought the best and the easiest way to avoid all these concerns was to bury these *tadīyas* or personal belongings of the ācāryas in samādhis. 

Now, another type of samādhi is a *grantha samādhi*. *Grantha samādhi* means a samādhi of scriptures. Many of you must know that there is such a *grantha samādhi* near the samādhi of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, in the same courtyard actually, not far from the Madana-mohana temple. This is a samādhi of scriptures written by, primarily, our six Gosvāmīs and some other previous ācāryas. Now, there’s many reasons for placing such manuscripts and scriptures in samādhis. The first reason is that such scriptures may be beyond the human mind, meaning that they’re so deep that we can’t understand them. The Gosvāmīs wrote very deep scriptures, but apparently, they went even deeper, and we might misunderstand them. They are only for pure, self-realized, pure devotees of the Lord, so they’re not for the general public, so they would be placed in that particular *grantha samādhi*. Or perhaps the language is impossible to understand, or they would put such scriptures in samādhi because the paper they were written on was very fragile, or sometimes the scriptures were incomplete; they were being written but the ācārya passed away before the conclusion, so they were put in samādhi. Or they were damaged by bugs, or scriptures used to be damaged by rain or moisture, so they’re sacred. For any of those reasons, a scripture would be placed in a box, covered with a red cloth, and then worshipped properly with sandala, dhūpa, and a garland and then placed in samādhi. That’s interesting. 

Now, in my readings, I discovered a very rare form of samādhi. In the olden days, it was a *vādya samādhi*. This is a samādhi in which musical instruments that were used or played by the ācāryas, like mṛdaṅgas, karatālas, bells, etc., that may have been broken in time, were placed in samādhi. They were placed in the earth with a small shrine on top of them where devotees could go and offer prayers and garlands to those musical instruments used by our ācāryas. 

Another rare samādhi that I found out about is called the *śākhā samādhi*. This is a samādhi of a branch of an ancient, sacred tree. For example, one example is the tree which Kṛṣṇa jumped off into the Yamunā River to fight with the Kāliya serpent. That tree, it’s still present; we pass that tree when we go on Vṛndāvana parikramā. A branch from that tree could be put into this particular *śākhā samādhi*, or trees in forests where the Divine Couple, Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, performed their pastimes, or even like a pilu bush on the banks of Śyāma-kuṇḍa, or the famous tamarind tree at Imitalā, or even trees under which our ācāryas did bhajan or wrote those sacred scriptures. Of course, no one would willingly break off such a branch of a tree like that; they would be taken only if a branch fell because of a storm or heavy wind and rain, or sometimes naughty monkeys would swing and break the branches of such trees which were thousands of years old. 

Actually, several years ago, I had the good fortune to go to Bangladesh with Rādhānātha Swami and several of his brahmacārīs. We went to take darśana of many of the holy places associated with Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and we had the extreme good fortune to go to Kheturi, which was the birthplace or appearance place of Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura. It’s situated right on the banks of the Padma River, and many of you know the pastime that before Lord Caitanya departed, He wanted to leave prema for Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, who was going to appear after Mahāprabhu’s disappearance. He was going to carry on the Saṅkīrtana movement. So Lord Caitanya took a part of prema, liquid prema, and He gave it to the Padma River personified, Mother Padma. He said, "One day in the future, a young boy will come to bathe in your waters; it will be Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura. You please pour this liquid prema over him so that he can experience it." That pastime transpired; it happened. Narottama came as a young boy, he bathed in the river, and Mother Padma came and poured this nectar over him, and he experienced the eight symptoms of ecstatic love of God. That pastime took place just on the banks, or just into the water on the banks, of the Padma River. And there was one tree, a big tree, overhanging into the water or over the water, and under that tree, that’s where Narottama achieved that prema, got that prema from Mother Padma, and that tree still exists 450 years later. 

So when we went to Kheturi, I went to visit that tree, take darśana of that tree, and I saw that there’s a Gauḍīya Maṭha temple there for the sole purpose of worshipping that tree. So with the few brahmacārīs, we sat down and we were chanting just near the water, under this tree. We’re chanting our japa, and suddenly a big storm came, just out of nowhere. A big storm came; it was such a violent storm that it broke off one of the branches of that tree, and we were sitting there and the branch fell just in front of me where I was standing chanting japa. And the temple pūjārī was there, sitting with us as well, and when that branch fell, I was looking at it with great awe and greed, and the pūjārī was there, and he was looking at it too. So he looked at me, and I looked at him, and he said, "All right, Mahārāj, take that branch." So I took that branch, and eventually when I came back to Europe, back to Poland, one of my disciples, Viśvambhara Dāsa, he carved japa-mālā from that branch, and I’d like to show you. These are my japa-mālā carved from the branch of the tree under which occurred that pastime of Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura. This is causeless mercy, his sacred beads. And there was so much wood in that branch that also even my kaṇṭhī-mālā beads are made from that sacred tree; it’s all the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda. But in Vṛndāvana, if the broken branch was small enough, the Vrajavāsīs would, and still to this day do, fix it back on the tree with melted lac. They put it back on the tree with melted lac. If it’s too big, they place it in samādhi. 

Kṛṣṇa. So now the last type of samādhi I would like to mention is a *jhadū samādhi*. There’s a *jhadū samādhi*—brooms—which sādhus or the ācāryas used to sweep the forest with every day for the pleasure of the Divine Couple. When such brooms got old and worn down, sādhus used to dig a hole in the ground and place the broom inside, and on top of that, they would grow a small plant so that no one could stand on top of such a broom samādhi. At the broom samādhis, I have to remember, they’re called *sohanī*. *S-o-h-a-n-ī*. And they can still be seen today in Vṛndāvana, down at Nidhivan; you can find these *sohanī* samādhis. It’s safe in Seva-kuñja, Vṛndāvana, and actually there’s still some existing in the first few kilometers of the Govardhana parikramā. 

Wonderful details. So these are just some of the different types of samādhi traditions in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya and in other places as well, and I hope that all this information and this nectar will help to awaken your love for our ācāryas and for their samādhis, and you will take the time to visit those samādhis when you go to Vraja. 

So I would like to end today’s class with a sweet poem by a Vrajavāsī poet named Balabhadra Dāsa. He wrote this poem hundreds of years ago, and it’s very touching to the heart: 
"O mind, always depend exclusively on the lotus feet of the ācāryas. Sing their glories, for they will grant you fulfillment in an instant. Day or night, keep company with the Lord’s devotees alone, and never eat anything that has not first been offered to the Lord." The poet Balabhadra advises to renounce attachment to anything other than the dust of the ācārya’s lotus feet. 

Thank you, Kṛṣṇa, and thank you for giving us access to all these wonderful glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. So thank you, Prabhupāda. We’re busy again; we’re busy up here on the Baltic Sea coast with our festival tour, literally a festival every day except Monday, but we’re busy with other arrangements, and we’re busy, but I do find time to research, and I love giving these classes to inspire you in your bhakti. So see you next Friday. 

Jaya Rādhā-Śyāma. Thank you.""