"*00419*.*
"### Samadhis of the Ācāryas – Part 1

Hare Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvan-dhām. *Vande ‘ham śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalam śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* So, today I would like to begin a new miniseries on the samādhis of our previous ācāryas as well as other great saints in our line. 

My references will be, of course, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books, along with the book entitled *Sūcaka-kīrtana*, which I found in the Vṛndāvan Research Institute. This includes various Vaiṣṇava songs by different authors, compiled in manuscript form by an unknown author 300 years ago. Also, the *Vaiṣṇava-pūjā-vidhi* by Govinda Dāsa, written in the mid-17th century; the *Vraja-utsava* by Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Shāstrī, who was a famous Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava astrologer in the 18th century; as well as Mahānidhi Swami’s book, *The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Samādhis in Vṛndāvan*.

To begin, our prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas and saints who have been placed in samādhis in Vṛndāvan, such as the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvan, are all understood to be amongst the personalities who accompany the Lord whenever He comes to the material world to reestablish religious principles: *paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām*—a famous verse in *Bhagavad-gītā*—"in order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to re-establish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium" (*Bhagavad-gītā* 4.8). 

So, when the Lord comes, He brings His devotees with Him. It is said, "You will never see a picture of Kṛṣṇa alone; He is always accompanied by His friends and devotees." So, 500 years ago, these intimate servants, friends, parents, and lovers of Kṛṣṇa came down from Goloka Vṛndāvan to assist the Lord in His incarnation as Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Our worshipable Lord, the most prominent amongst them, the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvan, empowered by the Lord, you could say they established the very foundation of His movement. For example, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī explained *sambandha-tattva* and the two paths of sādhana-bhakti: *vaidhī* and *rāgānugā*. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī revealed the loving exchanges between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and their spontaneous loving servants. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī proved the preeminence of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism by revealing, without any doubt, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī taught the height of material renunciation by relishing the deepest spiritual attachment for Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. There were other great devotees at that time as well, like Lokanātha Gosvāmī and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and later many generations of great ācāryas came after Lord Caitanya, like our beloved Śrīnivāsa Ācārya and Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, who were our heroes. Then came, amongst others, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa.

Now, in his famous work *Śrī Caitanya’s Teachings*, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī explains the role of Lord Caitanya and His associates. He writes, and I quote: 
> "The unprejudiced study of the life of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya will help us in the fullest measure to understand the actual meaning of the Gopīs' love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvan. The esoteric reason for this is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, and the associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya are the same as the Gopīs, mañjarīs, and other servitors of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja."

Now, hearing this, one might naturally lament, "All these great souls came and left; I am so unfortunate, I never got their association." And that was actually the mood of Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. He was, you could say, the original second generation of devotees after Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Approximately 450 years ago, he wrote in his famous *Prārthanā*, "*hā hā prabhu rūpa-sanātana, hā dāsa-raghunātha*"—it is very touching: "Where am I, and where is Rūpa Gosvāmī? Where is Sanātana? Where is dāsa Raghunātha, the deliverer of the fallen? Where am I? Bhaṭṭa Raghunātha and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, and where is Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja? Where did Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, the king of dancers, suddenly go?" Being separated from their loving association and the blissful pastimes of Mahāprabhu, Narottama dāsa can only cry. 

However, if we continue to read Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī’s words in his *Śrī Caitanya’s Teachings*, we come to—how could I say?—a most comforting statement. He writes: 
> "But they [meaning such great souls] can show themselves to us if they choose to do so." 

Wow! "But they can show themselves to us if they choose to do so." And how do they do so? Well, that is the subject of this series, because such liberated souls are beyond the limitations of time and space. So they can sometimes appear before a devotee to personally guide him or her on the path back home, back to Godhead. 

One time, a devotee asked Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, "Can the great devotees and saints of the past who have departed this world hear our prayers when we pray to them?" So Śrīla Bhaktivinoda replied, "Yes, they can hear you, and they can also reciprocate with your prayers." I was so happy to read that. And actually, after a lecture on September 9th, 1969, I was reading—an Indian lady asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, "Is the spiritual master still guiding us after death?" And Śrīla Prabhupāda replied, "Yes, yes. Just like Kṛṣṇa is guiding us, similarly, the spiritual master will also guide us. Yes, yes, just like Kṛṣṇa is guiding us, similarly, the spiritual master will also guide us."

And by visiting the samādhis of great saints, we may also be inspired and feel guided in our inner progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore, we should visit the samādhis of great saints, especially in Vraja, and pray to them; remember them, for there is actually a very intimate connection in remembering our great saints and attaining eternal residence in Vṛndāvan. Just by remembering them—this is explained very clearly by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who writes in his illustrious *Gītāvalī*: 
> "You should all remember Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra and all his family members, who are all sincere servants of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. You should also remember the father of Kavi Karṇapūra, Śivānanda Sena. Always remember all those Vaiṣṇavas who strictly follow the path of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and who are absorbed in *bhajana*. If you actually want residence in the land of Vraja, then you must remember all the Vaiṣṇavas who are followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī."

So again, we can approach all these saints, as well as our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, through their samādhis. Unlike common people in India who are burned and you could say forgotten at death, great devotees are lovingly placed in the sacred earth of Vṛndāvan. Śrīla Prabhupāda said in a *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* class in Māyāpur, March 4th, 1976: 
> "If you cultivate spiritual knowledge in large quantities, then your body is no longer material; it becomes spiritualized, *cinmaya*. Therefore, the body of a great saintly person is not burned; it is buried in samādhi, because a Vaiṣṇava's body is *cinmaya*." 

They act as, you could say, focal points for devotees to connect with the spiritual mercy, the blessings, and inspiration continuously emanating from these self-realized souls in samādhi. By visiting the samādhis, offering obeisances, praying, circumambulating them, offering prasādam, incense, ghee lamps, and flowers, sincere devotees can receive mercy from these eternal associates of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

So, in this series, we will talk about the departure of such saints from this world, like which day they departed, the time of their departure, the place where they are buried or placed in samādhi, as well as about their particular samādhis: the shape, the size, the architectural designs—we will get into all the details. Most importantly, we will discuss the mood of these great saints who reside in their samādhi-mandiras, meaning exactly what is their samādhi, their meditation, because the actual word *samādhi* means complete concentration of the mind on the Supreme Lord. In the *Nirukti* Vedic dictionary, it says it means one is in samādhi when the mind is completely fixed in understanding the actual truth of the self. That is the consciousness centered in these samādhi-mandiras, in the hearts of those great Vaiṣṇavas. Lord Kṛṣṇa tells Uddhava in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (11.16.24): *yogānām ātma-samrodho*—"Amongst the progressive states of yoga, I am the final state, samādhi, where the soul is completely free of illusion," Kṛṣṇa's words.

So, to begin with, the common term used for the departure of an ācārya or a saint—many devotees are familiar with this word, *tirobhāva*. *Tirobhāva*, which in Sanskrit literally means "disappearance day." However, there are many other names or terms in Vṛndāvan for the day a great devotee departs. One such name is *antar-dhāna-līlā*. *Antar* means literally the disguise of becoming invisible. In other words, the bodies of the saints become invisible because they are interred in the samādhi-mandira, but it is just a disguise, because in essence, these great souls are always with us. I read that *antar-dhāna* is one of the 11 types of extraordinary form-changing called *vikriyā*, which is a subclass of eight *siddhis* or extraordinary powers. These ācāryas disappear; they become invisible, but they are still present with us.

Another term used to describe the disappearance day of a great devotee in Vraja is called *tithi-viraha*. *Tithi-viraha* means literally "separation," and *tithi* refers to the time of the day of that saint's departure, or you could say in a general way, the day of separation. 

Another term used to describe the day such a saint leaves us is *lāla-gāthā*. This is my favorite, *lāla-gāthā*, which literally means "the red day." In Vṛndāvan culture—we discussed this before—red represents the meeting of one's beloved. So when great saints depart, it's understood they are joining their beloved Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in their eternal pastimes. Therefore, the departure day is referred to as *lāla-gāthā*. That is my favorite name. 

Another interesting name used in the Vaiṣṇava community in Vṛndāvan when great devotees leave this world is *kuñja-vāsa*. *Kuñja-vāsa* refers to, literally, eternal residence in the groves of Vraja. In other words, it refers to the day that a devotee attains eternal residence in the kuñjas or the groves of Vṛndāvan. That’s our goal. 

Yet another name which refers to the disappearance of an ācārya—where I read sometimes even the personal servant of an ācārya is *ānanda-visrānti-tithi*. *Ānanda-visrānti-tithi*, which means—it is also very sweet—the day of resting in bliss. 

And one last name I found was used in the olden days in Vṛndāvan; it was *vijaya-tithi*, meaning "the day of victory." This was used when Rajput kings, who had devoted their whole lives in devotion to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, left this world. For them, it was called *vijaya-tithi*. 

Actually, it is possible for a great devotee to depart on the day of his choice. For example, recently, on the day of Makara-saṅkrānti in—what was 2017, actually precisely it was the 14th of January 2017—the mahanta, the leader of the Nimbārka-sampradāya, his name was Śrī Rādhā Sarveśvara Devācārya, he was also known as Śrīji Mahārāja. He got up around 3:00 AM, he performed his morning duties, then he asked his followers if it was Makara-saṅkrānti. Confirming that it was, he took a seated position, entered into samādhi, and left this world in front of all those followers. Is this—is this Makara-saṅkrānti? Yes, it is. He sat down and, like *āsana*, entered into samādhi, left this world of his own choice. I believe he was 88 years old and he had been the head of that sampradāya as an ācārya for 74 years. He chose the moment of his disappearance. So this is the true meaning of, you could say, conquering death. Kṛṣṇa does not decide when such devotees leave; instead, such devotees disappear when they desire. All glories to such devotees, and we know where they go. 

Now, a very interesting fact is that a *tirobhāva*, or the departure day of a great devotee, it is often celebrated with more joy in Vṛndāvan and Bengal than the appearance day of that devotee. Why is that? Well, it's because when a pure devotee is born, his glories are yet unknown, but by the time he departs this world, his character and deeds are enshrined in history and can be celebrated in a great and wonderful way. The analogy is given of the lotus flower, whose beauty is hidden at night when it is closed up, but as the sun rises in the morning, it slowly begins to open and is fully blossomed by noontime. You can appreciate it. 

Towards the end, I was thinking just like our Śrīla Prabhupāda. Though an astrologer made remarkable predictions—or made many remarkable predictions—when Prabhupāda was born, his glories were unknown to the world at large; just the family members knew basically. Of course, there were a few further hints of Prabhupāda’s glories in his later years, even before he came to America. One time, a few of his sannyāsī godbrothers, they complained to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī that "Abhay Bābū"—he was, as some called him around that time; that's how Prabhupāda was referred to in the Gauḍīya Maṭha—they complained, "Being a working householder, he wasn't deserving all the attention that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī appeared to be giving him." We know that he was a favorite son, so they were complaining, "He's a working householder, but you're giving him so much association, not as much as sannyāsīs." Now, when Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī heard this complaint, he shot back, "Be quiet, all of you! In the end, he will do everything. Be quiet, all of you! In the end, he, our Prabhupāda, will do everything." And he did. Our Śrīla Prabhupāda became that chosen son who left India at the advanced age of 70 years old to spread the message of Lord Caitanya all over the world. 

So, as per tradition, we should celebrate his *tirobhāva*, his departure day, in a big way because we know much of his glories, for though he too has departed, he is still with us. Prabhupāda wrote of his own spiritual master, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī: "He lives forever by his divine instructions, and the follower lives with him." Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura had the following inscribed on the samādhi-mandira of Haridāsa Ṭhākura: 
> "He reasons ill who tells that Vaiṣṇavas die, / When thou art living still in sound. / The Vaiṣṇavas die to live, and living try / To spread the holy name around." 

And Prabhupāda wrote to me in a letter, because he had visited our temple in Detroit, and as he left, I wrote a letter as he was leaving and I gave it to him as he was getting in the car, and I was saying that I would miss him very much. So Prabhupāda actually wrote back two weeks later—quite a long letter—but part of that letter was to me: "I understand your feelings of separation. I am also feeling separation from my Gurumahārāja, but I always feel that he is watching over and protecting me." So I took that as an instruction that, although I feel separation from Prabhupāda, I feel he is watching over and protecting me and all of us, actually all of this International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. He is so kind. 

Now, in the past, and even in present-day Vṛndāvan, there are various ways a Vaiṣṇava community celebrates the departure of such an ācārya or a saint. One way is to organize a large feast after they depart, in remembrance of that great soul. And this was actually the final wish of Gour Mohan De, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s father. On his deathbed, he made this request: that after he passed away, a big kīrtana be held in honor of Lord Caitanya and a large feast be made for the assembled devotees. So we can do like that in our movement for the departure of any Vaiṣṇava. 

Now, it is really interesting: every year in Vṛndāvan and Bengal, on the disappearance day of any of the 64 direct or intimate associates of Lord Caitanya—those who were part of His pastimes 500 years ago—these associates are sometimes referred to as *mahantas*. A very special ceremony is observed on the disappearance day of any one of those 64 throughout the year. A special ceremony is observed which I will explain to you in detail because it is really interesting. I saw it a few times in the past few years. But first, I will name these particular 64 mahāntas or ācāryas because just by hearing their names, we are purified. These associates of Caitanya Mahāprabhu: the description begins with the Pañca-tattva standing on a six-sided jeweled *siṁhāsana* in the center of the Yoga-pīṭha, the appearance place of the Lord. Eight mahāntas or ācāryas surround them like the petals of a lotus flower, and these eight mahāntas, who are described as equal to the Aṣṭa-sakhīs, are accompanied by eight other great ācāryas, and they are described as follows: 

Svarūpa Dāmodara, who was with Candraśekhara Ācārya; then Rāmānanda Rāya, who was with Mādhava Ācārya, Dvijananda, Rāmacandra Datta, Vāsudeva Datta, Nanda Ācārya, Śaṅkara Ṭhākura, Sudarśana Ṭhākura; and [pause] who is with Śrīrāma Paṇḍita, Jagannātha Dāsa, Jagadīśa Paṇḍita, Sadāśiva Kavirāja, Śrī Mukunda Rāya; then Rāmānanda Vasu, who was with Paramānanda Ṭhākura; then Śivānanda Sena, who was with Śrī Makaradhvaja Datta, Raghunātha Datta, Śrī Madhu Paṇḍita, Viṣṇudāsa Ācārya, Purandara Miśra, Govinda Ṭhākura, Paramānanda Gupta, and Balārāma Dāsa. Then Govinda Ghoṣa—just to hear these names!—Govinda Ghoṣa, who was with Kāśī Miśra, Śrīkānta Mahiti, or sometimes it is said Vakeśvara, who is with Śrī Makara, Śrī Vidyā, Śrī Govinda Ṭhākura, Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra; then Vāsudeva Ghoṣa, who was with Rāghava Paṇḍita, Murāri Caitanya. And then there are eight Gosvāmīs as part of these 64 mahāntas: Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana, Śrī Lokanātha, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa, Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa, Śrī Jīva, Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, and Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja. Then there are eight Kavirājas—it is also said, including Śrī Janārdana Deva, Govinda Kavirāja, Karṇapūra Kavirāja, Narasiṅga Kavirāja, Bhagavān Kavirāja. Then there are the Deva-gopālas, or 12 cowherd boys: Abhirāma Gopāla, Sundarānanda; then four gatekeepers: Mukunda Dāsa, Sāraṅga Ṭhākura, Govinda Ācārya, and Vaṁśīvadana Dāsa. Now, the total number listed there is actually 104, although generally this list is called the "64 Mahāntas." Wasn't that nice, hearing the names of those intimate associates of Lord Caitanya? 

So, first of all, on any of their disappearance days, a huge feast is prepared for all of them. In other words, if it is the appearance day or disappearance day of one of them, then a huge feast is prepared for all of them. It is known as *bhoga*, in which devotees place 64 *āsanas*, 64 *cādar*s, 64 plates of prasādam, and 64 coins as *dakṣiṇā* in horizontal and vertical lines on the ground. Then the devotees invoke these 64 ācāryas to sit down at these designated places and pray to them to take the prasādam to honor the disappearance day of whomever that particular ācārya is being honored that day. After that, an *ārati* is performed to all the ācāryas, and afterwards their prasādam is distributed to all the assembled Vaiṣṇavas. This is followed by another celebration where devotees dance to the beat of 12 mṛdaṅgas and lots of khol-drums and kartālas while chanting the names of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And another ritual then takes place with the singing of *alāpacārī*, in which a Vaiṣṇava melodiously sings the names of all 64 ācāryas, saying "Jai ho! Jai ho!" after the name of each ācārya. Finally, all the Vaiṣṇavas go on *nagara-saṅkīrtana*, *harināma-saṅkīrtana*, village to village, and at one point they stop and sing a kīrtana known as *Sūcaka-kīrtana*. *Sūcaka-kīrtana*—this particular kīrtana we will discuss in detail in a further lecture in this series. It is really interesting. And finally, in the evening, there is *kathā*, discussions on the lives and departures of these 64 associates of Lord Caitanya, and in particular that particular ācārya whose disappearance day they are observing that day. And I was reading that on such days in Vṛndāvan and in Māyāpur, the deities are mostly in red and white outfits that day. And previously, when this ceremony was observed—because it's observed 64 times during the year—Vaiṣṇava men would shave their heads on the disappearance day of any of these ācāryas. So these ways, the departure of these great souls is celebrated, the 64 mahāntas. 

So I would like to finish today with the poetry of two well-known Vrajabāsī poets. The first is a poet named Rasikadāsa, whom I discovered in my research in the Vṛndāvan Research Institute. He wrote something very beautiful about these great ācāryas whom we mentioned. He wrote: 
> "All glory to Lord Nandanandana, the son of Mahārāja Nanda. All glories to His messengers who come to deliver the sinful and uplift the practitioners. By witnessing the sidelong glance of the Lord, they understand the meaning of that glance as an order to take responsibility of giving the highest meaning of life, *prema*, to others. Leaving all comforts, opulence, and pleasure in association with the divine couple, they appear themselves in front of us. Therefore, Rasikadāsa addresses all his listeners: 'My friends, take shelter of the moonlight feet of these ācāryas. If you do so, you are most fortunate.'" 

Wow. Another poet, Vinoda Vihārīdāsa, whom I discovered also in the Vṛndāvan Research Institute, he writes: 
> "May my mind always roam in the divine knowledge of the ācāryas which originated from the *tejas* or golden glow of Mahāprabhu. May my heart always dive deep in the beautiful form of them who are so dear to the Lord Himself. May my senses always serve them and purify the karma of my previous lives and those of this life as well. With my heart, speech, and actions, may I always desire to sing their glories and become a particle of dust at their lotus feet." 

If Vinoda Vihārī weeps in separation of these ācāryas and says to them, "Please, all of you ācāryas, just say once, 'O Vinoda, you are ours.'"

All right, Kṛṣṇa, thank you everyone. We will be back with part two in this new series next Friday from here, the Baltic Sea coast in Poland, where we are drowning not in water but in the ocean of devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. We bid you farewell until next Friday. All right, Kṛṣṇa, thank you so much. Take all the fallen conditioned souls with the *kīrtana* over to *prema*. 

Kṛṣṇa, you.""