"*00515*.*
"# Samādhis of the Ācāryas – Part 7: Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī

Dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We are continuing with our series on the samādhis of our ācāryas, and this will be part seven. Today, I would like to discuss the samādhi ceremony for Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and conclude with his success, as we’ve done with other ācāryas. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī was a veritable jewel in our disciplic succession. There’s a saying I heard last year in Vṛndāvana: "As a small spark is enough to burn a whole forest, a lion to scare a herd of deer, a single ray of the sun to nourish the lotuses of the world, a dark cloud to excite each and every peacock, so a scholarly leader is enough to enlighten the whole world." Such a devotional scholar was Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Teachings of Lord Caitanya*, Chapter 17: "To understand Lord Caitanya, one has to follow the direct disciples of Lord Caitanya, the six Gosvāmīs, and especially the path chalked out by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī." And of course, the *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā* by Kavi Karṇapūra attests to Jīva Gosvāmī’s greatness by declaring that in the spiritual world, in Goloka Vṛndāvana, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī is the gopī Vilāsa-mañjarī.

Actually, in my research about Jīva Gosvāmī for this lecture, I found so much information about his life and teachings that we could go on for days. It actually reminds me of a verse from the Bible, from John 21:25: "And there are also many other things that Jesus did, which if they were written one by one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that would have to be written." And so too it is with Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. One example of his greatness is his literary contribution; in his life, he compiled around 25 books with four hundred thousand Sanskrit verses. He would actually compose these verses in his mind and immediately write them down with a wooden stylus on palm leaves, and each verse, of course, was a priceless gem—perfect meter, rhythm, poetry, and meaning. He is actually considered the greatest philosopher of all in Indian history.

Śrī Jīva’s primary literary contributions, the *Ṣaṭ-sandarbhas*, provide, you could say, a written record of Lord Caitanya’s teachings, particularly to defeat the impersonal school of thought. Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa praised Jīva Gosvāmī as follows in his writings; he wrote: "By the mighty spade of his nectarean words, Jīva Gosvāmī tossed aside the dirt of fallacious Sāṅkhya arguments and recovered Kṛṣṇa’s splendor from the pit of vivarta-vāda. May he be our refuge." 

In a *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* class in Detroit on the 13th of June 1976, Prabhupāda said of Jīva Gosvāmī: "Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī is the nephew of Rūpa Gosvāmī. In the learned circles of Bengal, they say that such a big scholar and philosopher has not appeared in the past, and nobody expects a similar philosopher and learned scholar in the future. He was such a big personality, Jīva Gosvāmī. Big, big māyāvādīs, they were afraid of Jīva Gosvāmī’s logic and argument to establish the Vaiṣṇava philosophy." So again, much can be said about him, but today we’ll focus mainly on his departure later on in the class.

To begin with, Jīva Gosvāmī was the son of Anupama, who was the younger brother of Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. Anupama passed away earlier in the pastimes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and when Jīva Gosvāmī eventually followed his two uncles, Rūpa and Sanātana, to Vṛndāvana, he accepted the *caraṇa-śaraṇa*—the shelter of the lotus feet—of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who at that time was living, of course, in the forest of Vṛndāvana. In time, he became the only initiated disciple of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Scholars say that the family relationship of uncle and nephew was insignificant in their relationship compared to the relation as guru and disciple. This is very beautifully described by a poet named Govinda Dāsa; he wrote in the Brajabhāṣā language a book entitled *Padāvalī*.

Now, there’s a number of books entitled *Padāvalī*. In my research in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I came across many *padāvalīs* by different authors; some were written in Bengali, some in Brajabhāṣā, some in Oriya, some even in Sanskrit. The particular *padāvalī* that we’re going to quote is actually an unpublished book in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, but it was so nectarean that we came across it; I had it translated and copied. This particular part of that book, this Govinda Dāsa has written very beautifully regarding the relationship between Rūpa and Jīva:

> "The toenail of Śrī Rūpa was light emanating from the moon for Jīva; the divine yet sweet knowledge of Rūpa was the sky for Jīva; the lotus mouth of Śrī Rūpa was the universe for Jīva; the sweet words of Rūpa were the satisfaction of the senses for Jīva; serving the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa was the ultimate goal of life for Jīva; and the shadow of Śrī Rūpa was the protection for Jīva."

In such a way, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī’s world was surrounded by his beloved master, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Govinda Dāsa missed the chance to serve Jīva and Śrī Rūpa, who are the ocean of sweet nectar. We thank that particular devotee, Govinda Dāsa, for that sweet explanation. 

Now, it is well known that despite being from the same family, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī gave simple services like cleaning, filling water pots, collecting wood, and watering plants to Jīva Gosvāmī when he was young. Nevertheless, every instruction of his guru was very dear to his heart, and slowly the result of these services awoke affection in Śrī Rūpa’s heart for Jīva Gosvāmī. It is said that Jīva Gosvāmī became the "blue-eyed disciple" of Śrī Rūpa—meaning the favorite disciple, or he was actually the only disciple—and was given the important service of later on editing Rūpa Gosvāmī’s books as well as writing Sanskrit commentaries on those works. He became a very intimate disciple. Every morning, I was reading, Jīva Gosvāmī used to carefully handle those scriptures which were sometimes wet with the tears of Rūpa Gosvāmī. Another service that Jīva Gosvāmī rendered in Vṛndāvana was to greet all the exalted devotees who would come to see Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī from places like Purī, Bengal, South India, and Kashmir. So this is how the days and nights of the youthful life of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī were spent in service to his master, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. His life was only service of Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Then, in the year 1554, on the day of Śrāvaṇa Śukla Dvādaśī, Rūpa Gosvāmī departed this world and returned to his eternal sevā as Rūpa Mañjarī in the spiritual world in Goloka Vṛndāvana. One can only imagine how devastated Jīva Gosvāmī was on that day. Actually, Śrī Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura reveals the pain that such elevated devotees feel for those saintly persons they love when they leave this world. He describes it very nicely, very intensely, and very deeply in his *prārthanā*. He writes:

> "I will smash my head against the rock and enter into fire. Where will I find Lord Gaurāṅga, the reservoir of all wonderful qualities? Being unable to obtain the association of Lord Gaurāṅga, accompanied by all of these devotees in whose association He performed His pastimes, Narottama Dāsa simply weeps."

The day after his departure, Rūpa Gosvāmī’s divine form was placed in samādhi in Seva-kuñja, next to, or you could say in the compound of, the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, in a place where he had done bhajana for many years. He was not placed in samādhi near Goma-ṭīlā, which is that small hill where he discovered his Prāṇadhana—his most beloved deity, Govindadeva—because, as I explained some months ago, work had begun there already on Govindajī’s big temple; it was basically a construction zone. So Jīva Gosvāmī decided that he would be placed in samādhi near the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple.

Then, in time, gradually, with the departure of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī as well as many other associates of Lord Caitanya, all properties, bāīlīs, kuñjas, forests, kuṇḍas, and deities which were the responsibility of those saints came into the care and possession of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī for the purpose of, you know, preserving them, you could say, for future generations. But in time, Jīva Gosvāmī himself grew old. So, one evening in his old age, concerned about securing, preserving, and continuing the teachings of these ācāryas, he called for many local sādhus, scholars, writers, village counselors, followers, and disciples to come see him, and he wanted to discuss his last will and testament. He wasn't near his departure date, but he was growing old, so he always had a vision for the future. He called all these personalities, and in their presence, he sat down and he personally wrote his own last will and testament. 

You can imagine what a gathering that was; all these great personalities, he’s sitting there, he’s writing his last will and testament just to make everything clear: how things would go on after his departure. He wrote it in Sanskrit to begin with, and later on that occasion, he copied it in Bengali. Then he asked for specific witnesses—they were all sitting there—to come forward and sign the will as witnesses in his presence. Now, as many of you know, that original will still exists in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, and fortunately, it has been translated by our Hari-prasāda Dāsa of the GBC committee. I would like to take this opportunity today to read to all of you Jīva Gosvāmī’s will in full. This is a special moment in our *Samādhis of the Ācāryas* series.

The English translation is very eloquent:

> "November 1606. The following is the final will of the Vṛndāvana resident by the name Jīva. He is writing this: The constant follower of the lotus feet of the greatly renowned Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana, whose names are worthy of being chanted. Whatever activities have been performed by me have all been performed to facilitate the service of my worshipable lordships, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who are present in their deity forms. Firstly, I give this service to the saintly-natured soul exclusively dedicated to the service of the Absolute, Śrī Vilāsa Dāsa. Whatever paraphernalia has been collected for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s worship should be known as belonging to Śrī Vilāsa Dāsa after my departure. However, if on the destruction of my body, he, Śrī Vilāsa Dāsa, due to renunciation or being incapacitated, wishes to be relieved of the service, and if the supreme saintly son of Śrī Bharata Ācārya, the brāhmaṇa named Śrīmān Kṛṣṇadāsa, desires to be situated in the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa at that time, then Śrī Vilāsa Dāsa should himself hand over all my paraphernalia of worship along with the worshipable deities and everything else, including books, through another will. 
>
> In this, there is no other person who can claim any rights. Everything that belongs to me is being offered by me, so how can anyone else have a say in this matter? If anyone opposes this, then certainly he is a heretic and punishable by all the Vaiṣṇava kings. If the brāhmaṇa Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa also is incapable of performing the service, then Śrī Vilāsa Dāsa should willingly surrender everything to another fully eligible person. If Śrī Vilāsa Dāsa wishes to retire from the service in my mortal presence, then all decisions will rest on me solely. That this is my handwriting is a fact that can be testified by thousands. Moreover, those who saw me writing this will are also witnesses to the same. If it is not clear that certain handwriting is mine, then it should be considered if someone has enviously written something fake. However, if caution is exercised after my death, then this letter will be clear enough to convey my will. I am also writing the same in Bengali alphabet; that too should be considered as evidence. And I pray to all those who are my well-wishers that they may kindly help me in this matter. Auspiciousness to everyone, auspiciousness to everyone."

On another page, there’s a list of the witnesses along with their signatures. I had the great good fortune in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute to not only see this will but to hold it in my hands and touch the writing of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. I saw that one of the witnesses is Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, the author of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. What an august assembly of devotees! Now, after all the witnesses signed the will, they all had a big kīrtana; it’s described they had two kīrtanas, each four hours long, and they all danced and chanted in ecstasy.

Years later—I think, let me remember, it was on the third day of the bright fortnight of the month of Pauṣa in the year 1618—Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī completed his final pastimes on this earth planet and departed for Goloka. It is written that on that day, a wave of tears inundated Vṛndāvana, and the sound of lamentation could be heard everywhere. His samādhi was dug in the same area where his early life had passed in serving his spiritual master at Seva-kuñja, next to his Lord Dāmodara, and where the library he established was located. At that time, his samādhi was dug in such a way that the samādhi of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, which had previously been dug in the compound of Rādhā-Dāmodara, and Jīva Gosvāmī’s samādhi were in one line. They were in one line together, some distance apart. If you visit our temple now, you know there’s Rūpa Gosvāmī’s samādhi, then there’s all the beautiful deities, and off to the left is the samādhi of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. An interesting fact is that his samādhi was dug deeper than Rūpa Gosvāmī’s samādhi. The tradition is that if the samādhi of the guru is nearby, then the samādhi of the disciple should be dug deeper so that he is on a lower level than his spiritual master out of respect for the guru, just as we always sit below our gurus. The samādhi of the disciple should, of course, be much smaller. If we go today to the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, we’ll see a large samādhi of Rūpa Gosvāmī and a smaller samādhi of Jīva Gosvāmī. I was reading that at that samādhi ceremony, an earthen water pot with an open nose and a walking stick were placed next to Jīva Gosvāmī’s samādhi, and at the conclusion of the ceremony, all his disciples and followers came forward and placed coconuts and coins on the samādhi as a sign of gratitude and homage. Actually, the culture of placing coconuts and coins in Vedic ceremonies is always a gesture to offer respect, to congratulate someone, or again, to show a mood of gratitude. In ancient times, whenever kings would visit their gurus, they would offer a coconut with a gold coin on top of it to their spiritual masters.

To end our class today, I would like to finish with the *sūcaka-kīrtana* of Jīva Gosvāmī. We’ve discussed the meaning of *sūcaka-kīrtana* many times in this series. This was sung by the followers of Jīva Gosvāmī on his disappearance day through the centuries; it was written by a disciple in the lineage of Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī whose name was Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa. It is a very beautiful, heartfelt offering to Jīva Gosvāmī.

> "Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī is an ocean full of the jewels of *kṛṣṇa-prema*. O Prabhu, please give me your mercy; I am the most fallen but I want to sing your glories. This will keep me out of Māyā’s clutches. O Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, you are the son of Anupama, who is very devoted to Lord Rāma. Anupama is the younger brother of Śrī Sanātana and Rūpa Gosvāmīs. O Jīva, you know all scriptures, and you have revealed the inner meaning of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s writings. With your mind filled with detachment, you immediately renounced everything and went to Navadvīpa-dhāma. Upon seeing Lord Nityānanda, you fell down at His lotus feet and cried. Lord Nityānanda put His lotus feet on your head, then He lifted you up and embraced you. Overwhelmed with *kṛṣṇa-prema*, your body shook and displayed other symptoms of ecstasy. In that condition, you spoke the following: 'The name of Nityānanda Prabhu will deliver the entire universe and give bliss to all living entities. You have given your mercy and your own qualities to this fallen one. Such mercy is so rare, Lord Nityānanda, that even Lord Brahmā doesn't deserve it.' Lord Nityānanda replied, 'Śrīmān Mahāprabhu has given a special land to your family, so immediately go to that land of Vṛndāvana.' Overjoyed by hearing Lord Nityānanda’s words, you went to Vṛndāvana. My dear Jīva, while walking into Vṛndāvana, you constantly chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa and cried profusely. Continuously you called out, 'O Rūpa, O Sanātana, when will I see you? Please keep me alive until then.' Some days you drank only water and ate only a few chickpeas, but eventually you arrived in Mathurā. You lovingly gazed upon Mathurā and then slowly walked to Vaṁśīvaṭa in Vṛndāvana. You bathed in Yamunā, drank her pure water, and slept on her sands. The next day you went to Vṛndāvana. Upon seeing Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, all your desires were fulfilled. You wrote *Śrī Gopāla-campū*, which fully describes the nectarean pastimes of Braja, the *Ṣaṭ-sandarbhas*, and your many other works give full explanation of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Anyone who reads or hears these books will soon become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Your body is always adorned with all *sāttvika-bhāvas*—symptoms of ecstatic love—for Rādhā-Dāmodara. Your body radiates spiritual happiness and your mind loses its equilibrium when you recite *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. You always worship the divine couple and serve their transcendental conjugal pastimes within the groves of Vṛndāvana. You always meditate on Goloka and the loving pastimes of Rādhā-Dāmodara. O Jīva Gosvāmī Prabhu, this foolish rascal can't survive without your mercy which sustains my very life. After many births of accumulating pious acts, I have taken this rare birth wherein I have attained the service of your lotus feet. By touching a drop from Śrī Jīva’s ocean of mercy, I have attained the jewel of *prema*, pure love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Raghunātha Dāsa calls out, 'O Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, my only desire is to become your follower; please protect me and give me the shade of your lotus feet.'"

That’s a wonderful song. So, thank you, we’ll finish here. We are in Budapest, Hungary, at the moment with our traveling tour, and in a few hours, we’re flying to Paris, France, to go to New Mayapur to observe Vṛndāvana-īśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s appearance day. I’m very excited; I’m getting very emotional because I haven’t been there in 36 years, so I’m looking forward to that. We’ll address you next Friday or maybe shortly after, because I’ll be arriving back in Vṛndāvana around this time, so either that next Friday or a little after, we’ll continue with this series about our beloved ācāryas. Thank you so much.""