"*00466*.*
"# Samādhis of the Ācāryas – Part 8

Hi, dear audience, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvan-dhām. Please excuse us; we are one or two days late because we just came back from Europe from our Polish festival tour and visiting a few countries, and we needed a day break here before we started again. We are ready to go now. 

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale...* 

So, we are continuing with our series on the samādhis of our ācāryas in Vṛndāvan. This will be part eight. In this light, today I’d like to discuss some of the life and teachings of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. I was waiting for this one, and as we do, we will conclude with his departure.

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, of course, is known as our prayojana-ācārya, who teaches us—both by example and words—the deepest understandings and meanings of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Actually, to be honest, I don't feel at all qualified to speak about him today or the deep subject matters that he so kindly shared with us. Even to try and do so would be an attempt to look intelligent and special, which I’m not. So, I’ll quote a passage by one of my favorite devotees, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, from his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 12.11.24, where he recommends that we become humble by practicing or following the meditation he gives in that purport. He writes:

> "The earth, which is always visible to me, is the expansion of the lotus feet of my Lord. It is always to be meditated upon. All moving and non-moving living beings have taken shelter of the earth and are thus sheltered at the lotus feet of my Lord. For this reason, I should respect every living being and not envy anyone. In fact, all living entities constitute the jewel on my Lord's chest; therefore, I should never envy or deride any living entity." 

In other words, remain humble. 

So, to begin with, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, as many of you know, was the only son of a wealthy landowner. As a young boy, he had the association of Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura and received his blessings. At the age of 15, he had darśana of Lord Caitanya, and subsequently, by the mercy of Lord Nityānanda, we know he renounced his beautiful wife and opulent family. At that point, he ran to Jagannātha Purī to serve Lord Caitanya as well as, you could say, his śikṣā-guru, Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī. Mahāprabhu put him under the care of Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī for a total of 16 years. 

Of course, one day Lord Caitanya gave his personal Govardhana-śilā and guñjā-mālā to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. When that fateful day came that Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu departed this world in Jagannātha Purī at the age of 48, Dāsa Gosvāmī became so disturbed and distressed that he actually gave up eating. A short time later, Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, Rāya Rāmānanda, and Gadādhara Paṇḍita also left this world. At that point, devoid of both the association of the Lord and his intimate associates, it is described that Jagannātha Purī appeared empty and lifeless to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī—empty and lifeless. 

He actually writes in *Stavāvalī*, one of the books he wrote, "I no longer have the sustainer of my life, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. The land of Vraja has become empty and desolate. Govardhana Hill has become like a great python, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa has become like the gaping mouth of a ferocious tiger." 

Of course, he wrote this later on in Vṛndāvan when Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī passed away, but it gives us a deep understanding of how exalted Vaiṣṇavas feel when they lose their loved ones, their associates. Because Nārada says, "Guru-kṛṣṇa-vaiṣṇava"—these three persons are most dear to an advancing devotee: the Lord, his spiritual master, and the Vaiṣṇavas. So, later on, he lost the association of Rūpa Gosvāmī, and he wrote this poem. This helps us understand how he was feeling after the departure of Lord Caitanya and the other devotees I mentioned; he was devastated. 

His condition at that time has been compared to the residents of Vṛndāvan after Kṛṣṇa had departed for Mathurā. After the Lord had left Vraja, the Vrajavāsīs simply spent their days crying in separation. We’ve discussed this in many lectures. So, after Lord Caitanya left this world 500 years ago, Dāsa Gosvāmī decided to give up his life by going to Vṛndāvan and jumping off Govardhana Hill. We can only imagine what a long and arduous journey that was—to walk from Jagannātha Purī on foot to Vṛndāvan. On top of that, he was a lone pilgrim whom we can say no one knew or recognized. However, it is said that the fame of a devotee precedes him. The analogy is given just like the light of dawn precedes the sunrise. When Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī arrived at Govardhana Hill, he was met by Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. His fame traveled faster than him because in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, good news travels faster than bad news. 

Rūpa Gosvāmī hints at this in his *Vidagdha-mādhava* (1.13). There he writes: 

> "The transcendentally attractive qualities of an exalted devotee popularize his presence everywhere, even though he may be hidden from public view, just as musk spreads its fragrance everywhere even when locked away in a tight container." 

I’d like to recite that again: "The transcendentally attractive qualities of an exalted devotee popularize his presence everywhere, even though he may be hidden from public view, just as musk spreads its fragrance everywhere even when locked away in a tight container." Musk is a very powerful perfume, and I’ve actually had some musk that was produced in 1920—it’s illegal now to produce musk from the deer, but this was made in 1922; I bought it a few years ago—and sometimes I just walk into my room and I can smell the musk inside the container. So, you can’t hide it, neither can you hide the devotee’s glories. 

So, both Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, upon meeting Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, told him that they felt it was better he stay in this world, living at Govardhana Hill, specifically on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and by his example and words, share the glories of Lord Caitanya with the world. Because he knew them; he’d spent many, many years with Lord Caitanya. He actually started off as a young man in Jagannātha Purī; he was serving Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, who was the secretary of Mahāprabhu, so he knew Mahāprabhu very well. So, Rūpa and Sanātana said, "You can’t leave, you have to stay."

So, as we know, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī settled at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and he did *bhajana* there, I believe it was for 40 years. There he lived a very austere life of pure devotion, actually showing that the standard of renunciation required to attain the loving service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—to awaken our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the first half of the race is to get free from all the *anarthas* in the heart so that pure devotion can grow in a very healthy way—that’s 50%. That’s what we’re working on now. So, he showed a standard of renunciation; of course, it was very exalted, we can’t imbibe that, but we can try to follow in his footsteps. Renunciation is required to attain the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

Now, he could do it because he was 100% renounced, having tasted the bliss of Vraja-bhakti. As Caṇakya says, "You can only give up something if you get something better." The material world is attractive to the conditioned soul, but once that conditioned soul comes in contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness—even if it’s as simple as chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, hearing an introductory lecture to *Bhagavad-gītā*, taking *prasādam*, and associating with devotees—one begins to become convinced about the futility of material existence and the positive alternative of devotional service. Because *paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate*; even the old, tired devotee is getting the higher taste, specifically because he’s chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. Why? Because Prabhupāda said Kṛṣṇa is present in the sound of His name, and He is the reservoir of all pleasure. Such a wonderful science, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

Now, in his *Viveka-śatakam*, which translates as "100 Verses of Vedic Wisdom"—another one of my heroes, Śrīla Prabhupāda, alludes to this spirit of renunciation based on an attraction to Kṛṣṇa—he writes in verse 53. It’s really beautiful; he writes: 

> "Fleets of golden chariots, herds of huge elephants, impetuous horses, an umbrella embroidered with the sun and the full moon, the use of astonishingly beautiful collections of *cāmara* fans, a great kingdom, nine kinds of treasures extending to the horizon, beautiful girls—none of these can compare to a fragment of the bliss of worshiping the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, who is the Lord of the ladies of Vraja." 

It’s easy to see why he’s our hero; he explains it as it is. So, now, while at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Dāsa Gosvāmī—as Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was affectionately called by his followers—Dāsa Gosvāmī would every day chant a minimum of 64 rounds of *japa*. That’s a hundred thousand names of Kṛṣṇa. He would worship his Govardhana-śilā given to him by Mahāprabhu. He would bathe three times a day in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He would offer—let me remember—1,000 obeisances to Kṛṣṇa, 2,000 obeisances to Vaiṣṇavas after embracing them. That I read recently in the Vṛndāvan Research Institute—he would offer obeisances to two thousand Vaiṣṇavas after embracing each and every one of them. Just see his humility. And he would sleep for only 90 minutes, and some days not at all. Also, he only ate one leaf cup—which I measured last year, a leaf cup is 100 grams—one leaf of 100 grams of buttermilk daily. 

However, I was reading that after the disappearance of Lord Caitanya—we’re speaking about earlier, again after the disappearance of Lord Caitanya—he ate only fruit and milk. And after Sanātana Gosvāmī departed, he existed on a leaf cup of buttermilk every day or two. But when Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī departed, he gave up all eating and drinking altogether. This is renunciation. It’s said that he was, quote, "slowly burning in the fire of separation from the Lord and His loving servants," slowly burning in the fire of separation. We can’t really understand his feeling of separation, but we can understand that as much as you’re attached to something, when you lose it to that degree, you feel separation. You know, we’ve all lost things; you’ve lost a pen or a pencil, okay, you may lose your watch, it’s much more painful. So, as much as you’re attached to something, when you lose it, you feel the pains of separation. 

Now, we should understand that all the devotees of Kṛṣṇa—all the pure devotees, those in this world who have come here to deliver us and those in the spiritual world in Goloka Vṛndāvan—they love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone’s ever been loved before, and that love is increasing *ad infinitum*. It never reaches a peak; it just keeps growing and growing and growing. Hard to understand with logic and reasoning, but it’s there. Who can imagine how much separation Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was experiencing from his loving associates, the Gosvāmīs, other Gosvāmīs, and actually the Vrajavāsīs who were present at that moment in history? I was reading they themselves would actually cry upon seeing his condition; it just brought tears to their eyes. 

But despite his austere life and being fully engaged in devotional service, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī left us three books: *Stavāvalī*, which contains *Manaḥ-śikṣā*—many of you know *Manaḥ-śikṣā*—it also includes *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*, and more. He also wrote *Mukta-caritra* and *Dāna-keli-cintāmaṇi*, very deep Kṛṣṇa conscious literature which soothes the hearts of the Vaiṣṇavas when they feel separation from Kṛṣṇa. In fact, our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, he summarized the Tenth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, wherein we find Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvan pastimes, and he writes in *Kṛṣṇa* book—he actually writes in *Kṛṣṇa* book—that one day this *Kṛṣṇa* book, which is a summary study of the Tenth Canto of *Bhāgavatam*, he said it will give his followers solace when they come to the stage of *vipralambha-bhāva*, feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. Just see how Prabhupāda gave us everything. It’s a very important thing; Prabhupāda wrote that this *Kṛṣṇa* book will give solace to my followers, my disciples, grand-disciples, etc., when they’re feeling separation, *vipralambha-bhāva*, from Kṛṣṇa. 

So, Prabhupāda also gave us very deep insights to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, deepest. In *Jaiva-dharma*, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes—and I’ll quote here—"Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī showed the esoteric method of engaging oneself in the loving service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, sitting there on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa for 40 years." So, in this regard, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī wrote and taught that the divine service of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Vṛndāvan is the topmost perfection for Gaudiya Vaiṣṇavas. I’ve many times stated, quoting Śrīla Prabhupāda, that generally it’s understood that the followers of Lord Caitanya are aspiring to become residents of Vṛndāvan and specifically the *gopīs*. Of course, not everyone; we know that a number of the followers of Lord Caitanya, even Anupama, who was the brother of Rūpa and Sanātana, he was aspiring to become a devotee of—he was a devotee of Lord Rāmacandra—so those other relationships are there. But in general, devotees want to become *mañjarīs*. It’s no secret; the top of spiritual perfection is to come to be specifically a servant of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and for this reason, he’s known as our prayojana-ācārya. The translation of that means the teacher who reveals the highest fulfillment in life. Of course, this is way down the road for us, but as I often say, we know who we are and we know where we’re going; we don’t have to speculate and make things up. And therefore, if we stick to the straight and narrow, our future is very bright. 

Of course, we have to tolerate—we’re in this world, we take birth, we get disease, we grow old, and we die—but if we keep this at the forefront of our mind, our meditation that we’re going home, back to Godhead, we have nothing to lament. I remember when I first joined the movement in 1970–71, we used to go out on the streets of Detroit, downtown Detroit, even the ghettos of Detroit. We were, of course, singing Hare Kṛṣṇa, but we were young, so we used to sing sometimes all together as a chorus, 20 or 30 devotees: "We’re going home, back to Godhead! We’re going home, back to Godhead!" You know, the longest journey begins with the first step, but we’re taking the right step. Maybe we’re taking the right steps slowly; most of the world is running hellbent for leather in the wrong direction. So, all glories to our ācāryas who teach us by example and by the words emanating from the lotus mouth how to proceed carefully back home, back to Godhead. 

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī clearly established the supremacy of Vṛndāvanesvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and in his *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*—it’s a collection of intimate prayers—they are filled with extreme impatience and hopelessness due to separation from who he addresses as the queen of his life, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Due to separation from the queen of his life, therein he prays for Rādhārāṇī’s service in many ways. One such verse—two verses are as follows—he addresses her: "O affectionate one, I have nothing more to say with a heart burning in pain and with much weeping for your loving service. I offer this *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali* from my heart to your lotus feet; may it give you some small pleasure." That’s actually the last verse of that illustrious *śāstra*. 

Now, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī departed this world on the *śukla-dvādaśī tithi* in the month of Āśvina, in the year 1586, on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The devotees at that time, in particular Jīva Gosvāmī—who we mentioned took on a lot of responsibility after the other Gosvāmīs passed away—he arranged that his samādhi was on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. It’s actually on the northern shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, very close to Jāhnavā-ghāṭ, which was, as we know, the sitting place of Lord Nityānanda’s consort, His wife Jāhnavā-mātā. That’s where she would sit and take her sacred bath. So, his samādhi is not far from that. Nearby to Jāhnavā-mātā-ghāṭ is the Rādhā-Gopīnātha temple, built to commemorate the *darśana* that Jāhnavā-mātā had of Gopīnātha there on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. So there’s her bathing place, then there’s her temple, and then next is Dāsa Gosvāmī-ghāṭ. Of course, it’s all within a minute walking. The exact spot of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s samādhi, one of the most sacred places in creation, is that Dāsa Gosvāmī-ghāṭ on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. 

Now, his samādhi, if you look at a map of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, it’s situated near the groves of Lalitā, Viśākhā, and Rūpa Mañjarī. We gave a class last year on Rādhā-kuṇḍa; we mentioned that the *sakhīs* and the *gopīs*, they all have their *kuṇḍas* surrounding Rādhā-kuṇḍa. At that sacred place, in a circle, their *kuṇḍas* are there, also, and their groves—they have groves and they have little *kuṇḍas*. So his samādhi is situated near the groves of Lalitā, Viśākhā, and Rūpa Mañjarī, and it was constructed there to fulfill his desire to live forever on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in the Vṛndāvan forest. 

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, he mirrors that desire in his epic *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*. He prays as follows: "I pray that my heart may always find happiness in Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s pastime forest, where the creepers bear flowers that are picked by her own hands, where many charming places bear her sacred footprints, and birds passionately sing her glories." 

So we understand that in his spiritual form as Rati Mañjarī—because in the spiritual world we learn from our *śāstras* that Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is the *mañjarī* Rati Mañjarī—so in his spiritual form as Rati Mañjarī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī eternally and very blissfully serves Śrī Rādhā at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Now, Rati Mañjarī is eternally 13 years and two months old. As Rati Mañjarī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī engages as a maidservant to Indulekhā-sakhī, because the *mañjarīs* serve the *sakhīs*, and the *sakhīs* serve Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa. So he’s a *mañjarī* serving one of the principal *sakhīs*; her name is Indulekhā-sakhī, one of Rādhārāṇī’s very close friends. 

So it’s very interesting that he prays to Indulekhā in his *Stavāvalī*, in the *Sevā-saṅkalpa-prakāśa-stotra* number nine. You know, he’s offering these prayers as a *sādhaka*—although he’s eternally liberated, he’s teaching us—he’s offering prayers, but in this particular instance, he’s offering prayers in his eternally liberated form as Rati Mañjarī, and he prays to Indulekhā as follows—we just get some very deep insights here, but we relish them more than anything this world has to offer: 

> "May my guru, Indulekhā, instruct me in the art of making beautiful garlands of pearls, jewels, *guñjā*, and flowers so that I can decorate Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the temple at the center of Rādhā-kuṇḍa." 

This is a prayer coming from the heart of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who came to this world to give us the chance to go back home, back to Godhead. We’re looking into his heart: "May my guru, Indulekhā, instruct me in the art of making beautiful garlands of pearls, jewels, *guñjā*, and flowers so that I can decorate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the temple at the center of Rādhā-kuṇḍa." We have to let those words enter into our hearts and nourish our little *bhakti-latā-bīja*. 

So again, being always absorbed in that mood, he became—how can I say?—indifferent to his bodily needs, so much so that he became famous as the Vairāgya-ācārya, another name given to him: the Vairāgya-ācārya, or the spiritual teacher of renunciation. Now, as the Vairāgya-ācārya, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī taught us how to live as a perfect practitioner at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. We are *sādhakas*; this is devotional service in practice, and when the love awakes, it becomes *rāgānugā-bhakti* or *prema-bhakti*. So you could say we’re imitating the eternal residents in Vṛndāvan, but that’s okay; that’s *bhakti*—to imitate, just like a child imitates its parents when they speak or when they walk. So we’re following in the footsteps of these advanced devotees. We do as they do without their realization, but by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and following all the rules and regulations, we’ll have the *vijnāna*, the realization, one day by Prabhupāda’s grace. 

So he taught us to live as a perfect practitioner. He writes again in *Stavāvalī*, such an important book, and I will quote him: 

> "On the strength of the service I have done to the pollen of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s lotus feet, I am able to always reside—even in times of trouble—by the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa at the base of Govardhana Hill." 

That says a lot. "On the strength of the service I have done to the pollen of Śrī Rūpa’s lotus feet, I am able to always reside—even in times of trouble—by the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa at the base of Govardhana Hill." Meaning that all the difficulties of this world—even the most traumatic—a devotee can remain fixed in service to his spiritual master and live peacefully in the temple of his home, with the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He goes on: 

> "Protected by his friends and associates, I chant and hear the holy names of Śrī Rādhā and Mukunda, which defeat the sweetest nectar. I pray that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī may always protect me." 

Wow. "Protected by his friends"—meaning Rūpa’s friends and associates—"I chant and hear the holy names of Śrī Rādhā and Mukunda, which defeat the sweetest nectar. I pray that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī may always protect me." And we also pray in the same way, protect us from the most dangerous thing, which is illusion, that we may forget the lotus feet of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. 

Now, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī even went so far as to say that for him and for us, living in other places—like he says—even Vṛndāvan forest, Govardhana Hill, or even the Rāsa-sthalī where the rasa dance takes place, could not match even a single particle of the bliss of residing at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. That’s why Rūpa Gosvāmī glorifies Rādhā-kuṇḍa so nicely in *Upadeśāmṛta*; it’s the best place to reside. Of course, one must be qualified to reside there by serving the saṅkīrtana movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who’s even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa. We may one day get the opportunity to reside at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. 

I was reading that even Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, while absorbed in their loving pastimes, consider everything else and every other place to be insignificant. For Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Rādhā-kuṇḍa was a place wherein he could feel the deepest separation from Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. And I was reading that at times, unable to see Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he would lie upon the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, flooding the lake with his tears. And it’s described—it’s an interesting statement—he would call out in a whisper, gently. We think of calling out, your voice is very loud, "Help!" But it’s the intensity that counts, so it’s a very nice phrase: he would call out in a whisper to Rādhā, "I cannot live without you. I cannot live without you." So deep. We can only worship that statement from afar. 

At other times, I was reading, he would collapse on the shores of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and he would call out Śrī Rādhā’s names—like O Gāndharvikā, O Rādhikā, Vṛṣabhānāvī—and he would be absorbed constantly in the divine couple’s pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. I read that, for example, he would sometimes visualize how he as Rati Mañjarī would fan Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as they rested beneath the tree. And it’s said that by such intense yearning, he was once able to behold Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s pet swan, Tuṇḍīkārī, playing in the lake. He saw Tuṇḍīkārī, Rādhā’s pet swan, playing in the lake. And once, or probably on other occasions, he witnessed the divine couple talking intimately beneath a particular kadamba tree. So in these ways, we can meditate on Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and his beloved Rādhā-kuṇḍa. 

Now, certainly—most certainly—he imbibed that spirit from Lord Caitanya. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, according to Kavirāja Gosvāmī and *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. So, no doubt, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī imbibed or received mercy from Lord Caitanya, who himself, upon discovering Rādhā-kuṇḍa many years earlier, said to his servant Bhaṭṭācārya—they came across, we know that Mahāprabhu was the one that discovered again Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and when he approached those two ponds, he turned and he said to his servant Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, who had accompanied him on his trip to Vṛndāvana, he said: 

> "O friend, please meditate on Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is beautified by pavilions draped in flowering vines. This lake is praised by the great splendor of Vraja; its waters are filled with the beauty and sweetness of the divine couple’s amorous pastimes, and it is respectfully worshiped by Lord Kṛṣṇa." 

From the mouth of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu! And as Dāsa Gosvāmī imbibed his love for Rādhā-kuṇḍa by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, we must also take shelter of Mahāprabhu to awaken our dormant love for that sacred pond and everything Kṛṣṇa-conscious. He imbibed his mood of love for Rādhā-kuṇḍa by the mercy of Mahāprabhu, so we must also take shelter of Mahāprabhu if only because He’s the *yuga-avatāra*. Prabhupāda said, "When many instructions are given, the last instruction is the most significant." So many incarnations have come—as many as there are waves on the ocean—and they gave important, valuable instructions according to time, place, and circumstance, but the most recent incarnation of the age of Kali is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, *kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam*. 

Movement along with His associates and the basic principle, the *yuga-dharma*, is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. So if we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, following the instructions of Mahāprabhu and the intricacies and the details by reading Prabhupāda’s books, we can awaken our dormant love which is resting there within our hearts for that sacred pond of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and everything that is Kṛṣṇa-conscious. Again, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī has said this time in *Caitanya-candrāmṛta*, verse 33—another one of my favorites; he writes: 

> "A stone, even if sprinkled with nectar, will never sprout a single blade of grass. A dog’s tail, no matter how carefully stretched out, will never become straight. A dwarf can reach out his arms as much as he likes, but he will never be able to touch the moon. Similarly, those who follow religious rituals without the mercy of Lord Gaurāṅga will never attain ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa." 

*Nāsteva, nāsteva, nāsteva gater anyathā.* It’s all attainable by those three words: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, and Rāma, in the form of the *mahā-mantra* that Prabhupāda delivers so kindly to us in Western countries. 

So today, we’ll recite, as we have done with other ācāryas, Gosvāmī’s *kīrtan*, *suṭaka-kīrtan*, which, as you remember, these *suṭaka-kīrtans* are sung each year on the disappearance day of ācāryas. And that’s to say, in Vṛndāvan and Bengal and Jagannātha Purī, the *suṭaka-kīrtans* are all sung. It’s a tradition. Again, it’d be nice to imbibe with this tradition in ISKCON, and we’ll see if that happens. But just these *kīrtans*, they help us understand the character and the teachings and the success of all our previous ācāryas, and we can meditate on these things on their disappearance days. 

So once again, the author is a Vaiṣṇava poet, a Vrajavāsī poet, who lived some hundreds of years ago, and I believe this might be his longest *suṭaka*. It has actually 50 verses. So I’m going to read it here because it’s quite long, can’t be memorized; I’ll read it for your pleasure, and while I’m doing it, through oral reception you can associate with this great ācārya in our line, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa. 

By the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he begins: 

*The highest degree of renunciation manifested within the heart of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Wife, house, wealth, kingdom, and prestige—he left it as if they were all stool. Hearing that Rūpa and Sanātana had gone to Vṛndāvan, he gave up his opulent kingdom and pleasures equal to those of King Indra and went to see Prabhu, Lord Caitanya. To avoid the guards his father hired to watch him, Raghunātha got up in the middle of the night and fled on a back road. Feeling great anxiety, he ran away, not caring for eating and drinking. He didn’t know whether it was day or night. While begging, one night he went to a cowshed and, crying out, "Ha Caitanya! Ha Caitanya!", he collapsed from exhaustion. A cowherd boy gave him some milk; then he rested there overnight. That person who never traveled without a horse and never walked anywhere now placed his tender feet on the earth. That person who spent hours bathing in hot water brought to him by servants when he was young, and eating opulent food rich in six tastes, now eats only at sunset if he gets anything to eat at all. And if he gets nothing, he keeps traveling.* 

Imagine how sweet this is in the original Bengali. During his 12-day journey to Nīlācala-dhāma, Jagannātha Purī, he ate only three times. Seeing Lord Jagannātha’s temple from a distance, he began crying and shouting, "Ha Caitanya! Ha Caitanya!" Following a vow to attain perfection and chanting the name of Kṛṣṇa, Raghunātha dāsa went to Puruṣottama-Jagannātha Purī, and there he served the feet of Lord Gaurāṅga. With this desire in my heart, I, Balabhadra Dāsa, pray for the day when I can see Raghunātha dāsa in that mood. 

Out of compassion, Lord Caitanya gave the Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa mantra to Raghunātha dāsa. The Lord gave his personal deities of Govardhana and guñjā-mālā and offered him to the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī at Govardhana Hill in Vṛndāvan. After the disappearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Raghunātha dāsa became mad in separation. He began pulling out his hair, and then he went to Vraja. He decided to end his life by jumping off Govardhana Hill, but then he met two Gosvāmīs—Rūpa and Sanātana. Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs convinced him to live on by taking shelter of the sacred Rādhā-kuṇḍa. His clothing was a pair of *kaupīnas* and a torn blanket. Milk and forest fruits were his food; he never ate grains. He bathed thrice daily in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, always chanted *harināma*, remembered Śrī Giridhārī’s pastimes, and served the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. 22 hours a day he engaged in glorifying and remembering Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He slept 90 minutes a day, but while resting, he remained absorbed in *līlā-smaraṇa*, remembering Vṛndāvana’s loving pastimes. He never wasted a single moment. First, he would fix his mind on the honey-sweet lotus feet of Gaurāṅga; then he would always meditate on his *svarūpa*, his spiritual form as Rati Mañjarī. 

His desire was one with Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s. He always followed Sanātana Gosvāmī; he was very dear to Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. I take shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and all of his associates who are affectionate to all living entities. Saying this in great distress and crying, "Hari! Hari!", may I finally be merciful to me, O Rādhā-vallabha, friend of Gāndharvikā, Rādhikā-ramaṇa, O Rādhānātha, O Vṛndāvanesvara, please accept me as one of your intimate servants! 

When Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana disappeared, I myself became blind without eyes. How can I see? And without my life and soul, Rūpa and Sanātana, how can I maintain my body? Saying all these things, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī begins crying. Śrī Caitanya, the beloved son of Śacī-mātā; all of His associates; Śrī-nāma, the form of His holy name; Śrī-vigraha, holy deity forms of Kṛṣṇa—are my life and soul. To all the manifest and unmanifested places, the places I’ve seen or heard about, and to all the unlimited Vaiṣṇavas, I offer my humble obeisances. 

In separation from Rādhikā-Giridhārī, Raghunātha dāsa gave up all sense enjoyment. He ate nothing but dry, tasteless rice. In separation from Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, he stopped eating grains and took only milk and fruits. After the disappearance of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, he gave up eating and lived on water. When Rūpa Gosvāmī left this world, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī stopped drinking water altogether. He sustained his life simply by crying out, "Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa!" This was his foodstuff. Without seeing Rūpa Gosvāmī and his associates, Raghunātha dāsa burned in separation and became overwhelmed and cried. Even when *kṛṣṇa-kathā* was being spoken, he couldn’t hear it, but he cried out in anguish, "O Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, where are you? O Lalitā, Viśākhā, where are you? Please be kind and appear before me! O Caitanya Mahāprabhu! O my dear Svarūpa Dāmodara Prabhu! O my dear Rūpa and Sanātana!" Day and night Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī cried. His mind and body were burning up. In this condition, he sometimes rolled in the dust of Śrī Vṛndāvan. Starvation made him blind; his body became a great burden, and constantly he shivered in ecstasy due to separation from Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Falling on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, he breathed very heavily and became silent, with his tongue moving slightly and tears of divine love falling from his eyes. He entered samādhi, absorbed in remembering Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Please fulfill my one and only desire; I, Balabhadra Dāsa, intensely desire to serve Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and all of His eternal associates. 

50 very deep and very nectarian verses. 

Finally, I would like to conclude today with one of my favorite verses. I think it’s a very appropriate way to finish today. He writes—and of course, I’m not giving the Bengali or the Sanskrit much today, but just the essence—these verses, here’s one of my favorites: 

> "I vow to love my spiritual master, the Gāyatrī mantra, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, his associates, his elder brother Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Govardhana Hill, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Mathurā city, the twelve forests of Vṛndāvan, the land of Vraja, the devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and the eternal residents of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma." 

Raghunātha. There’s nothing more to be said. Thank you, everyone. Yes, we’re, by some causeless mercy, back in Śrī Vṛndāvan. We were gone three months on various preaching adventures. It was all successful by Śrīla Prabhupāda, and we tried as best we could to share it with you through videos and albums by Ananda Vṛndāvan Prabhu, Nitya Vṛndāvan. So, we’ll continue here in Vraja, where we’re getting ready for Kārttika. I actually came back a month early to go out and search—not the general places we always go, which are fine—but a lot of the places I found during the last few years in my research through our scriptures. I plan to take devotees to these places for the first time, actually. In those lectures, I remember inviting you to come to Vṛndāvan and we’ll take you to this place, I said, and that place. So, I’m going to fulfill my promise to all the Vaiṣṇavas and the Vaiṣṇavīs. If you can come, please join us; otherwise, Anand Vṛndāvan will keep all of you enlivened through the videos and the photo albums. 

Yes, so please give us your blessings that we can permanently remain here in Vṛndāvan and take shelter of Śrīla Prabhupāda, our greatest hero, and his beloved Gaur-Nitāi, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and Śrī Śyāmasundara. 

See you next Friday.""