
"But we are not afraid of either cold or illness because we are on a transcendental level. We have already mastered the technology of rising above the sickness of nature thanks to a simple method given by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu: listening and chanting about the glories of the Lord. Now, we have arrived in the presence of a very special sage whose name is Saubhari Muni, about whom much is written in the books of Kṛṣṇa.

We have spoken about Saubhari Muni several times over the past few years. We will not delve into the details of his life today, but we will remember that Saubhari Muni lived here. At that time, he had not yet achieved perfection; he had material desires in his heart. He was not as strict as he should have been, and so he fell victim to sexual desire. He sacrificed his celibacy to marry. This is simply proof that there are no problems with this—the scriptures say this is the safest āśrama for most. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda says that we need to find the one that suits us best. It does not matter what kind of service—brahmacārī, gṛhastha, or sannyāsa—the most important thing is that we can practice our spiritual life without problems and engage in service. As a result of the strong influence of the age of Kali, 90–95 percent of practitioners of Kṛṣṇa consciousness are engaged in serving the Lord. Problems begin when we think about the world; we see that the main sin is developing. Many are developing political projects and opening temples, and therefore the spiritual strength is disappearing. My Guru Mahārāja proudly declared that he created an army of sannyāsīs, and I will create an army of selfless volunteers. After some time, Saubhari Muni did not abandon his spiritual path; he again accepted the renounced way of life and thus achieved perfection. That is a standard process. The true meaning of sannyāsa is not just changing clothes, but seeing all connections with God. We are talking about this because these are the lessons we see here.

Here is Saubhari Muni's āśrama. I do not know whether this is before or after his family life. Here you can see the Śiva-liṅga, which is worshipped by locals, and he himself lived here. This place belongs to the Rāmānuja Sampradāya. The caretaker who lives here has gone on some transcendental mission, and everyone in the garden went to lunch, but they opened their house for us. I have mentioned before that it is impossible to imagine that somewhere in New York, Paris, or London, someone would give you the keys to their house and 300 people would flock there and do whatever they want. It is practically impossible to imagine, but that is what they did. They handed us the keys to their island, and therefore we should be grateful. Despite the fact that they are all on a grand parikramā, we can express our gratitude to them with loud applause.

Being in this place, we can remember how Vṛndāvana looked 30–40 years ago. When I first came here, everything was very natural, and we walked through thick dust. There is a photograph in which I am ankle-deep in dust, very happy. Today, you can see Vṛndāvana as it was before. This is the same Vṛndāvana which blesses us. Sometimes devotees collect a small capsule of this dust and worship it on the altar. Let us keep this place a secret and not tell anyone, so we can have the opportunity to sit here in a quiet, family atmosphere next time.

The person who lives here is very dedicated; they engage in spiritual practice all day long, sometimes chanting. So we will go again with the wonderful mood of Vṛndāvana, listening and vibrating the holy name, which opens the heart. We have already talked about the glories of four other personalities, and at the end of the parikramā, we will talk about the fifth. 

Keep in mind that today is Ekādaśī, which is important. Tomorrow, we are planning a parikramā to the place where Rādhārāṇī previously lived. Being married, her parents married her off, but she is the expansion of Kṛṣṇa, and Jaṭila, who is her mother-in-law, creates a variety of obstacles to her meeting Kṛṣṇa. Rādhārāṇī tries to get out of the house to see Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa tries to climb into the house to see Her. There were so many obstacles, the main one being her mother-in-law. Michael Shumovsky will tell the whole story as our lecturer today. He has studied not only my notes but the original books, and he has collected everything to give a deep lecture. 

Tomorrow at 6:30, the buses leave. We will go through the fields on the other side and have our picnic in Victory Park."