"*00217*.*
"Kṛṣṇa.

Please, so once again this year we've been very fortunate to come to this most sacred place, Vṛndā Kuṇḍa, and fall down at the lotus feet of Vṛndā Devī and ask for her blessings to be engaged in the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We know historically this place was a very important part of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and after Kṛṣṇa left this planet, it gradually became covered over and nobody knew where this place was. Largely, for 800 years it was rediscovered and again it was lost, and in recent times it was discovered and protected by the great saint Mādhava dāsa Bābā. Mādhava dāsa Bābā was a disciple of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and of course, Godbrother of Śrīla Prabhupāda. He was also a great scholar but also a great, you would say, protector of the dhāma. He did many things to protect it from dark parts of Vṛndāvana, and he protected the parikramā path around Govardhana Hill, and he developed this place. Near the end of his life, he had the desire to turn it over to ISKCON, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s followers. Śrīla Prabhupāda, of course, established the worship of Tulasī Devī everywhere in the world, so we owe a great debt to him, as well as Dīna Bandhu Prabhu, Śakti, and others for making this place available to us.

Kṛṣṇa.

First of all, we come into contact with Vṛndā Devī through Tulasī Devī. We worship Tulasī. It is said by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his *Stava-mālā*, concerning the Tulasī tree, that when Vṛndā Devī appears in this world, in this world of men, she appears as Tulasī Devī, and she is very kind. In the *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—we worship Tulasī Devī to become a follower of the sakhīs and to be engaged in her service. So in her original form, she is a very dear Gopī friend of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-śakti; she is an expansion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. When she expands herself partially, it is Tulasī Devī, and she arranges for all the intimate pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. There are different forests in Vṛndāvana—12 forests—and she arranges for Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī to come there at various times of the day and engage in those pastimes. So she picks the perfect forest, she arranges for the trees, the creepers, what birds will be there, what gopīs will be there, who won't be there, and what instruments will be played, what songs will be sung. Along with Paurṇamāsī, they come in the morning to this beautiful spot, Vṛndā Kuṇḍa, and they make all these arrangements. And when everything is set, when everything is ready and everybody knows what to do, she sends out her parrots, they inform everyone, and then the day begins. And Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa come to Gupta-kuṇḍa, which is just behind here, and this is their first morning pastime. So it's a very important place, and we pray to Vṛndā Devī to be engaged in the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and to develop the kind of love and service mood that she has. So Vṛndā Devī kī jaya, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya, Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya.""