Śrīla Prabhupāda said that this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement would take the world over by culture.

So, what culture was he referring to?

Not necessarily Indian culture; he was actually referring to the culture of the spiritual world, specifically the culture of Goloka Vṛndāvana.

So, here on our Festival tour in Poland for the last 28 years, we've taken that instruction or that prophecy to heart and are doing our best to present the culture of the spiritual world to the people of Poland. When you think of culture, what do you think of?

You think of music, you think of dance, you think of theater, you think of philosophy, you think of good food, you think of nice association. So, we have all those elements in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in a purely transcendental way. So, for us, for us, it's quite simple.

We present this amazing extravaganza we call the Festival of India along the Baltic Sea Coast for two months every day for two months. We come and do harināma on the beaches and in the towns, and then in the evenings, we have our festival program.

It lasts almost six hours. We do rāsa-līlā, we do Mahābhārata [stories], we give a talk on the Bhagavad-gītā, we have various Indian dance performances, we have a magic show, we have a puppet show, and around the festival site, there are about 20 tents depicting different aspects of India's spiritual culture.

And we find this is a very easy way for people to come in contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness, whereas a general mass of people may not be so inclined to go to a lecture hall and hear a talk on reincarnation or some other aspect of our philosophy, or maybe not even buy a book or come to a temple when they're on summer vacation.

And they see a big event, so exotic, so extravagant, so colorful, so blissful as this, their hearts are pulled, their heartstrings are pulled, and they come into the festival just to see what's happening. And we make it a festival in such a way that there's something for everyone.

We make it a family affair. There's something for the children, there's something for the teenagers, there's something for the mothers and fathers, for the grandparents. You walk around here, there's something for everyone to do. And what it does, it just… it’s their, you could say, their first step in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And the result is that many people do buy books, many people go to the questions and answers tent and begin asking questions of a spiritual nature. Our restaurants are overflowed with people, the long lines are there. And just in general, they get a very good impression of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and the culture that we're presenting, the culture of the spiritual world.

So, we've found this is a very nice formula for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness amongst the masses. It, in itself, is another form of bhakti-yoga. In the beginning, Prabhupāda encouraged us in book distribution, harināma, saṅkīrtana, festivals, so forth.

That has developed into nāmācchetana and big rathas and so forth, various ways in which we can present the culture of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But this is really a concentrated form of nectar where people can come and in this nice spiritual atmosphere, enjoy Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Because ultimately, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a joyful process. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, this process is joyfully performed. We take it to the people. We allow them to come here and enjoy. If you look around here in this video, you won't see many devotees dressed like myself.

They're behind the tables, they're up on the stage, they're fixing something in the back, whatever. We bring the people here and we let them experience. Rather than a normal festival like in a temple where, you know, on Rāvaṇa-līlā or Janmāṣṭamī, whatever our major events in our temples, we come and we have a... we enjoy and relish each other's association, doing different spiritual activities like chanting, dancing, and feasting.

We have to share that experience with people. That's the essence of Kṛṣṇa culture: that you need to experience that joy in order to ultimately give up material enjoyment, give up sense gratification, and embrace the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness as it is.

So, when they come here, they get that experience, they get that spiritual experience, and they really do enjoy it. The result is they'll come back the second day, they come back the third day, they'll come back year after year.

We've been doing this for 28 years as I mentioned, and now we're seeing people come back with their children. We're seeing people who came to the festival as children coming back again with their children. So, this is real success.

They come, and they are the festival. The people are actually the festival. We're in the background facilitating their first steps in Kṛṣṇa consciousness through this cultural extravaganza, which they call the Festival of India, but really, it's a festival of Vṛndāvana, the spiritual world, where all walking is dancing, all talking is singing, and there's a Hare Kṛṣṇa festival every day.

It's all due to the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.