
All right Kṛṣṇa and welcome to the Festival of India here in Poland along the Baltic Sea coast, summer 2018. We've actually been conducting this festival here in Poland on the north coast for 29 years now. It started off small, it was actually just seven of us, you can imagine, just a little tiny event we had on the beach.

But in the last 29 years, it's built up to this great cultural extravaganza. It's called Festival of India, and it's a family event. We have something for everyone in the family, something for the children, something for the adults, for the grandmothers and grandfathers.

And our whole concept is to give people an experience. It's not just a festival where you come and you're entertained by a stage show or any of the other attractions. Actually, what we want people to get is the experience of the festival in India.

More specifically, we want to give them the experience of devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. We like to say that our festival actually represents the local Gaudiya sampradāya. And to do that, we have many different exhibits in many different tents where people can come and, you could say, engage in devotional service to Kṛṣṇa.

Because that's the secret. Kṛṣṇa says in the Gita that He can be understood as a year's only by devotional service. And when one is full consciousness of Him by such devotional service, one can enter into the kingdom of God.

So it has to start somewhere. The living entity falls in the spiritual sky, he's forgetful. So we have to reawaken him and, you know, give people the opportunity to do a little bit of devotional service in the form of engaging their senses in a transcendental way.

So that's the concept of our of our event. We have many different tents here depicting different aspects of India's culture in different ways, people can be engaged. So we'd like to give you the experience as well. Those of you who are watching this video, we're going to take on a short tour of all the different tents and let you see what this festival is like.

And we, we found that this is a very, it's a very nice formula for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness, for introducing people to devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, and we feel that it can be used anywhere in the world. So you can replicate it wherever you are on this planet.

So let's go and see some of the exhibits that we are doing here at our Festival of India. So there's a saying in Vedic culture, *phalam pratyakṣam tadānu* – judge something by the results. So you can see that our formula, it works.

We have actually, at this moment, we have thousands of people here at this event. We get anywhere between three and five thousand people every evening. And after a morning and afternoon Hari Nama Sankirtana, we give out invitations and invite people to come.

And here you can see this is the cooking demonstration. This is one of the more popular tents that we have here. People like to eat, and our food is actually very popular in this country. We're known all over the world for our food, actually, but especially here in Poland, people love our *prasadam*.

So we don't just have a restaurant where they can come in and purchase the *prasadam*, but we actually teach them how to cook it here. It's, you know, they're engaged, they're seeing, they're smelling, sometimes they come forward and they help prepare the preparation or something like that.

And naturally, while the devotee is explaining, you know, how to cook *prasadam*, they're explaining the whole theory behind being vegetarian, the importance of being vegetarian, the value of being vegetarian, etc. So this is one of our most popular booths where people come and watch a cooking demonstration and participate again, engaging in devotional service.

Another one of our more popular tents is the astrology tent. One of our devotees, Mathura, he's some well-studied in astrology. And nowadays, astrology is something that's pretty much accepted in the West. When we started this event almost 30 years ago, people were a little bit uneasy when they heard about astrology.

But now, in modern times, astrology is very popular. And so people come in, they inquire about their future. But we're not simply interested in showing people what is their destiny, because it's always mixed, you know, this material world is a combination of happiness and distress.

So it's not we're just revealing people what is the good and the bad that's coming up in the future, but we're giving them the positive alternative of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Ultimately, when you read anyone's chart, it's going to be a mixed bag, and people can get a little bit upset or depressed.

So what we always do is we always offer the positive alternative that they can engage in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So more often than not, after visiting with their guru, Mahārāja, and having their chart read, people walk out with the *Bhagavad-gītā* or with a set of *japa* beads.

And this is the goal of our astrology tent, to again, engage people in pure devotional service, pure devotional activities, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So they read *Gītā* and they chant Hari Kṛṣṇa, and this is ultimately the solution to all problems, back home, back to Godhead.

So this tent is a tent where people can come and make a pot out of clay. Actually, it's a very engaging activity. People are fascinated. There's our potter, our devotee there. He takes the clay and he's got the machine there, and they make the cups and make the bowls.

And people are holding it and doing it, then they're painting it afterwards. And all the while, the potter is speaking Kṛṣṇa conscious philosophy in a very simple way, explaining simple living, high thinking, the whole idea behind *manora* from *Dharma*, we go back to the land, we live off the land, we protect the cows, like Prabhupada said, if you've got an acre of land and a cow, all your economic needs are met.

So these types of things are discussed with people when they're, you know, touching the clay and making the clay pot and so forth. It's just a way again of engaging people and introducing them in a very attractive way to the Kṛṣṇa conscious philosophy.

One of our most popular tents, you can see, especially for the children, it's very engaging, they get to keep the pot. So again, we judge something by the results. Actually, often when Prabhupada would travel into the temples, around the temples in our movement, he would ask devotees, you know, "How many books have you distributed?

How many devotees have you made?

How many temples have you, have you opened?" So we judge the success of this big cultural extravaganza in one sense by how many books are sold here.

We don't go around and distribute books at the festival, that's not our, that's not our process. We just let people come and enjoy and experience and get a spiritual awakening. And the natural result of that is they want to inquire.

There's no book distribution on the grounds of it. Still, we find, you know, people flock to the, to the book tent, as you can see, it's very crowded. It's crowded all, the whole five hours of our festival, it's always crowded.

And I always consider it a success when I see people walking away with the *Bhagavad-gītā*, *Upaniṣad*, or any one of Prabhupada's books. Like it's popular, and it's, it's natural that after coming to the festival, people want to inquire about, you know, what is this experience they're having, they want to go deeper.

So we encourage them to come here, or they naturally come, and they buy a book, and then they take it home, and then they continue on their journey of self-realization, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So the book tent, what are the most important.

So this is our yoga tent. This is Kṛṣṇa Maya, she's our yoga teacher. She's the wife of the astrologer, Mahārāja. And she's a certified yoga teacher, and she's teaching Hatha Yoga. Now, of course, in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, we read how Arjuna reluctantly rejected, though the yogas being too, too difficult, it's not really the process for this age.

But as it's being taught in modern times, it's a quite simplified version. It's yoga *asanas*, which is good for health and controlling the mind and senses. So we teach that yoga. But naturally, as the devotee is teaching new yoga, and she's explaining, she's also explaining about the perfection of yoga, which is Bhakti Yoga.

Prabhupada would describe yoga as a ladder. There's different steps on the, on the yoga ladder: Hatha Yoga, Jnana Yoga, Raja Yoga, Bhakti Yoga. So again, when people leave, they don't just have the experience of Hatha Yoga. We plant that seed in their mind that the highest goal is one of connecting with the, with God, with Kṛṣṇa, through loving and devotion.

So in each tent, there's an attraction, that the seed of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is planted in the person's heart so they can continue on the path of devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, which ultimately takes us back home, back to Godhead. So the yoga tent.

This is the, the makeup tent where the ladies, the girls and ladies can come and get the flowers painted on their faces. We're very lucky, we're very fortunate, we have devotees from all over the world at our festival, from 14 different countries.

And especially the girls from Ukraine and Russia, they're very artistic. So they're painting these flowers on people's faces. We say that in India, when there's a festival event in the villages, the tradition is the girls dress up with what we call the Gopi dots.

So, you may not be, you know, in an actual limb of devotional service, you know, Gopi dots, but Rupa Goswami did say somehow or other, yet, engage people in devotional service, somehow or other. So we have to be a little innovative.

Actually, as time goes on, we have to preach according to time, place, and circumstances without compromising the tradition. So this is an innovative way of getting people interested in coming to the event. And from here, they'll go to another tent and inquire deeper.

So it's just kind of a fun thing that we add to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We've got a lot of competition, and material energy is very attractive. So these cultural events, we have to make *nikasha* more effective than the material energy, and it can be, because Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive.

This is part of our, just to get people engaged, just get them to come, put on the, you know, the makeup and take a photo and send it home. And it's, it's just, it's fun. It's Krishna conscious fun.

Very successful, people love it actually. We go, Hari Nama the next day. We're going along the beach, we see so many of the children with the Gopi dots on from the previous evening. Behind me is the restaurant. It speaks for itself.

People, again, people love Kṛṣṇa conscious food. We're famous for that all over the world. So we have a crew of about, um, 50 or 60 devotees who are involved in the preparation of the *prasadam* in the morning, transporting the *prasadam*, selling the *prasadam*.

But the lines are always long, and we make sure that we have really first-class *prasadam*. We make sure the whole festival, we try to do everything first class, make it professional, make it first class, make it colorful, exotic, and make it devotional.

But just make it really, really attractive, just engage people's senses. So it's often said, spiritual life begins by controlling the tongue. So *prasadam* is the natural way. It's, they say it's Lord Chaitanya's secret weapon. So we make really, really nice *prasadam*, and people line up.

And we find that after the first day, on the second day of our festival or third day of the festival in a particular town, sometimes people come with big containers to take on the samosas or the katoris, or whatever they're attracted to.

Actually, on a daily basis, we're making about 600 to 700 samosas for our events. Again, we get thousands of people, so samosas are the most popular. So it's a restaurant. Behind me, there's the Little Theatre for engaging the children, theatrical performances, puppet shows.

Off to my right, we have seminars about life, to deal with life, and how to transcend this world and go back to the spiritual world. We have a tent over here, it's called Spiritual Fashions, where ladies can come and put on a sari.

We have thousands of saris that are donated by our congregation, ISKCON's congregation in India. They're very kind. The ladies donate saris to our festival program here in Poland. We'll have anywhere between 10 and 20,000 saris donated every year. And they can come and put them on for free.

And actually, the final *kirtana*, after the final *kirtana*, all those who have participated in the *kirtana* come up on the stage, and we dress them in saris. They get to keep those saris, they can take them home. Special opulence, there's so, a free gift.

People really appreciate that. They love the *kirtana*, they love the gift of the sari, they love the experience here. So just kind of creating the mood of *Vaikuntha*, that place where there's no anxiety, and what's more, *Goloka*, where one where spiritual life is eternal, full of knowledge and blissful.

That's our cultural extravaganza, Festival of India, this year's summer 2018, on the Baltic Sea coast.