"*00201*.*
"And thus the light appears. It is not delightful. "Lord, let there be light," and now here all the lighting is on.

When the Lord wants to place rebellious souls in the material creation, He simply looks at the material creation with one glance; He places them there. This glance is personified by the manifestation of Kṛṣṇa, but he is not exactly Kṛṣṇa. This is Śiva. There is Kṛṣṇa, there is only one Kṛṣṇa, there is one personality, Śiva, and there are many of us. One Kṛṣṇa, one Śiva, and many, many of us. Therefore, he is like Kṛṣṇa, as if not Kṛṣṇa. Our example is given—the example of milk and yogurt. The substance seems to be the same, but it is different. If you heat up the milk and put in a little sour substance such as tamarind, it turns into yogurt. Yogurt is the same as milk, only modified. At the same time, it is not milk. Milk tastes different, but the yogurt cools the body. In winter, we drink hot milk to warm up. If we get diarrhea or an upset stomach—meaning digestion is out of control due to excessive fire—we eat the yogurt to cool it down. That is to say, they are all dairy products, but they are different. So, this is the question: Kṛṣṇa and Śiva—they are the same person, but they are slightly different. Śiva is so incredible; he has, as we read, Śiva-tattva. I got this book and was able to read it when I was a young teenager, before I read the Bhagavad-gītā. So, sometimes if pious people in America ask, "Which God do you understand?"

And later I found: Kṛṣṇa and Śiva. Kṛṣṇa is incredibly unique and infinitely different from anyone, and many people consider [Him] supreme. In South India, everyone worships Lord Śiva as the Supreme Person. 3,400 years ago, there were many wars on the battlefield, and hundreds of thousands of people died. Who has the right to establish superiority? Who is in charge of what is happening on the ground? Before, wars were on the ground of God. Who wins the battle is God, and the main one. If you read the Vedas, you see He is really the Supreme Personality, but to really understand who the Supreme Personality is, you can turn to Him Himself and ask. If you approach Śiva and say, "Śiva, who is Supreme?" Once, on the Kailāśa mountain, you were sitting in your transcendental meditation, and on his lap sat his wife Pārvatī, and all, all, all, all—all the way to the very bottom, from that place here to our place, as beings in the lowest part of the beginning on our planet Earth at this moment. Rāma fought Rāvaṇa, and remember the end of this battle. We, of course, will not go into telling this story, but the end of this battle, when Rāma fought with Rāvaṇa—these ten heads of Rāvaṇa—and Rāma attacked him, such two huge titans collided, and all retreated. The warriors just looked at the magnificence of this battle. And we know why Rāma is so powerful. Where is this power? Rāma—He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is invincible. But it was not so simple, this battle, because Rāvaṇa was incredibly powerful. The battle continued for days. And where did Rāvaṇa get his strength? Rāvaṇa got his strength because he was a great devotee of Lord Śiva. He was a demon, but he worshipped Śiva. The demons of those days, they were such high-ranking demons—not such low-ranking demons that are found in our days—they could quote the Vedas very eloquently; they were not fools. Śiva calls him [Rāvaṇa]. It is easy to get angry and also easy to satisfy [Śiva]. Rāvaṇa was very much satisfied with his worship of Śiva, and he received from him a blessing that he would be an invincible warrior—not absolutely invincible, but practically invincible, very powerful, 99.9%. Lord Śiva... and he fed his [arrow]. Like you know, [he] had that touch, the arrow, and was about to shoot. And here, Rāma, this one percent, took advantage of the lack of his strength. Rāma took out his arrow, touched this arrow to his head—as you saw in theatrical performances of little boys, when they show this līlā, there is always a boy who is dressed as Rāma, he takes out his arrow from his quiver and touches this arrow to his head in order to introduce all his energy into this arrow, and then he puts it into the bow. And when he was just about to release this wound, at that moment he was already on the verge of death. And for the whole battle, Kālī is watching.

[She] turned to her husband: "Look, your devotee is now on the verge of death and he will just be killed now, save him. You must save your devotee." Divine meditation, having heard the words of his wife, he opens his eyes and says, "If someone, the Lord wants to kill him, no one will save him. And if the Lord wants to save someone, no one will kill him." And thus, through this līlā, Śiva himself showed who is Supreme, because Śiva could not save his devotee because he is not Supreme. The final word is to stand behind the Lord, behind the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Śiva showed that he is the same as everyone else; he is under the Lord.

As we are subordinate to the Lord in accordance with īśvara, he is the best of the best of the best. Devotees say the Gaṅgā is the greatest among all rivers, and the Lord Acyuta is the greatest among all deities. Also, Lord Śiva is the greatest among all Vaiṣṇavas. The Vedas are the greatest scripture among all sacred scriptures. Everything is clear, yes? Lord Śiva, he is not the Supreme; he is a servant, subordinate. But he does not think, "Oh, how bad it is to be subordinate." No, this is the greatest achievement, and he is the best of all servants. The greatest [thing]—to be a servant of the greatest master—is the most wonderful thing about Śiva. Śrīla Prabhupāda reminded us, you know, that the king's servant lives in the palace of the king, and he lives just like the king—almost just like the king—wears the same clothes, [eats] the same food, goes to the same holidays, communicates with people, but he is the same as the king almost. The problem begins only when he begins to think that he is the king. So to be a servant of the greatest master is the most wonderful thing that can happen, but we must always remember that our position is the position of a servant. As we speak in māyā, usually we don’t want to be sugar; we want to eat sugar. We don’t want to be God; we want to serve the Lord. This is our natural position. My spiritual brother wrote a book about Śrīla Prabhupāda, and he called it very appropriately, "My Illustrious Greatest Teacher, Master."

Among all, number one greatest Vaiṣṇava, this is the Lord. And everyone probably thinks, "And the greatest Vaiṣṇava means he is some kind of Gopī?" No, he is not Gopī at all. He is in charge of ignorance. In general, what is not some kind of the most insignificant, non-prestigious service for such a greatest master? But this statement speaks for itself: of the greatest servant, this is that he will do any, even the most insignificant, service for his master, for his great master. This is a real servant. How our Guru Mahārāja, he received slightly practical instructions: "I will conduct [preaching] in English." Accepting this as Śrīla Prabhupāda’s instruction, [he spread it] in English, books and other scriptures, and having done this, he changed the world in almost everything. What the West is now interested in—all kinds of philosophy, simple life, elevated thinking, life in harmony, karma, reincarnation, anything, everything that the West is now interested in—almost all this came from the preaching of the movement of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which [he] founded and created.

Tomorrow at home, I will meet a group. He is teaching this group, a very famous academic scientist, but he is also a very famous spiritual leader in America, Philip Goldberg. He wrote the book *American Veda*, describing the connection, the influence of India on the entire planet. He wrote more than [some] books. He has a group with him, which I will meet tomorrow. He came to India to meet with Rādhanātha Mahārāja and with you, and he called and asked me to accept this group. And I told him, "Mahārāja, how can I accept? I am just a crow compared to you. I'm a crow, and you, you're an eagle, a great bird." He said, "No, you can. You're... you're not a crow." So what should I tell him? He always beats me with his answers. I don't even know how to argue with him. He was very much influenced by Indian culture and philosophy, and so Prabhupāda’s preaching in English was a simple instruction. But he took it to heart and said, "More than he asked, he went above and beyond the call of duty." He said, "In the Armed Services, a soldier who does more than he is asked is awarded a medal for Service Above and Beyond the Call of Duty." On the basis of the books translated into English, all major languages are translated into English. He sold it following the instructions of his spiritual master. He spread this knowledge through the Krishna consciousness movement, and practically the entire West is now under the influence of some kind of yoga philosophy or some other philosophies. And all this, most of this, stems from the preaching of the Krishna consciousness movement which he created. He, as a true warrior, fulfilled the instructions of his spiritual master by writing these books, the Vedas, in English, and moreover, as the greatest warrior who receives the Order of Merit, he achieved beyond what was due to him. A click about Prabhupāda: Not only did he spread this knowledge in English, but like the greatest warrior, he did it in all the languages of the world, even in Swahili. I have two books in Swahili; that's how they call God, they [now] call Him Kṛṣṇa, they [call Him] Aku—just one phrase of his spiritual teacher: "I will conduct [preaching] in English."

And Lord Śiva, as the best servant, he took upon himself the most difficult, maybe not the most attractive, service to his master: to command ignorance. And since he took upon himself the fulfillment of this task, along with the instruction comes the power to fulfill this instruction; therefore, he is very, very experienced in commanding the *guṇa* of ignorance to such an extent that he himself never falls under its influence.

And Śiva looks completely consistent with what he commands: all these scorpions, spiders, snakes, reptiles, tangled hair, clothes in the style of hippie-parī, constant smoking of gañjā. He is constantly in this because this is what he commands. His appearance corresponds to what he does, but he himself never falls under the influence of all these things. This is only external activity, external work; he plays a role. Therefore, he is a hero. He is a role model for all entities in this race such as witches, goblins, ghosts, werewolves. Śiva-tattva... just swirling around and going where he goes, enjoying his presence. They are companions in his līlā, as if games accompany him. And the time of Śiva, when he flies out with his retinue of evil spirits, is the time of twilight. Therefore, women who want to conceive a good child should always remember that they should avoid the time for conception which is the time of twilight, because this is the time when Śiva comes out with his companions, and you do not want to then conceive some evil spirit that would get to you at this moment; it will be born, you look, and close to your child. But what is the result of this communication? Because of communication with him, these spirits and ghosts become devotees of Kṛṣṇa because they find the heart of Lord Śiva while in his presence.

And in the example of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we see something similar: who came to the West and who became his main audience for sermons? Hippies. And this is not something very romantic and rainbow. Hippies, in fact, there was nothing good in it; it was, you know, legalized sex, drugs, dirt, everything. And all these personalities were transformed being close to the abyss. And the same is Lord Śiva, who takes on the worst options, the worst cases. That is what these people in the West [are like]. Who can cure you? A scratch—there is nothing special. But if he cures your cancer, he is a really incredible doctor. Therefore, devotees like Śiva take on the most difficult cases. He [takes] care for Him [for a] month to make healthy thee.

There was one person who met me who started criticizing me: "Svāmī, with you..." I said, "Well, okay, you criticize me, but why are you criticizing? I will not tolerate this." And he started saying that, "Yes, you communicate with *yogi* all the time, with *māyāvādī* persons, with all sorts of such... with fools." I said, "Yes, seriously. But what about Prabhupāda, who communicated and served the very famous doctor Mishra? He even cooked for him for months. What about the Lord who communicates with everyone, and what about the Nitya-siddha who went to the meeting and preached to them there?"

And since Lord Śiva commands the modes of ignorance, his wife Durgā commands the material creation. People usually turn to them for material goods, and Lord Śiva and Durgā give them, so that in the end, they come to the conclusion that this whole material world, these material happinesses, they are absolutely futile. They do not bring joy; they do not lead to anything. Usually, Prabhupāda gave such an example, that when a person turns to a *bhakta* for some material benefit, it is like a person turning to a billionaire for 10 rubles. You think, "Why ask 10 rubles from a billionaire? You can ask for more." And understanding Lord Śiva's heart, his inner state, we as Vaiṣṇavas do not turn to him for material benefits. But we ask him for much more. We ask him for deep love, such as the Gopīs have. Kṛṣṇa and... wait a minute, why ask something from someone who doesn't have it? What's the point? Śiva, the most he meditates on is Saṅkarṣaṇa, on one of the expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and why ask him for a *bhakti* that he doesn't have? The Gopis—the best devotees—the Lord Gopis... which I hidden. But they keep their love [for] Kṛṣṇa hidden from the other residents for various reasons. Śiva keeps love for Kṛṣṇa [in his] heart. We can...

And usually we keep the most valuable things inside, hide this from public view, especially devotion. A pure devotee or humble devotee never puts his devotion on display. Like the Gopīs who live in Vraja and love Kṛṣṇa very much, they hide their love from the inhabitants of even Vṛndāvana, hiding it deep in the heart, like a huge treasure. It is exactly the same with the Lord. Śiva, in the depths of his heart, having a deep attachment to Lord Kṛṣṇa, he never puts it on display, but we as Vaiṣṇavas, knowing about the [inner] cup, ask for mercy. We know how to address the Lord and what is really in his heart. A devotee does not want to show his faith or his devotion in order to cause some cheap recognition of the public; therefore, he most often hides it. But as Jesus said, "My cup of love is overflowing," and it flows from the cup. In the same way, sometimes a pure devotee—his love, inner state—is not able to hold him; it flows from him. Also, Lord Śiva—sometimes symptoms of how he loves the Lord flow from his heart. Sometimes it can be seen as streams of tears, like rivers of tears from his eyes.

Like any great Vaiṣṇava, [he] never shows the public his inner emotions, but sometimes... there was the same incident at the festival in Māyāpura when we all gathered. From the first... in his speech, he spoke about how great the sight of all these girls from different parts of the world [was]. He said that the prophecy is being fulfilled, and the Lord's mercy, Lord Caitanya, is spreading everywhere. Saying this, his whole body began to tremble and tears began to flow from his eyes, and he could not contain himself; he simply fell silent, unable to speak further. And we all sat frozen, not knowing what was wrong, his eyes were flowing. And one devotee, one devotee, he took the *mṛdaṅga* and simply began to sing *kīrtana* in the *mṛdaṅga*, chanting... and then after this incident, we asked Prabhupāda what we should do when you fall into ecstasy, like, how should we behave in these situations. Prabhupāda became very shy, lowered his head, saying, "What ecstasy? I have not fallen into ecstasy. I don't know about the [cup], you are talking about. I have [none]." 

The mood of a devotee towards another devotee, especially towards a spiritual teacher—like in that bathhouse, "I am running after you in the hope of getting Kṛṣṇa and shouting 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.'" 

...This is the best samosa I have ever eaten. 

[The person] disappeared because the Rādhā-nātha Mahārāja stopped. He was surprised how Prabhupāda knows the recipe for... and this is an example of how the cup of love is overflowing, from which this love begins to pour out. And the glory of a devotee sometimes begins to manifest itself to other devotees unnoticed by the devotee himself. And eventually, a person comes to the conclusion: "Who was this? What kind of person was this? He was a saint among us." And we can receive great benefit simply from the fact that we can at least once give him the pleasure of... Snakes, scorpions, gañjā, all this dirt—what does he know about [that]? Rādhā-bhakti’s glory gradually spreads throughout all material creation. And one day, somehow [I] heard about the glorious... mood of the greatest devotees of Kṛṣṇa. This is *bhāva*, one of the definitions of love, that you give more than you take. Usually, this is my most common advice that I give to couples during their wedding ceremony: "You will be successful if each of you learns to give more than you take." Residents of Vṛndāvana and especially [the Gopis], they have a certain very rare love. This is what we want to achieve in our life. I heard one recording of Prabhupāda, he spoke about the Lord and his devotees, and he spoke about devotees, then about other devotees, other incarnations of the Lord, and then he spoke for a long time, and said—and the lecture was like a song—crying right at the end of the lecture, and repeated again, "They never ask Kṛṣṇa for anything, not about the [cup]." And not only are they ready to give everything to Kṛṣṇa, they are ready to lose everything for Kṛṣṇa, and go through any difficulties—any difficulties for Kṛṣṇa. They are ready to lose even their reputation for Kṛṣṇa, and reputation for a person is everything. And it is said that dishonor is worse than death; if a person loses his reputation or honor, he cannot continue to live. The Gopīs were ready to part with their reputation for piety. Running away from their homes at night to meet Kṛṣṇa, they were ready to give up everything. They were even ready to go to hell to save Kṛṣṇa from a headache. We all know this story, we will not tell it again, but they were ready to give their feet to Kṛṣṇa just to save him from a headache—to go to this... Prabhupāda compiled many videos and photographs that they took all this time, documentation of the deed of Prabhupāda on this planet. And somewhere among these videos, I saw how one of my spiritual brothers asked a question about Prabhupāda on a video: "And about Prabhupāda, where will you go from here after leaving?" Prabhupāda said, "Where will I go? I will go to hell to preach there."

And we thought... we could think that Prabhupāda would answer [that] he would go to [the spiritual world], but usually a devotee of Prabhupāda never revealed his spiritual *svarūpa* to us. But he did not say that he would go to [heaven]; he said, "I will go to hell." And this is the greatest devotion of the greatest level of Śrīla Prabhupāda. And the one we are talking about, it is said that the closest example of the greatest devotion in this world is a mother's love for a child. A mother is ready, if there is some kind of emergency, a mother is ready to sacrifice her life to save a child from an accident, even if there is an accident. 

And I'm not saying that if you become pure devotees or gain pure devotion you will have headaches or go to hell or suffer. No, this is just an example, an indicator that if you want to give everything to the Lord, it makes the Lord feel that you are dear to him and thus he will bring you closer to himself, as the Lord [says].

And we will think, "Yes, we want to get to the [abode] too." But as Confucius said, the great journey begins, it starts from the first step. So gradually, through the *bhajana* process, we will be cleansed of all unwanted things—anartha, lust, anger, and envy—and gradually we will reach the highest goal. And the main problem, from which... and the biggest obstacle from which a devotee must free himself in order to achieve the goal of this [devotion].

And we just have to follow the process that the spiritual teachers gave us, to serve our spiritual teacher, and the process—it works. And over time, in due time, we will take the *prema* of pure love. It can take millions of lives. For us, this does not matter; we will still do what depends on us, and this is the abode of pure devotional service in Vṛndāvana. So we come here to peek into these moods here. And Prabhupāda said that usually you need to come to Vṛndāvana to be inspired, and leave here, and only a very small number, only a few, should stay to live here. Usually, we come and get inspired and go back to our countries to maintain this mood and propagate the movement of Lord Caitanya, thereby serving this mood. 

But which of the devotees will hear this incredible, deep, emotional, beautiful, most beautiful description of Rādhā-bhakti and not be inspired to receive it? Therefore, Prabhupāda once said, if a devotee hears about the glory of Hari Kṛṣṇa, what intelligent person, having heard about the benefit of chanting Hari Kṛṣṇa, will not want to chant the holy [name] and at least serve such devotees from a distance? We are happy even doing "servant of servant of servant of servant," and we are happy with this position because the more devotees above us, the more *śakti* we will receive. Therefore, the Lord also heard about the glory of... glory of the Vraja-līlā, of all these places, to [dance] with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, He arrived here with this intention, this excuse. Lord, this is so inspiring, so attractive, [to] see this relationship. We know that this is the highest goal, that it is mysterious, mystical, and we... but we really want this. He came, Śiva came here, and he really saw how the dance of *rāsa* happens, and he thought that "I want [it]."

And Śiva, seeing the dance of *rāsa*, began to rush rapidly there, wanting to participate in it. And then suddenly appeared Paurṇamāsī, such an old, elderly woman, hands on sides: "So wait, where are you going?" "I'm going to the *rāsa*." "Here, flowers, this [garland], this kind of... few, here, make scent like that, [Vṛndā-devī], help them arrange... create the scenario of that day for Kṛṣṇa." And this was something that wasn't planned, you know? This personality coming with snakes and spiders all over his body and red eyes, and you know, pitchfork... "What are you doing here, Paurṇamāsī?" She met him on the road. Paurṇamāsī—this is the person who organizes Kṛṣṇa's līlās; she's like a scriptwriter for Kṛṣṇa's līlās every day, near the *rādhā-kuṇḍa*, where Rādhā-māsī and Vṛndā-devī meet and discuss how everything should happen, the līlās. Rādhā-māsī tells what līlās are; Vṛndā-devī says how they should look and how they should be decorated, and in general. And now, in the midst of all this, something completely unplanned appears. A guy with sparse hair appears with some kind of trident in his hands, shouting that he wants the līlā. 

The [mercy]... and took [it]... and she is a very exalted devotee, so seeing Śiva, his determination to get into the *rāsa* dance, she of course was able to understand his heart. A great devotee does not judge by the external; he sees the heart of the person standing in front of him. He does not judge by gender, country, or skin color; for some reason, external signs are not important. So Paurṇamāsī, she accurately determined the exalted position of this devotee, and as suggested, as the verse said, that the *brāhmaṇa* sees equally both a dog and dog food, and an elephant, and sees everyone equally. A *brāhmaṇa*, or the holy man, sees everyone with the same vision. One day, I was around the garden, I met one gardener with a huge stick, with a loincloth, with matted hair on his neck. I asked him, "Do you walk here screaming?" He said, "No, I walk... Śiva." And he said, "No, no, I am not only Śiva... in general, I am looking for Mother Paurṇamāsī so that she will turn me into a *gopī*." He said, "We cannot get to God directly, only through a devotee." And he told the story of how Kṛṣṇa turned Śiva into a *gopī* in *rāsa* dance; so it was his inner esoteric mood to walk around Vṛndāvana with such a look, looking for Paurṇamāsī. Before she had time to give Śiva any instructions, Śiva ran off to dance *rāsa*. At every step there are some guidebook instructions from Rādharāṇī that we should follow, corrections on the way home to God at the right moment. So the spiritual teacher will always be there and instruct us, not only on how to get out of the material world, but also on how, having reached the spiritual world, we can better satisfy Kṛṣṇa by showing the activity in which we are engaged. We will be... Śiva, having received this... running there, he saw how the girls were already getting ready for the *rāsa* dance. The girls looked at him and asked, "And a new *gopī* has come, I wonder, come here. And where are you from? Where are you from? From which village?" 

And [Śiva] answered, "I am... I am, and since each *gopī* has a certain village where the people have a certain [mood]... the senior *gopī* under which she serves has many things, many accessories of her origin." And therefore the *gopī* began to ask, but since he did not have time to hear anything from Paurṇamāsī, he ran away, he did not know what to say. So when they asked his name, he said, "Shivani, my name is..." and the girls said, "So, this is a deceiver! She got here by cunning, apparently."

And in order not to upset the pleasure of the Lord, Kṛṣṇa, since the *gopī* always takes care that He experiences the greatest pleasure... and this can be upset by the presence of someone who should not be there or is not qualified enough. And let's say, like in Śiva-saṅgam, in the *kīrtana* of the Lord, reading, if someone appeared who interfered with the disclosure of the pure mood in these *kīrtanas*, then the devotees took care that such people did not appear there or that they were not there so that the mood was pure, uncontaminated in any way. In the same way, the *gopī*, wanting to deliver the maximum [pleasure] to Her, this *gopī*... so that he would leave from there, they actually even beat [him].

And this is *gopī*, and this is *gopī*... she ran back in tears to Paurṇamāsī, and Paurṇamāsī turned this *gopī* back into Śiva and said, "Listen, you're not ready yet, you're not ready for this yet, but you know that I will appoint you as the protector of all the places of the secret pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. You will occupy four positions in the holy place in the four corners, and you will not let anyone who should not get there." The Lord was very satisfied with this service. A real devotee is always satisfied with any service, even if it may seem insignificant. The devotees are in the Vraja; they are devoted. They do not ask for any material blessings when turning to the Lord Śiva in the holy place in Vṛndāvana. They ask, "Please, let me find the right mood for him to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, to get here, please give me the right mood."

There is no one here, you can all go get the gift. But today, therefore, Śiva, everyone... therefore, you can go get in the form of a *gopī*. And the prayer of Paurṇamāsī when we appear before him sounds like this...

Therefore, saying this prayer... So we are from... we worship the Lord with all our souls, Śiva. And there is another līlā that I want to tell you, I don't know if it's been fixed, please be honest. Raise your hands, who needs to leave or eat millet, please. [Yes]. Who wants another short līlā to hear, naturally? Lord Śiva has a strong love or affection for Lord Kṛṣṇa. One of the games tells how one day Lord Śiva wanted to go to Nandagrāma and get the *darśana* of little Kṛṣṇa. In his form as he is... here he is. He went to the door of the house... [Kṛṣṇa] was somewhere in the fields, most likely, at home. He knocked on the door. There is a tradition among *sadhus* and holy people of Vṛndāvana that they go from door to door and ask Mother Yaśodā for a little alms in order to satisfy their hunger. You can only ask four houses, knock on four doors; if after knocking on four doors they don't give you food, you will fast all day. I once asked Mother Yaśodā for alms from him, our garden in the village... and we with this *sadhu* went through four doors, knocked on four doors, they fed us, they gave us *sabji* and *roti*. And the next year, I left... a year later when I returned, I was met by this *sadhu* and said, "Go collect [alms] again." We went again to the same four doors. I asked, "Why we go to the same people?" [He said], "Because they always give."

Yesterday, a few days ago, I was at home... he lives in the ditch where he spent his days, hearing Lord Nityānanda. And we were standing together, when suddenly at some point a cow opens the door with her horns and enters the building halfway, her huge body, and the woman [takes] a big chapati and gives [it], she eats and leaves. I looked out, I see she went to another door. I say, "What is she doing?" And he says, "Well, that's how it is. Since the moment this cow was a calf, she walks around, we feed her, [she] walks around collecting food." I thought, "If only a cow would come to my house every day and I would bring her a little..." That's why Śiva, I came to get [darśana] to the door on Nandagrāma. *Prasādam* does not always mean food; *prasādam* means mercy. Something seeing this, Mother Yaśodā screamed and saw on Nandagrāma snakes, scorpions, green skin, a skull on a garland on the neck, tangled hair... "She was in the snake, was... faster, faster, take what [you want] and get out of here!" And he said, "From which I thirst... this..." "Darn your son," this woman told him, "you know, I understand that for hundreds, maybe thousands of years you sat in asceticism and gained enormous spiritual power. But you at least looked in the mirror once? I know my son; he will see you, he will be so scared that he will not fall asleep. Therefore, come back as yourself." And having said this, [she] slammed the door. And Śiva stood and thought, "Lord, this means so many more years I will not see the Lord." And for a true devotee, even one moment without the Lord seems like millions of millions of years, plunged into great sadness. You know, you know that it is located on a hill called [Pavana-sarovara]... And very... here is such an outcast, upset, lost; he was coming down the hill and he didn't go anywhere but went straight to the forest which was next to Nandagrāma to think, "If I can't see Kṛṣṇa, how I..." In such a mood he began to shed tears. He explains that the price for purity, for love of God, the Lord... These are the words of devotees; sometimes in despair to see the Lord, [one] begins to shed tears. *Śāstra* is the price that must be [paid] to cry. And that the reason why a devotee chanting the holy name still does not shed tears is that he commits one of the ten, or all 10 offenses of the holy name; therefore [he] does not shed tears. And our goal is actually to overcome these offenses and gain this love. He cried so long and so hard; his tears formed a lake.

And devotees go to this lake and wash themselves in the lake of tears of Lord Śiva, praying to get rid of the offenses that they have unwittingly or unknowingly committed in the practice of devotional service and which prevent them from getting the Lord Kṛṣṇa’s *darśana*.

Meanwhile, up in her room, [Yaśodā] felt that she was attracted by the fact that she had brought some *prasādam*... because after she showed not very good signs in the past... constantly licked... [Kṛṣṇa] refused [prasādam]. This is so unusual. But in fact, this would be in the fact that the cries... in fact, he was crying because he really wanted to get [darśana], just like... Just like a devotee always strives to love Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa always strives to love and show love to his devotee.

Returned home, Nanda upset, said, "Listen to our [sadhu]... but [it was] an offense to a devotee to go and ask him forgiveness." And they dressed Kṛṣṇa... [to] this [sadhu] who is crying, and around him a huge lake. Said generally, [come] to see your son and eat the remnants of his food. Bring the remnants of *prasādam* from his plate here down for the Lord Śiva. And they fed Lord Śiva, this *sadhu*. These requests—Lord Śiva was very satisfied, even though he did not feel that he was being [offended]. All the same, to pacify them, he said, "I forgive." Then Mother [Yaśodā] said something very wonderful, listen carefully, she said turning to the kitchen, "Hello, moreover, all this wonderful, delicious food turns into even stronger [devotion] because your illustrious son... for all eternity that I will not touch any other food except that which your son ate."

Kṛṣṇa and Nanda [agreed] that they all have not yet drunk their offense, [they] said, "Okay, but we want to do one more thing: every day after my son eats, all the food will be brought to you, and when you [bless] it, it will be distributed to all the other residents." Same [thing]! And I saw with my own eyes—because I [wanted] to ask, easier to perform *prasādam*—and I saw personally how... and then they distribute it to all the other pilgrims, other living [beings]. Vaiṣṇavas, they are all Śaivites, but they are very friendly; they are friends with the Gosvāmīs because they feel brotherhood of kinship in their common service to their master. Once I was there, and there lives one main Vaiṣṇava of this area; he looks very threatening, gloomy, with a huge white [tika]. This kind of... [servant]. I was a little afraid of him. [He was] so beautiful, so calm. One day he was [by]... You think I have [nothing]? And he was so sweet, mercy...

Once this *sadhu* worshiped one... *śālagrāma-śilā*. She is so beautiful. I saw her, I was simply amazed by the light of this *śilā*. She was very smooth, which because it has been worshiped for many hundreds of years, she is simply... she was very attractive. I always thought about her. One day, while I was there, I passed by this Vaiṣṇava *bābā* and suddenly plucked up my courage and said to him, "Bābā." He turned to me and looked at me so sullenly. I asked him, "Can I have this *śilā*, Govardhana, your *śilā*?" And suddenly a smile appeared on his face and he told me, "Just because you are a disciple of A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, who spread Krishna consciousness throughout the world, I will give it to you."

Therefore, all this is by the grace of Prabhupāda, because a spiritual teacher is the one who reveals the spiritual glory. And we all feel the extraordinary power of this lady by the grace of Prabhupāda, and experiencing this here, we leave here preaching and bring other people here so that they too can experience the extraordinary power and might of the [holy] land. And my spiritual sister Yamunā [called] these moments "moments of magic" when someone [sees] the incredible power of a spiritual place.

Thank you.
