"*00440*.*
"Welcome, everyone. Once again, welcome back to our continued series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, and more recently, our discourses on many of the ācāryas who have spent time there. 

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.*

Today, we are going to take a little diversion from our regular series on the ācāryas who have spent time in Vṛndāvana to speak about a very special personality who lives forever in Vṛndāvana. We have chosen him, in particular, because today is his birthday—his appearance day—and that is the great Lord Śiva. Today is Friday, and this is Śivarātri. Śivarātri, of course—well, people in India know Lord Śiva; apart from Vṛndāvana, he is famous as Mahādeva. *Mahā* means great, and *deva* refers to the demigod; so, he is, amongst many things, the greatest of the devatās. I found a beautiful prayer that the devatās offered to him in Svargaloka; it is an interesting prayer:

> "We worship the three-eyed one, Lord Śiva, who is fragrant and who nourishes all beings. May he liberate us from death for the sake of immortality, even as the cucumber is separate from its bondage to the vine."

I mean, we could go on for hours and hours about the glories of Mahādeva, of Lord Śiva. We know he lives on Mount Kailāśa with Pārvatī. He is in charge of the tamo-guṇa, the mode of ignorance. He is always accompanied by ghosts, witches, hobgoblins, demons, and rākṣasas; he purifies them by his association. He destroys the cosmos at the end of creation with his special dance. He has a special drum that he plays, and he does a wild dance, and the friction causes the creation to be destroyed. So, how is it that today we are introducing him as "a very special personality who lives forever in Vṛndāvana"?

Well, let us go to the Vaiṣṇavas. We see him in a different light, and we literally see through the eyes of śāstra. Through śāstra, we see—we see through *guru, śāstra,* and *sādhu*—we see the glories of the Lord through the eyes of śāstra. I remember when we were in the military, we used to sing—I think it was called the "Battle Hymn of the Republic": "Mine eyes have seen the glory of the Lord; He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never sound retreat. O be swift, my soul, to answer Him; be jubilant, my feet! Our God is marching on." We used to sing that when we went with our drill instructor. So, if we really want to see the glory of the Lord, truly see the glory of the Lord, we cannot see it with these eyes; we have to see it through śāstra. 

So, what does śāstra tell us about the deeper understanding of Lord Śiva? Well, we turn to the grantha-rāja, the king of all scriptures, the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 12th Canto, 13th Chapter, very famous verse number 17:

> *nimnagānāṁ yathā gaṅgā devānām acyuto yathā, vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ...*

"Just as the Gaṅgā is the greatest of all rivers, Lord Acyuta is the supreme amongst deities, and Lord Śambhu (Śiva) is the greatest of Vaiṣṇavas." *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* is the greatest of all Purāṇas. A devotee could speak for hours on that verse because there is the Gaṅgā, there is Lord Acyuta, the Bhāgavatam—but we are specifically focusing on Lord Śiva. It says that he is the greatest of all Vaiṣṇavas. So he has so many glories, but this is his supreme glory: that he is the greatest of Vaiṣṇavas. He is the greatest devotee of Lord Viṣṇu, or the greatest devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa specifically. He loves Kṛṣṇa; he has *kṛṣṇa-prema*.

And as a result, Lord Śiva constantly exhibits the compassion of Vaiṣṇavas to give *kṛṣṇa-prema* to others. He has *kṛṣṇa-prema* and he gives *kṛṣṇa-prema*; this is a Vaiṣṇava. Actually, our Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu has glorified Lord Śiva in just that way in his famous *Śivāṣṭakam*. Yes, some devotees do not know that Lord Caitanya has his eight prayers to Lord Śiva, *Śivāṣṭakam*, in which he glorifies Lord Śiva. An associate of Lord Caitanya, his name is Murāri Gupta, he wrote a book about Mahāprabhu’s pastimes entitled *Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Carita Mahākāvya*, wherein he records Mahāprabhu’s prayers to Lord Śiva. It is there in that book that he records Mahāprabhu’s prayers to Lord Śiva when Mahāprabhu arrived in Bhubaneswar. It is one town, Ekāmravana, and we hear in that śāstra by Murāri Gupta that Mahāprabhu actually met Lord Śiva in person there and he offered Lord Śiva some beautiful prayers. Verse number seven is relevant to the point we are discussing right now about how Śiva has *kṛṣṇa-prema* and how he gives *kṛṣṇa*. The verse is as follows:

> "I repeatedly offer my respectful obeisances to you. This is Mahāprabhu speaking: I repeatedly offer my respectful obeisances to you, Śrī Śiva. You are the guru of everyone, from whom even Nārada and other great sages confidentially inquire. You are eager to bestow upon sincere souls priceless boons like the happiness of hari-bhakti. Thus, you create an auspicious atmosphere by your grace."

So we see that Śiva is the greatest of Vaiṣṇavas, and a distinguishing quality of a Vaiṣṇava is to always be concerned about the deliverance of others. Now, it is important to note that Lord Śiva’s love, again for Kṛṣṇa, is of the nature of *rāja-bhakti*, like the residents of Vṛndāvana. And how do we know that fact? That he loves Vṛndāvana-Kṛṣṇa? Well, there are many references to that, but one of my favorites is because Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura said so. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta offered the following prayer, which, of course, was written by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura wrote this prayer in his *Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma*, and Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, he offered this prayer to Lord Śiva—to Lord Śiva’s Liṅgarāja in Bhubaneswar—on June 22nd, 1922. I was reading the *Harmonist* again, that when Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī visited that temple, the famous temple in Bhubaneswar, he repeated this beautiful prayer of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura to Lord Śiva, and I would say all Braj-vāsīs know it:

> "O Śiva, O gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana, O you who are accompanied by Goddess Umā, O you who carry the moon in your hair, O Lord worshiped by Sanandana Kumāra, Sanāt Kumāra, and Nārada Muni. Worshiped by the Gopis, I beg you to bestow upon me love for the lotus feet of the divine couple who perform joyous pastimes in Vraja. I repeatedly offer my obeisances to you."

So this is a prayer that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī offered to Lord Śiva, showing how Lord Śiva is very much involved in Vraja, in *rāja-bhakti*. So that is why we worship Lord Śiva. Śrīla Prabhupāda makes that clear in many of his writings, but I found one purport in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 4th Canto, Chapter 24, Verse 30. Prabhupāda writes, and I quote again: 

> "It is said, *vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ*. Lord Śiva is the best of all devotees. Therefore, all devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa are also devotees of Lord Śiva. In Vṛndāvana, there is Lord Śiva’s temple called Gopīśvara. The Gopis used to worship not only Lord Śiva but Kātyāyanī or Durgā as well, but their aim was to attain the favor of Lord Kṛṣṇa. A devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa does not disrespect Lord Śiva but worships Lord Śiva as the most exalted devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Consequently, whenever a devotee worships Lord Śiva, he prays to Lord Śiva to achieve the favor of Kṛṣṇa, and he does not request any material profit."

So there it is, in a nutshell. We are also worshippers of Lord Śiva because we know that one can only approach the Lord through the medium of his devotee. So here is the Lord’s greatest devotee, so you do the math. 

In that beautiful prayer by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, it is mentioned that Lord Śiva is the "gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana." He is also referred to as the protector of the dhāma. Essentially, because of the gatekeeper and the protector, it means the same thing. And how is Lord Śiva protecting the dhāma? He is protecting the dhāma by his presence in four places—you could say four corners of Vṛndāvana—he is protecting the dhāma as:
1. Gopīśvara Mahādeva in Vṛndāvana central.
2. Kāmeśvara Mahādeva out at Kāmīvana.
3. Cakreśvara Mahādeva at Govardhana Hill.
4. Nandīśvara Mahādeva at Nandagrāma. 

These are the four ways. Gopīśvara Mahādeva is actually one of the most, you could say, prominent deities in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya. As we know, it is said one cannot enter Vṛndāvana without his permission, without Lord Śiva’s permission.

In the *Bhakti-ratnākara*, Chapter 5, Verse 741, it is said:
> *śrīmad-gopīśvaraṁ vande śaṅkaraṁ kleśa-hāriṇam, devānāṁ vṛndāraṇya-rati-pradam.*
"I offer my respectful obeisances to Gopīśvara, who is Lord Śiva himself. He is very merciful, removes all troubles, and grants spiritual love in Vṛndāvana."

He grants spiritual love in Vṛndāvana. Also, in the song, there is the following line: *Jaya jaya Gopīśvara Vṛndāvana-īśvara*. "All glories, all glories to Gopīśvara Śiva, who resides in the holy dhāma of Vṛndāvana." So Śiva is a very integral part of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. 

And then the second way he is guarding the dhāma: Kāmeśvara Mahādeva at Kāmīvana. As we have discussed many times, *kāma* means desire; it can also mean spiritual desire. And it is said that Kāmeśvara Mahādeva is the fulfiller of one's spiritual desires. In *Bhakti-ratnākara*, Chapter 6, Verse 3, by our beloved Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī—we haven't mentioned him for a while, but it is good to mention him again—he says about Kāmeśvara Mahādeva:

> "O Lord Kāmeśvara Mahādeva, I pay my respects to you, for you are merciful by nature, and you made Kāmīvana the most desired place for the devotees by your presence. Then he goes on: O Lord, you are the main object of Rādhā’s merciful glance. You are able to give all boons. Your forehead is decorated with three-lined tilaka, and your neck is decorated with Tulasī beads. O Lord of Kāma, I pay my respects to you."

So this is some Śiva, and that corner of Vraja has a liṅgam. Actually, there the Lord is present; Lord Śiva is present in all these four places as liṅgams. And I was reading that when King Vṛṣabhānu and his wife, Queen Kīrtidā Sundarī, wanted to have children, they actually made a pilgrimage to Kāmīvana. And after offering prayers to Kāmeśvara Mahādeva, they bathed with great devotion in a nearby lake called Māṇikī-kuṇḍa. If you go to Kāmīvana, you can ask for that body of water, that lake, and also take a bath there. And the caritras say that they went to Kāmīvana, they prayed to Kāmeśvara Mahādeva, and took a bath in the sacred lake because they did not want ordinary children. The caritras say that Vṛṣabhānu, he wanted children that would "glorify his family’s devotion to the Supreme Lord," and Lord Mahādeva answered the king’s prayers. Because as we know, Mother Kīrtidā, she proceeded in time to give birth to three divine children one after another: Śrīdāma, the cowherd boy; Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; and her younger sister, Anaṅga Mañjarī—all of whom, as we know, are very intimately connected with Kṛṣṇa. 

Of course, the family members of King Vṛṣabhānu are eternally connected; that is obvious. They do not require necessarily the blessings of Lord Śiva to be united, but Kṛṣṇa’s associates, like King Vṛṣabhānu and Kīrtidā Sundarī, when they are on this planet, they follow the earthly customs when here—just as Kṛṣṇa does, just as Śiva does—to set an example for all of us.

So then, who is next? Oh, yeah, there is Cakreśvara Mahādeva out at Govardhana Hill on the northern bank of Mānasi Gaṅgā. Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrīla Gosvāmī, spent so much time there. And there at Cakreśvara Mahādeva, there is a group of five Śiva-liṅgams that are famous by the name, well, Cakreśvara Mahādeva, and they protect that area of Govardhana. And that part of Mānasi Gaṅgā is known as Cakra-tīrtha. The present temple of Cakreśvara Mahādeva is actually a recent temple; the original one, unfortunately, I read, was destroyed by the Muslim invaders. However, the various deities are very old, and they are actually said to have been installed by Kṛṣṇa’s great-grandson, Vajranābha. 

Then, what, we are on number four: Nandīśvara Mahādeva, where there is the palace of Nanda Mahārāja. That palace is situated atop Nandīśvara Hill, and that hill is actually a form of Lord Śiva, who performed tapasya for several thousand years to be able to enter into Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vṛndāvana. I think we will discuss that a little bit later, but there is a liṅgam out there, and that is, you know, where Lord Śiva is guarding. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he writes in his *Vraja-rītī-cintāmaṇi*, First Chapter, number 15, some nice glorification of that Nandīśvara Hill with that Śiva-liṅgam situated. He writes:

> "The devotees declare that Nandīśvara Hill, the form of Lord Śiva now shining as Nanda Mahārāja’s capital, is an endlessly beautiful crown decorating Vraja-maṇḍala."

So now, this is a very confidential, intimate service of protecting the dhāma, which is an expansion of Balarāma protecting the renewal of the dust of Vṛndāvana, protecting the kalpa-vṛkṣa trees, protecting Kṛṣṇa’s favorite surabhi cows, protecting the the devotees. So many different rasas. This amazing service of being the protector, the guardian, the gatekeeper, was given to Lord Śiva by Mother Paurṇamāsī, mostly Yoga-māyā personified. As Mother Paurṇamāsī—most of you know, of course—that at one time Lord Śiva heard so much about Vraja. And if you hear about Vraja, what happens eventually? Your heart melts and you want to be a Vrajavāsī. You want to make Vṛndāvana your eternal residence, and you take up the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in earnest, knowing that that is the *paramaṁ gatim*. 

So Lord Śiva, you know, he heard about Vṛndāvana, and he heard about the rāsa-līlā, and he wanted to enter the rāsa-līlā. So he came to Vṛndāvana; he left Mount Kailāśa, he came to Vṛndāvana. And as he entered, on the way where Kṛṣṇa was performing the rāsa-līlā that evening, he was met by Mother Paurṇamāsī, who said, "No, you cannot participate in a male form, or let us say even more specifically, in the mood of a male. You have to be female, and you have to have the mood of a Gopi." So she said, "Okay, follow me," and she took him and she bathed him in the Mānsarovara lake. And he came out with the form of a Gopi, and he is looking around and—without asking any questions about, you know, "How should I act as a Gopi?" and "What’s my name?" and "What village do I come from?" because these are all important things that the Gopis know, "What is my service?", etc.—he just ran off for the rāsa-līlā.

And when he arrived at the rāsa-līlā, the Gopis, because Gopis are very accommodating, if a new girl comes they are very happy she has made it there, and they welcome her and they talk and introduce her to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and her new residence and her sevā. So all the Gopis gathered around Lord Śiva as a Gopi and they said, "Oh, so what village are you from?" So Lord Śiva, let’s say, he was about to say, "Oh, I’m from Kailāśa"—no, no, he wouldn’t say Kailāśa, that’s a whole other mood—he didn’t say anything. So then they said, "So what is your husband’s name?" And Lord Śiva didn't know how to say. "Well, how many cows does your husband have? And who are your children?" And this new Gopi, she had no answers. So the Gopis, they are very protective of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, they are protective of Kṛṣṇa, the divine couple. So they said, "There is something fishy going on here. There is something that is not right here. She looks like an imposter." And some accounts say they were ready to give her a little knock, but Mother Paurṇamāsī appeared. So then she revealed the whole pastime, explaining. She said, "Girls, this is Mahādeva Śiva; he is a great demigod. Be careful, do not take any action against him." So the girls are very respectful to any devotee. 

So then Paurṇamāsī, she turned to Lord Śiva and she said, "Dear Lord Śiva, no one can participate in the rāsa-līlā without really being a Gopi, so you have to observe this dance from a distance; you cannot actually enter into it." Śiva was devastated because he wanted to be somehow part of the Vṛndāvana-līlā. So then she said, "Actually, I will give you the service that you protect rāsa-līlā, you protect all of Vṛndāvana. You can be the guardian of the dhāma." In honor of this pastime, Lord Śiva’s desire to enter rāsa-līlā, he is worshipped in one of the most prominent temples in Vṛndāvana, as we mentioned earlier, as Gopīśvara Mahādeva. So many of you have been there; you go to Gopīśvara Mahādeva temple down in the center of Vṛndāvana town. The beautiful Śiva-liṅgam—every evening the Śiva-liṅgam is dressed in a sarī with earrings and, you know, Gopi paraphernalia—and Lord Śiva is worshipped as a Gopi at a particular time of the day. And many pilgrims come to him. This is, again, the tradition, that traditionally in Vraja culture, you know, when you arrive in Vraja, you go and you ask Mahādeva, "Please, Gopīśvara Mahādeva, please grant me permission to enter into the dhāma." Not just in the sense physically, but in the mood of a Vrajavāsī. "You give me those blessings."

So we can see his eagerness to be part of the Vraja-līlā. But as I was reading, I understood that Lord Śiva expressed his love for Vṛndāvana even before Vṛndāvana was manifest on this earth. Yes, long, long ago, Lord Śiva desired—this is before Kṛṣṇa’s presence, five thousand years ago—long ago, Lord Śiva desired to be present when Lord Kṛṣṇa displayed his pastimes on this earth. And in order to do so, he performed very long, arduous penances with his mind firmly fixed on that goal. So it is described that Kṛṣṇa appeared, and you know, he was grateful that Śiva wanted to be part of his pastimes, the playground of God, Vṛndāvana. And he said, "So how can I—what, what blessing can I give you?" So Lord Śiva asked for a very interesting blessing. He said, "Lord Kṛṣṇa, please, I want to be allowed to appear as a mountain, a mountain in Vṛndāvana." "Why do you want to be a mountain?" So, a very appropriate reply: Lord Śiva said, "Lord, I want to be a mountain because in the future you will appear in Vraja along with your eternal associates, and you will walk all over Vṛndāvana, and you will walk on this mountain that I will become. And my desire is to have the dust of the Gopis' feet upon my head."

So Kṛṣṇa liked that answer, and he blessed him to appear as the mountain which we mentioned a little bit earlier, upon which Nanda Mahārāja would build his capital, Nandagrāma. So that mountain is called Nandīśvara Hill. So yes, we covered the four places where Lord Śiva is the guardian of Vṛndāvana and how he got that service by the grace of Mother Paurṇamāsī. But further research shows us that his residence in four places as the guardian of Vṛndāvana, and his presence as Nandīśvara Hill in and of itself, are not Lord Śiva’s only residences in Vṛndāvana. For I found a beautiful quote: our ācāryas say that Lord Śiva also lives in "every forest, beside every lake, near every grove, and near every hill, and in every place of pilgrimage, and every place of pastime in Vṛndāvana." Every forest, beside every lake, near every grove and hill, and in every place of pilgrimage, every place of pastime in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. And they explain why: because he is so eager to just witness Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes throughout the day. 

So our ācāryas encourage us that whenever we see a deity of Lord Śiva present when we do our parikramās in Vṛndāvana, we should bow down before that form of Śiva, which is usually, again, a Śiva-liṅgam. And they say that you should offer water from a nearby kuṇḍa, or in the absence of a kuṇḍa, at least take some dust from that holy place. I think we mentioned this, you know, several months ago, how you know, we are going around Vraja and there is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and, you know, we are seeing all these different beautiful temples and this is Śiva-liṅgam, but the ācāryas say that we should take the time to bow down to those many Śiva-liṅgams that you see around, because he is the guardian of the dhāma and he grants us entrance into the dhāma. It is one of the five personalities which grants entrance into the dhāma in residence. So when you see a Śiva-liṅgam, do not just walk by; take some water from a nearby kuṇḍa, pour it on—I see that Vrajavāsīs do this all the time; they are always taking water and they are bathing the Śiva-liṅgam. And if there is no water, a little raja, a new little dust like that. This is Vraja, this is how we live in Vraja. We follow in the footsteps of the Vrajavāsīs, we learn how to worship Kṛṣṇa so that we can awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa. We get these tips, especially in the villages. You go through the villages in Vṛndāvana, you can really understand, "Wow, what is bhakti?" from the villagers. 

So I think maybe nine months ago, we mentioned that in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, there is actually a forest that is called Rudravana. There are so many forests, right? There is the twelve main forests and there is the sub-forest and there is the sub-sub-forest, and it goes on and on. And there is actually a forest named after Lord Śiva. *Vana* means forest, so *Rudra* is one name of Kṛṣṇa—excuse me, of Lord Śiva—so Rudravana. And it is recommended that just as one goes to Gopīśvara Mahādeva in the center of the town, one should also visit Rudravana to get Lord Śiva’s blessings to serve Kṛṣṇa and to love Kṛṣṇa and become an eternal resident of Vraja. Again, that is our process: we go through the devotees. In the *Ādi Purāṇa*, what does Kṛṣṇa say to Arjuna? "One who claims to be my devotee is not so. Only a person who claims to be the devotee of my devotee is my devotee." So just let us conclude that just as Kṛṣṇa is eternally present in Vṛndāvana, we can say Lord Śiva is eternally present in his forest in Vṛndāvana as Rudravana. So from time to time, we can go and we can pray to him there, sit in the forest and pray to him specifically to become a better devotee of Kṛṣṇa and to just get his association. Just to get his association. I was reading the other night in *Hari-nāma-cintāmaṇi*, he writes, it is so beautiful:

> "If one stays near a pure Vaiṣṇava devotee of the Lord for some time, one can receive the bhakti devotional energy flowing from that Vaiṣṇava's body. If one can bind that energy within one's heart, afterwards one will develop strong faith in the process of bhakti. Thus, if one lives close to a Vaiṣṇava, devotion will very soon appear within one's heart."

These are the words of Bhaktivinoda. You stay near a pure Vaiṣṇava for some time, you can receive the bhakti, the devotional energy that is flowing from his body. Wow. And when that energy becomes bound up in your heart, you will develop some strong faith in the process, and very soon that bhakti will manifest in your heart. 

So yes, we hanker for that. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, he writes in his *Viveka-śatakam*—remember we used to quote that a lot, a hundred verses of wisdom; it is actually text number one:

> "My body has attained the unpleasant state of old age, my lifespan is reduced, and my senses have little strength to grasp the strong sense objects. What shall I do? The land of Vṛndāvana, which removes all distress, is situated far away, and I am unable to attain the crest jewel of the association of the residents of that transcendental abode."

He is lamenting: "I am growing old, everything is but—and I cannot get to Vṛndāvana to associate with the residents of that transcendental abode." But we can from time to time go to Vraja. We can go to Māyāpur, you can go to Jagannātha Purī—these are the centers of Vaiṣṇavism—and we can associate through the *paramparā*, by hearing the words, the instructions of devotees. We can read Prabhupāda’s books; Prabhupāda said his ecstasies are present there in his purports. And we can associate with each other: *hari, guru,* and *vaiṣṇava*. So if we act like this, if we try our best to become devotees by surrendering to a devotee, that devotee will bless us and Śiva will bless us. 

In the 4th Canto of the *Bhāgavatam*, Chapter 24, Text number 28, Lord Śiva mentions how a devotee is very dear to him. *Kṛṣṇa-bhakta* is very dear to him. He says:

> "Any person who has surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, the controller of everything—material nature as well as the living entities—is actually very dear to me."

Any person surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, he says, is very dear to me. So like that, it is a science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He is pleased to see when we are worshipping Kṛṣṇa, because he is a great devotee; he will give us blessings, we can become better devotees. 

So there are some pastimes of Lord Śiva in Rudravana, that is his abode in Vraja. The caritras write that once, deep in meditation in Rudravana, Śiva, what was it? He suddenly called out to the divine couple: 

> "O abodes of mercy, please be kind to wayward souls and drive away their fears with the gift of pure devotion to you. Always thinking of our welfare. O abodes of mercy, please be kind to the wayward souls and drive away their fear with the gift of pure devotion to you."

So while he was saying that in our interest—we are all wayward souls, we have lost our path, we are like the black sheep of the flock—while he was saying that, thinking of our welfare, it is described that tears of compassion streamed down Lord Śiva’s eyes onto the ground. The ācāryas say, just as the River Gaṅgā falls in powerful streams from his matted locks onto the peaks of the Himalayas, so that is how the tears were coming out of his eyes, and those tears formed a lake, a lake in Vṛndāvana, in Rudravana. It is called Rudra-kuṇḍa. Either way, Rudra-kuṇḍa—those tears, that lake, is full of the tears that are the tears of Lord Śiva feeling compassion for the fallen, conditioned souls, asking Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to give us their prema. So who would not want to go and bathe in Rudra-kuṇḍa? And don't think, "Oh, yes, that was, you know, so many thousands of years ago, and now it's new water." No, that’s mundane conception. Everything in Vraja is eternal. 

But those aren't the only tears that formed this particular lake in Rudravana. Once the Gopis came to Govardhana Hill expecting to see Kṛṣṇa, you know, herding his cows, and they didn't find Kṛṣṇa herding his cows at Govardhana Hill, so they were heartbroken. And someone said, "But he is far away, you know, he is on the banks of the River Yamunā." So, unable to suppress their sorrow, it is described that the Gopis, they ran to Rudravana and they onto the banks of Rudra-kuṇḍa, and because Kṛṣṇa was so far away that day, they couldn't attain him, there they stopped—they stayed and they cried so profusely that their tears caused that kuṇḍa now to overflow its banks with their tears, and then that water washed their lotus feet. So not only is Rudra-kuṇḍa made from Lord Śiva’s tears out of compassion for us, but the tears of the Gopis as well. And those tears and that water mixed together washed their lotus feet. Those were their tears of separation, and they mixed with Lord Śiva’s tears. Let’s go to Rudra-kuṇḍa in Rudravana and just take, you know, a bath, a sacred bath there. Now, I also read that sometime later, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma passed Rudra-kuṇḍa one time on their way to Mathurā. It is said actually that, I think that pastime happened—Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma passed Rudra-kuṇḍa on the way to Mathurā with Akrūra on the chariot to go to Mathurā on the invitation of King Kaṁsa, they passed by that kuṇḍa. And the local Vrajavāsīs, remember we discussed one time that Vrajavāsīs followed them as long as they could until they couldn't walk any further, and they stopped. And all those Vrajavāsīs who were seeing Kṛṣṇa off, you know, knowing—we are not sure when he would come back—and feeling that just one moment in separation from Kṛṣṇa is like, you know, millions of years in separation, they sat down on the banks of Rudra-kuṇḍa and they cried in separation from Kṛṣṇa, and their tears also washed into Rudra-kuṇḍa. So this is the lake of Rudra-kuṇḍa, and we haven't heard so much about this, but now we know three reasons to take a bath in that sacred place, three reasons to take a bath in Rudravana at Rudra-kuṇḍa. Definitely a place to visit in our next Kārtika parikramā. 

So, you know, it is kind of a lake associated with sadness, but sadness on the transcendental platform. But not all the pastimes associated with that particular kuṇḍa are sad. The ācāryas say that Rudra-kuṇḍa’s deep and clear water are ideal for bathing, which makes it a favorite bathing spot for Kṛṣṇa and his cowherd boyfriends, this very deep, very clear water. So Kṛṣṇa comes with his cows and his friends, and they all bathe in the water there, they are all very happy. And the śāstra also says that while herding cows with his friends in different parts of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa would sneak away and meet Rādhārāṇī with her companions in Rudravana on the banks of Rudra-kuṇḍa—very, very special place. 

And for relief, it is described from the midday heat, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would change into bathing clothes and enjoy the refreshing waters of Rudra-kuṇḍa, which was—as described—always full of blossoming, aromatic lotuses. And it is described that they would swim together into the middle of the lake where Kṛṣṇa would abandon Rādhārāṇī; he would leave her. And I was reading, Rādhārāṇī is not a very good swimmer—we mentioned this some months ago—she is not a very good swimmer. So Kṛṣṇa would go away, and as she is desperately treading water to keep from going under, she would panic and she would call out to Kṛṣṇa, "Help me, I’m going to drown!" And then the Kṛṣṇa would come back and swim back as a valiant Kṛṣṇa and come to her rescue and enjoy her helpless state as she clung tightly to his neck for safety. 

These are all the things we’re discussing because this is a Śivarātri, and we’re speaking—we could speak about so many things about Śiva and Mount Kailāśa and so many pastimes of Lord Śiva, but we’re speaking about him in his relationship to Vṛndāvana. Now, scripture also says that this Rudra-kuṇḍa is the "embodiment of Girirāja’s anger." What does that mean, "Rudra-kuṇḍa is the embodiment of Girirāja’s anger"? Well, it’s mentioned that this anger is directed at those who fail "to observe the Anakūṭa ceremony" (you know, where offerings were made to Girirāja) or who argue that Kṛṣṇa’s form is an illusion. So Rudra-kuṇḍa is the embodiment of Girirāja’s anger for those who don’t observe Govardhana-pūjā, who argue Kṛṣṇa’s form as an illusion. Yes, and it is said that, how is it put? It is said that supernatural snakes who ornament Lord Śiva’s body become furious with such fools, for those two reasons. Because they become furious with such souls, whom they search out and bite with the venom of "misfortune and false doctrines." So if you’re not going to observe the Anakūṭa ceremony and you’re going to—and you’re going to say that Kṛṣṇa’s form is an illusion, then watch out for the supernatural snakes which we always see on Lord Śiva’s body; they’ll become furious with you, they’ll search you out, and they’ll bite you with the venom of "misfortune and false doctrines." You’ll fall under the illusion of some false doctrines. 

So, Kṛṣṇa’s special day. So I’d like to conclude on this very auspicious day, Śivarātri, the appearance of Lord Śiva, with a few prayers by Lord Śiva from his heart, glorifying his most beloved Vṛndāvana-Kṛṣṇa. And of course, these prayers come from the 4th Canto, 24th Chapter of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, entitled "Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Śiva." So here is Śiva revealing his heart to Kṛṣṇa. We get to hear:

> "My dear Lord, your two lotus feet are so beautiful that they appear like two blossoming petals of the lotus flower which grows during the autumn season. Indeed, the nails of your lotus feet emanate such a great effulgence that they immediately dissipate all the darkness in the heart of a conditioned soul. My dear Lord, kindly show me that form of yours which always dissipates all kinds of darkness in the heart of a devotee. My dear Lord, you are the supreme spiritual master of everyone, therefore all conditioned souls covered by the darkness of ignorance can be enlightened by you as the spiritual master. My dear Lord, I wish to see you exactly in the form that your very dear devotees worship. You have many other forms, but I wish to see your form that is expressly liked by the devotees. Please be merciful upon me and show me that form, for only that form worshipped by the devotees can perfectly satisfy all the demands of the senses, the spiritual senses."

Oh, nice prayers by Lord Śiva. So, appearance day of Lord Śiva kī jaya! Śivarātri kī jaya! 

Kind of a special lecture today. We took time off from our ācāryas to, again, speak about a person who lives eternally in Vṛndāvana-dhāma as the guardian and the protector, to whom we approach for entrance into that sacred dhāma. We will be back in a couple of days to continue with our lectures on some of our great ācāryas in Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Have a wonderful day.""