Inaugurated the sacred movement of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahā Mantra far and wide.

While doing so, he once made a now-famous prediction: "In every town and village, the chanting of My name will be heard." This prediction is now being carried out by your International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, under the direction of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

And this summer, here on the Baltic Sea coast in Poland, we are very happy to play a small role in fulfilling that prophecy with our festival program called "Festival of India" in Polish. This is our 32nd year here on the coast, and we have planned 45 festivals, which on average attract 3,000 people each day.

Over the years, it's become a great cultural extravaganza with our mammoth portable stage, numerous tents and exhibits, and a show that lasts five hours each evening. One of our main attractions is the many devotees from around the world who join us each year to participate in our stage productions and numerous other services that make our events popular for tourists and locals alike.

We have a crew of 150 devotees this year, and we are based out of a public school that we rent each summer. It's a Spartan life, as devotees sleep on the floors of the classrooms and shower in cold water in the school gym.

Often, there are as many as 20 or 30 devotees sleeping in each classroom. But any austerities we undergo are nothing compared to the bliss we experience by going out on Hare Nāma saṅkīrtana each day to advertise our festivals.

Through the years, we have developed an attractive style of Hare Nāma that has caught on with other devotee Hare Nāma parties around the world.

For example, we first introduced the accordion into our kīrtanas way back in the early '90s. Now, the accordion has become a modern-day instrument in many harināma groups. Our joyful processions are well organized, with the ladies chanting and dancing with fans in front, while other devotees follow in two lines holding flags, balloons, and banners.

We make sure we always smile and wave at people, which encourages them to smile and wave back. In such a surcharged atmosphere, people eagerly accept our colorful invitations. We give out between eight to ten thousand invitations a day. While our kīrtana parties are out chanting each day, our crews set up the festival sites.

It's a major effort to set up and break down the sites, as we move to three different towns each week, always returning to our school base each evening. We have to mention our kitchen crew as well, who cook two hearty meals a day for the devotees, as well as for our extremely popular festival restaurants.

We're also very proud of a traditional Indian dance group from Mumbai, India, called Saṅkhyā, who have been coming each summer for 15 years, for free, actually, to perform daily on our stage. One might ask how such a professional group can perform without receiving any remuneration.

The answer is they, like us, experience great joy sharing India's Vedic culture with the world. Typically, as I deliver my lecture from the stage each evening, I reflect on the fact that I'm representing a long, prestigious line of ācāryas going back to the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu 500 years ago, who all worked or served with great effort during their time in history to establish our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, with the ultimate aim of fulfilling Lord Caitanya's prediction to spread it around the world.

That prediction took a giant leap forward when our Śrīla Prabhupāda stepped upon the child of duty to sail to America in 1965.

Now, we, as followers, have the great fortune, the great privilege, to continue his and all the previous ācāryas' work. One of the highlights of the festival for me is when people line up to get their newly purchased Bhagavad-gītās signed.

I show the Gītā repeatedly during my 40-minute lecture, stressing its importance as an authentic scripture that helps people to cross over the ocean of material existence safely to the shore of the spiritual world on the other side. This year, I find people who are more eager than ever for spiritual knowledge, due to the sufferings they underwent during the past pandemic, as well as present world conflicts.

In the Gītā itself, Kṛṣṇa says, "Of the thousands among men, one perhaps strives for perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection, perhaps one knows Me in truth. But among them, O Pious men, are four kinds of pious men who begin to render devotional service unto Me: the distressed, the desire for wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute." But it's not only people who are in distress that buy books at our festivals.

Just the other day, a lady approached me after my talk to ask a question. When I asked if she had ever read the Gītā, she replied that she purchased one 30 years ago at our festival in the same town. "For me," she said, "she had approached me just to clarify a question she had from her study of the Gītā.

It's been a guidebook for me most of my life now," she concluded. Sometimes, as I walk around our festival site, appreciating how our devotees have dedicated their entire summer to serve with us, I remember another prophecy made by a great devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu named Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya.

In his verses, he writes, "From the time that the holy name of Hari became manifest on the earth, Vaiṣṇava folk began appearing everywhere, adorned with faultless tilaka and neck beads and equipped with the Mahā Mantra. In this manner, they became present in the very midst of the Age of Kali, where they purified the atmosphere, chanting." So indeed, it came to pass.

The movement is the modern-day pastimes. We see it each day in the blissful reactions people express upon seeing our kīrtana parties or the wonder and excitement they show while watching our stage performances. It's all about the mercy of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

He wrote another verse in this connection: "With the advent of Lord Gaurāṅga, the most attractive Personality within the three worlds, advented in this universe, all the fallen souls began to wave their arms in the air, excited by the congregational chanting of the holy names." We were also completely fulfilled because of our taking shelter of the same names of Lord Kṛṣṇa: "O my Lord." So, with that sweet taste of sharing the bliss of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness with others, we will continue with our two-month festival program here in Poland, cherishing every moment, continuing the work of the savior of so many great ācāryas in our line, like the Six Gosvāmīs, Śrīnivāsa, Śyāmānanda, Bhaktivinoda, and our own beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Sometimes, during the final blissful kīrtana of the evening, when some of our guests are chanting and dancing with us, I'll call out the names of those ācāryas, we're looking up at the sky, wondering if they may be watching. I conclude somehow that through the transcendental medium, they must be aware of our efforts, for how could we be successful without their mercy?

So, one last verse from Sārvabhauma: "From the time the sacred form of love for Kṛṣṇa gave out his gifts of love, sinner, drunkard, rogue, and thief, all very grateful to him, completely abandoned their sense enjoyment and loudly sang the names of Kṛṣṇa until they sank exhausted into the ocean of Kṛṣṇa-prema."