"*00139*.*
"This morning, we are reading from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Tenth Canto, Chapter 85, Text 16. Because of the shortage of time, and it is also the appearance day of Mātṛ-maṅgala, I will say a few words on the day that Lord Rāmacandra conquered Laṅkā and Rāvaṇa. I will just read the verse and we will move on from there.

"Those who are truly ignorant, while imprisoned within the ceaseless flow of this world's material qualities, fail to know You, the Supreme Soul of all beings, as their ultimate sublime destination. Because of their ignorance, the entanglement of material work forces such souls to wander in the cycle of birth and death."

Purport by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disciples: A soul who forgets his true identity as a servant of God is sent to this world to be imprisoned in a succession of material bodies, wrongly identifying himself with these bodies. Such a conditioned soul suffers the consequent distress of karmic action and reaction. Vasudeva, as a compassionate Vaiṣṇava, laments for the suffering conditioned souls whose unhappiness, the result of ignorance, can be remedied by knowledge of the principles of devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

The poet Devakīnandana, a famous poet, writes as follows:

"Śara, I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of all Vaiṣṇavas, praying I will not commit offenses in my attempts to please them. To all Vaiṣṇavas who have ever been and to all Vaiṣṇavas who ever will be, I offer my obeisances at their lotus feet."

I would also like to quote another prayer. It is very dear to my heart, which I would like to repeat: "As a disciple and a representative of my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, sitting here on this *āsana*, my mind longs for the blessed vision of my guru. It cries out like a thirsty *cakora* bird. My thirst is not quenched, and I can find no peace without the vision of that blessed person. Oh Lord and Master, your face is most beautiful, and the sound of your words imparts very deep wisdom. It has been so long since this rainbird has had even a glimpse of water. Blessed is that land where you dwell, my dearest friend and spiritual master. I give myself to you now and forever, oh deliverer of my soul. When I could not be with you just for a moment, the dark age of Kali-yuga dawned on me. When will I meet you again, oh beloved Lord and Master? I cannot endure the night, and sleep does not come to me without your audience. I will surrender everything to have your *darśana* once again. It was my extreme good fortune to meet you, most saintly of all saintly persons, and I will find you again in the eternal home where I am meant to dwell."

So, in this verse today, we hear the father of Kṛṣṇa described as a compassionate Vaiṣṇava, lamenting for the suffering conditioned souls. It has been a wonderful chapter, actually. We are hearing from Kṛṣṇa’s father. We get to hear from so many saintly persons, so many important persons. This is interesting—that we are hearing in this chapter from Kṛṣṇa’s father, and he is described as a compassionate Vaiṣṇava lamenting for the suffering conditioned souls. I was thinking that this feeling of compassion for the conditioned souls is really a devotee's most notable sentiment. You could say it's the crest jewel of all a Vaiṣṇava's good qualities. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.25.21, we hear a famous verse:

"The symptoms of a *sādhu* are that he is tolerant, merciful, and friendly to all living entities. He has no enemies. He is peaceful. He abides by the scriptures, and all his characteristics are sublime."

So, there in that classic verse, we hear the word *karuṇā*. *Karuṇā* means a *sādhu* who is merciful to others. This is Vasudeva; he is described as compassionate among his many qualities. A Vaiṣṇava goes out of his way to share his or her good fortune with others. And really, it is this quality of *karuṇā*, this sense of compassion for his brothers and sisters—how "brothers and sisters" means all living entities, because Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā* He is the seed-giving father of all created beings. Culturally many, but spiritually one. We are all part of one greater family, the family of God. We are all His children. So, a devotee has that deep vision, and he tries to reclaim his brothers and sisters. There is that saying, "Blood is thicker than water." They use it in a material sense—my family, my neighborhood, my country, as opposed to all other designations. "Blood is thicker than water; the blood of my family is thicker than water." But a Vaiṣṇava thinks differently.

He sees even a dog-eater as his brother and sister. That blood—that’s how a Vaiṣṇava sees, "Everyone is my brother and my sister." So, having been delivered himself or herself, he goes out of his way to share his good fortune with others. It is this quality of *kāruṇika* that sets him apart from all other classes of transcendentalists. There are three classes of transcendentalists. Prabhupāda would say the *yogī*—with his Bengali accent, we say *yogī*, but he would say *jogī*—the *jñānī*, and the *bhakta*. The devotees, they are all special souls in as much as they have all understood the temporary and illusory nature of this world. That is not so easy to understand, and they try to renounce gross and subtle sense gratification to transcend this world. That is no small realization, no small goal. So, *Bhāgavatam* says—and this is a very interesting verse—*Bhāgavatam* says we should honor all these classes of transcendentalists: the *jñānīs* who are very often Māyāvādīs, the *yogīs* who are pursuing mystic powers and are not interested in playing with material life, and the devotees. We should honor them all for this reason: they have turned their back on material existence towards transcendence.

There is the verse: "One can attain the path of liberation from material bondage only by rendering service to highly advanced spiritual personalities. These personalities are impersonalists and devotees." *Bhāgavatam* grants that whether one wants to merge into the Lord's existence or wants to associate with the Personality of Godhead, one should render service to these *mahātmās*. It’s interesting, I first fell off my seat when I first read that. However, the benefit of associating with Vaiṣṇavas, devotees of the Lord, cannot compare to the association of any other class of transcendentalists. Again, with elders. Why? Because a devotee—his mind is fixed on the higher goal of life. He is always looking towards the spiritual world. Wise and learned devotees always look to the supreme abode of the Lord, Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa. There are only two paths: *vṛtti-mārga* and *nivṛtti-mārga*. The path of sense gratification and the path of transcendence, culminating in going back home, back to Godhead, to Goloka. When I was a kid, I remember we’d joke around, and somebody was the "good guy," my friend was the "bad guy." "I'll take the high road, you take the low road. I'll go to heaven and you'll go to hell. I'll take the high road, you take the low road." Sense gratification. "I'll go to heaven, and you'll go to hell." Only two paths. So, someone who turns his back on sense gratification, material enjoyment, and tries to transcend into the effulgence of the Lord or mystic powers, God bless you. But wise and learned devotees are always looking to the supreme abode of Viṣṇu. The amazing thing is, those devotees are not interested in anything gross or subtle, anything that's not connected to pure devotional service. Rūpa Gosvāmī was famous; he wouldn't tolerate any statement in scripture that was against the principle of pure devotional service. Those devotees will give you a helping hand to achieve the same as they did. This is not true of *yogīs* and *jñānīs*. We have our *mahājanas*. There are twelve *mahājanas*. They are dear to our hearts, our heroes. Prahlāda Mahārāja, my dear Narasiṅgha... I see that there are many saintly persons indeed, but they are interested only in their own deliverance, not caring for the big cities and towns. They go to the Himālaya forest to meditate with vows of silence. They are not interested in delivering others. As for me, however, I do not wish to be liberated alone, leaving aside all these fools and rascals.

He is also referring to the other path of transcendence. "I know that without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, without taking shelter of Your lotus feet, one cannot be happy. Therefore, I wish to bring them back to the shelter of Your lotus feet." That is the distinguishing quality. A devotee is not satisfied with his own deliverance. He is concerned about others. In his introduction to *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī glorifies Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. In the same mood, he writes *duḥkhī*. The Vaiṣṇava, like Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, is an ocean of mercy to the fallen, conditioned souls. Indeed, he is so compassionate that although for himself he knows no unhappiness, he feels unhappiness on account of their suffering. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī noted this in the personality of Sanātana Gosvāmī. He was *santuṣṭi*—he was fully satisfied by dent of his devotional service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—at the same time, he was dissatisfied to see the fallen condition of the conditioned souls. So, this is the meaning of *karuṇā*, this feeling of compassion for fallen souls. And Kṛṣṇa’s father—his dad—he had that. Any devotee in any *rasa* has that, and it is the crest jewel of all qualities. A devotee is an abode of good qualities, but you know, in the days of yore, the king had a crown, the queen, and there were jewels, and there was the crest jewel—the top jewel, the most brilliant, the most beautiful, the most expensive. Just like here in India, the crest jewel of all crest jewels was stolen by the British some hundreds of years ago and now sits on the crown of the Queen of England. We won't get too political here. But what is the crest jewel? Devotees have their compassion.

And why I want it—right, we are Vaiṣṇavas, and we want these qualities because we can use them in the service of Guru and Gaurāṅga. Not that we become famous, "We are very merciful." No, we see ourselves as instruments in the hands of our spiritual masters, Kṛṣṇa. So we want these qualities to be good servants. There is nothing higher than being the servant of a glorious master and to be well-tuned into that *sevā*, into that service. So we want to have that *lobha*, this greed to develop this compassion, as exemplified by our Prabhupāda, Caitanya, Gaurāṅga, Kṛṣṇa Himself. They are the repository of those. We pray to them, "Please share some of that so I can serve You nicely." We have to have a strong desire. Like there was a song some 20 years ago, somebody was singing about sense gratification: "I want it ALL AND I WANT IT NOW." There are people like that out there. "I want it all and I want it now." We want the same greed for Kṛṣṇa. Like Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in *Padyāvalī*, "As young boys are attracted to young girls and young girls are attracted to young boys, with the same intensity, Lord, let me be attracted to Your lotus feet." He is turning it all around, like a magnet.

A magnet can repel and a magnet can attract. So, we are attracted to all these things of this world and we are turning it all around. We want some renunciation so that we can become attached to the science of Kṛṣṇa. So, where do we get this mood from? Kṛṣṇa. He comes to this world out of compassion. He could send anyone, but He comes Himself because we are His kids. I like to tell the story of Akbar. Akbar was a Muslim emperor some hundreds of years ago here in India. He had some attraction for other spiritual traditions, including Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism. He gave land here in Vṛndāvana. He gave permission for building some of the Vaiṣṇava, the Gosvāmīs' temples. A powerful man, an emperor. One day he was walking in one of the parks in Delhi—a beautiful park—and he is with his family members, he's with his security, he's with, beyond that, his guards, and then his military, and then like hundreds of people. He is surrounded by so many qualified people. And his grandson is trying to catch a turtle in a little pond 50 meters away, and the grandson slips and falls into the pond, starts to drown. He is only five years old. Akbar saw that. He stopped. He took off his crown—the dust came up—heavy coat with jewels. Quickly took it off, his shirt underneath, his pants, his shoes, his sword, his knife. He stripped down to his *kaupīnas*, let us say, and he ran to that pond and he jumped in, swam to the bottom, picked up that little boy with his finger, brought him and put him on the bank. Saved the boy's life. So afterwards, he goes back, and they redress him again, and everything has to be proper. He was walking along, and one of his ministers said, "Lord, why did you go and save the grandson? You had so many qualified men here." He said, "Because it's my family, it's my grandson. I could have sent any of you, but it's mine, so therefore I came." So Kṛṣṇa, who are we? What is our real identity? When you really get down to the essence, we are all Kṛṣṇa's servants. That is all. We are servants of the servants of the servant.

I once saw Prabhupāda's passport. We were traveling and we were going through immigration in New York City. Prabhupāda used to carry this white attaché case. I've never seen one like it. He had this white attaché case and he never let anyone carry it because all his important belongings were in there. Simple, but important belongings. So we were traveling and we broke away from the rest of the group and we came to the immigration stamp. Then we went to security. We got to the security; the security man was like a big, kind of rough policeman. He said to Prabhupāda, "Open it." I looked at him, and then Prabhupāda tried to open it, but he couldn't get the locks on. So the man said, "Open it." And I said to this policeman, I said, "If you speak to my spiritual master one more time like that, I'm going to break your face."

So he said, "I thought Hare Kṛṣṇas were nonviolent." I said, "Try me." So they said, "Then you open it." Oh, I said, "That’s the blessing for standing up for my spiritual master; I get some immediate benefit." I looked at Prabhupāda, went like this, and it clicked open, popped up. And there it was—it was like looking into a part of the spiritual world, seriously. *Kaṇṭhimālā*s were there, he had two pens, his eyeglasses were there, some papers, and his passport was there. So things were kind of shuffled around. So I thought I’d help put them in the right place. So I opened up the passport. I was holding Prabhupāda's passport. And there on the left side, there's all that you have to write down—different information. You know, what is your address, what is your occupation, when you were born, etc. So I just lost all consciousness of this world, getting a peep into the life of a pure devotee, and time stood still. And I read Prabhupāda’s... he wrote date of birth, and Prabhupāda wrote something in the 1800s. And then it said address, and he said "Vṛndāvana, India." And it said occupation. Now, I was thinking, if occupation... you know, usually, "I work in the tech industry," or "I'm a pharmacist," or "I'm a lawyer." Occupation: "Servant of His Divine Grace Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Paramahaṁsa Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta..." took three lines. That is his occupation. You understand? This is his identity. Nothing more than being the servant of Gurumahārāja. That is all we want. We just want to be the servant of the Guru who connects us to Gaurāṅga, and by the mercy of Gaurāṅga, we can be introduced to Rādhārāṇī. So, he is the first link, the most important link. So, where does a devotee get this quality of compassion? From his father. Like father, like son. He gets it from Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa preached, and Lord Caitanya really preached. Lord Caitanya walked most of India just preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He showed that *karuṇā*. In this way, assuming the sentiment of a devotee—because He is God, assuming the sentiment of a devotee—Lord Caitanya preached devotional service while practicing it Himself. They came in the mood of *kirtana*. So, we inherit... Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said Kṛṣṇa consciousness is something you imbibe from another devotee. Like, remember *kavacha*? You just breathe in and you get it. So, "imbibe" is a subtle word, actually; you get Kṛṣṇa, but you imbibe it. Even with one breath, you get consciousness if you are fortunate. So, if we want to go back home, back to Godhead, we have to develop this *kāruṇika*. It's an integral part of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, and we've heard that over and over. We just finished, I think, the *Bhadra* campaign. That is a big *karuṇā* act of mercy, and it is a ticket home. If we serve the mood of our spiritual master and Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this world, we qualify ourselves to serve their mood of loving devotion in the spiritual world. This is the essence. If we serve their desires here, we qualify ourselves to serve their desires there. That's why it's better to be on Fifth Avenue doing *harināma*, distributing books, with all due respect, than sitting at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. I offer my respects. There are many genuine souls there, but for the general populace, for us, it's better we're on 4th Street and buying Kṛṣṇa, because that's how you attract the attention of the *yuga-avatāra* Mahāprabhu. Bhaktivinoda Sarasvatī made this very clear in his *Caitanya-candrāmṛta* 500 years ago. It’s one of my favorite verses: "By serving the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this world, one qualifies oneself to obtain the causeless mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Goloka." Elegance is truth spoken concisely. That is everything. We want to be like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura; he is a very deep, *rasika* devotee. Don't think that Prabhupāda didn't want us to become pure devotees. It's why he came. So, Narottama was very *rasika* but a powerful preacher. He is our hero. Narottama, Śrīnivāsa, Śyāmānanda—the original second generation. They took the mantle full speed ahead. "By serving the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Lord Caitanya in this world, one qualifies himself to obtain the causeless mercy of God." Is there any one verse that says it all? That is it.

Actually, this mood of a Vaiṣṇava cannot be glorified enough. And it doesn't mean necessarily you have to be, you know, Vīra-vīśa-kṛpā Prabhu—one of my great, great heroes who rejuvenated book distribution on this planet. He is an empowered devotee. Or you don't have to be a great *kīrtana* singer like BB Govinda Mahārāja. You can be a mom. It's the original *bhakta* program. Mothers who give that time and attention and care and love to their children, but they are growing up their generals, lieutenants, infantry, continuing the *saṅkīrtana* movement. If you just cook for the devotees—preachers, they need energy—you cook some samosas or whatever. It's all part of the great *saṅkīrtana*, which means the complete glorification of the Lord. So everyone is just like this harmonium—I know this very well. My harmonium, there's one little screw; it keeps falling out and all the keys go off, and it's a little tiny screw. But without it, I can't play. So everyone has a part to play. Everyone should take that satisfaction, and we should all be thinking like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the pioneer. He won't be satisfied until all the 14 worlds are chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

Oh yes, but that’s an exaggeration... no, to think the glories of chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa* are an exaggeration, that’s an offense. He foresaw it. Prabhupāda said it to Gurudāsa in 1971 in London: "This ISKCON movement will save the world in its darkest hour." So it is getting dark now, and we will see—maybe not my generation or even your generation—but it will all come to pass. Such a *siddhānta*! When the Lord or His pure devotees say something, you don't need an astrologer. So this is our mood. We don't want to leave any of our... just like if there's a fire and there's a group of people, you take your children first and take them out, right? Not that you don't like anyone else, but it's family. You take your kid, "Come honey," maybe come back in. But we see everyone like that. We see everyone like... so our mission is not over, you could say, until all the desires of Śrīla Prabhupāda for spreading this Kṛṣṇa consciousness are in place. Once they are in place, you will see souls going back every day. *Gurukula*s, farms, a set of books in every house, your devotee's cookbook in every woman's kitchen. God bless her. I love that. I love that devotee. I love that cookbook. That's the standard. Our devotee is president of the United States—"Make America Kṛṣṇa Conscious Again"—because at one point the whole world under Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was Kṛṣṇa conscious. So these are big plans, but a devotee really is not even thinking of going back to Godhead. That depends on Śrīla Prabhupāda, the spiritual master. If they desire... just like Jayānanda Prabhu desired. He wrote to him a posthumous letter that, "If you had any material desires at the moment of death, you will be transferred to a *loka*, and there you can fulfill those desires, and then serve to go back to Vaikuṇṭha." But because you were hearing the chanting of *Hare Kṛṣṇa* when you died, which was a tape recording—because everyone in the LA temple was at *maṅgala-ārati*, tape recording Prabhupāda—you've gone to Kṛṣṇa-loka.

Bhakti... he said, "I see no reason why all my disciples cannot go back to Godhead in one lifetime." (1932 initiation lecture). It’s possible. But our mood should be, "Okay, but like Dhruva, who was on his way back. He is in the flower airplane. 'Hey, where is Mom and Suruci? She is not ready. She is not qualified. I am not going. My mother, take me back. I am not going.'" So they... this kind of devotee, he says, "We don't bring him back." And Viṣṇu says, "Where is he?" So they went back, and they got her on the desire of a Vaiṣṇava. So this is our desire. We have been blessed. There are so many people, seven billion with no blessings, and we see them just like Dhruva saw his mother.

It's not just a verse to memorize so you can pass the test or whatever. It should be your heartbeat. I mentioned in a lecture a couple of years ago that in America we have a special branch of the armed forces. We have the Navy, we have the Army, we have the Air Force, and amongst the Army, we have Army Rangers. Really, they are like really skilled professional fighters, and they have a motto: "Never leave a man behind." And they were in combat in Vietnam, they were in combat in Iraq, and so forth and so on. And if one of their soldiers was shot, lying wounded in the middle of the battlefield, right? Or if the battle's over and they had to retreat, sometimes, you know, run away to fight another day. Sometimes soldiers retreat; discretion is the better part of valor. You learn this in the military. So if a man is lying dead on the battlefield and they retreat, they go get him. That's their motto. That's why a lot of boys join, because that camaraderie. "Never leave a man behind." Army Rangers, sometimes you go to get the body, somebody dies getting the body, but they never leave a man behind. So I was thinking, I want to be like that. Sometimes Prabhupāda would use analogies of the material nature to define a spiritual principle or part of the philosophy. It's the art of speaking, preaching. Many times Prabhupāda used analogies to make philosophical things clear. So we can use that: "Never leave a man or lady behind." That should be our heartbeat. *Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom*—heartbeat.

Prabhupāda was walking on Stinson Beach. I know it well. I was born in San Francisco; it was the place I used to surf. And Prabhupāda would take his walks sometimes when he was there. And once, the waves were crashing. He said to his disciples, "What's that sound?" And they said, "Prabhupāda, that's the sound of the waves breaking on the sand." He said, "No, that's the sound of the gopīs' heartbeats when they're feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa." Always reminding us of the *prema* in Goloka Vṛndāvana, nothing more, nothing less. So this is the mood. This is the heartbeat of a Vaiṣṇava: "Don't leave anyone behind." So if that's true for the Army Rangers—you know, I'm speaking, it's like a patriot kind of, you know, all right, it's all destiny, it's all *karma*, really—but the sentiment is there, and the sentiment is there in our Kṛṣṇa conscious movement as well.

What about that statement of Vasudeva? *ko nv arthas tṛṣṇayā...* My Bengali—excuse me, my Bengali—please forgive me. "My dear Lord, let me suffer perpetually in a hellish condition, accepting all the sinful reactions of all living entities. Please finish their diseased material life." That’s taking it to the extreme. "Let me suffer perpetually in a hellish condition, accepting all the sinful reactions of all living entities. Let them finish their diseased nature. Let them all be the last man standing like Custer." But our life is a life of eternity. We should be the last man. We should, at some point, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, your mission is accomplished in this world. What's my next service?" No, you go home to the spiritual world. We should think like that, not that we don't complete a service and go to the Guru and ask for another service. "My dear Lord, let me suffer perpetually in a hellish condition, accepting all the sinful reactions of all living entities. Please finish the disease." At least this sentiment should be there. Then you will be a powerful instrument in the hands of the Lord. Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna, "Be but an instrument." Arjuna, he was a warrior. You can be an instrument cooking. You can be an instrument raising a baby. You can be an instrument driving. But be an instrument. This is the *yuga-dharma*.

So even in this movement, we have devotees of that caliber. We have devotees of that caliber. Laksmi Prabhu, he's a singer, and during COVID, because he didn't want to go outside, he had a YouTube program. It was mostly him. He invited some people. I watched—I didn't tell, but I watched it all the time because I love his melodies. I love the way he sings. So during COVID, and there being some devotees who would come, sometimes he was all alone. *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa*—who's listening? It's going into the ether, whether it's bugs or germs or spiders. So there's a very advanced devotee. We have Mahārāja sitting here with his *daṇḍa*. We have our illustrious temple president, Panca-gauda. We have so many—not just Prabhupāda disciples, but second, even third generation. I see when I travel, it's uncanny, some of these children, what they say and what they do at two years of age. There was a little girl, seven years old, a couple years ago. I was telling stories to children to try to encourage them, you know, to act as a hero for them. I was telling all kinds of stories of my adventures, and somehow I talked about a dream I had about Prabhupāda or something, and I said, "Do you children dream?" And four or five of them raised their hand, and one little girl said, "Yes, I dream of Śrī Rādhā." I said, "Okay." Like they just... it was like a picture or something. She said, "No, no, she's there, I'm there. I'm making garlands for her. Viśākhā, Lalitā says she likes five kinds of flowers, and we sew them in this way, and I give them to my senior who gives them to Rūpā, who gives them to Lalitā, who puts it on Rādhārāṇī." And she is describing the different types of names of different flowers I never heard of. I said, "Do you dream that?" She said, "Yeah, but it's not a dream. It's like, when I dream about her, it's real." "What else you do?" "Well, I cook. I cook *barfi*. I cook sandeśa." And she's giving the recipe and how she does it. And then we go to the *kuñja*s and we prepare all the flower beds for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And then we sing songs. I said, "You dream that?" She said, "Yes." I said, "Wow, I'd like to dream like that." She said, "You can't, 'cause you're a male."

I thought, who is this kid? "You can't. You're a male. Males can't do this. You have to keep practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then you go to the planet in the universe where Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are taking place. You take birth in the womb of a *gopī*. You get trained in *gopī-bhāva*. Then maybe you can come to Goloka and serve there. You're a male." I felt really inferior. So you never know; this movement, the demigods are waiting in line to take birth in this movement, Prabhupāda said. So when we see devotees like that, we should seek out... I have to admit, when the kid took her *prasādam*, she left a little something on her plate, a little crumb. I took the crumb. I thought, geez, you know, an old soul, a new... you never know. We should be respectful to our senior devotees who have made it this far, and through their preaching, through their speaking, we can understand their level of advancement, and we know they're very dear to Guru and Gaurāṅga. That association—in any group of devotees, there's beginners who we lovingly lift up; there's devotees on the same level, we embrace them in friendship; and we acknowledge the senior devotees. We acknowledge our spiritual master representing Kṛṣṇa, and we hanker for their association. *Devi-ārādhana*: "One can gradually become purified by seeing, touching, and worshiping temple deities, places of pilgrimage, and holy rivers. But one can attain the same result immediately simply by receiving the glance of an exalted sage." So when you get that mercy by helping a devotee up, by embracing a Godbrother, or by serving your seniors, you're going to make advancement. I would say most of our advancement comes from blessings. And then you have to share it. In the *Śrī-śloka-śataka*, it means 100 verses glorifying Mahāprabhu, *Ācārya* says: "All Vaiṣṇavas in the world, on the order of Caitanya, must proclaim His names from house to house, from country to country, just to deliver the fallen souls." We have to... you have to share it. As soon as you become a recipient of this mercy, you become a receptacle. People have to come and drink. If they don't drink, you go to them. Moses doesn't go to the mountain; the mountain goes to Moses. If they don't come to us, we go to them. Don't want to hold on to that mercy. "Oh, but if I give it away, I got mercy from Guru Mahārāja, and my deities are giving me a lot of mercy, and if I give it away, I'll have nothing left." No, mercy in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is based on spiritual mathematics, and I'm terrible at mathematics. I always ask, you know, when I travel in India, the children, you know, "What's your favorite subject in school?" "Math." Am I correct, ladies? Indian children, they love math, and I kept saying, "2 plus 2 is 5." "No Mahārāja, it's 4." I'm joking with them, but there's a transcendental mathematics in Kṛṣṇa consciousness: 1 minus 1 is a million if you're giving Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You give, but then you get because you gave, then you get more. Or Jesus said, "It's better to give than it is to receive." So part of giving away is that you have to become a fixed-up devotee. Therefore, *sādhanā*—it all starts in the temple room. Good *sādhanā* is required for every devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. At one initiation ceremony, one of my godsisters, she came up to Prabhupāda—he's sitting on the *vyāsāsana*—and Prabhupāda says, "So, what are the four regulative principles?" She got it right. Then he said, "So, how many rounds will you chant on these beads?" She said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, like we always say, I will chant a minimum of 16 rounds." Prabhupāda leaned over. He said, "Why minimum? Why not more? And he said, 'If you got time, chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa*.'"

So chanting, getting fixed up, and going out like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He'd chant a 100,000 names in his mind. 100,000 softly for the living entities. Then top of his lungs. 100,000 names. The top of his lungs. We chant for purification so that we can preach, but both are necessary. *Ācārya* says elsewhere: "Those who chant the names of Hari—remember, he's an intimate associate of Mahāprabhu, *Ācārya*—those who chant the names of Hari while cultivating the knowledge and practices of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and who worship His followers, the Vaiṣṇavas, certainly go to the abode of Śrī Śrī Hari upon leaving their bodies." You want to go back home, back to Godhead? Okay. So chant the names of Hari, cultivate knowledge and all the practices that Prabhupāda has given us, worship everybody but yourself—all Vaiṣṇavas—and you'll go to the Śrī Hari upon leaving your body. Oh, it's an exaggeration? It's no exaggeration.

You can't feel compassion, which is the theme of this lecture, if you yourself are still attracted to this world. Prabhupāda told my godbrother, Śatadhaniya Mahārāja... he gave him his *daṇḍa*, *sannyāsa*. "Take this *daṇḍa*. Never look back and think you've left anything valuable behind, and never envy the position of the materialistic sensors." But we know becoming detached so that we can be a good preacher—instead of saying, "Um, māyā... māyā's like really bad," I think you should say, "Māyā is really bad." So to be convinced, you have to be detached. How do you get detached? By becoming attached to Kṛṣṇa. Cāṇakya says you can't give up something unless you get something better. So what's the best of the best? Kṛṣṇa is the reservoir of all pleasures. So if you have Kṛṣṇa, you can renounce this world, become a powerful preacher. Rūpa Gosvāmī says in *Padyāvalī*, "Oh Lord, knowing You, Your devotee sees the greatest river as a puddle of water, the sun as a mere firefly, Mount Meru as a clump of earth, the emperor of the world as just everyone's servant, *cintāmaṇi* jewels like pebbles, desire trees like sticks, the entire world like a bunch of straw, and his own body a burden, because his only attachment is You." So therefore, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. Chant our *japa*, we chant in congregation, and then we have the internet. We have the streets—you can still chant in the streets. I just came from Russia. Forbidden to chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa* on the streets, forbidden to distribute books. But the devotees are making more devotees and they're distributing more books by going sort of silently on the internet. You can't preach there. If you get... if you preach, the FSB, the KGB, they come and take you and put you in a Russian prison for three days. I cannot begin to tell you how horrible the prison is that they put me in. I... I can't even, even to think back. It was so... couldn't take a shower for three days. Some devotees bought a little food. The guards were always looking at me till one day I gave a class and I had somebody who spoke broken English. And at the end of the class, one of the guards said, "You're a really cool guy," because I told him that my father—it's not really true, but my father was the police chief of San Francisco for most of his life—and I know what it's like to be a policeman. "You poor guys, you know," they became my friends. And I was leaving the jail, they said, "Um, Śrīla Prabhu, you have an adventurous life. Have you ever written any books?" And in my bag, I had that new book that's come out, *Adventures of a Traveling Monk*, a collection of all my diary chapters, many of them for the years. I said, "Yes." I said, "Oh," they were fighting over it. I said, "No, no, I have four or five. Here you go." He said, "Can you sign it?" This is how I left the prison.

Not... not me. Just so this... we can preach anywhere. But I do like being back in Vṛndāvana, taking the devotees on Kartik *parikrama*, Māyāpur and Kolkata and Puri this time. So this preaching work, it'll look good for you, and it'll look good for the people as well. Śarvatantra-ācārya, again, he's one of my favorites, he wrote: "The news broadcast by the saints is that all avatars of the Lord are indeed capable of delivering their devoted followers who worship them. However, Śrī Gauracandra delivered both devotees and non-devotees alike by His gifts of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's ambrosial names." Prabhupāda brought that mantle to the West, and as a result, this movement is spreading like wildfire all over the world and devotees are appearing. The last time I was in Russia was six years ago because of COVID, and then now the war, etc. But you know, I was thinking my poor disciples haven't seen me. I'm going to take a risk. I'm going to go there and I'll see a few of them. When I got to the festival, there was 4,000—not supposed to say it, but 4,000 devotees, beautiful *tilaka*, *kaṇṭhimālā*, *sārī*s, in a country where you can't distribute books, where you can't have *harināma*. This is the miracle of Mahāprabhu, and it was foreseen by Śarvatantra-ācārya in his *Śrī-śloka-śataka*. He states, one of my favorite... *tilaka-hari-nāma-bhūṣaṇa*. "From the moment that the holy name of Hari appeared on the earth, Vaiṣṇavas became manifest everywhere. Adorned with faultless *tilaka* and neck beads, and equipped with the *mahā-mantra* in the midst of the age of Kali, they purified the atmosphere chanting *Hari*." Indeed, it will come to pass, and it did. So we're coming now for Kartik. Prabhupāda told me, or told in his room—we had a *darśana*—Prabhupāda said, "Vṛndāvana's for inspiration." He wanted us to go back and distribute books. He's blessed a few great souls like our temple president, because of his sincere desire and his hard work for so many years here in this temple. It's not easy to be a temple president or a manager. He's... Prabhupāda's very happy with the service here. We come for inspiration, and then we go back home, and like Haridāsa Ṭhākura in the third stage, we broadcast it very loudly, or this... how do you say? The sound of silence of the internet. So he concludes:

"Oh, how wonderful is the character of Śrī Gaurahari, and still more that of His dear servants, all of you throughout the world. He spreads His gifts of love for Kṛṣṇa. He also blesses us with attraction for the saintly persons who take pleasure in the congregational chanting of the holy names of Kṛṣṇa." And if you participate in ISKCON's endeavors to spread this movement all over the world, you'll get the blessings of Kṛṣṇa. One of the final blessings in *Bhagavad-gītā*: "This is... you and anyone who's part of this movement. For one who explains this supreme secret to the devotees, pure devotional service is guaranteed, and at the end he'll come back to Me." Śrīla Prabhupāda *kī jaya*! Thank you. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""