"*00557*.*
"I’d like to thank my very good friend, my Muslim buddy—an old English term—for his very nice words of affection. He is actually one of my preferred or favorite preachers in ISKCON. He said he’s shy, which is true, but if you put him in front of an audience and he gets going, he always speaks so sweetly and convincingly, and it really touches the heart of the audience. He wrote an offering today; you could say it was a formal offering. He could have just as easily said, "Svarūpa, I love you," and I could have just as easily said, "Svarūpa, I love you," because that’s the nature of our relationship. It’s not just appreciation or respect; it’s just that we love each other because we love to do the same thing, as we all do. That’s why this is a movement in bhakti: we love to serve our spiritual masters, we love to serve our Founder-Ācārya Prabhupāda, we love to serve Gaura-Nitāi, and we love to serve the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana.

So, I just wanted to tell Svarūpa that in front of all of you, so it’s known. I’d like to thank Gopī-jīvana for a very well-presented introduction to the program today, the meaning of Vyāsa-pūjā. I would like to warn him, however, that at some point he’s going to have to come down from the Swiss Alps, where all the cows are, and get into preaching again. If you saw the backdrop, he’s up in the mountains, and Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "I’m not interested in going to the Himalayas for my own deliverance; I’m more concerned to stay in the cities of Kali-yuga to deliver people in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So, Gopī, you’re going to have to come down from that mountain. That was a really nice cow; it was amazing, she didn’t even move the whole time you were speaking. I think she was just enamored by what you were saying. But do take my words to heart: when the pandemic is over, come down from the Swiss Alps and preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

What can I say about South Africa? I’ve preached in many countries in my lifetime—I think a majority of the countries in this world—but of course, S.A., as we often say, has a special, a very special place in my heart. There are so many memorable moments; I mean, memorable moments preaching there. The results have been extraordinary because of the situation, because of the people whom I love very much, and because of the qualified devotees, both past, present, and future. It’s a very dynamic place for preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and some of my most memorable moments in my career are there, forever enshrined in my heart.

They are moments of purification and moments of spiritual strength, and almost like miracles, you could say. We have a system in our Vedic tradition where we observe the *saṁskāras*; those are specific moments in one’s life where one performs a specific *yajña* to consecrate and make sacred that moment. There are lots of moments in life, but there are some that are better and some that are best. Before conception, there is the *saṁskāra* where the parents perform a particular Vedic ritual in order to welcome a good soul, a *sādhu* or *sādhvī*, into their lives. Then at birth, there is a ceremony; then there is the *nāma-saṁskāra* when the baby gets its name—you do a *yajña*. There are specific rituals: ear-piercing, there’s a hair-cutting ceremony, then at six months—these are all *saṁskāras*. You strengthen the person by these *saṁskāras*. Like bamboo, if you look at a rod of bamboo, there are certain knots at different parts of the bamboo pole, and it’s very hard to break a bamboo pole because those knots are strength in that pole. If you’re a gardener, you know what I mean—how difficult it is to take away a patch of bamboo; it’s really hard. And that’s why *sannyāsīs* make their *daṇḍas* out of bamboo. So, in the same way, there are these moments in life: birth, name-giving, hair-cutting, school, marriage, even your death—they send you off with a *saṁskāra*. You get some bonus points; you’re not there, but your relatives, my friends, they do a *saṁskāra*. Somebody gives you bonus points. So, those *saṁskāras* are part of the Vedic culture; they are moments that are important and are spiritualized by *saṁskāras*. 

Now, we may or may not follow all that in ISKCON. One time Prabhupāda said, "If I told you all the rules and all the regulations that you had to follow to be a Vaiṣṇava, you would faint." I think as we get older, because we know time is of the essence and we want to hurry up and get Kṛṣṇa conscious before we leave this world, a person becomes more concerned about following as many rules and regulations as possible to better our chances for not coming back again—going back to the spiritual world. So, these *saṁskāras* are important, but this is a special time, place, and circumstance. This is called Yuga-dharma, and really, the most important rule or regulation we should follow is the chanting of the holy names, and specifically the original name of God, Kṛṣṇa, as He’s known in His hometown. Hometown boy, everyone calls Him Kṛṣṇa. And as we know, *nāmācārya-maṇi-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-rasa-vigraha*—He’s not different than that name. So that name is so auspicious that just one syllable, "Kṛṣṇa," you could say is more auspicious than all the Vedic *saṁskāras* and *yajñas* and rituals that are to be performed. Not to diminish their importance, but to magnify our understanding of the *mahā-mantra*. So powerful. *Kīrtana-kṛṣṇa*—there’s only one good thing left, and that’s the holy name.

So, my understanding is, though we try to follow all these various Vedic rituals—yes, they give us strength—when we’re engaged in the *yuga-dharma*, the process for this age, which is chanting and distributing the chanting, it’s not just chanting. There’s plenty of *sādhus* up here where I am in Maharashtra in the mountains; they’re chanting something, but also distributing the chanting, because that was the mood of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa when They came to this miserable world as one, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu. His whole mood was distribution: chanting and distribution. And that was the case with all His followers down to the present day. We see Śrīla Prabhupāda—we’re not supposed to speculate, but we know he’s a very, very, very intimate servant of the Lord, of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, if only because we know that he was the chosen son to spread this movement, which has been developing for 500 years, to all over the world. So, as his followers, we see him as the chosen son.

What was his mood? He may be in the spiritual world wrestling with Kṛṣṇa, offering a flower to Rādhārāṇī, but here, what was his mood? Work now, *samādhi* later; sharing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And to each his own—everyone has a certain ability given by God, by Kṛṣṇa, and everyone can participate, because "many hands make light work" means the complete glorification of the Lord. So our success in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even more than performing *saṁskāras*, is to assist Śrīla Prabhupāda in his mood in this world, and by serving his mood in this world, we are qualified to serve him in his mood in Goloka Vṛndāvana. I see special moments in my career in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in trying to push for the Saṅkīrtana movement. Whenever there’s a success, it’s like that knot in the bamboo pole; it’s a reassurance of spiritual success. You get mercy; your service has been acknowledged by Guru and Gaurāṅga. That’s what we’re looking for; that’s where we get our strength to go on, to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with others. So, I have so many of those—Caitanya Mahāprabhu, for want of a better phrase—I have so many of those in South Africa.

So many moments have given me service, given me wonder, given me spiritual strength, and I feel if I’ve gotten any mercy, a lot of it is because of my service to the Vaiṣṇavas, to Prabhupāda, and to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Rādhānātha, Jagannātha, Subhadrā, Baladeva, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu in South Africa. I’m kind of a latecomer; my great misfortune was that I came after the Rādhā-Rādhānātha Temple of Understanding was established. I must have performed so many sinful activities in my previous lives that I was not allowed to be present, or let’s just say I got off easy, because all the hard work was done. So many devotees worked so hard to establish that project and it has borne so much fruit. But still, there were some crumbs of service left over, and of course, one is the now famous, eternally famous Durban beachfront Ratha-yātrā. 

Munī-kārya, Śrī-mūla, and my humble self—they were saying, "Mahārāja, it can’t be done, you’re wasting your time, there’s too much opposition, this is S.A." But we did it. Well, not only did it, but all of you have carried on with that grand *mahā-mahotsava*, the *yajña*, which has made us famous throughout the entire country. So how can you—these things are enshrined, just like a *saṁskāra*. It’s just there in your heart. Your parents did it, or you’re doing it, and your friends do it when you die. It’s so important for me. These are the *saṁskāras*, these moments in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, serving the Saṅkīrtana movement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There are so many things I can go on and on about, but this is your chance to talk today. But again, taking up that theme of "culturally many but spiritually one," it’s like a mantra, it’s like a *sūtra* from the Vedānta-sūtra; it fits in time, place, and circumstance. It’s a way that we can purify and change society to see that the real way we’re all going to come together, despite the diversity, is that we all have a common theme in our lives: we’re all brothers and sisters, we have one Creator. If there’s one Father, everyone else, irregardless of where they end up on this planet, in the solar system, in this universe, and in this creation, we have a common bond: we’re all children of God.

There is no god but God; Muhammad is His prophet, but the first part is applicable: there’s one God. So everyone is created by Him, so we’re all brothers and sisters. Although brothers and sisters sometimes quarrel, they tease each other—blood is thicker than water, family attachment is stronger than any other bond in this world. So, what is the real family? The family you’ve got, the family of Kṛṣṇa. And that’s our message to the people of that country, because there’s so much cultural diversity, so many shades of color in human society in South Africa, from really white to really black and everything else between. That’s nice; variety makes life interesting. You can meet all kinds of different people, different cultures; rather than being envious or despising them, you can appreciate them. We love them. So we have so many preparations on a plate; we should see it like that. So, "culturally many, but what is the common?" Spirituality. Of course, you know we have the Afrikaans church and we have so many different churches down there, but Kṛṣṇa consciousness is special, as we know, for so many reasons. I don’t have to go there—that’s why you’re devotees, because you know it’s special. We have so much to offer the people: this philosophy, this food, this song, these books, holy places all over India—where I am now, everywhere you step you find something sacred. This was the original spiritual culture of this planet. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was emperor in Hastināpura near Delhi; he ruled the whole world, including South Africa. So it seems like a dream that one day the world would be Kṛṣṇa conscious; time will tell. Who knows? I mean, I’ve seen so many miracles by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, I wouldn’t doubt it. And then we move on to the next planet.

It is said he wouldn’t be satisfied until the 14 worlds were chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name. So we’re not limited in our vision; we see everyone as spirit soul, everyone as brother and sister—even the insects and the birds and the mammals. I was up in the jungle here in a cave, and a wild dog came out of the jungle—oh my God—and he came over and he gave me his hand. You may have seen that video; one million two hundred thousand views, that 45-second video of a wild, vicious dog coming out and putting his hand out into the hand of a *sādhu*. I rubbed his head, and we exchanged some love, and then he went. I miss that dog, I really do. I walk in the jungle now, I call him "Rishi." "Hey, Rishi! Whoa, Rishi, come on." So with this vision, we can conquer the world because we have such an attractive culture. And the South Africans are open. It’s not like communist countries, you know, Belarus; it’s not like the world is like now—you try to preach in some places, you’re thrown in jail in 20 minutes. South Africa is a democratic country; it’s got its problems, it’s got God-given problems, but I think because Kṛṣṇa consciousness is such a joyful approach—chanting, dancing, and feasting—I think people will one day embrace it. But we have to preach; we have to preach. 

So my dilemma now is that I’m stuck on a mountaintop in Maharashtra, India, and I can’t come to South Africa. I’d love to come down there; I’ve got all my friends, you know, we’ve been through thick and thin together. You know we’ve weathered the storm, we’ve enjoyed our biryani together. You can’t get biryani even in India; they don’t know what’s biryani. I guess they do, but they don’t know how to make it like South African biryani. We’ve got—I’ve got my Pie-pals, those little green things you have in PE and Uitenhage; we have our walks on the Durban beachfront. I’ve got all my friends, I’ve got disciples who own beautiful birds, African Greys, very unique disciples down there, and I’m missing all of you. And I can’t wait until this horrible scourge of the earth is gone. It’s there for a reason; nothing happens without a reason. I mean, Mother Earth felt it was time for some purification because of the sinful activities, although I don’t say that in public. But you know, nothing lasts forever. Nothing lasts forever except Vṛndāvana. By serving the mission in South Africa, it’s exciting, you know. I very much miss King Goodwill.

All right, Kṛṣṇa. I miss all my friends there; some have departed now, and you know, we served the greater public in various ways. I had plans with King Goodwill, you know; he was very favorable, he was going to come to our next Ratha-yātrā, and we had some good talks together. He was going to make me a Zulu warrior; that was on my bucket list, to become a Zulu warrior. I don’t know if it’s going to happen now, but I really loved him and I miss him. And I miss a lot of people: Thiru, Suraj—we worked together—Śyāma-lāla, so many devotees. But let us carry on in their memory, and one day we’ll have our eternal life—not in S.A., not in Johannesburg, but in that forest which is the farthest from, but that’s okay. That’s where we want to be, because we’re Gaura-bhaktas and we want to be where we can serve Mahāprabhu the best. So you’ve got a lot of challenges down there, a lot of hurdles, a lot of obstacles to overcome, but don’t hesitate, don’t be afraid. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said, "Difficulties encountered in your service, my Lord, that’s my greatest pleasure to take on the obstacles." Kṛṣṇa took on the demons, and it was here Prabhupāda preached against the scientists and the atheists and, you know, whatever. So whatever opposition there is, we embrace that as a chance to show Kṛṣṇa we’re really His devotees. We’re in His mood when He comes to the world—He said to save the devotees, annihilate the miscreants, and re-establish *dharma*. So you have your Prabhupāda-deśa, you have your place. Most of you are not going to be leaving South Africa unless you go to Mauritius for vacation or maybe India. You’ve got your Prabhupāda-deśa; that’s your lifetime service, that’s your place, that’s where Mahāprabhu has placed you, where He found you, made you a devotee. So work hard to deliver the people of that great country. South Africa is the one; it’s very beautiful. What can compare to the beautiful beaches? What, Cape Town is so beautiful, Drakensberg. You see, I know all these things. Are you keeping—I’m one-quarter South African—are you keeping up?

So, thank you for giving me this opportunity to come to your country. I really pray that I can come there again and serve in whatever capacity I can. I’ve got some years left, I’ve got a lot of energy. I recently did a blood test and the doctors couldn’t believe it; they said, "You’re 72, but you have the health of a man in his 40s." Like, what’s going on here? So, yeah, let me come down there and, you know, we can do some more amazing Prabhupāda, some more miracles. Why one or two? Kṛṣṇa consciousness has millions of miracles; we can have billions. And I think South Africa is one place that we can do that. So I’ve spoken long enough. I don’t—you know, I’m usually giving lectures on Vraja, I don’t get to give lectures about the basic tenets of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, so excuse me if I’ve talked too long. But I’m talking to the hearts of my disciples and friends, and disciples, friends, and followers: let us work together to please Śrīla Prabhupāda, who found the time to come to South Africa. That was an obstacle, getting Prabhupāda there, but there was something in Prabhupāda’s heart; he wanted to go to South Africa. He didn’t go everywhere, but he came to South Africa. So that says a lot. So thank you very much. South African Yātrā kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Rādhānātha, Subhadrā, Baladeva kī jaya! All the Vaiṣṇavas and all the Vaiṣṇavīs of South Africa! Hare Kṛṣṇa.""