Ladies and gentlemen, good day. I would like to begin this afternoon by thanking Fatima and her team for allowing me the privilege to once again speak at this domain. I had the great honor to be part of this event last year, and I found the talks to be extremely insightful.

Today, I am again appreciating how various speakers are touching on a series of topics. I've been requested to speak on "The Ecology of Life." Of course, this is not at all a new subject, as we all know, but I would like to take what some may see as an unusual approach and address the issue from a spiritual perspective, based on the fact that for the past 50 years, as a monk, I've been practicing Bhakti Yoga, the ancient science of spiritual life in India.

As always, you know, to begin, the ancient sages, the Rishis, the Yogis of India, stated that when the Supreme Lord created this world, He created it as a complete whole, a complete package, meaning with ample facility for every creature, for every man, animal, bird.

In one of the ancient texts of India called the Upanishads, we learn that the Lord is perfect and complete, and because He is so, everything that comes from Him, such as this material world, is fully equipped to fulfill the needs of all living creatures.

In simple terms, this means that our Earth is capable of providing everything we and all other living entities require. In other words, the material nature is arranged in such a way that the ant gets his one grain of sugar a day, and the elephant gets one ton of grass a day, and human beings were meant to get what we require as well.

It's all built into the master plan of the Creator. Unfortunately, at the present moment, we all find ourselves in a very precarious situation because the things we as human beings require, the very, you could say, basic necessities of life, like, you know, water, clean air, rich soil, are all diminishing or becoming polluted beyond being useful.

Facts speak for themselves. We just look at the destruction of our forests on this planet. It's estimated that in the next hundred years, there'll be no rainforest left. Globally, 2020 was recorded as the hottest year on record. Air pollution, it's said to kill an estimated seven million people per year.

Regarding extinction of species, in 2020, 15 species were declared officially extinct. Simply put, the master plan seems to have broken down. This prompts us to ask ourselves, where exactly are we falling short?

Certainly, science is our great ally in our efforts to achieve our goals. Business, but history has shown that all these things together are not enough to solve the complex issues that we face on our planet today as regards our environment, ecology.

So, what then do the ancient sages of the East say to us?

Actually, a lot. The Vedic scriptures of India, they discuss these points a lot, but I'll just say it briefly. We have a saying, isn't it?

Elegance is truth spoken concisely. It's basically that the 7.9 billion people on this planet are using the resources of nature not according to need, but there's simply not enough resources on this planet to fulfill the insatiable greed of at least the developed world.

I quoted earlier, it is said in a very poetic way, "Everything that moves or does not move that is within the universe is controlled and owned by the Lord. One should therefore only accept those things necessary for himself which are set aside as his quota, and one should not accept other things, knowing well to whom they belong." In simple, simple language, this can be taken to mean, "Take according to your need, not according to your greed." My spiritual teacher gives the following example.

He said, if we place a bag of seeds in the forest, a bird will come and, discovering the bag, will take one. But I'm more addressing nowadays the norm, which is something like, "I want it all, and I want it now." Isn't another way of looking at it that there's a fever, so to speak, for material enjoyment in modern society?

More than ever before. Recently, I read a quote that said, "He who is greedy is always in want." My observation in my travels around the world is that, again, nothing ever seems enough. The beggar is thinking he'll be happy if he gets one more kroner or one more ruble, and the billionaire is thinking he'll only be happy when he gets another billion.

That such a man's desires are never satisfied, and they continue to burn like a fire which is never extinguished. And it is not exactly in that type of consciousness in which we rape and abuse the earth, or let us say, Mother Nature.

Exploitation was not so apparent 200 years ago when there were only one billion people on this planet, but it's apparent now when there are almost 8 billion people on the planet. So, what's the solution?

Another ancient text from India called Bhagavad-Gita says that our unquenchable thirst for sense gratification or material enjoyment will only diminish when we're satisfied. But what does it actually mean to be satisfied?

He begins by understanding a basic premise of India's spiritual wisdom, and that is that we are the spiritual force within, with a spark of life within that animates the body. We say in Sanskrit, *ātmā*, or the soul. And if that soul is satisfied, the body calms down and doesn't need so much.

Technically speaking, the body is not living. This may come as a surprise, but just consider that the body is made of matter. And matter, in any form, is not conscious, it's not alive. You look around the room where you are, there are tables, there are chairs, there are glasses, there are lights, they're all material, but of course, they're not conscious, they're not living because they're matter.

Whereas, so our bodies are made of the same stuff. Any doctor will tell you the body is only, well, it's made up of 72% water. You're something more dynamic, you're that spark of life within the body, the soul. So, what gives the body the semblance of life?

Just like a car, a car is a machine, but it requires a driver to move. Now, for the person in the car to be happy, it's not enough to polish the car. You have to feed the person in the car, then he's satisfied.

So, all our efforts are going to please the senses of this body, and more or less, we're ignoring the real person within. But the earth cannot accommodate the insatiable desires of this body for the eight billion people living on this planet.

It's not created like that. Our world can be cured. We can be happy with simple living and high thinking. Modern life is such that it's so complicated, you don't have time to think in this way, to see that there's a spiritual solution to the problems facing our world today.

A person who's actually realized that she or he is not the body, but a brilliant spiritual soul within the body, recognizes the same spiritual spark in all living beings. Now, the soul is the source of life in my body, it's also the source of life in all bodies, in all creatures.

Actually, materially, yes, we are different from other species, but spiritually, all living entities are qualitatively the same. Just like today, you're all dressed in different types of clothes from different countries, but you're all essentially human beings. So, when someone's enlightened with spiritual knowledge, he sees the world a little different, where he sees all creatures really as brothers and sisters, because everyone comes from the same source, the Supreme Father.

And if you have the same father, you're brothers and sisters. And if I feel pain when I'm pinched, I see the animal also feels pain. Yes. So, I don't want to be pinched, either. Does the animal?

I don't want to die. It's for this reason that people in India, for the most part, have been vegetarian for thousands of years. Not only because it's healthy – most doctors, they say vegetarians live longer – but because it's a way of respecting all life as sacred and a way of living in harmony with Mother Nature.

It's a way of living in harmony with nature. A number of environmentalists are recognizing this fact. How in the world does a vegetarian diet heal the planet?

Vegetarians?

Well, a recent report that I read stated that the meat and dairy industries create 7.1 gigatons of greenhouse gases annually. That's 14.5 percent of the total man-made emissions. And beef is by far the biggest offender, generating 60 kilograms of greenhouse gas emissions per kilogram of meat produced.

So often I hear people say, "But I like my meat." My reply is, "Do you like your planet?" Statistics show, not just yogis and Rishis, statistics show that meat-eating has become the greatest threat to biodiversity, an important element in maintaining good ecology.

Statistics. And while 11% of the world's population suffers from malnutrition, we feed half of the world's grain to animals slated for slaughter. In a global study by researchers from the University of Oxford, they estimated what would happen if humans stopped eating meat and animal products altogether, and they concluded that the greenhouse gas emissions would be decreased by 70%. 70%.

Simply if humans stopped killing animals and ate a plant-based diet. Yes, where will I get my strength?

How will I be strong if I just eat plant-based foods?

He's the biggest animal on earth, he's strictly vegetarian. I think again, the facts speak for themselves. I'm speaking in terms of my country. It takes 2,500 gallons of water to make, and it takes 2,500 gallons of water, 12 pounds of grain, 35 pounds of topsoil, and the energy equivalent to one gallon of gasoline to produce one pound of beef.

And you can convert that into... With all that said, I think we have a saying, right?

The writing's on the wall, but who's going to read it?

There's a popular saying, "Be the change." But in order to be the change, according to what I've presented to you today, which is not my compilation or study, but people from Oxford and big universities, in order to be the change, you have to become vegetarian.

With those facts, it's black and white. Either you're part of the problem or you're part of the solution. Of course, there are other things, many other things we have to do to make the change in the world, to our ecology, to put it right again, but this is a very important part of it.

I think the whole world at one point is going to have to wake up and understand that to put things in order, we're all going to have to make some sacrifices. It's not just someone here and someone there; all are going to have to make some sacrifices to save our beloved planet, for ourselves, for our children, and for future generations.

We have to be prepared to make sacrifices, otherwise, it's not going to work. I've tried my best in a very limited time. There is a very important spiritual side to solving the present problems we face in healing our damaged planet.

Yes, we need to find happiness, peace, satisfaction within on the spiritual platform, not simply by enjoying and exploiting the limited resources of material nature. To do that, we must find a proper balance in our material and our spiritual needs.

So, ladies and gentlemen, in conclusion, let's explore this path. Let's go within to find our deeper happiness and give Mother Earth a chance to rejuvenate. Simple living and high thinking, we can together green the Earth, restore the Earth, and heal the Earth.

Thank you.