"*00290*.*
"Welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Vṛndāvana. 

*Namo oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.*

Please excuse me; today I have a little cold, but we will proceed. First, I would like to say some more prayers and glorification of Śrīla Prabhupāda: "Oh glorious one, the wish-yielding tree of love of God, whose manifestation is so astonishing. With the nice moonbeams of his knowledge, he destroyed the deep darkness of ignorance in my heart. He is the abode of bliss for the eyes. Seeing this fallen soul, he gave me the holy names which are coveted by everyone, although I did not even ask for them. I am fallen and helpless, and my intelligence is totally corrupt; I do not even have a drop of pious merit. He instructed me in the treasure of the worship of the divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. By showering me with the spotless *prema-rasa* which is given by Lord Gaurāṅga, he fulfilled all my desires." Vaiṣṇava Dāsa weeps: "I did not attain loving attachment to the lotus feet of my Gurudeva." 

This is a beautiful poem written by a devotee named Vaiṣṇava Dāsa from the Middle Ages. So, for our last two lectures, we have been discussing the cowherd boy pastimes in the vicinity of Kāmyavan, and I actually thought we had exhausted that material, but more research has revealed we have not. So, we cannot leave Kāmyavan just yet—and why would we ever want to? In *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Chapter Three, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he glorifies Kāmyavan, text 58. Actually, there are a few verses I will recite:

"In the twelve forests of Vraja, there are many pastime groves where Lord Kṛṣṇa, the moon of Vṛndāvana, enjoys His beloveds, and where the opulence is so great that it makes tears flow down Goddess Lakṣmī’s cheeks. To the south and west of Nandīśvara Hill are Kāmyavan forest and many other beautiful places such as Pramoda-vana, where the divine couple enjoy many confidential pastimes. Because of its many charming forests, groves, and lakes where Lord Kṛṣṇa relishes the sweetness of His pastimes, this place is known as Kāmyavan. When the fragrance of the divine couple’s pastimes of sweetness entered this place, the powerful goddess of the pastimes of supreme opulence hides."

So now that we have set the scene, as they say, let us wander a little more in this charming forest of Kāmyavan. Now, there is a famous *līlā-sthāna*, which means a place of *līlā*, in Kāmyavan called Aṭorā. A-T-O-R-A, Aṭorā, where one day Kṛṣṇa and His friends became so absorbed in play that they failed to notice the passing of time. In fact, on that day, they played for 24 hours straight. The cowherd boys, they played for 24 hours straight. I sometimes say that when you are doing something you like, time goes by very quickly, but when you are doing something you do not like, time goes very slowly. You often see people at work, for example; they are looking at their watch. 

So, if you are doing something that is supremely likable, theoretically you could do it forever, but that is possible only in the spiritual world. There, the residents can say to Kṛṣṇa with full confidence: "Loved You yesterday, love You still, always have, and always will. Loved You yesterday, love You still, always have, and always will." That is Vraja. So now, the cowherd boys, they may have failed to notice the passing of time, but their parents did not. So, when their sons had not returned with their cows at the usual time in the afternoon, the parents of all these cowherd boys, they climbed to the rooftops of their homes to look for that familiar dust cloud on the horizon. That—you know, when we have discussed how when Kṛṣṇa comes back from the forest back to Nandagrām etc.—the cows, they raise this huge amount of dust so people can see Kṛṣṇa is coming. So, they climbed the rooftops to look for this familiar dust cloud on the horizon; it was not there.

So, they also strained to hear Kṛṣṇa’s flute song, but it is described all they heard was the sound of silence, which caused their hearts to tremble in distress. And when darkness started setting in, Mother Yaśodā panicked, and thinking that a demon had kidnapped and devoured her son and his friends, she set off into the darkness immediately without even a torch to light her way. Now, of course, it is understood that Kṛṣṇa is the love of her life and she is the love of Kṛṣṇa’s life, so intimate is that relationship. But Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, we have quoted before, there is a beautiful, very beautiful verse in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, 9th chapter, verse number 20: 

"Neither Lord Brahmā nor Lord Śiva, or even the goddess of fortune, who is always the better half of the Supreme Lord, can obtain from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the deliverer from this material world, such mercy as received by Mother Yaśodā."

Wow. So now, when seeing Mother Yaśodā run off, Nanda Mahārāja ran after her and he restrained her. Then, I was reading, he very quickly organized a number of well-armed *gopas*, cowherd men and soldiers, to search the surrounding forest for Kṛṣṇa and his some cowherd friends in two groups: one headed towards Kāmyavan and the other headed towards Varṣāṇā. However, this grove, you could say this special place Aṭorā, it is in a secluded forest actually between the roads leading to Kāmyavan and Varṣāṇā; like, it is in the middle. So, neither of these search parties could see or hear the boys. It was only the next morning, when Nanda Mahārāja heard the sounds of the cowherd boys shouting in great glee, in great glee in Aṭorā, only then he was able to find his son Kṛṣṇa fully absorbed in playing with His friends.

So, along with the soldiers, he watched Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma immersed in play along with their friends, and even the cows, they were also playing with Kṛṣṇa. In fact, the boys and the cows and Kṛṣṇa, they were so absorbed that when Nanda Mahārāja went to get them, he had to hold them firmly to keep them from playing. See, it is like, "Whoa, stop, why? Hold on." And when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma finally noticed their father, they were just shocked. After offering obeisances, Kṛṣṇa said, "Father, why have you come here?" Nanda Mahārāja replied, "To bring you home; it is so late." And the Lord Balarāma said, "Why must we go? We just got here!" They had been playing 24 hours, but, "Why must we go? We just got here."

So, although 24 hours had passed, these cowherd boys were so absorbed in play, and the cows were so absorbed in watching them—that is also mentioned—that they thought only a few moments had passed since they had arrived. So then, Nanda Mahārāja, he quickly gathered all the boys and started for home. And on the way, the boys, they said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, it is not fair that we only got to play for a few moments." So, it is written, actually: "Just as a night of Brahmā had passed as Kṛṣṇa was absorbed in dancing with the Gopīs, so a second night of Brahmā had gone by while Kṛṣṇa was playing at Aṭorā." 

So, if anyone ever mentions you are in Vraja and someone says, "Let us go to Aṭorā," does anyone know what happened there? Now you know, and you can meditate on this. By meditating on these pastimes, even in our aspiring stage of devotional service, we can be present in Vraja. We can be present in Vṛndāvana. 

So, we see in such pastimes that the residents of Vṛndāvana, they are not affected by time as we are. They have spiritual bodies that are eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. They never grow old, and thus they can play forever. Like we mentioned in a previous class, it is interesting; yesterday I was reading my dear Godbrother Hari-śauri Prabhu’s *A Transcendental Diary*, volume one, and therein Hari-śauri writes about Śrīla Prabhupāda. He writes: "We were talking with Śrīla Prabhupāda in his sitting room about growing old, and at one moment, he got up from his desk, his eyes shone brightly, and he said very convincingly, 'I am not an old man; I will never grow old.'" All right, Kṛṣṇa. I remember when I was young hearing about adventurers in days gone by who traveled the world searching for the fountain of youth. Explorers used to do that; they used to go look for the fountain of youth. I remember reading that the fountain of youth was how it was described: a mystical spring that restores the youth of anyone who drinks or bathes in its waters. And this legend became particularly prominent in the 16th century, and I remember very well there was a reading about a Spanish explorer, Juan Ponce de León—I never forgot that name, Juan Ponce de León—who searched extensively for this fountain of youth. I believe it was the year 1513, in the southern part of the Florida peninsula in the United States of America. And he carried with him a description of the place where this fountain was supposed to be located, and that description read as follows: "The source is overshadowed by several gigantic magnolia trees, which, though numberless centuries old, have been kept as fresh as violets by virtues of this wonderful water." That is what place he was looking for. "The source is overshadowed by several gigantic magnolias which, though numberless centuries old, have been kept as fresh as violets by the virtues of this wonderful water."

So that is what he was looking for. He never found it, and the proof is that he died, right Kṛṣṇa? And when I was nine years old, I made a written pact with five of my friends on the back of a print of a painting by a famous artist; his name was Lucas Cranach the Elder, and the painting was called *The Fountain of Youth*. I think he painted it in 1546. And we, all my friends, we made a pact and we swore that when we reached 18 years of age, we would journey out in the world and find the fountain of youth. Boys will be boys. So, I hung that print of the painting on my wall, and I often stared at it—like before you go to sleep, you look around your room, and I would look at that painting—and the painting was of old people entering the waters of the spring on one side and exiting the other side as children. Somehow, I was just fascinated by this concept of eternal youth. So one day, I scribbled on the print, actually in the front part of the print, the words of a Disney character, Peter Pan. You know, this is all old Disney stuff. Peter Pan, and he sang in one song in a Disney movie: "And Neverland will always be the home of beauty and joy, and never grow up, never grow up, never grow up, not me." I still remember it: "And Neverland will always be the home of beauty and joy, and never grow up, never grow up, never grow up, not me."

But then, as fate would have it, one day my father told me, "Son, you are growing older now. The fountain of youth, it is a fairy tale; it doesn't exist." Oh my God, oh wow, I was depressed. But my father was wrong. My father was wrong. For when I was 19, one year past the promised date—because we were going to find it at 18—I found the fountain of youth by the mercy of my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda: the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which takes us back to the spiritual world, which is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. So, by Prabhupāda’s mercy, all of us have found the fountain of youth. We didn't have to go exploring all over this planet; you have to go to the proper planet, Goloka Vṛndāvana. So, we have found the fountain of youth. This is nicely explained; it is a little subtle, this verse, but I think you will catch it. This verse is from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 1st chapter, verse 61: *vṛndāvanam navī-neva*. "I went through Karṇāṭaka, Mahārāṣṭra, and Gujarāt and became old, but when I reached Vṛndāvana, I regained my youth as a gorgeous young lady once again." 

I am sure you can catch that: "I went through Karṇāṭaka, Mahārāṣṭra, and Gujarāt and became old, but when I reached Vṛndāvana, I regained my youth as a gorgeous young lady once again." Harī Kṛṣṇa. So now, on another occasion, it is described that Nanda Mahārāja, following family tradition, he felt impelled to visit Gayā to offer oblations to his forefathers. And as his servants began making preparations for the pilgrimage, his son, little Kṛṣṇa, saw bullock carts being loaded for the long trip. So, Kṛṣṇa asked his father, "Father, where are you planning to go?" And Nanda Mahārāja replied, "Oh, we are going on pilgrimage to Gayā. There, we will offer *piṇḍa-dāna* to our forefathers as Lord Rāmacandra did, and free them and ourselves from sin. What is more, we will see the footprints of Lord Viṣṇu. We will see the footprints Lord Viṣṇu left there when He slayed the demon Gayāsura." There is a famous pastime where Lord Viṣṇu killed this demon called Gayāsura, and while doing so, the Lord’s footprints were embedded in a rock at that site that we now call Gayā; it is in Andhra Pradesh. And pilgrims have been going there since time immemorial to offer *piṇḍa*—*piṇḍa* means oblations—for the deliverance of their forefathers. And we even read in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* how Lord Caitanya, isn't it, He went there after His father, Jagannātha Miśra, had departed this world, and it was there He met His spiritual master, Īśvara Purī. 

Anyway, Kṛṣṇa was not happy that He would have to leave Vṛndāvana and have to interrupt His play, so He proposed another solution. We see this pastime being repeated in different ways in Vṛndāvana, you know. When we discussed one time how the cowherd men and Nanda Mahārāja heard the glories of the Ganges up north, so they wanted to go, but Kṛṣṇa convinced them, "You don't have to go; the Ganges is here." I want to see Gaṅgā. So, pastimes do repeat with slightly different changes in different parts of Vṛndāvana. That is the variety; variety is the spice of life—spiritual life. So, Kṛṣṇa was not happy: "We are going to go to Gayā? That means I cannot play with my friends." So, He proposed another solution to Nanda Bābā. He said to His father, "Father, just as all holy places are present in Vraja, so try to understand, Gayā is also present here in Vṛndāvana in Kāmyavan, and it is called Gayā-kuṇḍa." It is a lake, Gayā-kuṇḍa. And Kṛṣṇa continued, "O King, if you feel that you must offer oblations to your ancestors, even though they were all sinless, then why take the long route to Gayā when a shorter one to Kāmyavan is just as beneficial?" 

Nanda Mahārāja, he offered to go to Kāmyavan on the way back, but Kṛṣṇa insisted, "No, *pita*, let us go to Kāmyavan first." So, very soon, a large caravan of Vrajavāsīs set out for Kāmyavan, and when they arrived in Kāmyavan, Kṛṣṇa brought His father to Gayā-kuṇḍa. There, they all made offerings to their ancestors, after which the Vrajavāsīs, they felt very satisfied that they had done their duty to their ancestors properly. Now, one may wonder how Gayā-kuṇḍa in Vṛndāvana can be equal to Gayā-tīrtha in Andhra Pradesh without the presence of Viṣṇu’s footprints, because really, that is what makes Gayā-tīrtha so special: that Lord Viṣṇu left His footprints there when He killed the demon Gayāsura. Well, the answer is that the footprint of the supreme Viṣṇu, who is Kṛṣṇa—because all incarnations come from Kṛṣṇa—is present at Gayā-kuṇḍa, or very near to Gayā-kuṇḍa, just a stone’s throw from Gayā-kuṇḍa on Candrasena Hill. A little hill there, Candrasena Hill. So, Kṛṣṇa left His footprint there one time while visiting Kāmyavan. I will relate that pastime: it is said that when Kṛṣṇa came to Kāmyavan, He was so enchanted by the beauty of the Kāmyavan forest that He climbed up this famous hill, Candrasena Hill, and He played His flute in praise of the forest. Kṛṣṇa plays His flute for different reasons, but He was so enamored by the beauty of Kāmyavan that He played His flute on top of Candrasena Hill in praise of the Kāmyavan forest. And what was the effect? It is said that, stunned by the beautiful melodies He played: number one, the demigods in airplanes above Him all fainted; number two, all kinds of moving and non-moving living entities were stunned. Rivers and streams, which are liquid, became solid, and hills and mountains, which are, you know, made of rock, they melted. 

That is the effect of Kṛṣṇa playing His flute. And Kṛṣṇa Himself, He slightly sank into the soft stone of that hill, leaving the imprint of His feet. So, yes, we can consider it as auspicious as Gayā-tīrtha because footprints are in both places, but in Gayā-kuṇḍa, it is the footprints of the original Personality of Godhead. So, when He stopped playing His flute—when Kṛṣṇa stopped playing His flute—the stone again became hardened, and that footprint was there, leaving a beautiful footprint actually of His feet, it is said, for pilgrims to come, pilgrims like us, to relish. So here is another place to put on the list. We have got a long list now of places to visit. In that upcoming *yātrā* program, we will visit Gayā-kuṇḍa in Kāmyavan and see these footprints of Lord Kṛṣṇa. 

Of course, we must—I was reading that Lord Caitanya and the Six Gosvāmīs all have come and taken *darśana* of Kṛṣṇa’s footprints at Gayā-kuṇḍa in Vṛndāvana. At Gayā-tīrtha, Lord Viṣṇu killed the powerful demon Gayāsura by stepping on him, and the demon was liberated, and his body was transformed into a series of auspicious hills. But our Ācāryas, they say that Kṛṣṇa created a Gayā in Kāmyavan, which is even more sacred. How so? Because it was created not by chivalrous valor as Lord Viṣṇu did in creating that holy place in Andhra Pradesh, but with the superior touch of amorous love and the flute song’s caress. 

Now, there is another wonderful pastime that took place on Candrasena Hill in Kāmyavan, and that is that one night Kṛṣṇa and the Gopīs were dancing in Kāmyavan, and the girls, they became tired. And as they rested, Kṛṣṇa climbed up Candrasena Hill again, and to get the Gopīs to join Him there, He played on His flute, which once again caused not only the stones and rocks on the hill to melt, as we said, but—it is so cute—the hearts of all the Gopīs as well. Now, Kṛṣṇa was expecting as a result the Gopīs would come up to the top of the hill, but what happened was that by playing His flute like that, His heart melted in love for the Gopīs. So He immediately, it is described, staggered down the hill in search of them. But not finding them—He could not find them—He ended up at a lake called Dhyāna-kuṇḍa, where He became absorbed in thoughts of Vṛndāvanesvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Actually, the word *dhyāna* in Sanskrit refers to thoughts, so this is where that *kuṇḍa* got its name: Dhyāna-kuṇḍa, because Kṛṣṇa was thinking of Rādhā there. But by this time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had retired to a lake called Vihvala-kuṇḍa. In Sanskrit, *vihvala* means "bewildered," so this lake got its name Vihvala-kuṇḍa because Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had gone there, her mind completely bewildered by Kṛṣṇa’s flute song. That particular occasion had a great effect on Vṛndāvana and the residents of Vṛndāvana as well. So, she went to Vihvala-kuṇḍa, bewildered by the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, and it is written that as her friends fanned her with peacock feathers, she sometimes laughed and sometimes cried in her absorption, or rather, being absorbed in meditation on Kṛṣṇa. But gradually, by chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names and massaging Śrī Rādhā, the Gopīs were able to bring her back to external consciousness and told her that Kṛṣṇa was waiting nearby for her to resume their loving pastimes. 

But the Ācāryas say—this is very interesting, it is a little subtle—the Ācāryas say that when her consciousness turned within itself, Kṛṣṇa was with her, but when her consciousness turned outward to her surroundings, He was not there. When her consciousness turned within itself, Kṛṣṇa was with her, but when her consciousness turned outward to her surroundings, He was not there. So, she entered this state of bewilderment. As a result of hearing the flute, Rādhā thought that Kṛṣṇa was playing games with her, sometimes appearing and sometimes disappearing—appearing within when she remembered Him, but when she would look around, He wasn't there. So, in this particular state of consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness that she was in, she thought, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa is playing games; He is appearing then He is disappearing." So, she became angry with Kṛṣṇa—"You appear and then you disappear"—this is the madness of love of God. So, she became *mān*—she became angry. So, when Lalitā-sakhī finally took Śrī Rādhā for that rendezvous which the Gopīs had arranged to meet with Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa stood up to receive her, but Śrī Rādhā kept walking right past Him, not even slowing down. She was so angry. So, the Ācāryas say Kṛṣṇa was like dumbfounded, like, "Why is she doing this?" So, He quickly ran after Rādhārāṇī, offering both praise and apologies for any mistake He may have made knowingly or unknowingly, but it is written He was met only with stony silence. So then, oh yeah, Kṛṣṇa ran ahead of Śrī Rādhā and He knelt in the middle of the forest path, leaving her no room to pass on either side of Him. Then He pleaded and He pleaded with her to give up her anger, her *māna*, and finally she relented. But she wanted to test her lover, Kṛṣṇa; she wanted to test His affection for her, His love for her, His allegiance to her. So she said—this is really amazing—Rādhārāṇī said to Kṛṣṇa: "I have heard my beauty is not the ultimate. We have repeatedly heard speakers of the Purāṇas say that the feminine charm reaches its summit in Mohinī-mūrti, the enchantress of self-controlled Śiva. Kṛṣṇa, I have heard that my beauty is not the ultimate. We have repeatedly heard speakers of the Purāṇas say that the feminine charm reaches its summit in Mohinī-mūrti, the enchantress of self-controlled Śiva." 

So Kṛṣṇa, He fell to His knees again, and He assured Śrī Rādhā that Mohinī-mūrti’s beauty does not compare to hers; it is not possible. But Śrī Rādhā was not satisfied with these words; she wanted more proof, she wanted more evidence. She wanted to see Mohinī-mūrti for herself. So, she said, "Kṛṣṇa, Devī told us that You appeared as Mohinī-mūrti from the ocean of milk. Please show us Your Mohinī-rūpa and let my friends judge whose feminine wealth is greater. Let my friends judge whose feminine wealth is greater." So, to prove that Śrī Rādhā was indeed the ultimate beauty, Kṛṣṇa manifested His form as Mohinī-mūrti. There He was, He just turned Himself into Mohinī. She was standing there alone on the banks of a lake now known as Mohinī-kuṇḍa because this pastime is taking place in Vṛndāvana, in that place—on the banks of the lake, and that lake became famous as Mohinī-kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa just transformed Himself into Mohinī-mūrti, and draped in a golden sari and ornamented with diamonds, Mohinī-devī at first stood alone, it is described, beneath the moonlit sky, as she cast a momentary spell over all the cowherd girls present. Draped in a golden sari and ornamented with diamonds, Mohinī-devī first stood alone beneath the moonlit sky as she cast a momentary spell over all the cowherd girls present. Then, she stood beside Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and at that time, everyone present could see that Mohinī-mūrti appeared to be like Rādhā’s shadow. And finally, all the—you know—she wrote all the Gopīs, they all nodded in agreement that the beauty of Mohinī could never match that of Śrī Rādhā. So, after satisfying both Rādhā and the Gopīs with the *darśana* of His Mohinī form, Kṛṣṇa resumed His original form as a cowherd boy, and confident of Rādhā’s favor, He invited her to continue with their pastimes. Really interesting *līlā*. One devotee has written: "As before, the divine couple and their associates roamed from grove to grove; from their pastime palette, they painted the colors of *kāma* onto the canvas of Kāmyavan with the brushes of their love." That deserves another recital: "As before, the divine couple and their associates roamed from grove to grove; from their pastime palette—like artists have with the colors, the palette—from their pastime palette, they painted the colors of *kāma*, transcendental love, onto the canvas of Kāmyavan with the brushes of their love." Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

So today, I would like to finish with the sublime words of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī in his little-known *Viveka-śataka*. I think the devotee who translated, ISKCON devotee who translated that book, and only not so many copies were produced, but fortunately I have a copy—Śrīla Prabhupāda—just to, you know, pour some more nectar into our hearts, to get rid of all those nasty things that we don't want there and to awaken that love which we are hearing so much about and a state that we want to attain as quickly as possible and go back to the spiritual world. One time, one of my Godbrothers said to Śrīla Prabhupāda—it was a nice sentiment—he said, "I just want to keep distributing your books, life after life." And on this particular occasion, Prabhupāda said, "No, no." He said, "This is called a *yuga*, and Kali-yuga is going to get worse and worse. You should try to go back to Godhead in this lifetime." 

So hopefully, these lectures are assisting us in that way by purifying the heart and increasing our *laulyam*, our greed for Vraja, for Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī puts it so nicely: "Oh Lord, by drinking the nectar of Your transcendental qualities in the association of saintly persons, hunger, thirst, delusion, madness, anxiety, and all other ailments do not pierce my heart. Rather, by emerging in the ocean of bliss, one forgets the whole world. Therefore, please tell me, how can I attain Your door, which is resorted to by sages like the four Kumāras and others? Let me be any living entity in Vṛndāvana: amongst creepers, trees, bushes, or grass; amongst the peacocks, skylarks, cuckoos, doves, eagles, vultures, or even amongst the cows, lions, elephants, rhinoceroses, porcupines, rabbits, antelopes, or bumblebees. Oh glorious Lord of Gokula, I do not pray for human birth again in this world. Even a savage who beholds the shining arena of the rasa dance of the damsels of Vraja on the banks of the Yamunā is better than I who am situated elsewhere. I am so foolish that all I constantly see are the doors of materialists with frowning eyebrows and raised noses due to the intoxication of wealth. O Śyāma, when shall I gladly roam the land of Vṛndāvana constantly chanting Your holy names, incessantly shedding tears, overtaken by love with a faltering voice, my hair standing on end, having a gracious form as one of Your girlfriends? O Śyāma, when shall I gladly roam the land of Vṛndāvana constantly chanting Your glories, incessantly shedding tears, overtaken by love with a faltering voice, my hairs standing on end, having a gracious form as one of Your girlfriends?" 

So again, when we end the lectures like this with the words of such pure devotees, what more can I say but just to thank them for enlightening us, giving us a glimpse into this beautiful twelve forests of Vṛndāvana, whereby hopefully one day by their grace we will reside and see firsthand. So thank you, be back in a couple of days. Glorious to Prabhupāda, once again. Let us take all the fallen conditioned souls with this—why leave him? Leave anybody back in this nasty material world? Boy.""