"*00124*.*
"Everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. 

*Nama oṃ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.*

So, today I would like to continue with the theme of wandering in Vṛndāvana, not only because Śrīla Prabhupāda sanctioned it, as we discussed in another lecture, but because our Lord Kṛṣṇa spends much of His own time wandering around Braj. And where is that stated? Well, in the song *Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava*, which every devotee sings before the Bhāgavatam class or Bhagavad-gītā class. That very famous song is actually written by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and the official name of the song is actually *Śrī Kṛṣṇa-viṃśottara-śata-nāma*. It is found in Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s book called *Gītāvalī*, and it is song number four.

Kṛṣṇa is the lover of Rādhā; He displays many amorous pastimes in the groves of Vṛndāvana. He is the lover of the cowherd maidens in Braj and the holder of the great hill named Govardhana. He is the beloved son of Mother Yaśodā, the delighter of the inhabitants of Braj, and He wanders—He wanders in the forest along the banks of the river Yamunā. So, therein we hear, *yamunā-tīra-vana-cārī*—Kṛṣṇa wanders in the forest along the banks of the river Yamunā. 

Now, in Allahabad and Gorakhpur here in India, Śrīla Prabhupāda fell into a trance after singing the first two lines of the song. After coming back to external consciousness in Gorakhpur, he said, "Now just chant Kṛṣṇa." And Prabhupāda said that this song is "a picture of Vṛndāvana. Everything is there: Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Vṛndāvana, Govardhana, Yaśodā, and all the cowherd boys." So again, in the song, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura emphatically declares that Kṛṣṇa wanders—*vana-cārī*—He wanders in the forest of Vṛndāvana along the banks of the Yamunā River. So today, we will wander with Him through *śabda-brahma*, the transcendental sound.

So, in our last lecture, we passed through the forest of Goravana. Now, nearby to Goravana is the forest called Āṭalavana. And just to the west of Āṭalavana is a very, very special forest that I would like to lecture on today. You will be very happy to hear the name of this forest; this forest is called Rādhāvana. And this forest of Rādhāvana runs along a good portion of the Yamunā River, and it goes without saying that Rādhāvana is the favorite place of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her girlfriends. Our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda has written an exquisitely beautiful and very charming verse about this particular forest, Rādhāvana. I’ve been trying to memorize it—I haven’t got it down yet—but the Sanskrit is very beautiful, and the verse touches the heart: *rata-kata-vaicitra-pallava-valarike, rādhā-padaṅka-vilāsan-madhura*.

I pray that my heart may always find happiness in Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s pastime forest, where the creepers bear flowers that are picked by her own hands, where many charming places bear her footprints, and birds passionately sing her glories. I’m going to recite that again: "I pray that my heart may always find happiness in Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s pastime forest, where the creepers bear flowers that are picked by her own hands, where many charming places bear her footprints, and birds passionately sing her glories." This is from *Rādha-rasa-sudhānidhi*, verse number 14. 

And as one might imagine, many wonderful pastimes take place daily in the forest of Rādhāvana. For example, after bathing in the Yamunā, Gopis like Lalitā and Viśākhā comb and braid Śrī Rādhā’s hair there and decorate her with the fragrant flowers that grow in abundance in Rādhāvana. And I read that the ācāryas say that Rādhāvana is similar to Rādhā-kuṇḍa in many ways and is as dear to Rādhārāṇī as Rādhā-kuṇḍa is to her. And because Rādhāvana is dear to her, the forest is also very dear to Kṛṣṇa. That we can appreciate in the beautiful pastime that I came across in Rādhāvana.

One time, anticipating where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī would bathe in the Yamunā in the Rādhāvana forest, Kṛṣṇa hid himself within a cluster of blue lotus flowers in the river. You know how the flowers float in the river—the lotus flowers—He hid himself in a cluster of blue lotus flowers in the river and waited until Rādhārāṇī and her friends arrived at a nearby bathing ghāṭa. So soon, Śrī Rādhā and the Gopis arrived. They entered the waters, splashing, joking, and of course, talking about Kṛṣṇa. But when she waded straight into deeper water, she came very close to that cluster of blue lotuses where Kṛṣṇa was hiding, and soon she got the scare of her life. She was swimming peacefully, again with her mind absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa, when—the ācāryas say—suddenly this cluster of blue lotuses in front of her exploded with a roar and completely covered her with water, lotus leaves, and foam.

So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was very startled, and she thought, "What is this? A demon, a crocodile, or what?" And then she screamed for help. But as soon as things calmed down, she saw just a few meters away Kṛṣṇa floating in the water, smiling and laughing at the joke He just played on her. But the ācāryas say that for Śrī Rādhā, this was no laughing matter, and so her fear quickly turned into *māna*, or anger. And she immediately turned her back on Kṛṣṇa, waded out of the water, and ran into the forest followed by her equally upset girlfriends. So Kṛṣṇa was left alone, standing shoulder-deep in the Yamunā and very disappointed that Śrī Rādhā had taken the joke so personally. So He waded back to the shore, waded through the water, and sat down on the riverbank, completely dejected, wondering how He could pacify Śrī Rādhā’s anger.

Now, we often hear in our bhakti-śāstras how Rādhā’s anger is never easy to appease; Kṛṣṇa always has a hard time. Of course, we should be careful not to think that her anger is something material or something mundane; it is transcendental and has its purpose. And this is very nicely described in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 14, verse 197: "Describing Rādhā: When the border of her sarī and the cloth veiling her face are caught by Kṛṣṇa, she externally appears offended and very angry, but within her heart, she is very happy." Learning scholars call this attitude: "Externally she's angry, but inside her heart, she is very happy." So it’s a different type of anger than we may think in this world. She’s angry, yes—she’s angry—but that anger facilitates Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s attachment for each other, so it’s very favorable. 

And I was reading the other night that when Śrī Rādhā is experiencing, we say in Sanskrit, *māna*, anger towards Kṛṣṇa, she often goes to a room to pout, either in Varṣāṇā or in Yāvaṭa, because we know as time went on she lived in various places. So when she’s angry, very often she goes to a room and she closes the door and pouts. So the scriptures describe that often Kṛṣṇa manages to actually get into Varṣāṇā or get into Yāvaṭa, and He’ll go to her room and He’ll knock on the door. The ācāryas say that Rādhārāṇī always refuses to speak to Him, so He always tries to plead, you know, through the door. 

And one time in Yāvaṭa, as Kṛṣṇa was trying to appeal through the door to Śrī Rādhā, one of her sakhīs, one of her girlfriends who was attending to her, stormed out very angrily from the room and she said to Kṛṣṇa: "Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā is completely drenched in the brilliant red color of love, exactly like a guñjā seed. Oh expert word-juggler Kṛṣṇa, her love is not like your love, which is exactly like the tiny red color on the parrot's beak." I’ll try to analyze that a little bit. So the sakhī is comparing love to the color of red in this analogy, and she’s saying that Rādhārāṇī’s love for Kṛṣṇa is full, like the prominent red color on a guñjā seed. You see in Vṛndāvana these little seeds—they make little necklaces sometimes, especially for the Vrajabāsīs. 

So if you look on that seed—the special seeds in Vṛndāvana—they’re red, black, and white, but red’s the predominant color. So this sakhī is saying that Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa is full, like the prominent red color on a guñjā seed, whereas Kṛṣṇa’s love for Rādhā, it’s minimal; it’s like the touch of red on a parrot’s beak. Here in India, we have lots of those green parrots in Braj, they’re flying everywhere taking messages, and if you look, there’s a little red dot on the side—on both sides of the parrot’s beak. So she’s comparing the love like that. Again, "Śrī Rādhā is completely drenched in the brilliant red color of love, exactly like a guñjā seed. Oh expert word-juggler Kṛṣṇa, her love is not like your love, which is exactly like the red tiny dot on a parrot’s beak."

So Kṛṣṇa went back to this particular pastime where He’s joked with her in the river and she’s gone into the forest. So Kṛṣṇa’s back on the riverbank, and He’s absorbed in thought: "How to pacify Śrī Rādhā’s māna, or anger, in this particular pastime?" He can’t figure out how to do it; it’s not easy. When, it’s described, suddenly Śrīmatī Vṛndā Devī happens to walk by. When that happens—because she plans all these pastimes with Paurṇamāsī—she happens to walk by with a number of her helpers who are carrying a variety of clothes and ornaments on their way to a forest storehouse. We’ve discussed many times how Vṛndā Devī keeps these forest storehouses in different parts of Vṛndāvana with different paraphernalia for the devotees to use in the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in that particular part of the forest. So here Vṛndā is going with her helpers and they’ve got all these items and pass by Kṛṣṇa. And the ācāryas say Kṛṣṇa smiled and thought, "This must be the hand of fate." 

So approaching Vṛndā Devī, He described His predicament—you know, "I angered her with this little joke in the river and now she’s in the forest pouting with her friends and how do I appease her?" So He said to Vṛndā Devī, "Oh Devī, please help me to regain Rādhā’s favor." So Vṛndā Devī smiled and quickly she came up with a solution. And what was that? Well, with the clothes and the ornaments her servants were carrying, she and her helpers dressed Kṛṣṇa up as a beautiful young girl, as a Gopi—a tactic we know that Kṛṣṇa often employs trying to get close to Rādhā to say sorry. So, satisfied with this disguise, when they finished, Vṛndā Devī said, "Kṛṣṇa, you know what to do now." 

So Kṛṣṇa, what did He do? He followed the Gopis’ footprints deep into the Rādhāvana forest, right up to the entrance of a grove where Rādhārāṇī was surrounded by her girlfriends, and she was complaining to her girlfriends about Kṛṣṇa’s trick in the Yamunā. And suddenly Rādhārāṇī looks up and she sees this new Gopi standing at the entrance to this kuñja, but she couldn’t recognize it was Kṛṣṇa. And although Kṛṣṇa was disguised, His sweetness and beauty enchanted Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—actually, the text says completely bewildered her mind. So Rādhārāṇī felt a certain surge of affection for this new dark-complexioned girl and invited her in. Rādhārāṇī said to this new Gopi, "Oh moon-faced one, who are you? You are so sweet and beautiful, please become my very dear friend." 

Oh, for that day when Rādhārāṇī says, "Please become my very dear friend!" So, as Kṛṣṇa disguised as the Gopi entered the grove, Rādhārāṇī noticed his—or her—hesitation, and she said, "Oh friend, you seem to be trembling. Is it with fear? I wonder, is this because you know that Kṛṣṇa lays in wait for you somewhere in the Vṛndāvana forest?" So then, Rādhā reached out and took hold of that Gopi’s wrist—of Kṛṣṇa’s wrist—and as soon as she did so, śāstra says, "She felt exhilarated, words stuck in her throat, and her limbs went stiff." 

Now, as soon as that happened, all of her girlfriends attending to her understood who this new Gopi actually was, and they all smiled in approval. How did they know? Because these are symptoms that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī often feels or exhibits in Kṛṣṇa’s presence. So these girls are clued in. So, in this particular instant, they were very pleased because, ultimately, the sevā of these Gopis is to actually unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—that’s their greatest pleasure. So they all smiled in approval, and Rādhārāṇī, when she saw her girlfriends’ favorable reactions, she also smiled, and she had no choice but to give up her anger, and she spent the rest of the afternoon in Kṛṣṇa’s blissful association. This, of course, is... I was reading this particular chapter, and there are many pastimes there. So there’s in the Rādhāvana forest—this is just one. Actually, the one ācārya says—and I quote it: "It’s very beautiful: no one can count how many pastimes Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy in the forest of Rādhāvana. Every pastime is novel, even if it happens hundreds of times, and devotees derive ever-expanding bliss hearing about them," which is so true.

Now, our ācāryas also point out that whenever Kṛṣṇa tries to pacify Rādhārāṇī’s anger, ultimately He’s almost always successful. And they give an especially sweet example of that, and that is that one time, Nanda Mahārāja invited King Vṛṣabhānu and all the residents of Varṣāṇā to come to Nandagrāma to discuss some upcoming festivities. Now, that day, for some reason, Rādhārāṇī was especially angry with Kṛṣṇa. I think I was reading that she’d seen Him with another Gopi the day before, so she was angry. Nevertheless, she decided to also come along, and at that particular meeting, you know, arranged by Nanda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa was sitting on one side of the meeting and Rādhārāṇī was sitting not far away on the other side of the meeting. So as the discussions were going on, Kṛṣṇa kept trying to get the attention of Rādhā, but she wouldn’t have anything to do with Him. Now, at one point, the morning sun came shining through the window, and taking advantage of this, Kṛṣṇa found a very unique and very sweet way to appease Rādhārāṇī’s anger. It’s described—even in front of all the elders—and this is very nicely described in Rūpa Gosvāmī’s work. How He did this, it’s verse 241, as follows:

"In order to appease Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa placed the shadow of His head at her feet. Taking advantage of that sunshine, Kṛṣṇa placed the shadow of His head at her feet. Then she put the shadow of both her palms on the shadow of the head of Kṛṣṇa. In this way, both of them, seated in front of their seniors, pacified each other and relieved their silliness. May this act of conciliation by Kṛṣṇa and the loving forgiveness by Śrī Rādhā be victorious in all the worlds." 

Wow. The sunshine’s coming in, so creating shadows at the same time. So through their shadows, they were able to come to terms, give up their silliness. "May this act of conciliation by Kṛṣṇa and the loving forgiveness by Śrī Rādhā be victorious in all the worlds." Thank you, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

So we’ll continue wandering. You’re not tired yet, are you? Wandering. And next, a couple kilometers further, we come to a very beautiful and especially fragrant forest. You’ll understand by hearing the name: Tamelvāvana. Tamelvāvana got its name because of the tamala flowers, or we know them as jasmine flowers, that bloom there. And many of you know jasmine flowers—the aroma is overwhelming. And the beautiful aroma of the jasmine flowers at Tamelvāvana, it’s well-known amongst Vrajabāsīs, particularly for the fact that the jasmine flowers there, they blossom all day and all night, irregardless of what season it is. You know, there’s six seasons present at all times in Śrī Vṛndāvana; we mentioned this earlier in another lecture, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they enjoy the particular characteristics of different seasons even in one day, passing through all the six seasons. 

Now, in all those seasons, whenever they come to Tamelvāvana, the flowers are always blooming—they’re in blossom, day and night as well—and so it’s described Kṛṣṇa really likes to meet Rādhārāṇī there whenever possible. Now, going a little bit deeper into this particular forest, Tamelvāvana, in the far southern corner of Tamelvāvana, there’s a place called Vanacāri. Vanacāri obviously gets its name from the fact that Kṛṣṇa likes to wander there. There we are, we heard earlier from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, He likes to wander along the shores of the Yamunā and in different forests; this is He really likes to wander there in this Tamelvāvana, particularly in this particular place called Vanacāri. 

And while doing three things—what is Kṛṣṇa doing when He’s wandering? Maybe someday someone will ask you that question: "When Kṛṣṇa’s wandering, what is He doing?" So Rūpa Gosvāmī is so kind, he reveals to us what the Lord does when He wanders: He does three things—He herds His cows, He plays with His friends, and He strolls with Rādhā: *rādhā-vana-cārī*. So the scriptures say that the Gopis like to bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to Vanacāri, seat them on a crystal throne within this general Tamelvāvana forest or grove, and then what? And then decorate them with a variety of ornaments, all fashioned from flowers—all kinds of flowers. 

Now, in his *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states that the Divine Couple’s ornaments are generally made of gold, but set with different precious stones in the gold—rubies, diamonds, sapphires. But sometimes, these ornaments can be fashioned only from flowers. And what type of ornaments, or what type of particular things that Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa may wear that can be fashioned from flowers, He describes this in verse 138—what you can make from flower ornaments—and I’ll just quote the verse as it is: "The flower ornaments of the Divine Couple are flower crowns, flowers in the hair, flower earrings, flowers decorating the forehead, flower necklaces, flower armlets, flower sashes around the waist, flower bracelets, flower anklets, flower bodices, and many other kinds of flower ornaments." And then Rūpa Gosvāmī concludes: "Just as these ornaments may be fashioned from precious jewels, gold, or other materials, in the same way, they can be made of flowers," and that’s exactly what happens. This is a pastime place for flower ornaments in Vanacāri. 

And because it’s considered one of the 64 devotional arts mentioned in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* and summarized by Śrīla Prabhupāda by *The Nectar of Devotion*—because it’s one of the devotional arts which are so important in serving the Divine Couple—Rūpa Gosvāmī goes into even greater detail in verse 141, and it’s a list—he gives a list of exactly what are these flower ornaments and how they’re made, how many flowers, and how you arrange them and what colors. It’s really beautiful; I read it for like 45 minutes, but I’ll just give you a few examples because time is of essence. Here’s some examples that he gives: "The flower crowns, known as *puṣpāpīḍa*, are the best of all, and they’re more pleasing than even the best jeweled crowns, called *ratnāpīḍa*. Lalitā Devī learned how to make these *puṣpāpīḍa* flower crowns directly from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. These *puṣpāpīḍa* crowns are made with flowers and flower buds of five different colors and placed in five points on the crown. This crown is expressly used to decorate Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." 

"Skilled craftsmen say there are five kinds of earrings; they are known by the names *tāḍaṅka*, *puṣpī*, *karṇikā*, and *karṇa*. Those are the five kinds of earrings. When an earring is fashioned from flowers in order to resemble a certain object, that earring is called *kuṇḍalī*. There are many different kinds of *kuṇḍalī* earrings; those flowers may be arranged to resemble a peacock, a shark, a lotus, a half-moon, and many other things." In other words, you have Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa wearing earrings that look like a peacock or a shark or a lotus, half-moon, but all made from flowers, not jewels. "We continue: a garland of flowers placed on the upper forehead along the hairline is called *lalāṭikā*. Such a garland should have flowers of two colors—red in the middle of the garland and the other color flowers on either side. Sash, meaning around the waist, made of flowers should be done with five different colors artistically strung together in a gently waving pattern, and Rūpa Gosvāmī calls this a *kaṇṭī*. Anklets made of different flower buds are called *kaṭaka*. These are of many varieties."

Hare Kṛṣṇa. I’m sure you liked it. It takes 45 minutes just to go on in here, but so satisfying. And Rūpa Gosvāmī goes on to write that not only that these flowers can be used in this devotional art of decorating for these small objects like earrings and anklets and bracelets, he said, but this devotional art of flowers, using flowers—you cannot... you should also make umbrellas for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, couches out of flowers, awnings out of flowers, and whole cottages out of flowers. I know in our ISKCON movement, on special days like Rādhāṣṭamī, the Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa get a flower outfit, but imagine—imagine making a whole cottage of flowers! 

The other day I mentioned, Śrīla Prabhupāda said one time that flowers are the only opulence left in Kali-yuga. So, again, this art of making flower decorations is listed as one of the 64 devotional arts, and it should be of interest to us as aspiring devotees. I mean, ultimately, at some point, we should be well-versed in these arts in order to properly serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. On a morning walk in New Delhi, India, on August 31st, 1976, Prabhupāda, you could say, encouraged us in this way—and I’m quoting him on that walk: "Just like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī," he said, "she was trained up in 64 arts. Do you think to captivate Kṛṣṇa is an easy thing? How much qualified she must have been, so that Lord Kṛṣṇa was attracted!" I’ll recite that again: "Just like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she was trained up in 64 arts. Do you think to captivate Kṛṣṇa is an easy thing? How much qualified she must have been so that Lord Kṛṣṇa was attracted!"

So, we’re all... by Rādhārāṇī’s grace, we all want to attract Kṛṣṇa. That’s what we’re trying to do when we chant, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." My dear Lord, my dear Energy of the Lord, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please engage me in your service. Through our chanting, we’re trying to attract the Lord, and we will. When that chanting becomes—when it becomes the pure name, and so in that way, we—through the various devotional arts—someday we can attract Kṛṣṇa. And of course, it’s mentioned, you know, that Prabhupāda said that Rādhārāṇī was trained up in these 64 arts, and that she perfected them. That we know from *Brahma-saṃhitā*, of course—she was trained, but of course that’s the pastime; she’s eternal, and her devotional service, her *rādhā-bhāva*, her pure love for Kṛṣṇa is also eternal. But that she has that, she’s perfect in that art, it’s nicely described in *Brahma-saṃhitā*: 

"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, residing in His own realm, Goloka, with Rādhā, who resembles His own spiritual figure, she, the embodiment of the ecstatic potency, possessed of the 64 artistic activities, in the company of her confidantes, sakhīs, embodiments of the extensions of her bodily form, permeated and vitalized by His ever-blissful spiritual rasa." 

There it’s mentioned that she possesses these 64 artistic activities, and when we read *Nectar of Devotion*, we know they begin with singing and playing musical instruments, dancing, theatrics, painting, applying cosmetics, and they exist in their perfect—complete and perfect—forms in Goloka Vṛndāvana. And to be able to enter into that transcendental mode, we have to know them. And as we advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, at some stage, we can look forward to being trained in these 64 arts. Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī sets an example for us in his *Stava-mālā* to show us that we have to pray to these residents in Vṛndāvana to train us up. He praises Viśākhā: "I pray that Viśākhā, whose voice is sweeter than the cuckoos, may teach me the art of beautiful singing." So we look forward to that day, to qualify ourselves. But won’t it be nice to be trained in that way?

For the time being, you know, yes, we’re beginners for all practical purposes, and what is our work now? Well, at our stage, *vāco vegaṃ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṃ jihvā-vegaṃ udaropastha-vegaṃ*—according to Rūpa Gosvāmī’s instructions to us, *Upadeśāmṛta*, we’re learning to control our mind and control our senses by engaging them in Kṛṣṇa’s service. Maybe we’re at step one, but that’s okay. Confucius, he was famous for saying, "The longest journey begins with the first step." So we have to be honest where we’re at, but we know it is the goal, and we look forward to that day. 

And we still have a lot of progress to make. I remember the first time I ever saw Śrīla Prabhupāda; it was 1971 when he was arriving at the Detroit, Michigan airport in America. For many of us, it was the first time seeing Śrīla Prabhupāda. You know, the plane landed, and Prabhupāda came down the tarmac, and we were waiting inside the airport. And we’d actually... we’d actually brought a Vyāsāsana—in those days, you could do things like that—and we had the Vyāsāsana, you know, right where Prabhupāda and all the passengers were coming in. Prabhupāda sat down, we were about at least 100 devotees, and we all sat around the Vyāsāsana. There wasn’t even a microphone. I remember all the passengers, they were also around looking at Prabhupāda because he was so effulgent. So Prabhupāda gave his short darśana there, and I was fortunate enough to be sitting right up front, near to Prabhupāda. And at one point, Prabhupāda leaned over from his Vyāsāsana, and he said very slowly, with great emphasis, "My dear boys and girls, please, please believe me when I say: you are not these bodies." So he was pleading with us. Why? Because it’s not easy to become free from the bodily concept of life, "I, me, and mine." So we have a ways to go, but rest assured, as it’s described in the progressive path of devotional service, one day a resident of Vṛndāvana, Prabhupāda, will train us in these 64 arts of devotional service. So it’s good to hear about them, what’s waiting for us. I often say, isn’t it, you know, repeating that what they say in modern society: "Trust no future, however bright." That’s true, but you can trust our future in Kṛṣṇa consciousness! We know what’s away; we don’t have to speculate, we read the śāstras: *ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo*.

And then comes all the wonderful spiritual qualities. So let’s keep advancing so we can wander a little further. I can take you to two more places a little further on than Tamelvāvana—maybe if I look at the map, it’s more like one and a half kilometers. There’s two villages a little further up the Yamunā River, and we will visit them, and these are the villages of Tilaka-gāḍī and Maṇi-gāḍī. I’d never heard of them before, but very... I’m very happy that we’ve discovered them, and I looked on the map and they’re there, the Vṛndāvana map, and both of these villages are connected to the history of a very empowered Vaiṣṇava saint. He was a Bābājī, a renunciate. His name’s not mentioned, perhaps out of humility; he didn’t allow anyone to write his name or mention him by name. But he lived in this particular area we’re going to describe, where these two villages came about, and he was doing his bhajana. And during this time, the local villagers—those who were there—well, actually, they settled in that area, and one reason was because the Bābājī was there; it was like their local saint and their representative of Kṛṣṇa. So that a village developed, and during his time amongst them, he impressed upon the villagers the importance of the daily chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s holy names through the process of japa. They basically got them all chanting on japa beads, the whole village. As time went on, as well as decorating their bodies with Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tilaka on the forehead and the 12 parts of the body. And in fact, eventually, the entire village—everyone was getting up every morning and chanting a fixed number of rounds on their beads as well as decorating their bodies with gopī-candana every day. So eventually people started, you know, looking at these Vaiṣṇavas—by Navadvīpa, because everyone in the village was very distinct, especially because of their tilaka, which is described in our śāstra, that they were the property of Kṛṣṇa. That’s how the scripture described it: people saw, "Oh, they’re wearing all this Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tilaka, they’re the property of Kṛṣṇa." So that village became known as Tilaka-gāḍī. People formed, you know, they’re there and around the sādhu, and time goes on, years go on; they’re all chanting japa, very careful to properly place the tilaka every day. So the village took on the name Tilaka-gāḍī. And I did a little investigation: that village still exists in Vṛndāvana. It’s about an hour, I guess an hour and a half drive from Vṛndāvana itself, and the practices that this Bābājī introduced endure in that village to the present day. Practically everyone in that village chants japa, and they religiously and proudly wear very distinctive, you know, big Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tilaka—not just on the forehead, but the whole body. Hare Kṛṣṇa! So when we do our next Kārttika parikramā, we’ll go there and we’ll chant japa with those villagers. 

So one day, as the Bābājī and some of his followers were walking along the Yamunā River—because actually we’re taking you along the Yamunā River of this whole class—we’re walking along the banks of the Yamunā River chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa on their beads, it’s described a brilliant, shining object amongst the stones on the riverside caught the Bābājī’s eye. So he bent down and he picked up, could you say, a fist-sized gem, it’s described, which shimmered with an unearthly luster. In my mind I was trying to think, "What does that look like?" It’s shimmering, which means it’s like this—shimmering with an unearthly luster; it’s also described it felt very pleasing to the touch. 

Now some of the Bābājī’s followers, they said, "Oh, it’s a diamond! It’s a diamond!" And others were saying, "No, it’s a precious gem that’s fallen from Svargaloka." But Bābājī, he was playing with it like a ball; he was tossing this jewel, you could say, up in the air, he caught it again, he looked at everyone, he said, "This is a cintāmaṇi-maṇi." Maṇi means like it’s a jewel or stone, a stone—what do we call that? We call those touchstones, right, a touchstone? And he says, "This cintāmaṇi-maṇi is not a diamond, it’s not fallen from Svargaloka, it comes from Goloka Vṛndāvana." *Cintāmaṇi*, because what is the spiritual world? The spiritual world is made of these *cintāmaṇi* stones; they’re self-effulgent, they’re transcendental. So, hearing how this special touchstone, you could say, had come from the spiritual world, his followers imagined the priceless things that this gem could create. So then, to the amazement of everyone present, that Bābājī threw that precious gem right into the middle of the Yamunā River as he said, "Great wealth is of value in the hands of those empowered to use it in Kṛṣṇa’s service, but an obstacle on the path of devotional service for ordinary souls like me. Better we just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." Don't worry—nice instruction. Great wealth is of value in the hands of those empowered to use it in Kṛṣṇa’s service. Just like Śrīla Prabhupāda, he came to America with nothing but a few rupees, but he had full faith in the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa and the instructions of his spiritual master. So, as a qualified representative of the Lord, most qualified, Kṛṣṇa gave Prabhupāda unlimited wealth. Great wealth is of value in the hands of those empowered to use it in Kṛṣṇa’s service. With that wealth, Prabhupāda expanded Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over this world. But those not as advanced, we also have to use wealth in the service of Caitanya Mahāprabhu to continue this saṅkīrtana movement. We should be a little careful; it can be, if not used properly, an obstacle on the path of devotional service. So we have to be careful to keep the movement going, so we have to use... legalize everything in Kṛṣṇa’s service, *yukta-vairāgya*. And how do we remain—remain detached from that? We realize that real wealth is there, uh, in the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, because that will eventually give us everything that we need, which is love for Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇava. 

So where that particular pastime took place, people began settling there as well, and in time that village also took on a name, Maṇi-gāḍī, like Tilaka-gāḍī, because everyone was known for their tilaka. This village, not far from Tilaka-gāḍī, it became Maṇi-gāḍī, the village of that that precious gem—people remember that pastime. So, of course, this particular pastime at Maṇi-gāḍī, it reminds us of a similar pastime where Sanātana Gosvāmī had a touchstone and he... he gave it to a young Brāhmaṇa boy. And we know that eventually that Brāhmaṇa boy, in... again in favor of pure devotional service to the Lord, he took that *cintāmaṇi* stone and he threw it into a lake. Actually, that pastime we discussed many months ago; actually, that particular touchstone that that Brāhmaṇa boy had, he threw it into the Kusum-sarovara lake, Govardhana Hill. And I heard that, you know, of course someone may want to find that touchstone, but I read in the 1930s the British government, who thought they owned India at that time, they were ruling India, they... they did different surveys of the land as they would do, and they tried to determine the depth of Kusum-sarovara with whatever instruments they had at that time—they couldn’t find the bottom of Kusum-sarovara lake! I mean, in the 30s they had, you know, some... they had ways of knowing how deep an ocean was or a river or lake; they could not find the bottom of Kusum-sarovara. So if anyone’s thinking, "I’m going to find that touchstone that, you know, the boy threw away in this pastime with Sanātana Gosvāmī," good luck, and no need to just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

So these special gem-like stones, they have, you could say, an imaginary concept of them even in Western literature. I was reading in Greek history, they have a similar stone; they also called a "philosopher’s stone," for want of some better words. And the Greeks described it as this stone that it could turn metals, such as basic metals, into gold or silver. And the Greeks also said that such a stone could make or create perpetually burning lamps, that such a stone could turn common crystals into diamonds. If you had such a philosopher’s stone, they said you could revive dead plants—I mean, they really got into it—you could create flexible glass, it could rejuvenate people from fatigue, and one Greek philosopher said if we had such a stone, people could become immortal. And I read that Islamic philosophers, hundreds of years ago, they also said that such a philosopher’s stone could transform base metals into gold, like that. The boy that, you know, got the stone from Sanātana Gosvāmī, originally he was running around Vṛndāvana touching everything, turning it to gold. The Vrajabāsīs weren’t impressed. So he went back, you know, ask Sanātana Gosvāmī, "Is this really something valuable?" He said, "No, chant this mantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa." So people have this idea that this particular stone can turn things to gold, and it actually did in the case with the young Brāhmaṇa boy and Sanātana Gosvāmī. But the Islamic philosophers, they said that this change of being able to change with this philosopher’s stone something into gold... called this substance, this particular stone, they had a name for it: *al-iksīr*, in Arabic. And I was told that from that word comes the word "elixir," and they describe this substance, the stone; it could be in the form of a hard object or a powder. Now, when it was in the form—when this philosopher’s stone was in the form of a powder—it was soluble and produced amazing results in its soluble form. Yet this particular powder, it couldn’t be burnt by fire. And we’re getting off track here a little bit, but just talking about this idea of these philosopher’s stones. So, both the boy who was with Sanātana Gosvāmī, he realized it doesn’t compare to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, so he threw it in Kusum-sarovara, and our Bābājī, he threw it into the Yamunā. 

So, some good lessons from that particular Bābājī, who because of his presence gave the first village the name Tilaka-gāḍī by training up everyone in the practices of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and who taught, who showed us, the futility of material wealth by taking this stone—which could turn material things into something—throwing it into the Yamunā River. We thank him. We have to thank all these previous saints for the philosophy and for the examples they set for us. Of course, for many people, it’s hard to believe that anyone could throw away such wealth. Not for the Vrajabāsīs or those aspiring to be like them, as us; it’s understandable because we’re beginning to experience that the pure gem of eternal service to the Lord is infinitely more valuable and beneficial and pleasing than a *cintāmaṇi* stone, because we have tasted, even at this point, the nectar that comes from chanting Kṛṣṇa’s sweet holy names. And this is nicely expressed by Rūpa Gosvāmī again, in two of my favorite verses from his *Padyāvalī*, and we’ll finish today with these two verses which show how a devotee has no attraction to the things of this world because of that *para-māthārthika*, that higher taste a devotee gets through practicing devotional service to the Lord, in particular, chanting Kṛṣṇa’s sweet names. *Abhinna-tvān-nāma-nāmī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya*. There’s no difference between Kṛṣṇa, who’s all-attractive, and His holy name. So let’s finish—we’re finished with these two, such beautiful verses from Rūpa Gosvāmī.

The first one is from, uh, it’s text 56 in *Padyāvalī*, and the second one is text 23: 

"Oh Lord, your devotee sees the king of rivers as a handful of water, the sun as a firefly, Mount Meru as a clump of earth, the emperor of the world as a mere servant, a multitude of *cintāmaṇi* jewels as simply pebbles, a valuable desire-tree as a mere stick, the entire world as a bunch of straw, and his own body as what a burden only!" 

And the final verse today, putting everything at the proper perspective: 

"If the opulence or knowledge of many millions of universes were clustered together, they would hardly equal a small fragment of the glory of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy name. Kṛṣṇa’s holy name is my life, it is the goal of my life, it is the means I will employ to attain the goal of my life. Hare Kṛṣṇa."

Thank you, Prabhu. So nice to wander again, and so special for us today. And we’ll continue our wandering as authorized to do and as our beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa also wanders throughout Vṛndāvana. I’ll be back in a couple of days to go through the book and find some more forests or such holy places like today. I thank you. We’ll see you soon. *Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda kī jaya!*""