"*00437*.*
"A very warm welcome back to our lecture series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma and the many of our ācāryas who live there. We say "warm" in one sense because here in India, yesterday was the first day of spring. All the deities in Vṛndāvana and all the various temples in the region were all wearing yellow, which is the tradition on that day, so it is warming up. Today, I would like to speak about one of my favorite devotees, one of my favorite heroes in Kṛṣṇa consciousness: Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. I can see some of you are smiling; also, this will complete our lectures on the, if I could say, transcendental trio: Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita, and now, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. 

Actually, for many of us in the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura is one of the most important ācāryas in our line. Again, he is a veritable hero for those wanting to dive into the nectarean ocean of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana and then come up and surface in Goloka Vṛndāvana. There is that wonderful prayer by Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura in *Prārthanā*, Chapter 8, text 88. He writes, "As one develops attachment to the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, accordingly his heart gets inundated all of a sudden by the nectar emanating from the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." It is the same principle: by doing saṅkīrtana, we get mercy from above. 

I was so much looking forward to giving this lecture. Of course, it is not the first time I have spoken on Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura—many times. In our family of devotees, we have all heard many times about Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura from our beloved Vaiṣṇava historian, Chaturbhuja Prabhu; he has got some wonderful lectures on Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. And Mother Śītalā, my god-sister, of course, she is well known for writing a wonderful book on Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. Nevertheless, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura’s glories remain not only ever-fresh but eternally endearing to our hearts. It is certain that if we just continuously hear about him or all of our ācāryas, our hearts will become purified, and one day we will attain that supreme abode. 

Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura himself has guaranteed this in one of his songs in his epic *Prārthanā*. I keep talking about favorites, but it is a favorite of my parts. There is a song in *Prārthanā*, "Śrī Gaurāṅga-guṇāvalī-gāna"—means the glories of Śrī Gaurāṅga—and there, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, "One who accepts the associates of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu as *nitya-siddhis* is certain to be elevated to the spiritual kingdom to become an associate of the Supreme Lord." So, there you go. He goes on, "One should also know that Gaura-maṇḍala-bhūmi—those places in Bengal where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu stayed—are equal to Vraja-bhūmi or Vṛndāvana. There is no difference between the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana and those of Gaura-maṇḍala-bhūmi or Śrīdhāma Māyāpura." 

So, we can begin to appreciate—well, we already do—but today we can begin to appreciate Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura by knowing and understanding who he is in the spiritual world, as we have done with a number of our ācāryas recently. Now, in this case, devotional scholars have two opinions on who Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura is in the spiritual world. Most authorities say that he is Campaka-mañjarī; others say that he is Vilāsa-mañjarī. Either way, we know the mañjarīs are very close and very intimate girlfriends of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Just how close they are is described very nicely by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, text 31:

> "I take shelter of Rūpa-mañjarī and the other very dear maidservants of the great queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who please her by offering her betel nut, massaging her feet, offering her water, and arranging for rendezvous with Kṛṣṇa. Because these maidservants can enter the area where the divine couple enjoy their most confidential pastimes without feeling shy, they are even more dear to Rādhikā than the sakhīs, such as Lalitā, who themselves are more dear to her than life itself. In other words, the mañjarīs, headed by Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī, can freely enter those kuñjas where even the *prāṇa-priya* sakhīs hesitate to enter."

So, there is an intimate glimpse into the nature of the mañjarīs. And so it was that the mañjarī—Campaka-mañjarī or Vilāsa-mañjarī—was called upon by Kṛṣṇa to join him in his pastimes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu 500 years ago in the form of Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. Also known as Ṭhākura Mahāśaya; I love that name, they have given him Ṭhākura Mahāśaya. In this way, we can appreciate how special Narottama is. 

We can say he was "called upon" literally, because one time, when Mahāprabhu was doing nagara-saṅkīrtana along the banks of the Padma River, which is not far from Māyāpura, with his associates—many of you know—he began calling out in the middle of the kīrtana, "Narottama! Narottama! Narottama!" And at that time, Mahāprabhu had no followers of that name. Lord Nityānanda—actually, Mahāprabhu fainted in the kīrtana after calling out Narottama’s name; he fainted on the ground. Lord Nityānanda came and he whispered into the ear of Mahāprabhu, "Lord, who is this Narottama?" And Mahāprabhu replied, "He is a personality who will appear after our departures from this world, and he will carry on the saṅkīrtana movement." 

At that point, Mahāprabhu sat up and he called for Padmāvatī, the Padma River personified. He handed her a golden water pot and he said, "My dear Padmāvatī, within this water pot is liquid *prema*, pure love for me and pure love for the divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I request you that the day a great devotee of mine named Narottama enters your waters, you pour this liquid *prema* over him." So, when Padmāvatī asked how she would recognize Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, because so many people bathe in her sacred waters every day, Mahāprabhu replied, "When he enters your waters, those waters will overflood your banks with ecstatic love." 

As Lord Caitanya predicted, in or around the year of his appearance—I think I can’t remember the year, but in the month of Māgha (January-February), early 1500s—Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura appeared in this world in the town of Kheturi in East Bengal, which is now in Bangladesh. His father was a great king named Kṛṣṇānanda Datta, and his mother’s name was Nārāyaṇī Devī. They were fabulously wealthy; his father was a king, and they raised their son as a prince. The day he was born, they called in an astrologer, and they read the newborn baby’s chart. The astrologer predicted much of the success that Narottama would go on to achieve in his life. However, he said to them, "But I must warn you as parents: it says here in the chart that he should not be allowed to bathe in a large body of water like a river, because if he does so, he will simply go mad. He will go mad." 

After six months had passed, Narottama’s parents arranged for his *annaprāśana* ceremony, where the child is given his first grains. But when they offered him the grains, he refused to eat them; he closed his mouth and turned his face away. But suddenly, an old brāhmaṇa came forward with some *mahā-prasādam* grains he had offered to his deity that day, and Narottama easily accepted those grains. He easily accepted them, indicating that he was not interested in food which was not first offered to the Lord—an indication of his divinity at six months old. At the age of five, he had his ears pierced, and he began his studies in school. As Narottama advanced in years, as he grew older, he showed himself to be a very exemplary student. He mastered all academic subjects and religious books as well. But it is described that his favorite activity was to sit at the feet of an elderly brāhmaṇa by the name of Kṛṣṇadāsa, who would daily recite the early, middle, and final pastimes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Narottama actually relished these stories throughout his youth, and in hearing this kathā, he resolved to devote his life to the principles of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

Then one day, soon after Narottama became a teenager, Lord Nityānanda appeared to him in a dream. He said, "My dear Narottama, tomorrow, as the sun begins to rise, you should go and take your bath in the Padma River. At that time, you should receive the totality of *gaura-prema*, or love of God." Narottama awoke, and when that *brahma-muhūrta* hour came, he went down to the river. As the sun was rising, he entered the Padma River. He walked into the water there, and Padmāvatī, she saw—the river was overflowing with ecstasy, the waves would go churning here and overflooding the banks—she was thinking, "Oh, Narottama has come!" So she came with that golden pot of *prema*, and as requested by Mahāprabhu, she poured it over the young boy. As soon as she did so, Narottama became mad, as predicted by the astrologer, but mad with love of God. At that moment, when he became imbued with that ecstatic divine love for Lord Caitanya, for the divine couple, his dark complexion turned to the color of molten gold, like Mahāprabhu’s own distinctive hue. Mahāprabhu has that—he is the golden avatāra—so Narottama, he assumed that color as well. 

That particular spot on the Padma River, which of course is in Bangladesh as I mentioned, is considered a very sacred place. There is a tree growing on the banks of that river. I went there; I have been there by Mahāprabhu’s grace and mercy. I was able to visit Kheturi, and I went to this particular place; it is called Prematali-ghāṭa. There was, when he entered the water, a tree—a large tree—kind of growing over that water, the river there. It was under that tree in the water that he got the *prema-prema*, all that he got. There is a Gauḍīya Maṭha temple there which goes all the way down to the riverbank, and every day they have seven offerings and seven ārātrikas to that tree. It is still there after 500 years; when you see it, it is still blooming, it is a very big, thick tree. They have decorated it in so many various ways, but seven offerings and seven ārātrikas because that tree witnessed this pastime. 

When I came there, I made friends with a *bājārī*, a very nice Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava *bājārī*, and we went; we sat under the tree. We were just discussing—he spoke English—and we could see a storm was coming, big storm was coming, big dark clouds. We were there for quite some time, and then the storm came, and it was a very strong wind. One big gust came, and a branch from that tree broke off and fell at our feet. It fell at our feet—a big branch—and I just, I immediately picked it up and put it to my heart. Then I turned to the *bājārī* and I said, "Ji, do you think that I could keep this branch?" He said, "Certainly, it can only be Ṭhākura Mahāśaya’s desire." So when I came back to the West after that visit to India, I had my disciple carved ṭhappā beads from that branch, that tree that witnessed Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura receiving Kṛṣṇa *prema*. I would like to share with you—these are the beads that are carved from that tree; very beautiful. I have been chanting on them for many years now. It is just pure nectar. You can see them a little closer there for you all. Yes, dear to the heart, some special creeper. 

So after receiving that *prema* from Padmāvatī and having gone mad, Narottama made his way back to the bank of the river under the tree, and under the tree he rolled in the ground, exhibiting all eight symptoms of ecstatic love of God. What are those symptoms? Well, if we go to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s *Nectar of Devotion*, they are very clearly explained: 
1. Becoming stunned.
2. Perspiring.
3. The standing of the hairs on the body.
4. Faltering of the voice.
5. Trembling of the body.
6. Changing of the body’s colors.
7. Shedding tears.
8. Devastation.

In the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, *Nectar of Devotion* is a summary study of *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* by Rūpa Gosvāmī—Rūpa Gosvāmī gives a scientific explanation of these eight symptoms of love of God. He writes of a pure devotee:

> "When the vital force of his life is in contact with the earth, the pure devotee is stunned. When the same force comes in contact with water, he begins to shed tears. And when the same force comes in contact with fire, he profusely perspires. And when the same force comes in contact with the sky, he experiences complete devastation. And when that force comes in contact with the air, he trembles, his voice falters, and the hairs on all of his body stand up."

Then Rūpa Gosvāmī says that these symptoms are sometimes manifest internally but rarely externally, because he says a pure devotee always feels such symptoms within himself, but afraid of materialistic people, he does not generally manifest them externally; otherwise, they may misunderstand him to be mad and not understand the transcendental nature of that madness. So, that is his explanation, an interesting explanation. 

Now, when it was the morning, people were coming down to the river to bathe and to wash their clothes, etc. So, when the people found Narottama rolling on the banks of the river under that precious tree, crying and wailing, "Gaurāṅga! Gaurāṅga! Gaurāṅga!", they concluded that he had become haunted by a ghost. They carried him home to his parents, to the palace. When his parents saw him, they were shocked. In fact, his mother said, "My dear Naru, what has happened to you? Why do you weep in this pathetic way?" And Narottama replied, "My dear mother, this morning when I went to bathe in the Padma River, the golden-colored Supreme Lord entered into my heart. It is he who is causing these tears. I am feeling his ardent love, and as I am separated from him, if you want to relieve my distress, please allow me to leave home now and go in search of his divine lotus feet." 

So when they heard that he wanted to leave home to become a renunciate, they took him to his room, to his quarters, and they locked him in, and they posted guards outside his room so he couldn't escape. They tried so many different ways to cure his madness—he’s a prince, why does he want to be renounced? What is all this crying and wailing and perspiring? Maybe it’s a ghost. They tried so many measures, but actually it was just *viraha*. So they thought that one way that they could keep him in Kheturi, that he wouldn't run away to find Mahāprabhu or his associates, they decided to get him married, and it’s described, to keep him bound up in family life. 

He heard this; he could hear them talking like this, and he was very anxious. So one night, sometime later, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared to Narottama in a dream, and in the dream, the Lord said, "O Narottama, as you are anxious to be with me, I am anxious to be with you. For now, though, I want you to go to Vṛndāvana, and there you should take initiation from my dear associate Lokanātha Gosvāmī." 

To make a long story short—because I only have 90 minutes, and again, there are lectures with more details—but I think this will be part one, anyway. But after a few months, Narottama managed to escape from his home, and he began walking through the jungle on the three-month journey to Vṛndāvana. But as we can imagine, it wasn't easy; after all, he was a prince brought up in the palace and not used to the rigors of living in the jungle, and as such, his progress was somewhat slow. Unfortunately, his father had sent soldiers to bring him back, and when they caught him in the jungle, they demanded he return home with them. But then he said something really wonderful to them. He said, "Sirs, when a young girl falls in love and gives her heart to a boy, she is unable to share that heart with any other man. In the same way, when one completely gives his heart to the Supreme Lord, he is unable to remain at home; rather, he feels he must join his lover in his lover’s abode, Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, in the pleasure groves of Śrī Vṛndāvana." 

So his words so much touched the hearts of those soldiers, they just turned around and they left empty-handed. So Narottama continued. But at one point in the journey, he fainted due to exhaustion, and in that exhausted state, Mahāprabhu appeared to him in the disguise of a golden-skinned brāhmaṇa and gave him a pot of milk to drink. That milk caused him to fall asleep, and then Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs appeared to him in a dream—as we always say, a vision—and they said, "Narottama, your suffering will soon end. Mahāprabhu has appeared to you and has brought milk to you for your nourishment in disguise. Drink deep and proceed to Vṛndāvana." 

With the words of Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmī, when they spoke those words, he woke up and he just cried in joy. Actually, in the eternal *līlā* of Goloka Vṛndāvana, distributing milk to Śrī Rādhā and the Gopis is actually one of Narottama’s services as a mañjarī; we will hear a little bit about that later. That is one, as a mañjarī, one of his services is to offer milk or help prepare the milk sweets for Śrī Rādhā. But now, in the form of Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa—the form of Mahāprabhu—were reciprocating, you could say, by serving milk to him, their pure devotee. This is the saying: "Love is reciprocal." 

But his joy of having *darśana* in his dream with Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs was soon forgotten, for when he finally reached Vraja, just as he was entering Vṛndāvana, he was informed that Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs had just departed this world. But by the Lord’s grace, he soon found solace in the shelter of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, and Jīva Gosvāmī took him in, actually. And later, of course, Lokanātha Gosvāmī also gave him supreme shelter as his initiating spiritual master, and that is a pastime we have related in a previous lecture, so we will move on from there. 

At his initiation—I was reading recently because I like to read this pastime over and over and over again about Narottama—at his initiation, Lokanātha Gosvāmī revealed Narottama’s eternal form to him as Vilāsa-mañjarī, or that was part of the initiation process, and he explained in detail his service in the spiritual world. Generally, the guru does not reveal such esoteric subjects so early in a disciple's devotional life, but of course, Lokanātha Gosvāmī was a special personality, and Narottama was a very, very special disciple. Some months later, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī appeared to Narottama in a dream, and she said, "My dear Narottama, dedicate yourself to the feet of your guru and do whatever he asks. Your sincerity and austerity have pleased me, and I will see that you are engaged in a very confidential service." I hear it is mentioned here: "In Goloka Vṛndāvana, my attendants make a special milk-based preparation, and Campakalatā is the most efficient Gopi in the service. You shall work under her direction, boiling the milk." 

So there are the details. It is actually said that after being given these divine instructions by his spiritual master and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Narottama would sometimes go into elaborate meditative trances, visualizing himself boiling milk for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the Gopis while in his mañjarī form. From time to time, in that *mānasa-sevā*, doing *sevā* in his mind in that transcendental state, he would sometimes get small burns on his hands from, you know, boiling the milk, you know, touching the pot or pouring it out—get a burn in the meditation. But then when he would come out of the meditation, he would find his hands with the same burns. He’s doing *mānasa-pūjā*, *mānasa-sevā* in his mind; it is a very advanced stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He was associating with the residents of the spiritual world, and he’d burn his hands, but when he woke up, the burns were still there. So it is said that he would try to cover those injuries with a cloth whenever that happened, out of shyness, his humility, so others wouldn't see. But it is described all Vṛndāvana knew the transcendental way in which he had received those burns. Everyone in Vṛndāvana knew, "Oh, no, he didn't just, you know, that morning cook; he got them in his transcendental meditation." So his fame spread very quickly in Vraja. 

It was during this period in Vṛndāvana that Narottama met Śrīnivāsa and our beloved Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita, and as we have discussed several times, they became very tight; they became very close friends while studying under Jīva Gosvāmī in Vṛndāvana. Then, of course, at the end of their education, all three of them traveled with the original books of the Gosvāmīs to Bengal, and as we know—most of us know—those books were stolen on the way but were later recovered by the heroic efforts of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. As Śrīnivāsa Ācārya was engaged in recovering the books, Narottama returned to Kheturi for the first time since running away from home. But he received a hero’s welcome—not as a prince, but as the fine *sādhu* that he was, because his fame had spread there as well, and they were very proud to have their prince back as a *sādhu*, as a renunciate, as a Vaiṣṇava. He made the best use of his time in Kheturi. He began preaching the philosophy of the six Gosvāmīs that he’d learned in the school of Jīva Gosvāmī. *Prema-vilāsa* relates that at this time he started initiating disciples himself, even persons from the brāhmaṇical order, which would later cause some problems for him. Technically, as a prince, he was from a Kāyastha order, something like a minor Kṣatriya order, and caste-conscious smarta brāhmaṇas, they couldn't accept that he was initiating, first of all, and to them, more important, that he was initiating brāhmaṇas, who are of higher status. But of course, Narottama was transcendental to all such designations, being a *nitya-siddha*, an eternally liberated soul. But this is how things were to play out, as we will hear later, probably in part two of our lecture on Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. 

Now, after spending some time in Kheturi, Narottama developed this very strong desire to have the association of the remaining associates of Lord Caitanya who were still living. Of course, Mahāprabhu had passed, and Nityānanda had passed, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa—they had all passed. Many of Mahāprabhu’s followers, this is some decades after, but some were still living. So we can understand—we also always anchor for association with devotees, especially advanced devotees. So one day, Narottama left Kheturi on an extended pilgrimage to Navadvīpa, to nearby Kaṭvā, to Jagannātha Purī—there are so many places—to find such rare souls. One of the first places he went was Navadvīpa; that is some distance, Kheturi to Navadvīpa, some distance. When he arrived in Navadvīpa, he was lamenting, "I just missed, I just missed the pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. I didn't get to see Lord Nityānanda, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa, and so many other persons." He was lamenting in this way, *śoḍaśa-dāmodara-rāmānanda-rāya*. His lamentation increased; it was just building up as he entered Navadvīpa. When he came into Navadvīpa, he was shocked; it was in a perpetual state of lamentation. He was feeling lamentation, but when he walked into Navadvīpa, he looked around—everyone had the same mood as him. Since the departure of Mahāprabhu, again, several decades earlier, everyone had simply been crying, crying, crying in separation from the Lord. They were described as barely maintaining their lives; they were hardly eating, hardly sleeping, no social activities were going on. It was as if the town was dead, having lost its very soul, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

Seeing this, Narottama became overwhelmed, and once again he fainted, unconscious on the ground. Now, hours later, when he came to, something amazing happened. As he got up off the ground and looked around, he suddenly saw that everything had changed. Navadvīpa had transformed into the Navadvīpa that it was when Caitanya Mahāprabhu was there. Everyone was very joyful and very happy, and there was lots of kathā going on, and kīrtana, and offerings; the mood was wonderful. And right before his eyes, this massive kīrtana party passed by, roaring with the holy names, going through the town. It is described there were literally hundreds of thousands of people chanting and dancing in great ecstasy, beating the mṛdaṅgas, playing the karatālas, blowing their bugles, waving the flags, and chanting the holy names at the top of their lungs: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare..." 

He could not believe his eyes! Navadvīpa was indeed alive with the saṅkīrtana movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and he thought, "This is what I came to see! I thought I’d missed it, but no, miraculously it’s still happening! It’s still happening!" And he was just—then he fainted again. And this time when he came to and he opened his eyes, everything had disappeared. That joyous mood, the kīrtana, the offerings, the ārātrikas, the people dancing, the ecstasy—the whole of Navadvīpa was again plunged into the mood of *vipralambha-bhāva*, separation from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Again, he saw people just sitting on their doorsteps or in their homes, you know, cobwebs; they hadn't even bothered to clean the house. The milk was boiling over on the stove, nobody could move, they were feeling so much separation from Mahāprabhu, weeping and weeping and weeping. This whole mood of *vipralambha* had again pervaded every house in Navadvīpa. In fact, as Narottama looked closer, he saw the Ganges was no longer flowing; he saw the calves were not suckling milk from the teats of their mothers; the mother cows stood motionless, with grass still in their mouths, unchewed; bees were sitting stunned on the tips of lotus flowers; birds in the trees had long ago stopped singing, and people stood like statues. 

So Narottama just began walking around in a daze. He had come here hoping to meet some of the few remaining associates of Caitanya, but this is what he encountered. And then suddenly, one very old, bent-over *sādhu* walking with his cane, he came up to Narottama and he said, "Young man, who are you and what is your name?" And Narottama replied, "My name is Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. I am the disciple of Lokanātha Gosvāmī." He took such pride saying that, "I am the disciple of Lokanātha Gosvāmī. I have just come from Kheturi." And hearing this, the old man, you know, who was walking with his cane—three legs, as they say—he suddenly began dancing in ecstasy, jumping and twirling and calling out, "Ha Gaurāṅga! Ha Gaurāṅga! Ha Gaurāṅga!" Then he said, "You are Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura! You were predicted by Caitanya Mahāprabhu! He called out your name before he left us. He told that you will carry on the banner of saṅkīrtana. We have been waiting for you, we have been waiting for you! You will bring us all back to life with your kīrtanas and your kathā; you will spread the glories of Mahāprabhu everywhere and breathe life back into the saṅkīrtana movement." 

Then he began weeping uncontrollably. That old man, he took Narottama by the hand, and after walking together for some time, he introduced him to a famous devotee named Dāmodara Paṇḍita. Now, this Dāmodara Paṇḍita was very, very old as well. And Dāmodara Paṇḍita, he sat with Narottama, and out of his kindness, he could say, fulfill the desire of Narottama to get some association with advanced souls. The way was that Dāmodara Paṇḍita related the pastimes of the associates of Lord Caitanya who had already departed, but still he got the association in that way. Just like we’re discussing today, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, we were born 500 years too late, our Narottama was lamenting, he was born several decades—we’re thinking, "Oh, but then again, are we too late?" No. We have Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda came and gave us all this nectar of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, revealed to us all these wonderful personalities, who they are in this world, who they are in the spiritual world, and what our chances are of finally getting their association one day. So by hearing, we can associate—it is called *śabda-brahma*. And so Dāmodara Paṇḍita, he was relating the lives of so many of the great associates of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. They actually sat for ten days, and as Dāmodara Paṇḍita spoke, Narottama’s mood of separation for these great souls increased more and more and more. On the final day, he fainted again, unconscious. 

Yes, so that night, the last day, on that night he slept under a tree and he had the most amazing dream—not a dream, again, a vision—and in that vision, all the associates of Lord Caitanya that Dāmodara Paṇḍita had been discussing with him, they all appeared in the vision to Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. And they embraced him one by one. Each one of them came forward and they embraced, the next one came forward and embraced, the next one here, and they all said, "Narottama, we bless you, for very soon you will execute the mission of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Wow! Hearing this and receiving the blessings of so many great souls caused Narottama to swoon in ecstasy. And the next day, taking the blessings of Dāmodara Paṇḍita, Narottama continued on his journey to other holy places to meet great souls associated with the Lord who were still somehow alive. On that journey, actually, he met Jāhnavā Mātā, the wife of Lord Nityānanda, who was still living and was the most prominent Vaiṣṇava living at that time. 

Now, when Narottama was going on, you know, to find the association of these great souls, he came to Jagannātha Purī. And he had another amazing vision—a lot of amazing visions. This vision, it happened on the day that the Ratha-yātrā parade, the annual Ratha-yātrā parade, was going down the main thoroughfare in Jagannātha Purī—I think many of you have been there, it is a long, very wide road—and the chariots, they roll down to the Gambhīrā temple, they spend time there, they come back later. There were three large chariots rolling along, Baladeva, Subhadrā, Jagannātha, and millions of people were watching. As he was standing there watching the whole thing, suddenly, as the cart of Lord Jagannātha passed by—this is the actual Ratha-yātrā—he happened to come the day of the Ratha-yātrā. When he saw it pass by, he saw Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu dancing ecstatically in front of the cart. And when Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu saw him, Mahāprabhu came over and embraced Narottama, saying, "Through you, Narottama, I will manifest a new type of kīrtana that will mesmerize the entire universe. Through your kīrtana, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, I will reveal my mission. For you, I will explain my message, and through you, I will reveal my very deep and divine līlās." 

"Anyone who takes shelter of you will get the shelter of my lotus feet and easily attain *prema-bhakti*." Then Mahāprabhu concluded, "Very soon, Narottama, you will be joined by a special devotee by the name of Rāmacandra Kavirāja. Rāmacandra Kavirāja, he is a disciple of Śrīnivāsa, and together the two of you will propagate the chanting of the holy names." 

As that vision faded, suddenly Narottama found himself inside the temple of Lord Jagannātha, and the pujārī was doing ārātrika. So while the ārātrika was going on, Narottama ran forward to see Lord Jagannātha; he was in the parade and there was Jagannātha, but suddenly he’s in the temple and Jagannātha is on the altar. So he rushes forward to see Lord Jagannātha, and just as he came in front of Jagannātha, a garland—a garland fell from the neck of Lord Jagannātha onto the neck of Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. And the ācāryas say that at that moment, Narottama realized his mission on earth and how to achieve it. It all became crystal clear to him. It was a very historic moment; he had received so many blessings, so many instructions. It all became very crystal clear. It was a historic moment and the beginning of an amazing chapter in the history of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism as he set out to begin his preaching in earnest. He had been on *parikramā*; I was going to say, he was going to go back to the West, we would say—we’ve been in Vṛndāvana, we’ve been in Māyāpura, we’re going to go back to the West and preach—so he is going to begin his preaching there, in that part of India. 

It is a chapter of adventure; it is a chapter of struggles, setbacks that turn into amazing victories which will make the hair of any sincere devotee stand on end, what he does. And I want to share it with all of you, all those incredible pastimes. We’ll move on, and we will discuss them next week. We’ll pause here; we’ll pause here to catch our breath and allow me to do some more research, and in a few days, we will continue with the preaching activities of our hero, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. We’ve brought you to this point, and we’ll leave you sitting on the edge of your seats. Thank you so much. I have really enjoyed, again, it’s almost as if we can feel that Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura is in our presence. We can feel his blessings when we humbly prostrate ourselves before him and ask his mercy that we can assist him, now 500 years later, in continuing the spread of the chanting of the holy names to every town and village. So yes, I will see you soon. That wonderful tree that witnessed the pastimes of Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura ki jaya! See you soon in a couple of days.""