"*00298*.*
"Hi everybody, welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Bhāhūmi, Śrī Vṛndāvana. But first, *oṃ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya śrīmate...* the revealer of the Dhāma. In our last lecture, we discussed a very beautiful pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that you may remember took place in Kokilāvana. Now, a short distance from Kokilāvana is the very sacred līlā-sthāna of Yāvat. I’ve been waiting a long time to speak about Yāvat, where Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu built a very beautiful palace for the pleasure of his daughter. When she married the cowherd man named Abhimanyu, the śāstras say that this whole pastime of Rādhārāṇī’s marriage and her moving to Yāvat began as a result of Kaṃsa’s lust for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. One day, news reached Vṛndāvana that Kaṃsa, after hearing of Rādhārāṇī’s legendary beauty, was planning to kidnap her, make her his own, and bring her to Mathurā. And when Rādhā’s grandmother, whose name is Mukhara, got wind of this, she came and she took Śrī Rādhā from Varṣāṇā, where she was living with her family, and hid her in a very beautiful place in the Vṛndāvana forest. That place is called Saṅketa.

And Śrī Rādhā lived there in a charming cottage next to a lake called Saṅketa-kuṇḍa for quite some time, actually. But later on, to further protect her, Mukhara arranged for her to marry Abhimanyu. Now, that marriage took place very quickly one day because Mukhara was scared—you know, Kaṃsa is going to come—so to give further protection, she arranged this marriage to Abhimanyu. This happened very quickly; not everyone knew. In fact, on the day of the wedding, Kṛṣṇa was on his way back to Nandagrāma after a day of herding cows when an older Braja-vāsī who was walking by offered Kṛṣṇa one big laḍḍu, and Kṛṣṇa took that laḍḍu and he bit into it. As he was doing so, he turned and he said to that old Braja-vāsī, "This is delicious! Where did it come from?" So that older Braja-vāsī said, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, you didn’t hear? There was a big marriage this morning." So, as Kṛṣṇa was biting deeper into the laḍḍu, he asked, "Oh, and who got married?" The old Braja-vāsī replied, "Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī married." But before he could finish his sentence, hearing the name of Rādhārāṇī getting married, Kṛṣṇa spit out the laḍḍu and he fainted.

So again, Yāvat is where Śrī Rādhā lived with her husband. Now, *yāva* (y-a-v-a) is the red foot-lac worn by chaste Indian ladies on the bottom and sides of their feet, and *vaṭa* refers to the banyan tree. Kṛṣṇa decorated those lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā with his own names, I was reading "Kṛṣṇa-Kṛṣṇa-Kṛṣṇa" as the design, and the tree under which he decorated Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet is called Yāva-vaṭa, from which the town’s name is derived. As we mentioned, the palace of Yāvat was built by Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu as a wedding gift for his daughter, and there’s a very beautiful description of the original palace. It was very beautiful and very spacious with wide alleys, etc. But because Rādhārāṇī was forced to wed someone other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa, she simply saw it as a prison. Every night, seated in the moon tower of the palace—we read in *Vṛndāvana-līlās* that these palaces often had a moon tower on top where someone could sit and look at the beauty of the moon—every night seated in the moon tower of her palace, Rādhā would gaze towards Nandagrāma, where it’s described unhappy Kṛṣṇa was looking towards Yāvat.

So now, Rādhārāṇī is Kṛṣṇa’s eternal consort, but for the sake of pastimes, she was apparently married to Abhimanyu. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and all her friends actually, as we know, lived in and around Varṣāṇā in their youth until they were of a marriageable age, and after their weddings, they all moved to Yāvat with their husbands. Rādhārāṇī moved with Abhimanyu to Yāvat in the palace, and all her girlfriends, they also came to Yāvat with their husbands. But Yogamāyā deceives these husbands and they never actually see their wives. The scripture states that, "The women they see are only shadows of them." And the Gopīs, who are actually expansions of Kṛṣṇa’s own pleasure potency as is Śrī Rādhā, they can never be touched by any other man other than him. The example is given: just like Sītā was always safe from the hands of Rāvaṇa even though she had been kidnapped by him—she was the goddess of fortune, so Rāvaṇa could never really touch Sītā. So Kṛṣṇa, you could say, is the true husband of the Gopīs, and their marriage to others is just an illusion created by Yogamāyā to enrich his loving pastimes. It’s described that, "Dull-witted Abhimanyu counts his wealth in cows, thus he lives mostly in his barns, while Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law, Jaṭilā, and her daughter, Kuṭilā, are always preoccupied with their many household chores." These cowherd men, it’s just a līlā, it’s a pastime; they are married, but they don’t actually ever see these Gopīs, only Kṛṣṇa sees them. But it appears they are married so that when Kṛṣṇa meets the Gopīs and meets Rādhā, the intensity of that *sambhoga*, that meeting, is enhanced or it’s increased. Jaṭilā is the mother of Abhimanyu and thus Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law, and Kuṭilā is the sister of Abhimanyu, and together they play the role of trying to keep Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa from meeting. In doing so, again, we see a constant theme: we’re reminded of a constant theme in Vṛndāvana that in separation, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s love for each other intensifies, again making their meetings more relishable. Everything is made even more intense by the fact that just as Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā are always trying to stop Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa from meeting, Rādhārāṇī’s Gopī friends are always trying to unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa at Yāvat. So Yāvat is a very special pastime place; *parakīya-bhāva* is very prominent there. 

For example, one night under the cover of darkness, Kṛṣṇa snuck into the courtyard of the Yāvat palace and he quickly climbed up a *pelu* tree. From there, he began to imitate the singing of a cuckoo in order to attract Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s attention. Recognizing immediately that the sound was coming from her beloved, Rādhārāṇī came and she looked out the window of her room. However, Jaṭilā also heard Kṛṣṇa singing, and she came out of the palace waving a big stick. Kṛṣṇa’s—it’s described his untimely singing had made Jaṭilā very suspicious. What does it mean when the śāstra says "untimely"? I looked into the matter a little bit more, because cuckoos usually sing in the morning, noon, or afternoon, or any time in between, but they rarely, if ever, sing at night. You won’t hear cuckoos singing at night. So Jaṭilā took this "untimely" singing—she’s always, you know, afraid Kṛṣṇa is going to come, her daughter-in-law is going to go out, and they’re going to meet—so she came out that night when it was dark, she came out swinging her stick. Now, Jaṭilā is also described as half-blind, so being very determined, she came out because she’s blind, she couldn’t climb the tree, so she stood at the base of the tree and she said, "Who’s there? Who’s there?" At that point, Kṛṣṇa went silent, but that did not convince Jaṭilā that whoever it was cuckooing—can I say like that?—whoever was cuckooing had left. So, waving her stick in the air, she circled that tree, going around and around while calling out to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She called out, "Rādhārāṇī, turn the lights out and go to sleep! I am keeping a very deep-voiced cuckoo from spoiling yours and our family’s reputation; tomorrow I will hand him over to the King’s men." So, Rādhā didn’t—she was told, she blew out the candles, but she stayed by her window; it’s described exchanging gestures and whispers with Kṛṣṇa while Jaṭilā continued to tap her stick and pace around the courtyard. Kṛṣṇa was quite uncomfortable in his perch, but he remained where he was; it’s described, encouraged by Śrī Rādhā’s nearby presence. Finally, Jaṭilā sat down to rest and then she dozed off. Making the most of the occasion, Kṛṣṇa then spoke openly to Rādhā until the light of the dawn approached, at which point he climbed down from the tree and ran out the gate. 

Now in the morning, enter Abhimanyu into the drama, I think like someone comes onto the stage, you know, the next part of the plot thickens. In the morning, Abhimanyu, who had been spending the night guarding cows, entered the palace and saw his mother fast asleep in the courtyard. So, waking her up, he asked, "Mother, what are you doing here?" Still drowsy, Jaṭilā looked up into the tree and she said, "Someone’s in the tree making cuckoo sounds." So, Abhimanyu looked up and didn’t see anything, so he said, "Mother, there’s no one up there, what to speak of a cuckoo bird." So, Jaṭilā said, "I am certain that a very mischievous person climbed up the tree to gain access to your new bride. He must have left as I rested." So, Abhimanyu, he was doubtful, but he said, "Mother, if you fear such a danger, then from now on, I will lock the main gate every night." 

The ācāryas say the next day all Kṛṣṇa could think of was Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So, that next night he made his way back to the palace again, and while circling that mansion, that palace, towards the back of the palace, he came to a cluster of *beri* trees (b-e-r-i), *beri* trees, which in English means the Indian plum tree. And they made a little kind of a forested area right at the back of the palace there called *Rāvaṇa*; it’s on the opposite side of the palace from where Kṛṣṇa was the night before. So, Kṛṣṇa was standing next to one of those *beri* trees, Indian plum trees, closest to the wall next to another window of Rādhārāṇī’s room. So again, he called out, "Rādhā," with his cuckoo-like voice. And again, Jaṭilā, suspecting foul play, she came out of the palace with a stick and she went around to the back of the palace, but she couldn’t see Kṛṣṇa, although this time he’s not in the tree, he’s at the base of the tree, you know. But she couldn’t see him because I was reading that Yogamāyā, she makes Kṛṣṇa invisible whenever he’s in Yāvat, so none of the residents of Yāvat, except for Vṛndāvaneśvarī and perhaps some of her Gopīs, can see him. Everyone else is not allowed to see him when he’s there, to facilitate the pastime. So she couldn’t see Kṛṣṇa landing there. The pastimes described in detail—actually, there’s more detail given than I’ve shared—in Rūpa Goswāmī’s *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi* 1.16, because I was curious. I’d heard—many of us have heard the pastime when we go to Yāvat, the speaker always talks about the pastime of Kṛṣṇa climbing the tree making the sound of the cuckoo, but I didn’t know that the next night Kṛṣṇa came back again and on the other side of the palace under a *beri* tree he again sounded like a cuckoo bird. But when I was reading *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi* giving this class, I discovered—and then I found it described in other places as well—so we can summarize in more detail. Rūpa Goswāmī, *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi* 1.16, he gives us an insight into this pastime: "Last night, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was standing near a *beri* tree near Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s courtyard, cooing like a *kokila* again and again. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī understood his signal, but as soon as she went to open the door, her bangles and bells sounded. Śrī Kṛṣṇa heard them, but from inside the house old Jaṭilā called out, ‘Oh, who is there? Who is there?’ Hearing her loud call, Śrī Kṛṣṇa with a distressed heart spent the whole night under the *beri* tree." 

So, two times, the similar līlā with a little variation; so wonderful. An ācārya concludes, "May the fortunate and pure-hearted souls who know what secrets Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī share from their respective hiding places on these moonless nights be merciful to us." So there are a number of famous pastimes at Yāvat which we will share with you perhaps in the next one or two lectures. But we can finish today with a humorous one, again with Jaṭilā, and this time along with her daughter, Kuṭilā. Now, Jaṭilā’s name is very interesting; it refers to a *jaṭā*. Jaṭilā refers to the distinctive bunch of hair on her head. She has a big *jaṭā*, we say, on her head, and generally, it’s the sādhu who wears this style of hair. Sādhu-s typically, they never cut their hair; I was told they keep their *tyāgas*, their spiritual strength, in their hair, so they don’t cut it. It grows very, very long. I personally seen sādhu-s with hair that goes down to the ground or even longer; in fact, I took a photo one time of a sādhu I met in Nepal up in the mountains near Muktināth near the Kāḷī Gaṇḍakī river. The photo shows his hair extending well beyond his body, like six or seven feet beyond his body or more. He told me that his parents never cut his hair, and he left home as a youth to become a sādhu, so he’d never cut his hair his whole life. In some of these cases, I was told that the sādhu-s, they tie their hair up—it’s not even a topknot, it’s just a big bunch of hair—and in order to keep it there, some of the sādhu-s, they mix in tree resin and other substances to keep their *jaṭā* from falling to the side. They put the tree resin there, so it becomes very solid, doesn’t move, and it stays like that for their whole life. So, Jaṭilā had a tangled head of hair like that above her head, but the important thing here is that the ācāryas say that her mind was also *jaṭā*, very, very twisted and very entangled. So Jaṭilā, she’s always thinking, you know, "How to keep Rādhā in Yāvat and how to keep Kṛṣṇa out of Yāvat." This is her mentality; this is all part of Yogamāyā’s arrangement to facilitate these līlās. Her daughter, Abhimanyu’s sister, her name is Kuṭilā, and the Sanskrit *kuṭila* means crooked. So both of them, Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā, are always presenting obstacles to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s meetings. 

One day, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had a scheduled meeting with Kṛṣṇa in a beautiful grove not far from the palace, so she made an excuse that she was going to pick flowers. Jaṭilā initially agreed, but as the day progressed, Jaṭilā, with her *jaṭā*, her entangled mind, began to worry that, "Well, she’s gone a long time; maybe she’s meeting with Kṛṣṇa." So, she sent Kuṭilā to look around the area outside in the fields, the pastures, the forest, to see if Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were meeting. In time, Kuṭilā actually approached the place where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were meeting, but Śrī Rādhā had posted several of her Gopīs as lookouts, and when they spotted Kuṭilā coming, they ran to tell Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa cleverly hid themselves in a very close and nearby forest. You would think Rādhārāṇī is hidden, Kṛṣṇa’s hidden, but there’s always a problem: Kṛṣṇa is hiding somewhere, he can be easily discovered. He’s God; how can he be easily discovered? The reason he can be easily discovered is that his transcendental body is extremely fragrant, extremely fragrant. The aroma of Kṛṣṇa’s body smells like *aguru*, which is a very rare and expensive oil or perfume that we use in our deity worship; *aguru* mixed with musk, sandalwood, and camphor. When I read that some months ago, I took—I have some *aguru* actually and I also have musk perfume, but this musk perfume that I have is from the 1920s because most perfume, the original perfume, is banned in India because unscrupulous people take it from the musk deer in an improper way. The sādhu-s used to take that musk; it comes in little granules in the navel of the musk deer. So they’d take a silver spoon, the sādhu-s, and they would take out these little granules from the navel of the musk deer; the musk deer uses that aroma to attract the female deer so mating season becomes very predominant. Sādhu-s would take a little silver spoon, take some of the granules, and mix it in, make a perfume for their deity worship. But modern-day persons would—anyway, I don’t want to go into detail, but it’s forbidden now to take that musk granules from the male deer. But I have some from 1920, some of that oil, so I mixed it with *aguru*, the musk, the sandalwood, camphor, offered to my deities, and then after the pūjā I got to smell the actual aroma that Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body has. It was something wonderful, Prabhupāda would say "simply wonderful." So that when Kṛṣṇa hides, the Gopīs—whoever’s looking for him—they can easily find him because that aroma is very strong. In fact, in śāstra, it says that if Kṛṣṇa is some place and then he leaves, that distinctive aroma stays in that place for at least a *daṇḍa*, or 20 minutes. 

So now, when Kuṭilā came on the scene, she smelled that fragrance and she immediately said, "Ah, I know that Śyāma has been here!" So *Śyāma* or *Śyāma* of course is one of the popular names for Kṛṣṇa, especially in ISKCON, and *śyāma* means that it refers to the hue of his transcendental body, which is like the color of a monsoon cloud. *Śyāma* means the color of the monsoon cloud, and we often call out in ISKCON, "Rādhe Śyām, Rādhe Śyām." That’s good, because Rādhārāṇī’s form is golden. *Rādhe*, but more specifically, what color gold? Well, the color of gold that’s been melted down 10,000 times, because when gold is melted down by jewelers, it becomes more golden, more lustrous, more beautiful. So the color of Rādhārāṇī’s transcendental body is the color of gold that’s been melted down 10,000 times. And because Kṛṣṇa’s body is the color of a monsoon, a dark grayish blue, bluish-black you could say, monsoon—when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are together, it’s described that they look like lightning in a monsoon cloud in the monsoon season. Like here, right now, here in India, we’re in monsoon season, I’m in Mahārāṣṭra, so it’s very prominent here. Sometimes I look in the sky and I see this dark bluish-black monsoon cloud coming, you see this bolt of lightning, very bright lightning; I think, "Ah yes, that’s how it’s described in the scripture." Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s golden form with Kṛṣṇa’s bluish-black monsoon cloud. I’ve seen, I can understand the analogy very clearly being in India; in India, you can see these things. 

So anyway, as Kuṭilā approached the area where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were, "I have seen, I know Śyāma is here." In order that she didn’t look for Kṛṣṇa, Rādhārāṇī devised a plan—well, you could say Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa devised a plan. Rādhārāṇī came out of the forest with a basket of flowers as if she had been picking the flowers, but due to the strong aroma of Kṛṣṇa’s form, Kuṭilā said, "Śrī Rādhā, I know Śyāma’s been here." But in Sanskrit, of course, words can have different meanings, we’ve discussed that many times, so *śyāma* can also mean "nighttime." So Rādhārāṇī said to Kuṭilā, "Oh Kuṭilā, no, the night is no longer here; you can see the morning is coming, the sun is rising." So Kuṭilā got frustrated and she said, "No, I mean Hari, Hari is nearby, I can smell him." But the word *hari* can also mean "lion" in Sanskrit. So she said, "Oh Kuṭilā, you smell the lion? Oh, you have saved our lives, thank you! We must all leave immediately." So seeing that she wasn’t making any progress, Kuṭilā stomped off. 

So then Kṛṣṇa—the plot thickens—Kṛṣṇa, he did the most amazing thing: he disguised himself to look like Abhimanyu. Catching up with Kuṭilā, he said, "Oh my dear sister, what are you doing here?" So Kuṭilā, she was surprised to see her brother, who was actually Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu. So she said, "Oh Abhimanyu, you know, I almost caught Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together! I almost caught your wife with Kṛṣṇa." So Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu, he said, "Good work, Kuṭilā. You know, I have to tell you something very confidential, a secret." He said, "I have heard that Kṛṣṇa has disguised himself as me." And when Kuṭilā heard that, she shook her head and she said, "That rascal Kṛṣṇa, he’s disguised himself to look like you!" And Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu, he said, "Yes, and I’m going to call King Kaṃsa and get some soldiers and have that rascal arrested. And as soon as I do that, I’ll fetch Rādhārāṇī, take her into her quarters, lock the doors, and stay with her and protect her." So Kuṭilā said, "Yes, you must do that!" 

So then Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu, he went on, he said, "And you should be aware, Kuṭilā, that I have heard that this Kṛṣṇa disguised as me is going to come to the palace at the normal time I usually come, and he’s going to try to enter the palace. I want you to go back now and tell our mother what he’s planning to do. The two of you, you go to the *go-śālā* (cow barn) and you get some very wet cow dung and make big cow patties and pile them on the roof." So Kuṭilā said, "Well, why would we do that?" So then Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu, he said, "Well, when that rascal Kṛṣṇa comes disguised as me, you ask him who he is and he will tell you a big lie at the gate; he will say, ‘Of course, I’m Abhimanyu.’ And at that time, you take those big, wet cow dung patties and you throw them down on him!" So Kuṭilā started laughing and laughing. She said, "I love this plan! Kṛṣṇa is going to come disguised as you to the palace." So she ran home, and together with Jaṭilā, they went to the barn and they got very fresh cow dung and made it into patties—I think it’s described 20 or 30—and they piled them on the roof just in front of the main gate to the palace and they waited for Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu. 

It was actually Abhimanyu, so at the normal time, the real Abhimanyu came home, but he saw the door to the palace was locked. This is unusual. And he looked up and he saw that his mother and his sister were up on the roof screaming at him, "You rascal! You debauchee! We know who you are; you’re Kṛṣṇa!" So Abhimanyu, he’s like, "What?" He looked up, he said, "Mother, have you gone mad? Kuṭilā, you’re my sister, I’m your son, Abhimanyu! I’m not Kṛṣṇa!" So Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā shot back, "No, you are Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu!" So Abhimanyu yelled, "Come on down, you can pinch me, you can see I’m your son!" So then Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā said, "We knew you would say that!" So at that very moment, they started throwing down these very wet cow dung patties all over him. They were splattering, it’s described, all over him, and they threw more and more, and finally they knocked him down. Finally, all you could see was his nose, I think, his few fingers covered in cow dung, he popped his head out and he said, "My mother and my sister must have been possessed by a ghost! I have to go to Mathurā to get an exorcist who can take ghosts out of people’s bodies." 

I remember in the beginning of the movement—I’m not sure now, but in the beginning of the movement—there was a picture of a painting in the old *Teachings of Lord Caitanya*, accompanied by a comment by Śrīla Prabhupāda where you see Jaṭilā hitting the real Abhimanyu with a stick, screaming at him, "You rascal! You’re Kṛṣṇa!" and Abhimanyu’s saying, "No, I’m your son," and Kuṭilā’s nearby adding, "Hit him more, mother, hit him more!" Prabhupāda’s commenting on that painting, remember that? Such a well-known pastime in Vraja. Now, these are very simple pastimes, and one may think, "Oh, the pastimes of the Lord, he’s God, they must be very complicated," but actually, the beauty of love is often in its simplicity, that things that happen may not appear to be so significant—they may be very simple—but it’s the mood in which they happen that makes them important to the lovers. You know, they can be sitting on a bench and just, the boy hands the girl a flower and melts her heart. So loving affairs can be very simple, but it’s the mood behind them that really makes them what they are, and that’s especially true in the spiritual world. If it’s true in this world, how much more important it is *ad infinitum* in the spiritual sky. A simple pastime—I’ve told this pastime of the cow dung patties many times, but it’s always ever-fresh, just like the cow patties; they were very fresh. So the pastimes are always fresh in Kṛṣṇa-līlā and we can sing them, glorify them again and again and again. 

So I hope you enjoyed these wonderful pastimes today. I mentioned, I think in the last lecture, that Kṛṣṇa brought Goloka to this earth and manifested it as Gokula, and he performed many līlās, many pastimes in Gokula, both for the pleasure of his devotees in the spiritual world but for the benefit of the conditioned souls as well in this world. And when he had enacted sufficient pastimes, he left this world for Goloka. If we spend a good amount of time now, we’re saying a good amount of time, hearing and chanting these pastimes, we will become purified to the point that we can join the same pastimes in Goloka. You only get from something as much as you put into it, like you know, if you’re an athlete, you can’t just show up at the track and start running. As much time as you put in training, and into your lifestyle actually as an athlete, as much as you put that effort into that, that will be the result of the race. So it’s also true in the spiritual equation. We have to find time; we’re all very busy, busy as bees, and that is necessary, but we have to find time, as much time as possible, because it’s so purifying. Kṛṣṇa—in the beautiful verse I found in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11th Canto, first chapter, verses 6 and 7—we hear how Kṛṣṇa felt that he had given us enough time, enough material, enough subject matter. His pastimes are infinite; there are—you can’t count how many pastimes there are—but when he came to this earth, this particular verse in 11th Canto, I found it so interesting: Kṛṣṇa left this planet when he felt that he had given us sufficient līlā to hear and chant about to become pure devotees. So I thought that would be a really appropriate verse to listen to today. So I will finish a really good verse from 11th Canto, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*:

"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the reservoir of all beauty. All beautiful things emanate from Him, and His personal form is so attractive that it steals the eyes away from all other objects, which then seem devoid of beauty in comparison to Him. When Lord Kṛṣṇa was on the earth, He attracted the eyes of all people. When Kṛṣṇa spoke, His words attracted the minds of all who remembered them. By seeing the footsteps of Lord Kṛṣṇa, people became attracted to Him, and thus they wanted to offer their bodily activities to the Lord as His followers. In this way, Kṛṣṇa very easily spread His glories, which are sung throughout the world by the most sublime and essential Vedic verses. Lord Kṛṣṇa considered that simply by hearing and chanting those glories, conditioned souls born in the future would cross beyond the darkness of ignorance. Being satisfied with this arrangement, He left for His desired destination."

Wow. So Prabhupāda also said that just as Kṛṣṇa and the sages—they cross over the ocean of material existence with the boat of transcendental knowledge and they get to the other side—the mystical thing is that that boat of transcendental knowledge with which they cross the ocean of nescience to the other side is still on this side. It remains on this side of the ocean, and we can also get in that boat of transcendental knowledge and cross the ocean of nescience to join Kṛṣṇa and his eternal associates in the spiritual world. And therefore, these lectures, so many lectures these days, so many of my God-brothers and God-sisters are lecturing—I think the lecturing has increased a thousand-fold at least online during these present historic times of the pandemic—so that’s the silver lining, as we’ve discussed many times, in this cloud of darkness in Kali-yuga. 

So thank you everyone so much, and I will be back in a couple of days with more līlās about Yāvat. Stay tuned; there’s some really wonderful līlās about Yāvat. I will take your leave. *Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!*""