"*00456*.*
"This is the Lord Himself, and it is a great privilege to speak about Him here. This is one of my favorite activities. And since the guest is my closest friend, I give him this honor of speaking. It is like giving your friend a gemstone. In 15–20 minutes, we will have to go to the darśana. We still have two weeks of Old Church Slavonic, and the most outstanding of them is rūpānuga. And our sampradāya is called Rūpānuga-sampradāya, since we are considered a śiṣya by all followers of the Swami. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī was the eldest brother. And before they came to the consciousness of the Lord Caitanya movement, their names were Vallabha and Śakaramallika. These were the names that Emperor Bengalī gave them. Navāb Hussain Shah, who was a very, very powerful emperor. He ruled throughout Bengal and Orissa.

In fact, he forced them into service. The Rūpa lived in a place called Rāmakeli. They were already great Vaiṣṇavas then. And at home, they had a house, as if their house was like Vṛndāvana, in which was the Hill of Govardhana. That is, they had a kind of Gupta Vṛndāvana or a hidden Vṛndāvana in their place, a hidden Vṛndāvana. Navāb Hussain Shah is a huge monument to the construction of his city. And he is the greatest builder in his ministry. And they built a huge tower. And one day he was looking at this tower, and he said that it was a very good job. And then his architect said to him, “But Your Majesty, I can do it even better.” And this infuriated the Navāb. "You have already done what you could, but you couldn’t do it, just like you couldn’t use all your opportunities here. This means that you can still use your best skills in serving another king." He wanted this building to be remarkable, like no one else had. And then he threw the man off the tower. But he had no architect to continue this contrivance. So he invited his chief minister and he said, "You must go to Rāmakeli immediately." And since he gave this order with anger, and some other news came to him, he never finished this sentence of his. And the chief minister stood there and trembled. He was told to go to Rāmakeli, but not told why. And then the Shah looked at this man and said: “I told you to go to Rāmakeli, why are you still standing here?” And then he pushed him off the tower. And he just didn't want to be here, well, without anything. He just pushed him into this. And he walked up and down the street, trying to figure out what he should do. You see how he walks back and forth down the street. He then approached him.

He said, "I think the king needs an architect." And the minister was surprised: “How do you even know why I’m here? Who am I?” And he then found the best architect he could find in Rāmakeli and brought him to the king. The king was surprised, very pleased, but he said: "This is too reasonable for you. This is not your job." Who told you what he wanted? He said, "I actually found a person, the person who told me what I needed to do." And Rāmakeli was famous for its architects, and Sanātana did not know this. He simply saw the minister, who was dressed in royal clothes, and he turned out to be Rūpa there. He just put it all together and thought of it. But when the king saw this intelligence, he said: "Bring here this man who told you what I need." Thus, the Sanātana came to the king. And the king said, "I want you to work for me. I want you to become my chief minister." The Sanātana did not want to get involved in any politics at all, did not want to manage themselves, but the king began to threaten them: "If you do not engage in service, then I will harm the Vaiṣṇavas. I will kill brāhmaṇas, I will destroy temples." In this way, Sanātana was forced into service by simplicity. And also his brother Rūpa. And they received these titles of Dabir Khas and Sākara Mallika. They became the king's first secretary and the king's prime minister, the king's financial minister. They worked very well in these posts, but they were unhappy serving this king. Although they worked very well, they were very eloquent. They spoke Urdu, Sanskrit, Bengali. And the king could leave them to govern the country. And he himself was going off somewhere to wage war, and they completely administered the entire country.

One night, Sanātana was being carried on a palanquin. It was a very, very windy, rainy night. And Sanātana suddenly heard some people saying: "Who went out into the street on such a night? There can only be two kinds of people. Either a prisoner or a servant of the king."

And when he heard this, it sank very deep into his heart. He said: "In fact, there is no difference. My chains are golden chains, but still they are chains." And the king ordered me to go to the capital. And although it is windy and rainy now, I still have to go. And they began to think how they could get out of this service. And at the same time, they had already heard about the Lord Caitanya, about His activities, about His pastimes, and they began to write Him letters, praying to Him to deliver them from this tangled material situation. It says that they did not know how to contact this Caitanya, but their mother suggested that they write Him a letter. So they wrote three letters, but did not receive a single reply.

Finally, they received a reply to their letter. It was a letter in which there was one line. And Mahārāja can correct me. And, as far as I remember, the content of that letter was that the Lord Caitanya said, "Just as a powerful woman has a lover, she does housework, serves her husband even better. Of course, she is a lover, and her husband does not suspect her of anything. In the same way, even externally you must perform your duties very well, and internally develop your relationship, your love with Kṛṣṇa."

They were very, very happy to receive this letter, which had one line from Prabhu. Finally, Prabhu came to Rāmakeli, and they were able to get His darśana. They approached Him with straw clenched in their teeth. They approached Him, remaining in secrecy. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He used the pretext of visiting Vṛndāvana. But in fact, He went in the wrong direction. Traveling from Purī to Vṛndāvana, He went in the wrong direction, and He entered Rāmakeli this way, and thousands of people followed Him. Thus they came to meet Him. And with straw in their teeth, they lived on the ground, and they said: "They call us learned men." And since we know Persian, Sanskrit, and we know how to manage, but in reality we are fools because we don't know who we really are. And they asked a very famous question: "Who am I? This is the most important question. This is a question that is related to bhajan. What Mahārāja was talking about, because the answer is that you are the eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. It is this answer that establishes our relationship with Kṛṣṇa." Then he asked, "Why are we suffering? Why are we experiencing the threefold suffering?" And so they, in a very, very humble mood, approached Caitanya Mahāprabhu and inquired from Him. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave them so much mercy.

After Lord Caitanya left Rāmakeli, they could no longer continue to engage in government service. Their hearts were already detached. And they told the king that they had fallen ill, and they could not come. And this went on for a long time. And finally the king said that they cannot remain ill for so long. "What is going on there? I myself must go and see what is going on." And he went to their home. And what did he see? Rūpa and Sanātana were sitting in the house. Rūpa had already left. There were many, many brāhmaṇas around, sitting and discussing Bhāgavatam. And the king became very angry. "You say that you are ill, and yet you are sitting here and studying Bhāgavatam." And this gives us an understanding of how brilliant Sanātana Gosvāmī was. When he wanted to study Bhāgavatam, several dozen brāhmaṇas would come to him and study it with him, going into detail, what is written in the commentaries, what is the meaning of everything and so on. They studied Bhāgavatam very deeply, as he says to you: "Drink this nectar of Bhāgavatam."

Those of you who want nectar, then use your mind, study Bhāgavatam, and drink this nectar. This is what Sanātana Gosvāmī did. As he said, by this time Rūpa Gosvāmī had already left. And after this incident, the king put Sanātana in prison. And Sanātana had to bribe, give a bribe to the jailer so that he would release him from prison. And Rūpa sent him news in a letter about what he had there, what he had there. He said where the gold coins were that could inspire this jailer to let him go. He reported it to the village. He said, "I have gold coins waiting for you, but you need to let me go to Mecca. I see that you are a very religious person. I want to fulfill my life's purpose, to go to Mecca. So, if you free me now, you will receive a huge spiritual benefit and as a token of gratitude, I will reward you with gold coins." And the jailer said, "That sounds very attractive. But what shall I tell the king? Just tell the king that you brought me to the river bank to answer the call of nature." And he jumped into the river and because of the heavy chains he simply drowned. And the jailer agreed to this plan. And thus Sanātana was free. He made his way through the jungles to Jagannāth Purī. He did not want to go along the main road because the king's servants were looking for him there. And by the time he arrived in Purī, a skin disease had spread all over his body. And when Lord Caitanya saw him, He hugged him very tightly, with great love. And this fluid that was coming from the wounds on his body, it also got on the body of Lord Caitanya. And Sanātana began to consider himself a great offender.

He felt like an offender more and more, and he communicated very strongly. And he decided that "When the Ratha-yātrā comes, then I will simply throw myself under the wheels of the chariot and thus atone for this offense." The next day, the Lord Caitanya came to Sanātana, "Come here, let me hug you." Sanātana felt terrible. Lord Caitanya hugged him very tightly, and He said, "This is My body, not yours. You can't take it away. You cannot jump under the wheels of a cart. I have many plans for this body." Sanātana Gosvāmī was very surprised, because the Lord had read his thoughts. And after this incident, when the Lord Caitanya embraced him, all the wounds on his body miraculously immediately healed. Later He gave instructions on the science of devotional service.

He gave him instruction on how to write a book on the practice of devotional service, which He wanted Sanātana to complete. He gave him very detailed teachings, and this can be found in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. This is called, this chapter is called Sanātana-śikṣā or the teaching that was given. Anyone who wants to understand all the details of the teachings of devotional service must very seriously study this section of Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Everything is there. Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave all the very detailed instructions on the science of devotional service to Sanātana Gosvāmī in this section. And then later, by order of Caitanya Prabhu, Vṛndāvana came from many Gosvāmīs. Here he opened holy places, installed deities, and wrote transcendental literature. And Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta is one of the first books that was written. And the very essence of Bhāgavatam's teaching is Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. They not only wrote books, but they also wrote commentaries on other books. Why? Why write commentaries on their own books? Because the book was revealed to him. And the commentaries were already his realizations on those books that were revealed, on the knowledge that was revealed to him. And another book that he wrote is Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. All the details, how to place, how to wear kaṇṭhī-mālās, how to perform the ceremony of arcana, how to worship the deities. All these details are there. All the details about practical devotional service are in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. You can find a lot there. It's like an encyclopedia. Not all of this is necessarily necessary to apply. And in medical medicine, you can find different types of treatment for diseases. And not necessarily. This does not mean that all types of treatment are necessary. This book is very broad, and the ācāryas choose what we can apply now in our days. And we are forever indebted to the Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī for this amazing book. And Gopāla helped him compile this book and also wrote his commentaries. Sometimes there are even disputes about who wrote Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. And just as we say sometimes someone wrote a commentary, that's why we say. But the author, in the same way, Hari-bhakti-vilāsa was written by Sanātana, and the commentaries were written by Gopāla Gosvāmī. We need to be more precise now, because time is running out. I tried to say the main thing. And there are a lot of samādhis around here. Here, on this side, samādhis, Tapan Miśra and Candrasekhara. They were great devotees of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Miśra was the father of Raghunātha Gosvāmī, the elder brother, who very skillfully expounded the Bhāgavatam. And when we go there from that side, in the extreme left corner there will be a copy of the manuscript repository, called the Grantha-mandira, where the manuscripts of the Gosvāmī devotional books are kept. There are two versions. One is that these books are so sacred, so sublime, that they are not for all people, so they were simply buried there. And the other is that since over the years these books begin to crumble when touched, they were simply buried there too. Be that as it may, all the Vaiṣṇavas offer their obeisances to these books in any case.

After this, we will now return again to the place where the Mahārāja gives lectures every evening. This is the place where Balarāma will distribute his transcendental feast. We want you to come back here, maybe for some time, because this is a very wonderful place to pray, read, study, pray for mercy. Tomorrow we will visit the samādhi of Rūpa Gosvāmī and the Jīva Gosvāmī and Kṛṣṇadāsa and the room where the priest lived when he was there. This is the Rādha-Dāmodara temple. Now we need to go around very quickly and then we will come out on the parikramā road again and go back home. I have already sent one devotee to say that we will still come. I know that you are already hungry, and there will be a very good feast there. And I want to give you some simple practical advice: It is better to undereat than to overeat. And be like the Gosvāmīs. And in India, it is very easy to get sick from overeating or from drinking contaminated water.

So, we are now going between the samādhis. Years came here and was pleased by his disciples in this very place.

May I offer obeisances to him who has been able to understand the mind or inner desire of Caitanya Prabhu and has established a mission that will fulfill this desire in this world. This is a very amazing thing. What can anyone understand of Caitanya Mahāprabhu? As far as we know, the reasons for His appearance are external and internal. The external reason is the establishment of yuga-dharma. This is the nāma-yajña where the Yugāvatāras appeared and established the processes of enlightenment in this age. By the way, Kapila came in the third yuga. Kṛṣṇa came. And in Kali-yuga, an incarnation appeared who established Saṅkīrtana. In fact, this is a dark incarnation of the Lord. But 500 years ago, an incarnation appeared who was golden in color. Why was He golden in color? He was golden in color because He was a special manifestation, a special manifestation of the Lord, although He was Kṛṣṇa Himself. Although He was an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, He accepted the bhāva and the mentality of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Why did Kṛṣṇa accept the bhāva or the mentality of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her duties? Because He wanted to understand three things. Very confidential, very deep things. He wanted to understand His own sweetness, which attracts Rādhārāṇī to Him. Kṛṣṇa is described as the most sweet. There are different verses that describe the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa. So, He is the most attractive. Kṛṣṇa means all-attractive. And what is this attraction? And this attraction is a kind of magnetism, an attraction that clings to you. It is connected with the word. And in Gītā, Kṛṣṇa describes different varṇas, there are different qualities, how they work. When He describes yours, He says this verse like this: "kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṃ" means plowing, it means protecting cows. Vaiśyas are engaged in agriculture and protect the cows. And "śrī" means this when the bull pulls the plow behind himself, and the plow moves along. And in the same way, Kṛṣṇa attracts, He kind of pulls the mind and heart of the devotee. He pulls the hearts and minds of His devotees. And the highest of all these devotees is Rādhārāṇī. And Kṛṣṇa wants to know what is there in Me that so strongly attracts, draws her. And although this love is perfect, it is constantly growing. Although it is completely pure, it is very intricate, very twisted, although this is the highest that can be. It is the most humble. These are the three most contradictory qualities of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Kṛṣṇa's love. So Kṛṣṇa wanted to know this about Himself, and what it is that evokes her love for Him. And He also wanted to know what kind of happiness it is that she feels in relation to Him. And it is much happier, much more pleasant to love than to be loved. A person receives more emotions when he loves than when he is loved. Maybe someone even loves you, but you may not know about it. That is, you are completely indifferent to this feeling, but a person who experiences love, he is overwhelmed with different feelings. Will he be able to see his object? Will he be able to communicate with Him? Therefore, there is much more in loving than in being loved.

So Kṛṣṇa wanted to know what Rādhārāṇī feels. And how could He know them? It is impossible to know until He finds Himself in the position of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī Herself. And so, in order to know what she feels towards Him, what sweetness she feels, what she experiences in love for Him, He made Him appear. And therefore He came here in this mood of Rādhārāṇī with her duties and with her color. Bhāva and skin color, they are connected with each other. When someone, for example, is angry, then the face turns red. It is connected. When someone is happy, then the face glows with happiness. And the color of the body of Rādhārāṇī is shining golden. The color of molten gold. This is the sign in her heart of Kṛṣṇa. And having accepted her mood, Lord Caitanya also took the color of her body. And He came here as a devotee, serving Kṛṣṇa, chanting the names of Kṛṣṇa. Because Rādhārāṇī chants the name of Kṛṣṇa and feels the pain of disagreement with Kṛṣṇa, just as Rādhārāṇī feels the pain of separation from Kṛṣṇa. Thus He experienced the role of Kṛṣṇa's lover when Caitanya Mahāprabhu danced at the Ratha-yātrā festival. He was overwhelmed with so many emotions, His body transformed in eight different ways. It's called aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāva. Eight bodily transformations. He cried, rolled in the dust, fell into a heap, then danced in great ecstasy. And the devotees noticed that He was singing one song. It was a well-known poem. And by well-known, I mean it was not Vedic. It was not a verse from a Purāṇa. It was a love poem. I don't remember the Sanskrit version of this verse, but the main gist of the verse is that, "You are the same lover, and I am the same girl. And we meet together again after a long separation. And although it is the same time of year now, I feel unsatisfied. How I want so much, how I long to be with you again on the river bank, under the shade of the trees." This very poem was sung by Lord Caitanya all the time, He cried, rolled on the floor, danced in ecstasy. And no one could understand the behavior of Lord Caitanya, except for a few of His close devotees. A sannyāsī who sings some well-known love song. This was very unusual behavior. Rāmānanda Rāya could understand. Rāmānanda Rāya could understand. But no one else except them could understand the state of mind of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. A few days later He went, as He usually did every day, to visit Haridāsa Ṭhākura. And Rūpa, he was living with Haridāsa Ṭhākura at that time. And when Caitanya Mahāprabhu already entered, almost entered this hut, and it was a hut with a grass-covered roof, and He noticed that a palm leaf was stuck into the roof. And He pulled out the palm leaf to look at it. And on that palm leaf was written this poem. At that time, people did not have paper, they wrote on palm leaves. And when He read this poem, He was very amazed. What kind of poem was this? It was written there: "You are the same Kṛṣṇa, and I am the same Rādhā. And although we meet here again after a long time at Kurukṣetra, my heart is not satisfied. How I long to be together with you again in the forest of Vṛndāvana, on the bank of the river, under the Kadamba tree." And when the Lord read this composition, His heart was filled with great joy. And, as I said, surprise. He was amazed. Who understood My mind? Who read My mind? Who wrote this poem? They told Him, "Rūpa has written this poem." Rūpa wrote this poem and went to take a bath in the ocean. And when Lord Caitanya came, Rūpa was not there at that moment. Mahāprabhu was very pleased with Rūpa. A few days later, Mahāprabhu again came to the house of Haridāsa Ṭhākura. And this time He brought with Him the Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya. And they sat together. It was such an informal association. And Rūpa was sitting in front of them. And the Lord asked the Svarūpa Dāmodara, "How did he manage to understand My mind?" And they replied: "Only if you empower a person, then he will be able to understand your mind." Therefore, from this verse we can understand, from this incident, that Rūpa is the recipient of your mercy. He is the object of your special love. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked him to write his other verses, which he wrote. Read a poem about the holy name, "When I read these syllables 'Kṛṣṇa', I wish that I had thousands of tongues, thousands of ears to enjoy, to enjoy nectar." This is a sweet vibration. Such an amazing verse. And the reciter Mahāprabhu said: "Until this time, no one has succeeded in glorifying the holy name so well." And as I already mentioned, Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote and then Mahāprabhu asked Rūpa Gosvāmī to read these plays. And with each line everyone became more and more satisfied and very much amazed. Caitanya Prabhu said that Rūpa Gosvāmī's handwriting was like pearls strung on a string on a page. His handwriting was so beautiful. And from these incidents everyone understood that Caitanya Mahāprabhu inspired and empowered Rūpa Gosvāmī to understand Himself, to fulfill His deepest inner desires. This is the understanding and presentation of all the subtleties of love for Kṛṣṇa, love, the love of the residents of Vṛndāvana for Kṛṣṇa. This is an unusual thing. Ordinary scientists cannot explain this. Only the one whom the Lord Himself has authorized to do this. That's why you are called Rasācārya. He is our Rasācārya. And he explained the love of God in terms of rasa. Who can explain the love of God? For the readers it was something so vague. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī described love to God as rasa or bhakti-rasa. Rasa means exchange or nectar. In our modern languages this is very difficult to explain. But this means an emotional exchange. And he described the love of God as the highest spiritual exchange, as bhakti-rasa. And he wrote Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. And the terms he used to explain it, he borrowed from the kavi-śāstras, that is, from books that were written about poetry.

Rasa is the subject of descriptions in poetic books about poetry, about poetry. So he wrote down the levels of love for God, the stages of love for God: bhāva, prema. And he explained what rasa is. It has five components. This is vibhāva. Vibhāva has two divisions: ālambana and uddīpana. Ālambana means state of mind, that special mood of exchange. We know that there are four main rasas, four or five. This relationship is not service, but friendship, but parental love and marital love. And in uddīpana it means incentives or impulses. And for devotees in different moods there are different types of incentives. Yaśodā's mother, who is in a state of parental love, when she hears Kṛṣṇa speak in such a childish language, babbling like a child, it gives her a huge impulse to love. And when the cowherd boys see the flute, it is a great impulsion for them to remember Kṛṣṇa. When the cowherds see dark blue clouds, it awakens in them the memory of Kṛṣṇa. Or when they see a peacock feather or they hear the sounds of a peacock, these are all different types of uddīpana. There is also anubhāva here. Anubhāva is an internal emotional state, just as there are different types of happiness, love and so on. Then aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāva. This is an external manifestation of these feelings at the level of the body, such as, for example, when the hair stands on end on the body, when it is frosty, goosebumps appear, and tears flow from the eyes, when a person has no control. This is called stambha. Stambha means pillar. The devotee is like a statue, he cannot move.

And then it's transcendental emotions. And these are emotions that are very, fleeting emotions, and these are grief, anxiety, fear, and so on. So this is the systematic description of the rasa-śāstra that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī explained in order to describe the various different manifestations of love. And the eternity of Kṛṣṇa and the devotees who enter into the eternal līlā of Kṛṣṇa. Before Rūpa Gosvāmī, no one explained this. And love for God was a very confusing concept. And in the Western tradition this still remains a vague concept. But even in the Vedic tradition before Rūpa Gosvāmī this was also such a vaguely obscure concept. No one could understand it except those who experienced it. But according to the mercy of Rūpa Gosvāmī, this is the most confidential information. It has become available to all of us by the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda. This most secret information was given to us in the book *Nectar of Devotion*, and it was distributed on the streets of New York, Paris, Los Angeles and Warsaw. And people read this about different bhāvas, ecstatic experiences of love for God. This is so amazing. And Rūpa Gosvāmī gives many examples of different aspects, different aspects of rasa. And although he did describe everything very accurately, it was not exactly speculation. It is in the scriptures, but it is not clearly expressed, but he gives examples of each description in each of the most different scriptures. So, this is the treasure. This is the most amazing scripture that has ever existed. There is nectar there waiting for us all to help us advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to help each of us reach the stage of pure love of God. So we will end here with *Prabhu Kṛṣṇa-bhaktas... Rādha-Kṛṣṇa*. Actually, it is described that this distance between samādhi and bhajana-kuṭīra of Rūpa Gosvāmī is the most sacred place in the entire universe. And because of the historical significance of this place, because of those transcendental personalities who lived here and were placed here in samādhi, because of the depth of their spiritual realizations and their teachings. Before we leave here, everyone should offer their full obeisances here and pray to understand these special teachings of the Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, especially how Śrīla Prabhupāda revealed them to us. We must pray that we can practice these teachings. And we must pray that we can spread the mission of the Lord, as the Six Gosvāmīs wanted long ago and later, as Śrīla Prabhupāda spread it in the West. Last night in the lecture we talked about *vandanām* or offering prayers. And such prayers for pure devotion need to be offered precisely in this place, in these circumstances. And undoubtedly, these prayers are full of devotion and will be heard by our previous ācāryas, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī. And there is no doubt that they will answer these prayers. And they had a very great desire that this teaching of Kṛṣṇa consciousness would spread throughout the world. And priests like you came here to Vṛndāvana. Please pray to the ācāryas to give you the opportunity to spread this teaching in the West and bring more and more Vaiṣṇavas here with you. Please, before we leave, please offer your respects. This is the sacred Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's samādhi itself. We will now leave from here and pass the temple of Rādha-Govindadeva, where the deities worshipped by the Gosvāmīs are located. And we will also talk a little about his life, his teachings and hold a small kīrtana. And this will conclude our morning parikramā. And we will have another lecture in the evening. And tomorrow at 5:00 am we leave for Rādhā-kuṇḍa. And before we go our separate ways, I want everyone to raise their hands if they can go, if they can afford to go. Tomorrow there is a train to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Tomorrow morning we will start very early. By 5:00 am we should all be in front of the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma gate. Bring some breakfast with you, because we won't be handing out any darśana there. And take a gamchā with you to wash yourself in the Rādhā-kuṇḍa. And take something from the sun for yourself, since we will be walking in the sun a lot. We'll be back around two o'clock in the afternoon. *Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī Vṛndāvana kī jaya! Śrīmad-ācārya kī jaya!*

*Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.*

[Hare Kṛṣṇa kīrtana continues...]

My respects to the disciples of Prabhupāda who also joined us this morning on the parikramā. I can't see everyone, but I see that Ananta is the president of the GBC in Australia. He is hiding somewhere. All the students are... They are hiding. Mother Śītalā is here. She is the eldest student of Prabhupāda, she loves him very much. She is my dear sister. I just noticed her now. And if I missed anyone, please forgive me. Raise your hand. Great is the great deity Rādha-Govindadeva and she does not want to raise her hand, this is a sign of advancement, that is, let these devotees go ahead, let us before beginning bow to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma and that person Śrīla Prabhupāda, thanks to whom we are here.

*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.*

We are on the street. Actually, it was on the bank of the river Yamunā in this place. And Kṛṣṇa consumed this fire to protect the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana. We also have to mention that we talked about apārādha. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that the forest fire represents quarrels in the Vaiṣṇava society. This is also a demon. Therefore we have to be careful and avoid this demon and not allow this demon to disturb our Kṛṣṇa consciousness and not to become involved in politics among the devotee groups. What is this, for example, this group of devotees wants to do this, they criticize and insult devotees of another group of devotees. This is all very dangerous. We must also remember this while we are in this place. Pray to Kṛṣṇa to free us from these disturbances, to open us to perform pure vaiṣṇava-sevā and not to be involved in politics between different groups of devotees, so that this does not arise among us from time to time and does not confuse us and did not force us to criticize the devotees. This is such a trick of Māyā. We must be aware of this and consciously experience it. Now we will conduct a kīrtana.

[Music]

*Govinda Hare, Gopāla Hare, Govinda Hare, Gopāla Hare...*

[Kīrtana continues]""