"*00262*.*
"Today we celebrate the appearance day of our most dear personality, His Divine Grace. I know that for many of us, this is our favorite day of the year. This is a day when we can meditate on the personality who has given us the most valuable thing: Krishna consciousness. This is the day when we can come before the portrait of Śrīla Prabhupāda, offer obeisances at his lotus feet, and pray that he will give us the strength and opportunity to serve him throughout our lives and even after this life.

There is a lot that can be said. Just as yesterday we said we could say a lot about Janmāṣṭamī, in the same way, we can say a lot about Śrīla Prabhupāda. Yesterday, we took that as the main idea, the main topic of the lecture: when Kṛṣṇa was given His name. The glory of Kṛṣṇa is endless, but as we know, yesterday we selected only a small part of His glory and described how He was given the name Garga-muni, how Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were given Their names. And just as Kṛṣṇa has unlimited līlās, so too Śrīla Prabhupāda has unlimited glories. From among this endless glory, I have chosen just one small chapter, which we will call "Śrīla Prabhupāda in Vṛndāvana."

We will focus on how Prabhupāda came, stayed, and lived for a long time in Vṛndāvana, and how he remained there throughout his life. As we all know, Vṛndāvana was very dear—Vṛndāvana is very dear—to Śrīla Prabhupāda. He spent a very long time in Vṛndāvana before he went to fulfill his mission in the West, and he chose Vṛndāvana as the place where he would leave this world. When I think of Vṛndāvana, I think of Prabhupāda. When I think of Prabhupāda, I remember Vṛndāvana.

I would like to begin with a very appropriate prayer: "O beloved spiritual master, you always remain near the cowherd girl Rādhā and the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu. Please grant me service to your lotus feet, the masters of devotional service. Please immerse me in the ocean of joy by giving me the happiness of serving the feet of the Lord in the depths of the earth."

When we read *Śrīla Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta*, we learn that Śrīla Prabhupāda first came to Vṛndāvana in 1925, when he was about 30 years old. What is interesting is that he was on a business trip. One day, he commented on his first visit to Vṛndāvana, saying that he expected Kṛṣṇa to jump out from behind every bush or tree. Of course, Prabhupāda heard a lot about Kṛṣṇa from his father, Gour Mohan De, and also his eternal father, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. But at the same time, we know that Prabhupāda is the representative of the eternally liberated soul. He once said, "In my life, I never knew what sinful activity was, and I never forgot the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." This was the mood with which Prabhupāda entered Vṛndāvana.

The second time Śrīla Prabhupāda visited Vṛndāvana was in 1933, immediately after he took initiation from Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. Then he visited again in 1935 to join the *maṇḍala parikramā* with his spiritual teacher. During that time, when Śrīla Prabhupāda came to join the *parikramā* and they were circumambulating Rādhā-kuṇḍa along with Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, he gave him one very famous instruction: "If you ever get money, print books."

At that time, Prabhupāda was still a *gṛhastha* and had a pharmaceutical business. At that moment, he also began to write *Back to Godhead*. This business flourished until 1951, when everything started to fall apart. This was very unusual because when Śrīla Prabhupāda was born, an astrologer predicted that he would become the richest person in the whole of India. He also predicted, to the surprise of Prabhupāda’s parents, that he would travel throughout the Western world and open 108 temples. But Kṛṣṇa had other plans for His chosen son. Just like the Lord told Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira 4,000 years ago: "Whomever I am especially favorable to, I gradually take away all his wealth. Then all the relatives and friends of this poor man turn away from him, and thus misfortunes fall upon him one after another." Although he should have been the richest man, Kṛṣṇa had other plans and took all his wealth.

When the business began to collapse and there was nothing left for him—no money, and his wife also left him—he was left alone. Thus, he began his period of renunciation. At that moment, his preaching activity began to increase. Leaving everything behind, Śrīla Prabhupāda tried to open a preaching center in a city called Jhansi. He wanted to open preaching centers, conduct kīrtanas there, give lectures, and distribute prasādam. But Kṛṣṇa had bigger plans for Śrīla Prabhupāda. In the city of Jhansi, Prabhupāda always had his gaze directed towards one large hall. There was a kitchen and different rooms, and Śrīla Prabhupāda meditated that this would be his hall. He asked the mayor of that city, but the mayor didn't give it to him because there were women who wanted to meet and sing bhajans there. So, the mayor gave this hall to those women, and then Prabhupāda decided to go to Vṛndāvana.

At that moment, he had already taken *sannyāsa*. In 1953, when he had decided to go to Vṛndāvana, he inquired about renting a room somewhere near Keśī-ghāṭa. In fact, at that moment, Śrīla Prabhupāda could not find a room, so he started traveling. After some time, he finally moved to Vṛndāvana. How would I start living there? This became his permanent place. He began to prepare himself to print books and prepare to preach. In 1953, that room was not available near Keśī-ghāṭa, but three years later, in 1956, Prabhupāda found a room in the Vaṁśīgopāla temple in Vṛndāvana. Even today, the Gosvāmīs in Vṛndāvana maintain those rooms in which Śrīla Prabhupāda lived, both in the Vaṁśīgopāla temple and near Keśī-ghāṭa. We all go to the room of Śrīla Prabhupāda at Rādhā-Dāmodara, but we must remember that it was Śrīla Prabhupāda who first stayed in these rooms. These rooms are now in the same condition as they were when he lived there. Historically, Śrīla Prabhupāda then moved to the temple of Rādhā-Dāmodara, and this became his base until he left for the West in 1965. Thus, Prabhupāda lived in Vṛndāvana for 10 years.

During these years, Śrīla Prabhupāda lived as a real *sādhu* in Vṛndāvana. He was a renouncer, and most importantly, he was a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Speaking of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s renunciation, we can see how renounced he was in his poem, which he wrote in 1958, two years after he moved to Vṛndāvana. It is a very beautiful poem:

"I am sitting alone in Vṛndāvana. In this mood, I gain many realizations. I have a wife, sons, daughters, grandchildren, everything, but I have no money, so all this is fruitless glory. Kṛṣṇa showed me the naked form of material nature, and by His power, all this has become tasteless to me today. And everyone left me—my wife, my friends, my brothers, my sons. It's such a pain, but it makes me laugh. I sit alone and laugh. In this *māyā-saṁsāra*, who do I truly love? Where have my loving father and mother gone now? And where are all my elders, who were my family? Who will give me news about them? Tell me, who? And all that remains of this family life is just a list of names."

It was such a real renunciation of Śrīla Prabhupāda when he moved to Vṛndāvana and he had nothing, but he found real love in Kṛṣṇa. Several years later, when Śrīla Prabhupāda arrived with Western leaders, he visited the temple of Rādhā-Dāmodara. I listened to the recording of them visiting the temple, and there Śrīla Prabhupāda remembers: "Here at every step you remember Kṛṣṇa, and your spiritual strength increases due to this association. For example, from 1960 to 1965, when I lived here, I sat in these rooms, chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa, and saw Śrīmat Jīva Gosvāmī and Rūpa Gosvāmī. Just thinking about how they wrote gave me the courage to write, too. I typed and did a little cooking. I lived very simply, content with the presence of Rūpa Gosvāmī. These are the best in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism. They actually inspired me to go West. And now I have hundreds of temples that I can visit, but I still like being here the most."

It is no wonder that Prabhupāda chose Vṛndāvana as his place of residence for many years. Those of you who have visited Vṛndāvana know that there is a holy place every kilometer. Prabhupāda chose Vṛndāvana because Vṛndāvana is Kṛṣṇa conscious. It was also very rich in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava culture. Kṛṣṇa appeared in Vṛndāvana, and the Six Gosvāmīs visited Vṛndāvana in order to make such a foundation for the modern days of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Two places are especially dear to Vaiṣṇavas: Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura. If we study the lives of our devotees, we can always see that they are constantly going from Māyāpura to Vṛndāvana, from Vṛndāvana to Māyāpura. If we study the lives of our predecessors, the ācāryas, they do not think much about visiting other holy places. Maybe they will go to Hṛṣīkeśa to preach, or out of interest, we can go to Śrīraṅgam to see where Mahāprabhu went.

When I took *sannyāsa*, I had such a desire to travel to all the holy places of India. I took it, and days later I went out completely barefoot because my shoes were stolen. I traveled by bus and by train. I spent about six months traveling, driving around southern India and visiting holy places. When I was sitting in one of the temples, I saw that there was a copy of the *Purāṇa* in English. I just sat there chanting, and then I took this book, read it, and saw this verse there: "In the Kali-age, devotees will leave service to other holy places and will live either in Vṛndāvana or in Navadvīpa." And then I went back to Vṛndāvana. An interesting verse: "In the age of Kali, devotees will give up service to other holy places and choose to reside either in Vṛndāvana or in Navadvīpa."

It is not that you cannot visit other holy places; no, it is possible. But your heart should belong and live in these two places: the *yogapīṭha* where Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared and Navadvīpa where Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu lived. It is very interesting how a certain verse guides our life. Although Śrīla Prabhupāda was born in Kolkata, not very far from Navadvīpa-Māyāpura, Vṛndāvana gave opportunities for Prabhupāda to write, publish, and distribute the *Back to Godhead* magazine. The magazine was the very first publication of Śrīla Prabhupāda. He published and wrote this magazine. Sometimes he himself would take the train and go to Delhi and distribute it there. He also sometimes went to the workshop where they print to print *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*.

In fact, if we learn about the life of Śrīla Prabhupāda, in his later years he spent a lot of time in Māyāpura, where he had the desire and dream of building a Temple of the Vedic Planetarium, which at the moment is almost completed. Of course, there is no difference between Māyāpura and Vṛndāvana; according to the revealed scriptures, there is very little difference or none at all. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings that you all should know that Gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi is equal to Vṛndāvana. There is no difference between the residents of Vṛndāvana and the residents of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura.

Initially, Prabhupāda dedicated 10 years of his life in Vṛndāvana to writing and printing this *Back to Godhead* magazine. But then, one of his good friends said that it would have a greater effect if Śrīla Prabhupāda would publish large books, like, for example, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. And then Prabhupāda took it seriously. But Prabhupāda did not live at all in the spirit of renunciation in Vṛndāvana; he seemed to be preparing to go to the West. At that time, it was very unusual for a *sādhu* to simply go outside of Vṛndāvana. Many *sannyāsīs* took the vow of *kṣetra-sannyāsa*; they took a vow that they would never go beyond the limits of Vṛndāvana. Even now, I know several *sādhus* who took such a vow, and they never leave Vṛndāvana. We have great respect for these *sādhus*. But Prabhupāda’s mission was greater; he had to be like a swan, because he had to wander throughout the earth and tell of His glory.

Prabhupāda became more like Nārada Muni, who speaks in *Garga-saṁhitā* 18.12, one of my favorite verses: "I wander on this earth meditating on Śrī Rādhā, who is like the moon shining in the arena of the Rāsa dance, who is like the bright lamp in the palace of Vṛṣabhānu, and the chief jewel in the necklace of Goloka." This was the mood of Śrīla Prabhupāda. I wander about this earth, meditating upon Śrī Rādhā, who is like the moon shining in the arena of the Rāsa dance, who is like the bright lamp in the palace of Vṛṣabhānu, and the chief jewel in the necklace of Goloka.

This was such a preparatory process in order to go West. When Śrīla Prabhupāda lived in Vṛndāvana, his daily *sādhanā* was very strong. Every morning and evening, Śrīla Prabhupāda visited all the seven temples of Vṛndāvana. He would visit them gradually: first Śrī Madana-mohana, then Rādhā-Gopīnātha, Rādhā-Ramaṇa, and he would break his fast in order to buy some groceries and some vegetables. Then he would come back around 11:00 in the morning to cook. Using such a kerosene stove, and also a three-tiered cooker—these are Indian cookers—Śrīla Prabhupāda usually cooked rice, potatoes, sometimes *śāka*, and rotis. He ate millet only once a day, around 12 noon. In the evening, Prabhupāda got some milk. If he did not have time to cook, he would accept *mahā-prasādam* from the deities in the temple. After lunch, he slept for 15 minutes, and then he wrote again. In the evening, he again walked around these seven temples.

We can see that there was a good balance between *sādhanā* and preaching. This is a very good example for us. For example, when reading about Haridāsa Ṭhākura, it is said: "Some people behave very nicely, but they do not preach the cult of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, while others preach but do not behave in an appropriate way." Śrīla Prabhupāda answered this by performing both duties related to the holy name: his personal conduct and his preaching. Therefore, he is the spiritual master of the whole world, for he is the most exalted devotee in the world. Being an ideal *sādhaka* who observed such strong *sādhanā*, Prabhupāda became very popular or famous in Vṛndāvana, and many of the holy brothers began to come to the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple every day.

Śrīla Prabhupāda had one very close Vaiṣṇava friend named Kṛṣṇānanda Bābā Mahārāja. When he came to Śrīla Prabhupāda, Prabhupāda would often ask him to stand outside his room while he wrote or translated books so that the Mahārāja would, as it were, tell all the people who came to see Śrīla Prabhupāda that he was now busy and could not meet. And Kṛṣṇānanda says, "I will probably have to do the same." In the early years—'72, '73—I met this Bābā, and I remember him. This *sādhu* was like a follower of the relatives of Lord Caitanya, who communicated with Uddharaṇa Datta. This Bābā died at the age of 78 in 2007.

Bābā Mahārāja often shared with all of us such *saṅkīrtana* stories about Śrīla Prabhupāda during the times when he lived in Vṛndāvana. There was also one babaji, Viśvambhara Bābājī. We simply called him Bābājī. There is one story that he told: "Prabhupāda and I often went together to the Yamunā for *saṅkīrtana*. He brought karatālas for chanting. I played the mṛdaṅga. A few local devotees became accustomed to his beautiful *parikramā* and joined him on the banks of the Yamunā."

Your Śrīla Prabhupāda engaged everyone in chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra and the Pañca-tattva mahā-mantra, and also danced joyfully on the banks of the Yamunā in the afternoon. In order to fulfill the prophecy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrīla Prabhupāda first came here to Vṛndāvana. The Lord used such a powerful man to fulfill His mission. All such things must be done with serious, very strong *sādhanā*. I feel that Kṛṣṇa rewarded him because he had so much *niṣṭhā* and *śraddhā* in him. I have never seen such a persona and such feelings. If you want to take something, your hand must take it itself. This is how you need to steal—steal wealth—and then you can take it from the guru.

Śrīla Prabhupāda had many friends in Vṛndāvana. In fact, Bābājī also shared another story. When he lived in the temple, Rādhā-Dāmodara, he was 30 years old. He seemed to live in one temple, which was located next to the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple. He lived high up on the second floor, and he could sort of look into the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple and see what was going on there. He lived so close to the Dāmodara shrine that he could constantly hear the devotees talking, the ringing of the bell, and what was going on in the temple. He shared something very wonderful: he recalled that many times in the middle of the night, he heard a crying voice from the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple near the *samādhi* of Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Imagine he’s lying in bed, and then he hears this crying. One day, when it was Pūrṇimā, the full moon, he climbed onto the roof of his house to see what was happening. He looked down and saw that Śrīla Prabhupāda was sweeping the area near the *samādhi* of Rūpa Gosvāmī. Prabhupāda was bent over like this with a small broom. He swept himself, and Prabhupāda cried. Śrīla Prabhupāda cried: "O Rūpa, O Sanātana, O Raghunātha, please give me your mercy. Without your mercy I can do nothing. Please grant me your mercy. Give me the strength to carry out your instructions." Bābājī mentions that almost every day, Prabhupāda would do it around 12 midnight or 1 a.m., when no one was around. He would get up, sweep, and pray for mercy.

This is such a very, very personal realization of his stay in Vṛndāvana. But he did not stay in Vṛndāvana; he left from there. One day, when we were in Vṛndāvana, Prabhupāda told us that Vṛndāvana is for inspiration. Historically, Śrīla Prabhupāda then went to Calcutta and left Vṛndāvana on the *Jaladuta* on September 17, 1965. I often think about the fact that when Prabhupāda came to America, I was the captain of the swimming team in America and I was 15 years old. The Lord came to save all the young girls and boys in America. There was such a burning desire in the heart of Prabhupāda to go to the West and share with all the Western people the glories of Kṛṣṇa, but he also had a very burning desire in his heart for separation from Vṛndāvana. As much as you are attached to certain things, when you lose them, that's how you feel this separation. We can understand how dear Vṛndāvana was to Śrīla Prabhupāda. We can get a glimpse into the heart of Śrīla Prabhupāda by reading the poem he wrote while he was at sea on September 10, 1965:

"The ship is sailing very smoothly today, and I feel better today. But I feel the separation of Śrī Vṛndāvana and my Lord Śrī Govinda and Rādhā-Mādhava. My only solace is the *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, in which I taste the nectar of the līlās of Lord Caitanya. I left Vṛndāvana-bhūmi to carry out the order of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, following the order of Lord Caitanya. I have no qualities, but I took the risk in order to fulfill the order of His Divine Grace. I am completely at their mercy, being so far from Vṛndāvana. And if I overcome this crisis, it will only be by the good will of Lord Kṛṣṇa, my friend and philosopher."

It is very interesting that Prabhupāda addresses Kṛṣṇa as a philosopher. Because Kṛṣṇa is actually a philosopher; He wrote the *Bhagavad-gītā*, which is the ideal philosophy. And so he says, "If I overcome this crisis, it will be only by the good will of Lord Kṛṣṇa, my friend and philosopher." In this poem, we get such an opportunity to see how much Śrīla Prabhupāda was attached to Vṛndāvana.

One day, already in the West, in New York at the end of the 1960s, Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote: "Here I am now sitting in New York, the greatest city in the world, but my heart always yearns for this Vṛndāvana." Much later, during a visit to Vṛndāvana, Śrīla Prabhupāda said: "I lived very simply in Vṛndāvana. The presence of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī was enough for me. And now I have places where I can go, but I still love being here in Vṛndāvana the best."

Śrīla Prabhupāda also has another chapter on Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Prabhupāda had so many chapters about Vṛndāvana during his life. So many chapters! For example, this chapter is about when he came to Vṛndāvana after riding 12 times around the entire globe, and he brought his dancing white elephants to Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Prabhupāda left Vṛndāvana and came to the West to preach. For what? In order to bring back all the Western devotees to Vṛndāvana. And another chapter in his *līlā* in Vṛndāvana: in the famous commentary in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 5.1.8, the Prabhupāda invites the whole world to come to Vṛndāvana: "A person should go to the forest of Vṛndāvana and take refuge in Govinda, and that will bring him happiness." This will bring him happiness. Therefore, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness is building the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Temple to invite its members, as well as all those who want to live peacefully in a spiritual atmosphere. This will help one to attain the transcendental world and return home, back to Godhead. Each of you has an invitation to Vṛndāvana. No one can tell you whether you can go there or not. You always have an invitation. You must experience Vṛndāvana.

There are many chapters in the life of Prabhupāda related to Vṛndāvana: how first he came to Vṛndāvana, then he joined the *parikramā* with his spiritual teacher in Vṛndāvana, the Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā. Then he came to check if he could live there, then he moved and lived in Vṛndāvana, then he invited other devotees. There is one more chapter, his last chapter. With the passage of time toward his disappearance, he seemed to have grown old, and he came to Vṛndāvana in order to stay there and, as it were, to make it his last final place of pastimes. In what seemed like his last final attempt to make Śrīla Prabhupāda's health better, he went to Hṛṣīkeśa. I know a certain place where Śrīla Prabhupāda lived in a house. I know a particular room where he lived; we visited all of these. When Śrīla Prabhupāda was there, he often went to improve his health; he went boating, it was like breathing in fresh air. But when it became clear that nothing would help, he told the disciples, "Take me back to Vṛndāvana."

So in his last chapter on Vṛndāvana, he gave the final instruction on how to leave this world in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We see this often in photographs and videos: when Śrīla Prabhupāda was ready to leave this world, he was lying down, he had a microphone, and he was saying his last comments on the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. This was his last instruction on how to leave this world in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness in Vṛndāvana.

We discuss many *līlās* or holy places of Bhārata and India. For us, the most important holy places are Vṛndāvana and Māyāpura. For me personally, I also know other devotees for whom the most sacred place in Vṛndāvana is the *samādhi* of Śrīla Prabhupāda. In Vṛndāvana, there are 60 million holy places, and of course, for us, the most sacred place is the *samādhi* of Prabhupāda, where we must come, because all these *līlās* about other holy places can open only by the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda. So when I go to Vṛndāvana, one of the first places I visit is his *samādhi*, and each year I give a report of my service. When I arrive, the very first thing I do is go to Śrīla Prabhupāda to offer my respects, to thank him, and to give a kind of report about what I have been doing, about my service.

Even at the present moment, on this day, we can very strongly feel the presence of Śrīla Prabhupāda himself. He who talks about the death of a Vaiṣṇava is mistaken, for life continues in sound. Vaiṣṇavas live while dying, and while living, the holy name is given as peace to the whole world. Again, I hope you enjoyed these stories from Śrīla Prabhupāda. There is so much we can add, but I really enjoyed linking Vṛndāvana and Śrīla Prabhupāda in this way.""