"*00226*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa. Today it is my very good fortune, a great blessing, that I am standing underneath the actual jackfruit tree under which Śrīla Prabhupāda was born. This house, of course, it doesn't exist anymore; it was the house of his auntie. It was the tradition in those days that a woman who was going to give birth would go to one of her relatives, give birth there, stay for some time, and then go back to her own home with her husband. So, Prabhupāda was born here under this tree. There was actually a house here, and the tree was overgrowing the house, and in the room that was just here, Prabhupāda was born. He stayed here for one year, then he went with his mother to the house of his father, so that is the history.

I didn't know it quite like that. This land is very sacred to all of us. In 1977, Prabhupāda wrote to my Godbrother, Śyāmasundara, to acquire this land somehow or other and build a memorial. So, we can see just off to my left, your right, there's a memorial there to Śrīla Prabhupāda. The real history is how a pure devotee appears in this world to disseminate the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the chanting, all over the world. So, we are very blessed to be here. Actually, I feel very emotional here because this is of such spiritual significance. I am here with Vraja-śīlā Prabhu, my Godbrother, and he has a group of young devotees who are traveling around. I feel like I could stay here for hours, or days, or weeks, just taking in the significance of Prabhupāda's appearance. I don't say "birth" because, just like we don't say Kṛṣṇa took birth, we say He appeared. So, the birth of a pure devotee is also by the will of the Lord. It is not birth like destiny or karma; it is something divine. 

So, this is a very divine place, a very divine place. And just like we think of the *sankīrtana* movement spreading from Māyāpur, the birthplace of Lord Caitanya, we also consider the *sankīrtana* movement to have spread from here with Lord Caitanya’s representative, Śrīla Prabhupāda, the *senāpati-bhakta*, the general who spread the *sankīrtana* movement all over the world. All glories to Prabhupāda! All glories to this sacred place and this jackfruit tree, the dust of which I put on my head. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Let us all serve the mission of Śrīla Prabhupāda, for which he appeared in this world to continue the legacy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the *yuga-dharma* of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. All glories to Prabhupāda, all glories to the place that he appeared in this world.""