My name was Joktan, but many times I've been called Ganache, Alafia, and others. That's my secret, my new heart. She changed her name. When I became a devotee, I became a new person. Jai Shri Krishna!

I am indebted to you all. Today, I took a die-hard devotee's advice. Radhe Krishna!

Once, I heard that a certain devotee would never speak in front of you all, so I also feel very uncomfortable speaking in front of you. Jai Shri Krishna!

Today is one of my revered speakers, [Devotee's Name, likely referring to a specific devotee they just mentioned or are about to], and I listen to him regularly. Of course, the relationship between God-brothers is different than the relationship between the spiritual master and the disciple.

We shouldn't, in one sense, consider anything less important than our own spiritual advancement. Śrīla Prabhupāda informed us in his songs, "Bairagya guru, vaiṣṇava, sevā." The association of pure devotees, Vaishnavas, and those personalities is essential for our progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Just as we depend wholly and solely upon the spiritual master to understand the glories of Kṛṣṇa, we also depend upon the association of God-brothers and sisters to realize the glories of our spiritual master. So, in my relationship with His Holiness [Spiritual Master's Name, likely referring to Bhakti Tirtha Swami or another elder devotee], I am very indebted.

For so many not just years, but decades, almost 50 decades of serving Śrīla Prabhupāda together in his association, and in the association of our illustrious God-brothers and sisters, we have gained some appreciation for Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Therefore, we can understand that friendship in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so important. By nature, as spirit souls, we are social beings. Obviously, you will never see a picture of Kṛṣṇa alone; He is always with some associate or associates, some devotees.

That's the nature of *bhakti*, of love. And the Lord is always with His devotees, engaged in transcendental loving relationships. So, in the material world, when we come to this world, it is, of course, a perverted reflection. But we remain social animals, you could say.

We require association with other persons. Hardly ever do we want to be alone. Just sometimes to get away from things, we may be alone. But generally, we like to be with other people. But this world is such a nasty place that when we develop so-called friendships in this world, it's very degrading.

We search out love, we search out friendship. But because the nature of that friendship is we're trying to enjoy mundane things, sensual things. Nowadays, in Kali Yuga, it's really the only opportunities you have are sinful things to do together.

And you do those things together, and you think, "Well, this is my best friend because we like the same music, the same cars, the same type of girls, the same non-mentionable [things]." When you're with your friend, you go to hell.

What time was that?

I was in America a couple of years ago, and driving somewhere, I fell asleep. The driver was one of those drivers who drive very closely to other cars. A derivative came up behind the car. No, from IIC [International Society for Krishna Consciousness] on the bumper sticker, it said, "Real friends don't let their friends eat meat." That's like that's almost a Kṛṣṇa conscious bumper sticker. "Real friends don't let their friends eat meat." So, it's very frustrating.

As a result of all those frustrating relationships, looking for love in various ways in the material world, then we somehow, by Kṛṣṇa's mercy, we come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And we have the most worshipable person in our life, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

We have our spiritual master, who delivers us from material existence to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. And we have the support, as we advance from *śraddhā* to *prema*, from friends, God-brothers, and sisters, nieces, uncles, and aunts. It's an extended family in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And all these relationships encourage us. And we do these things; we do all these Kṛṣṇa conscious activities together. And there's a saying, "A friend in need is a friend indeed." So certainly, for just beginning the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you need friends to inspire us.

Sometimes, sometimes to chastise us. Who's going to tell us we're doing something wrong except someone who's a real friend?

And on so many occasions, [Devotee's Name, likely referring to the one they are discussing] chastised, corrected me, guided me. These are few people in your life that you can really accept their chastisement because you know it's the chastisement of love.

Many times in the material world, when someone chastises you, it's out of envy or jealousy or anger, whatever. But in a loving relationship, when you chastise someone, it's really to bring them up to your standards. That's the opposite of the duty.

The first-class man is to make a fifth-class man also first-class. So, as we advance on the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because the process works, it definitely works. From whatever stage one comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it always works. Friendship means that generally, we are on pretty much the same level of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

It's a wonderful adventure to have a friend in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As you chant "Hari Kṛṣṇa," as you associate with devotees, as you take *prasādam*, as you render service to the spiritual master, all the wonders of Kṛṣṇa consciousness become revealed to you.

There are so many wonderful things awaiting us on the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We should never become despondent. Whatever is spiritual will be revealed to us by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. So, with a God-brother, you're walking along that path, and you may trip up a little bit, and there's a friend to pick you up.

And then you discover something wonderful together to share that realization. That's so nice to have someone to share that realization with. And we do that in the very simple activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, sitting together and hearing the glories of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and looking at each other with that realization.

You're driving somewhere, and you have some realization about the glories of another devotee or something that you read, and it makes it that much more real and authorized when someone on the same level of Kṛṣṇa consciousness shares that with you.

And then, again, when you slip up a little bit, there's so much, my mind, "Hey, you're making a big show, but I know your heart." Thank you. That's the real friend because we need these obstacles to be removed from the heart so that we can develop our love.

So, just as I'm dependent on my spiritual master for progressing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I'm dependent on the association of my God-brothers and my God-sisters. We have different relationships. I would say that [Devotee's Name, likely Govinda Swami] is my bosom buddy.

That's an old English term, "bosom buddy." And again, I'll just repeat it because spiritual things need to be repeated. We went to visit one *sato*. And that *sato* looked at [Devotee's Name] and said to me, "He's already delivered." So, really, what about me?

I thought, if I just follow in his footsteps and do *kirtan* with him, enjoy *Bhagavatam* with him, and go on adventures with him, and sometimes get his cooking. Then, the other day, we were sitting there chanting, and he started crying.

He looked at us and said, "These two devotees, they've been together serving their spiritual master for many, many lifetimes together." "Oh, my deliverance is this year." How can I be delivered without the mercy of the *Vaiṣṇavas*?

So I'm very grateful to Śrīla Prabhupāda for having a friend like [Devotee's Name].

We've been through many things together. Many wonderful experiences, going way, way back. I'm very grateful to him for his friendship, enjoying the same things in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, relishing, sharing realizations, giving gifts and charity to each other, sharing our realizations, taking *prasādam* together.

My only lamentation in this relationship is he doesn't cook enough. Because as we've heard, he has many attributes. He is a melodic voice; whenever he opens his mouth and sings, it melts the hearts of the audience. He's a very good speaker; he's a natural speaker.

And he's humorous. Humor is the best medicine. Life can be big and tough, even when we struggle. But he's always got some joke to crack. But just like you said, you can get away with it because he's so compassionate.

And I really appreciate that humor. And I look forward to many, many years more. I was pretty tough, you know. I predicted he'd live well into his 90s, maybe 100. So, you know, I pray that all the way out, he'll continue to be my friend and consider me his friend, and we can continue relishing the progress together on the path of pure devotional service, safely delivered by the mercy of our spiritual master, [Spiritual Master's Name].