"*00414*.*
"# Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s Coronation (Part 1)

Hi everyone, a very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved *Śrī-Vṛndāvana*. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvam | sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca ||*

The other day, after our lecture which was entitled "The Queen of Vṛndāvana," in which we discussed the prelude up until Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s coronation as Queen of Vṛndāvana, we didn't discuss the actual coronation itself—at least not in detail. A number of devotees contacted me and asked if I could describe the actual coronation. As a service, I, of course, agreed. So that is our focus today. Here we go: the official coronation of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as Queen of Vṛndāvana. It is actually described in several places; I found it in my research, most notably in Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s *Mādhava-mahotsava*.

But firstly, I think it would be good to backtrack a little bit. You may remember that when the rumor went around Vṛndāvana that Rādhārāṇī had been crowned Queen of Vṛndāvana by her *gopī* friends in a playful way in the forest, her chief rival, Candrāvalī, was very upset. So, Candrāvalī’s best friend, Padma—you can remember—tricked Kṛṣṇa into apparently saying in public that he felt Candrāvalī would make a better queen. With that, the whole of Vṛndāvana became upset, especially Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She actually became angry, thinking that Kṛṣṇa had rejected her. So you could say Kṛṣṇa was in "hot water," to use a modern term, and with no idea how to resolve the issue, he approached Vṛndā Devī and asked for help. As I was going through the different scriptures, I found an actual quote of what he said to Vṛndā Devī when he met her. I thought I’d share that with you.

He said, "O Vṛndā Devī," Kṛṣṇa said, "for so long I referred to Rādhā’s face as the moon. However, now that angry face appears to be like the sun; for if it were the moon, why would it scorch my heart so much?" That’s *Mādhava-mahotsava* 3.37. So after saying that, it’s described that Kṛṣṇa fell unconscious. To revive him, Vṛndā Devī held a garland of *mādhavī* flowers that was personally made by Śrī Rādhā close to the nose of Kṛṣṇa. As soon as the fragrance of that garland entered into Kṛṣṇa’s nose, he woke up, and at that point, he requested Vṛndā Devī to go see Rādhā and her friends and explain that he never meant that Candrāvalī should be Queen of Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa said, "Tell her the opposite is true; I want Śrī Rādhā to be Queen. Now hurry!" So, at that point, Vṛndā Devī went to see Śrī Rādhā and her friends and she explained what Kṛṣṇa had said, but they didn’t believe Kṛṣṇa.

And what’s worse, they sent Vṛndā Devī back to Kṛṣṇa with the following message. It’s subtle, but it’s really nice. The message was as follows: "The moon, *candra*, derives its illumination from the sun, *bhānu*. Similarly, you may coronate the moonlight, Candrāvalī, as the queen of Braja, but she won’t be able to illuminate your forest without taking shelter of the sun-like daughter of Mahābhānu, King Vṛṣabhānu." That was the message to Kṛṣṇa. So, as we know, ultimately the matter was settled when Vṛndā Devī had Lord Brahmā speak as a celestial voice from the sky that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī should be coronated as Queen of Vṛndāvana. We remember that Candrāvalī was devastated, as was Padma, but all the Vrajabāsīs, very innocently, they accepted this celestial voice from the sky as something divine, and everybody went about preparing for the ceremony. And that’s where the class ended.

So, we’ll proceed with the coronation. From the moment that Rādhārāṇī heard that celestial decree, I was reading that she accepted it as Kṛṣṇa’s desire. She knew that this pastime of her being crowned Queen of Vṛndāvana would bring Kṛṣṇa great pleasure, and pleasing Kṛṣṇa was her only reason for living. If it pleased Kṛṣṇa that she walk in procession through Vṛndāvana, that she be bathed by demigoddesses, that she be dressed as royalty, then she would wholeheartedly and joyfully consent to this decree from heaven. If it pleased Kṛṣṇa that she sit on the throne of Vṛndāvana as a monarch, that she be crowned in his favorite forest, Vṛndāvana, that she go about and appoint members of a parliament, she’d agree; she would agree to that as well. 

For her, Kṛṣṇa is everything. So she agreed to be crowned Queen of Vṛndāvana—for Kṛṣṇa, really. So it’s so sweet. So the next day, in preparation for the actual coronation, there was a traditional *adhivāsa* ceremony. Those of you who live in Māyāpura, you’re very well familiar with the *adhivāsa*; it’s what you do just before the big function starts. So, in preparation for the traditional *adhivāsa* ceremony, some of the older ladies of Vṛndāvana—well, let’s say senior ladies like Yaśodā, Rohiṇī, and Kīrtidā Sundarī—they began everything by giving their blessings to Śrī Rādhā. And then, as was the custom, some other elderly *gopīs* they splashed the crowd that was present with butter and yogurt, and I was reading that while others playfully threw fragrant mixtures of turmeric water over everyone present. I just love these details. But here again, the plot thickens, as it often does in *Rāja-līlā*, as Padma was still adamant that her best friend Candrāvalī, not Rādhārāṇī, be Queen of Vṛndāvana. So the next day, after the *adhivāsa*, Padma went to Yāvaṭ, where Rādhārāṇī lives with her husband, Abhimanyu—we’ve described that *līlā* before; Abhimanyu is actually the shadow of Kṛṣṇa, it’s described. Anyway, this is where Rādhārāṇī lives with her husband, and Padma spoke to Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law, Jaṭilā.

Now, Jaṭilā is rather elderly, a little hard of hearing, kind of grumpy, and she’s always on the lookout that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa do not meet; she makes obstacles to the meeting, which makes the meeting more relishable when they do meet. Anyway, Padma said to Jaṭilā, "Jaṭilā, didn’t you hear the celestial voice say that Kṛṣṇa, who we know was always fond of flirting with Vṛndāvana’s *gopīs*, will also be present at Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s coronation? You didn’t catch that?" So, hearing this, Jaṭilā became infuriated and she said, "Okay then, because of this, I refuse to let Rādhārāṇī go to this coronation." And then she said, "Actually, tell all the senior *gopa* men to cancel this coronation altogether." Wow. And with that, Jaṭilā locked Śrī Rādhā in her room and placed armed guards at the door.

Now, news travels fast in Vraja, and when people heard—when the Vrajabāsīs heard—that, everyone was very upset. So Paurṇamāsī, Yogamāyā, when she heard what had transpired, she came to Yāvaṭ and she spoke in such a way as to quickly allay Jaṭilā’s fears: "It’s okay, don’t worry. Kṛṣṇa is going to be there, but you know, we’ll make sure that they don’t meet; they don’t look at each other either." So Jaṭilā agreed. Then Paurṇamāsī dismissed Śrī Rādhā’s bodyguards and she freed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So then, soon after, Śrī Rādhā left Yāvaṭ to go to the coronation ceremony, accompanied by a large contingent of her ornately dressed girlfriends. It’s described that as the *gopī* procession moved across the fields of Braja, it was like a multicolored victory banner fluttering in the wind, and Mother Earth, Bhūmi, quivered expectantly at the thought of personally bathing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī at the ceremony. And musicians led this procession, followed by women showering flowers and *brāhmaṇas* chanting mantras, with some younger *gopīs* trailing behind carrying many of the ingredients for the sacrifice and for the coronation. And I also read that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s most intimate friends guarded her so carefully that even demigoddesses in heaven couldn’t catch even a glimpse of her.

And it’s also written that as Śrī Rādhā passed by all the Vrajabāsīs’ homes on the way to the coronation, they envisioned her as the "sum total of all auspicious things" that one could hope to see at the commencement of a journey, at any undertaking, or at a sacrifice. They saw her as the sum total of all auspicious things that one could hope to see at such functions. So when they looked closely at her—the Vrajabāsīs—it goes into more detail: when the Vrajabāsīs saw Śrī Rādhā coming by with this procession, they perceived the ornaments on her ears as flowering creepers in bloom, her braid as the tail of a peacock, her face as a fully opened lotus, her eyes as flitting hummingbirds, and her smile as a pure white swan. And as she left the village area and entered into the forested area where the coronation was actually going to take place, Rādhā remembered the pastimes that Kṛṣṇa had enjoyed at different places that they passed by—you know, "Here he did this, here he did that, here he did this, here he did that"—and it’s described that she carried herself in a stately way befitting a queen.

And even her most intimate friends were mesmerized by her association, by her presence, and each of them thought, "I must have never properly studied Śrī Rādhā’s beauty before today," because she was just so beautiful going on the way to the coronation. The way she carried herself and how she had been dressed and how everyone was appreciating her, and the *gopīs* were with Rādhārāṇī like all the time, but something about that day, they thought—each one of them thought—"I must have never properly studied Śrī Rādhā’s beauty before today." Of course, everything in Vṛndāvana is increasing, so... And in order to relish the moment on this particular glorious day, at one point Rādhārāṇī stopped and all of her *gopī* friends crowded around her, and they were very eager to render her some varieties of service at that particular moment. 

So it’s written that on Rādhā’s right, Lalitā fanned her, and on her left, Viśākhā held a picture of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in front. Citrā carried sandalwood pulp to refresh Rādhā’s faded *tilaka*, and behind Viśākhā, Campakalatā carried a jeweled chest meant for Kṛṣṇa. And behind Campakalatā, Tuṅgavidyā sang Kṛṣṇa’s glories, and in front and to the right, Indulekhā carried Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s *tāmbūla*, and to Indulekhā’s left, Raṅgadevī accompanied herself with a *vīṇā* as she sang enchanting songs about the Divine Couple. Kuṅgudalatā praised Rādhikā with clever words, and after Kuṅgudalatā came Sudevī, absorbed in Rādhā’s thoughts, serving Rādhā’s emotions through meditation. Wow, so much in one moment; that’s Vṛndāvana! They all crowded around her; in different ways, they rendered their services to her. So it’s described that the wives of the demigods were also eager to have Rādhārāṇī’s association, so what did they do? It’s amazing; they assumed forms of *gopīs* and joined the procession—a special day.

Then, in the same way, it’s described as a surge of an ocean wave washes driftwood ashore, so a surge of divine love brought Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s colorful procession to rest in the forest at a place called Umrao. Umrao—this is where the coronation was to take place. Now, upon arriving, this contingent of *gopīs*—they all saw a very special grove had been prepared by Vṛndā Devī for the coronation. Everyone came into this particular grove, and then, "Oh wow, look!" And what Vṛndā Devī had organized: she’d organized a bathing platform, a coronation throne, she’d organized dignitary seats, observation areas, and all the requisite paraphernalia for the function. Everything was there. So then Vṛndā Devī took Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—she actually escorted her to each section of this grove, describing the various purposes of these sections in relationship to the ceremony. And after some time, she introduced Śrī Rādhā to this... how would you describe it? A very palatial room that she had built, this big, beautiful room which was surrounded by six smaller rooms, which all together formed like a square—a large square—which could be accessed from four directions through four gigantic doors. It’s a little detail, but that’s how it’s described. And the *śāstra* says that all these rooms were surrounded by distinctive courtyards, floors, arches, trees, gardens, vines, flowers, and canopies which were all very remarkable. It said so remarkable that even Lord Brahmā was unable to adequately describe them; what Vṛndā Devī had created, even Brahmā was unable to describe how she’d set up this coronation ceremony.

And the *śāstra* goes on to say that Śrī Rādhā appreciated Vṛndā Devī’s work, but without Kṛṣṇa, it said the vast, opulent area had no real attraction for her. All that was so beautifully designed and set up, and Rādhārāṇī appreciated it, but without Kṛṣṇa, this beautiful paraphernalia had no attraction for her. So then Śrī Rādhā said to Vṛndā Devī something very wonderful. She said, "O friend, without Śyāma and his artful, loving pastimes, this matrix of groves is like a beautifully decorated body from which the life force has long since passed. I’m not happy here." Wow. "O friend, without Śyāma Kṛṣṇa and his artful, loving pastimes, this matrix of groves is like a beautifully decorated body from which the life force has long since passed. I’m not happy here." So Vṛndā smiled at Rādhā and she said, "Be patient, dear. Just as a bejeweled cup signals that nectar will shortly be served, this charming grove signals that a divine pastime is about to unfold."

Then the two of them proceeded to a particular part of this beautifully decorated area where they found Paurṇamāsī and some *brahmacārīs*—it’s described lighting a sacrificial fire on an elaborately decorated square platform called the *sārvabhauma-homa-gṛha*. And then, as Paurṇamāsī poured oblations into it—into a sacrificial fire on top of that platform—and chanted sacred mantras, the wives of Śiva, Sūrya, Yamarāja, and Agni, they appeared on the scene. And in the scriptures it’s described again how this was all going on, but Rādhārāṇī was kind of lamenting, you know, "Where’s Kṛṣṇa? It doesn’t mean anything unless Kṛṣṇa’s here. It should be the same for us; life doesn’t mean anything unless we’re Kṛṣṇa conscious." So she was thinking like that, and Paurṇamāsī saw this concern on Śrī Rādhā’s face, and she read her mind. So Paurṇamāsī turned to her assistant, Vṛndā Devī—because Vṛndā Devī assists Paurṇamāsī—and Paurṇamāsī said to Vṛndā, she whispered actually, "Now is the time to bring the blue sapphire of Vṛndāvana out of hiding. Go quickly! Now is the time to bring the blue sapphire of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa, out of hiding. Go quickly!"

So Vṛndā sped off, and Paurṇamāsī turned her attention back to the proceedings as they were going on. And all of a sudden, an avalanche of flowers fell from the heavens, a signal that the preliminaries in earnest, preparing for the *abhiṣeka* bathing ceremony, should begin. So at that very instant—I was reading—sacred waters sprang from the right hands of Mother Ganges, Yamunā, and Sarasvatī. They were all there in their personified forms. The Ganges was there, the Yamunā was there, Sarasvatī, and in their personified forms as beautiful ladies, and instantly sacred water poured from Mother Gaṅgā’s hand, from Yamunā’s hand, and Sarasvatī’s; and that holy water mixed with the perspiration—the divine perspiration—of Paurṇamāsī to form a beautiful lake.

And then into the waters of that sacred lake entered the potency of every sacred place in Vṛndāvana as well as all the holy tirthas in creation. And at that point, colorful birds began singing from trees that were overhanging the lake’s playful waves and blooming lotuses, that’s how it’s described. And prompted by these very auspicious omens, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ascended a throne. Now, Kṛṣṇa had been actually watching intently from a secluded grove nearby, and at the sight of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ascending the throne, it made him start trembling, and he became stunned, and then he collapsed unconscious into Subala’s arms. Wow! First, he was watching Rādhārāṇī ascend the throne, and he trembled and became stunned, and then he collapsed unconscious into his cowherd friend Subala’s arms. So that’s when Vṛndā Devī arrived to bring Kṛṣṇa into the bathing arena; she first had to assist Subala in reviving him. And when Kṛṣṇa regained consciousness, what did he do? From his lotus mouth, he just began glorifying Śrī Rādhā as Queen of Vṛndāvana and as his Queen. 

So meanwhile, the wife of the Sun God, her name is Chāyā Devī, began offering *ārati* to Rādhārāṇī with the five-pronged *ghī* lamp before a large crowd of mesmerized Vrajabāsīs. And while the crowd was absorbed in that meditation of the *ārati* being performed for Śrī Rādhā, Vṛndā brought Kṛṣṇa into the function, and when they saw Kṛṣṇa, everyone was very happy, and Vṛndā placed Kṛṣṇa next to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And the *śāstra* says this created a familiar dilemma, which was how, in the presence of their elders, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa could restrain themselves from exchanging loving glances. This is called a "familiar dilemma." They’re together because, you know, there’s many functions happening in Vṛndāvana; they have a structured society, and you know very often Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would be at the same function. But that familiar dilemma was: how, in the presence of their seniors, etc., how would they restrain themselves from looking at each other in a loving way, sidelong glances? 

So this was a dilemma. The *ācāryas* write—we had to look deep into the scriptures here—the *ācāryas* write that, quote, "The solution lay in the hypnotic effect the Divine Couple had upon the assembled Vrajabāsīs, an effect that enabled Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to exchange unnoticed but mutually satisfying glances." Everyone was just so absorbed in the hypnotic effect of the Divine Couple that they didn’t notice—somehow they didn’t notice Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; they exchanged their loving glances. Now, even going deeper here, the *śāstra* says—I’m going to quote here—"In that exchange, Kṛṣṇa’s glance was like a begging bowl extended by the pauper of love, and Rādhā’s glance was like coins of gold bestowed by the monarch of divine emotions and self-satisfied beauty upon Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa and the Vrajabāsīs were bewildered by the spell of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities and features, and therefore they didn’t notice Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa exchanging all these loving glances. Now, when these Vrajabāsīs were, like, hypnotized by the beauty of the Divine Couple, some saw Kṛṣṇa’s silken complexion as a cloud mixed with lightning. Others saw the feather in his topknot as a dancing peacock eager to enjoy the reign of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s coronation bath. Other Vrajabāsīs saw his shark-shaped earrings as evidence of the charms that melted their hearts, and still others saw his broad chest like they saw the night sky reveling in the 24 and a half moons of Śrī Rādhā’s form. Let me repeat that one: "Still others saw his broad chest like they saw the night sky reveling in the 24 and a half moons of Śrī Rādhā’s form." Now, when I read the "24 and a half moons of Śrī Rādhā’s form," that... some people saw like that, the 24 and a half moons of Śrī Rādhā’s form. I wondered, "What are the 24 and a half moons of Rādhā’s form?"

So then I read and I discovered in the *Mantrārtha-dīpikā*—in that scripture called *Mantrārtha-dīpikā*—it describes what are the 24 and a half moons of Śrī Rādhā’s form, and I’m very happy to share that with you. The 24 and a half moons of Śrī Rādhā’s form are as follows: one, her face is the king of moons; her left and right cheeks are a moon each; her forehead is a half-moon; the *tilaka* spot of sandalwood on her forehead is another moon; and added to this are the 20 other moons of her fingernails and toenails. Should we go over that again? Her face is the king of moons, her left and right cheeks are a moon each, her forehead is a half-moon, the *tilaka* spot of sandalwood on her forehead is another moon, and added to this are the 20 other moons of her fingernails and her toenails. Kṛṣṇa, so then Kṛṣṇa broke this trance—how they were perceiving him—he broke that trance with the sweet music of his flute, which got everyone up singing and dancing. Singing and dancing, he broke the trance, everybody started singing and dancing, and with that, all the forest animals came and joined in the *kīrtana*. Everyone was invited! All the animals, they came to the coronation, and cuckoos sang in tune with Kṛṣṇa’s flute, bees hummed along, and peacocks danced in time with all the Vrajabāsīs who were dancing. Can you imagine this scene? The Vrajabāsīs are dancing to the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute and peacocks are coming and dancing in time with the dancers. Just envision this: the Vrajabāsīs, and then there’s peacocks everywhere, and they’re also dancing in time.

So a few moments later, Umā—the wife of Lord Śiva—she started chanting Vedic mantras as part of the coronation ceremony, and then she offered flowers, *dūrvā* grass, puffed rice, and white mustard seeds to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Then she gently sprinkled *arghya* over Rādhārāṇī’s head—bear in mind these, again, are still the preliminary rites to the actual *abhiṣeka*; the bathing, Rādhā is going to be bathed nine times. So then Umā washed Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet with water mixed with rose petals, and with that, Śrī Rādhā folded her hands in respect. And Umā, you know, she got a little upset; she whispered to Rādhā, "Don’t offer me respect, offer me friendship! When you play in the Yamunā..." Umā’s washing Rādhā’s lotus feet with a mixture of rose petals and with that Rādhārāṇī, you know, she’s folding her hands in respect, "Thank you, thank you, Umā." So Umā whispers, "Please don’t offer me respect, Rādhā; offer me friendship when you play in the Yamunā. Don’t bother offering me respect, I want your friendship when you’re bathing with your *gopī* girlfriends in the Yamunā river." Because she’s, but she’s... for that, the mood of Braja. So then Umā offered *ācamana*, *madhuparka*, and a second *ācamana*—those of you who are *pūjārīs*, you’ll know what I’m speaking about—different substances, part of the *pūjā*. And finally, Umā offered a second *ārati*, and as she offered the second *ārati* to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the wife of Lord Śiva, she meditated on her desire to one day become a cowherd girlfriend of Śrī Rādhā in Vṛndāvana. The meditation went on and on. So at that point, a number of *gandharva* girls sang the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as Lalitā and some of the more prominent cowherd girls sprinkled Śrī Rādhā with eight auspicious kinds of earth. I thought that was interesting, there’s these *gandharva* girls singing, you know, the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as part of this preliminary up to the bathing ceremony. Lalitā and some of the prominent *gopīs* they sprinkled Rādhā with eight auspicious kinds of earth. Now again, it got my mind going, I was intrigued. "What are the eight auspicious kinds of earth?" So I researched, and I found the eight auspicious kinds of earth, and I was thinking, "You know, somehow I’ll get these eight auspicious kinds and I will utilize them somehow in the service of my deities on my altar. I’ll maybe I’ll sprinkle them."

So what are these eight auspicious kinds of earth? These eight auspicious kinds of earth come from: number one, a riverbank; number two, where a wild boar has dug with his tusk; number three, where a bull has dug with his horns; from a doorway; from an anthill; from the ocean; from the property of a temple; and number eight, from the bank of the Ganges. That is nectar! *Śāstra* states that this earth that was used to be sprinkled on Śrī Rādhā, because it came from Braja, it was made even more auspicious and fragrant by the fact that it had previously come in contact with the feet of the one who wanders throughout Vṛndāvana tending cows, searching for young *gopīs*, and playing with his friends. All this earth is auspicious to begin with according to the previous statement, but it’s become even more auspicious because it’s *reṇu*, it’s the earth of Vṛndāvana, and the fact that it’s so auspicious because previously this earth came in contact with the feet of... actually the description there is, "the one who wanders throughout Vṛndāvana tending cows, searching for young *gopīs*, and playing with his friends."

So next, the *gopīs* poured over Śrī Rādhā *pañca-gavya*, eight more varieties of earth, honey, and finally *kuśa* grass. Now, wait a minute, eight more varieties of earth? That really got me going because I was really happy to find those original, because I’m going to get those and sprinkle them on my deities, eight more varieties. So then I really had to—it took me a couple of hours—but I found the other eight varieties. It’s like, you know, people go searching for treasures, or they look—you know, gold miners, or people have those special machines, they’re looking for metal on the beaches and different places to find things people have lost. So this is a real way to do it, search for this nectar, and I found it.

The other eight varieties of earth are: earth that comes from the king’s door, earth from the juncture of four roads, earth where an elephant has dug with his tusks, earth from both sides of a river, earth from a cow pen where the cows are kept, earth that comes from the meeting of three pathways, and earth from a town. That’s interesting. So they put this over Śrī Rādhā as well; I thought that was really interesting. It was also mentioned, we mentioned there *pañca-gavya* is actually a mixture of five products received from a cow. Many of us know this because we have our *abhiṣekas*, isn’t it, in our temples and in our homes? So that’s part of a traditional ceremony to bathe the deities in *pañca-gavya*. So *pañca-gavya* means milk, yogurt, *ghī*, cow dung, and cow urine. All auspicious! Wow, this is an amazing ceremony, isn’t it? And this is only part one, because there’s so much, I have to divide it into two classes. So after this, some young *brāhmaṇīs* came forward and sprinkled Śrī Rādhā with fragrant water, fragrant with *kuṅkuma*, and then using a pot with a thousand holes, they bathed her with water blessed by herbs, scents, seeds, flowers, and jewels—a pot with a thousand holes, and within that water it’s described that the water was blessed... it’s that’s how it’s written, it was blessed by herbs, scents—meaning things with a pleasant aroma—seeds, flowers, and jewels. And again, this is all preliminary! This isn’t the actual nine baths; this is all leading up to the main *abhiṣeka*. So at this point, it’s written that, you know, Rādhārāṇī is being bathed by these things, or sprinkled, or you could say it’s lightly bathed. And at this point, Kṛṣṇa, he tries to steal a glance at Rādhārāṇī’s figure, but he couldn’t look at her figure because his eyes were intercepted by the sweetness of her *kuṅkuma*-stained face. That’s as far as he got; he wanted to see her transcendental form, but it’s described his eyes were intercepted, intercepted by the sweetness of her *kuṅkuma*-stained face. So then Paurṇamāsī, she came forward and she touched Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s head and throat, placed a *kuśa* grass ring on her finger, and soaked her hands in *gorocanā*. She soaked her hands in *gorocanā*. Now what is *gorocanā*? I use *gorocanā* often in my deity worship. I put it in the bathing water, or sometimes I take little parts of *gorocanā* and when I make the sandalwood paste, the *candana*, I put *gorocanā*. It’s quite expensive, actually. *Gorocanā* is just a bright yellow pigment whose... it’s described its luster is more attractive than gold, and it’s made in different ways. Nowadays we get that *gorocanā* from the bile of a cow and the cow’s stomach. This secretion comes—it’s a golden secretion—and from the bile of the cow you can make this. It hardens into little pieces when you obtain it from the cow dung and then it crystallizes and then they sell it in the market, and you mix it like that, it makes a beautiful golden color in the *candana*. But sometimes it’s—you can get it from rainwater flowing from the hoof of a cow during the Svāti-nakṣatra constellation. I haven’t got that type of *gorocanā* yet—rainwater flowing from the hoof of a cow during the Svāti-nakṣatra. Whenever that happens in the stars, then the rain—if it rains and it flows over the hoof of a cow—boom! You’ve got *gorocanā*. So this was also used in the ceremony for Śrī Rādhā. 

So after all these auspicious rituals, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and everyone was ready for the main part of the coronation ceremony: nine auspicious baths. And there’s a great detail about each bath, but just to begin with, each bath was poured from a pot made entirely of a—entirely of different jewels. Each pot was carved from a jewel, from a jewel, a particular jewel; nine different pots. There was a coral pot made only of coral; there was a ruby pot—must have been a big ruby! One pot made only out of rubies; a pearl pot; a diamond pot; a cat’s eye pot; an emerald pot; a yellow sapphire pot; a blue sapphire pot; and a pot made from *gomeda*. *Gomeda*—what is *gomeda*? I looked up *gomeda*. *Gomeda* is known as hessonite in modern times; it’s a pure yellowish transparent gem that I was reading in astrology it counteracts the evil effects of the Rāhu planet. So, nine pots: coral, ruby, pearl, diamond, cat’s eye, emerald, yellow sapphire, blue sapphire, and *gomeda*—these pots.

So at this point, the pots were ready and they had auspicious sacred waters from the lake that we described earlier that came from the hands of those Gaṅgā, Yamunā, and so forth, perspiration of Paurṇamāsī, that lake; the pots were filled. So at this point, it’s really building up, when you read it, it’s like, "Whoa." At this point, the principal *gopīs* stepped forward, each of them eager to serve their beloved Queen by bathing her with water from these auspicious pots. At the same time, this whole—all that, this crowd, all that, everyone—moves forward to observe this. It’s just like a wave, a whole crowd comes around Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī for this auspicious ceremony. And I was reading the demigods and their wives jostled above in the sky in their flower airplanes for better vantage points to observe the ceremony. It’s like... and even the forest animals, the birds and bees, maneuvered themselves closer. Everyone’s eyes were fixed on the most beautiful form of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was dressed in very beautiful bathing attire, some special attire that her girlfriends had dressed her in. And soon they dressed her in this attire and were very anxious, looking forward to her soon becoming officially their Queen. So then Mother Paurṇamāsī, she steps forward and she announces, "Let the nine baths begin!"

And with that, we’ll finish today. I know you’re probably sitting on the edge of your seats, but we have to finish, we can’t go on too long. Well, we could go on forever, but let’s take it in different parts so we can... we’ll relish more. In a couple days we’ll finish here, leaving you hankering for more nectar about our beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s auspicious coronation ceremony. We’re back in a couple of days, and if you’re fortunate to have Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa on your altar in your homes or in your temples, now when you see [them] next time, you’ll appreciate her even more. And that’s our process: *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ* brings Kṛṣṇa-smaraṇam—Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, which is the goal. Thank you so much for again giving me this opportunity; I just really relished researching this particular part of Braja, the coronation of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And I have a whole another lecture; we’re going to go through each bath: how it was performed, what it meant, what were all the emotions—Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa, the *gopīs*, the animals, everyone’s there focus. So we’re back in a couple of days. Let’s just finish as we usually do with a few appropriate verses to kind of wind up the pastime and, you know, experience a little bit of the emotion of the *līlā*. This is from Śrīla Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī’s *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*:

"When will my heart become immersed with the great joy in the ocean of sweetness, pastimes, and beauty of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet? When will I live in Vṛndāvana, rejecting the most esteemed wealth of impersonal liberation as if it were just a blade of grass? My heart has been stolen by Śrī Rādhā, who walks through her forests shining with beauty in her lotus feet, sweet with the sound of her ankle bells, making the surface of the ground pleasantly gold and red with attractive rings on her toes and quivering anklets gleaming with gems. Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī..."

She’s the revealer of the Dhāma. It’s all only by His mercy. Be back in a couple of days. 

Thank you, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Jaya Prabhupāda!""