"*00450*.*
"A very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Let me begin: *oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ. śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam.*

So, today we will continue with our discussion on the very historical coronation of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as Queen of Vṛndāvana. I must admit some hesitancy to speak about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī because, as we all know, it is a very deep and confidential subject matter. Actually, there are only a few mentions of Rādhārāṇī in Vedic scriptures. As you know, even in her own Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the Bhāgavatam doesn't mention her directly, but rather as *ārādhito yaḥ*—that gopī who gives the most pleasure to Kṛṣṇa. Historically speaking, of course, some poets and writers like Jayadeva Gosvāmī did write about Śrī Rādhā in previous times, but her full glories were only revealed by Lord Caitanya and the six Gosvāmīs 500 years ago. Now, one might question, why did the world have to wait so long for her to be introduced to us? Well, our ācāryas have commented that the Lord actually ordered Yogamāyā to make those few portions of the Vedic scriptures describing her difficult to understand until the Lord himself appeared to reveal her glories.

Therefore, one of her names is Veda-gopyā. Veda-gopyā meaning she who was hidden in the Vedas. So we should understand that this is one of the great contributions, amongst many, that Lord Caitanya and his immediate followers gave to the world: revealing to us the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Historically speaking, before the time of Lord Caitanya, there were only deities of Kṛṣṇa, not Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. In earlier lectures, we discussed how the six Gosvāmīs all found or came upon their worshipable deities; for example, Sanātana Gosvāmī found Madana-mohana alone—there was no Rādhārāṇī—Rūpa Gosvāmī found Govindajī alone, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī found Gopīnātha alone at Vaṁśīvaṭa, et cetera. But in time, the six Gosvāmīs wrote extensively about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and thus Jāhnavā Mātā, the wife of Lord Nityānanda, she eventually established deities of Rādhārāṇī for most of the Gosvāmīs' deities, and the tradition has continued down to the present day. As we all know, it is our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda who established the worship of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa all over the world. Glorified therefore, as members of ISKCON, we never worship Kṛṣṇa alone; we don't just have a deity of Kṛṣṇa, we always worship him along with Śrī Rādhā.

Now, I found a very amazing verse in the *Gopāla-sahasra-nāma-stotram*, verse number 17, which goes so far as to say: *gora-tejo vināśyatu*. "A person who worships, chants about, or meditates upon śyāma-teja, the personality with the dark effulgence—Kṛṣṇa—without engaging in similar worship, chanting, or meditation upon gaura-teja, the personality with a golden effulgence—meaning either Gaura or Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, both of whom have a golden effulgence—becomes extremely fallen." Let me recite that again: "O Pārvatī, a person who worships, chants about, or meditates upon śyāma-teja, the personality with the dark effulgence—Kṛṣṇa—without engaging in similar worship, chanting, or meditation upon gaura-teja, the personality with a golden effulgence—meaning either Gaura or Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—becomes extremely fallen." The import of this verse, of course, is that one should always worship Kṛṣṇa with either Gaura or Rādhā. So, again, I hesitate to speak about Śrī Rādhā; it is a very deep subject matter, but I feel that we can do it with the permission of Śrī Rādhā. I came across a lecture of Śrīla Prabhupāda last night, actually, a Rādhaṣṭamī lecture in London, August 29, 1971. Prabhupāda said, "These are, of course, very transcendental topics. It is a great science. Only one who is advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and well-conversant with the śāstra can understand such things. But still, we can discuss from the śāstra scriptures. When Kṛṣṇa wanted to understand himself, he adopted the tendency of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu." So this is a Rādhā lecture, and Prabhupāda is saying this is a very deep subject matter, but still we can discuss from the scriptures. So I very humbly ask Śrīla Prabhupāda's permission to continue with our coronation lectures.

I do not have any strength in understanding the śāstras, nor do I have any strength in my intelligence. I am engaged in this difficult task only after taking shelter of the strength of my guru. As I mentioned in our last lecture, I found information about Śrī Rādhā's coronation from various sources, including Jīva Gosvāmī’s *Mādhava-mahotsava*, which Śrīla Prabhupāda mentions in his purport to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* Ādi-līlā 10.85. He writes, "As far as our information goes, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī composed and edited at least 25 books. They are all very much celebrated and they are listed as follows," and therein Śrīla Prabhupāda lists the books. This scripture I am referring to, *Mādhava-mahotsava*, is listed as number seven, wherein the coronation is described in detail. So in our last lecture, we concluded just as the nine principal coronation baths, the abhiṣekas of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, were about to commence. So now, for the pleasure of all the devotees, we will describe each bath one by one.

So, śāstra says that the first abhiṣeka or bath that the Vrajabāsīs gave Śrī Rādhā was with pure water poured from a ruby pot, and as the water poured over Śrī Rādhā, it appeared like fresh nectar descended from the full moon flowing over a golden creeper, like strings of fine pearls. Now, let us remember that Kṛṣṇa is sitting very close, very near to Śrī Rādhā, observing this abhiṣeka. So I was reading that as the water was being poured over Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa's friend Stoka Kṛṣṇa, he joked, "Kṛṣṇa, you don't need to feel shy about stealing glances at Śrī Rādhā. Why bother to suppress your love? Everyone is so absorbed in watching her that no one will even notice you." Then one gopī said to Śrī Rādhā, "Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa is staring at you, but don't look back at him even by mistake. In times like these, you can increase his loving affection for you by acting as though you are indifferent."

So the ācāryas say that during these baths, during this abhiṣeka, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa suppressed their loving ecstasies, fearing that the Vrajabāsīs would detect their attraction for each other. We mentioned this in the last lecture. The ācāryas say, in fact, that Yogamāyā had arranged the entire abhiṣeka for the pleasure of the divine couple, but the divine couple, wary of exposing their innermost feelings, would not even dare to look at each other. 

In the second bath, the goddess Umā and her associates came forward with a sun-red coral pot from which they poured golden water over Śrī Rādhā's dense, cloud-like hair, which then flowed down her moonlike face. But even though it covered her face, it is described the water could not conceal her golden effulgence, which gradually spread throughout Vṛndāvana as the coronations were taking place, touching everyone and everything with its color and its warmth. So while everyone was enchanted with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's radiance, the cowherd boy Vasantaka, he said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, why be so shy? Everyone is blinded by Śrī Rādhā's golden brilliance. Now your bumblebee eyes can safely rest on her lotus face." 

Third bath: Then Saṁjhyā and Chāyā performed this third bath using a pot made of pearls, and the water from that bath appeared like rivers of grace flowing into an ocean of luster, youth, and beauty, which is Śrī Rādhā. I will recite that again: "The water from this bath appeared like rivers of grace flowing into an ocean of luster, youth, and beauty." Then it is described that a contingent of ladies from the sun planet, and specifically it is mentioned angels, fairies, and society girls, assisted by the two wives of Vivasvān; well, they assisted the two wives of Vivasvān by ringing bells, banging gongs, chanting mantras, and blowing conch shells. In the midst of this, the cowherd boy Ujjvala teased Kṛṣṇa. He said, "Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā's girlfriends have interpreted your reluctance to gaze upon their mistress as a sign of fear, and so they are laughing at you. How intolerable is this!" So Jīva Gosvāmī makes a note at this point; he says by this time the entire bathing arena was flooded with divine caraṇāmṛta.

So then the fourth bath began, and for this bath, the personified rivers, headed by Yamunā Devī, came forth with a diamond-studded pot, and the rays of light reflecting off the pot created a halo over Śrī Rādhā's head, and the waters in the pot glorified her by speaking these words—now, this is interesting, the waters are speaking, but this is Vṛndāvana, and we have discussed on a number of occasions how everything in Vṛndāvana is personal or, you could say, personified—the waters are addressing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. They say, "Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa is the master of the three worlds and the treasure of Vaikuṇṭha, but he serves you as his greatest wealth. Therefore, you are our supreme empress and our ultimate goal. All glorious to you, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī!"

Number five, fifth bath: In the fifth bath, Śyāmala Gopī came forward with a pot made of the gem called *kāntamani*, and as she poured the water over Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she said to Vṛndāvana's queen, "May this fifth bath, the liquid form of the fifth mellow, bestow upon you the fifth perfection. By that perfection, may you realize your innermost desire to have Kṛṣṇa as an obedient, submissive lover." Now, when I read that, I probably like you, I became curious as to what is the fifth mellow and what is the fifth perfection. So I researched, and I discovered that the fifth mellow is the mellow of love, and the fifth perfection refers to the power to get anything that one wants. 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So then, sixth bath—this is one of my favorites. In this bath, Vṛndā Devī, who is described aptly as the keeper of the Vṛndāvana forest, she lifted an emerald pot high in the air and said to Rādhārāṇī, "With this sixth abhiṣeka, I bathe your six limbs and request that with the six qualities of a monarch you protect this transcendental forest of six seasons." Now, the six limbs are the head, shoulders, chest, torso, legs, and feet, and the six attributes of a monarch—I had to search for this—the six attributes of a monarch are people, troops, wealth, forts, council, and friends. And my favorite, the six seasons of Vṛndāvana—listen to this: "The joy of monsoon, the pleasure of autumn, the satisfaction of winter, the happiness of the dewy season, the beauty of spring, and the auspicious season of summer." I have to recite that again: "Vṛndā Devī referred to the six seasons: the joy of monsoon, the pleasure of autumn, the satisfaction of winter, the happiness of the dewy season, the beauty of spring, and the auspicious season of summer." *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya!* Then the water falling from Vṛndā's pot turned yellow-black like honey as it flowed over Śrī Rādhā's hair, white like milk as it touched her face, and it foamed like a waterfall as it cascaded over her limbs. I guess we don't have time to recite everything twice, but I am going to do it: the water falling from Vṛndā Devī's pot turned yellow-black like honey as it flowed over Śrī Rādhā's hair, white like milk as it touched her face, and it foamed like a waterfall as it cascaded down her transcendental limbs.

Now at this point I was reading, Kṛṣṇa was watching, and as a result he was so absorbed he went into ecstasy and he started trembling. And noticing this, the cowherd boy Kiṅkiṇī spoke up—now, first I want to explain that the word or the name Kiṅkiṇī refers to small bells, like ankle bells or waist bells. So listen to this carefully: Kiṅkiṇī says, "Kṛṣṇa, your trembling causes your waist bells and ankle bells to ring so loudly that I, your little bell, have become unnecessary. Should I go away?" "Your trembling causes your waist bells and ankle bells to ring so loudly that I, Kiṅkiṇī, your little bell, have become unnecessary. Should I go away?" These are where our real emotions should lie. 

It takes some time, then Madhumangala, also seeing Kṛṣṇa trembling, he said, "Friend, you were warmly dressed, why then do you tremble in the same way as Rādhā who is covered in wet bathing clothes in the open air? Her shivering is understandable; I don't know about yours. Why are you trembling?"

Number seven, seventh bath: Then the youngest gopīs began to bathe Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with water from a yellow sapphire pot. Now, seeing this, the women from the seven upper planetary systems turned pale from ecstasy. Now, how do we understand this? They are so far away; they are in the seven upper planetary systems, so how do we understand this? It is a little subtle, but it is written that "Rādhā's authority extends to all corners of the universe, and so residents throughout the 14 planetary systems felt as if the water splashing over Rādhā was nectar pouring over their own limbs." So these particular ladies—there are seven upper planetary systems—but Rādhā's dominion goes over fourteen. Be that as it may, all the residents throughout the fourteen planetary systems felt as if the water splashing over Rādhā was nectar pouring over their own limbs; they went pale.

Now we arrive at the eighth—I'm trying to go slow because there are only nine baths—the eighth bath was given by gopīs who first blessed Śrī Rādhā with the words, "This is so nice! May this abhiṣeka protect Vṛndāvana, conquer the pride of Candrāvalī, and broadcast your glories, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, throughout the universe."

We now arrive at the ninth and final abhiṣeka. For the ninth and final abhiṣeka, Rādhā's dear friends like Madhurikā—such a beautiful name—and others, they brought water in a rare and valuable pot decorated with golden, brilliantly shining gomedha gems. Now some accounts say that the pots were made of these jewels, other accounts I read the pots are decorated—be that as it may, these are amazing pots full of the water from the lake from the hands, you remember, of the personified Yamunā River, and the Ganges, and Sarasvatī, and the divine perspiration of Paurṇamāsī. This is all the water that is being used with this golden effulgence. So, these very dear friends of Rādhārāṇī, they have brought forth this particular pot of brilliantly shining gomedha gems. So soon, everyone present, including Rādhā, became aware that this unprecedented event was about to draw to a close. At that moment, it is written, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa managed to finally steal a loving glance towards each other, and it is said that during that loving exchange, the opulences of the Vṛndāvana forest themselves transformed into nectar, and the gopīs also used that nectar to bathe Śrī Rādhā. Then it goes even deeper: śāstra says, yet as great as it was, when this glorious liquid cascaded over Rādhā's delicate features, her unmatched touch imparted to it a fresh, effervescent virtue—a virtue that caused it to bubble and fizz with ecstasy. "Yet as great as this liquid was, this glorious liquid cascading over Rādhā's delicate features, her unmatched touch imparted to it a fresh, effervescent virtue that caused it to bubble and fizz with ecstasy." Now as the Vrajabāsīs watched this ninth bath, they were amazed, and Subala, when he turned to look at Kṛṣṇa's face, only to find Kṛṣṇa being—it is described—bathed by his own tears with Śrī Rādhā reflected in his eyes: "Bathed by his own tears with Śrī Rādhā reflected in his eyes." It is also said that spellbound by the silent beauty of Rādhārāṇī's eyes and eyebrows, Kṛṣṇa could not hear a thing. Kṛṣṇa could not hear a thing.

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So, with the bathing ceremony complete, the gopīs, goddesses, Gandharvas, and all the women of Vṛndāvana, not to mention Kṛṣṇa, eagerly anticipated seeing Śrī Rādhā finally dressed and ornamented as their queen, as the Queen of Vṛndāvana. And Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī is so kind, he gives us insight into the mind of Kṛṣṇa. Just imagine how wonderful is this movement that we have access somehow to hearing the thoughts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So Jīva Gosvāmī says, Kṛṣṇa thought: 1) "What wonders would the rest of this coronation hold? What marvels?" 2) "What marvels will Rādhā's ceremonial dress and royal crown reveal?" And 3) "And how will she appear when finally seated on her throne?" 

So, after all the bathings had been done, Vṛndā's gopīs guided her from the bathing throne—it is described—to another magnificent seat, and there they surrounded her, forming a curtain to screen her from sight. There they are, like the curtain, all the gopīs, and it is described their bodily effulgences lit up the enclosure so that they could attend to their duties. Circles, a lot of gopīs, so perhaps not a lot of sunlight could get in, but they could do their duties, which is to dry and to dress, very much because of their own effulgence. Remember, we read in the spiritual world that everything is self-effulgent. So there, they dried Śrī Rādhā and clothed her in a dress prepared especially for a queen. And so as not to disappoint them, Śrī Rādhā invested her full potency in the dress that she had been offered. As such, its embroidered swans immediately came to life and cooed in concert with the tinkling of her ankle bells. "So as not to disappoint them, Śrī Rādhā invested her full potency in the dress she had been offered; as such, its embroidered swans immediately came to life and cooed in concert with the tinkling of her ankle bells." 

So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī then accepted a delicate sash for her waist, scented with perfumes like musk, and like her complexion, the sash gave off a soft reddish glow that revealed her heart's feelings and radiated love for Kṛṣṇa. Now, of course, Kṛṣṇa and the Vrajabāsīs were not able to see Śrī Rādhā, but they could see radiating from behind the gopī screen that golden effulgence tinged with red emanating from Śrī Rādhā's form, which pleased and pacified their eyes and hearts. So then the gopīs, they profusely decorated Śrī Rādhā with flower ornaments. Again, we see how important are flowers in our Vṛndāvana culture; they decorated her with flower ornaments. Thus, she appeared like a floral goddess of Vṛndāvana, making the nearby trees shudder in bliss. "She appeared like a floral goddess of Vṛndāvana, making the nearby trees shudder in bliss." 

Then, with Rādhārāṇī's dressing and ornamentation complete, this circle of gopīs stood aside in one smooth motion, like, you know, we were getting ready for the opening of the deities, the deity darśana—so the curtain, one smooth motion—so like that, these circles of gopīs. And as everyone saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī dressed as their queen—and of course understanding her very deep spiritual nature and her love for Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa for her—it caused the onlookers, Jīva Gosvāmī describes, to burst forth in applause. 

Now, what happens next, prabhus, is actually beyond description: how Vṛndāvana's new queen is received by her subjects, the Vrajabāsīs, how they come forward with a multitude of gifts for her. I promise you, hearing such loving exchanges, even though we are just still aspiring devotees, it is going to melt your heart. It is nothing like you've ever heard before. So, are you ready? So all that and more I will share with you in our next lecture entitled "Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's Coronation, Part Three." Oh, Maharaj, yes, we want to give you some hankering for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the whole point of this, actually, is to purify our hearts and gradually, gradually as the years go by, as the lives go by, perhaps awaken our love for the divine couple. But that hankering has to be stronger than our hankering for anything and everything in this world. So I am going to leave you hankering for more and also to digest all that. 

Yes, to digest all of that. So we will come back. I have the treasure chest behind me, and I have to dive in and pick out the particular jewels and analyze them as Śrīla Prabhupāda has taught us—hear from our previous acāryas and then in my humble service to all of you. So please don't be angry with me; just bless me. So I would like to conclude today with the words of Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī from his illustrious *Govinda-līlāmṛta*, Chapter 8, Text 77, which attests to the fact that Kṛṣṇa is indeed very much subservient to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as the Queen of Vṛndāvana, as we are seeing—actually, she is his queen as well, which we heard in a previous lecture. So this is a very beautifully described passage here. Śrī Rādhā is inquiring from Vṛndā Devī. So Rādhā says, "Oh my beloved friend Vṛndā, where are you coming from?" And Vṛndā replies, "Oh, I am coming from the feet of Śrī Hari." Rādhā says, "Where is he?" And Vṛndā replies, "In the forest on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa." Śrī Rādhā says, "Oh, what is he doing there?" And Vṛndā says, "Oh, he's learning how to dance." Śrī Rādhā says, "And who is this guru? Who is his dance teacher?" And Vṛndā replies, "It is your image, Śrī Rādhā, which is revealing itself in every tree and creeper in Vṛndāvana. Your image is roaming like a skillful dancer in every direction, as Kṛṣṇa dances behind you." 

One last thing, please: if there were any mistakes in what I spoke, may the kind and learned devotees correct me and purify it. However, if there was anything nice in whatever I spoke, please know that it belongs to my guru; it does not belong to me. Okay, please, if there were any mistakes in what I spoke, may the kind and learned devotees correct me and purify it. However, if there was anything nice in whatever I spoke, please know that it belongs to my guru, Prabhupāda; it does not belong to me. Thank you, thank you all so much. Yeah, I'll be back with Part Three; maybe we'll even have a Part Four, and beyond that there's so much more to discover in our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. See you soon. *Śrī Śrī Gauranītāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī kī jaya!* Kṛṣṇa! Thank you.""