"*00439*.*
"# Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s Coronation (Part 3)

Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees, welcome back again for yet another session on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* So, we are continuing with our series on Braj, and hopefully, by doing so, we increase our attachment to that best of abodes. Of course, the best would be to live in Vṛndāvana, as Rūpa Gosvāmī has instructed us in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* (2.294): *kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam | tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau kuryād vāsam vraje sadā*. The devotee should always think of Kṛṣṇa within himself and should choose a very dear devotee who is a servitor of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. One should constantly engage in topics about that servitor and his loving relationship with Kṛṣṇa, and one should live in Vṛndāvana.

If one is physically unable to go to Vṛndāvana, he should mentally live there. Now, I was studying that verse more carefully the other day, and Rūpa Gosvāmī uses the word *kuryād*, which implies that this is *vidhi-vākya*; it means it is a mandatory instruction to be followed by everyone. But being *trikāla-jña*—Rūpa Gosvāmī being *trikāla-jña*, which means being able to see past, present, and future—he concludes: however, if one is physically unable to go to Vṛndāvana, he should mentally live there. This, of course, entails creating the Vṛndāvana atmosphere wherever we live. In this age of Kali, devotees—all of us—we cannot survive in Kṛṣṇa consciousness unless we create this Vṛndāvana atmosphere in our surroundings. And how do we do it? Prabhupāda has taught us: by chanting, by reading, by worshiping our Deities, by respectfully taking prasādam, associating with other devotees, etc. We have to do that; otherwise, we will be enveloped by the atmosphere of Kali-yuga. It is so powerful. I found a beautiful verse in the *Subhāṣita-ratna-bhāṇḍāgāram*; it says:

When an alligator is in its natural habitat, which is water, it can defeat even the king of elephants, but devoid of that natural habitat, the same alligator gets defeated even by an ordinary dog. So the alligator has to be in his element in order to defeat the king of elephants. So we have to be in our element, which is Vṛndāvana, in order to repulse the effects of Kali-yuga. And what is that Vṛndāvana atmosphere? *Śravaṇam kīrtanam*. Therefore, we are doing these lectures twice a week for well over a year now to create that atmosphere. Now, another important point that I was thinking was that these lectures actually prepare all of us for that day, which will come, when we can actually visit Vṛndāvana proper again here in India. If we don’t prepare ourselves for entering Vṛndāvana, then when we come, only our bodies will enter Braj, but not our hearts.

We want to be like Akrūra. Although he was employed by King Kaṁsa, he was actually a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa. He was living in Mathurā, but knowing that Kṛṣṇa was living nearby in Vṛndāvana, he was always thinking of Kṛṣṇa and Vṛndāvana. But he couldn’t visit Vṛndāvana out of fear of Kaṁsa. But when Kaṁsa finally appointed him as his chariot messenger to bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to Mathurā, Akrūra got his chance to visit Vṛndāvana. And because he was so well-versed in the glories of Vṛndāvana, when he arrived, he experienced so much joy and happiness. The devotee scholar whom we sometimes refer to as Śrī Harisūri gives specific reasons why Akrūra felt so fortunate upon arriving in Vṛndāvana. This devotee scholar wrote a very nice verse in this regard, wherein he reveals Akrūra’s thoughts upon arriving in Braj. It goes like this: Akrūra was thinking, "There is not even a small portion of land here in Vṛndāvana that remains untouched by Hari’s lotus feet; neither is there a single tree that has not experienced the happiness of being touched by Hari’s soft hands; nor is there a single living entity here who has remained devoid of His merciful glance."

So then, Harisūri reveals what he says is a hidden meaning in this verse. It is very interesting. He says that the dust of Vṛndāvana is so fortunate because it has directly received the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, but the trees of Vṛndāvana are also fortunate because they derive nectar directly from that dust—from the soil of Vṛndāvana—by absorbing the water which comes through that dust for their nourishment. And in their joyful ecstasy, having received that mercy from the dust of Vṛndāvana, they produce delicious fruits which are imbued with that nectar. And when the birds eat those nectarean fruits, they start chirping loudly in ecstasy. So Harisūri concludes that just by hearing the chirping of the birds in Vṛndāvana, one can become Kṛṣṇa conscious because all that nectar has come through those transcendental mediums. Just by hearing the chirping of the birds in Vṛndāvana, one can become Kṛṣṇa conscious. So, prabhus, let us drop everything now and run to Vṛndāvana. That is the advice of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī in his illustrious *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, Chapter 1, Śataka, he calls them, verse number 80. He says, "Oh friend, by great good fortune you have attained this body where you have heard Vṛndāvana’s wonderful glories and learned that everything in this world is just a dream. Do not put any faith in the mind or the body; run to Vṛndāvana." I just love that verse: run to Vṛndāvana. Oh, so we will continue our journey to Vṛndāvana with *Śabda-brahma*, part three.

So to refresh our memories with the amazing *darśana* of Śrī Rādhā, as remember in her new queen dress where the embroidered white swans came to life and cooed for her pleasure. The Apsarā women of Svargaloka—after that *darśana*, the Apsarā women of Svargaloka offered *ārati* to Śrī Rādhā, and then she was whisked away to another grove and yet another majestic throne for more ceremonies. We discussed, you remember the nine baths, and then Rādhārāṇī was dried by her gopī friends, and then she put on that beautiful new dress of the queen. Everyone was stunned by her transcendental beauty. So the Apsarā women, they offered an *ārati*, and then she was whisked away to another grove and yet another majestic throne, it’s described, for more ceremonies.

So upon arriving at that grove, her closest assistants showed her her reflection in a bowl of fresh ghee that represented the molten love of her followers. Then she brought up—she called for gifts to be distributed to her subjects. And the first gift was a box made of flower buds that was engraved with her name, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and it was filled simply with Vṛndāvana flower petals. But because it is Braj, those flowers were worth all the gold in the universe. And Rādhārāṇī lovingly gave this special box to Paurṇamāsī, who we know is in charge of arranging all these transcendental pastimes. So the first gift went to her. And next, she gave, what is it, baskets of jewels to the brāhmaṇas who were in charge of conducting all these ceremonies. Then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī asked Madhumaṅgala what sort of gift he would like. Now when I read that, I was thinking, "Oh, he’s going to ask for lotus," but in this particular situation, Madhumaṅgala, he respectfully joined his palms and he said, "Śrī Rādhā, please give me your most cherished treasure," implying Śrī Kṛṣṇa. So Rādhārāṇī said, "My dear baṭu"—she called him my dear baṭu—"now go and take your gift." So overjoyed, Madhumaṅgala turned, and Kṛṣṇa was just next to him, and he embraced Kṛṣṇa, and then he began to dance in ecstasy. But the ācāryas say that this made Kṛṣṇa feel a little uneasy because he had made so much effort to unite with Rādhā, but it appeared she had given him away to Madhumaṅgala. So sensing Kṛṣṇa’s concern, the cowherd boy Ujjvala, he joked; he said, "Kṛṣṇa, you look pale and thin; you’d better sit down. Everything’s going to be okay, don’t worry." So the same ācāryas, they say that:

"The cowherd girls were so amused by Kṛṣṇa’s despondency that they let their veils fall from their heads." And I just really like that: the cowherd girls were so amused by Kṛṣṇa’s despondency that they let their veils fall from their heads. *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya!* So at this point, Paurṇamāsī came forward and she announced, "Dear residents of Vṛndāvana, soon we will officially crown our new queen." So at that moment, everyone looked toward Śrī Rādhā, and true to her compassionate nature—we’ve discussed so many times about Rādhārāṇī’s compassion and nature—she raised her hand in a *mudrā* of blessing and what did she do? She declared, "Let all bound creatures be liberated. Let all bound creatures be liberated." And the ācāryas say that this was good news for those creatures still bound by the modes of material nature in creation. But so interesting, those very same words struck fear in the hearts of the perfected gopīs and gopas. How so? Because they were also bound, but bound to Kṛṣṇa by the ropes of love.

So they are getting nervous. She said, "Let all bound creatures be liberated." Okay for the conditioned souls, but the gopas and gopīs, they took that to mean, "She’s going to break our bond of love to Kṛṣṇa; we’re bound to him by ropes of love." So Śrī Rādhā noticed this in the gopīs and the gopas, so she gave all those gopas and gopīs a reassuring glance and dispelled their fear: "No, your bond to Kṛṣṇa and to me will never be broken." So then everyone noticed that just by Śrī Rādhā’s approaching this status of queen of Vṛndāvana, the last few ceremonies, the opulence of the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana began increasing. And as everyone looked around, they saw rivers started flowing with nectar, mountains erupted in gems, trees began oozing honey, and cows dripped milk everywhere.

One ācārya, he comments, "Kṛṣṇa’s presence in Vṛndāvana makes it exceptionally beautiful, but when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was about to be crowned, Vṛndāvana’s beauty increased a thousand-fold; thus Kṛṣṇa was especially overjoyed." So the next part of the ceremony entailed Śrī Rādhā being clothed in a second royal dress, and this was to take place in another grove where there was a small ornate palace that Vṛndā-devī had prepared. We mentioned this in the first lecture; she said, "Set all of this up." So Paurṇamāsī asked everyone to gather, and as she organized another procession to that grove, and she did this by placing Kṛṣṇa and all his cowherd boyfriends in front—they were to lead this procession—then she placed Śrī Rādhā in the middle of the procession with all of her girlfriends encircling her, with the rest of the Vrajavāsīs they very joyfully followed behind. So it’s written, "By having Kṛṣṇa lead Rādhā from one grove to another, Paurṇamāsī broadcast the inner purpose of the coronation: to confirm that Rādhā was Kṛṣṇa’s and that Kṛṣṇa was Rādhā’s."

So when this large assembly reached the desired grove with its very special quaint palace, Rādhā was seated on an ivory throne with all the Vrajavāsīs sitting facing her. I was reading: the boys to her left, the elders in front, and the goddesses to her right. Then as Yamunā and Mānasī-gaṅgā waved *cāmaras* on either side of Rādhārāṇī, the Vrajavāsīs silently watched as "her golden effulgence mingled with her captivating scent to form a wispy golden mist." Her golden effulgence mixed with her captivating scent to form a wispy golden mist. Also witnessed that the gopīs who were preparing to dress and decorate Śrī Rādhā had themselves become dressed and decorated, not by clothes, but by "the radiance of Śrī Rādhā’s sweetness, beauty, and aroma." The gopīs who were to dress her, they had also become dressed and decorated not by clothes, but then by what? By the radiance of Rādhā’s sweetness, beauty, and aroma. Then, once again, like we’ve described in a previous lecture, Śrī Rādhā was encircled by a gopī curtain—her girlfriends surrounded her like a curtain, screening her from the eyes of the crowd of the Vrajavāsīs, but it’s mentioned, "not from the all-pervasive mind of Kṛṣṇa, for he was absorbed in trance upon her." Then again, the gopī Sañjā, she stepped forward and began braiding and decorating Śrī Rādhā’s hair. And I was reading that when she had finished, your beauty on his long braid, it resembled a black vine decorated with tiny flowers, it resembled a variety of gems, and it resembled Kṛṣṇa’s bee-like mind.

Then she placed a peacock feather at the end of the braid, and she asked her friend Chayā to add to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s hair scented oils, tiny garlands of delicate flowers, and *sindūra*. And Chayā finished by placing a number of dazzling jewels in Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s hair, making her hair appear like a star-filled sky. Then another gopī began painting patterns on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s face; she painted budding creepers on her forehead, flowering creepers on her cheeks, and a bumblebee-like spot of *kastūrī* on her chin. These are the original gopī dots—we do that in our public festivals in Poland, we people come and we decorate their faces, so this is the original gopī dance. And another gopī came, and she drew a line of *kājala* on Śrī Rādhā’s eyes, hung a pearl on the tip of her nose, and put sparkling jewels on her ears. And yet another gopī was about to redden Śrī Rādhā’s lips when she noticed how rosy Rādhā’s smile already was, and thinking that lipstick would only hide the natural beauty of Śrī Rādhā’s lips, she put down her brush. Then that same girl fastened a silk band engraved with Kṛṣṇa’s name on it around Śrī Rādhā’s neck and valuable rings on all ten of her fingers. And oh yeah, other gopīs were about to lacker Śrī Rādhā’s soles of her feet, but her feet had turned red just by touching the ground, so the *lākṣā* wasn’t applied—interesting. So then the ācāryas comment, "To what can Śrī Rādhā’s fully ornamented beauty be compared? A golden vine fully blossomed? Mount Sumeru glistening in the sunshine? Hardly. Her indescribable glory can only be compared to itself."

Now it was time for the official crowning part of the ceremony. So at this point, Śrī Rādhā rose from her seat and again, accompanied by a large contingent of her girlfriends, proceeded to yet another beautiful grove that had also been prepared by Vṛndā-devī. And there was another small palace, it’s described, whose entire floor was set in golden gems and its sides glowed with marble pillars and arches. Now at the center, inside this palace, in the center of the palace was a tall bakula tree. You see that in India often; there’s a tree inside the palace or inside a courtyard, like in our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple in Vṛndāvana, there’s a tamāla tree there in the courtyard just before, in front of the temple. So in the center of this palace was a tall bakula tree with fully ripened fruits and flowers, in whose branches—it’s described, this is really nice—lived many wise birds who perpetually conversed about the innumerable wonders of divine love. Wow, in those branches of that bakula, lived many wise birds who perpetually conversed about the innumerable wonders of divine love. Now I was reading that the amazing thing about this tree is that it appeared to change shape.

Sometimes taking the shape of a giant lotus and at other times assuming a form, the ācāryas say, as effulgent as it was incomprehensible. Other times it took a form as effulgent as it was incomprehensible, the divine poetry. And at the base of the tree stood a special throne, said to be the throne of thrones, and next to the throne was a footstool covered in a tiger skin along with royal paraphernalia all fashioned from gold. Now when Śrī Rādhā saw the throne, she naturally thought, "When I sit upon that throne, all of Kṛṣṇa’s desires will be fulfilled. When I sit upon that throne, all of Kṛṣṇa’s desires will be fulfilled." And then Lady Tārākī led Śrī Rādhā to that throne, where Vṛndā-devī offered Śrī Rādhā another *ārati* as all the people, the plants, animals in Vṛndāvana shed tears of joy. And it’s described demigoddesses showered flowers from Svargaloka, and holding Lalitā’s hand, Rādhā ascended the throne and gracefully assumed her seat. But then Rādhā noticed that her superiors were still standing, so she requested that they all be given seats as well. Now one of those seats was a dazzling throne meant for Kṛṣṇa, which was next to but not adjoining her own throne. So as Kṛṣṇa sat on that throne, each guest present perceived him differently according to his or her mood, to their *rasa*. Those who were in the mood of amorous love saw Kṛṣṇa seated right beside Rādhā on her own throne, and those guests who were in a parental mood saw the Divine Couple seated on separate thrones. So like that, so once everyone was seated, Paurṇamāsī approached Śrī Rādhā’s throne carrying an embroidered cushion upon which there was a special crown and a scepter.

And as all the Vrajavāsīs chanted *jaya Śrī Rādhā*, she finally placed the queen’s crown on Śrī Rādhā’s head and made the official proclamation that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was now officially the Queen of Braja, she was Vṛndāvana. And as Rādhārāṇī accepted the crown, everyone gasped as they witnessed the miracle. And what was that miracle of miracles? That was that the throne, the scepter, and the crown, already as brilliant as the sun, became twice as effulgent. Then, after everyone calmed down, the time came for Rādhārāṇī to appoint a royal cabinet. But because she was so shy in the presence of her superiors, she looked timidly at Paurṇamāsī, as if to say, "Can you arrange that?" But Paurṇamāsī, she requested Kṛṣṇa to make the parliamentary appointments, it’s described, which he gladly agreed to do. So Kṛṣṇa appointed that Lalitā would be the Prime Minister, Viśākhā would be Śrī Rādhā’s personal secretary, and Vṛndā-devī would be the forestry minister, and other gopīs were appointed to different offices according to their natures. So after Kṛṣṇa had filled every government post, then everyone began celebrating. Dancers and musicians and orators were all assembled, and the dancers—I was reading—when the dancers came forward, they portrayed Rādhārāṇī’s qualities and pastimes in movements and gestures, and the singers, they simply, you know, glorified her with their beautiful voices and poetry set to music that Jīva Gosvāmī actually describes just left Kṛṣṇa stunned. But as excellent as the performances were, Rādhārāṇī’s mind was elsewhere; she simply yearned to be alone with Kṛṣṇa in a secluded place. So it’s very touching; looking towards the sky, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said, "O Creator, you protected me from being consumed by my own anger, from being humiliated by my competitor, and from being confined by my in-laws. After having saved me thrice, will you not protect me once more? Without your mercy, I fear that I will drown in a deluge of desire for Kṛṣṇa’s enveloping embrace." I haven’t repeated anything a couple of times in this lecture, but I’m going to recite that again: Looking towards the sky, Rādhārāṇī said, "O Creator, you protected me from being consumed by my own anger, from being humiliated by my competitor, and from being confined by my in-laws. After having saved me thrice, will you not protect me once more? Without your mercy, I fear I will drown in a deluge of desire for Kṛṣṇa’s enveloping embrace."

So Lalitā and Viśākhā were very close by, and they understood Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s mind, and together they thought: if Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa could be alone now without their subjects, they could finally relish each other’s association. They were thinking like that. So then Paurṇamāsī, who was standing nearby, she read those gopīs’ minds, so she’s in charge of the pastimes, and so she immediately requested all the demigoddesses to return to Svargaloka to begin with, and the text says, quote: "These ladies of heaven happily collected their belongings and blessed Rādhārāṇī with these words: 'Oh Śrī Rādhā, may you attain the good fortune of your lover’s company, and may this majestic grove be known as Rādhikā, the place where Rādhikā became intoxicated by love.'" So Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, he says that these demigoddesses and all their heavenly assistants, he calls them, they mysteriously disappeared and no one could figure out how they had left or where they had gone.

Then Paurṇamāsī, she turned to the older residents of Braja and she requested them to return to their respective homes with a message to all the Vrajavāsīs that "Śrī Rādhā’s coronation is complete." Then Paurṇamāsī, she smiled at the younger gopīs and she instructed them to resume their household chores, but she warned that they must be ready to return and serve their queen at a moment’s notice, which gave them great inspiration. And finally, Paurṇamāsī turned to Kṛṣṇa and with a smile she said, "Kṛṣṇa, I must personally narrate the details of today’s festival to anyone who may have missed this coronation, so I have to go now. So until I return, stay here and protect Rādhārāṇī." She said that with a smile, and then she left.

So Jīva Gosvāmī, he writes: now finally Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were alone. And as a result, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes filled with tears, and seeing her crying, Kṛṣṇa gently wiped the tears from her lotus eyes. Jīva Gosvāmī says that "by the magic of Kṛṣṇa’s touch, the mountain of Rādhā’s ruling over Braja sank into the ocean of love, and that noble, mighty queen who had been crowned that very day again took on the mood of a simple milkmaid." Thus Jīva Gosvāmī concludes; he says, "Therefore Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they are personifications of beauty, the temples of youthfulness, the kingdoms of all good qualities, the treasuries of all kinds of bliss, the substances of the 64 devotional arts, the heavenly flowers scented by Cupid’s own fragrance, the monsoon showers of loving exchanges, the pinnacles of divine charm, and the loving shelter of their devotees happily reigned over Vṛndāvana forevermore." Coronation as Queen of Vṛndāvana. So let us conclude today; yes, we have to conclude because, well, that’s the final lecture on the coronation of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. We’ll conclude with a few words of Jīva Gosvāmī in his glorious *Mādhava-mahotsava*, from which I drew much information for these three lectures. Let us hear from him; he’s the one that revealed these transcendental pastimes to us. He writes at the end of his *Mādhava-mahotsava*, his concluding words, quote: "If the *rasika-bhaktas* in some way taste even a portion of this work written by me, then my efforts will have borne fruit. Just to be seen by the devotees of Kṛṣṇa, the slayer of Aghāsura, makes one’s whole life successful. May Śrī Rādhā, who is endowed with the most intense bliss, who experiences continuous happiness, whose body is covered with symptoms of ecstasy, and who tastes the sweetness of various emotions inspired by her beloved while on the royal throne in the forest of Braja, bestow supreme beauty to everyone. I eternally serve beautiful Kṛṣṇa and his servant Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who have made my present and future life auspicious, whose precious lotus feet are most worthy of service, and who, as the personifications of magnanimity, have bestowed their own *prem-bhakti* on me in a shower of mercy. In 1555 A.D., one Jīva living in Vṛndāvana completed this new poetic work by his own desire."

For us, the revealer of this wonderful *dhāma* of Śrī Vṛndāvana, we offer our most humble obeisances. So, prabhus, that concludes our three lectures on the coronation of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as Queen of Vṛndāvana. I hope that you enjoyed these descriptions, these pastimes. I hope they have entered into your hearts and purified your hearts and helped to awaken that *bhakti-latā-bīja*, that seed of devotion for God and Kṛṣṇa that’s deep within your hearts. Thank you for this service again, and yes, there’s so much more to be discussed about Śrī Vṛndāvana, so I will go back to the books—when I say "hit the books"—and I’ll be back in a couple of days. *Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Gaurī-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya!*""