Welcome, everyone, to our live view and update on Krishna's Village of Peace at this historic Woodstock Festival, number 23.

Our devotees have now all arrived, 700 of them. They've come from great distances, at great expense, with great austerity. The bus from Moldova, which included Macedonia and devotees, took about twenty-two hours to get here. A bus came from Kiev, and from Ukraine.

And a bus came from Moscow, all the way from Moscow. I don't know how many hours that took. And devotees are here, all assembling, meeting old friends. We have a lot of veterans here at Woodstock; they've been coming for many, many years.

They know the ropes. A lot of new devotees are excited about getting involved in this Maha, Maha, Maha-preaching. We just added this to Go See, and we went over the programs for the next few days. Actually, tomorrow, we're going to have Hari-nama at 2 o'clock in the afternoon.

A lot of people have already arrived at the Woodstock Festival grounds. I haven't seen this before. Generally, they arrive one or two days before the event because there's so much publicity about Woodstock this year. It's just, it's everywhere on the internet.

It's a famous event, etc., etc. So, thousands of kids have already arrived. So, we decided to start a day early, and earlier. And we're going to go to Hari-nama with beautiful invitations, French ones, which are colorful. Invitations which describe to the kids the different events that happen over the four days of the Woodstock Festival, exactly what's happening in our village.

Our cultural program, like we have up on the close, we have a five-hour show with theaters and different dramas and lectures and, and demonstrations, a puppet show, things like that. So, we'll be doing that in the morning hours. And then in the afternoon, of course, the bands come on.

And then massive prasadam distribution. So, this was already on the invitations. We will be giving out these invitations. We will probably do about 15 or 20,000 invitations tomorrow amongst all the kids everywhere. And then we, one of our favorite activities, the Krishna's Village of Peace's mass distribution of *prasadam*, you know, really delicious.

Well, we have some fantastic cooks. We have a huge pot. Took a ton of *prasadam* at one time. And the kids all know about it. So, to start the *prasadam* distribution at four o'clock. And we're going to start *kirtan* as well.

Some of our *kirtan* leaders have arrived. Mata Hari, who's here of course, and Madhava Krsna has arrived, and Jiva Gopi is coming pretty soon. Mahatma's here. We do Govinda's. Madhava is coming here. Sarvatma, Sakti and entry. What a line of actually spoke with Febby.

I will be within tomorrow as he said, you've already got the eighteen there. So, yeah, this is an update on what, on what we're doing. And we'll keep you posted tomorrow. Maybe you can come out with us in the Hari-nama, you can see the food distribution, and we'll speak about the particulars of each day as each day unfolds.

It was in Maha, Maha, Maha-preaching, Woodstock 2017, Krishna's Village of Peace.

Thanks for joining us. And please keep us in your prayers. We need a lot of mercy to be able to do this maha-preaching. It's of unprecedented proportions, so we need a lot of mercy. It can only be done by mercy.

So please keep us in your prayers, that we can get this message of Krishna consciousness to over 1,400,000 people who would seek this. *Jaya* Krishna.

Thank you very much.