Hare Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our ever ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma, Śrīmat Nārāyaṇa Viṣṇu Padāya Kṛṣṇa Preṣṭhāya Bhūte Śrīmatī Bhakti Vedānta Swāmī, oh, glorious to. So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part 135 in which we will continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's disguises in their Vṛndāvana pastimes. But first a prayer by the poet Viasadas to remember our spiritual masters and previous ācāryas. He writes: serve the divine āsana of your guru which is passed down from one ācārya to another. It is the eternal place of the guru paramparā. Take shelter of this divine seat which is accepted by all the ācāryas and upon which the guru sits delivering the bewildered and fallen while meditating on Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I baste massage this āsana with fragrant oil which is like massaging the very lotus feet of my guru. Thank you to that poet. So let us begin today. I'd like to mention first that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are not the only ones who use disguises in Vṛndāvana pastimes. Śrīdhara Swami mentions in his Śrīla Bhāgavatam ṭīkā, verse 85, he writes:

"Tāṃś cānti gopā gopīṣu nānāśā yadā cchaturāś caraṇa dīnā peśalā" and other servants are Śrī Kṛṣṇa's foremost spies. Kṛṣṇa has spies always wearing many types of disguises. They visit the gopas, gopīs, and others in order to secretly accomplish Kṛṣṇa's tasks. Wow, Kṛṣṇa has eyes for that matter. Even the demons, the asuras, disguise themselves when they come to Vṛndāvana. Prominent amongst them is Pāṭalāsura who we've heard about many times, who disguised himself as a cowherd boy, hid amongst the other cowherd boys pretending to be one of them. He had hoped to carry off Balarāma and then kill Kṛṣṇa. But when he carried Balarāma off on his shoulders, his true demon form was revealed, and Balarāma killed him with a mighty blow. A mighty blow. Then there was Vatsāsura, who was a demon who disguised himself as a calf. Once while Kṛṣṇa was herding his calves in the forest, Vatsāsura assumed a form of a calf and charged at him, and recognizing this deception, Kṛṣṇa killed the demon. So disguises, disguises, disguises in Vṛndāvana. And of course there was Aghāsura, a demon who disguised himself as a giant serpent lying across a mountain trail to trap Kṛṣṇa and His friends. And when they all mistook his open mouth for a cave, they playfully entered it. And once inside, Kṛṣṇa expanded His form, suffocating the demon and ultimately killing him. Disguise, disguise, disguise.

Now the other day I was reading in the Uttara Kāṇḍa section of the Rāmāyaṇa. The Rāmāyaṇa, there is a pastime therein where demigods assumed disguises. It's here, there, and everywhere. Sometimes demigods assume disguises as well. In that particular pastime I was reading, it's explained also how the peacock got its beauty. So let me share it with you. I'd never heard it before or read it before. Once Rāvaṇa set out on his Puṣpaka Vimāna—what's a Puṣpaka Vimāna? It's a mystical airplane—along with an army of Rākṣasas, determined to defeat other kings, and landed on a mountain called Uśīravīra. Uśīrava. There's a mountain called Uśīrava. Rāvaṇa examined the valley therein to see whether there were any kings doing tapasyā there, and a king named Maruta was in fact performing a yoga called Maheśvara in his āśrama there, and Indra and other gods, demigods, were also present to receive their share of offerings—havya bhāga, those are the offerings that demigods receive at yajñas—but at the sight of Rāvaṇa, the demigods quickly assumed different disguises so he couldn't recognize them as demigods, and they all fled in panic. And at that time Indra assumed the disguise of the form of a large peacock. That was his disguise. He looked like a big peacock. Now as soon as Rāvaṇa left that place, it's described the demigods reassembled there. And from that time onwards, Indra, having assumed the disguise of a peacock, it's described he felt a special attachment to that kind of bird. He felt a special attachment to that kind of bird. So the next day he called for a peacock and said to it, "My dear peacock, until now you were blue in color, but from today onwards the feathers of you and your future generations will have various vibrant colors. All my thousand eyes I transfer to your feathers, my dear peacock. Also, from now on, you will be immune from all diseases, and whosoever kills you will meet with death soon after. What's more, you will dance at the commencement of the rainy season, and people will always greet you with great enthusiasm." Wow. So devotional scholars say that it is because of Indra's blessing that peacocks are so beautiful in appearance and actually they do dance at the onset of the rainy season. Wow, what history we're part of. It's amazing.

So now another Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa disguise pastime in Vraja. We'll get back to Vraja. So this pastime is famously known as Luk Luk Līlā. L-U-K L-U-K Līlā. Luk Luk Līlā. It's a tongue twister which in Brajabhāṣā language means the game of hide and seek. Let's play Luk Luk. Let's play hide-and-seek. So it's written by a lesser known Brajabhāṣā poet named Śyāmakiśora. I did some research. He was from the Haridāsa Sampradāya of the Banke Bihārī temple and he lived in mid-17th century. In his book Līlā Mādhurī, he describes a wonderful pastime of Śrīmatī Rādhārānī disguising herself. So one day Śrī Rādhā went to the Yamunā to engage in jala-keli, water sports, with their gopī friends. And at that time Kṛṣṇa just happened to be nearby herding cows in the Vṛndāvana forest when he said to his dear friend Subala, "O Subala, you are the knower of all forest mysteries. Tell me, my friend, from whom have you learned all these forest mysteries?" And Subala replied, "The goddess of the forest herself initiated me in this knowledge." Not as a goddess. The goddess of the forest herself initiated me in this knowledge. So Kṛṣṇa asked, "Then tell me how many types of grasses are there in this forest of Vṛndāvana?" What a detail. Subala thought for a moment and replied, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, there are many types of grasses in Vṛndāvana. Ṣaṭ sahasra aṣṭa śatāni ṣaṭ vimi." He said exactly 6,826 in number types of grasses. 6,826 in number. So now we know another detail of Vraja. Love is in the details. So smiling, Kṛṣṇa said, "Well done, Subala. Not only are you learned in the science of the forest, but you also have great skill in counting and remembering numbers." So Subala said, "I'm not only good in these skills, Kṛṣṇa, but I can also know by the special blessings of my guru who is present in this Vṛndāvana forest at any time." What a blessing from his guru. He could know who is present in the Vṛndāvana forest at any time. The intricacies of Vrajalā. So curious Kṛṣṇa asked, "Well Subala, can you tell me who's present right now?" So sitting in a lotus position, the yogi's lotus position, and closing his eyes in meditation, after a few moments he said, "A kanyā." A kanyā means a girl. So Kṛṣṇa said, "A kanyā? Which kanyā?" To which Subala replied, "Her name is Viśabhānu Kumārī, the daughter of Mahārāja Viśabhānu, Śrī Rādhā." So as soon as Kṛṣṇa heard Śrī Rādhā's name, he embraced Subala and said to nearby Madhumaṅgala, his cowherd friend, "Oh Madhumaṅgala, I will come back in a little while. You just take care of the cows." So then Kṛṣṇa proceeded to the banks of the Yamunā river where after searching for a while he saw Śrī Rādhā playing with her gopī friends in the water, the jala-paśa. So approaching them, Kṛṣṇa requested all the gopīs to go to Govardhana hill where he said their in-laws were gathered and were waiting for them. And then he said to Lalitā that he would bring Rādhā safely to her house that evening. Kind of transcendentally kidnapped her. And at that point Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa left together for the forest of Madhuvana. The forest of Madhuvana. And upon arriving and seeing the kuñja-galis. First time I came across this: the kuñja-galis. What are they? They are the narrow pathways through the forest of Madhuvana or any forest in Vṛndāvana. You know, it's a thick forest, Vṛndāvana. There are these dusty little pathways that go in and out and around. They're called kuñja-galis. G-A-L-I-S, kuñja-galis. So Rādhā said to Kṛṣṇa, "O jewel of the gwalas," G-W-A-L-A-S, gwalas means cowherd boys, "O jewel of the cowherd boys, behold these forest pathways. They are dense, narrow and countless in number. So let's play Luk Luk here. Hide and seek. Kṛṣṇa, let's play Luk Luk here." So Kṛṣṇa was very excited. And he replied, "Yes, I will hide and you will find me. I will hide and you will find me." But Rādhā responded, "It's always been like that. Today, however, I will hide and you try to find me." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Okay, but let me say it will be very easy and quick to find you." So Rādhā said, "We'll see. Now close your eyes and sing a song while I hide myself."

So Kṛṣṇa started singing a song all about Śrī Rādhā while Rādhārānī disguised herself in a most curious way and hid in the lush Madhuvana forest. And after some time Kṛṣṇa called out loudly, "Hey Rādhe, hey, I'm coming!" and he started to look for Rādhārānī everywhere. But after a long and futile search, he was unable to find her. So disappointed, he started praying to her. "O Rādhe, where are you? My heart is aching without your darśana. Are you safe? Please be the object of my vision." Such a beautiful line: "Please be the object of my vision." Then suddenly Kṛṣṇa came across a very handsome young cowherd boy and he said to the cowherd boy, "My dear gopa, in these narrow pathways of this Madhuvana forest, have you seen my beloved Rādhā?" So the gopa replied, "Who?" And Kṛṣṇa said, "Śrī Rādhā, my beloved." So smiling, the cowherd boy said, "O, the Rādhā who disguises herself in the soft sweet breeze of the Yamunā. The Rādhā who disguises herself in the sweet aroma of Vṛndāvana flowers. The Rādhā who disguises herself amongst the honey of dark bees. The Rādhā who experiences the magic of siddhas. The Rādhā whose names are chanted by Śiva. And the Rādhā disguised as a cowherd boy who is now standing right in front of you. And the Rādhā disguised as a cowherd boy who's standing right in front of you." So Kṛṣṇa's eyes opened very wide. "Whoa." And he said, "O Rādhe, indeed your presence is felt in each and everything in this forest of Vṛndāvana, but witnessing you disguised in gopa-veśa, meaning cowherd boy dress, is indeed the most wonderful thing. This time you really did trick me. All glories to your gopa disguise as a gvala in Madhuvana. A gvala in Madhuvana." The poet Śyāmakiśora sings the glories of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa who roam together on the forest trails of Madhuvana.

Wow. So let us conclude today with a verse from Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.16.46:

Obeisances to you, O Lord, who manifest varieties of material and spiritual qualities. You disguise yourself with the material qualities, and yet the functioning of those same material qualities ultimately reveals your existence. You stand apart from the material qualities as a witness and can be fully known only by your devotees.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Oh glorious to. So thank you, prabhus. This was a fun class today hearing all these different pastimes. Transcendentally fun. So we'll be back next Friday with more nectar on disguises. There's so many disguises as we're reading: Vraja, Kṛṣṇa, cowherd boys, demigods, asuras. It's an interesting topic and we have more to say. So Śrī Śrī Gaura Gītāya, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarāma Gītāya, Śrī Vṛndāvana and disguises Gītāya.

Sanitiḥ. Jaya. He śrī glories to Vraja.