""Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and a warm welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. We are continuing with our miniseries on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 88. In this lecture, I would like to continue our discussions on the vīṇā, the musical instrument. You may remember last week we discussed how Nārada Muni acquired this beautiful instrument, how he was trained to play it, and how he travels both in the material world and the spiritual world playing it while singing the glories of the Lord. All glories to Nārada Muni. 

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī refers to Nārada's vīṇā as follows in his *Stavamālā*, wherein he is actually glorifying the holy names of Kṛṣṇa. He writes: "O life of Nārada's vīṇā! O you who are like the waves of essential nectar in the ocean of sweetness, O Kṛṣṇa-nāma, I pray that you please always manifest on my tongue with transcendental rasa." Actually, we must thank Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī for his continuous, deep realizations, which he shares with us through his writings and his poems on everything Kṛṣṇa-conscious. Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has written about him in his invocation to his commentary on Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *Utkalikā-vallarī*. He writes as follows: "May Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, the king of emotional devotees, who makes even stone-like hearts melt with his *Utkalikā-vallarī* prayers, and who is the bestower of pure devotion for the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, be merciful unto us." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, regarding the vīṇā: the vīṇā is one of the oldest instruments actually recorded in Vedic literature, for it is mentioned in both the *Ṛg Veda* and *Sāma Veda*. According to the Vedas, a vīṇā player needs to master Vedic wisdom. It is not just enough to know how to play the vīṇā; the Vedas say that a player should also know the secrets of the vīṇā and how it responds specifically to devotional music. The Vedas say that if played properly according to these injunctions, one can even attain mokṣa, or liberation. I found that interesting. This is confirmed in a śloka from the *Yājñavalkya-smṛti*: "One who knows the mysteries of playing the vīṇā is adept in śruti and jāti, has knowledge of the śāstras, and has knowledge of the tāla, meaning rhythm, effortlessly finds himself on the way to mokṣa, or liberation." What a quote! 

A famous and learned Vedic scholar named V. Subramania Sharma wrote in his *Vīṇā-rahasya*—and I will quote here—"In days of yore, yogis who practiced vāyu-yoga, he says the most difficult form of yoga, played the vīṇā when intense heat was generated in their bodies due to their yoga practices. The right kind of rāga played on the vīṇā created a sāttvika-bhāva in such yogis, which cooled their bodies. Such yogis needed to be elevated from materialistic and ignoble thoughts and feelings to noble and sattva feelings and consciousness." Quite eloquent, but interesting, you know, that the heat generated from the yoga practice, they could cool it down by playing the vīṇā, a special instrument.

So now, vīṇās are typically around 1 meter or 3.5 feet in length, although the size can vary depending on the height of the player, and usually the vīṇā is played while sitting down cross-legged. And I was reading that there are actually different kinds or different types of vīṇās: there's the Sarasvatī vīṇā, the Rudra vīṇā, the Chitra vīṇā, there's the tritantrī vīṇā—it's kind of a tongue twister, the tritantrī vīṇā—and there's the vicitra vīṇā, which I read is actually the favorite vīṇā of Lalitā-sakhī. That particular vīṇā has technically four melody strings, five drone strings, and 13 sympathetic strings for those who are into stringed instruments.

Now, one very interesting thing I read in my search is that according to the *Śiva Purāṇa*, Rāvaṇa, the asura Rāvaṇa, was actually an expert vīṇā player. Actually, therein Rāvaṇa is described as a staunch devotee of Lord Śiva, as well as a wise man who had complete knowledge of the Vedas. However, as we know, he was also completely and extremely arrogant, which is ultimately the reason for his downfall. So, once it is described in the *Śiva Purāṇa*, Rāvaṇa wanted to show off his strength to Śiva. How? By lifting Mount Kailāśa. And while doing so, he reached down and effortlessly lifted up this huge mountain with Śiva and Pārvatī still sitting on its peak. Now feeling a sudden, you could say, earthquake, and realizing what Rāvaṇa was doing, Lord Śiva decided to teach him a lesson. So, Lord Śiva very lightly pressed down the big toe of his left foot, and immediately the mountain started coming down on Rāvaṇa, threatening to crush him under it. So, it is described that Rāvaṇa thought fast, and knowing how Lord Śiva is fond of music, he immediately tore open his chest with his fingernails and pulled out his own nerves, and then wound them around his toes so as to form—it is described—a vīṇā of some sort. And sitting in the same uncomfortable position, he started playing on his own jīva-vīṇā; it is described his jīva-vīṇā, literally, you could say, playing his heart and soul. Now, moved by this melodious music, Lord Śiva swayed in bliss just for a moment, because he likes music, and without realizing it, lifted his toe slightly off the ground. This eased the pressure, allowing Rāvaṇa to scramble out in a hurry. Then, realizing this mistake, this mighty king of Laṅkā approached Lord Śiva and fell down on the ground like a rod, a daṇḍavat, falling at his feet and apologizing profusely. Hare Kṛṣṇa. So I thought that was an interesting thing, he created a vīṇā from his own nerves. 

And actually, I read that in the past, several hundred years ago, in the courts of the Rajput kings in Rajasthan, poets and singers used to play a string instrument; it was called a rāvaṇahattha. They called it a rāvaṇahattha—an instrument that it is said was inspired by the vīṇā made by Rāvaṇa from his own body. And actually, I've seen several times, when I'm in Jaipur, that this instrument is still being played by musicians in the evenings out at the Amber Fort; they sit on the steps of the fort and they play for tourists. I've seen that particular instrument.

Anyway, now we'll move on to the vīṇā's role in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana. It would be good to get back to Braja, after all, this is part of a miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, not Rādhā's pastimes with Lord Śiva in a ghastly rasa. 

So, one of my favorite Vṛndāvana poets, who are so important to evoke emotion in our hearts, spiritual emotion—bhakti—is Śrī Balabhadra Dāsa, and he composed a beautiful poem several hundred years ago describing a midday pastime of a concert of music that once took place in the Vṛndāvana forest. Therein, he describes that in front of a large assembly of gopīs, the Divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, were playing flute and vīṇā together. In front of the gopīs, they were playing the flute and the vīṇā together, and he mentions the poem should be sung in the rāga Sāraṅga melody. So, here it is; he wrote—it is actually in present tense: "Śrī Kṛṣṇa, drenched in the hue of love, is sitting with Śrī Rādhā inside a kuñja-vana, playing rāga Sāraṅga through the nectarian flute on his lips. In spite of being the enchanter, very skilled, extremely clever, and full of attributes, he is playing the wrong note deliberately this time. Then his beloved Śrī Rādhā, who is a mine of all fine arts, who is the abode of all attributes, who is extremely intelligent, picks up her vīṇā and plays the same note but in a different style." Śrī Balabhadra Dāsa says here, "Hearing this, my Lord, the upholder of Śrī Girirāja, is extremely pleased and, giving her a garland from his chest, lovingly says, 'Well done, wonderful, so good, so fine, you are most beautiful and the very source of all my happiness.'"

And in his *Utkalikā-vallarī*, verse 13, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī also alludes to the fact that sometimes Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa play their favorite instruments together. He writes: "O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the song of your flute is the Agastya Muni that swallows the ocean of Śrī Rādhā’s unyielding self-restraint. O Śrī Rādhikā, your skill at playing the vīṇā is so extraordinary that your music bewitches the deer-like heart of he who enchants the entire world." What, we know, without these ācāryas we would not get this glimpse into the spiritual world so beautifully. Now, in his commentary to this particular verse, which I just quoted by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa writes—he wrote a commentary on *Utkalikā-vallarī*—he writes: "Quote: This verse indicates that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are dedicated to pleasing each other through the expert playing of their instruments." Short but very sweet commentary.

Now, in *Stava-mālā*, verse two, our beloved Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī gives us another glimpse of the vīṇā's role in Vṛndāvana-līlā. In the following stanza, he is expressing his own personal desire to associate with the gopī friends of Rādhārāṇī and participate in their pastimes with her. He writes, addressing a gopī: "O friend, when being asked by playful and charming Lalitā, will Śrī Rādhā happily, sweetly, affectionately, and shyly teach me again and again your splendid and peerless pastimes filled with many concealed riddles and puns while accompanied by the beautiful sound of her, Śrī Rādhā's, vīṇā?"

Now, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī gives yet another hint of the vīṇā in Śrī Rādhā's pastimes in his *Stavāvalī*. *Stavāvalī* has different songs, so in the song called *Prārthanā-daśaka-bhūmikā-vandanā*, he describes—he mentions the vīṇā again. And interestingly enough, I was reading that Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s description of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s transcendental body in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, verses 165 to 181, is actually based on the book *Stavāvalī* by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Now, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's translation of the original Sanskrit of the song *Prārthayamāna-bhūmikā* reads as follows: "So nice, she sleeps in her room with the aroma of pride, and when she lies down in her bed, the transcendental variety of her loving ecstasies are like a jeweled locket in the midst of her necklace of separation. Her transcendental chest is covered by her sarī in the form of affection and anger towards Kṛṣṇa. She has a stringed instrument, a stringed instrument known as a kaccha-vīṇā, which is the fame and fortune that actually dries up the faces of the other gopīs. She always keeps her hands on the shoulder of her gopī friend who represents her youthful beauty, and although she is highly qualified with so many spiritual assets, she is nonetheless affected by the Cupid, Kṛṣṇa." As we heard, the vīṇā again. 

Now, not only is Śrī Rādhā expert, as we have been hearing, in playing the vīṇā, but so was her sakhī, Tuṅgavidyā. I was reading Tuṅgavidyā is a celebrated music teacher who is also an expert singer. She sings in the style known as *Mārga*, and it is said that with her vīṇā and her singing, she provides background music for the Divine couple's evening pastimes. Wherever they are in the evening, Tuṅgavidyā comes and she sings and plays the vīṇā. So just see how relevant the vīṇā is in Braja-līlā; such an important instrument.

Now, here is something really interesting. When I read this, I was like, "What? Kṛṣṇa also plays a vīṇā?" Yes, Kṛṣṇa plays a vīṇā. The description of his vīṇā is found in *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, text 121 to 124, by Rūpa Gosvāmī. He writes: "Kṛṣṇa has several flutes, one of which is Bhuvanamohinī. Another flute is named Mahānanda; it is like a fishhook that captures the fish of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s heart and mind. Another flute, which has six holes, is known as Madana-jañtī. Kṛṣṇa’s flute named Kalanā makes a low tone-like sound like softly singing cuckoos. He is very fond of playing this flute in the rāgas Gauḍī and Gāndhārī. Then, next, his vīṇā is named Taraṅgiṇī." There you go, it's a vīṇā. "His vīṇā is named Taraṅgiṇī." Kṛṣṇa then—he concludes, "The wonderful sacred mantra he chants is the name of his dearest Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." That's Kṛṣṇa’s mantra. The wonderful sacred mantra he chants is the name of his dear-most Rādhārāṇī. And so too is our mantra, because in the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra we have Śrī Rādhā: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

So, Kṛṣṇa's favorite instrument is the flute, while Rādhā's favorite instrument is this vīṇā called the kaccha-vīṇā. But what's amazing is that Rādhārāṇī also plays the flute, as we just heard. Kṛṣṇa plays her favorite instrument, a vīṇā, so she plays his favorite instrument, a flute. And according to the gopīs, she actually plays the flute better than Kṛṣṇa. Śāstra says that she even teaches Kṛṣṇa how to play the flute. In fact, the place where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī used to give flute lessons to Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, it's in a particular kuñja called Nidhivana, in Vṛndāvana, and that place is still visited and worshiped by pilgrims even today. That particular place, that particular forest, there's even a temple of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī at the exact place where she gave Kṛṣṇa flute lessons. We've been there with our parikramā party in Kārttika. And interestingly, the famous deity of Baṅke Bihārī, he is so famous in Vṛndāvana, appeared near there as well in a place called Raṅga-mahal in that particular forest, Nidhivana. 

And on the far side of Nidhivana, I'm remembering, is the samādhi of the famous Swami Haridāsa. Now, it might be good to mention at this point that oral tradition has it that Swami Haridāsa was the guru of Tansen, the famous musician in the court of the Emperor Akbar several hundred years ago. Some of you may remember that several years ago, we lectured on Tansen, and it is said that Akbar once came to Nidhivana with Tansen to hear Swami Haridāsa sing because he was such a beautiful singer with a vīṇā. And the Emperor Akbar came dressed as a commoner, and he watched and listened with great satisfaction as Tansen first performed a song for his guru, Swami Haridāsa. He actually performed it—I was reading—in the dhrupad rāga, accompanied by his vīṇā. And when his student Tansen had finished, then Swami Haridāsa took the vīṇā and pointed out a mistake that Tansen had made in the bhajan. And then famously, Swami Haridāsa sang the same rāga so sweetly that all the birds and the animals in the nearby forest gathered to hear. Just in your mind's eye, you can see this saint is playing the vīṇā and singing a bhajan glorifying Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa so sweetly and so with so much bhāva, he touched the hearts of all the animals—the deer, the rabbit, the squirrels, the chipmunks, the butterflies, the bees—they all came and they assembled to hear. Wow! And Akbar had never heard such beautiful singing, it is described, nor had he ever seen such a devotional performance that attracted all kinds of living entities. 

So afterwards, Akbar, he just begged; he repeatedly asked to do some service for Swami Haridāsa, as is the custom when you get some mercy from a sādhu. But Swami Haridāsa replied that he didn't need anything; he is a true saint, he has everything, Kṛṣṇa-bhakti. So, he suggested that the Emperor could do something for Vṛndāvana, something for Braja. He said, "My dear Emperor, you are so persistent and have such a keen desire, so please, kindly get one of the broken stairs on the Yamunā-ghāṭ repaired. Just get—there's a broken stair on the ghāṭ down by the Yamunā—just repair that." And he then directed his disciples to take the Emperor to this ghāṭ where there's a broken stair. 

Now Akbar was disappointed and somewhat offended. He thought, "Swami Haridāsa is telling me—I am the King of Hindustan—to get a damaged stair repaired? I'm the one who has constructed huge forts and built big mosques, and now his disciples are taking me to see a broken stair which I should get repaired?" He's thinking, "Certainly this sage Swami Haridāsa is a great musician, but it seems to me he's a little bit mad at the same time." Nevertheless, he remained calm and followed Swami Haridāsa’s students to the banks of the Yamunā. And when they reached their intended destination, Swami Haridāsa’s disciples eagerly pointed out the broken-down staircase. But Akbar, who obviously had no understanding of the transcendental nature of Vṛndāvana, just stared at this very simple—how could you say—stone-mortar masonry, again wondering why the saint Swami Haridāsa was engaging him in such a menial task. But Vṛndāvana is full of wonders. Suddenly, right before his eyes, the entire ghāṭ appeared to him to be built of precious metals like gold and silver and platinum and studded with all kinds of rare gems; it is described like rubies and diamonds, sapphires, emeralds, and all these jewels were glowing everywhere like the sun. Only that particular stair, a particular stair on that staircase which was indicated by Swami Haridāsa’s disciples, was missing a significant number of such jewels. So, overwhelmed by what he saw, Akbar realized that he wouldn't be able to get the matching gems to repair that particular stair on the staircase, even if he spent his entire royal treasury to repair it. He must have had a big treasury because he was Emperor. He realized, "How can—there's so many jewels on this one block on the staircase, I can't do that." He fainted. When he woke up, he realized at that point that Swami Haridāsa was more than just an expert player of the vīṇā and singer, and he realized that most importantly, Vṛndāvana was not or is not an ordinary place. And then suddenly this whole scene before him changed again, and the ghāṭ appeared as an ordinary stone-mortar masonry. So he was in shock—Vṛndāvana is such an amazing place. 

So, still in shock, Akbar walked back to Swami Haridāsa’s hut, and he just fell before him, daṇḍavats—like a rod, daṇḍavat means you fall like a rod—and he was just stunned, and he was expressing great respect for this great saint. And then he admitted to him his incapacity to touch anything in Vṛndāvana. "How could you do anything for Vṛndāvana?" So he is the Emperor, now he is being very humbled by this transcendental abode of Vṛndāvana of which he had a vision by the mercy of the saints. And he just, after paying his respects, he left for Delhi along with Tansen. How could he fix that ghāṭ? It was all the sādhu's grace to show him the glories of Braja. Amazing story. Vṛndāvana is such an amazing place. It brings to mind one of my favorite verses, again from *Utkalikā-vallarī* by Rūpa Gosvāmī—*Utkalikā-vallarī* means translated, "A Vine of Hopes." So, text 66: "We hear the miracles that happened in Vṛndāvana. O handsome, fragrant, transcendental desire tree blooming in the Vṛndāvana forest and embraced by the mādhavī vine of the Goddess ruling this forest, O tree, the shade of whose glory protects the world from a host of burning sufferings, what wonderful fruits did the people find at your feet, Vṛndāvana? What wonderful fruits did the people find at your feet?" Not just, you know, mangoes and oranges and whatever, but the mysteries of Vṛndāvana and all its glories are revealed to a sincere devotee. When will that day be ours?

So, back to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the power of her favored instrument, the kaccha-vīṇā. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī again, in *Utkalikā-vallarī* verse 28, he writes—we can get some more appreciation for her vīṇā—he writes: "O Vṛndāvana-īśvarī, Śrī Rādhike, the sound of your vīṇā overpowers and silences the flute song of he who is crowned with the peacock feather. When will the music of your vīṇā reach my ears? When will the music of your vīṇā reach my ears?" Now, in his own words, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī confirms that Śrī Rādhā’s vīṇā overpowers Kṛṣṇa. In his *Stavāvalī*, it's in the section called *Śrī Viśākhā-vīṇā-stotra*, verse 121, he writes as follows: "The sound of Rādhā’s vīṇā makes Kṛṣṇa tremble and the flute slips from his hand. The tinkling of her bracelets and ornaments makes him forget his own body and the path that leads him back to his home." Another, we could say, absolute confirmation that Rādhārāṇī is expert in playing the vīṇā comes from Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who in his commentary on *Brahma-saṃhitā*—we all know that it’s actually published, his commentary on *Brahma-saṃhitā* on text 37—in that commentary, and in text 37, he famously reveals the 64 transcendental arts that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is expert in. And we always read this on Rādhāṣṭamī, her appearance day, we all read the 64 arts that she's expert in. And therein he describes, in text 37, that the 28th art form that she's famous for is *vīṇā-vādya*, meaning Śrī Rādhā is expert in the art of playing the vīṇā and a small drum, most wonderfully. What he says, he confirms she's expert in the art of playing the vīṇā, and he includes a small drum, most wonderfully. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, finally, in the book *Saṅgīta-ratnākara* by Śrī Śārṅgadeva, I found this book in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, we find the praṇāma-mantra for the vīṇā. Now, there's a lot of Sanskrit, I won't be able to repeat all that, recite all that, but here is the praṇāma-mantra for this most amazing instrument. He writes: "Even if one simply sees or touches a vīṇā, it bestows comfort both during and after one's lifetime. It cleanses and purifies all sins and evils, not only of the downtrodden but also of those who have committed heinous crimes. I offer my respects to the glorious vīṇā instrument. I offer my respects to the glorious vīṇā instrument." 

So do we! The author further attributes different parts of the vīṇā to the different demigods who reside in the vīṇā. Just like in the *daṇḍa* of a sannyāsī, it is said 33 million demigods reside within the *daṇḍa* of a sannyāsī; so also within this particular instrument, the demigods reside. He writes: "Lord Śiva is in the vīṇā's body, Pārvatī in its strings, Lord Viṣṇu in the bridge, Lakṣmī in the main resonator, Brahmā in the second resonator, Sarasvatī in the nābhī—which is the center part of the chest board which resonates at the actual sound—Vāsuki the serpent king is in the pegs of the vīṇā, the Moon is in the jīvāla—which is described as the cotton thread pieces that are used between the string and the bridge—and the Sun-god is in the frets." And he concludes that because all the devas are invoked in the vīṇā, it is indeed a very auspicious instrument. Maybe this talk, this lecture, will encourage some devotees to learn to play the vīṇā.

So I would like to actually end today with the Sanskrit poem by a South Indian Vaiṣṇava named Deśika Swami. It's a prayer that he offers to his spiritual master in the introduction to his book called *Dayā-śatakam*. *Dayā-śatakam* is translated as 100 verses dedicated to the mercy of the Lord and Guru. So he writes, so beautiful: "I am but a child in age, knowledge, and devotion, but my Guru, as part of his deeds, placed me on the high pedestal as an ācārya. Not content with that, he also created beautiful poetry too, using me as an instrument. He has put me in the place of a high-quality vīṇā, which produces melodies that gladdens the heart and uplifts the soul. Even though I am by myself, like the vīṇā, incapable of composing poetry, my Guru, like an expert musician who can produce soul-stirring music from the most ineffective of instruments, has composed this excellent poetical work of *Dayā-śatakam* using me as but an instrument. I offer my respectful obeisances to him again and again and again." Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

Thank you, prabhus, it's a wonderful research, this transcendental instrument. This is part two. We'll move on to another item next Friday, which will stimulate somehow or other our ecstasy and love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We'll make it there one day, don't worry. Bring Kṛṣṇa there; keep hearing about Braja, Braja, Braja, Braja, studying and going there and rolling in the dust and embracing the desire trees and praying to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her priya-sakhi, that we can reside there eternally. It will happen, but gradually, specifically by hearing. Śravaṇam is the first of the nine processes. So, see you next week. Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-kī-jaya. Vṛndāvana-dhāma-kī-jaya. May Kṛṣṇa-nāma-kī-jaya. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""