Everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Vrindavan Dham, Śrīmatī Bhakti-devi. We're continuing with our mini-series entitled "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 34. In this lecture, I would like to continue discussing Krishna's ornaments.

Actually, this will be our third lecture on His ornaments. As we've stated many times, all these many lectures are meant to stimulate our love for the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, in Vrindavan. It may seem like a very lofty goal, but it's really possible.

Rūpa Gosvāmī very beautifully summarizes in his introduction to the *Ādi-līlā* section of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*: "He writes it's very beautiful. Govinda resides eternally in Vrindavan, in the spiritual world of Vrindavan. The buildings are made of touchstone, the cows are known as Surabhi cows, givers of abundant milk, and the trees are known as wish-fulfilling trees, for they yield what everyone desires.

And He is worshiped by hundreds and thousands of gopis, cowherd girls, who are all goddesses of Fortune. When Krishna descends to the material world, the same Vrindavan descends, just as an entourage accompanies an important person, because when Krishna comes, His land also comes.

Vrindavan is not considered to exist in the material world. Therefore, devotees take shelter of the Vrindavan in India, for it is considered to be a replica of the original Vrindavan." Although one may complain that no corporation wish-fulfilling trees exist there, when the Goswamis were there, *kalpavṛkṣas* were present.

It is not that one can simply go to such a tree and make demands. What must first become a devotee. The Goswamis would live under a tree for one night only, and the trees would satisfy all their desires. For the common man, this may all seem very wonderful, but as one makes progress in devotional service, all this can be realized.

As one makes progress in devotional service, all this can be realized. Thank you. So, before describing Krishna's ornaments in detail today, I'd like to take some time to discuss more about His general dress, upon which these ornaments are placed, to get a full picture of His attire.

That there are four kinds of clothes, a dress on the body of Krishna: Number one, His shirt; number two, His turban; number three, His belt; and number four, His wearing garments.

Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that in Vrindavan, Krishna very often wears reddish garments with a golden shirt and an orange-colored turban on His head.

In *Nectar of Devotion*, which, of course, is a summary of *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in chapter 26, "Krishna also wears different kinds of belts that, when combined with His enchanting smile, increase the transcendental bliss of His associates." Prabhupāda says that as a baby elephant is sometimes dressed in colorful clothing, so Krishna's beauty is manifested with such colorful clothing on different parts of His body.

Wonderful details. Then, quoting Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that the word *ākulpa*, *akūpa*, refers to specifically the texture of Krishna's hair, His nicely dressed body, anointed with sandalwood pulp, and decorated with flower garlands, His *tilaka*, and His chewing betel.

He's doing fine now. Regarding Krishna's hair, Rūpa Gosvāmī says it's sometimes decorated with flowers, placed on the middle of His head, or else reaching down His back.

These are all meditations for a devotee. As for the ointment on His body, the pulp of sandalwood, it generally appears to be white, and when it's mixed with saffron dye, it appears to be yellow. He also goes on to say that in Vrindavan, where there are obviously many varieties of flowers, Krishna very often wears a vaijayanti Garland.

A vaijayanti Garland. Now, this vaijayanti Garland is made of at least, Prabhupāda writes, at least five differently colored flowers, and this special, this special Garland is very long.

It actually sometimes it's described it goes to His ankles, and sometimes *śāstra* describes it touches His feet, either or. But besides the special Garland, there are other kinds of flower garlands too, sometimes decorating Krishna's head, while at other times hanging around His neck and His chest.

Krishna is sometimes called Vanamaali.

Vana, or van, means forest, and maali means, Prabhupāda translated as gardener.

Maali means gardener. So, Vanamaali means one who extensively uses flowers and garlands on different parts of His body. Now, it's interesting to note here that Krishna is dressed, or was is, and was dressed like this, not only in Vrindavan.

Rūpa Gosvāmī says also on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, He was dressed like this. And He writes, "Seeing such colorful dress and the garlands of different flowers, some great sages prayed, 'Lord Krishna was going to the battlefield of Kurukshetra not to fight, but to grace all the devotees with His presence.'" Now, as regards the ornaments that decorate Krishna's body and the clothes that we mentioned, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* that Krishna's helmet, His earrings, His necklace, His four garments, the bangles on His head, the rings on His fingers, His ankle bells, and His flute are all different features of His ornaments.

He concludes that "just saying that," He concludes, "the enemy of,*agāt* (which means ignorance or suffering), always looked beautiful with this incomparable helmet, His earrings made of diamonds, His necklace of pearls, His bangles, embroidered garments, and the beautiful rings on His fingers." Now, for what's the word, connoisseurs of *rasa* who are interested in, you know, the details of everything connected to Krishna, gives a more, a more extensive list of Krishna's ornaments in his erotic *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Gaṇadeśha Dīpikā*.

He wrote the *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Gaṇadeśha Dīpikā*, which we will read from now, or let us say, recite from, and it includes some details that we mentioned in previous lectures, but herein we'll discuss it in more explicit detail, meaning with the Sanskrit text.

So, to begin with: Rūpa Gosvāmī describes on both arms of Krishna are great protection amulets, bedecked with nine gems.

So, I was curious, what are these nine gems?

Details, details, details. I researched and found out that these nine gems are as follows: Pearl, Ruby, Cat's eye, *Hasanite*, Emerald, Coral, Yellow Sapphire, Blue Sapphire, and Diamonds. Then, the next ornament that Rūpa Gosvāmī reveals to us here. The two armlets of Krishna are known as *Aṅgada*.

His two bangles are named *Kāñcana*, and the ring around His finger, the ring around His finger is named *Ratnamukhi*. The beautiful name for the devotee, *Ratnam*. And the golden cloth that He wears is known as *Dhīra-kāṅchana*. The golden waist bells of Krishna are named *Haṁsa*, and *Gañjana*.

The sweet tinkling of these waist bells, Rūpa says, and anklets forcibly snatch away the hearts of the *Dora* and Gopis. The *Haṁsa-Gañjana* anklets. His golden necklace is named *Tārāvalī*. His pearl necklace, Krishna's pearl necklace, *Prabhā*.

The locket around His chest, He also has a locket around His chest, *Bhīṣaṇa-mohana*. And I was reading that that particular locket contains a painting of Śrī Rādhā in it. Then, that famous, most famous jewel, *Mani*, that decorates His lotus chest, was offered by the wives of Kāliya when he entered into the waters to defeat Kāliya.

Then Rūpa writes, *Maṇḍala*. His two sharp-shaped earrings are named *Rati-rāga* and *Daivata*. He wears shark-shaped earrings, one is called *Rati-rāga*, another is *Daivata*. His crown is named *Ratnapura*, and the crest ornament on top of His crown is named *Cāmara-dāmarī*. *Cāmara-dāmarī*, the top jewel.

Then, the peacock feather crown of Krishna is named *He's* famous for the peacock feather in his crown. *Mona*.

His *Guñjā-mālā*, that made from the *guñjā* berries, is named *Rāgāvalī*, and His *tilaka*, Krishna's *tilaka*, *Iṣṭa-mohana*.

So, the next item... This is going into detail of the, of the, um, the vaijayanti Garland we mentioned earlier. The Garland around His neck, made of many wonderful leaves and flowers, is named *Vanamālā*. And the Garland made out of five special different colors is named *Vaijayantī*.

So, He has a normal Garland, quote unquote normal, nothing's normal in Vrindavan, of many leaves and flowers, it's Vanamālā. And the special Garland with five different colors is named Vaijayantī. Now, I did some more research and according to the famous *Prema-mañjarī* commentary, there's a *Prema-mañjarī* commentary on *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* 10.21.5, states: "Vaijayanti, this particular, these particular garlands are made of five flowers: Tulasi, Kuṇḍa (which means Jasmine), Mandara (means hibiscus), Parijata (the Parijata is actually the night-flowering Jasmine, I always wondered what Parijata was, but I found in that commentary in the *Bhagavatam* it's the night-flowering Jasmine), and number five, the lotus." Now, according to the *Bhakta-mano-rañjanī* commentary, another commentary on *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* 10.21.5, the five flowers of this vaijayanti Garland have to be of the following colors.

This is really going into the details, details. So, white, red, yellow, light blue, and dark bluish-black. So, pujaris, take note. If you want to put a vaijayanti Garland on Krishna, the deity, down to His ankles or down to His feet.

The colors in that, you may not be able to get the flowers mentioned in the West, the night-blooming Jasmine, but try to match the colors of the vaijayanti Garland, which again are white, red, yellow, light blue, and dark bluish-black.

That will please Krishna and Rūpa Gosvāmī too, because he gave us that information.

So, next, Ivan. The concluding verse here. "The *aṣṭamī* night of the dark fortnight of the month of Bhadra has become ornamented, ornamented by the appearance of Krishna.

On that night, the moon aligns with this dear wife, the constellation named Rohini." This is how Rūpa Gosvāmī concludes this detailed description that He has given to us. Very nice. Now, we'll move on. As we explained in a previous class, Mother Yaśodā decorates Krishna.

Remember, in the morning, we were discussing, she decorates Krishna with all these different beautiful ornaments of jewelry before Krishna goes off with His friends to herd the cows and the pasturing grounds of Vrindavan.

And she dresses Krishna in different ornaments for different pastimes because perhaps He'll engage in other pastimes during the day.

So, there are different ornaments, it's described by Rūpa Gosvāmī, for different pastimes. It's like, you know, we ourselves dress accordingly to the place we're going or what's happening there, etc. So, same with Krishna, He dresses according to different pastimes.

Actually, I read there's a saying in Braja, in Braja Bhasa language. It means *Vesh*, which is the dress and ornaments, should be according to the mood of the pastime. You have to dress Krishna according to the mood of the pastime.

So, I said that by side, like that, for example, when Krishna attends the Royal Court with His father, Nanda Mahārāja, we discussed that pastime, I think, two years ago.

When Krishna attends the Royal Court with His father, Nanda Mahārāja, He wears opulent robes, royal robes, with gold-studded gems.

I remember. And while in the forest, He accepts all the leaves, the vines, and flowers, feathers from different birds, and sticks of bamboo that the forest offers Him. I like that. The forest, everything's conscious in Vrindavan. So, these things are offered by the forest to Krishna for His pastimes there.

A little bit different dress because of a different mood. And then, when Krishna goes to meet Śrī Rādhikā, it's described He dresses in the most attractive *nayaka*, as the most attractive hero, or hero who destroys the pride of Cupid.

He'll dress as a hero. And when He kills demons, it's described He dresses to appear like fear personified, standing before them, ready to kill them. I didn't read the details, but just to show you, there are different dresses according to different moods.

So, when He kills the demons, He appears like fear personified, standing before them, ready to kill. Now, more specific details of Krishna's dressing according to a particular pastime are given by the Vaisnava poet Paramānanda Dāsa of the Vallabha Sampradāya in his work entitled *Śrī Caita Paramānanda Dāsa Padāvalī*.

Now, the Vallabha Sampradāya sometimes referred to as Pushtimarga. And Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Nectar of Devotion* as follows: "The process of devotional service is sometimes called Pushtimarga.

Pushti means nourishing, and *mārga* means path. Such development of sentiment nourishes devotional service to the highest standard. Thus, it is called the path of nourishment, or Pushtimarga. The Vallabha Sampradāya, which belongs to the Viṣṇusvāmi sect of the Vaishnav religion, worships Krishna in this Pushtimarga." So, we're quoting from a poet of that Pushti Marg, which Prabhupāda glorifies in *Nectar of Devotion*, that mood, that sentiment.

So, Paramānanda Dāsa has written that it's very interesting. After waking up in the early morning, Krishna first washes His face and rinses His mouth.

Then He uses a twig to clean His teeth with a gold leaf-shaped tool called *Jivha-lekha-ni*. To clean His tongue. After rinsing His mouth with the sweet, fragrant, and cool water of the Yamuna River from a golden pot, Krishna then has breakfast, which is called *Bhog*.

The poet writes, this breakfast is enriched with butter, yogurt, and churned milk. Then Krishna gets dressed, or He is dressed, to wrestle with His friends that day.

Now, the ornaments that Mother dresses Him in for such pastimes, they're called *Vṛhad-śṛṅgāra*. Again, this is the class about ornaments. So, the particular ornaments that He's dressed in for wrestling are called *Vṛhad-śṛṅgāra*. Where the poet says, "Every limb and part of Krishna's transcendental body is decorated with different kinds of ornaments of gold and gems, all for wrestling." And for these wrestling pastimes, He wears a pearl necklace called *Teja-vardhana*.

This translates, this means an ornament to increase *tejas* or glow. He also wears an armlet on His left arm, on His left arm, known as *Bala-vardhana*, meaning an ornament to increase power or strength, because He's wrestling with the boys.

He also wears a golden chain around His waist called *Vira-vardhana*. It means literally an ornament of increasing potency. Now, it's the cowherd boy Viśāla and his servants that help dress Krishna in these specific ornaments.

They help. At this point, the Braja poet Lālikā-kiśora takes over. And I'm just saying he takes over by describing how, after Mother Yaśodā dresses Krishna, she goes out in search of a peacock feather, a famous peacock feather took place in his turban or his crown.

And he writes, "When she comes out in the open courtyard of the palace, she finds hundreds of peacocks opening their feathers in different ways to offer them to decorate Krishna." So, expecting their feathers will be offered that day, every peacock calls out very loudly, the names of Krishna, like, "Take my peacock feathers!" So, Lālikā-kiśora says a little bewildered by this display, so many peacocks offering their feathers, Mother Yaśodā just picks up one feather from the nearest peacock.

She just picked one feather from the nearest peacock. So, also the poet Sūradāsa, also from the Pushtimarga, he refers to these blessed peacocks in one of his poems called. He writes, "Oh friend, look at those most fortunate peacocks, with whose feathers the son of Nanda, Lord Krishna, decorated His crown.

How fortunate also are Nanda and Yaśodā, His parents. They must have acquired so much merit previously. Why was I not born as the dust in Vrindavan, so that the lotus feet of my Lord could just step all over me?" The Creator Brahmā and the great sages, Nanda, and Śaunaka, all stand in awe with their folded hands in prayers.

Sūradāsa concludes, "Just to catch a glimpse of that Śrī Krishna, the butter thief, means everything to saintly persons." Just to catch a glimpse of that Śrī Krishna, the butter thief, means everything to saintly persons.

Now, after the early morning wrestling matches, let me remember, Subala and Śrīdāma, they dressed Krishna in lighter clothes, closing ornaments.

Pastimes finished. So, now, another mood. When Vrindavan is full of so many moods, transcendental moods of love. So, Mother Maṅgala, Subala, and Śrīdāma, they dress Krishna in lighter clothes and ornaments at that time.

Krishna wears a *dhotī*, a *chattara*, and again, a forest flower garland.

His wrists are decorated with bands made of white, fragrant flowers, and His turban is decorated with different types of motives and feathers, as well as a long braid down His back. Now, the next phase of this *śṛṅgāra*, or ornamentation, is when Krishna gets tired.

He's with cows and the cowherd boys all day out in the forest. He sneaks away at 12 noon to meet Śrī Rādhā and Rādhā-kuṇḍa. So, the pastime is, He gets tired, quote unquote tired, and He comes back home late afternoon, maybe early evening, you could say.

At that time, you know, the mood changes. So, the ornaments change, the clothes change. At that time, the mother of Balarāma, Rohiṇī, takes off, removes all of Krishna's clothes and ornaments, bathes Him with saffron and turmeric water.

Wow. She bathes Him with water mixed with saffron and turmeric. He may want to bathe your deities like that. Prabhupāda, He massages His body with fragrant oils and dresses Him in fresh clothes, along with these described light *śṛṅgāra*, light *śṛṅgāra*, or ornaments.

What are light *śṛṅgāra* ornaments?

Silver and diamonds. That's light *śṛṅgāra*. Silver and diamonds. This *śṛṅgāra*. But this particular mood, this particular time of day is called *Oḷāi-śṛṅgāra*, A-U-L-A-I, *Oḷāi-śṛṅgāra*. And it can actually be seen in the Rādhā-ramaṇa temple late in the evening on warm summer days, when Rādhā-ramaṇa-jī wears just a small *kaupīna* and turban, along with these light ornaments.

Now, at night. We're proceeding here. Another mood, another dress, more ornaments. At night, after performing the Rāsa-līlā dance, Krishna is decorated by the Gopis, by the Gopis.

They also get a chance. Cowherd boys, Mother Yaśodā, they dress Krishna with the following *śṛṅgāra*, or ornaments.

To begin with, two strings of pearls with an emerald added between them, which is called *Dūlārī*. *Dūlārī* string, or two layers, two strings of pearls. Then they dress Krishna with *Chandra-hāra*.

It's a crescent moon-shaped necklace of studded diamonds, which is commonly known in Vrindavan as *Hass*. H-A-S-S. I found. Then they dress Krishna, or ornament Krishna, with a single necklace.

It's called *Tṛvala*. *Tṛvala*, which in detail is a pearl string in which, after each pearl, there's a leaf-shaped motif, a leaf-shaped motif. Then the Gopis ornament Krishna with different, more different other different types of necklaces, like *Lichilada*, a little bit of a tongue twister, which is a necklace having three strings, in which each string has a single pendant.

Then *Pañchalata*, it's the same as *Lichilada* but with five strings of pendants. Obviously, if you know how to count the numbers in Hindi or Sanskrit, seven strings with seven pendants in the middle. Then *Amlā-mālā*, the necklace made of gold beads in the shape of an *āmlā* fruit. *Āmlā*.

Then they may also dress Krishna, *Kamala-mālā*.

It's a necklace with golden beads in the shapes of Jasmine buds. Then the list goes on and on, actually. We could spend hours. A long necklace with different, matchless pendants of different shapes and sizes strung together, one after another.

Then Gopis, they may give *Bhaṅgaka*. *Bhaṅgaka*, or it's a necklace with the, the, the nails of a tiger, you know, different nails of attackers strung together. Krishna will wear that.

Then sometimes a string of nine gemstones. So, again, I looked at what are the gemstones. So, then I read more from this poet, and he describes the Ruby, Emerald, Blue Sapphire, Coral, Diamond, Cat's eye, *Hasanite*, Yellow Sapphire, and layers of pearls.

Then the *Kushtubha* necklace. The *Kushtubha* necklace, which the poet says, which has a mirror for looking in. Hmm. Try to imagine something. A necklace, money. It has a mirror for looking in. Then, which is a very small string of golden pendants on a simple black thread with one pearl on each side of the pendant, one pearl on each side of the pendant.

Then *Hara*, H-A-R-A, which essentially is just a long golden necklace. And there in the forest, in the nighttime, you know, after the Rasa dance, Rasa Lila has taken place, they also dress Krishna with *Kanti*, which is a simple chain of gold beads. *Hamelā*, a necklace with a big pendant in the middle and a gold coin pendant on either side of that big pendant.

If you're a jeweler, take note. Then *Kamala-mālā*, *Kamala-mālā* is actually a lotus garland. Then *Guñjā-mālā*, a *guñjā* berry necklace. And finally, *Tulasī-mālā*, in the sense of a *Tulasī* leaf garland. Mother. Last but not least, actually so important, that the *Tulasī* necklace for Krishna.

So, we can see that Krishna gives, I was thinking, a chance to serve Him with such *śṛṅgāra* ornaments or decorations to all classes of His devotees.

Again, to His parents, like Mother Yaśodā, Rohiṇī. To His cowherd boyfriends, like Mother Maṅgala, Śrīdāma, Subala. And to His cowherd girlfriends, the Gopis. He loves them all. And I was thinking, He loves us too, even in our fallen state, because He allows us to dress Him in His form as *arca-vigraha*, the deity in this world.

He doesn't say no. If we can qualify ourselves, purify ourselves by practicing Krishna consciousness, as given to us by His mercy, even in our fallen state, because well, we're not pure devotees yet, even in our state, we can also dress Krishna in beautiful clothes and ornaments.

So, this fact should encourage us and give us hope that we too, one day, can participate in all the pastimes we mentioned today. That's the goal. We want to enter into these pastimes in Braja. And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī very nicely expresses this hope and aspiration in his *Padāvalī*.

Beautiful verse. And we'll finish today with this verse, one of my favorites. "I am fallen, but when I remember Your name, Dina-bandhu, the friend of the fallen, I become encouraged. And when I hear that You love Your devotees, my heart trembles." Thank you.

A lot of detail, but how love is in the details when we're practicing Krishna consciousness.

I hope that this will inspire you to serve your deities with more detail. Some of these items and some of these ways you can incorporate in deity worship. And hope, by Śrīla Prabhupada's Grace, one day again we can serve the Lord in the same way.

I do think that we have a couple more classes on ornaments. Let me see. Perhaps next week, we can describe Śrī Rādhikā's ornaments. Please give me your blessings that I can research that and find all this authorized knowledge from Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas and some of these wonderful poets from Śrī Vrindavan Dhām.

So, thank you from the Baltic Seacoast. Again, in the second week of our festival in India along the Baltic Seacoast, literally thousands of people are coming to our events, thousands of people are coming, and their hearts also being touched by Krishna consciousness.

See you next Friday. Is the revealer of