""### Stimulation for Ecstatic Love Part 076: A King Becomes a Saint

Hi everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana. First, we have to apologize that last week we were traveling and we weren't able to record last Friday's lecture, but today we are on time. *Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa*, *namaste*, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

So, we are continuing with our miniseries on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 76. I would like to continue our discussions on Vaiṣṇava poets today. So, today we will speak about a poet I've often quoted in our Vṛndāvana lecture series over the past four years, and that is Lalita Kiśora Dāsa. He is one of the more recent poets of all those we've discussed, for he was born in the middle of the 1800s and he died in 1930. 

I found him of particular interest because he was born in a royal family but eventually he left everything behind to become a simple *sādhu* in Vṛndāvana and simply write poetry about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He was born into a royal family in Lucknow, which is actually not that far from Vṛndāvana. At birth, his parents gave him the name Śyāma-kuṇḍala-lāla, and he had a brother named Śyāma-kuñjabihārī-lāla. They were very close. Their father’s name was Śyāma-rādhā-vinoda-lāla, and interestingly, their father was an initiated disciple of a Rādhāramaṇa Gosvāmī named Guṇamañjarī Dāsa Gosvāmī. 

At that time in history, of course, the British were reigning over India, but despite that, this family ruled Lucknow independently due to their power, their influence, and their status. Seeing their mother and father worshipping Rādhā-ramaṇajī from a distance—you know, in Vṛndāvana—and their guru with so much devotion, love, and respect, Śyāma-kuṇḍala-lāla and Śyāma-kuñjabihārī-lāla also started developing loving sentiments towards the Lord, which inspired both of them to start writing poems about the pastimes of the Lord in Vṛndāvana at a very young age. 

Both their parents were devotees, so they imbibed that spirit. Seeing these interests, their father, the king, as they grew up, hired five teachers who taught them different subject matters. One teacher they hired for teaching the boys Brajabhāṣā language. They had another teacher to teach them Persian language, which was, I read, the official language of the Mughal courts at that time. Yet another teacher taught them the Urdu language, which was the local language at that time in Lucknow. And they hired one teacher to teach them Bengali and Sanskrit languages, and finally one British teacher to teach them English. 

Well-educated boys, and as teenagers, these boys spent their days simply studying *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* and, as well, you know, politics—because they were princes, so they also studied war, the use of weapons, taxing, etc. But it is described their main interest was simply writing devotional poetry. Thus, their interests were not like other princes of other states in India at that time who were lost in satisfying their senses with women, liquor, and luxury. 

Seeing their deep faith and interest in Kṛṣṇa consciousness as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, one day their father decided to send them to Vṛndāvana for 40 days to stay at his guru's āśrama. And along with them, their father also sent a small altar made of 22-karat gold as a small gift to Rādhā-ramaṇajī in Vṛndāvana. So, during their stay, the boys became inspired to ask another Rādhā-ramaṇa temple Gosvāmī, Rādhe-ramaṇa Gosvāmī, for initiation. And when their father heard that, he was very pleased, and this Gosvāmī kindly accepted them. 

So at the time of initiation, he changed their names: Śyāma-kuṇḍala-lāla became Lalita Kiśora Dāsa, and Śyāma-kuñjabihārī-lāla became Lalita Mādhura Dāsa. So, like this, the boys spent these 40 days serving their guru and listening to his lectures. But when the time came to return home from Vṛndāvana back to Lucknow, the boys declined. "We're not going back, we're going to stay in Braja." 

So after several weeks, their father the king sent a special contingent of soldiers to get them. And after coming back as newly initiated devotees, Lalita Kiśora Dāsa and Lalita Mādhura Dāsa, they just spent their days writing devotional poetry, it's described, and crying in separation from Vṛndāvana. 

So one day, the guru of their father, Guṇamañjarī Dāsa Gosvāmī, he came from Vṛndāvana to visit Lucknow, and when that happened, Lalita Kiśora was very inspired to see this saint come to give them association. So he wrote in a poem: 

> "Oh dear brother, look what a beautiful day it is today, the Lord's representative came to our house to celebrate devotion. To celebrate devotion, my heart is overwhelmed to see his beautiful face. Lalita Kiśora joins his palms and begs at his lotus feet for an invitation to visit Vṛndāvana again." 

Kṛṣṇa! So during his stay, Guṇamañjarī Dāsa Gosvāmī spoke on the *Gopāla-campū* of Jīva Gosvāmī for five days, and then he returned to Braja. And this visit left another very deep impression on Lalita Kiśora, simply increasing his mood of separation from Vṛndāvana. As time went on, it was seen that he was gradually losing interest in all his princely duties, finding solace only in his poetry glorifying Vṛndāvana and Rādhā-Śyāma. 

Then, suddenly, both his grandfather, also a great devotee, and father died within two months of each other. And the day after the departure of his father, Lalita Kiśora requested his own guru, Rādhe-ramaṇa Gosvāmī, to come to Lucknow and speak on the glories of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. He felt this would give solace to everyone lamenting the death of his father, the king. And his guru came; he spent some time with the people. And finally, when his spiritual master was leaving Lucknow, Lalita Kiśora made an unusual request of his spiritual master: he asked him to take his own personal deities, Lalita's personal deities, to Vṛndāvana. 

He had also named them Rādhā-ramaṇa, after Guṇamañjarī Dāsa Gosvāmī's deity in Vṛndāvana. So Lalita asked his guru, "Take my deities to Vṛndāvana." And when Rādhe-ramaṇa Gosvāmī asked him why he wanted to send his deities to Vṛndāvana, Lalita Kiśora replied: "My Lord, who is like a family member, will be going to Vṛndāvana. When he reaches there, he will surely make arrangements that I will also come to Vṛndāvana to serve him there." 

I thought that was nice. "My Lord, who is like a family member, will be going to Vṛndāvana. When he reaches there, he will surely make arrangements that I will also come to Vṛndāvana to serve him there." 

So a few days after sending his deities to Vṛndāvana with the spiritual master, Lalita Kiśora had a dream wherein his deities were calling him to Vṛndāvana along with his whole family and kingdom, because now he was king—he was the appointed king after his father departed. So now his deities are calling him to come to Vṛndāvana along with the whole family and the kingdom. 

So the next morning, Lalita Kiśora delegated some responsibilities in Lucknow, and then he sent a letter to his spiritual master, Rādhe-ramaṇa Gosvāmī, with the following poem: 

> "The much-awaited news of going to my beloved's house has reached my ears. The dream... soon the dust of Vṛndāvana will be in my robes, and Tulasī neck beads will be my only ornament. Sitting under the shelter of devotees will be my luxury, and chanting the names of Lalita-ramaṇa will be my satisfaction. Whatever dry *chapātīs* I eat, I will eat them as a lavish meal." 

Lalita Kiśora says, "I have forgotten the pleasures of the three worlds in comparison with the bliss of going to live in Braja." He took it—his deity was calling him. So here he goes. 

So as Lalita Kiśora made arrangements to move to Vṛndāvana, his spiritual master, Rādhe-ramaṇa Gosvāmī, made arrangements for his disciple's new life in Vṛndāvana. But that was going to be no easy task, for although Lalita Kiśora himself was aspiring to live a simple life as a *sādhu* in Braja, he wasn't taking *sannyāsa*, and he still had the responsibility of his family and his subjects, many of them with him now and to come to him in Vṛndāvana and those who stayed in Lucknow. 

On an auspicious day, he left Lucknow along with his family and 4,040 servants and ministers, etc., and a large army of hundreds of chariots filled with his kingdom's treasures. In the meantime, Rādhe-ramaṇa Gosvāmī arranged for more than 3,000 tents on the banks of the Yamunā for Lalita Kiśora's servants and army. 

And when this grand caravan arrived in Vṛndāvana, Lalita Kiśora with his family, including his son whose name was Śyāma-kamala Kiśora, yeah, and his brother, Lalita Mādhura Dāsa, they moved into a very small *havelī*—it's like a little home—right in front of Rādhā-vallabha-nanda's temple. That place is presently known as Patni-malun. I looked it up on a map of Vṛndāvana. And wanting to contribute to the glory of Vṛndāvana, very soon Lalita Kiśora began the construction of a large temple near Nidhivana in Vṛndāvana, on which he spent almost 70 lakhs of gold coins—now, that's equivalent to many millions of dollars today—and that temple took eight long years to complete. Building was going on, I was reading, day and night. 

The temple still exists and it's famous today as the Śahjī temple. I've never visited it in all my years in Vṛndāvana, so I looked it up on the internet; very impressive. So I plan to take devotees there during our next *parikramā*. A magnificent temple, it's described. The walls of the temple are decorated with mosaics depicting Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, and interestingly, many British attendants are depicted standing with joined palms and saluting the altar. And in the entrance, there are many statues of Gandharvas from Svargaloka, and there's a family portrait made of mosaic from, what is it, German marble on the entrance floor, so that the dust of the visiting devotee's lotus feet will touch their bodies. See the kings of yore. 

There's also on the property a big platform for *rāsa-līlā* theater, and the courtyard of the temple is filled with many, many beautiful fountains, and behind the temple, there's a very large and beautiful garden. Also, I was reading one of the gates in and out of the temple opens directly onto a *ghāṭa* on the Yamunā river. 

After completing the temple, Lalita Kiśora requested his spiritual master to discuss with all the Rādhā-ramaṇa Gosvāmīs to move Rādhā-ramaṇa to this new, magnificent temple. But unfortunately, because of some disagreements, Rādhā-ramaṇa wasn't moved. I guess you could say that he chose to stay in his present-day temple where he is situated now. An interesting thing is that Rādhā-ramaṇa's present temple was renovated by Lalita Kiśora's grandfather, Mahārāja Vihārī Lāla—famous family, for sure, intimately connected to Rādhā-ramaṇajī. So that's why we've included them in one of our Vṛndāvana lecture series here. 

So then, Lalita Kiśora, he moved his own Rādhā-ramaṇa deities into the new temple, and he would personally do *sevā*—I was reading—every day from Maṅgala-ārati till the afternoon, and his brother, Lalita Mādhura Dāsa, would do *sevā* from the afternoon through the evening until the deities took rest. These two brothers just gave their lives to their deities, Lord Rādhā-ramaṇa. 

It is said about Lalita Kiśora that as he spent more time in Braja, his faith and devotion increased to the point that he literally worshipped the *raja*, the very dust of Vṛndāvana. In fact, it's interesting, he had large clay bowls made from the mud of nearby Agra into which he would answer the call of nature every day. One of his servants would take those bowls filled with his stool and travel way beyond the boundaries of Vṛndāvana and empty the contents there. And therefore, he had such respect for the dust of Vṛndāvana; he didn't want to answer the call of nature in that dust. So he passed stool into these large containers of mud from Agra, and then his servant would take it far, far away to deposit. Interesting. 

Daily he would rise early each morning, bathe in the Yamunā, and then he would begin his deity *sevā*. Later in the day, he would go with the *kīrtana* party, you know, to the Rādhā-ramaṇa temple, and have *darśana* of Rādhā-ramaṇa, and there he would sit and listen to *kathā* from his spiritual master. Then he would sit and chant *japa* for many hours, and in the late afternoon, he would return to his own temple and sit and compose poems and sing them for his deities while playing various musical instruments. He was also a talented singer and a player of musical instruments. 

In time, he learned that his property and his kingdom in Lucknow was taken over by the British government, as they did many of the temples in India. But being the devotee that he was, he was more concerned that an infamous marauder named Vijaya Ṭhākura was coming to plunder and ransack Vṛndāvana. He basically lost all his wealth and everything in Lucknow—the British took everything over, his palace and his kingdom and everything—but he wasn't as disturbed as he was when he heard that this person, Vijaya Ṭhākura, was coming to plunder and ransack Vṛndāvana. 

Around the same time, now, I'm reading this, Vijaya Ṭhākura was a powerful person; he was known for standing up and fighting even the British, very powerful at that time. This marauder, this *ḍakait*, he actually even killed a number of British officials and officers, and they were looking for him. So hearing that he was coming to Braja to ransack Vṛndāvana, Lalita Kiśora and his brother, Lalita Mādhura Dāsa, who now for all practical purposes were *sādhus*, they drew from their early life's training as warrior princes. They assembled a small army, put down his bead bag, found his sword, and he went to meet Vijaya Ṭhākura as he was arriving in Braja with his army. 

And approaching Vijaya Ṭhākura with that army on horseback, the two brothers reached the border of Vṛndāvana, where they found this *ḍakait* was just entering into the frontier of Vṛndāvana. So there, Lalita Kiśora confronted this marauder, this *ḍakait*. He said, "Sir, beyond this line is the sacred land of Vṛndāvana where the saints do their *bhajana* peacefully and children play happily in the sacred groves scattered throughout this land. Do not disturb the atmosphere of such a divine place. Rather, come with me tomorrow and I will happily give you all the wealth that I brought from my kingdom in Lucknow." Remember, when he came, he brought a lot of wealth. 

So at that point, it's described Vijaya Ṭhākura, he sneered, because he was looking forward to getting such wealth after a bloody battle. But anyway, he said, "Okay, I agree." So Lalita Kiśora said, "Oh Ṭhākura, I have heard that you have not eaten anything for the last three days due to traveling here. You haven't taken anything to eat on your voyage here, so let me feed you and your party delicious food with my own hand." So Vijaya Ṭhākura agreed. 

So returning to his temple, Lalita Kiśora himself started preparing this food for Vijaya Ṭhākura and his men. And at one point, Lalita Kiśora's wife asked him, "Prabhu, why are you doing this? Why are you making a poisonous snake your pet? Why are you making a poisonous snake your pet?" 

So Lalita Kiśora, he smiled, and he said to her, "My dear wife, please believe in the power of the *mahā-prasādam* of our beloved deities." And after cooking and offering the food, Lalita Kiśora served Vijaya Ṭhākura and his men the *prasādam*. 

Now, the next day, Vijaya Ṭhākura came back to Lalita Kiśora's home to get this treasure promised by Lalita Kiśora. So when he arrived, Lalita Kiśora told his servants to go to his quarters and bring a large treasure chest hidden in a secret vault. And when this treasure chest arrived, Lalita Kiśora told Vijaya Ṭhākura to open the chest. And when Vijaya Ṭhākura did so, he was shocked to find only a very beautiful painting of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī's Rādhā-ramaṇa deity—a beautiful painting—and a ball of Vṛndāvana dust that had been made mixing the *abhiṣeka* water of Rādhā-ramaṇa with the dust of Vṛndāvana, and then dried as a ball, which, it's described, Lalita Kiśora used to lick every day before breakfast. 

And as Vijaya Ṭhākura stared in disbelief at these two articles, Lalita Kiśora said humbly—it's described with tears in his eyes—"I have only these treasures in my life. Please take it all, Ṭhākura." This was his treasure. So overwhelmed by this experience, you know, associating with this saintly king, you could say this *sādhu*, and coming in contact with this ball of Braja-raja mixed with the *abhiṣeka* water of Rādhā-ramaṇa, Vijaya Ṭhākura had a change of heart. He started crying, and getting down on his knees, he begged Lalita Kiśora for forgiveness. 

So Lalita Kiśora said, "Vijaya Ṭhākura, I promised you, so now you must take this painting and the ball of *caraṇāmṛta* and Braja-raja. Take shelter of these treasures and keep eating the *prasādam* of the Lord, for that alone is what has changed your mind and purified your heart." The *prasādam* of the deity... It sounds incredible, but you know, to... we should never think that the glories of the Lord are some type of exaggeration. No, that's an offense. This is all history. Hare Kṛṣṇa. So Vijaya Ṭhākura was satisfied; he took the painting and the ball of dust. He was satisfied. 

Now after a few days, an arrest warrant for Lalita Kiśora was issued by the British court in Mathurā. Why? Because he gave shelter to Vijaya Ṭhākura, whom the British were looking for. So Lalita Kiśora was arrested by British constables and thrown in a jail in Mathurā. He had to stay there, I think, for a couple of months. And on the day of his hearing in the Mathurā district court, tens of thousands of people filled the streets of Mathurā in front of the courthouse in support of Lalita Kiśora. 

It's described, raising their hands and arms up to the sky, they loudly and repeatedly chanted the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*. And it's said that as that *kīrtana* filled the streets and alleys of Mathurā, it reverberated in the walls and pillars of the court. And as the trial began, the British magistrate asked Lalita Kiśora, Śyāma-kuṇḍala-lāla—aka Lalita Kiśora—said, "Tell the court, do you know Vijaya Ṭhākura?" 

So Lalita Kiśora replied, "Yes, I do, my Lord." 

The magistrate then asked, "Do you know that he is an enemy of the British government?" And Lalita Kiśora replied, "Yes, I do, my Lord." 

Then the magistrate said, "Knowing this, did you give him shelter for three days in your house?" And Lalita Kiśora replied, "Yes, I did, my Lord." 

Then the magistrate said, "Do you know that the punishment for such an offense is death by hanging?" And Lalita Kiśora said, "Yes, I do, my Lord. And if you feel that feeding a hungry man is a sin, then give me punishment. And if you think making an invader peacefully leave Vṛndāvana is a sin, then give me punishment. And if you deem that making him a devotee of the Lord is a sin, then give me punishment. I am ready to accept your punishment of death. But sir, I heard that the British government asks a condemned person if they have a last wish before putting them to death for their sins. Please ask me then, what is my last wish?" 

So the magistrate looked into Lalita Kiśora's eyes and he said, "Criminal, what is your last wish?" 

So Lalita Kiśora paused, and then he said very slowly, "Sir, my last wish is that for the sins you mentioned, I be put to death in Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana, in the midst of devotees, throwing Braja-raja dust all over my body while I am dancing in *kīrtana*. Sir, this will be the greatest favor on the most sinful person you have ever met in your life." 

And then he broke out in a song he composed, his mind at the beautiful song. He sang: 

> "People who are captured by the strong power of Kṛṣṇa are not afraid of an arrest warrant from the government. People who are hit by the sharp arrows of Kṛṣṇa are not afraid of bows and arrows. People who are pierced by the dagger-like eyes of Kṛṣṇa are not afraid of guns. The poet Lalita Kiśora sings, and people who have already died from love of separation do not fear worldly death. People who have already died from love and separation from Kṛṣṇa do not fear worldly death." 

Hare Kṛṣṇa. So, I listened to this, actually—just see the power of this devotee. Tears started rolling down the British magistrate's face. And when Lalita Kiśora finished, the magistrate, he paused and he said, "Dear Lalita Kiśora, it is evident that you are a true follower of your God. So go back to your village now, and never do such things again, as you've been charged—all your charges are dismissed. You are free to go." 

And upon hearing this pronouncement, the crowds that were lining the streets of Mathurā began cheering. It is said that that tumultuous roar could be heard throughout Vṛndāvana itself, which is some distance away. Then a huge procession of the people of Mathurā escorted Lalita Kiśora with a rousing *kīrtana* back to Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana. It's been described like a procession of a king returning home from winning a battle. 

Unfortunately, a few days later, Lalita Kiśora's only son, Śyāma-kamala Kiśora, he died in Vṛndāvana. So the day after that, Lalita Kiśora began a big festival—a big festival—but the festival was in honor of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that continued for 46 days. So during that time, many people of Vṛndāvana came to him and said, "Lalita Kiśora, your only son has died at a very young age, and here you are holding a festival of singing and dancing and theater and food for many days with *rāsa-līlā* theater performances. If you do not feel sorry for the death of your son, then at least appreciate your wife's condition, as she is suffering so much." 

To that, Lalita Kiśora would reply, "My dear friends, my only son was a greater devotee than me, for he achieved the topmost goal of life before me. He reached Braja, he reached the dust of Braja." 

Unfortunately, several weeks later, Lalita Kiśora's own health started to deteriorate. He was quite old, but he just smiled and said to the people, "I am now running as fast as possible to achieve the final stage of life, to return back home to Goloka Vṛndāvana." He described his bad health as running very fast back home, back to Godhead. 

So realizing that he was now on the verge of death, he officially took *sannyāsa*, and he spent every moment of his waking time chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. It's described at that time in the cold weather in the month of Kārtika. Then one day, he called his brother and asked him to build a small, like, *bhajana-kuṭīra* on the banks of the Yamunā where he could peacefully and with fixed attention simply focus on chanting the names of Kṛṣṇa: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. 

So his brother, Lalita Mādhura Dāsa, did as was requested, and then one day, Lalita Kiśora, while gazing—it's described—at some beautiful paintings of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa that were hung around this platform like a little *bhajana-kuṭīra*, he started singing ecstatically. And news spread that he may soon leave his body, so many Brajavasīs they gathered there. And after a short time, while fully conscious and singing the glories of the Lord, Lalita Kiśora left his body by his own desire, you could say, leaving behind a legacy of a lifetime of devotional service—a king who became a *sādhu*. 

That day, the Brajavasīs, they took his body on a palanquin to circumambulate the seven main temples of Vṛndāvana, and then they placed him in *samādhi* in the courtyard of his very own beloved temple, which I will take devotees to in Kārtika, and we will bow down to this saintly person. 

Lalita Kiśora's contribution to poetry of the Lord is actually a true stimulation for ecstatic love. So today, we shall finish with a few stanzas of that poetry which came from his heart. Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

Poet Lalita Kiśora says: 
> "I worship the devotion of the Brajavasīs whose life and air is Kṛṣṇa. Whose fire of separation comes from Kṛṣṇa, because of these things, the forest fire did no harm to them. I worship the cowherd boys and cows of the Lord who give eternal bliss to Kṛṣṇa, as do his beloved Vṛndāvana and all his devotees." 

Lalita Kiśora says: 
> "I will worship the disguised Kṛṣṇa who entertained Rādhā and her sakhīs with his playful pastimes, and I offer my respectful obeisances again and again to the sakhīs whose ultimate goal is to reunite the divine couple in the forest of Vṛndāvana. My eyes are thirsty to see the beautiful festivals celebrated by the Brajavasīs, the sweet and melodious sound of the flute outside the doors of the Brajavasīs, and the dancing of the Brajavasīs in great ecstasy. My ears are thirsty to drink the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's poetry from the mouth of the Brajavasīs, and my tongue is thirsty to taste the nectar of food stuffs cooked by the Brajavasīs." 

Poet Lalita Kiśora prays: 
> "May the dark night of Braja, Kṛṣṇa, be glorious; may the moon of Braja, Śrī Rādhā, be victorious; and may the stars of Braja, the gopīs, be gracious to us all." 

Another poet to whom we're eternally indebted. More modern poetry, but he had that *bhāva*, he had that taste, he had that *prema*. So, thank you, Lalita Kiśora. We'll continue next week I think with another poet, so until then, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""