Hari Krishna everyone, and welcome back once again to our continuing lectures on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Caitanya, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Namaste all glories to Śrī Guru and Gauranga. So, we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 52. In this lecture, I would like to speak on Kṛṣṇa's Kaustubha, which, as we all know, hangs around His neck and rests on His lotus chest.

We mentioned it actually several times in our last lecture about the Śrīvatsa mark on Kṛṣṇa's chest. We actually quoted, um, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.28.14, wherein it stated, "His chest has the mark of Śrīvatsa, and the brilliant Kaustubha gem hangs around His neck." Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in fact, the relationship between the two is actually quite intimate, as explained by, uh, Śrīdhara Swami in his commentary to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 12.11.10.

He writes, "Kaustubha-tejasā śata-patra-śeya-śītalam" – the illumination of the Kaustubha gem is reflected in Kṛṣṇa's soft, śata-patra-like hair. The illumination of the Kaustubha gem is reflected in Kṛṣṇa's soft, śata-patra-like hair. So, let's go into some, uh, detail about this mysterious gem.

The Sanskrit dictionary, Amara-kośa, states that the term "kṣiti" refers to the earth, and the verbal root "bhū" refers to, uh, uh, spreading or prevailing. So, that jewel whose influence pervades the entire earth is known as Kaustubha. Another meaning is that, uh, Kaustubha refers to that which covers the earth, uh, literally meaning the oceans, since they pervade the earth.

Thus, the ācāryas say the jewel born from that kṣobha ocean is known as Kaustubha. During the churning of the ocean, this jewel was produced as one of the opulences manifested by the ocean. Now, a nice detail about this gem is given in the Kaustubha-carita, uh, 3.11.

That book was written by Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. And he writes, "Bhānum anubhāsaṁ kaustubhaṁ." Kaustubha is the effulgence of the sun. Kaustubha is of the effulgence of the sun, literally. He writes. Now, here's a really nice detail, but you have to listen carefully. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, one of our great heroes, says in his commentary to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.2.10, "Kaustubhaṁ, the Kaustubha, is always to be understood as being accompanied by the golden lace that binds it to Bhagavān's neck." That's interesting, because we learned that the Kaustubha gem, uh, hangs around Kṛṣṇa's neck by a golden lace.

Somebody might inquire, "How's it hanging there?" Well, there there's the answer.

Now, again, Śrīdhara Swami remarks on the Kaustubha gem hanging on the chest of Kṛṣṇa by a golden lace in a very poetic way, like poetry captures our minds. In his commentary to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.8.30, he writes poetically, "The Kaustubha makes an appearance on Bhagavān's form just as gems make an appearance on great mountains." The Kaustubha makes an appearance on Bhagavān's form just as gems make an appearance on great mountains.

Now, in Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū, 2.22.25, our Kavirāja, Kavi-karṇapūra, gives us a hint, a hint of the color of the Kaustubha gem. He writes, "Kaustubha-rāśiṁ śyāmaṁ varṇaṁ." And the word "śyāmaṁ" literally means reddened, reddened. And in, um, I did a lot of research.

You can see in Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanā-mṛta, 12.6.5, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, "The Kaustubha gem defeats the rising sun and moon and pervades the universe with redness." There we have two confirmations, it's reddish. The Kaustubha gem defeats the rising sun and moon and pervades the universe with redness.

Now, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura also gives a wonderful, how could I say, a wonderful twist to this list of nectar. He writes in his commentary to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.28.26, and you have to listen carefully. He writes, "It is actually the Lord's neck that decorates the Kaustubha, not the other way around." Usually, the gem decorates the neck, but Bhagavān is so beautiful that it appears as if His neck decorates the Kaustubha gem.

We've heard that before in some of our previous classes. Wow. And, uh, I found in my research that Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī has also mentioned the Kaustubha in his commentary to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.15.19. He writes, "Kaustubha-brahma-rūpaṁ." Kaustubha is the personification of the impersonal Brahman.

We're getting different commentaries here, all perfect. Kaustubha is the personification of the impersonal Brahman. Another, while. And once again, we hear from Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who reveals a a deep secret about the Kaustubha. As he puts it in his commentary to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.28.28, therein he writes, "Kaustubhasya, yāni kiraṇāni." It's really interesting.

The unlimited rays of the Kaustubha are actually unlimited living entities. I found that quite amazing, and it's confirmed in the Gopāla-tāpanī, Gopāla-tāpanī, verse 67, where it says, "Tad-dhāma, tad-dhāmni, tad-dhāmni" – by its essence, its light, the Kaustubha is the shelter of all jivas.

By its essence, it's put, its light, the Kaustubha is the shelter of all jivas. Wow. And in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam again, 3.28.28, it says the Kaustubha jewel on Kṛṣṇa's neck represents, "jagat-cakṣuṣaṁ tat tvām." And one last verse in this connection, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 12.11.10, says, "Upon His chest, the almighty unborn Bhagavān Hari wears the Kaustubha, which represents the pure spirit soul." Wow.

Now, it's important to mention here a point, um, I've come across multiple times in my research, and that is that the devotees of the Lord in Vaikuṇṭha, who have, uh, formed forms similar to Him, that's called prākṛta-rūpa, prākṛta-rūpa. They may have a conch, a cakra, a club, etc., but none of them have the Śrīvatsa mark or the Kaustubha jewel.

These two items, which we're discussing, because they act as a stimulus for ecstatic love in the hearts of Kṛṣṇa-bhaktas, are actually unique to the Lord. Last Friday, in a previous lecture, I mentioned in his purport to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.9.30, Śrīla Prabhupāda confirms this.

He writes, "In Vaikuṇṭha-loka, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has four hands and decorations like the Śrīvatsa mark on His chest and the gem known as Kaustubha. These are, uh, special indications of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord's personal attendants and other devotees of Vaikuṇṭha have the same features except for the Śrīvatsa mark and the Kaustubha gem." Just want to make that clear, because we mentioned it about the Śrīvatsa mark, so make it clear about the Kaustubha jewel as well.

Now, another point we have discussed is that, although the paraphernalia of the Lord is eternal and thus always with Him, when He descends for pastimes in the material world, such paraphernalia manifest to Him in various ways as part of of His līlā, or pastimes, in this world.

Now, for example, um, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura states in his commentary to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.6.65 that when Kṛṣṇa defeated Kāliya, his wives brought many valuable jewels as gifts to offer to Kṛṣṇa, and the Kaustubha was one of them. So, this way, uh, the eternal Kaustubha gem made its appearance in Rṛta-līlā in Vṛndāvana through the hands of the wives of Kāliya.

Now, in Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-gaṇadeśa-laghu, 13.1, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī confirms this fact as follows. He writes, "Kāliya entered the depths of his lake and offered the gem named Kaustubha through his wives." Kāliya entered into the depths of his lake and offered the gem named Kaustubha through his wives.

So, that eternal gem manifested 5,000 years ago in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in that particular way. And Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī also adds one more detail to this pastime in his commentary to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.6.66. He says, "The Kaustubha, which was present on the four-handed Vasudeva form during Kṛṣṇa's birth, then manifested itself in Kāliya's lake and then was offered to Kṛṣṇa through the wives of Kāliya." It's all tied together.

Now, just a few more tasty details before we relate, um, some pastimes. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says in his Laghu-vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, uh, on 10.5.69, he writes, "Although the glowing Kaustubha is present on Bhagavān's chest, it only glows when desired by Bhagavān." Although the glowing Kaustubha is present on Bhagavān's chest, it it only glows when desired by Bhagavān, by Kṛṣṇa.

And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, 2.1.57, he writes that the Kaustubha gem can defeat many hosts of sons, yet by Bhagavān's desire, it doesn't manifest its full effulgence. The Kaustubha gem can defeat many hosts of sons, yet by Bhagavān's desire, it doesn't manifest its full effulgence.

Now, of course, we could go on and on with so many verses. I quoted many verses and and many details, uh, why?

Because our ācāryas have written numerous literatures actually about the Kaustubha jewel. Before I started preparing this this talk, I didn't know very much about Kaustubha, but I just realized there are so many references to the Kaustubha jewel in the writings of our ācāryas.

Examples I found in my in my research include the Alaṅkāra-kaustubha of Śrīla Prabhodananda Sarasvatī, a lot more information there, and the Candrakānta-kaustubha, um, of Śrīla Rāmānanda Rāya, who was the disciple guru of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Both those scriptures. But I think we've had enough scriptural references to the Kaustubha jewel now.

For a very beautiful pastime involving the Kaustubha gem, our beloved Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes, uh, in his book, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta-laharī, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta-laharī, in there, there's a chapter called Swapna-Vāsa-Amṛta, Swapna-Vāsa-Amṛta, that translates as "The Nectarian Pastime Dream." It's about a dream, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had one night when she fell asleep in Vṛndāvana.

And when she woke up the next morning, she told Kṛṣṇa about her dream, a dream that had both, it's described, enchanted her heart but left her bewildered at the same time. She said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, I just had the most unusual dream.

A golden-complexioned brāhmaṇa was dancing and singing in the midst of a multitude of people along the bank of a river. Sometimes he called out, 'O Kṛṣṇa!' and sometimes he sighed, 'O Rādhā, where are you?' Sometimes he fell to the ground, sometimes he acted wildly, losing all composure, and sometimes he danced ecstatically with his loving associates.

He has made all the residents of this world, from the blades of grass up to Lord Brahmā, loudly call out the name Kṛṣṇa. I felt drawn to him, and because he sometimes cried out, 'O Rādhā, O Rādhā,' I thought he could only be you.

But the next moment he called out, 'O Kṛṣṇa, O Kṛṣṇa!' Just as I called out for you, I was forced to wonder if this effulgent brāhmaṇa could somehow be me.

But now I'm confused. If that brāhmaṇa was you, then where was I?

And if he was me, then where were you?" So, Kṛṣṇa took Rādhā's hand and started to tease her.

He said, "O, Vīrasambhāvanī, Vīrasambhāvanī," it's a beautiful name for someone, Vīrasambhāvanī means, uh, "my my curious one." "In the past, you have seen so many of my incarnations, Nārāyaṇa, Varāha, the Śṛṅga. Without being confused, it's, um, it really is puzzling that you can't identify this brāhmaṇa you've seen so many of my incarnations.

So, I think it's puzzling that you can't identify ify this brāhmaṇa." Then something amazing happened. Kṛṣṇa touched the Kaustubha jewel on His chest, and Rādhā suddenly saw her dream unfolding within the Kaustubha gem. And Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he writes, it's actually text five, "At that moment, the Kaustubha gem, knowing the meaning behind all this, began to shine.

As soon as it did so, all the details of the of the dream were completely revealed." As it did so, all the details of the dream were completely revealed. And Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura goes on to write, "And because the Kaustubha gem revealed everything, Rādhā realized the brāhmaṇa in her dream was Kṛṣṇa." Rādhā realized the brāhmaṇa in her dream was Kṛṣṇa, not only Kṛṣṇa, but the brāhmaṇa was her as well.

Hmm. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes Rādhā actually, in text six, "Beloved, I now know what is in your heart and makes you smile. You are He, and I am also He." In other words, what was her realization?

It was that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had become one person in the personality of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the golden avatāra who would appear one day in Kaliyuga and flood the world with the nectar of the Holy names. Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

As confirmed, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, that the Supreme Lord was originally one, but then He became two, as brought in Kṛṣṇa, and He again became one in the personality of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Rādhā Kṛṣṇa, nāṅga. Now, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, 6.1.2, "The loving affairs of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are transcendental manifestations of the Lord's internal pleasure-giving potency.

Although Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are one in their identity, previously they separated themselves. Now these two transcendental identities have again become united in the form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." More confirmation from Caitanya-caritāmṛta, he goes on to say, "I bow down to Him who has manifested Himself with the sentiment and complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, although He is Kṛṣṇa Himself." At this point, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he goes on to write, "Just how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī concluded that the golden-colored brāhmaṇa in her dream was Kṛṣṇa." He writes that she understood this because she remembered Garga Muni's statement at Kṛṣṇa's name-giving ceremony, that "This baby Kṛṣṇa will appear one day as an incarnation with the yellowish-golden complexion." And then he writes in the voice of Rādhā speaking to Kṛṣṇa, she speaks like this, "In the king of Vraja's presence, the learned Vedic scholar Garga said that you will appear with a yellow complexion.

He did not lie. So this dream of mine is true. It's not an illusion. In this dream, I have directly seen You." So, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura concludes in in text nine of Swapna-Vāsa-Amṛta, "If the bumblebee of the reader's mind drinks the nectar of this Swapna-Vāsa-Amṛta, then that intelligent reader will quickly awaken from the dream of materialistic doubt.

Such a reader will attain Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He will sport in the ocean of pure love. He will attain the purest mercy of the king of Vṛndāvana." So nice.

And one, uh, very famous devotee praises, "Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, to experience the utmost intimacy, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa united in one form within a grove of Vṛndāvana and played the flute.

Adopt that form and mood. The Lord of Vṛndāvana, Rūpa, has appeared in Nadia." That's so deep.

To experience the utmost intimacy, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have united in one form within a grove of Vṛndāvana and played the flute.

Adopting that form and mood, the Lord of Vṛndāvana, Rūpa, has appeared in Nadia.

Connecting Kṛṣṇa and Radha. And anyway, so after this discussion, Rādhā and about the dream, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa talked about their combined appearances, Lord Caitanya, and His blessings upon the world. It's described until their girlfriends joined them in Vṛndāvana.

Wow, such a sweet and profound pastime. Deep. But I I hope I spoke on it in such a way we could all understand and relish. And if we think about it, all of us have received those blessings of Lord Caitanya that the ācāryas have mentioned in their writings. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in his Vṛndāvana-śataka, it's one of my favorite books, actually.

Vṛndāvana-śataka.

It's described as 100 verses of wisdom. In chapter one, entitled, text number three, he writes as follows: "When the moonlight Lord Ganga appeared in Gaṅgā, glass became gold, gold became a philosopher's stone, byuro gems produced similar matchless jewels, and crows became like Garuḍa.

Crooked, ugly trees became sandalwood trees, and barren trees became wish-fulfilling trees. Is this all not wonderful?

Is this all not wonderful?" All right, Kṛṣṇa.

Wow. So, I would like to finish today with a with a meditation, which we can all memorize, a meditation on who we are and what we want to be, what we want to become. Almost like, these days, they, they have mission statements.

It's written by a most learned and devoted brāhmaṇa. I just love this verse. "Having accepted the renounced order of life, my home is this Vṛndāvana forest.

My bed is the soft dust of Vṛndāvana.

The sky of Vṛndāvana is my blanket, and the flowering creepers of Vṛndāvana are my only belongings.

The moon over Vṛndāvana is the lamp of my hopes, and my chanting beads are counting the days until I meet the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." Thank you, Prabhus.

We've learned learned so much today about the Kaustubha jewel. So, throughout your daily activity, śravaṇaṁ, try to remember some of the details and the pastimes of this wonderful, um, stimulus for ecstatic love in the hearts of devotees. And we'll be back, uh, next Friday.

Thank you so much. Krishna.

Jai!

Glorious to Śrī Kṛṣṇa!