Harē Kṛṣṇa everyone, and a warm welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. But first, glories! So, we are continuing with our miniseries on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 128. Today, we will continue our discussions on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s dress and attire.

But I’d like to begin today by saying that, in truth, we are only able to understand any and all things about Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa by the mercy of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the yuga-avatāra. In a lecture on March 28, 1975, in Māyāpura, Śrīla Prabhupāda said: "Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mercy is so unlimited that He is helping us to not only understand Kṛṣṇa, but He is also giving direct love of Kṛṣṇa and the status platform of love as it was experienced by the gopīs."

So, I thought today I would share with you a beautiful poem about Lord Caitanya. The famous Vrajavāsī poet Kiśorīdāsa, he writes—or he wrote for our benefit:

"Covered in a golden hue with beautiful long dark eyes. That’s how kindness incarnated. Wearing a yellow silk robe and curly locks. That’s how mercy incarnated. Walking along with the music of countless mṛdaṅgas and an ocean of devotees. That’s how compassion incarnated. Holding love of Kṛṣṇa in His heart and the desire to reside in Vraja. That’s how grace incarnated. Covered under the motherly veil of Mother Śacī. That’s how kindness towards the fallen souls incarnated."

The poet Kiśorīdāsa beholds the limitless ocean of kindness who incarnated for one and all. Caitanya Mahāprabhu kī jaya!

So, as we mentioned, today we’ll discuss more about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s beautiful dress and attire. Of course, what is most beautiful is Her transcendental body, which Her dress and attire decorate. In *Govinda-līlāmṛta*, Chapter 11, verse 90, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī describes something very small about that transcendental body, but in such a significant way to stimulate love in our hearts. And what is that? He just describes Her mouth. He writes: "Another gopī said, 'Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s mouth is a great mountain peak that rivals the insignificant summit of Mount Sumeru. From that mountain peak of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s mouth, many rivers—such as the transcendental nectarean celestial Ganges river of Rādhārāṇī’s smile, the beautiful nectar river of Rādhārāṇī’s transcendental fragrance, the nectarean celestial Ganges river of Rādhārāṇī’s discourses, the nectarean Ganges river of Rādhārāṇī’s singing, and the nectarean celestial Ganges river of Rādhārāṇī’s breathing—all flow to the nectar ocean of Lord Kṛṣṇa, like rivers always flow to the ocean.'"

So, all this beauty of Rādhārāṇī’s mouth is flowing to the nectar ocean of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

So, regarding Her dress and attire, first we’ll discuss what Śrī Rādhā wears around Her waist. Now, the Sanskrit word for waist—well, there are several words for waist: *kaṭi*, *madhyadeśa*, *madhyama*. And *kaṭi* is the most common and direct translation for waist. *Madhyadeśa*—this term means "middle region" or "middle part" and can also refer to the waist. *Madhyama*—it can also refer to the waist, although it often means middle or intermediate, not exactly. And *kaṭa* refers to the hips and loins, but not directly to the waist. In summary, *kaṭi* is the most accurate and widely used term for waist in Sanskrit.

Now, in His *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, he writes in verses 162 and 163: "Charming, full of sweet nectar, and decorated with a deep navel, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s beautiful waist enchants the three worlds. Her sloping hips lead to Her charmingly beautiful slender waist, which is bound by a creeper of three beautiful folds of skin and decorated with a sash of tinkling bells."

You just try to see this in your mind’s eye. We want to keep this vision at one point forever in our heart, in our mind’s eye. In verse 35 of *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali* by our beloved Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he gives more information—more details—about Rādhārāṇī’s waist. Famously, he writes: "Oh, slender-waisted one, when fearing that your very slender waist might break, while I very carefully tie it with a new golden belt, splendid with flower-cluster tassels at each end... when will that happen?" It is said that Rādhārāṇī’s beautiful waist is slender enough to be encircled by a single hand. I actually read that in several places. Her beautiful waist is slender enough to be encircled by a single hand.

Actually, all the young gopīs of Vraja are slender in appearance, and therefore, like Śrī Rādhā, they are often referred to as *kṛśodarī*. It means "one with a slender waist," and the slenderest gopīs are called *sukṛśodarī*. They are—this is, "love is in the details"—they are 12 to 13 years of age, slightly older. Rādhā and Her sakhīs are in their 14th year, so they’re more grown up, but they’re still quite slender. However, Candrāvalī and her friends are one year older still, and because of that, their waists and hips are a little fuller. Cāraṇas say their beauty, though dazzling, is rarely called slender *kṛśodarī*.

Now, in Vṛndāvana, Rādhārāṇī is often referred to as *kṛśodarī*, or slender girl. Like the time the Vrajavāsīs stood beneath Govardhana Hill as Kṛṣṇa held it above His head. I was reading, some young gopīs had begun to worry that Kṛṣṇa’s unobstructed view of Śrī Rādhā was distracting Him from the task at hand, which was what? Keep holding up the hill. So, one excited gopī called out to Śrī Rādhā: "Please go away from the path of Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, oh slender girl! Don’t let Govardhana Hill fall from Kṛṣṇa’s hands as a result of His constantly gazing at you." And when Kṛṣṇa heard that slender Rādhā—*kṛśodarī*—was advised to leave His field of vision, let us say, He sighed in disappointment. Oh, and for that reason, Girirāja tottered for a moment on His hand. Oh, so beautiful. *Śrī Vṛndāvana-devī kī jaya!*

Now, there’s another meaning to Rādhā being referred to as a slender girl, as follows: and that is, despondent at being separated from Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā sometimes—often, you could say—displays symptoms of ecstasy that are disturbing. For example, in *vipralambha*, or separation, sometimes She loses weight so suddenly and drastically that Her bangles fall off Her arms. She becomes—we can see She becoming very slender, and the bangles were falling off Her arms. And I was thinking, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who came to experience this love of Rādhā for Him, He would also sometimes display such symptoms to the extent that His body would appear as though no more than skin and bones.

I also read once, Subala spoke to Kṛṣṇa about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s extreme condition. He said to Kṛṣṇa: "As soon as Rādhikā saw You, She felt great pain in Her heart. Bereft of patience, She rolled on the ground in ecstasy, bathing Her body in Her tears, while She wailed out loud." To ease Rādhā’s distress, a girlfriend said: "Oh girl who has become so slender, the darkness of night is approaching. Soon you will meet Mukunda. But should He see you in such an emaciated state?" At this, Rādhā took heart, composed Herself, and covered Her face with Her veil. Kṛṣṇa!

Now, ācāryas say that just as sacrificial arenas are made of gold, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s *kaṭī*, or waist, is covered by costly dresses beautifully embroidered and interwoven with valuable threads. A chain of tiny golden bells rests upon Her waist. A second set of waist bells, which are actually described by the ācāryas as "a friend of Her anklets." Wow, a second set of waist bells! They’re described as "a friend of Her anklets," cover Her opulent silken clothes. And remember, we’ve discussed many times, everything in Vṛndāvana is fully conscious, even apparently inanimate—gopī-conscious, fully Kṛṣṇa-conscious—so we could understand how a second set of waist bells are a friend of the anklets. Harē Kṛṣṇa! The ācāryas say that these bells, these second set of bells, proclaim by their jingling Her every graceful movement, especially Her dancing.

Regarding Rādhā’s waist bells: elsewhere, I also read that when Kṛṣṇa stole the gopīs' clothes and joked with them from a tree branch overhanging the Yamunā, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī trembled uncontrollably from the cold as Her jingling waist bells spoke up. They were actually saying: "Oh, son of Nanda, how can you cause such discomfort to this delicate princess accustomed to palatial luxuries? This is wrong." The way He smells, this is wrong. And at this advice, Kṛṣṇa at once asked the girls to come out of the water and retrieve their clothing. Everyone has a part to play in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Actually, all the different *rasas*, the moods, are facilitating this mood of *mādhurya-rasa* in Vṛndāvana.

On another occasion, Kṛṣṇa made a swing go so high that Rādhārāṇī was shaking with fear, and at that time, Her waist bells came to Her to help Her. Again, it’s described that at that time, the waist bells joined the petition—there’s a petition going on here coming from Rādhā’s earrings, anklets, and necklace—again, fully conscious, to make Him stop. So, Her waist bells said: "Oh Lord, 'Fear' personified, fear is Your name. How can You cause so much fear to this helpless gopī?" And this particular appeal by the waist bells caused Kṛṣṇa to slow the swing so Rādhā could get off.

Now, I was thinking that at times, teachers give instructions by gestures rather than words—like, even in Italy, you see people talk with their hands. So, sometimes teachers give instructions by gestures rather than words, and a transcendental example is Rādhā’s waist bells once taught Kṛṣṇa a lesson by demonstrating how eager Rādhā is to please Him. On this occasion, Rādhārāṇī was in the middle of dressing up to meet Kṛṣṇa when She heard Kṛṣṇa’s flute song urgently calling Her, meaning "come quickly." As a result, Rādhārāṇī became—how is it described?—bewildered and anxious. And in that state of mind, She placed Her ornaments in the wrong places. Amongst other things, She placed the ornament for Her hair-part at the end of Her braid, She used eyeliner for *tilaka*, and She smeared Her body with foot-lac instead of putting *kuṅkuma* here and there.

Now, when She came before Kṛṣṇa in this state, He noted—listen to this—that Her necklace was surrounding Her waist, and Her waist bells, now silent, were hung from Her neck. Seeing this, Kṛṣṇa’s heart melted to see these signs of Rādhā’s love for Him manifest in a disarray of dress and attire. Love is a very complex thing in Vṛndāvana that we’re beginning to understand, aren’t we?

Now, a well-known devotional poet named Caturabhujadāsa, he reveals some glories about Rādhārāṇī’s waist in one of his poems. He writes: "Oh, rasika-jana"—meaning someone learned in the art of *rasa*—"listen carefully. A treasure of beauty stays on the waist of Kiśorī Rādhā. She holds the most auspicious items on Her waist. There, She ties an iron and gold dagger, which is gifted to Her by Mother Paurnamāsī in order to protect Her from evil and bad eyes. There, on Her waist, She carries a bag and a pouch full of gold coins, which shows Her status as the daughter of Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu. She ties a waistband with gold bells and diamonds around Her waist. She wears a waistband made of kuśa, which shows Her chastity. She binds a golden ring on Her waist, which holds golden keys to a pasture known as *kuñja-nikuñja*. We say *kuñja-bihārī*, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoying each other’s association in a pasture; you could say like that. So, She has keys to that pasture. Wow. You need keys to get into this pasture in Vraja. She hangs a very small flute around Her waist. Why? To hypnotize Kṛṣṇa." In one lecture we gave years ago, you remember, She plays the flute better than Kṛṣṇa. Caturabhuja prays: "May the waist of Kiśorī always be protected by Rati, Cupid’s consort." Kṛṣṇa!

Now, by researching, I also learned that Śrī Rādhā’s skirts or dresses are tied on Her waist. She has different skirts, different dresses; they’re all tied. And the string with which these dresses are tied is known as *nīvi*. The string is called *nīvi* or sometimes *nīvī* in Sanskrit. And the knot that such strings make is called *grantha* or *granthi*. Now, a devotee scholar in Vraja named Māvādāsa, he elaborates—thank God—on these *nīvi-bandha* strings and *granthi* knots on the dresses of Śrī Rādhā as follows. He writes: "*Nīvi-bandha* and *granthika*, or known as *sakhāli*—twin friends, they can have twin friends. The *nīvi* string is made of the softest silk, which is threaded by the *chattīs*, or the most chaste girls of Vraja. This thread is softer than cotton, smoother than a sip of milk." Wow, smoother than a sip of milk, brighter than a sparkling star, and more coolant than a monsoon breeze, more coolant than a monsoon breeze. *Priya-sakhī* gopīs tie the two ends of the *nīvi* string together on Rādhā’s waist, and the ensuing knot thus appears like the top-knot of Lord Śiva’s braids. This *granthi* knot is glorious. Why is it glorious? It’s glorious because it ties and holds together the limitless chastity and beauty of Vṛndāvaneśvarī’s waist.

*Nīvi* and *granthi*, it’s described, are the two dams which hold the river of beauty which flows from the two sides of Rādhā’s waist, which is adorned by countless jewels and gold belts. In this way, the sakhīs tie the *nīvi* string and the *granthi* knot. He concludes: "Śyāmasundara’s gaze always falls on these beautiful strings and knots of the Queen of Vṛndāvana’s waist." Māvādāsa calls out: "Victory to the chaste Rādhā who holds Her *nīvi* tightly in the midst of Her loving pastimes." Thank you to that long-forgotten poet.

Another poet—all glories to the poets—Govinda dāsa describes Śrī Rādhā’s waist as follows. Actually, when I was preparing for this class, I was thinking, "How much information am I going to find about Rādhārāṇī’s waist?" But by the glories of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas, it’s there. So he writes: "The waist of Śrī Rādhā is a nectarean bliss ocean of beauty, a bliss ocean, a bliss ocean of beauty as it flows in two directions. The epitome of perfection and beauty stays in the center where Her navel is located. The *priya-sakhīs* paint sharks, crocodiles, snakes, and tortoises on Her waist with—what?—sandalwood paste. They paint Her navel like a lotus bud which holds a bee inside its petals. The lake of Her beauty resides in Her navel like a soul resides in a body. The beauty of Her waist is always increasing." The poet Govinda waves a whisk in bliss at the Divine Couple of Vṛndāvana. That’s his poem. That’s his heart. Let’s make it our hearts.

So, let us finish today with text 18 or 25 of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s *Śrī Rūpa-cintāmaṇi*. That book—translated, that means the "Chintamani Jewel of Beauty." He writes—it’s long, I’ll just quote the first two lines to get going. Vī... this is very, very beautiful. It’s long, but thankfully so.

"Oh mind, please meditate on Rādhārāṇī’s fine curly braided hair, the jewel, golden-leaf *tilaka*, and curly hairs on Her forehead, Her eyebrows, mascara-anointed eyes. Meditate on Her ears, the charming shark-shaped earrings near Her cheeks, Her pearl-decorated nose, Her lips, Her splendid teeth, Her musk-dot-decorated chin, Her neck marked with three lines and decorated with many necklaces, Her gracefully sloping shoulders, Her armlet-decorated arms and elbows, Her lotus hands endowed with beautiful and auspicious lines and decorated with bracelets, Her jewel-less—meditate on Her jewel-less... Her rings, Her beautiful fingernails, Her breast covered with a splendid red lotus and locket, Her flower-petal abdomen with a line of hairs. Meditate on Her navel, Her slender waist marked with three lines, Her colorful undergarments, Her blue petticoat. Meditate on Her thighs, knees, legs, ankles, anklets and ankle bells, Her toe—Her *kumkum* toe rings and toenails. The barley, cone, and *aṅkuśa* beneath Her left big toe, the *ūrdhva-rekhā* beneath Her fourth toe, the small chariot nearby, the lotus, flag, flower, and vine in the middle, the elephant-goad beneath Her little toe, beneath that a bracelet and parasol, on one heel a half-moon, on the other heel a fish. Meditate. Above that a flying mountain, on the sides a *śankha* and *padma*. Under a big toe a conch shell, under a little toe an altar, and beneath that a beautiful earring."

Thank you, Viśvanātha Ṭhākura, for that. It can be a constant meditation, actually. All these things are meant to be—we replace whatever we meditate on in this world, which ultimately brings no satisfaction; we meditate on these things, and *tuṣṭi*, the heart, will be fully satisfied. So, I really enjoy this service of giving you all these things to act as a stimulant for developing ecstatic love, one day by Prabhupāda’s grace, for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So, thank you. I think we can get one more lecture about Rādhā’s waist, as miraculous as it sounds. I’ll do my best, and see you next Friday.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa kī transcendental waist dress transcendental book distribution kī jaya! Hari-nāma saṅkīrtana festivals kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the domain!""