Hare Krishna, everyone.

Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Om Viṣṇupāda Paramahaṁsa Parivrājakācārya Aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swami Mahārāja kī jaya!

Namaste. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part sixty-three. In this lecture, I'd like to continue with the theme of last week's talk, which concerned, as you remember, painting or paintings in Vṛndāvana.

In that lecture, we discussed how painting is one of the sixty-four arts employed by the residents of Vṛndāvana in their service to Krishna.

And as you may remember, painting is listed as number five in those sixty-four arts. It's called *kalā* and the definition of *kalā* is the art of drawing, calligraphy, and painting pictures. It includes all forms, from simple village arts up to the highest, perfectional stage of masterful painting.

It's the definition given. But these sixty-four arts are not just limited to the residents of Vṛndāvana.

In Krishna's pastimes 5,000 years ago, any Krishna *bhakta* may become proficient in any one or more of these arts at any time in history.

For example, last year, while visiting the Bhajan Kutir Ashram in Vṛndāvana, where we actually had *darśana* of the original *Rāmāyaṇa* section of Caitanya Mahāprabhu by the very hand of Krishna Dāsa Kavirāja Goswami, at that time, the elderly Mahanta, the head of the ashram, a very nice Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, he also showed us a small, very beautiful painting of Rādhā and Krishna that was also done by the hand of Krishna Dāsa Kavirāja Goswami.

It was very beautiful. Actually, as a result of the appearance of Lord Caitanya and His associates, there was, historically, a surge in devotional paintings in Vṛndāvana, Bengal, Orissa, even parts of South India, especially through the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries.

Much of it was sponsored, of course, by devout kings, including the Rajput kings of Rajasthan, the Kalinga and other dynasties of Orissa. I was reading as well as kings and *seths*. *Seths* means, how to translate that, prince-like men of Bengal.

And I was reading that the brushes for painting were made of soft hair from the tails of animals, and the colors used were made from flowers and different processed natural minerals. But the most significant thing were the canvases, which were often just made of paper, and that was actually a rare commodity even at the time of the Six Goswamis.

I was reading that during the purity of the Goswamis 500 years ago, most of the paper used by artists to paint came from General Man Singh's paper factory in Sind, which is now present-day Pakistan. And the paper was treated through many different processes, like, you know, cutting, flattening, laminating, drying while adding white-based pigments, and then again drying.

Then thereafter, black and gold borders were added as a frame, and then again dried in the sun until finally this paper, or you could say this canvas, was ready for painting. It was a bit of a complicated process, a very natural process.

And I discovered that these types of paintings can even be seen today. For example, in Vṛndāvana Mahādeva Temple in Vṛndāvana, this is a place where Śrīla Śatādhuta Goswami would sometimes reside.

You can see these types of paintings. Also, in Bhajan Kutir, which we just mentioned earlier, there are some of these types of paintings. And a big collection of these ancient paintings can also be seen in the Museum of the Vṛndāvana Research Institute.

I've seen them there. Now, the kings of Rajasthan, in particular, had a great interest in many art forms, amongst which painting was, you could say, of foremost importance. The kings often decorated their palaces, their ceilings, and walls with beautiful paintings of Krishna's, Rādhā and Krishna's various pastimes.

Amongst them was the very famous King, Mahārāja Śrī Sāvant Singh. I've become kind of a history buff for the history of Rajasthan and Jaipur in particular. So, Mahārāja Śrī Sāvant Singh, he was born, let me remember, in 1699. And he was also known because he was *rājarṣi*, *rājarṣi* means a saintly person sitting on the throne.

And in Vṛndāvana, because he was a saintly person, he was known as Nāgar Dāsa.

They didn't call him the king. He used to visit Vṛndāvana like sometimes the Rajput kings would do.

And he was known as Nāgar Dāsa, and he's a king in Rajasthan, a Krishna *bhakta*.

And I was amazed to read that he wrote more than a thousand poems in the Braja Bhāṣā about the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Krishna.

And I discovered that he established a unique school of painting in Vṛndāvana known as Kishangarh.

The specialty of this school was that in the paintings of Rādhā and Krishna, their eyes were stretched to their ears, and their noses were very pointed.

It's a characteristic of that type of painting. Then, of course, there are paintings known as *pichavai*. We used to distribute *pichavai* paintings in the early days in the movement in Europe. I remember we'd get them from Rajasthan. *Pichavai* literally means backdrop.

This art form was invented to paint backdrops in the palaces, but later it developed into an art form in and of itself. And the main motifs used in *pichavai* are lotuses, lotus leaves, cows with calves, the Yamunā River, Śrī Girirāja, and Govardhana Hill.

I think most of you have seen *pichavai* paintings. Now, there are a number of other schools of devotional paintings, as I mentioned before, which all simply serve to show how down through the ages, Krishna conscious paintings have served as a stimulus, a stimulus for awakening devotees' love for the Lord.

You look at the Lord's pastimes in painting, you become enlivened. Now, of course, our very own Śrīla Prabhupāda knew the value of transcendental paintings in modern times to attract people to Krishna Consciousness.

In the very beginning of our movement, he approved pictures from Brijbasi & Sons. I think the older devotees will know what I'm talking about. Brijbasi & Sons, it's a popular printing house that specializes in large prints of famous paintings of Krishna and other, well, Krishna and various avatars of Krishna.

So, Prabhupāda approved.

In the beginning, we didn't have any devotee painters, like really early, really, really early in the movement, or they were just learning to paint. So Prabhupāda would authorize that we could use the prints from Brijbasi & Sons as decorations in our temples, ISKCON temples.

But of course, later on, when disciples who were artists joined and became proficient in painting, Prabhupāda actually personally instructed them.

Such was the interest he had in paintings, he personally instructed them how to paint Krishna and His pastimes to be used in his books, as well as his temples.

Our books are full of the BBT paintings, and Prabhupāda was very proud of those artists.

I was remembering how in the very beginning of our movement in New York, Śrīla Prabhupāda once asked one of the first and foremost painters, Janardana, to paint the Supersoul within the heart.

He gave her that instruction, "Go paint the Supersoul within the heart." But when she went to her room and sat down before the canvas, her mind went blank. And she went back to Śrīla Prabhupāda and said, "Prabhupāda, I don't know what the Supersoul looks like." This is very early in the movement. "What does the Supersoul look like?" So, Śrīla Prabhupāda said very seriously, "Oh, to know and realize that, you'll have to meditate like a yogi for thousands of years, you know, to see the Supersoul in the heart." So, when Janardana looked a little disappointed, Śrīla Prabhupāda smiled and he said, "But by the mercy of the spiritual master, you can know such things immediately." And Śrīla Prabhupāda began to explain how the Lord in the heart looks as He stands on a lotus flower, holding a wheel, club, lotus, and conchshell.

And again, Śrīla Prabhupāda was very appreciative of the service of his disciples who painted.

One time, my god-sister Govinda Dāsī shared with Janardana that when she was in New York, Śrīla Prabhupāda had commented that in a recent painting Janardana had done of Rādhā and Krishna, Prabhupāda said it looked like Rādhā had another boyfriend.

Rādhā had another boyfriend. This was because at the time Janardana was painting, she was using references from old painting masters, and she had copied a girl in a Dutch painting to look like Rādhā, and in the original painting, the girl was facing away from her suitor.

And Janardana copied her just like that, while showing the girl holding a garland. So in her painting, Rādhā was holding a garland, but was facing away from Krishna, who was playing his flute.

That's the explanation. So, sometime later, when Janardana had the opportunity to meet Śrīla Prabhupāda, she said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I heard that you didn't like that painting because it looked like Rādhā had another boyfriend.

She was turning away from Krishna.

I'll do it over." Śrīla Prabhupāda kindly said to her, "No, Rādhā is offering Janardana a garland for painting so many nice pictures of Krishna." All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

That's how he took it in the end. So, at the beginning of our movement, it was Śrīla Prabhupāda himself, who, perfectly knowing Krishna, instructed his disciples how to paint Him.

Now, while preparing for these two classes, the one last Friday and this class today on paintings in Vṛndāvana, I came across an amazing pastime where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī herself personally inspired a devotee, you could say in modern times, to paint.

It begins with, you could say the *ācāryas* saying that peacocks are sometimes said to be Rādhā and Krishna's dance teachers.

So, at one time, at a sacred place in Vṛndāvana, now called Mor Kutir, it's at Vṛndāvana, Rādhā and Krishna instead of dancing like peacocks, decided to actually become peacocks and dance together near Vṛndāvana.

So, Krishna became a peacock, and Rādhā became a peahen.

And when they started dancing, it's described all the forest animals became so enchanted with the Divine Couple that they had taken such forms and were dancing like that, that they all came to see and watch this transcendental *līlā*. And actually, it's a famous *līlā*, and it's such an important *līlā* that even a hundred or two hundred years ago, Rādhārāṇī appeared to a blind Vaiṣṇava who was residing in Vṛndāvana in a cottage at Mor Kutir and requested him to paint a picture of Her dancing with Krishna and the peacocks at that area.

This is, you could say, recently compared to 500 years ago. But the blind Vaiṣṇava, he said, "You know, he's astounded, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, how can I paint?

I'm blind." But Rādhārāṇī knew that he had very deep spiritual vision, he was a pure devotee, obviously. So she famously said to that painter *bābā*, "Have faith in my words to inspire all practicing devotees now and in the future, the same potency that guides your meditation will also guide your hand." And so, by the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, not only did that blind devotee paint a very beautiful painting of Rādhā and Krishna dancing with the peacocks, but also by Her mercy, his eyesight was restored, and he could see what he had painted.

And that painting is still there. Next time you go on parikramā in Vṛndāvana and you go to Vṛndāvana and you're coming up the backside there, go to Mor Kutir.

You can see that painting to this very day. A modern-day miracle. So, I would like to share another beautiful painting pastime, painting pastime. We recently discovered this pastime while researching the lives of our previous *ācāryas* in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute.

In Braja, we found it in a book called Śrṛṅgāra Līlā. Śrṛṅgāra by the famous Braja poet named Rasika Ray. He's got a good name, Rasika Ray. Śrṛṅgāra means, or it refers to pastimes of affection. So, as Prabhupāda would sometimes say, once upon a time, Krishna asked Mother Yaśodā, "Mā, please tell me, who do you love the most?" Asked his mother, "Who do you love the most?" And Mother Yaśodā replied, "Of course, you, my beloved son." Then Krishna asked, "And Mā, how much do you love me?" Yaśodā replied, "There is no limit, my beloved son." Then Krishna said, "Mā, may I ask you something?" And she said, "Yes, of course, my beloved." So Krishna said, "My dear Mother, my friend Śyāma cries when he goes home without me.

He feels so much separation from me when he cannot see me for the duration of an entire night. I would like to give him a picture or a painting of myself, which I think will comfort him and appease his feelings of separation from me." So, Mother Yaśodā said, "All right, my son, let me find someone to paint your picture." So, a short while later, Mother Yaśodā met Sudevī Sakhī, one of the intimate *sakhīs*, and asked her if she knew any artist who can make a painting of Krishna.

So, Sudevī Sakhī said, "Yes, Mother Yaśodā, I know a Gopi named Citrakā who once received a boon from the goddess Sarasvatī, the goddess of art and learning, that she can make a painting of anyone in creation just within a few minutes." So, Sudevī went to see Citrakā, who agreed to go to Nanda Grāma to meet with Mother Yaśodā.

So, when she arrived at the palace of Nanda Mahārāja, Mother Yaśodā greeted her and introduced her to her beloved son, Krishna.

Now, when Yaśodā asked Krishna to stand up very straight so that Citrakā could see how she might make a painting of Him, Krishna said, "But Mā, you know how I prefer to stand in a threefold bending form.

You know how I prefer to stand in a threefold bending form." So, He assumed that stance with a beautiful flute on His lips and a peacock feather on His head. And as Citrakā, you know, let's say gazed upon Krishna, studying how to paint Him, she became very attracted to Him.

So for a long time, she just stood there, staring at Him with wide open eyes and a mouth in amazement, without even blinking. Then she turned to Mother Yaśodā and said, "I will try my best to do this painting." So, that evening, Citrakā sat at home and began her painting of threefold bending Krishna.

And while remembering His beautiful form, His unique features, and it's described, His enchanting smile, her painting manifested most wonderfully. In fact, hosts of demigods and demigoddesses hovered above her painting canvas, transfixed as the Lord of all creation seemed to manifest on the canvas.

But at one point, here the plot thickens, at one point Citrakā called out in frustration, "I am at a loss to understand the true color of Krishna's body and complexion." So, she put her paintbrush down and in desperation, she prayed to goddess Sarasvatī, the deity of art and learning, for help.

Then, amazingly, Sarasvatī appeared and asked her, "Citrakā, what is the matter, my dear daughter?

What is the matter?" So, Citrakā said, "My dear Sarasvatī, you gave me the boon that I can paint anyone's picture within a few minutes, but I have failed in painting Krishna's portrait even after a thousand attempts, for I am unable to understand the exact color of His complexion." So, Sarasvatī smiled and she said, "Citrakā, even I, the goddess of art and learning, have difficulty in duplicating the color of Krishna's body.

His complexion is simply mystical. Even if one mixes each and every color in the creation in an infinite variety of ways, one cannot duplicate the exact color of Krishna's transcendental form.

I think to understand the true color of Krishna, you have to go to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the queen of all wisdom and art.

She will bless you. Only then can you finish your work for Mother Yaśodā and Krishna." So, Citrakā went to see her Queen, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, to explain her dilemma.

And as Citrakā entered the *kuñja* where Rādhārāṇī was sitting, surrounded by other maidservants, Citrakā came forward and explained her problem. And at that point, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī smiled and said, "My beloved Citrakā, you have all my blessings. Now, please look into my eyes." So, when Citrakā looked into Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's eyes, she saw the beautiful form of Krishna smiling while standing under a mango tree.

Citrakā was again amazed to see this form of Krishna, and while carefully meditating on Him in the eyes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Citrakā suddenly understood the true color and complexion of Krishna.

She was ecstatic, thinking, "Now I can complete my service to Mother Yaśodā." And as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī slowly closed her eyes, Sudevī Sakhī said, "Dearest Citrakā Sakhī, the secret to your success in realizing the true color of Śrī Krishna's beautiful form is simply the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

No one can truly understand Krishna without the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." This is the lesson to be learned today.

This is the lesson to be learned today for all of us as well. Hare Krishna.

So then Citrakā went back to her home in Candrapur, where she lives at the base of Vṛndāvana, and completed her painting with the colors of Krishna's body as revealed to the eyes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

And after making some finishing touches on the painting, Citrakā went to Nanda Grāma and presented the painting to Mother Yaśodā, who, upon seeing it, started crying in great ecstasy. Then Mother Yaśodā called Lala, her Lala Krishna, and said, "My darling son, please come quickly to see what Citrakā has brought for you." And Krishna came and sat on Yaśodā's lap, and seeing the painting for the first time, seeing the painting, Krishna said, "Mā, why are you showing me a mirror?

Mā, why are you showing me a mirror?" So Mother Yaśodā said, "Lala, it's not a mirror.

This is a painting of you. It's so perfectly done that we can see the true color of your beautiful form, so dear to all of us. It's so perfectly done that we can see the true color of your beautiful form, so dear to all of us.

You can now give this painting to your friend Śyāma so he will never feel separation from you again." Then Yaśodā sort of turned to Citrakā and said, "Dearest Citrakā, how can I pay you for this beautiful painting?" So Citrakā replied, "With just your blessings, Mother Yaśodā." So appropriate. "With just your blessings, Mother Yaśodā." So Yaśodā said, "Yes, of course, but ask for anything, whatever is your desire." So Citrakā smiled and said, with a little touch of humor, "Well, you can give me your son." "Well, you can give me your son." But Yaśodā was shocked by hearing these words and she said very famously, "I can give up everything for Krishna, but I cannot give Krishna away for anything.

I can give up everything for Krishna, but I cannot give Krishna away for anything." And even Krishna was a little shaken and He said, "And I cannot live without my mother.

We are inseparable like water and wetness, the sun and its warmth." Then turning to Citrakā, Krishna said, "But I promise you, my dear Citrakā, that from now on, every day as I pass through your village, I will visit your home and give you my *darśana*." And Citrakā, of course, was most pleased with this promise of Krishna.

Hare Krishna.

What a nectarean pastime. So, I will conclude today with a personal memory shared with you, and that is that when I first came to the Detroit Temple in 1970, I think, there was a devotee giving me a tour of the premises, and as we entered the temple room, he showed me different paintings of the different *Daśāvatāras* decorating the temple.

And when I saw a painting of Lord Buddha, I was immediately attracted, and I thought, "That's what I'm looking for. I want peace. Life is so stressful. I want to be peaceful like that." But that devotee, he replied, "I think, actually, what you're looking for is over here." And he motioned to the wall on the opposite side, pointing to a painting of Pañca Tattva dancing ecstatically in *saṅkīrtana*.

He said, "This is actually what you're looking for." And surely, it turned out to be that was what I was looking for, and that is what I'm looking for, and that's what I hope one day I can join the eternal pastimes of the Pañca Tattva dancing.

And next, Śrīla Prabhupāda, Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

And several years later, when Śrīla Prabhupāda came to visit our fledgling temple in Paris, France, we had a large copy of that same painting in the middle of the altar in the temple.

We hadn't installed deities at that time. We just had this beautiful painting, a copy of this beautiful painting of Pañca Tattva, the same painting. And I remember so clearly when Prabhupāda arrived at the temple and came into the temple room, he saw that painting and he paid full *daṇḍavat* to that painting, full *daṇḍavat*, reminding us all that the painting was, in fact, a deity.

And that being said, I will finish this lecture today with a quote that I opened last Friday's lecture with. From Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 11.27.12, it says, "You may remember one of the eight types of deities is a deity painted out of color." So, Śrīmad Bhāgavatam says, "The form of the Lord is said to appear in eight varieties: stone, wood, metal, earth, paint, sand, the mind, or jewels." Jaya.

Hare Krishna.

Thank you. That concludes our research study and lecture on paintings as a stimulus for ecstatic love. Thank you so much, devotees. We'll be back, uh, next Friday with more nectar. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Vedas.

Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya Prabhupāda.