

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Namaḥ oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we’re continuing with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 132, in which we will continue our discussions on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s dress and attire—in particular, today, her veil. But I would like to begin with a beautiful prayer by the Vaiṣṇava poet Mādhava-dāsa to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and the saints of Vraja; it is so nice. He writes:

“I have devoted myself to the lotus feet of the rasika devotee named Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is my only savior. Because of this, the trees of my hopes always stay green. Remembering my guru, I feel overjoyed day and night. Through his vision, my eyes see and relish the ultimate beauty of his divine form. Oh, my friend, always pray that the saints will not become offended by us, because if they are offended, then even the living body will remain dead. Oh, my friend, the path of divine love and service is rare, and one should walk this path courageously because one cannot reach his destination by sitting at home. I am never required to go door-to-door for anything, for I am a servant at Śrī Rūpa’s doorstep, where my chariot is always filled with all that I need. One who takes full shelter of the names of the holy saints never sinks in the deep water of the sea.”

Mādhava-dāsa says, “May I serve the saints of Vraja who save the fallen and help them to cross over the ocean of miseries.” Wow. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, about Rādhārāṇī’s veil, the saint Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura, a well-known ācārya in the Nimbārka-sampradāya, writes in a composition of 100 poems. I found it: “Oh mother, when will I behold the red veil of Śrī Rādhā and the green shawl of Kṛṣṇa flowing in the air and wiping out my ignorance? It will give solace to my eyes when I see them both standing under a tree, hiding from the rain, all wet in love for each other.” Śrī Bilvamaṅgala says of the veil, the shawl, the sarī, the chādar, the bodice, and the dhoti: “There was nothing left, including their hearts, which was not drenched in the rain of love.” Thank you to that poet.

The following pastime, written by a Vaiṣṇava poet named Madhurī-dāsa, is known as Tārāvalī, meaning “the multitude of sparkling stars.” Such a nice pastime. One day, Śrī Rādhā and her gopīs were playing a game of hide-and-seek. The gopīs approached Śrī Rādhā and said, “Oh Rādhī, today’s weather is very pink”—that was how it was described—”like a blossoming rose flower in your garden. Our desire is that you please play a game of hide-and-seek with us today. But this time, you will have to find us, and so we gopīs will be hiding from you.”

So, she replied, “Oh dear gopīs, you all live in my heart. Even if you hide from me, my heart will show the way to you.” I love that: “Even if you hide from me, my heart will show the way to you.”

So, the gopīs said, “Oh Priyā”—meaning ‘dear one’—”you are the personification of kindness. Please find us now, like you find the lost souls of Vṛndāvana.” And with that, all the gopīs took off their ankle bells so that no sound would be heard while they were hiding. One gopī stayed back, and with her hands, she covered Śrī Rādhikā’s eyes while all the other gopīs found their spots for hiding themselves.

Then, Śrī Rādhā started looking for the gopīs, but initially, she was not able to find any of them. Eventually, she got so tired from searching; it is said that she started asking the trees and vines where her friends were. She said, “Oh Mālati, the flowering vine, tell me, where is my Viśākhā? Where has my dear Viśākhā hid herself? Oh Mādhvī, please tell me where my heart and soul, Lalitā, has gone. Oh Vāsanti, please tell me where has my Raṅgī gone. Oh Brāhmī, Vrajavāsī, lead me to the footprints of my dear gopīs. They are like my life and the water of the vine of my hopes.” Wow, and the water of the vine of her hopes—her friends.

So, a long time passed, and unable to find any of her girlfriends, she sat down, exhausted, on a rock. Then, suddenly, she noticed a dark shadow hiding behind a pu bush. Thinking it to be Lalitā, she ran towards the shadow, crying out, “I found the shelter of my life! I found you, I found you, oh Lalitā!” But the moment she said that, she saw that it was actually Kṛṣṇa—the first and Krishna. So, Kṛṣṇa came forward and embraced Śrī Rādhā and took her to—it is described—a dense kuñja near Vana where the aroma of jasmine flowers spread all around and the moon was in its full glory. Wow, what a setting.

And in that kuñja, Śrī Rādhā saw that actually all her gopīs were sitting down, wearing silk and white dresses. Some were fanning, some were waving whisks, some were showering flowers, and it is described others were singing and dancing. But in the middle of everyone, Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa winked at Lalitā with a message to bring a special set of clothes for Śrī Rādhā. He winked at Lalitā; you know, just by winking, she got the point: bring a set of clothes for Śrī Rādhā.

So, Lalitā went and brought a dress which is described: it was made of black silk on which were embroidered stars that twinkled. Wow. In your mind’s eye, think like that—a black silk dress embroidered with stars that twinkled. And it looked so real; it is described that the stars in the sky started feeling embarrassed that their shine was less than the stars on the veil of Śrī Rādhā. This is absolute truth, absolute reality. And Śrī Rādhā’s face, it is described, looked like a full moon surrounded with countless twinkling stars in the dark sky.

So, Kṛṣṇa said to her, “Oh Śrī Rādhī, your beautiful face is giving the nectar of life to all the planets and the stars in the sky. The veil of your mercy showers grace on all the goddesses in the higher planets. The charm of your beautiful face is the glory of all planetary systems. Your veil—your veil—holds the sky and all the stars.” Wow, her veil holds the sky and all the stars. “On your veil, you carry thousands of tears of love which themselves sparkle like stars. In the group of star-like gopīs, you are the moon, my dear. The whole Braja-maṇḍala is the sky of love in which the twinkling jewel-like stars are your beloved gopīs. You are the moon of bliss and pleasure, and I am the dark cloud that hides the moon from evil eyes.”

The poet Madhurī says, “And I am the dwarf servant who stays on the ground but wants to touch the high-rising moon in the sky. And I know one day, by the mercy of my guru, I will be able to attain the star and the moon of Braja—Śyāma and Śyāmā.” Wow. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, doing a lot of poets today because they just stir the heart with devotional feelings. The poet Govinda-dāsa writes the following: One day, Śrī Rādhā was very sad because she was not able to decide which veil she should wear to meet Kṛṣṇa near Govinda-kuṇḍa that afternoon. Seeing her sad, Raṅgā Devī took Śrī Rādhā to a treasure house—a treasure house where countless very rare veils were hanging on ropes. Sounds like one of those special treasure houses that Vṛndā Devī arranges all around Vṛndāvana. So, in that treasure house were countless veils, and they were all hanging on beautiful silken ropes.

So, Raṅgā Devī said, “Please choose one of these beautiful veils for your meeting with your Lord.” She said, “Look at this one, it’s called Indra-dhanuṣī—the rainbow veil of yours, under which you saw Kṛṣṇa for the first time. And look at this one, it’s called Citra-bhaṅgīmī—the veil painted with designs of peacocks and swans. Wearing this veil, you had your first dream of Kṛṣṇa in the forest. And do you remember this one? The veil called Māna-dāminī—wearing this veil, you conquered your māna, your anger, with Kṛṣṇa. And have a look at this one called Subhagya-vardhana—the veil of increasing fortune, which was given to you by Durvāsā Muni to please Kṛṣṇa.”

All these veils! And see this one, Prema-sahelī—the lover-friend veil, which was gifted by Lalitā to you for your secret meeting with Kṛṣṇa—different veils for different rasas and different moods. She brought it. “Do you see this one? Vaṁśī-mohinī—the flute-thief veil, in which you hid the stolen flute from Kṛṣṇa.” Wow, hid the flute in her veil!

“And do you remember this sacred one, Durlabha-oḍhanī—the rarest veil of all, which you got from the Goddess Sañjñā, the wife of the sun-god; while wearing it, you became invisible to the Vrajavāsīs whenever you wanted to meet Kṛṣṇa in the daytime? Previously, look at this one, Mātṛ-oḍhanī—the veil of motherly love, which was gifted to you by Mother Yaśodā for making food for Kṛṣṇa for the very first time in her kitchen. A special veil just for that occasion!”

And have a look at another one, Puṣpa-laṭikā—the flower-filled veil. Wearing this one, you roamed around the gardens of Braja with Kṛṣṇa. And just see here, Śrī Rādhā, the golden-embroidered veil, Suvarṇikā. And this veil here, Śyāmalā—the dark one. And Mṛdula, the softest of all veils. “Rādhā, look here, Kārādhanikā—the longest of all veils. And Vāmanikā—the shortest of all veils. See here, Ullāsikā—the lightest of all veils, and Guru-banikā—the heaviest of all veils. Which one do you want to choose?”

“What about Maṇḍanikā—the floral veil, or Vratanikā—the veil with the mantra written on it? How about Kumudikā—the lotus-printed veil, or Vādikā—the veil with many ornaments hanging from it?”

“I like Nava-ratikā,” she said. “I like Ratnatikā—a veil embroidered with nine gems. Or how about Tārā-māṇikā—a twinkling star veil?” This is pure nectar; love is in the details! “See here, Ja-sutā—a pearl-embroidered veil. And oh, look at Nāga-phanikā—a veil embedded with stones manifested from the hoods of rare snakes. Or Mukta-śikhā—a veil embedded with pearl-like gems manifested from the foreheads of very old elephants.”

“And Śrī Rādhā, what about Candanikā—a veil with sandalwood fragrance, or a sandalwood-paste-colored veil? It’s got two meanings there. Maybe this Vastrasālikā veil, a white veil. Or how about an Anurāga veil, a red veil? Maybe Jvālā-kaṇikā, a crimson veil. Or how about Hariyālī-līlā?” That’s a tongue twister! “Hariyālī-līlā, a lush green veil. Or Vāsinī, a silver veil. Maybe Anusāriṇī, a yellow veil,” she said. Papatī—a veil with parrots painted on it. “How about that one for your meeting today?”

However, she brought, “My favorite is Nāmāvalī—a veil with 100,000 names of Kṛṣṇa written on it.” So, after pondering all these choices—because she wanted to get the best to please her Kṛṣṇa—Rādhā chose the last one, which Raṅgā Devī liked the most: Nāmāvalī, a veil with 1,000 names of Kṛṣṇa written on it. And after placing it over her face, she wore it. It is described very gracefully and looked like part of the grand procession of Indra and his subjects in heaven. And when the lifter of Govardhana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, witnessed Śrī Rādhā in this beautiful veil, he lost control and fell into Śrī Rādhā’s arms. Looks like she picked the right one! It goes on, the poet Govinda-dāsa sings the glories of the divine couple now and forever. That’s how he concludes: “The poet sings the glories of the divine couple now and forever.” And so should we. And now we have material to contemplate on, to sing, as a stimulation for ecstatic love.

So, wow, this is one of my favorite talks, actually. So let us conclude today with some verses from the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa, from the section called Śrī Kṛṣṇa-janma-khaṇḍa, entitled “The Glory of Śrī Rādhā’s Name.” The śāstra states—Kṛṣṇa’s… actually Lord Śiva is speaking here: “Simply by vibrating the sound ra, Kṛṣṇa’s ecstatic jubilation fully blooms. Simply upon hearing the sound da, Śiva says, he chases after the chanter with great enthusiasm.” Let me recite that. This is Śiva speaking about the glories of Rādhā’s name: “Śiva says, simply by vibrating the sound ra, Kṛṣṇa’s ecstatic jubilation fully blooms. Simply by hearing the sound da, he, Kṛṣṇa, chases after the chanter with great enthusiasm.” Wow, Rādhā!

It goes on: “Now Lord Kṛṣṇa is proclaiming: ‘The moment I hear the sound ra from anyone’s lips, I grant them my supreme prema-bhakti. But the next moment, when I hear the sound da, I completely lose myself and become intoxicated in Rādhā-nāma, because of my great longing to hear the name of my beloved, I run after the devotees who chant Rādhā-nāma, Rādhā’s name.’” By Kṛṣṇa, one more: “The holy name of Rādhā is fully accomplished in perfection as follows: the syllable ra denotes dāna, the bestower of a gift. The syllable da indicates nirvāṇa, liberation. Thus, she who mercifully bestows liberation into the eternal kingdom of painlessness is called Rādhā.” Description of the spiritual world: into the eternal kingdom of painlessness is called Rādhā.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. This is your nectar today, all these wonderful details. So, I’m in China right now, traveling the length and breadth of this country, meeting so many wonderful devotees and having our programs—a little small, we can’t get too big here yet, but it is big—but we have to meet in small groups. It is wonderful seeing the devotion of these Chinese devotees and sharing with them also some of the details of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-līlā. So, I’ll be here another three weeks. Nevertheless, we will study and present another lecture on Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace to you next week.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Glories to the revealer.
