Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and a warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 123.

Now, as many of you know, recently we lectured extensively on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's ankle bells. But today and next Friday, I would like to speak specifically on the famous red lac that decorates her lotus feet.

Now, lac is a resinous material secreted naturally by what are called lac insects, insects found mainly in Southeast Asia. This red lac substance is secreted by certain glands in the abdomen of these lac insects.

Now, Kavi Karṇapūra identifies these specific insects as indragopas in his *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*, Chapter 11. Therein he writes:

“The millions of indragopas, tiny red insects crawling over the ground, color the delicate lotus feet of that goddess of the rainy season with an effulgent red lac. A row of splendid restless cranes adorned her throat as a pearl necklace. The fanned tails of the dancing peacocks comprised her beautiful hair. The fragrant air blowing by the Arjuna trees laden with sweet flowers formed her pleasant breath.”

Kṛṣṇa. Indragopas—I always wondered what they were.

So I found a beautiful verse by Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī glorifying this red lac on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's feet in his book *Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi*. It's Verse 18 from the chapter entitled *Dhanya Dhanya Rādhikā-caraṇa*. It means, “The lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā are my only treasure.”

So he writes:

“My only shelter are Śrī Rādhikā's lotus feet, which I yearn to worship with love and devotion. These lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā are painted by Kṛṣṇa's soft fingers with a feather dipped in the most fragrant red-colored juice. The gopīs follow Kṛṣṇa's example and worship the same feet for the happiness of all living entities. These feet are glorified in the Upaniṣads and are found in the depths of the hearts of pure devotees.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī also famously refers to the red lac on Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet in his *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*, Verse 43, a very famous verse:

“O Kṛṣṇa-priyā Rāṇī, when may I decorate Your splendid soles with the nectarean red foot lac that once made Kṛṣṇa's head even more beautiful when, to soothe Your jealous anger, He placed Your lotus feet upon His head?”

The prayer by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.

Now, of course, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī knows much about the service to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet because in the spiritual world, in Goloka Vṛndāvana, he is present in his eternal form as Rati-mañjarī. There, along with the young gopīs, he helps dress Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in various clothes and ornaments, including painting the soles of her lotus feet with this red lac.

And this fact is confirmed by Kavi Karṇapūra in *Govinda-līlāmṛta*, Chapter 19, Verse 49:

“The maidservant gopīs then bathed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, dressed her in a splendid red sari, anointed her with cosmetics, tied her braids, decorated her with artistic tattoo markings, decorated her moonlike forehead with red sindūra, placed a dot of musk on her chin, a garland around her neck, a lotus flower in her hand, a pearl on the tip of her nose, mascara around her eyes, earrings on her ears, a sash around her waist, betel nuts in her mouth, flowers in her hair, and red lac on her feet.”

In this way Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī appeared very splendid and very beautiful.

So such an intimate service is actually reserved only for the younger gopīs, or rarely for the slightly older gopīs, the sakhīs, such as Rādhārāṇī's eight personal girlfriends.

But it's interesting that one time a young gopī questioned if there was even a need for Śrī Rādhā's feet to be decorated with red lac.

And I was reading the other day in *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta Mahākāvya*, Chapter 4, Verse 96, where Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes—listen carefully here:

“Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's toenails and foot soles are naturally a deep red color. Nevertheless, one gopī colored them with red lac. But you may ask, why? Does it make sense to worship the radiant sun with a tiny ghee lamp?”

Thank you, Ṭhākura.

Now there's an interesting pastime where Kṛṣṇa Himself painted this red lac on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's feet, and I'll share this pastime with you.

Once, on Śivarātri, most of the members of Rādhārāṇī's household went to worship Lord Śiva at Ambikāvana, where it's described they spent several days chanting the glories of Mahādeva.

Now, taking advantage of this opportunity, Kṛṣṇa disguised Himself in the attire of a barber's daughter. Carrying a full basket of utensils, He knocked on the door of Rādhārāṇī's palace and introduced Himself—or let's say herself—to the young gopī who answered.

So disguised, Kṛṣṇa said in a feminine voice:

“My name is Śyāmadāsī. I'm a barber's daughter, and my father has sent me to offer a manicure and a pedicure to the daughter of Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu. I'm very expert at my trade, and I long to serve the queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.”

So after consulting with Lalitā, the young gopī brought the barber's daughter to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's room.

And as the barber's daughter bowed before Śrī Rādhā, Rādhārāṇī asked:

“Dear beautiful girl, why have you come here?”

And the barber's daughter replied:

“Simply to serve Your lotus feet.”

So enchanted by the beauty and the voice of the barber girl, Śrī Rādhā couldn't help but submit to her request.

And as the barber's daughter began expertly trimming Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's toenails, curious, Śrī Rādhā asked:

“O effulgent girl, please tell me, amongst your people, what is considered the greatest happiness in the three worlds?”

The barber's daughter looked up and replied:

“O Gaurāṅgī, everyone in my village knows that association with Kṛṣṇa is the greatest bliss.”

Now charmed by the girl's reply, Rādhārāṇī asked:

“Then tell me, wise one, what do your people consider the ultimate shelter?”

And the barber's daughter replied:

“There is no better shelter than songs about Kṛṣṇa and the recitation of His holy names.”

There is no better shelter than songs about Kṛṣṇa and the recitation of His holy names.

So intrigued, Śrī Rādhā continued:

“Dear girl, what desire leads to the highest auspiciousness?”

And the barber's daughter replied:

“The desire to attain Kṛṣṇa.”

The desire to attain Kṛṣṇa.

And amazed by the words of this young girl, speaking in such a nectarean way while attending to her lotus feet, Śrī Rādhā said:

“O barber girl, how have you become so enchanted by that cowherd prince?”

So the barber's daughter replied:

“O Queen, who in the villages of Vraja does not love that killer of demons? His good qualities and fame as a faithful lover are spread through all the groves along the Yamunā River.”

So Śrī Rādhā then asked:

“O enthusiast of Hari”—I like that—“O enthusiast of Hari, tell me what you have concluded to be the supreme form of enjoyment.”

So smiling and looking up at Śrī Rādhā, the barber's daughter replied:

“My dear Queen, the transcendental form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

The transcendental form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

So at that point, the barber's daughter began removing the old lac from Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet and began to apply fresh lac.

Then she asked:

“O wise beauty, what is the ultimate goal of life?”

And the barber's daughter replied:

“My Queen, there is only one purpose to our existence, and that is to attain Kṛṣṇa's eternal company.”

To attain Kṛṣṇa's eternal company.

Now at this point, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was becoming a little suspicious of the clever answers of the barber's daughter.

So with a quick motion, she suddenly pulled off the veil on the barber's daughter's head, revealing Kṛṣṇa Śyāmasundara, who, it's described, was smiling from head to toe.

And taking advantage of the moment, Kṛṣṇa reached out and touched Śrī Rādhā's red-lac soles with His forefinger and respectfully placed a small portion of that red lac on His chest, actually just near to His heart.

And seeing Kṛṣṇa's submissive mood toward their queen, all of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's maidservants burst out with joyful cries, calling out:

“Jaya Kṛṣṇa!”

That's the pastime. Such a sweet pastime.

Now, further research shows that Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra gives more insight into this pastime in his book *Alaṅkāra-kaustubha*, Chapter 8, Text 3. He writes:

“This lac which stuck to Hari's chest outshines even the Śrīvatsa sign, the Kaustubha jewel, and the mark of the goddess of fortune on the chest of Śrī Hari. It shines like the rising sun prayed to by darkness or a red lotus blossoming in the Yamunā. May the red lac on Rādhā's lotus feet protect you all. May the red lac on Rādhā's lotus feet protect you all.”

And Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, in his *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta-śataka*, Chapter 13, Verse 25, refers to this pastime while encouraging all of us to take shelter of Vṛndāvana, where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet constantly traverse that sacred ground. He writes:

“Hari takes in His fingers the red cosmetics touching Śrī Rādhā's colorful jeweled anklets and with awe and reverence places it over His heart. Please worship Vṛndāvana, where Śrī Rādhā gracefully walks with her soft, delicate feet.”

We must thank all these great ācāryas.

So let us conclude today with a beautiful verse by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his *Gopāla-campū*, Pūrva, Text 33. A beautiful verse. I read it last night and I thought I'd include it today.

He writes:

“A person who is a king but does not serve Lord Hari, a person who is generous but does not offer everything to Lord Hari, a person who is an expert poet but does not glorify Lord Hari, a person who surrenders to a guru without surrendering to Lord Hari, a person who is very qualified but is not dedicated to Lord Hari, a person who is very sincere but does not take shelter of Kṛṣṇa, and he who does not follow in the footsteps of Śrī Rādhā, Vraja's goddess of fortune—these seven persons pierce my heart like javelins, O Kṛṣṇa.”

So thank you very much.

Today, Prabhus, we have one more class about the red lac on Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet, and we'll give that class next Friday.

Thank you.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

All glories to Śuka, the revealer of the dhāma.

Thank you to all of you.

My obeisances.
