Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our lecture series on Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrīla Prabhupāda, namaste. So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part 108, an auspicious number. Today we will discuss the fourth quality of Kṛṣṇa once again that distinguishes him from Lord Nārāyaṇa, namely rūpa-mādhurī, his most extraordinary beauty, and it will be part two about his lotus eyes.

To begin with, the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.9 says that he has no eyes but sees everything. He has no eyes but he sees everything. This in fact refers to the fact that Kṛṣṇa has no material eyes – that's what it means. His eyes are not made of skin, flesh, bone, etc. Furthermore, the Viṣṇu-sahasranāma states that there are six names that denote or refer to or explain Kṛṣṇa's eyes. The first is lohitākṣa, meaning his handsome eyes are reddish. Number two: sahasrākṣa means he has thousands – or I think it's better to say infinite – eyes. Number three: padmanābha, meaning his eyes resemble lotus flowers. Number four: aravindākṣa, meaning his eyes are exactly like lotus flowers. Number five: mahākṣa, his eyes are beautifully wide. And number six: suṣama, his eyes are very beautiful. Six names.

Now there is a famous pastime as we all know in Dāmodara-līlā where Kṛṣṇa starts rubbing his eyes and the kajal he is wearing starts smearing around his eyes. Some detail here: the ācāryas say that this was due to a transcendental conflict between him and mother Yaśodā. Firstly, mother Yaśodā left him dissatisfied by leaving him alone to take care of the boiling milk. Later she also got into a real dispute, you could say, with him when she tried to tie him up to the mortar. And as soon as that happened, Kṛṣṇa started crying. The śāstra say bālasya rodanaṁ balam – it's interesting: crying is the strength of children. The parents will know what I'm talking about. Crying is the strength of children. However, while crying, Kṛṣṇa's kajal – that's called kajal – started spreading all around his eyes, and he started rubbing his eyes with his hands.

Now here at this point, the devotee poet Harirāya, whom we often quote, he poses the question: why did Kṛṣṇa rub his eyes with his hands? And in order to give a reply, Harirāya composed a beautiful verse in his Bhakti-rasāyana, his commentary on Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.9.11. He writes – the Sanskrit is very long – so he writes: Kṛṣṇa thought, "These two eyes of mine are actually the Moon and the Sun. The Moon and the Sun are the founders of the two prestigious dynasties in which I appeared." Now a note here: actually the Bhagavad-gītā, chapter 11, text number 19, describes that the Sun and Moon are actually Kṛṣṇa's eyes. So Kṛṣṇa continues: "However, due to the spreading of the thick kajal, the reputation of these dynasties is now being tarnished. How can I tolerate this?" Thinking like this and desiring to wipe away the disrepute of his own family members, the Supreme Lord rubbed his eyes with his own two hands. Brilliant. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Here the Upaniṣad scholar, my good friend Hariparṣad Dāsa, has composed a beautiful verse in this connection, giving another reason why Kṛṣṇa cried tears on this occasion. Different scholars can interpret or give different meanings to Sanskrit words or Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, and the first line he writes is: Kṛṣṇa thought – it's really interesting – "In my previous incarnation as Rāma, I got freed from the forest on this day of Dīpāvalī. On this very day, however, I have again been tied down in another forest by my angry mother. If as the Supreme Lord my life here in this material world is so full of bondage, then what to say of the misery of the conditioned souls?" Having considered this fact, our Lord displayed tears in his eyes and cried out of compassion for the poor conditioned souls, even as baby Kṛṣṇa. Isn't that wonderful?

So last week we quoted several Brajabhāṣī poets who, as you remember, wrote beautiful poems about Kṛṣṇa's eyes. And in my research this past week, I came across a medieval Muslim devotee poet named Ralīna. His Muslim name was Sayyad Gulāma Nabī, who described Kṛṣṇa's eyes in a most wonderfully poetic way: "Ahalā halā marī jarāra – wonderful are Govinda's eyes: white as if filled with pristine heavenly nectar, black as if full of the deadliest of poisons, and reddish as if filled with the most intoxicating wine. If he glances even once at someone, that person simultaneously lives due to the nectar, dies due to the poison, or stumbles around due to the intoxicating wine." That's pretty far out.

Now more research revealed one of Kṛṣṇa's names interestingly enough is Animiṣa, A-N-I-M-I-Ṣ-A, animiṣa – it means one who doesn't blink his eyes. When I read that I thought of Lord Jagannātha. Lord Jagannātha on the rathayātrā is so eager to see and give mercy to the fallen conditioned souls all through the parade, he never blinks once. He doesn't miss anyone. Animiṣa – one who doesn't blink his eyes. However, we were considering that during the pastime of Kṛṣṇa's killing Pūtanā, we all know from reading Bhāgavatam or Kṛṣṇa book how he closed his eyes as soon as the witch Pūtanā came in front of him to kill him. Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.6.8 describes this: "Understanding her to be an infant killer, the Lord of all moving and non-moving entities closed his eyes. She then placed the infinite Lord, the cause of her death, on her lap, just as a fool places a sleeping serpent on his lap mistaking it to be a rope." Now various devotee commentators have given different reasons for Kṛṣṇa closing his eyes. We'll just take one of them. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives five reasons why Kṛṣṇa closed his eyes when the Pūtanā witch came in front of him. The first one is to show that he is a small child afraid of such fierce demons. Number two: to avoid seeing such an inauspicious demon as Pūtanā, he closed his eyes. Number three: that no cheating can remain in front of the vision of the Lord – because she cheated, she came as a beautiful woman and assumed a real form – so that no cheating can remain in front of the vision of the Lord. Number four: the Lord would have felt embarrassed to kill the lady who had shown the mood of a mother to him; he wanted to avoid that embarrassment. Number five: he did not want to see her suffering in front of his eyes.

Now again Harirāya the poet further reveals the Lord's mind at this moment. When Pūtanā came, the Lord is thinking: "If I look at her with compassion, she will become immediately liberated and the pastime won't take place. And if I look at her with anger, she will be burned to ashes. Better I don't look at her at all." That's why Harirāya's understanding is Kṛṣṇa closed his eyes because if I look at her with compassion she will become immediately liberated and there won't be any pastime, and if I look at her with anger she'll be burnt to ashes; better I don't look at her at all. Thank you, Harirāya.

Now there's a beautiful pastime often relished by the Vrajavāsīs because they relish this līlā containing numerous references to Kṛṣṇa's eyes. Once Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa walked along a riverside path, meaning along the Yamunā, taking in the natural beauty of Vṛndāvana, and soon they came to a dense thicket near Ānanda-ghaṭa. There are many ghāṭas along the river, so Ānanda-ghaṭa – they came to that ghāṭa on the Yamunā river. And Kṛṣṇa turned to Rādhā and the gopīs behind her and he said, "Hey, why don't we all play hide and seek?" It looks like it originates in the spiritual world. And always eager to please Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs replied, "Yes, of course Kṛṣṇa, let's play." And with a note of sarcasm, Lalitā Devī added, "But only if you, Kṛṣṇa, don't cheat. No peeking while others hide." In other words, the game is somebody closes their eyes, everyone goes and hides, and then that seeker has to go out and find them. So he said, "Don't cheat, don't peek while we're all hiding." And Kṛṣṇa was about to protest Lalitā's unfair remark, but then he had a better idea. He said, "If you're so worried about me cheating, Lalitā, then why don't you cover my eyes with your hands?" So Lalitā nodded in approval and replied, "Good idea, and we'll draw straws to see who gets such an honor." Sarcastic. But setting the rules of this game – which described – was not easy. Kṛṣṇa wanted the seeker (the person who's looking for everyone who's hiding) to tag by touching or embracing those he found hiding. But the gopīs, suspicious of Kṛṣṇa's enthusiasm, insisted that being seen was enough – you don't have to touch. And Kṛṣṇa nevertheless volunteered to be the first seeker. It was agreed that due to the large number of gopīs having to hide, he would count all the way to fifty – 1,2,3,4 – before searching. And as Kṛṣṇa leaned up against a tree, some girls tied a blindfold around his eyes so he wouldn't see where the other gopīs went to hide. And as he started counting to fifty, a few girls remained there to see if he would peek from under the cloth over his eyes. And sure enough, he did in time, and they called out, "You cheated, Kṛṣṇa!" So Lalitā then stood behind Kṛṣṇa to cover his eyes again more securely as the remaining gopīs ran in all directions to hide behind the trees, the bushes, and the rocks in the Vṛndāvana forest.

So then when Kṛṣṇa reached fifty, he called out, "Okay girls, here I come!" Then taking off his blindfold, he began searching for signs of where the gopīs – it's mentioned especially Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī – had gone to hide. Now previously when playing this game, Kṛṣṇa would find Rādhārāṇī by following her distinctive footprints, or perhaps a monkey might betray Rādhā and reveal her hiding place. But sometimes Kṛṣṇa just couldn't find her. At these times, when Kṛṣṇa had searched high and low without finding her, Rādhā would get so excited that her fulgence would glow brighter and give her away in anticipation – her fulgence would glow brighter and just give her away. Sometimes, though rarely, it's described a gopī friend in a joking way would betray her. In this process of looking for Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa invariably found other gopīs too. Some of them he touched to get them out of the game; well others outran him. On some occasions – I was reading or I heard – he found neither Rādhā nor any of the other gopīs, and at those times he would wonder, "Where did they all vanish to?" Then he would look anxiously at Lalitā supervising this pastime, but Lalitā as expected revealed no hint. Kṛṣṇa would then search frantically for footprints, but the Vṛndāvana forest was hiding them. And one time the Vrajavāsīs say, going deep into the forest, he saw a marble pavilion at one part of the Yamunā river, and suddenly the forest exploded with shrieking gopīs coming out to make their escape, and Kṛṣṇa, thoroughly humiliated, would fail to catch even a single gopī. At such times, Kṛṣṇa would accuse the gopīs of using mystic powers to become invisible. "Ridiculous!" they would cry. Then he would accuse Lalitā of chanting mantras over his eyes to obscure his vision. That second excuse always made the gopīs clutch their sides and laugh hysterically. But finally, by the arrangement of Yogamāyā – because there is Vipralambha and there is meeting – by the arrangement of Yogamāyā he would find Śrī Rādhā and regain his pride. Hare Kṛṣṇa. So in this way, Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs would enjoy a game of hide and seek in the beautiful Vṛndāvana forest.

So like this, there are many pastimes in relation to Kṛṣṇa's lotus eyes. So let us conclude today with a poem by the devotee poet Śrīdāsa Ṭhākura. I described his history a couple of months ago. He writes, what a way to conclude, describing Kṛṣṇa: "His graceful eyes are like two blue lotus flowers. The restless glances from the corner of his eyes are like flower arrows, arrows that wound the amorous hearts of saintly gopīs, moving the archer's bow of his eyebrows and emptying the two quivers of his eyes. How many flower arrows did he fire? How many flower arrows did he fire? Many playful girls' hearts were wounded, but those girls could not gaze on anyone but him." Thank you, dear poet.

Thank you, prabhus. I think we have another class about eyes, because if you do a search on Google or anywhere about Kṛṣṇa's eyes, so many quotes come up. Just have to arrange them in a nice way. So we'll do our best and we'll be with you next week, part three about Kṛṣṇa's lotus eyes. All glories to Śrī, the revealer of the nectar. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Balarāma, jaya. Śrīla Prabhupāda. Thank you. Hare Kṛṣṇa.