Warm welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Vrindavan Dham. So today, we have given 310 lectures in this series, beginning from March 23rd, 2020. And what has been our purpose in giving so many discourses on Vrindavan?

Simply to remind ourselves of the goal of our lives, which is essentially to become permanent, eternal residents of the topmost planet in the spiritual sky, Goloka Vrindavan. In his book, Vrindavan Days, chapter 5, Harikesha, one of Śrīla Prabhupāda's first disciples, who I quoted a couple of weeks ago, recounts Śrīla Prabhupāda's words from one of his famous lectures in Vrindavan in 1972. "Living eternally in Vrindavan, engaged in the loving personal service of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the goal of all Gaudiya Vaishnavas.

In our hearts, in our minds, and with our lives, we all try to live moment by moment in Vrindavan. We meditate on Vrindavan, dream of Vrindavan, and try our best to tell everyone about the sweet glories of Braj Dham.

Every Gaudiya is a messenger of Vrindavan, carrying the good news of Radha-Govinda's pure loving service to one and all. I am simply Vrindavan's messenger." The effect of living in Vrindavan cannot be overestimated. At every turn, you are reminded of Krishna.

Here, your spiritual strength increases due to that contact. For instance, from 1962 to 1965, I would sit in these rooms and chant Hare Krishna and see the samadhis of Jiva and Rupa Goswamis.

Just by thinking of how they wrote, I got courage to write. I would type and cook a little. I lived very simply, content to be in Rupa Goswami's presence. These samadhis are the very best in Gaudiya Vaishnavism. They actually inspired me to go to the West.

Thank you, sir. Now, Śrīla Prabhupāda's determination to live in Vrindavan, even if there were inconveniences, is also seen in the strong words of Raghunath Das Goswami in his *Dhyana Candrika*, which is actually part of his book *Stavavali*, wherein he takes ten vows.

Referring to Vrindavan in verse 2, he writes, "I will not live in any other holy place, even for a moment, even if there is a deity of Lord Hari there, and even if I can lovingly relish transcendental topics of Hari with great devotees.

Instead, I will live in Braja birth after birth, even if I pass my time chatting casually with the villagers." But our acharyas have made it very clear that living in Vrindavan doesn't mean to simply exist there, to just be there.

Rather, it means to be active in serving not only Braj and Krishna, Krishna and Balarama, and all the residents of the Dham who are dear to the Divine Couple.

Rupa Goswami writes in his *Satika*, verse 74, "One who serves the residents of Vrindavan who are without possessions, who are immersed in Krishna-rasa, who are desireless, and who are fearful of the company of worldly people, brings Vrindavan's Master Krishna and His mistress Radha under his control." So, we are continuing today with our series on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 45.

Part 45. In this lecture today, I would like to discuss more about, well, one of our favorite subjects, Braj Renu, the dust of Vrindavan. And I thought we could begin by recounting one of the most famous pastimes involving Braj Renu as follows.

Many of you know this, or hopefully all of you know this. One day, Krishna and His friends were playing on the bank of the Yamuna at a place called Brahmanda Ghat.

Brahmanda Ghat, when suddenly Krishna decided to glorify the dust, or you could say the dirt, of Vrindavan by eating a little.

So, seeing Krishna do this, His friends, the cowherd boys, they ran back to Krishna's home, Nandagram, to tell Mother Yasoda.

They want to tell on him. This is actually nicely described in Śrīmad Bhagavatam, 10.8.32: "Once, while Krishna was playing with all His small playmates, including Balarama and other sons of the gopas, all His friends came together and lodged a complaint to Mother Yasoda. 'Mother,' they submitted, 'Krishna has eaten earth.'" That's how the verse goes in the Bhagavatam.

So, hearing this, that Krishna had eaten earth, dirt, dust, Mother Yasoda became very angry.

And grabbing a stick, she ran out of the house to where Krishna was sitting on the bank of the river at Brahmanda Ghat.

She confronted him, saying, "Lala, your brother and friends have told me that you are eating dirt, and I can see some on your lips. Why are you doing such a naughty thing?" So, Krishna said to Mother Yasoda, "No, Maya, I didn't eat dirt." "Some other Yasoda said, "And how am I to know that you are telling the truth?" So, Krishna famously replied, "Mother, if you don't believe me, then you can look in my mouth and see for yourself." "So, Yasoda Devi said, 'Then, Lala, open your mouth and let me see.'" Now, the acharyas say that as Krishna opened his mouth, Yoga Maya exerted her influence over Yasoda Devi and showed her the entire universe with all its planets, etc., within her son's mouth.

Yoga Maya essentially showed her Krishna's majestic opulence, which was unknown to her, for she simply thought of Krishna as her darling child.

Now, it's interesting. Śrīla Jiva Goswami tells us exactly what she saw in his *Gopal Champu*. He writes, "You should have thought, 'Oh, how amazing!

The same world that is visible outside is now also within the mouth of my child. Within this world, I can see Mathura Mandala, and within Mathura Mandala, I can see Vrindavan. And within Vrindavan, I can also see myself holding the hand of my child.

What on earth is going on here?

I cannot be dreaming because my eyes are open. Neither can this be an illusion of the demigods because I am too insignificant for them to bother with.' So, she started to think, having seen what I've seen today in the mouth of my child, is it true what Gargamuni had said when my son was born, that he is the Supreme Personality of Godhead?" Now, at this point, it is described, Krishna could sense what his mother was thinking and he became alarmed.

He thought, "If Mother stops thinking I am her son, who will feed and cuddle me?

If Mother stops thinking that I'm her son, who will feed and cuddle me?" So, Yoga Maya then caused Mother Yasoda to forget that her son could possibly be the, how would you say, the Lord of all that be, the Lord of all opulence.

At which time she took Krishna on her lap and again caressed him as her darling son.

Hmm. Now, the acharyas say that by eating dirt, earth, dust, Krishna allowed his mother to briefly see his majestic opulence, but only briefly.

Why?

Because in Vrindavan, Krishna hides his opulences so that his devotees don't know he is God and can worship him without awe and veneration like in the Vaikuntha planets, and thus they can associate with him more intimately, more freely, as a friend, a child, or a lover.

See. Actually, in *Caitanya-charitamrita*, Madhya Lila 3.16, we hear Krishna's words in this regard, "Knowing my opulences, the whole world looks upon me with awe and veneration, but devotion, made feeble by such reverence, does not attract me." And the *charitamrita* says that considering all this that Mother Yasoda briefly witnessed Krishna's opulence as God Almighty, we should understand that Mother Yasoda was especially favored by the Lord, and thus she should be considered the topmost devotee in Vasudeva-bhava.

For the acharyas say that Krishna's becoming Mother Yasoda's son was not the first time that God had become somebody's child.

I was thinking, for example, previously Krishna became the child of King Dasharatha and Kausalya as Lord Ramachandra, and with those parents, Krishna delighted them with his childhood pastimes.

Because a little later he left to go to the forest, etc. But he never showed them his majestic opulences like he did to Mother Yasoda in his mouth. On the other hand, there are some devotees to whom the Lord only showed the opulence of his majestic form, like the four Kumaras, for example, but he didn't show them his childhood pastimes.

But Krishna's favored Mother Yasoda by sharing with her both his childhood pastimes and a glimpse of his opulences in his mouth.

Therefore, she was especially blessed. The great devotee-poet Harisuri, who I've quoted before, writes very poetically in this regard in his book *Bhakti Rasayanam*. It's actually a Sanskrit commentary on the 10th canto of *Śrīmad Bhagavatam*. So, in this regard that we're speaking, the theme, he, he writes this, follows, it's poetic. "Whom He gave pleasure as a child, He did not give pleasure through His opulence.

And whom He gave pleasure through His opulence, He did not give pleasure as a child. However, amongst all these devotees, the best example is Mother Yasoda, to whom the Lord gave endless pleasure through His opulence as well as through His childhood activities." My Krishna, I was researching and *Śrīmad Bhagavatam* 10.9.20 says it perfectly, "Neither Lord Brahma, nor Lord Shiva, nor even the Goddess of Fortune, who was always the better half of the Supreme Lord, can obtain from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the deliverer from this material world, such mercy, such mercy as received by Mother Yasoda." This devotee Harisuri, our poet, was born in the 19th century in Nashik, Maharashtra, India.

I was reading that every day, as a peer devotee, he would wake up before sunrise, take a bath in the Godavari River, chant his prayers, recite the entire Vishnu Sahasranama, then read twelve chapters, then perform goseva (cow service), and only then he would eat breakfast.

What a nice example. My dear, illustrious senior Godbrother, Radhanath Swami Maharaj, asked his disciple Hari Prasad to publish this *Bhakti Rasayanam* in both Hindi and in English. And I obtained a draft of that book in English. I thought I'd share something from it with all of you.

So, in *Bhakti Rasayanam*, Harisuri shares some very interesting realizations on the verse that we opened up with today, *Śrīmad Bhagavatam* 10.8.32. Maybe I'll recite it again so we're focused here. "One day, while Krishna was playing with his small playmates, including Balarama and other sons of the gopas, all those friends came together and lodged a complaint to Mother Yasoda. 'Mother,' they submitted, 'Krishna has eaten earth.'" Now, how does Harisuri pose the question, "Why did Krishna eat dirt?

Why did Krishna eat dirt?" And he gives a very lengthy explanation.

So, let's go over it. So, first of all, he says that Krishna thought, "In a previous incarnation as Parashurama, I snatched the entire Earth from the Kshatriyas and gifted that Earth to the *dwijas*, the demigods, which means the twice-born Brahmanas." Brahmanas are twice-born. "Twice-born Brahmanas.

I remember that pastime and I would like to do the same thing again, to some degree. I would like to do the same thing again, to some degree." So, thinking like this, Krishna again gifted a little Earth, some dirt, some dust, to his *dwijas*.

But here Harisuri makes it clear, but that by *dwijas* is meant actually Krishna's teeth.

How so?

Because in Sanskrit, teeth are also known as *dwijas*, teeth are also known as *dwijas*, meaning like Brahmanas. Teeth take birth twice. Meaning we have our milk teeth, you know, our baby teeth, and then we have our permanent teeth. So, *dwija*.

So, firstly, as Parashurama, Krishna gave the Earth to the twice-born Brahmanas.

But remembering that pastime, wanting to do the same thing again, to some degree, Krishna ate dirt as the small boy in Vrindavan and gifted it to his *dwijas*.

He gifted it to his *dwijas*, his teeth, in his mouth. I thought that was interesting. So, then Harisuri says, "At this point, the devotees of Krishna in all the planetary systems were thinking that this dust of Braja, which has touched the feet of the cows and the Gopis in Vrindavan, is desired by all the denizens of Heaven.

It is not achievable by the, how does he say, unsaintly demons, and it is meditated upon by the yogis. But how can we devotees, who have not taken birth on the Earth, who are on the higher planetary systems, achieve the good fortune of getting that dust, that Braj Renu?" So, then Harisuri writes, "Meditating seriously, seriously upon this long-cherished desire of His devotees, the demigods, the Supreme Lord, who has all the planetary systems within His stomach, and who is an overflowing ocean of mercy, ate the dust of Braja so that it could reach all His devotees staying in these higher, various planetary systems." In other words, when Krishna ate the dust of Vrindavan, Mother Yasoda saw all the demigods and their planets in His mouth.

Meaning, finally, those demigods had mystically come in touch with that dust in the mouth of Krishna.

Wow. Such a wonderful realization. So, then I was reading at that point, Harisuri quotes his Guru, his name was Mahakavi Dundi Raj Shastri, who wrote his own book called *Bhagavata John Janam*. And in 2.7, his Guru writes, "Just adding something to this, this entire universe contains valuables such as the desire-fulfilling cup, the victory tree of Heaven, the golden mountain Meru, and the precious jewels, and the hoods of Ananta Shesha.

However, even with all these valuables, this universe can never be on par with Sri Dham Vrindavan. Why?

Because history is proof that even the tiny particles of dirt taken from random locations within Vrindavan got transformed into this same gigantic universe after they entered the mouth of a tiny little child Krishna." In other words, Harisuri wants to say that after Krishna ate the dirt of Vrindavan, its particles got transformed into the entire universe.

He goes on to write, "It's such a phenomenon can occur through only a few particles of Vrindavan's dust, then what to speak of the entirety of Vrindavan?

Certainly, it is such an abode that it cannot be compared even with all the universes put together." Thank you. So, I mentioned in the previous lecture, to repeat, that we should plan somehow or other to obtain some of that dust of Vrindavan.

That's called *lobham*. It's agreed, lust, anger, greed are the three gates leading to hell in this world. But we're not talking about that type of greed to enjoy this world. We want the greed of becoming Krishna conscious.

So, we should be greedy for that dust because it's *tadiya*, it's something connected to Krishna, and it can act as a stimulus for ecstatic love, which is the theme of this miniseries.

Now, we previously discussed how Akrura, he had that *lobham*, he had that greed. Upon approaching Vrindavan, as soon as he reached Vrindavan, and I believe it was for the first time in his life, he saw the footprints of the love of his life, Krishna, in the dust.

And Akrura couldn't believe his good fortune. He actually says, when he met Bhagavatam 10.38.3, "What pious deeds have I done?

What severe austerities have I undergone?

What charity have I given to a worthy recipient, so that today I will see Lord Keshava?" He calls Krishna.

They try to say that Akrura not only saw Krishna's footprints in the dust of Braja, but he also saw the trees, the birds, the insects, the animals who all resided in Vrindavan.

Therefore, he said, "Now all the dawns of my life have become auspicious." Actually, that's the word used in the Bhagavatam. "Now all the dawns of my life have become auspicious." So, our poet, Sri Harisuri, composes a verse at this point to share how could I say the hidden feelings hidden in the heart of Akrura, which caused Akrura to feel so fortunate.

Listen to this. He writes: "Akrura thought, 'There is not even a small portion of land here that remains untouched by Krishna's lotus feet.

Neither is there a single tree that has not experienced the joyous agitation of being touched by Krishna's soft hands.

Nowhere is there a single living entity here who has remained devoid of Krishna's merciful glance.' That's my favorite part. 'Nor is there a single living entity here who has remained devoid of Krishna's merciful glance.' We always beg for that glance." He goes on, "How wonderful!

How did it happen today, after millions of lifetimes, that I obtained the good fortune of all these entities of Vrindavan at once?" This is the important line here. "After millions of lifetimes, that I obtained the good fortune of all these entities, these pure devotees that we listed in Vrindavan, at once.

Certainly, it is due to the culmination of my immense good fortune." Now then, Harisuri gives a beautiful explanation of these thoughts of Akrura, how he obtained the good fortune of all those entities at one time. It's really interesting. First, he mentions the soil of Braja, the earth, the dirt, the dust.

He says that that soil was marked with the remnants of the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus, the soil was fortunate. Next, he writes that the trees were fortunate because they drank their nourishment from that soil of Vrindavan, which contained the remnants of Krishna.

And then, in turn, he writes, these trees produce fruits. In this way, the fruits of the trees became the remnants of the remnants of Krishna.

Then he writes, after eating the fruits of the trees, these birds and animals produce joyous sounds. Those joyous sounds, thus, the remnants of the remnants of the remnants of Krishna.

And then he says, "And by hearing these joyous sounds of the birds and the animals of Braja, Akrura got the remnants of the remnants of the remnants of Krishna." In other words, he got the remnants into it by the soil, the trees, and the birds and animals of Braja all at once.

Akrura's words were, "After millions of lifetimes, I obtained the good fortune of all these entities at once. How is it possible?" So, in this way, Harisuri explains a clear statement that how he received the good fortune of Braja, the living entities of Vrindavan, beginning with the soil, beginning with the dirt, with the dust, Braj Renu.

So glorious!

It all started with Braj Renu. Braj Renu, Kṛṣṇa. So again, how fortunate we are that we can actually go to Vrindavan and roll on that dust. Or for that matter, Vrindavan and Mayapur are non-different, according to our acharyas. We can go to Mayapur and roll in the dust of Mayapur.

And if we need more inspiration in this regard, we can take it from a great devotee, Raghava Acharya. He was an associate of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, who formed much of his life, lived in a cave on Govardhan Hill. And after taking his bath every day, he would roll in the dust of Vrindavan.

Now, that's interesting. In the material world, if you roll in some dust, then you take a bath. But here, this great devotee, after taking his bath, he wants to be *anukulin*, he wants to be clean, to touch, to touch and roll in this precious substance of Braja, the dust, the Braj Renu.

That's how we perceive the dust. It is said that dust was the only decoration he wore. People like to decorate themselves with jewelry and fine clothes, etc., to look attractive. But he wanted to be attractive to Krishna.

So, his only decoration was the dust of Vrindavan, his loincloth, his kanthamala, his neck beads, his japa, and the dust of Braja. He knew and demonstrated that such dust was the best ornament and means of purification for a resident of Vrindavan.

So, let's pray that by Śrīla Prabhupāda's mercy, he has actually invited us to Vrindavan.

There's a purport like that in *Śrīmad Bhagavatam* when he's talking about the opening of the Krishna-Balarama Mandir, he's inviting everyone to come to Braja.

And part of coming to Braja, before entering into Braja, is to roll in the dust of Braja. So, today we'll conclude with a short prayer that eloquence is truth, spoken concisely by the wives of the Kaliya serpent, that they're glorifying the dust on Krishna's lotus feet, the wives of the Kaliya serpent.

It's a verse from the 10th canto, 16th chapter, verse 36. Short but sweet. "Dear Lord," the wives of Kaliya said, "we are simply astonished to see that He, our husband Kaliya, is so fortunate to have the dust of Your lotus feet on his head.

This is a fortune sought after by great saintly persons. Even the Goddess of Fortune underwent great austerities just to have the blessing of the dust of Your lotus feet. So how is it that Kaliya is so easily getting the dust of Your feet on his head?

How is it that Kaliya is so easily getting the dust of Your lotus feet on his head?" Hare Krishna.

Thank you so much, Prabhu. Again, this is where we get our nectar, *shravanam kirtanam*, Krishna-smaranam.

We're able to remember Krishna by hearing His pastimes and His glories, about His devotees, and about His Abode, etc.

So, I think I have, by Śrīla Prabhupāda's mercy, one more class to give on Braj Renu.

It's a pastime class, mainly a pastime class. I think you'll really relish it. So, I look forward to being with you again next Friday. Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dham, ki Jai! Śrī Caitanya Mahaprabhu ki Jai!

Hare Krishna!