Hi Krishna everyone and welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So, we're continuing with our minis-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 67. As we have previously covered two of Lord Caitanya's favorite poets, namely Vidyapati and Chandidas, as stated in Caitanya Charitamrita, today we will discuss the life and poetry of the third personality referred to in Caitanya Charitamrita, and that is the illustrious Jayadeva Goswami.

And because there's so much information about him, we'll discuss about him in two lectures. So, this is part one. Next Friday, part two. But first, in order to better understand his and other devotional poets, I would like to briefly mention another technique in devotional poetry used by these personalities to enrich their writings, to enrich their poetry.

Scholars call such techniques *alankaras*. It means ornaments. And today we'll discuss *vṛtti*. *Vṛtti* refers to to a phrase or a sentence or a word that can have multiple meanings. And Śrīla Kavikarnapura gives an example of *vṛtti* in his illustrious *Alankara Kaustubha*, verse 71.

It's really nice. He writes: Radha says to Krishna, "Who are you, dark fellow?" And Krishna replies, "I'm Hari." Sada interpreting Hari as lion says, "But this Vṛndāvana forest has become devoid of such ferocious animals.

How can a lion be present here?" So Krishna says, "Oh Radhika, I am Mādhava." Interpreting Mādhava as the month of Mādhava says, "How has the Vṛshik month arrived untimely?" "B month?" Krishna says, "Oh, charming lady, I am Janardana." And Radha, interpreting Janardana as "he who gives all people trouble," it's one interpretation, says, "Oh, it's nice that a troublesome person like you is staying here in the forest away from the city and the people in general." So Krishna says, "Oh girl, I am Madana." So Radha, interpreting Madana as honeybee, says, "Well, that can be seen from your black color.

Indeed, a double-scale you are, double-scale you are." So this sweet and humorous poetic exchange, in this we see the terms Hari, Mādhava, Janardana, and Madana, but they've been interpreted with different meanings like that. So this is an example of the poetic technique or ornament, *alankara*, called *vṛtti*.

Har Krishna!

That's our poetic lesson for today, poetry. So, on to the life and, um, poetry of Jayadeva Goswami. I was waiting to give this lecture, part one and part two. It is said that Jayadeva Goswami was born either in the 11th or 12th century in a village in Bengal called Kenduli-bilva in the district of Birbhum.

And his father's name was, um, let me remember, Bhojadeva, and his mother's name was Radhadevi. And as we know, in the lives of, uh, great personalities, often their childhood is full of amazing pastimes, miracles actually. And so it's no surprise, uh, when we learned that Jayadeva Goswami discovered his *ishtha*, his worshipable Lord, the deities of Rādhā-Mādhava, when he was just a small boy.

There are no exact details about where or how he found them, but it is written that he worshiped them as a child, a young child, he worshiped them in his youth, he worshiped them through middle age, and he worshiped them in old age until he passed away.

So, I was thinking from this, his example, we can see that deities appear out of the strong desire of such devotees who wish to worship them. But of course, Jayadeva Goswami is most famous for his literary contributions, and most notably, his most famous work, *Gīta Govinda*. *Gīta Govinda*.

Therein he describes the loving pastimes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her gopīs with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It is said that Jayadeva Goswami wrote the *Gīta Govinda* not far, actually, from our Mayapur Chandra Mandir in West Bengal. I thought that was really interesting.

And in it, he clearly identifies himself as the author. In verse 3.7.10, he writes very eloquently: "He who appeared in the village of Kenduli-bilva, just as the moon rises from the ocean, has collected Śrī Kṛṣṇa's expressions of lamentation. Thus, Jayadeva is humbly narrating this song." So it's concrete proof.

We should mention at this point that although *Gīta Govinda* has achieved, could I say, worldwide popularity and is readily available to one and all, it was originally intended only for very advanced devotees, not for everyone, actually. In the introduction, Jayadeva Goswami establishes the standard, uh, for who is qualified to hear or read *Gīta Govinda*.

He writes: "If your heart yearns for remembrance of Śrī Hari which bestows all happiness; if you are hankering to contemplate upon Śrī Hari with intense affection; and if you are overwhelmed with curiosity to know about Śrī Hari's skill in his loving pastimes, then by all means read this book." "You may find this poetry very sweet and pleasing, but if you do not nurture these three desires, then this moving and lyrical literature is not for you.

Only if your heart is full of intense eagerness to fathom Śrī Hari's loving pastimes will you be able to appreciate my pleasing and inspiring poetry." That's like poetry itself. So then, we hear the qualifications for reading, uh, *Gīta Govinda*.

As we know, Caitanya Mahaprabhu would regularly discuss, uh, the verses of *Gīta Govinda*, and he would do so only with his most confidential associates: Svarūpa Dāmodara and Ramananda Raya. And Śrīla Prabhupāda also made it very clear that of all the songs of *Gīta Govinda*, only the invocation, known as the Daśāvatāra Stotra, is fit to be heard or sung by his followers.

We can read *Gīta Govinda*, but only the invocation, or we can hear parts of it that are not so deep. This we understand. Prabhupāda wrote a letter to my godbrother Ānanda-gopāla dāsa on, uh, July 15th, 1972.

Therein he wrote regarding the songs of Jayadeva Goswami: "Those songs are for siddha-bhaktas, not for us who are sādhana-bhaktas, or learning bhaktas." Prabhupāda's very humble. "Lord Caitanya never divulged in public, rather he enjoyed these, these topics in the company of his selected three or four devotees.

There is one song by Jayadeva," Prabhupāda writes, "worshiping the ten incarnations." "With this song, it is all right." He concludes, "There is one song by Jayadeva, worshiping the ten incarnations.

This song is all right." So, the Āchāryas say that actually Jayadeva Goswami originally composed *Gīta Govinda* primarily for the pleasure of Lord Jagannātha. Going a little deeper here. But as Śrīla Prabhupāda mentioned, the song Daśāvatāra about the ten incarnations in *Gīta Govinda*, that's for everyone.

And as we see, it's often recited and sung by pious, by pious persons, as well as danced to and performed in theaters. It's been going on for a thousand years now. And in these two classes about Jayadeva Goswami, we'll learn more about this wonderful book, *Gīta Govinda*.

So, a little more about his history. Jayadeva lived during the reign of a king in Bengal whose name was Lakshmana Sena. And I was reading that Jayadeva mostly kept to himself, writing his poems and songs about Lord Kṛṣṇa. But as time went on, his general works became very popular with the common people.

And in time, his poetic songs reached the ears of the king, Lakshmana Sena. It was a tradition in those days that the king was often entertained by, uh, court musicians. So, one day in his palace, this king was listening to a, a concert by his musicians who were, uh, accompanied by a choir of singers.

Now, as the choir sung, the king saw many of the singers sway as tears filled their eyes, the choir's singing and they're swaying as tears filled their eyes. So, listening more closely to the words of the song being sung, the king also started crying.

Obviously, he was a very pious, *rājarṣi*. So, when the music was over, he turned to his chief minister and he said, "What saintly person composed that song?" "You want to know what saintly person composed that song?" So the minister replied, "Sir, a strict renunciate who lives alone in the forest outside the city composed it.

His name, uh, is Jayadeva Goswami, and he's loved by the people." So the king, Lakshmana Sena, he said, "Can you please bring him here?

I want to meet him." But his minister said, "Sir, he probably won't come. He's a renunciate, thus he shies away from royalty and opulence, and he lives in seclusion." But the king was determined to meet the saint, uh, Jayadeva.

So, what did he do?

He dressed up as a common man and went incognito to the humble *bhajan* of Jayadeva Goswami. And there, in front of Jayadeva Goswami, Lakshmana Sena took off that common dress and revealed that he was the king. Then he invited Jayadeva Goswami to give up his simple life of living in a grass hut and come to live, uh, in the Royal Palace.

And, and right there, he said to Jayadeva, "Everything will be taken care of for you there." But Jayadeva Goswami, he wasn't interested. He looked around at his humble dwelling and he said, "I have everything I need here, and in my heart, I'm fully satisfied just worshiping the Lord of my heart and writing my poetry and songs." So, Lakshmana Sena said, "Yes, it's true what you say, and you have the right.

You're a *sadhu* to stay in a secluded place. You're a renunciate. But also, as a *sadhu*, you're meant to share your knowledge and wisdom with others. You must share your good fortune with others. You're a *sadhu* because without the association of saints like yourself, how will the common man ever become freed from the vicious cycle of birth and death?" So appropriate.

So, at that point, Jayadeva Goswami went silent. Then the king said, "This is what I'll do. There's a beautiful, very simple abode not far from my palace called Champahati, like a little *kunj*, a little forest. It's a forest actually of *champaka* trees.

We'll make you a *bhajan* center there, and you can continue your writing. In this way, sometimes myself and other fortunate souls can come and take the, the dust of your lotus feet." So, being an exemplary Vaishnava and knowing that the primary duty of a Vaishnava is to deliver others, Jayadeva Goswami agreed.

So he moved to that forest and, and he took his deities with him. And as promised, uh, Lakshmana Sena arranged an accommodation for him there, and he actually built a little temple for, uh, his deities, Rādhā-Mādhava. And so the first formal worship of those deities began at that time.

So for some time, Jayadeva Goswami kept writing his poems and his songs, and the king would come and visit him, you know, whenever possible. But one day, Lakshmana Sena, the king, sent, uh, Jayadeva Goswami to Jagannātha Puri. There was some special function going on, I didn't catch what it was, but he sent, sent him there for that special function.

But historically, once there, Jayadeva Goswami ended up becoming the court poet of the king of Orissa. And after a few years passed by, Jayadeva Goswami got married. And it's very interesting how it all happened. I was reading, there was a Brāhmana from South India whose name was Sudeva.

And he had no children. He and his wife had no children. So one day, he, he journeyed to Jagannātha Puri and he prayed to Lord Jagannātha, "Oh Lord, if I ever get a child, I will give him to you, whether a boy or a girl, I'll give my first child to you." Lo and behold, by the mercy of the Lord, after sometime his wife became pregnant and gave birth to a daughter whom they named Padmavati.

Padmavati. And when she was 12 years old, the Brāhmana brought her to the temple of Lord Jagannātha, presenting her to the deity. He said, "Oh Lord, as I promised, I brought my first child to you. Here is my daughter." So immediately, Lord Jagannātha ordered Sudeva, apparently he was a very advanced devotee, a pure devotee, because the Lord, uh, ordered him.

He said to him, "My dear devotee, there is a devotee named Jayadeva. He is an exalted personality and very dear to me. Take your daughter to him and ask him to accept her hand in marriage. You can tell him that this is my order." So once again, we hear a pastime where the deity of the Lord speaks to his devotee.

This should convince us that the deity of the Lord is non-different than the Lord. And what's more, each deity has a special mood and different pastimes. I was remembering one time, Śrīla Prabhupāda, uh, was taking *darśana* of Rukmini-Dāśī in Los Angeles, in in America.

And afterwards, his secretary asked him, "What was he praying for?" Because Prabhupāda was intensely praying in front of those deities.

So Prabhupāda replied, "I was praying to Rukmini-Dāśī to engage me in the service of Rādhā-Vihārī in in Bombay." So this way, we can understand each deity is unique.

Time in Dallas, Texas, Prabhupāda said to the head *pujari*, "You're the intimate servant of this deity.

So what is the mood of this deity?

You're the intimate servant of this deity. So what is the mood of this deity?" So the *pujari* didn't know what to say, didn't know what to reply.

So Prabhupāda mildly chastised him, saying, "You're serving this deity for so long, you should know the mood of the deity." Har Krishna.

So, being ordered by the Lord, Sudeva went to the forest with his daughter and met Jayadeva Goswami. Sudeva said, "Oh, Goswami Mahārāja, kindly accept my daughter as your wife and engage her in your service." But Jayadeva replied, "O Brāhmana, what are you saying?

I'm a poor person living in the forest. You should give your daughter to a qualified Brāhmana who has the right to accept her hand and who is well-situated in society." So Sudeva said, "Actually, Jayadeva, I was ordered by Lord Jagannātha to give my daughter to you.

And so it's your duty to obey his command. Please do not think of disobeying the Lord's order, for if you do so, you will be tainted by the offense of violating his command." So nicely put. So Jayadeva said, "Lord Jagannātha can keep thousands of women in his service.

It would, it would only enhance his beauty. But for me to keep one wife would be a huge burden. Therefore, I cannot accept your daughter. Take her and return home. I have my writings to do." But Sudeva turned to his daughter and said, "Dear one, I must follow Lord Jagannātha's order.

I cannot disobey Him. I'm requesting you to stay here and don't leave." Wow. Then he left. So, at that point, you know, the father's gone, the daughter's standing there, Jayadeva was, it's described, he was perplexed what he should do with the young girl.

But finally, he spoke to her, saying, "I am not a suitable husband for you. I will not be able to carry out the responsibility of maintaining you." And hearing this, the young girl, Padmavati, folded her hands and said, "My dear husband, my dear husband, whether it brings happiness or distress, I have dedicated my life to you." So, hearing Padmavati's, you could say, chaste words and seeing her, how can I put it, remarkable determination, Jayadeva realized it was indeed Lord Jagannātha's desire, and that the Lord must have a higher purpose.

So he agreed to accept her as his wife. This is the nature, I was thinking, of a pure devotee of the Lord, to always put the desires of the Lord before his desire. The same principle holds true, actually, for a disciple who sees his spiritual master as a representative of the Lord.

He always puts the desire of the spiritual master before his or her desire. So, after their marriage, Jayadeva Goswami and Padmavati returned to the kingdom of Lakshmana Sena and the forest of Champahati. So, historically, it was during this period that Jayadeva Goswami began writing *Gīta Govinda*.

And I would like to share at this point a very beautiful and I could say, innocent part of *Gīta Govinda* with you, so you can appreciate Jayadeva Goswami's, um, looking for a phrase, poetic expertise. In this particular song, particular part of *Gīta Govinda*, Jayadeva Goswami is describing how Kṛṣṇa is waiting for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī at a rendezvous spot called Rādha-samīra or sometimes referred to as ādha-samīra-gata.

It's on the banks of the river, uh, Yamunā. "One gopi says to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī: 'O forest-dweller, decorated with a forest garland, Kṛṣṇa eagerly awaits you in a grove on the windswept bank of the Yamunā. Dressed in the most attractive way, Kṛṣṇa has crossed all obstacles to meet you by the shore of the Yamunā where a soft breeze carries the scent of sandalwood from the Malaya Hills.

Over and over again, he checks to see if the decorations in the grove are just right. Then he walks out into the courtyard and looks down the path for you. Not seeing you, he sighs in sorrow. O Rādhā, using the cloak of night, go to meet him, but please leave your telltale ankle bells behind you.

You glow like shining lightning, but of what use is such overwhelming beauty if it cannot rule over a monsoon cloud decorated by a formation of flying swans?

O Rādhā,' he finishes like that." Har Krishna.

So, Jayadeva Goswami concludes this song by advising his readers, he calls his readers saintly persons: "O Saints, Kṛṣṇa is joyful and gentle. Give your heart to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and their pastimes together, then all three will appear in your minds." Let's recite that again: "O Saints, Kṛṣṇa is joyful and gentle.

Give your heart to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and their pastimes together, then all three will appear in your minds." So, we will continue with more pastimes and poetry of Jayadeva Goswami next week. For today, I would like to, uh, conclude our glorification of him, um, with the beautiful poem by the medieval poet Vāṇīnātha Dāsa that we have recited a few times in the last couple of lectures on poets.

But I was thinking it's just the perfect way to conclude. It's called "God's Choicest Poet." "Jayadeva, Kaviśvara, Śrī Vidyāpati, Rasa-nidhis Chandīdāsa, Rasika Āśraya, Akhila bhūvan anup All glory is to Śrī Jayadeva, the crest jewel amongst poetic kings. All glories to Śrī Vidyapati, the abode of rasa.

All glories to Śrī Chandīdāsa, the great connoisseur of rasa. These poets are unparalleled in their excellence in the three worlds. The creation of these poets were pristine songs describing *madhura-rasa*. These songs were written in prose and verse, and they were relished by my Lord, Gaurāṅga Chandra, along with Ramananda Raya and Svarūpa Dāmodara.

When Raya Ramananda and Svarūpa Dāmodara desired to awaken a particular mood within the Lord, they would sing these songs. Hearing their singing, even wood and stones would melt. Such were the sweet pastimes of these three individuals. Those moods and emotions of Śrī Rādhā, which were hidden from the masses of people in general, were demonstrated with great effort by my Lord Gaurāṅga to one and all.

Now that He has disappeared from external vision, these *rasas* do not touch my heart even on listening to these songs. Thus, Vāṇīnātha Dāsa simply cries. All Krishna." So, thank you for returning to Jayadeva Goswami and his poetry.

And maybe another technique in poetry in our poetry lesson, like we began this class with, um, next Friday. Oh, glorious to Śrī Caitanya, the revealer of the *nija-rasa*. Kṛṣṇa. Jaya Śrī Jayadeva Goswami. Kṛṣṇa.