Hari Krishna, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing lecture series entitled “The Glories of Vṛndāvana.” Viśākhā-sakhi-kṛṣṇa-śrīmatī-bhakti-namaste. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Today we continue our meditation on the beautiful eyes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. This will be part 165 in the miniseries, “Stimulation for Ecstatic Love.” I would like to begin this humble lecture with some prayers to Guru and Gaurāṅga composed by the famous Brajabhāsī poet named Vyāsadāsa. He writes so beautifully: “The soft, sweet breeze around the dwelling place of my guru cleanses the dirt from the hearts of his disciples. His chanting of the names ‘Gaurāṅga, Gaurāṅga’ destroys the sins of many ages. In Kali-yuga, the Lord appears as Gaurāṅga and through the guru, His dearmost servant and representative. Oh my mind, wander in meditation on serving Guru and Gaurāṅga, the refuge of all conditioned souls. Vyāsadāsa longs for the love residing in the hearts of Guru and Gaurāṅga.” I love that one.

So, now about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes. I was reading recently that the gopīs, the sakhīs, and the mañjarīs regularly decorate Rādhārāṇī’s eyes with a dark collyrium. In Sanskrit, collyrium is also known as kajal, añjana, śyāmala, and śyāmara—śyāmara, it’s that black cosmetic that the ladies put on their eyes. And applying such dark collyrium around Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes actually serves different purposes. It’s interesting, and that’s revealed to us by the poet Navala Mādhurīdāsa. In one of his prayers, he prays, “Oh, may your dark collyrium bring Gopāla closer to your vision. May it protect you from all evil eyes. May the darkness of your eyes soothe the pain of separation from your dearmost Kṛṣṇa.” Navala Mādhurī prays, “May the darkness of your ornamented eyes also be merciful unto me at all times.” Thank you to that poet.

Now, it’s interesting that ancient Ayurvedic medicine described exactly how collyrium was prepared in those days to be used, of course, as a cosmetic on people’s eyes. Today we’re talking about Rādhārāṇī’s eyes; very special. So firstly, the procedure was that dry neem leaves were placed inside a cotton wick, and then that was dipped into pure cow ghee. After that, a single almond was fixed onto a bronze or a brass plate using soft, sticky dough, and that was all burned along with the ghee-soaked wick. And after some time, the residue from all of that was collected and rubbed onto a rough stone. And then a few drops of sesame oil were then added to make it like a smooth paste, which was then applied around a person’s eyes. I found that really interesting.

And what’s more, Ayurvedic scriptures also describe in detail the stick used in those days to apply that collyrium. It was called an añjana-śalākā. And an añjana-śalākā stick had the following features. Those features are as follows: Mūlaka-vakra—the tip of the stick was shaped like a jasmine flower bud. Kalā-pārti-maṇḍala—its circumference was approximately the size of a peanut. Aṅgula—the length of the stick measured eight aṅgulas. I looked it up; an aṅgula is 1.76 cm. Tanu-madhya—the middle portion of the stick was very slender and delicate. And sucāra—it was well-crafted, smooth, and freed from roughness, as well as no jagged edges. It wasn’t crooked and it didn’t have excessive sharpness. And finally, sādhu-nigraha—it was comfortable to hold and easy to use. And it’s described that such a stick was fashioned from materials like gold, silver, animal horn, copper, brass, iron, crystal gemstones, and other suitable substances.

Now, surprisingly, I also found a mantra for offering sacred collyrium to the divine couple when you’re offering it to your deities, and I found it in the Ṛgveda, verse number 6.18.614.3. Ṛgveda is very vast. Here it is: “I offer this sacred kajal which heals, reveals, softens, and brightens the eyes.” Saying this—you know, this actually that we’re saying this to the deity—”I offer this sacred kajal which heals, reveals, softens, and brightens the eyes, your eyes, my Lord.”

Now, since we’re discussing collyrium in detail here, I would like to repeat a quote from a previous lecture I gave by the poet Cayaṇa because it perfectly fits into this lecture. Some of you may remember it. He wrote very beautifully: “Kṛṣṇa says to Rādhārāṇī, ‘Rādhārāṇī, your eyes do not need collyrium to be black. Your skin does not need soft oils to be soft. Your lips do not need betel nut to be red. Your teeth are bright without polishing, and you are beautiful even without ornamentation. You do not need perfume to be fragrant. And you know all the arts of love without studying the scriptures.’” Kṛṣṇadāsa says, “You are the very life breath of my Lord, the upholder of the Giri mountain.” The upholder of the Giri mountain. Thank you to that poet.

Now, of course, numerous Vṛndāvana poets have glorified the enchanting eyes of Rādhārāṇī in countless ways. For example, the famous Muslim Brajabāsī poet—of course, he was Muslim previously, but he came to Vṛndāvana and fell in love with the divine couple a couple of centuries ago—he is a famous Brajabāsī poet. His name was Raskhān. We actually gave a lecture about him two or three years ago. One of my favorite poets, Raskhān. He writes: “One day, Rādhārāṇī was seated beneath a tamāla tree. With a gentle sigh, she said to her sakhī, Lalitā Sakhī, ‘Oh my dear friend, what misfortune it is to take birth in Braja. For here at every step, one is forced to remember that dark-complexioned cowherd boy.’” Now, why is she saying that? She goes on: “Before meeting him, my life was peaceful, but now my eyes have witnessed the way he reveals his beauty. I have completely become a servant of that beauty. My eyes became the broker who confirmed the deal of selling my heart. I sold my heart to Kṛṣṇa along with all my desires. Now everyone in the forest knows about it. Like the beating of a drum echoing through the woods, its sound has reached every ear.’” Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is saying everyone knows how I’ve given my heart to my beloved Kṛṣṇa. Wow.

So, today I’d like to share a very sweet pastime by the Brajabāsī poet Nandadāsa. He is a very famous pure devotee. He writes as follows: One day, Vṛndā Devī, accompanied by her maidservants, came to see Rādhārāṇī, and upon arriving, she saw that Rādhārāṇī was crying and saying to her gopī friend Kuṇḍalatā, “Oh Kuṇḍalatā, you were so cruel to me. Though you serve in Nanda Mahārāja’s house, you never arranged for me to meet Kṛṣṇa. What have I done to deserve this?” So Kuṇḍalatā was a little surprised and she gently replied, “Oh Rādhī, you have just met Kṛṣṇa, but in the depth of your ecstasy”—this is the point here—”you have forgotten that I was the one who arranged that meeting with him.” Wow.

So, seeing Rādhārāṇī’s condition, Vṛndā Devī stepped forward and said very softly, “Dear Rādhī, today I have brought a gift for you from Mother Pourṇamāsī.” So Rādhā said, “O Vṛndā, I am glad you’re here, but I really don’t need anything except to see always the beautiful form of my beloved Madana-mohana.” So Vṛndā said, “O Priyā, you are suffering from the fever of divine love, the fever of divine love, but Pourṇamāsī has sent something that will relieve your suffering.” Then, it’s described, moved by deep compassion, Vṛndā Devī gently opened the treasure chest sent by Pourṇamāsī and within it was a golden, jewel-studded frame beautifully set with a painting of Kṛṣṇa. A beautiful painting of Kṛṣṇa.

Now, the moment Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī saw it, her tears stopped and a radiant smile blossomed upon her face. You can imagine a flower blossom as it opens up. So a radiant smile blossomed upon Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s face, and seeing her joy, naturally all her gopīs became blissful. They were beaming with happiness. But then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said to Vṛndā Devī, “Oh Vṛndā, my eyes have become the servants of Śyāma. Without His actual personal darśana, these eyes feel abandoned like orphans. Day and night my eyes hanker to see only him. Nothing else, even this painting, can give me relief.”

So then Vṛndā Devī said something really interesting. She said, “Oh, your words are full of truth. For the wise say there are two kinds of treatment: āyantika and ekāntika. Āyantika brings temporary relief, soothing pain for a short while, but ekāntika is the true cure which removes suffering forever.” What a wonderful discussion. So Rādhārāṇī replied, “What you say is true, for Mother Pourṇamāsī has given me some brief relief with this painting of my beloved. But my ailment is far deeper. It requires an ekāntika—a complete and lasting cure. My dearest Vṛndā, this means my eyes require the personal darśana of my beloved.”

So, understanding the intensity of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s viraha-bhāva, of her separation, Vṛndā gently assured her that she would soon find a way to unite her with Kṛṣṇa. This is a lot of what the sevā is for the sakhīs and the mañjarīs, just to somehow bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together despite all obstacles. So the next day, Vṛndā Devī went to meet Kṛṣṇa and she said, “Oh Kṛṣṇa, without your darśana, Rādhārāṇī’s vision is clouded by longing.” How beautiful is that? “Rādhārāṇī’s vision is clouded by longing. Holding a painting of you in her hands gives her only momentary relief from separation. Weeping in separation, the collyrium has washed away from her eyes and her cheeks and hands have darkened from wiping. Her tears mixed with that kajal or that collyrium. Oh, Śyāma, delay no longer. Please go and meet Rādhārāṇī.”

So hearing this, Kṛṣṇa wrote and sent a letter to Rādhārāṇī with his dear cowherd friend Śrīdāmā, and it was written on a tender mango leaf and marked with a dot of kajal from his own eyes—from Kṛṣṇa’s eyes. Now, upon receiving the letter on behalf of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Lalitā Sakhī opened it and quickly read it out loud to Rādhārāṇī. The letter said from Kṛṣṇa to Rādhā, “Oh knower of my heart, O Priyā, come meet me in a grove of mālati flowers where spring blossoms and love flows freely.” Description of Vṛndāvana. A grove of mālati flowers where spring blossoms and love flows freely.

So hearing these words, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī rose up at once and immediately set out to meet Kṛṣṇa along with many of her gopī maidservants. And arriving at this grove of mālati flowers, she saw a beautiful golden staff and Kṛṣṇa’s dark cloth cādara resting nearby. So seeing this, she said to Lalitā Sakhī, “Oh Lalitā, look, I see Kṛṣṇa’s paraphernalia. Surely he must be near.” So while searching for him, Rādhārāṇī heard the soft chiming of Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells, and following that divine sound, she entered deeper into that grove. Actually, that grove is called Ānanda-kuñja. Ānanda-kuñja translates as the bower of bliss, where she beheld finally the radiant form of Kṛṣṇa. And upon his lotus lips rested a regal flute. It’s described like a king seated upon a throne. His limbs were moist with perspiration and he was anointed with fragrant sandalwood paste. With half-closed eyes, he stood in a graceful tribhaṅga, a three-fold bending posture. What was he doing? Softly singing Rādhā’s name through his flute. Softly singing Rādhā’s name while his sash flowed gently in the breeze. The poet Nandadāsa concludes: “Seeing that form of Kṛṣṇa standing before her, the eyes of Rādhā attained eternal bliss.” So sings Nandadāsa.

Thank you, Nandadāsa. Dear devotees, I pray that you enjoyed hearing some of the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī today, especially about her eyes. Everything about her is glorious. It’s said in the Purāṇas, quote so beautiful: “When Lord Mādhava hears the syllable ‘Rā’, he becomes exceedingly joyful. And when he hears the syllable ‘dhā’ following it, he eagerly pursues the chanter with great reverence.” Rādhā. He eagerly pursues the chanter with great reverence. And our beloved Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura writes in Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi: “Śrī-rādhā-śaraṇam… Let the name of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, in which the two divine syllables are embodied and which personifies the ultimate truth, eternally shine within my heart.” Thank you, Śrī Prabodhananda Sarasvatī, for all you’ve given us, and thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda, for presenting it to us in this age of Kali in such a way as we can understand and again hope against hope to join you one day in Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world. Thank you, praises…

All glories to Prabhupāda. See you next week.