Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Nama om viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmi-nitya-nāmine. Namaste sarasvatī-devī gauravāṇī-pracāriṇe. Nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-paścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.

So, again, we’re continuing with our miniseries on “Stimulation for Ecstatic Love,” and this will be Part 57. And you may remember last week we discussed the fragrance of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body and what a powerful effect it can have on anyone who’s fortunate enough to smell it. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes: “Smelling the fragrance of incense, garlands, and scents or perfumes offered to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the thirty-ninth limb of sādhana-bhakti,” meaning devotional service and practice. And there are a number of examples of that and the result that comes from it.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 9.9.41, it is stated: “Mahārāja Ikṣvāku absorbed all the activities of his body and mind in Kṛṣṇa’s service. He always engaged his mind in meditating on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, his words in describing the glories of Kṛṣṇa, his ears in hearing the words spoken by Kṛṣṇa, and his sense of smell in smelling the flowers offered to Lord Kṛṣṇa.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.48.7 states that Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental fragrance is so powerful that it causes amazing effects within His devotees to the point where it purifies them of all material desires and attachments. Now, that example is given of Kubjā, who was instantly freed from all material desires simply by smelling the fragrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, as many devotees know, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote a book called Utkaṇṭhā-vallārī. Utkaṇṭhā means “very intense eagerness mixed with extreme restlessness,” and vallārī means “creeper.” Thus, Utkaṇṭhā-vallārī means “the vine of intense longings,” the vine of intense longings. And in verse 30, Śrīla Rūpa writes: “O King of lovers and crest jewel of consorts, Rādhā, even just a trace of your glorious fragrance humbles all other aromas. When will the honeybee of my nose experience a festival of bliss in inhaling the rich scent of your blazing golden and bluish limbs, smeared with musk and kumkuma?”

Now, it’s interesting to note that the Lord’s fragrance is so potent that that which comes in contact with Him often acquires the same overwhelming fragrance by association. I read last night that Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments on their own, they’re very special, but coming in contact with Kṛṣṇa’s bodily qualities, most notably His fragrance, they take on that fragrance as well as His all-enchanting power and become as extraordinary as He is. They take on His fragrance. And I was thinking, even something sinful and cruel can become supremely fragrant in contact with Kṛṣṇa. Wow, that’s a bold statement. And what’s an example of that? Pūtanā. After Kṛṣṇa had killed that terrible demoness, Nanda’s brother, his name was Upananda. Actually, ordered some men to chop Pūtanā’s body into pieces, pile the pieces in one place, set them on fire. Then, it’s described in the Bhāgavatam that as her body burned, it gave off a sweet fragrance like agar incense or perfume. The ācāryas say that because Kṛṣṇa had sucked Pūtanā’s breast, she was purified of all reactions and bodily impurities, and by the touch of the Lord, her dead body took on the fragrance of His body. Wow.

And what’s more, that fragrance soon permeated the whole of Braja. The ācāryas say that thousands of people came to Gokula, curious to find the source of that celestial aroma, only to be told the smell was coming from the burning body of a dead Rakṣasī. That’s nice. But what many devotees, rasika devotees, will find most interesting and captivating is that Kṛṣṇa Himself is mesmerized by the fragrance of the body of His dearmost Eternal Consort, Rādhārāṇī. This is the subject matter of this lecture, actually. Her fragrance is nicely described in Govinda-līlāmṛta 11.16. There it’s written: “All Rādhārāṇī’s limbs are scented with kuṅkuma. Her navel, eyebrows, hair, and eyes bear the fragrance of blue lotus flowers, anointed with aguru and musk. Her chest, ears, face, nose, hands, and feet bear the fragrance of lotus flowers, anointed with karpūra. And her sides and nails bear the fragrance of kāki flowers, anointed with sandalwood paste.” Kāki flowers anointed with sandalwood paste. Such mercy! We have to know these details of Kṛṣṇa’s eternal consort; it’s a stimulus for developing ecstatic love. When we win with that divine race.

Now, that Kṛṣṇa is mesmerized by Rādhārāṇī’s transcendental fragrance is made very clear in Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi. Therein, he prays—it’s really beautiful: “I offer my obeisances to that direction from where Śrīmatī’s fragrance, that maddens even Madhava, comes. Oh direction, oh direction, show me my prāṇanāthī, the queen of my life.” Then he writes: “Jaya jaya aparūpa Govinda-mādita-mādhavā, jaya jaya maṅgala-maṅgala-gati-madana-mohana.” “All glories to the wonderful Gopi whose fragrance maddens Mādhava! All glories to her auspicious, beautiful, holy name! How wonderful is her dress that carries the extraordinary fragrance of mallī flowers! Her very dress carries the fragrance of mallī flowers!” Fragrance… You may have caught the name Govinda-mādita-mādhava. The ācāryas say this refers to “she who maddens Mādhava with the fragrance.” It’s one of her names.

Now, our dear beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda goes on to say: “Glorious, glorious is the breeze that carries the fragrance of the edge of Rādhā’s garment! Glorious is the breeze that gives this fragrance to the abode.” The abode of what? Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nose. And the following—this is very important—confirms in Kṛṣṇa’s own words how much He is, how can I say, affected by the fragrance of Rādhārāṇī. It’s in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.30.42. We hear: “Yad api mama gandhaṁ jagat prahrād ye’ṅga gandhaḥ, tad api mama mano hṛtaṁ te’ṅga gandhaḥ.” “Although my body makes the whole universe sweet-smelling, my mind and heart are stolen by the fragrance of Rādhā’s body.” That’s Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa says, “Although my body makes the whole universe sweet-smelling, my mind and my heart are stolen by the fragrance of Rādhā’s body.”

Now, another important point is that Kṛṣṇa is not only attracted to the fragrance of Rādhā’s transcendental form, but that of all the gopīs. All the gopīs are dear to Him; they’re all dear to Him for that matter. Gopāla-campū, Pūrva, 3.21.24, says: “When Kṛṣṇa came down from the kadamba tree to return the clothes He had stolen from the braja-kumārīs, He smelled the sweet fragrance of their charming lotus faces and forgot everything. He came down with their clothes, but smelling the fragrance of their charming lotus faces, He lost everything.” Śrī Rādhā-līlā kī jaya!

Now, actually, there’s a very nice pastime wherein Vṛndāvanēśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, finds Kṛṣṇa and her gopīs who were all hiding from her in a game of transcendental hide-and-seek. She discovered them how? By the fragrance of their bodies. In that particular game, somewhere in the Vṛndāvana forest, after she had, you know, closed her eyes as per the rules of hide-and-seek, and everyone had hid themselves behind trees, bushes, and it’s described even amongst the flowers. The ācāryas say she first captured Lalitā, I remember, Viśākhā, Citrā, and Rūpa Mañjarī and a few others as a result of number one, their unique fragrances, their murdhaja [hair], and sometimes by their giggles. Let me repeat that: how did she find them hiding in the Vṛndāvana forest? It’s so wonderful! Hide-and-seek in this world is a perverted reflection. How did she find those gopīs? By their unique fragrances, by their murdhaja, and sometimes by their giggles.

Then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī set out to find Kṛṣṇa. How so? By—it’s described—luring Him into the open with her charm. She didn’t have to find Him behind a tree or no. She lured Him into the open by her charm because she controls Kṛṣṇa by her beauty, by her love, by her bhakti. In this regard, the ācāryas say, and I’ll quote here: “In pursuit of victory, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī employed her bodily effulgence, her natural beauty, her tinkling ornaments, and above all, the sound of her voice as she sang Kṛṣṇa’s sweet holy names.” That’s what lured Him out into the open. Her bodily effulgence, her natural beauty, her tinkling ornaments, and above all—this is important for us, for we want to attract Kṛṣṇa—the sound of her voice by singing Kṛṣṇa’s sweet holy names. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Or any beautiful name that is known by the Brajabāsīs.

But it’s described, Kṛṣṇa had hidden Himself very well. He’d actually gone to the top of a nearby hill, and He crouched behind a bush. And from there, He could see Rādhārāṇī’s every movement. And being in that particular place, He had the ability to retreat to another place if she came too close. Now, if she comes up and I’ll run here, or I’ll run there, He’d seen the whole scene. But to make a long story short, because it’s so nectarean, when He saw her finally approaching His hiding place, the sight of her, the very sight of her, her beauty, her soothing effulgence—now, it’s described as a soothing effulgence—and the sound of her chanting His names, all combined to make Him freeze. Freeze to the spot. And try as He might, Kṛṣṇa was unable to move.

Now, at one point, He attempted to crawl away, but the ācāryas say His hands, as well as His feet, were just frozen in one place, not by cold, but by ecstasy. He was frozen; He couldn’t go anywhere. And when He stood up, hoping to run away, His whole body went numb with ecstasy. And it was only with great difficulty that He managed to turn His eyes away from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. It’s described, away from the charm of her mystical chanting of His holy names coming from a lotus mouth. Now, while this was all going on, all of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s gopīs were in attendance. They are never far away from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. They were all watching in amusement. They were laughing out loud, giggling, and some of them were holding their sides, seeing Kṛṣṇa frozen on top of the hill.

Now, unable to move, Kṛṣṇa, how could you say He stood helplessly on the hill. And when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī finally reached Him, she very lovingly placed her hand on His arm and announced her victory, saying, “Kṛṣṇa, you are caught!” A good title for today: “Kṛṣṇa, you are caught!” And what it—it just gets better, as everything does in Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. And Kṛṣṇa, still fixed to the spot where He was, He pleaded, “Dear one, my dear Rādhā, I have but one request.” So, with a smile on her face, she asked, “And what is that?” Kṛṣṇa said, “Please stop mesmerizing me by so sweetly chanting my names, so that I can move again.” By your chanting, Kṛṣṇa was in ecstasy; He couldn’t move. So He said, “Please stop singing my name so I can move again.” And the ācāryas conclude: “Such is the power of chanting Lord Kṛṣṇa’s holy names that should give us faith in Śrīla Prabhupāda.”

So, therein we hear that not only Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s transcendental forms are wonderfully fragrant, but so are Lalitā and Viśākhā, and Citrā and Rūpa Mañjarī, all the gopīs’ forms, actually all other associates in the spiritual world. And that’s waiting for us.

So, today, I would like to finish with—let me think—two verses from Govinda-līlāmṛta by Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, and a final verse from the Śuka-śataka, it’s one of our Gauḍīya literatures. Śuka-śataka, second chapter, verse 59. That’ll be the last verse.

So, Govinda-līlāmṛta: “Sweeter than many lotus flowers, anointed with kuṅkuma, the tidal waves of the celestial Gaṅgā River of the fragrance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s transcendental form suddenly one day inundated the forest of Braja. When Lord Kṛṣṇa filled His nostrils with this fragrance, He became overwhelmed once again with ecstatic love; the hairs of His body stood up, and He moved erratically, just like an intoxicated bumblebee.”

Next verse: “May Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī grant to me the service of her lotus feet, anointed with kuṅkuma. Her splendid golden complexion removes the pride of the golden lotus flower, anointed with saffron. Her sweet fragrance, her sweet fragrance chastises the fame of the aroma of lotus flowers. She is fully qualified to fulfill all the desires of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of the cowherd men.”

And last verse from Śuka-śataka: “May Śrīmatī Rādhā, whose golden form, anointed with kuṅkuma, robs the golden lotus’s pride, whose sweet fragrance, anointed with kuṅkuma, rebukes the lotus fragrance, and who can fulfill all the Gopas’ Prince Kṛṣṇa’s desires, give me service to her lotus feet.” Friend, the transcendental fragrance from her form.

Thank you, Prabhus. That was just pure nectar. Once again, we’re in China. We’re traveling with a small party, visiting different congregations of devotees. It’s—what do you say?—madhur, madhur, madhur. It’s very, very sweet. Such wonderful devotees, in their own ways, trying to spread Lord Caitanya’s movement here. It’s really nice. So, here for a couple more weeks, but we will go through the scriptures again and be present with you for another item which brings stimulation for ecstatic love to the Divine Couple. So, all glories to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the revealer of the…

Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrīmati Īśvara Purī kī jaya! All over the world, kī jaya! Back home, back to Godhead, kī jaya! Jaya jaya Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāma! Śyāma Śyāma Śyāma! Rādhā-vallabha! Kṛṣṇa-vallabha!