Everyone, a warm welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Vrndāvana Chandra. Nitāi Gaura Haribol! *Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.* *Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.* *Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.* *Namo Sarasvatī devī gauḍa vāṇī pracāriṇī nirviśeṣa śūnyavādī paścāttya deśatāriṇī.* Oh, glorious to You!

So, today will be Part 26 in our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love. In our previous lectures, we discussed many objects, many items which help to increase our love for the Divine Couple. And I was thinking that, um, this is the beauty of rāja-bhakti, that even something so simple as a flower, someone wearing tilak, some vines or creepers, or flutes or ankle bells, can help to awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa.

On this subject, a very famous Vaiṣṇava poet, who I discovered in the Vrndāvana Research Institute, his name is Harirām Vyāsa. He wrote a beautiful glorification of Kṛṣṇa’s smile in his language. But because often so much is lost in a straight English translation, I took the time to change what he wrote into an English poem, which I feel captures the essence of what Harirām Vyāsa was describing in his language.

I, I pray he’ll be pleased. What he wrote is called: "In Vṛndāvana’s Embrace" Sweetness unfolds where service blossoms, A tale untold, nourished by Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā's sacred names.

Our very life substance, our souls it reclaims. Vines and creepers are cherished kin, Trees stand tall, they’re my Gods within. Material duties, mundane in their plight, Chanting Kṛṣṇa's name is our guiding light. Flowers and groves, gemstones divine, Their beauty a testament, enchanting and fine.

Sunlight cascades, brooks grounded, Molten gold, a sight that unfolds, witnessed an enchanting sight. The Divine Couple’s gaze, pure delight, Eyes locked, a connection so deep, Their smiles of treasure, we shall forever keep. We thank that devotee. Hope that he likes the poem.

But I really feel it, it gives to us what he gave us. So, actually, our Ācāryas have explained that there are many, many objects or items which can help stimulate our love for Kṛṣṇa. So today, once again, we'll just pick one and with the help of Guru and śāstra, we’ll do our best to describe it.

And what is that object?

What is that item?

Kṛṣṇa’s smile. Kṛṣṇa’s smile. To begin with, the illustrious saint Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura writes: "Oh, my friend, the transcendental body of Kṛṣṇa is very sweet, and His face is even sweeter than His body. But His soft smile, which has the fragrance of honey, is sweeter still." He would recite verses such as this, tasting their contents and meanings by explaining them himself.

The following two verses from Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya 21, verses 139 and 140, explain how, absorbed in the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Mahāprabhu would say: "Of all His features, the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s smile is the sweetest, for it is like a full moon distributing its rays in all ten directions throughout the material world, beyond the material world, and in Goloka.

The frequent illumination of Kṛṣṇa’s smile is like camphor; it permeates the sweetness of His lips, which He then blows into His flute and transforms into divine vibrations that enter into space." And in Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya 17.144, the Lord says: "Kṛṣṇa’s camphor-like smile also mixes with His pleasing speech to produce a mysterious, deeply meaningful sound that awakens all kinds of divine melodies in the hearts of those who hear it." Again, that’s often the mouth officiating.

Kṛṣṇa’s smile, it’s always best to hear from the Lord himself or His representatives. There’s a quick little line by, um, a Gopi in this regard. Uh, I found it in Balaika Nāṭaka 2.3.6. We hear, a Gopi once said: "How can I describe the charm of Kṛṣṇa’s smile?" From all directions, we're getting glorification of the Lord's smile.

So the other day, I was thinking, um, unfortunately, I’ll probably have to wait a long time to see Kṛṣṇa smiling at me, probably many births. But the next morning, I read in The Teachings of Lord Kapila, Chapter 7, where Śrīla Prabhupāda says that when a devotee, with all his heart and soul, serves Kṛṣṇa, dresses Him in nice garments, and gives Him a flower, Kṛṣṇa smiles. "If you can get Kṛṣṇa to smile upon you just once," Prabhupāda concludes, "your life’s goal is fulfilled." So I thought, oh wow, I dress Kṛṣṇa every day in His deity form.

Maybe one day my deity will smile upon me. Many times have I recounted how when Śrīla Prabhupāda was installing the Chota, the small Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, in Los Angeles in the early days in our temple there, he said, "If you see these deities as brass, they’ll remain brass to you forever.

But if you worship them with devotion, according to all the rules and regulations in the scripture, one day these deities will speak to you." Prophet said that, of course, someone may say for argument’s sake, "How can a deity smile?

Isn’t this smile limited, you could say, to the form given by the sculptor?" He has said that a devotee’s conviction is that the deity cannot only smile, but He can also walk and talk.

And we repeatedly hear such things from our Ācāryas about the histories of deities like, you know, Śākṣī Gopāl, the witness deity, stood his witness for the young brāhmaṇa boy. And why should we doubt those histories from our Ācāryas?

Why should we ever doubt our Ācāryas?

I believe it was my god-sister, Mother Malati, who very early in the movement, she said to Prabhupāda one time, "Prabhupāda, is it really true that God is a little boy, and He’s blue, and He wears a peacock feather and plays with His friends in the sand and dances with Gopis at night?

Is it really true?" So Prabhupāda, he just closed His eyes, and he thought for a moment, and he opened them up and he said to Malati, "Malati, do you think I would cheat you?" "No, Prabhupāda, we know You would never cheat us.

You’re giving us the absolute truth, something beyond what our mundane eyes and senses can see." So we thank you from the depths of our heart. Ācāryas have said that Kṛṣṇa has appeared to us in His deity form so that, amongst other things, we will be easily attracted to His smile, because every time the curtain opens, when Kṛṣṇa is smiling, if not the Ācārya writes, we will be attracted to the reflection of His smile as the alluring illusory energy.

And so it is. So it is. Now, in preparation for this lecture, I found that in our *Padavali*, the smiles of several deities are considered especially important. And they are the smile of Lord Jagannātha, the smile of Lord Narasiṁha as He’s seen in His deity form near the Rādhā-Vallabha temple, and the smile of Rādhā-Ramaṇa.

How so?

Lord Jagannātha’s smile, because well, He’s always smiling to see His devotees. Lord Narasiṁha’s, because in that form near Rādhā-Vallabha temple, Narasiṁha Deva’s smiling at Prahlāda. And Rādhā-Ramaṇa, His smile is so attractive because He’s smiling, His lotus face. Now another Ācārya has written, "For those who bow down before Him, Kṛṣṇa’s smiles and laughter are most merciful.

For devotees, the Lord’s smiles and laughter dry up the ocean of tears caused by the suffering of this world." So true. Now, amongst Kṛṣṇa’s companions, the cowherd boys and the Gopis are especially expert at making Kṛṣṇa smile. They love to see Kṛṣṇa, well, they’re expert at making Him smile.

How so?

With what?

Their jokes, their riddles, and their games. I read that they are also blessed to witness His many responses to their jokes and riddles, etc., when He smiles. Now, it’s said that out of all His personal companions, Madhumaṅgala is the chief jokester.

We’ve discussed this before. He provides Kṛṣṇa with comic relief. It’s said whenever necessary. In this regard, our hero-poet Sūr Dās has written in his *Mohana Ki Murli*, "It's very nice. Once Madhumaṅgala and Balarāma were playing with balls of kadamba flowers.

Suddenly they started throwing these flower balls at each other. Then they welcomed in all the other boys as well as Kṛṣṇa into the game. After that, Madhumaṅgala became tired of running and started breathing very heavily with his mouth open, like breathing with his mouth open.

When suddenly a flower ball flew into his mouth and got stuck there, causing Kṛṣṇa to start laughing uncontrollably." Sūr Dās says, "Oh friend, look at the smile of Kṛṣṇa, just see!

As a result of that smile of Kṛṣṇa, all the forests are becoming green and fresh, the buds are opening, and the flowers are blossoming. The Yamunā is flowing in ecstasy, and clouds, just see, they are dancing in bliss. The cows are wetting the ground with their milk, and their calves are running around in enthusiasm.

All the three worlds are celebrating this moment. Rādhā is the most satisfied looking at His face, and Līlā is simply staring at His smile. Everyone is thinking that Kṛṣṇa is smiling at them." Sūr Dās says, "But I think He is laughing at Māyā, making fun of His material energy." A nice conclusion by Sūr Dās.

Now, it’s written that the Gopis adore—the word is used, adore—Kṛṣṇa’s smiling according to the relationship with Him as well as their the depth of their love for Him. In this way, each one of them tastes the nature of His smile differently.

For example, Kṛṣṇa’s servants relish His smile as a reward for their services. His parents, um, yes, His parents as a sign of His well-being. His friends as confirmation of their intimacy. And His lovers, the Gopis, as fuel for their loving desires.

That’s so nice. Now, when Kṛṣṇa was young, as we know, He would sometimes run from the elderly cowherd men as they pursued Him to the streets, you know, houses and courtyards of the village, because He’d stolen something, calling out, "Catch that rascal!

Catch that rascal!" until He was finally cornered somewhere with nowhere to hide.

So, I was reading at that time, Kṛṣṇa would employ His smile. He’d use His smile. He’d smile at the cowherd men, attracting them just as a snake charmer hypnotizes a serpent. And those charmed cowherd men would then totally forget why they were chasing Him, why they were chasing Him.

Kṛṣṇa would also use His smile to hypnotize the women of Braja, and then He would sneak into their homes and pinch their babies and make them cry and eat and distribute their freshly churned yogurt. How did He get in the house?

Smile. He’d smile them, and He, like it’s described, He would hypnotize them with a smile so charming. But if these elderly Gopināth, men, or or the Gopis were somehow able to capture Him and bring Him before Mother Yaśodā for punishment, Kṛṣṇa would easily dissipate His mother’s anger with another smile.

He had a smile for her. It’s described only on rare occasions when Yaśodā is so angry that she could not be influenced by Kṛṣṇa’s smile, and she would follow through with, you know, punishing Him in some way by binding His rope with, uh, with binding His belly with ropes, etc.

Now, Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī describes in his *Padavali* that it's a really sweet pastime. One evening in Gokula, as Yaśodā sat on Kṛṣṇa’s bed waiting for Him to fall asleep, she asked, "Oh, my rising dark moon!" I just love that. "Oh, my rising dark moon, my child, why, why are you not asleep?" So child Kṛṣṇa replied, "I do not know, Mother.

Sleep has not come to me. Sleep has not come to me." So Yaśodā lovingly said, "Then I will tell you a bedtime story to make you fall asleep." Kṛṣṇa asked, "Mother, what is this new story that I have never heard before?

Please tell me." So Yaśodā said, "I will tell you about the appearance of Lord Narasiṁha Deva." Now Rūpa writes, "A few minutes later, when she said, 'The Lord then appeared from the pillar, very eager to rip the demon to shreds,' a smile appeared on child Kṛṣṇa’s lips." Because we, He’s the source of the Lord.

I’m hearing that pastime, He was very… a smile appeared on Kṛṣṇa’s… another smile.

So many smiles. Beautiful smiles. However, as far as the milkmaids of Vṛndāvana are concerned, the Gopis, they would feel the Lord’s smile even more intensely.

Vṛndā Devī once said, "My dear Mādhava, Your newly invented smile has so captivated the hearts of the Gopis that they are simply unable to express themselves. As such, they have become bewildered and will not talk to others. All of these Gopis have become so affected that it is as if they had offered three sprinkles of water upon their lives." In other words, they have given up all hope of living.

And in *Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛta* 3.1.2, we hear how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī once disclosed to a friend Her dissatisfaction at having Kṛṣṇa smile at Her without having any further contact with Him. He just walked by and smiled. She said, "Oh friend, although I have drunk the coconut nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s talks mixed with the camphor of His smile, because I have also not drunk the nectar of the touch of His body, I am broken and withered, as if I had drunk poison." So actually, in my research, I found that there’s so much information about Kṛṣṇa’s smile.

It was kind of hard to pick which verses, which pastimes to, to speak about. Actually, there’s, there’s more information about Kṛṣṇa’s smile than any of the other items we have discussed in this series, "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love." In 10.46.21, we hear Nandakumāra saying to Uddhava, "As we remember the wonderful deeds Kṛṣṇa has performed, His playful side, long glances, His smiles, and His words, we forget all our material engagements." And I’m hoping that’s what will happen as a result of hearing all about Kṛṣṇa’s smile and smiles today and forevermore.

We’ll just relinquish in the attachments we have to this world and fully embrace His lotus feet. His smile is so attractive. Now, in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, in the Northern section, wave one, there’s a description of *Bhakti-rasa*. It means the mellow of humor.

And therein, many things were discussed. But therein, Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī describes the six kinds of Kṛṣṇa’s smiles. I was so happy to find that, like, I need more!

I need more things to talk about. So, you know, something specific. So, he discusses the six kinds of Kṛṣṇa’s smiles. Six smiles. And they are called as follows: His *smita* smile, His *hasita* smile, His *vihasita* smile, His *avihasita* smile, His *āpohasita* smile, and last but not least, His *atihasita* smile.

So I thought we'd just analyze them a little bit with, with, you know, what we, what I've read from Rūpa Goswāmī. So, says that *smita* refers to smiling without opening the mouth and revealing the teeth, like that. It’s *smita*.

You don't show your teeth. And Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī gives the example that Kṛṣṇa once said to Subala, "O Subala, where should I run?

Please help me!

This old hag, this old Gopi is running after me, chastising me verbally for the yogurt I stole." Seeing Kṛṣṇa running in this way, the faces of sages in the sky, Rūpa writes, the faces of sages in the sky bloomed like a lotus and exhibited *smita*, smiling without opening their mouths.

They're all up there. Hmm, very nice. Then second is *hasita*. Rūpa says that Śrī Rūpa says that *hasita* includes all the characteristics of *smita*, as well as revealing the front teeth. As an example of *hasita*, he gives the example of Ayanī.

When Abhimanyu, Rādhā’s husband, said to, um, his mother Jatilā, "Just look, who's coming disguised as me?

It's Kṛṣṇa. He’s just disguising himself. He’s coming to see my wife, Rādhā. He’s just dressed like me." So, not believing him, because Kṛṣṇa was dressed so nicely like Abhimanyu, Jatilā shouted, "It shouted it, Abhimanyu!" and threw him out of the courtyard.

As Abhimanyu kept shouting, "No, no, please don’t you understand?

It’s an imposter!

I’m the real Abhimanyu!" And the Gopis who are watching this scene smiled while showing their teeth.

They smiled so, now we see the teeth. Smiles there, but the teeth are showing. Then Rūpa describes *vihasita*, which he says includes all the characteristics of *hasita*, plus it is accompanied by the sound of laughter. The example he gives is that one time Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh friend, steal this delicious yogurt.

You're uselessly worrying that someone will see us. This old Jatilā, she's here sleeping and snoring, she's not awake." So when Kṛṣṇa said like this, Jatilā, who was pretending to sleep, couldn't control herself and laughed out loud to reveal her toothless gums.

So she's not only smiling, her mouth is open, but she's laughing out loud. Then he proceeds to number four, *avihasita*. This is a smile that includes all the characteristics, all the characteristics of *vihasita* and is accompanied, he uses this word, Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī, is accompanied by a gleeful contraction of the eyes and blowing of air through the nose.

Rūpa writes an example of *avihasita* is one time Kṛṣṇa returned to an underground after a meeting. Now, during the meeting, she had, you know, shyly kissed Him, and the reddish marks of her vital nut were left on His eyes.

So also, in a joking way, He had taken and worn a bluish cloth that she had, but He’d forgotten to take it off. So to all this, Mother Yaśodā said, "Son, why are your eyes red?

Did you apply some red mineral?

And why are you wearing the bluish cloth of Balarāma?" Balarāma is always dressed in blue.

Why are you wearing Balarāma's bluish cloth?

So hearing this, the Gopi nearby, who knew what had transpired, she couldn't control her laughter and she laughed out loud through her nose. Like, you know, we can laugh like that sometimes. So the mouth is open, and the teeth are there, and the noise is there, and now, you know, laughing out, like, through her nose.

So we move on to number five. These are Kṛṣṇa’s, the results of Kṛṣṇa’s smile, or what, how Kṛṣṇa can make someone smile. So then there’s *āpohasita*. It includes all characteristics of *avihasita*, but it’s accompanied by tears due to excess laughter and vigorous shaking of the shoulders.

I was wondering, what’s that?

So an example of *āpohasita* is when one time Nārada Muni was laughing out loud, and his shoulders were shaking because of too much laughter. Tears of laughter were coming from his eyes, and his brilliant teeth were visible. So Rūpa Goswāmī writes, "Indeed, he must have seen baby Kṛṣṇa dance at the request of an old Gopi." Then he concludes, Rūpa, "That same baby Kṛṣṇa makes even Brahmā dance to His tunes." And then number six.

You know how, what causes people to laugh in Vṛndāvana, including Kṛṣṇa, of course?

We're speaking about Kṛṣṇa's smiles, but Rūpa is describing how everyone smiles in Vṛndāvana to, due to these six different, uh, types of.

They exhibit these six different types of smiles. So the last one is *atihasita*. It includes all the characteristics of *āpohasita*, and is accompanied by what?

Loud clapping of the hands, which causes each limb of the body to shake vigorously. An example of *atihasita* is when Kṛṣṇa and the old Gopi Mukarā were arguing. Kṛṣṇa said to her, "Old lady, your face is full of beautiful wrinkles." Like, it's not a compliment. "And this monkey friend of mine is asking me repeatedly to marry you to him." So Mukarā replied, "Kṛṣṇa, I have many Vālīs." All these can mean wrinkles, or it can mean monkeys. "But I will surrender myself only to the one who has tamed many Vālīs, like Bali Mahārāja, for example.

Kṛṣṇa attained Bali Mahārāja’s Vāmana. Thus, I will not marry anyone besides You, O dear Kṛṣṇa. Please come here and marry me." So hearing the argument of Mukarā and Kṛṣṇa, the Gopi girls present, they laughed loudly, clapped their hands, and jumped up and down repeatedly out of laughter.

So these are the six kinds of humor that is produced in in Vṛndāvana.

Kṛṣṇa smiles in, in these six ways. And actually, all the residents of Vṛndāvana smile in these six ways.

Have we seen in these wonderful pastimes?

So, next week, we’ll discuss what I think we’ll discuss about Rādhā’s smile. I’ll research that, see if I can find something about Rādhā’s smile. Of course, this is all very deep, but it has been nicely summarized in Śrīla Prabhupāda's *Nectar of Devotion*, which, of course, is a summary study of Rūpa Goswāmī's.

So then, I thought it would be appropriate, we could finish today with a prayer to Prabhu, by whose grace only these topics of, you know, stimulation and ecstatic love can be realized and experienced by us. So, this is a prayer.

Of course, I adapted it a little bit for easy recital, but it's, uh, Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura’s songs 21 and 23. And as I recite this, I'm remembering the lotus feet of my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. "Oh, my master, please place me under the shade of Your lotus feet.

If I have pleased You at all with my devotional service, then kindly cast Your merciful glance upon me. If You are satisfied with me, the desires of my mind will be fulfilled, and I will attain the company of Lord Caitanya.

With my present eyes, I will then be able to see the transcendental forms of the Divine Couple. Without Your mercy, I may spend my days and nights chanting the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and hearing Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, but I will never realize my desire for their personal company.

Bless me that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet will always be impressed within my mind, and that I may have Your company when You manifest Your form as a maidservant of the Divine Couple. Oh, my master, when by Your mercy will I be able to serve the foremost Gopi, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and submerge in the bliss emanating from the Divine Couple’s lotus feet?

At that time, it will string gardens of lotus flowers, approaching Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, I will place the garlands around their necks and anoint their limbs with fragrant substances. Like a guru, I will follow the Gopis’ orders and offer the Divine Couple mental nuts, draw artistic tilak patterns on their foreheads, and red sindur, and fan them with the *cāmara* whisk as they sit on a golden throne." Oh, glorious.

So today was Kṛṣṇa’s smile. I hope that you are alive, and by that, next time the curtain opens, you can see and appreciate Kṛṣṇa’s smile even more. And we'll be back in one week with, um, about Rādhā's smile. Thank you so much.

Haribol!

Glory to Prabhupāda, the revealer of the *dhāma*! Śrīla Prabhupāda's smile, the smile of all the residents.

Property time.