Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

Namaste. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we are continuing with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 130, in which we will continue our discussions on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s dress and attire, in particular, once again, her transcendental waist.

But I’d like to begin today with a passage from *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* by our beloved Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī. It is Śataka 7, part of Verse 31, in which he mentions her waist.

So he writes:

“Always and in all situations meditate on yourself as one of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s many maidservants, who are all expert in the arts of transcendental mellows, expert in making a great variety of colorful garlands, garments, and ornaments, wonderfully youthful, beautiful, graceful, and decorated with beautiful faces, always blossoming with happiness as they serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Meditate on Śrī Rādhā, who has a very slender waist, who has beautiful broad hips, who is beautifully decorated with a belt, anklets, necklaces, bracelets, and golden armlets, who wears on her head a splendid and very fine veil.

I pray that I shall always meditate on my actual spiritual identity in this way and that even in the greatest calamity I shall not be illusioned into thinking that this material body is myself or that this home and its various paraphernalia are my property.”

Wow.

So I found a beautiful poem by Vallabhadāsa, who was a medieval poet, in his book *Vallabha-sakhī*, in which he also glorifies Śrī Rādhā’s waist. He writes:

“I offer my respects to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā, which are placed in the dust of the forest of Vṛndāvana.

I offer my respects to her waist, which is bound by the ropes of Kṛṣṇa’s arms. Even for a moment, Madhusūdana does not remove His arms from Śrī Rādhā’s waist. It is like a snake who binds itself tightly around a sandalwood tree. Kṛṣṇa’s arms are like the serpent bound to the waist of sandalwood-tree Kiśorī.

I offer my respects to the beautiful face of Śrī Rādhā, which charms all three worlds by its beauty.

I offer my respects to the yugala-svarūpa of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, which helps this Vallabha cross over the ocean of material existence.”

Thank you, poet.

Now, I also came across a beautiful pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in a book called *Dāna-mādhurī* by the Vaiṣṇava scholar Mādhurīdāsa, who I discovered was a contemporary of Jīva Gosvāmī and a disciple in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

I consider him one of the many great known and unknown Vaiṣṇavas in the annals of time whom we can be inspired by.

Śrīla Prabhupāda mentions this in his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.1.1. He writes:

“Within the past 500 years, many erudite scholars and ācāryas like Jīva Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Vallabhācārya, and many other distinguished scholars, even after the time of Lord Caitanya, made elaborate commentaries on the Bhāgavatam, and the serious student would do well to attempt to go through them to better relish the transcendental messages.”

So Mādhurīdāsa writes very beautifully that once upon a time Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd friends called out to Him with great excitement from the top of Govardhana Hill:

“O Gopāla! Look! Some Vraja gopīs are traversing this hill on their way to sell butter.”

Shouting back, Kṛṣṇa said:

“My dear friends, hold on! Stop these maidens immediately.”

So the cowherd boys immediately tried to rein in that group of gopīs, but they were far too many in number, and they started to escape.

The cowherd boys called out to Kṛṣṇa again:

“O Giridhārī! Come quickly! These gopīs won’t listen to us at all. Please help us stop them.”

Suddenly, with the speed of the wind, Kṛṣṇa came to that place and, standing there with a long stick, said:

“My dear girls, why don’t you listen to My friends? If you think you are clever enough to escape this land of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, then you are under the influence of illusion. Stop at once!”

Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s words, the gopīs began murmuring to each other, and then they started laughing.

So Madhumaṅgala, Kṛṣṇa’s good friend, asked them:

“Girls, what mantra are you murmuring?”

And a gopī called Indu replied:

“Well, this mantra is not about food that you like so much.”

With that, all the gopīs started laughing and giggling again.

Then Madhumaṅgala said:

“Dear Gopāla, did You hear what this foolish gopī said to me? We should punish all of them.”

So Kṛṣṇa agreed, saying:

“You are right, Madhu. But first, let’s look at what they are hiding in their pots.”

So Madhumaṅgala replied:

“My dear King, my nose reveals to me that in those pots the gopīs hide the softest and sweetest butter that even the creator of the worlds craves for.”

So Kṛṣṇa said:

“I think they’re not only hiding the softest and sweetest butter from Me, but also one soft and sweet gopī. Bring that gopī to Me at once.”

So Kṛṣṇa then asked that particular gopī:

“O beautiful maiden, your body and its limbs look like solid butter. Your skin shines like white butter. Your eyes look like melted butter, and your beauty looks like an ocean of sweet and soft butter. What is your name, dear gopī?”

At this point, Lalitā interrupted Kṛṣṇa. She said:

“You silly boy! Speak nicely to this gopī, for she is none other than the beloved, most dear and beautiful daughter of Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu. After performing many different types of penance, the sun-god himself gave her as a boon to her family. Now move aside and make way for our queen to go. Move aside and make way for our queen to go.”

So Kṛṣṇa said:

“Lalitā, why are you always sitting on a pan of fire? Cool down. I’m just trying to help your queen. I want to praise her beauty.”

So here the author gives a description of the beautiful and auspicious limbs of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kṛṣṇa is wanting to glorify her.

This is called *śubha-aṅga-manthana*.

Kṛṣṇa says:

“For a long distance you have been holding a butter pot on the side of your sensitive waist. This waist of yours is not meant for holding these heavy pots.

Just like when a little bee sits on a flower bud, the flower bud can bear its weight. But if a hawk comes and sits on the bud, the flower cannot bear that.

O Queen, your waist is dainty and slim, and the butter pot is heavy and big. Why are you still holding on to it?

Look carefully. The soft skin of your waist appears red with marks and lines. These marks are a manifestation of Cupid’s curse for not being able to make his wife’s waist as beautiful as yours.

Only light golden belts look good on your waist, not heavy pots.”

So, looking at Subala, Kṛṣṇa continued:

“Subala, immediately call the potter who made such a pot, which makes My queen suffer so much.”

Then, winking at Subala, Kṛṣṇa said:

“Go now, My friend. Bring him to Me, and I will punish him accordingly.”

Then Kṛṣṇa continued:

“O Queen, after hearing all of this, why are you still carrying the pot on your waist?”

Then, tearing His flower garland—a long vaijayantī garland made of five different types of flowers that hung down to His ankles—Kṛṣṇa said:

“O Queen, let Me tie this soft, cooling, and fragrant garland on your waist as a waistband. It will cool your tired waist.”

So Lalitā spoke up again and said:

“Our Rādhā’s waist is worshiped and desired by the Gandharvikās from higher planets. After performing penances for ages, they are still not able to have a waist as beautiful as hers.

But O catura-śiromaṇi, the smartest of all, do not fool us now. Do not fool us now.”

Then, looking at Rādhā, Lalitā said:

“Kṛṣṇa just wants you to place your butter pot on the ground so that all His friends can take it and eat all of our butter. Don’t be fooled, Rādhā.”

So Kṛṣṇa retaliated:

“O Lalitā, you should go to the Yamunā and dip in her waters three times. Then all your anger will be gone.”

Like a debate going on here.

In the background, when He said that, all the cowherd boys started laughing, and some even said:

“Bolo Yāmunā Mahārāṇī kī jaya!”

So then Kṛṣṇa said:

“The beauty which has been made for worship is now present before My eyes. I am glorifying her beautiful waist, which is decorated with perspiration from all the effort and struggle of carrying the burden of this butter pot.

My heart aches when I see Kiśorī-dhārī holding the heavy pot on her waist. That waist of hers is the ocean of bliss and beauty. So why does it have perspiration all over it?”

So Lalitā said:

“Indeed it is as such, but Śrī Rādhā’s mother-in-law made her carry her pot by herself, bring it to Govinda-kuṇḍa, and donate all the butter to a priest there for a Viṣṇu pūjā.”

So Kṛṣṇa said:

“Don’t you know that the king is known to be like Viṣṇu for all the people living in his kingdom? Thus, what are you waiting for? Can’t you see that the cowherd boys are just like Viṣṇu-dūtas? Please offer your pots to them, and then all of us will go to the Yamunā together.”

So Lalitā said:

“But for doing that, we will be cursed by Lord Viṣṇu Himself. Please let us go.”

So Kṛṣṇa replied:

“But no, the Lord will be happy to see that you are serving your king well.”

Then immediately all the gopas, all the cowherd boys, started snatching and taking away the pots from the gopīs.

After emptying the pots, the gopas showed their thumbs to the gopīs in a gesture symbolizing the gopīs’ loss in the battle of the butter pots—the Battle of the Butter Pots.

At the same time, by removing the burden of the butter pot from Śrī Rādhā’s waist, Kṛṣṇa had the rare opportunity to behold the beauty of her transcendental waist.

Mādhurīdāsa praised guru and Gaurāṅga, by whose mercy he could describe the divine beauty of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda.

Of course, these pastimes, with all their details, are meant to help us focus our minds on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

As we’ve said many times, love is in the details.

This is confirmed in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Third Canto, Chapter 29, Verses 11 and 12:

“The manifestation of unadulterated devotional service is exhibited when one’s mind is at once attracted to hearing the transcendental name and qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is residing in everyone’s heart.

Just as the water of the Ganges flows naturally down towards the ocean, so devotional ecstasy, uninterrupted by any material condition, flows to the Supreme Lord.”

So in that light, we’ll finish with one last pastime popular by tradition amongst the sādhus in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Once upon a time, just after dancing with Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī noticed her waist bells were missing, and with her eyes she ordered Tulasī Mañjarī to find them.

However, her waist bells were silent out of transcendental pride and felt offended for being abandoned.

So Tulasī Mañjarī was looking for them, and upon finally locating them, she soothed the bells’ anger by saying:

“O kiṅkiṇī-mālā, O kiṅkiṇī-mālā, you are very dear to Rādhā. Please don’t think she abandoned you on purpose.”

Then Tulasī affectionately held the waist bells to her chest and kissed them to soothe their anger and make them jingle sweetly again—jingle sweetly again.

Then she finally tied them around Śrī Rādhā’s beautiful waist.

Upon seeing Śrī Rādhā’s smile at having her waist bells back, Tulasī Mañjarī felt unlimited bliss, knowing that her service, her sevā, was successful.

Beautiful insights, transcendental insights, by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda and the ācāryas into the beautiful realm of Śrī Vṛndāvana, meant to eventually stimulate some ecstatic love in our hearts.

So thank you, Prabhus.

We’ll be back next Friday.

Jaya Śrī Rādhe!
