Hi Krishna, everyone, and welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, oṁ viṣṇupada Paramahaṁsa Parivrājakācārya Aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, ki jaya!

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So, we're continuing with our miniseries on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part ninety-one. So, last week, we began our discussions on Kṛṣṇa's favorite plant, the Tulasi plant, or the Tulasi tree, as she's sometimes referred to. And we will continue discussing her glories in this lecture.

We began last week's lecture by explaining that the Tulasi plant in this world is an expansion of Rādhā in the spiritual world. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, in his Eight Prayers to Rādhā-devī, writes in text seven: "They who are learned in the Satya-tantra glorify you.

You are Kṛṣṇa's pastime potency. The Tulasi plant is your form in the world of men. O Rādhā, I bow down to your lotus feet." We also discussed in detail how Śrīla Prabhupāda very much appreciated Tulasi and established her worship in the Western world.

In the beginning, he actually gave the specific mantras for worshiping Tulasi-devī. It's written that for a mantra to be effective, it must be given by the guru. Prahlāda Mahārāja states, "A mantra must be received from a bona fide spiritual master in disciplic succession, otherwise it will not produce the desired effect." So, in a letter dated April 7, 1970, Śrīla Prabhupāda again wrote to my god-sister, Gaṅgādāsī, as follows: "I am giving herewith three mantras for Tulasi-devī as follows: Number one: Vṛndāyai, yei, aśe, yei, Kṛṣṇa-priyāyāi, namo namaḥ.

We all know that mantra. 'I offer my repeated obeisances unto Vṛndā, Śrīmatī Tulasi-devī, who is very dear to Lord Hari Kṛṣṇa. O goddess, you bestow devotional service to Kṛṣṇa and possess the highest truth.'" Then, number two. Prabhupāda says, "The following mantra should be chanted for picking Tulasi leaves and mañjarīs from Tulasi." Now, of course, we don't chant this mantra when we're worshiping Tulasi-devī, but this mantra is specifically for those who are picking her leaves and her mañjarīs for using in Kṛṣṇa's service. "Tulasi, amṛta-janma, tvam hi keśava-priyā.

Kṛṣṇa-sevārthaṁ ca patrāṇi mṛṇayāmi tava priye. Pavitrāṇi ca te kṛtvā kuru māṁ pāpa-śūnyam." "O Tulasi, you were born from nectar, and you are always very dear to Lord Keśava. Now, in order to worship Lord Keśava, I am collecting your leaves and mañjarīs.

Please bestow your mercy upon me." And the number three, we know this, the mantra for circumambulating the Tulasi tree: "Yāni kāni ca pāpāni brahma-hatyādikāni ca, dṛṣṭi-pātena naśyanti prādic-iṇena niḥsaṅgaśaḥ." "By the circumambulation of Śrīmatī Tulasi, all the sins that one may have committed are destroyed at every step, even the sin of killing of a brāhmaṇa." Thank you.

So, it's very clear from Guru and śāstra that there are great benefits, immense benefits, from worshiping Tulasi. In this regard, I found a special verse in the Harivaṁśa, which we quoted a lot in our last lecture: 9.155. "O sage, whose wealth is austerity, they who see Śrīmatī Devī when they first open their eyes in the morning are free from all the sins of their days and nights." Now, it appears from this verse that sleeping at night near to a Tulasi plant is very beneficial.

So when you wake up, you can see her. And here's another verse in that connection. It's also from the Harivaṁśa, 9.158: "A person who for even a moment rests in a Tulasi forest comes freed from the sins of ten million births.

Of this, there is no doubt." Now, there's yet another verse in Harivaṁśa 9.115. This is a nice one: "In Kali Yuga, the Lord of the universe is not pleased with anything other than a Tulasi-devī forest. In the stage of Kali, Lord Keśava disregards thousands of holy places while eternally residing in a forest of Tulasi-devī plants." Wow!

A Tulasi forest!

This morning, I was trying to think if I've ever seen or heard of a Tulasi forest. When I remembered a pastime of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, where, many of you know, he was searching for the authorized birthplace of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Navadvīpa for a long time actually.

And one day, he looked out of a window in his home in Godruma, where he saw a bright light coming from a forest of Tulasi plants some distance away. He took this as a sign that it could be the birthplace of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

And sure enough, when he took Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī there in a basket, because he was so old, he couldn't walk, Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī jumped out of the basket and began dancing in ecstasy, calling out, "This is the birthplace of Nimāi Paṇḍita!

This is the birthplace of Nimāi Paṇḍita!" So, we move on.

There are a number of specific characteristics of Tulasi-devī regarding her leaves. There are actually two bona fide varieties of Tulasi: one is Rāma Tulasi, the other is Kṛṣṇa Tulasi, with different colored leaves. They are known in botanical terms as Ocimum sanctum, which means Rāma, and Ocimum gratissimum, which means Kṛṣṇa Tulasi.

Now, śāstra confirms this actually in the Viṣṇu Rahasya, quoted again in Harivaṁśa 7.271, where it is stated: "Kṛṣṇa-rūpā Kṛṣṇa-tulasī Kṛṣṇa-vallabhā." "All kinds of Tulasi-devī, whether black or green, are dear to Kṛṣṇa, just as Deity of the waxing and waning moon are also dear to him." But later in Harivaṁśa, it also mentions that of the two, the black and the green versions of Tulasi, the green one with green leaves is most dear.

It's actually a very, very interesting verse. It even explains why there are two different versions of Tulasi here. It is Harivaṁśa 7.278, quoting Prahlāda Pañcarātra. The verse describes her in her form as Rādhā-devī, because, we know, synonymous with Tulasi is an expansion of Rādhā-devī. "So, pleasing words spoken by Rādhā-devī are certainly in the mode of goodness, and her wrath is in the mode of ignorance.

According to these two qualities of Rādhā, Lord Hari displays two different moods. This is the reason that Tulasi-devī has two different colors. Although blackish Tulasi-devī is certainly dear to Kṛṣṇa, green Śrīmatī Tulasi-devī is especially dear to him." It's right there in śāstra, Harivaṁśa.

Now, regarding these leaves, and we must also mention the mañjarīs, the mañjarī buds of Tulasi-devī. There are unlimited verses describing them. I had to sift through many verses to select a few for this class. When there are unlimited verses describing them, as well as the benefits of using them in the Lord's service.

For example, in the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, chapter 243, verses 58 to 60, it said: "Therefore, one should bathe Lord Hari in his form of Śālagrāma-śilā with scented water and adorned with Tulasi-devī's as well as mañjarīs smeared with sandalwood paste. By doing so, one fulfills all his desires." It goes on, "In the first leaf, there is Lord Brahmā.

And in the second one, Lord Śiva. Stays in the mañjarī itself, Lord Viṣṇu is present. These three always remain in her leaves. Intelligent people should collect her auspicious mañjarīs along with these two kinds of leaves." Quite detailed, but interesting.

Love is in the details. Haravilāsa 9.90 also quotes the Aṣṭa-siddhānta, the Aṣṭa-siddhānta, wherein it is said: "Śālagrāma-śilā tu tulasī-dala-vāsitaḥ, Pītvā naraḥ sudurvāraṁ punaḥ pānāṁ na vindati." "The charaṇāmṛta of the Śālagrāma-śilā is full of fragrance because it contains Tulasi-devī's leaves.

Those who drink it will no longer experience birth in this material world and ever again have to drink another mother's breast milk." I was reading in The Harmonist the other day, again, we explained in a few classes earlier, a publication put out regularly by Śrīla Bhakti Śiddhānta Sarasvatī, wherein it is described how Śrīla Prabhupāda's sister, Bhavāriṇī Devī, whom we all knew as Pishima, she cured her son of cholera during a cholera epidemic in Kolkata sometime in the 1930s, simply by giving him the charaṇāmṛta of the Lord mixed with Tulasi.

Mentioned that in The Harmonist, to cure him of cholera with the charaṇāmṛta, the bath water of the Lord mixed with Tulasi leaves. Now, in the South Indian version of Mukta-mantra, which contains sixty mantras, the current BBT version, which is based on Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's Sanskrit edition published in 1895, consists of fifty-three mantras.

But in the South Indian version, there's an interesting śloka, number five, in this regard about the charaṇāmṛta of the Lord: "Gauḍīya-guṇābharaṇam, pītaṁ kṛṣṇa-padāmbuja-madhu, yo pibati sa muktaḥ syāt, vimalo yo na pibati sa mohitaḥ." "The liquor distilled from Lord Govinda's lotus feet is most amazing.

One who drinks that liquor becomes free from intoxication. Whereas one who refrains from drinking it, who refrains from drinking it, becomes intoxicated by material illusion." I want to recite that again: "The liquor distilled from Lord Govinda's lotus feet is most amazing.

One who drinks that liquor becomes free from intoxication. Whereas one who refrains from drinking it, refrains from drinking it, becomes intoxicated by material illusion." Now, actually, the effect of Tulasi leaves is so potent that the Gauḍa Pāvana in the section called Sāra-sodara, chapter 8, verse 26, says: "Gaṅgā, tulasī, viṣṇu-pādo-dakaṁ, nāma-karaṇaṁ, tathā bhagavad-gītā, mokṣa-dvāraṁ." "Ah, the Bhagavad Gītā, the water of Goddess Gaṅgā-devī, the leaves of Tulasi-devī, the water from the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu, and His holy names are six things that give liberation at the time of death." Let's repeat that one again: "Ah, the Bhagavad Gītā, the water of Goddess Gaṅgā-devī, the leaves of Tulasi-devī, the water from the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu, and His holy names are six things that give liberation at the time of death." And by Prabhupāda's grace, we have all those in our grasp.

Now, when we speak about Tulasi leaves, I was reading, it can also mean dry Tulasi leaves. The Padma Purāṇa, in the section called Kūrma Yoga Saraṇā, chapter 2, says: "Ananta, the Lord of the world, abandons fragrant flowers like mandaras, China rose, kuṇḍas, a type of jasmine, and lotuses, but gladly accepts even dry Tulasi leaves, which are full of virtues and ensure the destruction of sins, which are full of virtues and ensure the destruction of sins." And śāstra states that even if one doesn't have fresh or dry Tulasi leaves, one can use the wood of Tulasi for worshiping the Lord in his deity form.

Where is that confirmed again?

Harivaṁśa 7, verse 263. It's actually quoting from the Viṣṇu Purāṇa. "The Supreme Lord Hari never accepts anyone's worship without Tulasi-devī. Therefore, if Tulasi-devī's leaves are not available, then one can use Tulasi-devī's wood to touch the Supreme Lord's body. And if even Tulasi-devī's wood is not available, one should simply chant the name of Tulasi-devī while worshiping Lord Hari.

And even if Tulasi-devī's wood is not available, one should chant the name of Tulasi-devī while worshiping Lord Hari." It also states: "Yaḥ svāyaṁ bhajati cāntaṁ naṁ saṅgrahītaṁ, śiraṁ bhati, naṁ viṣṇuṁ tulasī-kāṣṭha-cūrṇam." "In the age of Kali, a devotee of the Lord cannot be considered an actual devotee if he does not offer Tulasi-devī's wood paste.

This is an interesting verse. If he does not offer Tulasi-devī's wood paste to Lord Viṣṇu." That's from Harivaṁśa 6.3.26. Actually, even the earth, or they say, clay that Tulasi grows in is considered all auspicious. Harivaṁśa 4.243, therein it stated: "Tulasī-kāṣṭha narottama, narāṇāṁ tejas taṁ dṛḍhaṁ, bhālam udbhāvitaṁ yatas, pāpa-karma-vihīnam." "One whose forehead is decorated with tilak made of clay from the base of a Tulasi plant cannot come under the influence of sinful reactions, even if he commits sin repeatedly by force of circumstances, even if he commits sin repeatedly by force of circumstances." So, yes, we have gopī-candana from Dvārakā.

We have the mother of Rākhī. And here it says we could take the clay or the dirt from the base of a Tulasi plant and use it as tilak, very auspicious. Harṣaṇā. So, I'd like to finish today with a pastime from the Tulasi Mahātmya, which itself is from the eighteenth chapter of Harivaṁśa Sudā, which many of you know is part of the Narada Purāṇa.

So, very bona fide, wonderful pastime to finish today, just glorifying Tulasi-devī. So, once there was a somewhat materialistic brāhmaṇa who, desiring to collect vegetables and rice, left his home at dawn with a sickle and a rope. It's described, and roaming here and there, he came to a large, auspicious forest of Tulasi trees.

Again, we hear a forest of Tulasi trees, and it's described, "the forest resembled an emerald adorned with gold, and due to the tenderness of the plants, it was extremely pleasing to the mind just to look at it." And surveying the forest, he thought, "These Tulasi plants can provide food for both men and cows.

So I will collect some of them and carry them inside a bundle of straw. I will also collect some from my neighbor who can use the leaves of the Tulasi plant in service to his Viṣṇu deity." Now, it's written that by destiny, that was the very moment in his life that he was supposed to die, his life was supposed to come to an end.

And thus, unknown to him, the servants of Yamarāja, the Yamadūtas, were already approaching a nearby poisonous snake and instructing it as follows: "Oh, ferocious black snake, bite this brāhmaṇa immediately. This materialistic twice-born deserves to be bitten by you, but bite him quickly, for if he should touch Tulasi-devī before you do, we shall have no power over him." So thus instructed, this poisonous black snake quickly approached this twice-born farmer.

But by chance or good fortune, the farmer did happen to touch Tulasi-devī inside the bundle of straw he was kind of arranging all, just before the snake was poised by him. Now, what's more, the plot thickens in a wonderful way.

Because of his having touched Tulasi-devī, Sudarśana-cakra, the disc weapon of Lord Viṣṇu, suddenly appeared for the protection of the brāhmaṇa, although it's described it remained invisible. So, as the brāhmaṇa left this amazing Tulasi forest, the snake quickly hid inside this heavy bundle of straw that he was carrying.

Now, while reading this the other day, I thought it was interesting that the Sudarśana disc appeared so quickly to protect him. But then I found a verse in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam that relates the same: "Seek and you shall find." Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.18.13: "With great pleasure, the almighty Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, having observed that a great danger was befalling His unalloyed devotees who were fully surrendered souls, at once took up His Sudarśana disc to protect them, at once took up His Sudarśana disc to protect them." And it's also stated in Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa 4.25.9: "Lord Kṛṣṇa, who dearly loves His devotees, always protects them, both great and small, with a Sudarśana cakra." And I was also thinking that it's quite amazing that just by touching Tulasi, the brāhmaṇa warded off death.

But then I read in the Anti-section of the Padma Purāṇa, did a lot of research, as quoted also in Haribhaktivilāsa 9.14, the following: "Just by looking at you, Tulasi-devī, all sins become removed. Just by touching you, one's body becomes pure.

By praying to you, all diseases practically become removed. If one waters you or makes you wet, the fear of Lord Yamarāja, death personified, is destroyed. Just by planting or transplanting you, one comes closer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

If someone offers your leaves to the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, you award that person liberation as well as loving devotion to Him." Great verse!

So, as the brāhmaṇa left the Tulasi forest, the servants of Yamarāja followed him, waiting for the occasion when he would present the foliage of the Tulasi plant to his neighbor. And several hours later, when the brāhmaṇa arrived at his neighbor's house, the Yamadūtas secretly entered the house and warned that neighbor not to interfere with their duties.

They told him that after the brāhmaṇa put down the straw grass bundle to take out the Tulasi plants he was bringing him, the snake would bite the brāhmaṇa, causing his death, then they would take him to the abode of Yamarāja.

But at that point, the brāhmaṇa's neighbor, who it's described was compassionate by nature, began considering ways to save the brāhmaṇa. And in a mood of compassion, he said to the Yamadūtas, "Oh, you generous persons, out of kindness to me, have revealed the danger of the poisonous snake biting the brāhmaṇa, but this brāhmaṇa must be bringing the auspicious Tulasi plant to me so I may offer her leaves in service to my deities.

So, I beg you, please don't harm him." So at that point, the messengers of Yamarāja, the Yamadūtas, they actually considered his request for a moment, and then they said, "Within an hour and a half from now, his duration of life will be complete, and he will have to die by snakebite.

Only the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, who always longs for receiving offerings of food decorated with the leaves of Tulasi-devī, can protect them. Lord Viṣṇu always dwells in a forest of Tulasi trees, thinking, 'When will some fortunate person offer me just one leaf from one of these auspicious trees?' If this brāhmaṇa were to enter such a forest of Tulasi trees and offer a leaf of Tulasi-devī to the husband of the Goddess of Fortune, Lord Viṣṇu, then the Lord's personal weapon, the Sudarśana cakra, would at that very moment certainly protect him.

Therefore, we have no power over anyone, pious or sinful, who worships Lord Hari with Tulasi leaves at the time of death. Such a person is carried away by the messengers of Lord Viṣṇu. But for now, if you intend for this twice-born to be protected, then you yourself should at once perform worship of Tulasi-devī on his behalf, and thus extend the duration of his life." So hearing this, the brāhmaṇa neighbor very carefully and conscientiously worshiped a Tulasi plant.

And as he was doing so, the brāhmaṇa happened to enter his home with this present of the leaves of the Tulasi tree that he collected for his neighbor. And at that very moment, both the brāhmaṇa and his neighbor, from different parts of the room, could see the servants of Yamarāja and the snake quickly making their exit from that house.

They ran away. The servants of Yamarāja and the snake quickly left that place. Harṣaṇā. Then the brāhmaṇa's neighbor informed the brāhmaṇa of all that had happened, and they decided that they would go on pilgrimage to a temple of Lord Viṣṇu and worship Him for the pleasure of Śrīmatī Tulasi-devī.

Harṣaṇā. Nice pastimes. So, I want to actually conclude today with quotes from a letter Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote to my god-sister, Govinda-dāsī.

We quoted some of this letter in the previous class, but this letter is dated April 7, 1970. "My dear Govinda-dāsī, I am so glad to learn that Śrīmatī Tulasi-devī has favored you so much. If you can actually grow this Tulasi plant, and I am sure you will do it, then you must know it for certain that your devotion for Kṛṣṇa is testified.

I was very much anxious to introduce this worship of Tulasi amongst our society's members, but it has not become successful until now. Therefore, when I hear that you have got this opportunity, my pleasure does not have any bounds. My pleasure does not have any bounds.

Tulasi leaf is very, very dear to Viṣṇu. All Viṣṇu-tattva deities require a profuse amount of Tulasi leaves. Lord Viṣṇu likes garlands of Tulasi leaves. Tulasi mixed with sandalwood pulp and placed on the lotus feet of the Lord is the topmost worship.

Lotus leaves mixed with sandal pulp and placed on the lotus feet of the Lord is the topmost worship. But we must be very careful, for that Tulasi leaf cannot be placed on the feet of anyone except Lord Viṣṇu and His different forms.

Tulasi leaves cannot be placed even on the lotus feet of Rādhārāṇī, or on the lotus feet of the spiritual master. It is entirely reserved for being placed on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. We can, however, place Tulasi leaves in the hands of Rādhāṇī for being placed on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, as you have seen on the Govinda album." Harṣaṇā.

Thank you once again, Śrīla Prabhupāda, for instructing us in the science of devotion service.

So, thank you, Bābā. I believe we have enough information glorifying Śrīmatī Tulasi for two more classes. I think we'll get four classes out of this amazing subject matter, her divine grace Śrīmatī Tulasi. So, I hope these classes are inspiring you in your appreciation and your affection and ultimately your love for Śrīmatī Tulasi.

We'll finish here. See you next Friday. Krishna.

May Śrīla Prabhupāda's glories increase.