Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So today we continue our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 159, in which we'll explore again the many disguises that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa adopt in their loving pastimes in Vṛndāvana.

In this episode, we will hear a beautiful līlā in which Kṛṣṇa disguises himself as a soldier of Kaṁsa, cleverly approaching Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to appease once again her māna, her loving anger.

But before beginning, I would like to recite a prayer glorifying the spiritual master, by whose mercy alone one becomes qualified to hear and speak about these loving pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. It's a prayer by the poet Navala Madhurīdāsa. Beautiful name, Navala Madhurīdāsa.

He writes:

“Guru is my mother and guru is my father. He is my master and I am his servant. This world is an ocean in which I am drowning, and my guru is the boat by which I will cross it. He is the sun and the moon of devotion. By his mercy my tongue chants Kṛṣṇa's names, my fingers move on the rosary, and my feet dance in ecstasy. His words cleanse the heart. Nagarī sings the glories of guru, glories unmatched in this world.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, the great Vrajavāsī poet Sūrdāsa, in his poem Dāna-līlā, describes the entire land of Vraja with the phrase jana dāna māna kṣetra. Jana dāna māna kṣetra. It means the place where the pastimes of dāna and māna reside.

So, of course, dāna refers to Kṛṣṇa's playful demand for taxes of butter and yogurt, and māna refers to the gopīs' transcendental loving anger. Thus, throughout Vraja we find sacred places where these two pastimes intermingle and unfold again and again.

The tax.

On many occasions, as we know, Kṛṣṇa blocks the path of Śrī Rādhā and the gopīs, demanding this tax before allowing them to pass. In Sanskrit, tax is called kara—k-a-r-a, kara—something collected by a king for the welfare of his citizens. Kara, something collected by a king for the welfare of his citizens.

Now, the classical poet Kālidāsa, in his Raghuvaṁśa, describes how King Dilīpa, who was an ancestor of Lord Rāma, collected taxes just as the sun draws water from the earth only to return it a thousandfold as rain.

So poetic.

“Just as the sun draws water from the earth only to return it a thousandfold as rain.”

So our poet says, in the same way, the small tax Kṛṣṇa takes from the gopīs returns to them as unlimited bliss. Unlimited bliss.

The poet Paramānanda dāsa captures this mood in one of his poems. He writes so beautifully:

“Today even simple yogurt has become as precious as gold. Kṛṣṇa demanded gold as his tax, yet Rādhikā offered him yogurt instead. He tasted only a small handful of butter, but in return he filled Rādhikā's heart with overflowing bliss. This yogurt is so rare that even Brahmā longs for it, yet it is freely given as an offering of pure love.”

Wow.

Now, some background as to why Kṛṣṇa assumed the disguise of a soldier of Kaṁsa. It's described by a Vraja scholar named Gopāla Śaraṇa. Gopāla Śaraṇa, in his book Līlā-vilāsa, explains that Kaṁsa had established tax checkpoints throughout Vraja, the largest being at Tālavana, which was guarded by Dhenukāsura.

But after Balarāma killed Dhenukāsura, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma effectively, you could say, freed the residents of Vraja from taxation.

Thus, when Kṛṣṇa later enacts tax-collecting pastimes, he does so in disguise, and often as a demanding soldier of Kaṁsa—often as a soldier of Kaṁsa.

So here we go.

Kṛṣṇa disguised as a Kaṁsa soldier, from Sūrdāsa's Dāna-līlā.

One day Kṛṣṇa whispered to the cowherd boys:

“My dear friends, if you see a group of gopīs approaching Govardhana Hill, immediately stop them. Do not let them pass without paying tax.”

So by the arrangement of Paurṇamāsī, very soon a radiant group of gopīs appeared, dressed in colorful saris, carrying pots of butter, and moving with the grace of royal elephants.

Ah, in your mind.

Moving with the grace of royal elephants.

Their ankle bells stirred longing even in the hearts of yogīs, and the fragrance of their butter pots rivaled the descriptions of the rasa-śāstras.

Wow.

At their center stood Śrī Rādhā, the crown jewel of Vṛndāvana.

And the gopīs called out:

“Boys, move aside. Let us pass.”

So the cowherd boys, what did they do? They ran to Kṛṣṇa, shouting:

“O Giridhārī! Only you can control these gopīs!”

So with that, Kṛṣṇa quickly assumed the disguise of one of Kaṁsa's soldiers and came rushing down the hill, declaring in a stern voice:

“This is a tax checkpoint. You cannot pass without paying.”

And Lalitā replied mockingly, almost sarcastically:

“Oh sir, we're trembling with fear. Please take whatever we have.”

And hearing that, all the gopīs burst into laughter.

Then, feigning anger, Kṛṣṇa announced:

“I am a soldier of Mahārāja Kaṁsa, and you have insulted me. Now you see what happens.”

Then he signaled to Śrīdāma and Stoka Kṛṣṇa, his friends, who began whistling very loudly, causing all these monkeys—hundreds of monkeys—to come out of the forest and cause all kinds of havoc for the gopīs.

In your mind's eye, you can see it like that.

So disturbed, Viśākhā-sakhī stepped forward and said:

“Please call off your army. We're ready to discuss.”

And Kṛṣṇa replied:

“You had better be ready.”

Then Lalitā said:

“But we cross this checkpoint every day. We've never heard of any tax before.”

And Kṛṣṇa slyly replied:

“Yes, that is precisely why I will collect the tax for all your previous visits here as well.”

So Lalitā said:

“Don't you know we are with the Queen of Vṛndāvana?”

But Kṛṣṇa scoffed:

“There can only be one throne here in Vraja, and it belongs to King Kaṁsa.”

Then Lalitā—you know how she is—answered very boldly:

“We only know one queen: Śrī Rādhā.”

So now, approaching Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa said very softly, almost submissively:

“O Queen of Vṛndāvana, give me my tax and pass freely.”

But then, when he demanded an impossible amount of butter—the poet says, an impossible amount of butter—Rādhā simply gestured that nothing would be given. Nothing would be given.

And then, to the shock of all the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa suddenly seized Śrī Rādhā's veil, and in doing so he broke the butter pot upon her head. He broke the butter pot upon her head.

And with that, butter spilled everywhere.

Sūrdāsa says, covering the earth as well as her transcendental body.

Then he describes her form as glowing like freshly churned butter—soft, radiant, and divine. Soft, radiant, and divine.

After that, Kṛṣṇa stood mesmerized, having performed abhiṣeka upon his beloved.

Well, the poet says:

“The monkeys feasted, the gopīs laughed, and butter flowed like love itself.”

“The monkeys feasted, the gopīs laughed, and butter flowed like love itself.”

And with that, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's eyes met, and the poet says:

“The entire world disappeared.”

He concludes:

“Sūrdāsa offers his everything to Giridhārī disguised as Kaṁsa's soldier.”

Short but sweet.

Today I would like to conclude with a prayer glorifying the gopīs, written in the Vrajabhāṣā language. I just came across it recently.

“Vṛndāvana is a forest of nectar. Braja-maṇḍala is an ocean. Yamunā is its lotus, and Vṛndāvana its nectar. The gopīs are the flowers, and Kṛṣṇa, the moon of Gokula, becomes the bumblebee tasting their essence.”

All glories to the gopīs of Vṛndāvana, especially the aṣṭa-sakhīs, the eternal companions of Śrī Rādhā.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

[snorts]

With that ending, I'd just like to take a minute to inform all of you that my disciples have published a new book. You may know we have a series called The Traveling Monk in Sacred Places. There are three volumes already published. This is the fourth volume.

I think devotees will really like it.

It's called Śrī Rādhā and Her Eight Companions.

These are transcripts from my lectures through the years, especially that year in which we described a lot about Rādhārāṇī, her pastimes, and her associates, etc.

So that's there, and we focus in this particular volume on the eight sakhīs who stand gloriously on the altar in our temple, the big temple in Māyāpur. There's Rādhā, four sakhīs on one side and four on the other side.

And so we go into great detail about each of those sakhīs, based on authorized scripture, with a lot of help from Śrīla Prabhupāda and some of my senior devotee friends and scholars.

So this is available now. It's been printed. It's very beautiful. We have illustrations throughout this volume. You can see here, very beautifully done.

It's a first-class presentation, first-class knowledge, and first-class presentation—of course, all by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dhāma.

So, if you'd like to purchase the book, I'm going to be traveling in India, of course, to the various temples now for about six weeks.

But if you'd like, you can purchase the book. Just click the link in the description below. I'm sure many of you know how to do that. Just click the link in the description below, and you can have a copy.

If you can't come to Vṛndāvana, you can have Vṛndāvana in your home.

Thank you very much.

We have one more—only one more—pastime of Kṛṣṇa in a disguise. It will be the conclusion of that mini-series next Friday.

And then we move on, actually move on, to understanding even more about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

So, see you next Friday.

Companions.

Thank you.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

[music]
