Everyone, a warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vrindavan. Thank you for being with us with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love. And this will be part 27. In our last class, we discussed extensively about Śrī Kṛṣṇa's beautiful smile.

So I thought it would be appropriate today to speak about His eternal consort, Vrindavanīśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's smile. And I'm sure that you'll be as eager to hear about it as I am to speak about it. His purpose 10.1.4. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that, "In topics about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there must be a speaker and a hearer, both of whom are interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Now, because the subject matter is so sublime, anything in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, both the speaker and the listeners relish.

So, to begin with, Śrīmatī's smile has a similarity to everyone's smile in Śrī Vrindavan, including her beloved Kṛṣṇa. In *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Northern Section, Verse 1, we read when describing these six kinds of Kṛṣṇa's smiles, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes, "The classification of smiles given here in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* remains the same for all residents in the spiritual world." Really important.

The classification of smiles given here in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* remains the same for all residents of the spiritual world. But surely, Śrīmatī's smile is extra special. How's that?

Because she possesses the topmost love for Kṛṣṇa. It's, uh, 4.131, Kavikarṇapūra makes it very clear. He writes, "All glories to Rādhā's love for Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of the demon Mura. Although it is all-pervading, it tends to increase at every moment.

Although it is important, it is devoid of pride, and although it is pure, it is always beset with duplicity." So she possesses the deepest love. So her smile must be especially nice. But to further understand Śrīmatī's smile, we can hear from my Godbrothers in a conversation they were having about the evolutionists and Thomas Huxley, Henry Bergson, and, uh, Samuel Alexander.

I was reading it that Rādhārāṇī's smile is one of the 64 arts, which also include dancing and cooking. The purpose and effect of any or all of those arts is simply to make Kṛṣṇa happy, to make Kṛṣṇa happy. So therein we see that Rādhārāṇī's smile is a stimulus in arousing Kṛṣṇa's love for her. 3.179, Kṛṣṇa Himself admits the power of Śrīmatī's smile.

He says, "Śrīmatī is very beautiful when she covers her face with her sari. The little I see of her smile is like liquid camphor filtered through a finely woven cloth." *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 15.119 states that Kṛṣṇa is always eager to see Śrīmatī's smile, especially when her smile signals that she is no longer angry with Him.

There, it is stated, Vṛndā Devī once said to Kṛṣṇa, "Anybody, about Rādhā, heard the Gopi messenger say, 'When the charming nectar moon bathed the forest on the Yamunā shore with splendid moonlight, angry Rādhā suddenly became pacified, and the luster of her smile indicated that she had become pleased with you.'" Now, Rādhā's maidservants, who rarely leave her side for a moment, are well aware of the effect of her love on Kṛṣṇa.

In *Govinda-līlāmṛta* 11.88, we hear, embracing her princess, a Gopi once described Kṛṣṇa's smile in this way: "The desire vine of Hari's qualities grows in the garden of Rādhā's heart and flowers in the form of her smile. Furthermore, it is written, the soothing effect of her cooling smile, the moonlight of her face, shames the material moon in this universe and transforms Kṛṣṇa day by day into an increasingly thirsty cichora bird." Hmm.

What to speak of her smile pleasing Kṛṣṇa?

It continuously enlivens her maidservants. Śukadeva Gosvāmī has described that I found this, it's so nice. "The budding of her gentle smile lights up the ten directions and nourishes her swan-like friends, who blossomed with love for her and sing of her unlimited glories with angelic voices." Isn't that nice?

So her smile has an all-pervasive effect in, in Vrindavan. Actually, it's a well-known fact that the effulgence of her smile makes Vrindavan's creepers grow, its flowers blossom, its stones melt, and all manners of birds and beasts happy by singing her praises.

They become happy by singing her praises. Now, Jīva Gosvāmī writes that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's different qualities combined together to make a divine couple perfect in every way. He writes, "Kṛṣṇa, the former beauty, he says, is dashing, clever, witty, and full of joy.

And Śrīmatī, the form of love, he says, is soft but cunning, submissive but contrary, cool and warm, and best compared to a sweet camphor-scented smile." Sweet camphor-scented smile. How glorious is that smile!

So today, I would like to share a really beautiful pastime concerning Śrīmatī Rādhā's smile by a famous Vrindavan poet whose name was Śrī Rām Ray Dās. I've quoted him before, I think, two years ago. Śrī Rām Ray Dās, he actually was a contemporary of the well-known poet, one of my heroes, Sūr Das.

Sūr Das, whom we often quote, refer to. Sūr Das's samadhi again is out of Chand Sarovar. And I've visited there many times for inspiration. And this pastime is found in Śrī Rām Ray Dās's, I found it in the Vrindavan Research Institute, had part of it translated, and just came across this gem.

So therein he describes that once Madhu Maṅgal called Kṛṣṇa in a loud voice from the top of Govardhan Hill. Just in your mind's eye, there's Madhu Maṅgal on top of Govardhan, and he's, he's calling in a loud voice to Kṛṣṇa.

He shouted, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa!

Oh, Kṛṣṇa!

Please help us. Viśāl and Stok are trying their best to control your cows and take them back to the ghośālā of Nanda Mahārāja, but are unable to do so. So they called me. But I've tried all my supradominical powers, but nothing is working.

All your cows are just dancing and accessing and running wild. Kṛṣṇa, don't delay!

I can see you hiding on top of a Kadamba tree, writing a letter to your beloved Gopis. But Kṛṣṇa, don't be a lover in times of responsibility. All your loving affairs shouldn't affect your service to Mahārāja Nanda. Oh, you with a dark cloud complexion, please do something, otherwise I can see these cows are going in the direction of Vṛṣabhānu, which means Vṛṣaṇā." So with that, Kṛṣṇa smiled at Madhu Maṅgal from afar, while on this highest branch of a Kadamba tree.

Then He started playing His flute in three different melodies, and suddenly all the cows who were running wildly everywhere, they stopped. And what did they do?

They simply stared at Kṛṣṇa in the tree. It's described like a person stares at a beautiful painting. Like, "Whoa." So they all gathered together like bees, you know, another description, you know, surrounding a lotus flower as it opens. So Kṛṣṇa jumped from that, the top of that tree, onto the ground.

And then He just started walking in front of the cows towards the underground, with Madhu Maṅgal on one side and the cowherd boys Viśāl and Stok on the other side. Now, far away in the underground, but for Śrīmatī Rādhā, she was ecstatic seeing, you know, Kṛṣṇa coming back home from a great distance.

So she immediately ordered her maidservants, "Dear Gopis, please spread spring in Vrindavan." I like that. Please spread spring in Vrindavan for welcoming my Kṛṣṇa. Tell Indra to send his elephant to sprinkle nectar on the ground. There should be roses blossoming for Kṛṣṇa all the way home.

And make sure bliss is residing everywhere. Make sure bliss is residing everywhere. All glories to the Lord. So saying that, Mother Yaśodā turned to her maidservant, and in order to support her, because her body was shivering in the ecstasy of Vātsalya-rasa, the description is that tears poured from her eyes, tears of love poured from her eyes, and her body was perspiring, her breasts were heavy with milk, and her head was spinning in bliss.

Then suddenly Kṛṣṇa blew His buffalo horn. Remember, we had a class about buffalo horns. Kṛṣṇa blew His buffalo horn, which reverberated throughout the entire Vrindavan landscape. And Gopis could be seen everywhere rushing to gather paraphernalia to welcome Kṛṣṇa back home.

This goes on every evening, actually. Remember, and each time it happens, the devotees, the Rājasī, feel like it's the first time. It's really. We talk about in, in the spiritual world, in Vrindavan, every word is a song. If we step as a dancer, there's a festival every day.

Well, this is the festival when Kṛṣṇa comes home after herding the cows all day long. So the sounds of these Gopis, the sounds of their thousands of ankle bells, it's described, combined with the sound of Kṛṣṇa's buffalo horn, making a wonderful symphony, which won over the hearts of all the Gandharvas watching, watching down from Gandharva-loka.

And actually, the poet describes, an ocean of bliss started flowing in the narrow alleyways of Vrindavan, and the sound of drums, horns, and flutes caused a heroic emotion in everyone. Heroic emotion in everyone. So then very soon, in the distance, all the Rājasī could see 900,000 eager cows running home.

Just in your mind's eye, just imagine 900,000 cows running home, making the whole earth dance in ecstasy. Everyone started shouting, "Let's go see Kṛṣṇa's evening procession!

Let's go see Kṛṣṇa's evening procession!

He's coming home!

Kṛṣṇa is coming home!" Then, as Kṛṣṇa entered the Vrindavan village, all the Gopis looked down at Kṛṣṇa from their windows, and they showered Him with fragrant flowers.

Mother Yaśodā was the first one, you're right, out front. She was right out front, the first one to welcome Kṛṣṇa home. And as He came, she gave Him a loving embrace, a loving embrace. And she said to Him, "Oh, my dear son, now please take this golden bucket, it's newly made and embedded with gems and minerals.

Please take it and now milk your favorite cows." So what, why? "So that I can make butter for you out of milk." Wow.

So that I can make butter for you out of milk. The mysteries of Vrindavan. So Kṛṣṇa, He became very excited, and kissing his mother's cheek, He ran with that golden bucket to the ghośālā for the, I could just say, the evening milking of the cows.

And upon reaching the ghośālā, He sat down and started preparing for milking. When suddenly He saw Śrīmatī Rādhā, who was on her way to visit Mother Yaśodā, passing by. So tightening His waist belt, you know, adjusting His turban, He stood up and He walked a few steps towards her.

But while standing before one another, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa were unable to speak because of the presence of their elders. Instead, they started talking with their eyes. They started talking with their eyes. Now, Kṛṣṇa wanted to embrace Śrīmatī Rādhā, but instead, He held Subala Sakha tightly for a long time, because, well, the elders were there.

While looking into the eyes of Śrīmatī Rādhā, and while Kṛṣṇa gazed into her, Śrīmatī Rādhā showed Him, the poet says, her first smile. Her first smile. Then Kṛṣṇa, because He couldn't actually embrace Rādhā because the elders were there, He gets the cheek of Subala.

Well, looking into Śrīmatī Rādhā's eyes. Now, with that, Rādhā responded with a second smile. Then Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear Subala, just look at this beautiful smile of Śrīmatī Rādhā. Because of it, I'm losing all power in my arms. I'm losing all the power in my arms.

I'm supposed to milk the cows. Please help me to remember my duties." So then Subala handed Kṛṣṇa the golden bucket, but unable to remove his eyes from Śrīmatī Rādhā's smile, Kṛṣṇa sat with it. Well, reaching out for the udder of a cow, he was unable to remove his eyes from Rādhā's smile.

So he sat with that bucket, you know, and reached out for the udder of a cow. But as he started milking, no milk was coming. Then suddenly Mother Yaśodā, she arrived at the ghośālā, anxious that Kṛṣṇa was taking too long to milk the cows.

So there she saw Śrīmatī Rādhā smiling at Kṛṣṇa with all her love, and Kṛṣṇa lost in the beauty of Rādhā's smile was trying to milk a bull. He was lost in the beauty of Rādhā's smile. Therefore, he was trying to milk a bull.

So smiling, Rādhā smiles here, smiling. She saw, clapped in front of Kṛṣṇa's eyes, and turning to Śrīmatī Rādhā, she said, "Oh, beautiful Rādhā, come with me now, and let Kṛṣṇa continue to milk this bull." So seeing this fun, all the cowherd boys and cowherd girls who were gathered there, they started laughing as the divine couple continued, continued smiling at each other, looking in each other's eyes and smiling.

So Śrī Rām Ray Dās says, "It's really nice. I sacrificed all my desires for the smile of Śrīmatī Rādhā, which makes the Lord forget His duties and causes the three worlds to dance in ecstasy." All glories to that poet.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So we'll conclude today with the pastime that my dear Godbrother Śrī Rām Swami described so beautifully in his magnum opus. What is his magnum opus?

I consider it to be his *Navadvīpa-mahimā*, wherein Śrīmatī Rādhā receives a letter from Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhā has received a letter from Kṛṣṇa. This pastime begins as follows: Looking again at the letter in her hands, Rādhā trembled, perspired, and cried tears of joy as she slowly unrolled it and then read with a trembling voice.

Kṛṣṇa has written her, "Oh, beautiful princess of Vṛṣabhānu, from the day I first saw you, my life changed. I was, after all, a carefree cowherd boy playing in the fields of Rādhā, but now I am held captive with a tiny hope that you may bless me with a casual side-long glance.

My friends try to console me, not knowing the reason I am so morose, but I find solace in the image of your smile, your complexion, your hair, and your matchlessly beautiful form. Rādhā, your translated beauty is a reflection of your heart.

That which is within you is revealed by your peerless form. Without you, I have no life. What wings are to a bird, what the sun is to the world, what the soul is to the body, you are to me.

If you think I should live, if you think I deserve to see you in person, then meet me by the bank of the Yamunā beneath the Kadamba trees where cuckoos sing and bees hum. Please, Śrīmatī Rādhā, allow me to serve you, for you are the queen of my heart, my Rādhārāṇī, my worshipable deity.

I am your servant eternally." With that, Śrīmatī Rādhā fell silent. Placed the letter gently on her lap, with her face turned down, an uncontrollable smile suddenly appeared on her lips, the kind of smile her friends had not seen for many days.

Suddenly raising her head and looking around, she said excitedly, "He has accepted me!

He has accepted me!

He has accepted me!

Oh, my friends, I must meet Kṛṣṇa by the Yamunā tonight!

Please help me to look my very best!" All right, Kṛṣṇa.

Another wonderful pastime with her smile. That's all they could find on smiles about Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhā. I'm sure there's more because while they're eternally smiling pastimes in Śrī Vrindavan. But I've been very happy to share all that with you.

Again, I hope that when your deities open up the next morning, you're in the temple, and you know, the other day we said, look at Kṛṣṇa's smile. Now you can look at Rādhā's smile and be so much inspired. So thank you.

And, um, we're going to move on next week to another item, or we could say, subject, or more like a personality to, to hear about them as a stimulus for awakening our love for the divine couple. And what, what could that be?

A drum roll here. What could that be?

You'll be very happy to know we're going to talk about Kṛṣṇa's cows because they also act as a stimulus for awakening our love for the divine couple, Kṛṣṇa, Balarām, and all of Vrindavan. So I've been researching kind of off to the side for a few weeks because it's something I really wanted to research and talk about.

I think we're going to get maybe two or three classes about Kṛṣṇa's cows. Please join us. Thank you once again for this opportunity. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn.

Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Gaurāṅga.