

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Namo Oṁ Viṣṇu-pādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe. So, we’re continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, based of course on Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Chapter 26 of The Nectar of Devotion. In today’s lecture, we will talk about the glories and the role of parrots—yes, parrots—in the divine pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We’re moving on from flowers, and this will be part 15.

Now, there are numerous kinds of birds in the pastimes of the Lord, which you could say decorate the land of Braja and serve the divine couple with their colorful feathers and their chirping and singing. Of course, it’s understood that the birds in Vṛndāvana are not ordinary birds. Nothing in Vṛndāvana is ordinary; I’ve said many times, it’s all extraordinary. In the Rādhā-Ramaṇa Temple in Vṛndāvana, there’s a book called Pāra-mañjarī by Śrī Guṇa-mañjarī Dāsa. He was a devotee initiated into the line of Rūpa Gosvāmī; his actual name was Śrī Gosvāmī-kālūjī. So, in Pāra-mañjarī, he wrote a beautiful poem called Uttama-kāṇḍa-o-rādha. There is a very beautiful and detailed description of Vṛndāvana’s parrots—many birds in Vṛndāvana, but today we’ll discuss parrots. Therein we learned that these parrots of Vṛndāvana, their main service is to relay messages of love between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who of course were constantly feeling separation from each other. This is especially true during the rainy season when I was reading Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā force Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī just to stay inside the palace at Yāvat and not go out and meet Kṛṣṇa.

During those times, Kṛṣṇa arranges to send messages to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with his personal parrot, whose name is in Sanskrit, Vicakṣaṇa. Vicakṣaṇa means “the one who has sharp vision.” Now, Vicakṣaṇa is a very interesting character, for he can change into three different colors at will. When he sits on Kṛṣṇa’s forefinger or his shoulder, his feathers turn a golden color; when he flies to the Vṛndāvana forest with a message from Kṛṣṇa, he appears as a green parrot; and when he arrives with the message for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he sits on her forefinger or shoulder and his feathers turn red.

Now, there’s a nice explanation why he assumes these different colors. First of all, when he’s near to Kṛṣṇa, he assumes a golden color to remind Kṛṣṇa of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s golden complexion. When he flies to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with the message, he changes his feathers into a bright green so that no one in Braja can identify him, because after all, he’s delivering a confidential, secret message, so he needs to blend in with all the other parrots in Vṛndāvana. And when he finally reaches Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he changes color for the third time and appears red, for the ācāryas say that red is the signature color of love. I just love that: “Red is the signature color of love.”

In this regard, there’s a very beautiful verse in Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Padyāvalī, verse 242. Referring to red as the color of love, it is speaking to Kṛṣṇa: “Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is completely drenched in the brilliant red color of love, exactly like a guñjā seed which is completely red on the outside, except for the mouth. Oh, expert word-juggler Kṛṣṇa, her love is not like your love, which remains only on the mouth, exactly like the red color of the parrot’s beak.” That’s pretty deep. In other words, Lalitā is comparing love to the color red and saying that Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa is full, like the prominent red color of a guñjā seed, whereas Kṛṣṇa’s love for Rādhā is minimal, like the touch of red on a parrot’s beak.

Our scriptures give an even more detailed description of this special parrot, Vicakṣaṇa. They say he has a dark red beak, a small crown on his head which is placed on his crest, he has golden tilaka—actually the same shape of tilaka that Kṛṣṇa has—and I found this particularly beautiful: he holds a red rose between his feet when he flies into the air of Braja. You can just imagine in your mind’s eye him flying with the message, a beautiful green color, and in his feet, he’s holding a red rose. He flies with the speed of a blinking eye, and he ignites the fire of love in the hearts of the Vraja-gopīs. And he once very famously said—it’s very nice—he said: “Of the many services rendered to the Prince of Braja, delivering messages is the most exciting.” He’s a parrot delivering a message; he thinks because of his rasa with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that he has the best service, delivering messages to the divine couple.

Now, there are many other important parrot messengers in Vṛndāvana, for example, the famous parrot couple Śuka and Sārī. You often hear that Śuka is the pet parrot of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. There’s also Dakṣa, who is the head parrot of Vṛndā Devī. In Sanskrit, Dakṣa means “one who is very expert at various skills.” Rādhārāṇī has two other favorite parrots; one is named Śukṣamāti and the other is Śubhā. She has a few parrots: Śukṣamāti and Śubhā. And I was reading that Kṛṣṇa’s parrot, Vicakṣaṇa, he is in love with Śukṣamāti, and Śubhā. Love reigns supreme in Vṛndāvana. Vicakṣaṇa actually has—I was reading also—the Kāma-mantra, the hymn of love, written all over his feathers. That little fluff on his chest, the Kāma-mantra is written there, the hymn of love. Vicakṣaṇa, Dakṣa, and the many other parrots of Rādhārāṇī’s gopīs, they also have parrots. They all live in a golden cage, which is described as moving forever in the direction of the flowing wind. All these parrots live in a golden cage, and what is the nature of that cage? It moves forever in the direction of the flowing wind.

This amazing information even goes deeper. I was reading that it’s described that Kāmadeva has a parrot, and that parrot’s name is Prema-śuka, meaning of course, “the parrot of love.” Now, here’s what’s really interesting: Kāmadeva’s parrot, Prema-śuka, is the guru of all the parrots in Vṛndāvana. This is just the Lord’s arrangement; he is the guru of all the parrots in Vṛndāvana. Vicakṣaṇa, they’re all disciples of Prema-śuka. And what does he teach them as the guru? He teaches them the different ways to fly in the Vṛndāvana sky; he teaches them how to understand the words of love in a message from their master; how to repeat the same message word-for-word in front of the person for whom the message is destined; and how to convey that message in a secluded place at the right time. It’s also said that all the secrets of love are learned by heart by all these parrots. Extraordinary personalities, all the secrets of love—and this is Vṛndāvana—are learned by heart by these parrots.

Furthermore, they all have golden chains and pendants around their necks which are marked with signs of love. They all wear golden ankle bells which make very pleasing sounds to the ears. They can speak many different languages, these parrots. And here’s something extraordinary: they can copy the voices of the Vraja-gopīs; they can copy the voices of all the presiding gopīs; they can also mimic the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. These parrots are very good at making jokes as well as sympathizing with their masters when they are distressed or feeling separation. When Krishna or Rādhā are feeling separation, these parrots sympathize with their masters. They can all sing songs to wake up their masters and mistresses in the morning or the afternoon, and what’s more, they remind them of their schedules.

All these parrots, they all meet with their extended parrot family every day, flying in the sky together, making loud noises in the air, which cause everyone in Vṛndāvana to become excited. You know, in Vṛndāvana, we often see these big flocks of green parrots flying through the sky. So in the spiritual world, they fly together making loud noises in the air, which, because it’s transcendental sound vibration, actually are just glorifying Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; everyone becomes excited.

Now, after Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Lalitā-sakhī, Viśākhā-sakhī, Nandīmukhī, and other senior gopīs discuss and decide on the details of an upcoming Rāsa dance, such details are told to Vṛndā Devī, who then relays these details to her parrot, Dakṣa, who then gives this information to 16,108 other parrots who spread this detailed information to each and every gopī of Braja. Why? So they can follow the akṣara—Sanskrit means the theme—the theme for that day or that night’s Rāsa dance. Now, what information is that? That information includes the color of clothes that the participants of this upcoming Rāsa dance should wear, what fragrance they should put on, where the dance will take place, which beat will be played on the drums, and which dance form will be used during that particular upcoming Rāsa dance. An educated guess is there are different ways they dance the Rāsa dance, so that’s all spread by the parrots.

Now, another interesting thing to note is that it’s often said that in the spiritual world, Śuka—who I mentioned earlier, one of Rādhā’s favorite parrots—actually, there’s no śāstric reference for this. I consulted many devotional scholars, many śāstras, but actually, there’s no śāstric reference for this, and none of our ācāryas have stated that Śukadeva Gosvāmī is Śuka in the spiritual world; it’s not there in the śāstra. However, Śukadeva Gosvāmī has aptly been compared to a parrot by his sweet recitation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and this analogy is appropriate because, as we’ve heard many times from Prabhupāda, when a parrot tastes a fruit on a tree, that fruit becomes even sweeter. How so? Because of the saliva generated from the mouth of the parrot; it’s just one of nature’s ways. So therefore, the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which are mādhura—they’re very, very sweet—but when narrated by someone like Śukadeva Gosvāmī, they become even sweeter. And this is confirmed in the Bhāgavata-saṅgīta; many devotees know this verse. It’s Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.1.3: “O expert and thoughtful men, relish Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the mature fruit of the desired tree of Vedic literatures. It emanated from the lips of Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī; therefore, this fruit has become even more tasteful, although its nectarean juice was already relishable for all, including liberated souls.”

In this regard, I would like to conclude with two quotes today. First, part of a poem by Vyāsadāsa, a poet I discovered in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute. He was born in the 15th century; he was a poet from Vṛndāvana in the disciplic succession of the Haridāsas of Braja. He wrote something very beautiful: “The parrots of Vṛndāvana spread the message of love of Kṛṣṇa to all the young girls of Braja who were separated from Kṛṣṇa and enclosed in their prison-like homes. At the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, a parrot appeared—a parrot appeared—who spread the message of love in the form of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to the conditioned souls in this world who are separated from Kṛṣṇa and enclosed in the prison house of the material world to free them by meditating on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. I offer my respectful obeisances again and again to the king of all parrots, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who was the son of Vedavyāsa.” We thank that devotee.

And finally, this is the quote I found from the Bhāgavata-campū of Abhinava Kālidāsa; it’s 1.23: “Even if devoid of any meaning, the sounds made by dvijas—meaning brāhmaṇas or birds—are enchanting to hear. What then to say of that particular dvija, the parrot Śukadeva Gosvāmī? And what to speak of his voice, which is filled with Mukunda’s pastimes? It is indeed most glorious.”

To the terrace of Braja, all glorious, glorious revealer of the dawn. So I’m going to cut it a little bit short today because this is the actually our first day of our Rishikesh Kīrtan Fest. We’ve gone out in the street, but a lot of invitations here in Rishikesh. We’ve put a lot of posters up; the buzz of the town is our festival, which actually takes place in the morning—they can come to our morning program where we mostly chant Hare Kṛṣṇa—the people can come to our noon program, the westerners, where we have workshops, and of course the evening, for like five or six hours, we have some of ISKCON’s best kīrtaniyas. It’s going to be chanting, chanting, and chanting, sharing good fortune with all these wonderful people who come to India, who come to Rishikesh specifically to learn about yoga, and as we know on the ladder of yoga, the topmost yoga is Bhakti-yoga, so you have to get busy, busy with that. So please excuse me, it’s a little short today, but in the midst of all this beehive of transcendental activity for the next three weeks, I’ll do my best to do a talk like this every Friday. Thank you. Please give us your blessings, Prabhupāda, that we can be successful in this service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi.

The parrots of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Rishikesh. Back home, back to Godhead.
