Hi Krishna, dear devotees, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

As most of you know, we've been absent for a couple of weeks because we were having our Kartik Parikramā here in Śrī Vṛndāvana, and it finished yesterday.

So we're back with you again. Viśva-kṛṣṇa namo 'stu te. So, we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love after a short break, and this will be part 101. And today, we'll continue speaking about the third of Kṛṣṇa's qualities that distinguish Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa, and that is: "He can attract living entities from all over the universe by playing on His flute." Number three.

Now, in his book, *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes exactly how Kṛṣṇa's flute playing affects living entities in various ways. It's interesting, he writes, the sound vibration created by the flute of Kṛṣṇa wonderfully stopped Lord Śiva from playing his dindima drum.

And the same flute has caused great sages like the four Kumāras to become disturbed in their meditation. It has caused Lord Brahmā, who was sitting on the lotus flower for the creative function, to become astonished. And Ananta Deva, who was calmly holding all the planets on his hood, was moving this way and that due to the transcendental vibration from Kṛṣṇa's flute, which penetrated through the covering of this universe and reached to the spiritual sky.

So again, that's really interesting. By the mercy of Rūpa Gosvāmī, we learn not only that Kṛṣṇa's flute attracts all living entities in the universe, but how it affects them individually as well, all by the grace of Rūpa Gosvāmī. But what's just as amazing is that Kavi Karṇapūra, in his *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*, chapter 6, verses 13 and 14, reveals how Kṛṣṇa's flute playing in the spiritual world – because we heard about the material universe – he reveals how Kṛṣṇa's flute playing in the spiritual world, specifically in Gokula Vṛndāvana, affects the living entities who are there.

The nitya-siddhas. He writes, "When the creatures in Vṛndāvana forest drank the nectar of the sound of Lord Kṛṣṇa's flute, their natures became radically altered, and they became filled with the symptoms of ecstatic love." That's the theme of our series, the symptoms of ecstatic love.

When the sound of Lord Kṛṣṇa's flute was heard in Vṛndāvana forest, the stationary trees and plants began to tremble in ecstasy.

The moving creatures became stunned and motionless. The flowers all turned white, perspired, and cried tears of honey. The birds became choked up and could not sing. And the grass and creepers stood erect in transcendental bliss. Wow. And in *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*, chapter 13, verses 31 and 32, he continues.

He writes, "A female parrot said, 'Lord Hari's companion, the flute, causes havoc in this forest. The flute stuns the flowing streams, attracts the entire atmosphere, enchants all living entities with its spell, and forces the women of Vṛndāvana to transgress the codes of religion.'" "When he goes on," a male parrot said, "Who can describe the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa's flute?

By showering the nectar of its music upon the hearts of the women, this flute washes away the mud of love for any other man and uncovers the heart's natural love for Kṛṣṇa." And in *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*, chapter 19, verse 72, he writes, "The sound of Lord Kṛṣṇa's flute aroused amorous desires in the moon-faced gopīs, who had beautiful tears.

They began to stutter, and their garments became loosened. Without a trace of remorse or second thought, they all at once left their homes." Such is the vibration of Kṛṣṇa's flute in the spiritual sky, especially in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

And so, it's quite obvious that Kṛṣṇa's flute has an even more powerful effect upon the residents of Vṛndāvana more than anywhere else in the material and the spiritual creations.

This is because there's a reason for this. This is because Vṛndāvana is the topmost spiritual place in all the creations, where spiritual emotions are at their highest.

This is Braja. Spiritual emotions are at their highest. That is explained actually by the great devotee Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who quotes Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the opening verse of his *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. "Cc. madhya 9.194. 'The most worshipable form of the Lord is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Mahārāja Nanda, and Vṛndāvana is the topmost worshipable abode.'" And amongst those who live there, as we know, the cowherd girls, the milkmaids, the gopīs of Vṛndāvana, are the topmost devotees. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.44.15 states, "The ladies of Braja are the most fortunate of women, because with their minds fully attached to Kṛṣṇa and their throats always choked up with tears, they constantly sing about Him while milking the cows, winnowing grain, churning butter, gathering cow dung for fuel, riding on swings, taking care of their crying babies, sprinkling the ground with water, cleansing their houses, and so on.

By their exalted Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they automatically acquire all desirable things, such as the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.44.16 states, "When the gopīs hear Kṛṣṇa playing His flute as He leaves Vṛndāvana in the morning with His cows, or returns with them at sunset, the young girls quickly come out of their homes to see Him.

They must have performed many pious activities to be able to see Him as He walks on the road, His smiling face mercifully glancing upon them." Those sidelong glances as He walks on the road, His smiling face mercifully glancing upon them.

But I was reading nevertheless, such sidelong glances or quick glances of Kṛṣṇa described were not sufficient to satisfy the gopīs' attraction to Him. Thus, they lived in constant feelings of separation. And from them, the gopīs in Śrī Gopal Campū, Pūrva Chapter 17, our beloved Jīva Gosvāmī writes, "One day Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa wrote new leaves about the depths of their feelings of separation from each other." And the winds of the autumn season brought Śrī's leaf to Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's leaf to Rādhā.

And Śrīmatī Rādhā had written: "It's very poetic. The lightning bolts, who have the clouds as their very life, are very pious, for they're never seen without their dark clouds. But I am unfortunate because I am always seen without the dark cloud, Kṛṣṇa." And Kṛṣṇa had written: "The moon has given up its cloudy shelter, and the swan and the blue lotus are beautifully decorating the lake.

But thinking of Vṛndāvana, my mind doesn't take pleasure in these things." "Fie on providence!

Fie on providence!" Meaning Kṛṣṇa is saying that very poetically that Vṛndāvana is looking very nice, but nevertheless, without His Rādhā, it's not so appealing to Him.

And Jīva Gosvāmī writes that after reading Kṛṣṇa's leaf message, you know, she wrote on the leaf, "Rādhā rāṇī embraced the leaf, made a pendant out of it, and wore it always around her neck." Wow. In these ways and more, we can understand that due to social customs, boys and girls didn't mix freely in Vṛndāvana.

And so the gopīs of Vṛndāvana were often feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa even when He was there, even when He was there.

And realizing this, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī writes, Kṛṣṇa eventually started playing His flute in a unique way to satisfy them. And because the sound of the flute was coming directly from His lips to His heart, he says the desire of the gopīs to have the personal association of Kṛṣṇa was satisfied.

Wow. However, Jīva Gosvāmī also points out that amongst the gopīs who had particularly intense feelings of love for Kṛṣṇa, those gopīs remained distressed. Some of them had this particular, they were in particular distress and in separation, and they remained so even though the flute was playing.

And amongst them, Śrīmatī Rādhā was the most distressed. And therefore, she expressed – it's described – her transcendental jealousy towards the flute with the following words: "Kṛṣṇa's flute is extremely pious, for even though it is not of feminine gender, it is able to give up all shyness and drink the nectar flowing from Kṛṣṇa's lips, which in fact belongs to us gopīs.

The flute is never satisfied by this nectar, and when it has become overfed on it, the flute emits sounds that cause the rivers to swell up with joy and the trees to shed tears in the form of dripping honey." Then Rādhā rāṇī thought within herself as follows: "Oh, shark earrings, you kiss His cheeks regularly.

Oh, flute, you relish His lip nectar. Oh, garland of forest flowers, just see, even these ordinary jewels do not give up the body of Śrī Hari." Let's recite that again. This is Rādhā's thinking: "Oh, shark earrings, you kiss His cheeks regularly.

Oh, flute, you relish His lip nectar. Oh, Garland of forest flowers, just see, even these ordinary jewels did not give up the body of Śrī Hari." Har Kṛṣṇa. At this point, I'd like to share with you a poem written by a medieval poet named Kavi Karṇapūra, who I discovered was the head priest of the Jagannātha temple in Purī at one point, and a very intimate associate of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

In fact, he's mentioned in Caitanya Caritāmṛta, 1519 and 1529. And this poem, or song, you could say, is technically categorized as *āvega-pāṅgā*. Āvega-pāṅgā. This means literally expressing deep attraction through one's complaints. Wow. How detailed is the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Āvega-pāṅgā, expressing deep attraction through one's complaints.

So in this song, Śrīmatī Rādhā indirectly expresses her deep attachment to the sounds of the flute by complaining to the flute itself. Śrīmatī Rādhā says in a complaining mood: "Oh, vamśī flute of the mind-stealer Kṛṣṇa, please play very softly.

Your loud, rapturous sounds make us cowherd girls extremely distressed. Oh, vamśī flute, you have now become a lady of our family lineage, residing in a society of respectable elderly people. So we warn you not to make any sounds when you're placed on the lips of that Ruffian Kṛṣṇa.

That Ruffian Kṛṣṇa!

Please listen to us and give us a promise of remaining completely speechless at all times. Please do not slaughter us helpless ladies. Please do not slaughter us helpless ladies." Very deep. A devotee scholar notes here that the term for flute, vamśī, is feminine in gender, since the lady named Vamśī is now in constant association of Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhā says that she has become like a woman in the cowherd family lineage, residing in a society of respectable elderly cowherds such as Nanda and Upānanda.

Thus, she should learn to behave properly and stop making such captivating, sweet sounds that caused the cowherd girls to behave in a manner not acceptable for the society, and thus ruining their reputations, which is worse than killing them. He paraphrases there.

Now, Śrīmatī Rādhā continues: "Whatever family traditions and rules of modesty I had have all flown away to the other side of the Yamunā. No, with the dark Ruffian plays upon you, the only thing I can say to you now, oh flute, as I walk down the path of the Yamunā, is that I do not know if after hearing your sweet, sounding songs, these shameless life-airs of mine will stay in my body or not." After hearing your sweet sounding songs, oh flute, these shameless life-airs of mine will stay in my body or not?

Then she concludes, "Oh, vamśī, your birth is in the rough village bush named taraḷa." Your birth is in the rough village bush named taraḷa. It actually means tara, the bamboo. I found out. Tara, the bamboo. Whereas my heart is soft and simple.

This simple heart of mine is now being thrashed to pieces in the hands of an uncouth, rough village dweller like you, oh flute. So, the poet Kavi Karṇapūra, who has composed this poem or song, he writes, "My mind now understands clearly that this flute has come into existence simply to do away with innocent and helpless cowherd girls." Thank you, poet.

In the following pastime, a very beautiful pastime, Śrīmatī Rādhā rāṇī will get her revenge on her competitor, the flute, in a very humorous way. That pastime is as follows: One time, Śrīmatī Rādhā rāṇī left the rāsa dance. And Kṛṣṇa, noticing this, also left the rāsa dance, looking for... we've discussed this.

But in this particular rāsa dance, He wandered through all the kuñjas around Govardhana Hill, calling out, "Rādhā, Rādhā rāṇī's name," until finally, somewhere near Jaipur, He found Rādhā rāṇī in a kuñja with Alīta and Viśākhā and some other gopīs.

But when Kṛṣṇa came up to Rādhā rāṇī, seeing her, she turned her face away and said to Alīta, "Tell this rascal boy to go away." So Kṛṣṇa bowed His head and with tears in His eyes, He left that place and went to another kuñja nearby, where He laid down and went to sleep, apparently.

So then, Rādhā rāṇī smiling told some of her friends to find out where Kṛṣṇa went and report back to her. So eventually, her friends found Kṛṣṇa laying down, sleeping in this other kuñja with His crown off and His flute under His hand.

So when the girls came back and told this to Rādhā rāṇī, naturally all the gopīs, Brajā, Alīta, Viśākhā, Ratī Mañjarī – all of them got the same idea at the same time. Was all Pārvatī working?

They all thought together: "No one is guarding Kṛṣṇa. He's asleep and He's alone in the kuñja. This is the perfect opportunity to steal Kṛṣṇa's vamśī, His flute!" So they all got together, and very silently, they snuck into the kuñja where Kṛṣṇa was.

Finding Him sleeping – actually, He wasn't sleeping, He was pretending to sleep. So the gopīs started discussing how they were going to steal His flute. So Alīta says, "This flute can only be stolen by someone who's very clever, very quick, and very fast." And immediately, simultaneously, all the girls turned around and looked at Śrīmatī Rādhā.

So Rādhā rāṇī smiled because here was an opportunity to associate with her beloved, first of all, and to get back at her, to get revenge on him. So she tied up her sari like pants, tied a cloth around her bangles and ankle bells so they wouldn't make any noise, and snuck up very slowly and very quietly to where Kṛṣṇa was.

And she moved very carefully, very deliberately, on the ground, one step at a time, making sure that Kṛṣṇa didn't wake up. Finally, she got to where Kṛṣṇa was and carefully reached out and grabbed His flute. Then she jumped up and ran.

It's described like the wind, while all the other gopīs giggled and laughed. Of course, they didn't see. But as soon as the flute was gone, a big smile came on Kṛṣṇa's face. So after some time, Kṛṣṇa came back to the first kuñja where the gopīs were, and He called out, "Hey, do any of you girls know where my flute is?

Do any of you have my flute?" And they all looked at Him like, "What do you mean, do we have your flute?" And Alīta said sarcastically, "First you offend Rādhā rāṇī, and now you accuse some of her friends of thievery?

You rascal boy!" So at this point, Kṛṣṇa came forward and started personally searching the gopīs for His flute.

They were saying, "Don't touch me!

Don't touch me!

Don't touch me!" And Kṛṣṇa said, "I'm looking for my flute." So at this point, the gopīs started secretly handing the flute, one after another, you know, to each other, one to one to one to one, so He couldn't find it.

And one of the gopīs handed the flute to Śrīmatī Rādhā, finally, right in front of Kṛṣṇa, right in front of Kṛṣṇa's hand, with the flute. So Śrīmatī Rādhā just stood there smiling with Kṛṣṇa's flute in hand. Now, because she's the chief of all the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa couldn't just go up and start roughing her up looking for His flute.

So to the joy of all the gopīs present, and the joy of all the vraja-vāsis past, present, and future, Kṛṣṇa knelt down in front of Śrimatī Rādhā rāṇī, took her hand, and begged her to give His flute back. He begged her, "Please give my flute back." In essence, this shows the power of pure, unadulterated love for Kṛṣṇa, bhakti.

It is so powerful, it can control the all-powerful Lord. Or, we can say, Kṛṣṇa allows Himself to be controlled by the love of His devotees. That's important. He allows Himself to be controlled by the love of His devotees. So, this is the intimate sweet love of Vṛndāvana, which cannot be found even in Dvārakā, the official kingdom of God.

Only in Braja. Har Kṛṣṇa. Actually, she gave the flute back. So, let us finish today with a verse from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Lalita-mādhava*, 10.38, where the gopīs are speaking: "It is so sweet, dear Kṛṣṇa, the fragrance of the mellows of Your pastimes is spread throughout the forest of the glorious land Vṛndāvana, which is surrounded by the sweetness of the district of Mathurā.

In the congenial atmosphere of that wonderful land, You enjoy Your pastimes with Your flute dancing on Your lips and surrounded by us, the gopīs, whose hearts are always enchanted by unpredictable ecstatic emotions." Mar Kṛṣṇa. So thank you very much.

We are again, we're back on course. We did take a break for a couple of sessions because we had a very ecstatic Kartik Parikramā here with about 350 devotees. Perhaps you've seen some of the videos or seen the photos on my Facebook page, but it was ecstatic.

So I'll go back to my library behind me, and we'll continue with these discussions next Friday. Thank you so much. Glorious to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the revealer of the divine śāstra. Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa's flute. Śrī, thank you. Har Kṛṣṇa.