Hi Krishna everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Today, I'm addressing you from Śrī Dhāma. I just came back from a one-month tour of, um, the land of the great red dragon, China. It was really nice. Oṁ viṣṇupāda. So today, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 59.

You may remember last week we discussed the tāla tree as a stimulus for awakening our love for the Lord. So I thought this week we could speak a little bit about the kadamba tree. We have discussed the kadamba tree extensively in previous lectures, but new research has yielded some new and interesting information as well.

But I thought we could begin by speaking about trees in general. This would be really interesting for those of you who are environmentalists, concerned about, well, Mother Nature, as we are. First of all, um, trees were highly revered in ancient Vedic culture, as confirmed in the Agni Purāṇa.

There are a few verses here from the Agni Purāṇa which, which I came across. "He who in a city or forest cuts down trees without reason will enter a hell called Jamaka or Jīva, which is dreadful and terrifying." Wow. "One who cuts trees that shade cool places and a thorny forest will be tormented by Yamarája's messengers." Another verse in the Agni Purāṇa says, "Oh King, if a person plants even a single pious tree, he dwells in heaven as long as three lifespans of Indra." Pretty powerful.

And trees never harm anyone and are always helpful, even to those who inflict harm on them. They are like a parent who tolerates a son who at times causes distress, driven by greed for opulence, land, or material possessions. Also from Agni Purāṇa, "A man desiring good welfare should engage in planting trees and nurture them with the same love he gives his own sons." It should be noted, though, that trees can be more faithful than one's own son, who may turn away from the injunctions of scriptures and engage in sense gratification.

And finally, "One should never cut down a fig, banyan, or wood apple tree. Similarly, those trees that are meant for auspicious deeds should not be cut by those who seek prosperity." Wise words from the Agni Purāṇa, though that's general trees around the world.

Now, regarding the trees of Śrī Vṛndāvana, in Krishna Book, chapter 22, Krishna addresses his cowherd friends on the banks of the river Yamunā, saying, "My dear friends, just look at these most fortunate trees in Vṛndāvana.

They have dedicated their lives for the welfare of others. Individually, they are tolerating all kinds of natural disturbances such as hurricanes, torrents of rain, scorching heat, and piercing cold. Nevertheless, they are very careful to relieve our fatigue and give us shelter." My dear friends, I think they are glorified in this birth as trees.

They are so careful to give shelter to others that they are like, uh, noble, highly elevated, charitable men who never deny charity to anyone who approaches them. No one is denied shelter by these trees. They supply various kinds of facilities to human society, such as leaves, flowers, fruits, shade, roots, bark, flavor extracts, and fuel.

They are the perfect example of noble life. They're like a noble person who has sacrificed everything possible—their body, mind, activities, intelligence, and words—for the welfare of all living entities." So Krishna's words about the trees in Vṛndāvana.

Now, our Śrīla Prabhupāda and his illustrious Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta go so far as to say, we're building up here.

He writes, "I bow down before the great trees of Vṛndāvana, which are filled with leaves and sprouts, maddening beasts, the tumult of many birds, streams of nectar, honey, and branches bowed down with many splendid, wonderful fruits and flowers." Then he writes, "I pray to become a tree in Śrī Vṛndāvana and please Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Krishna with my limitless, splendid, sweet fruits, my unlimitedly splendid, fragrant flowers filled with splendid pollen and splendid honey, my splendid host of birds, and my splendid twigs and buds.

Oh, let me become a tree in Vṛndāvana." Now, according to the book, Rājinī-gantu, Rājinī-gantu, it's an ancient Ayurvedic encyclopedia that I found in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute.

There it's described that there are actually 27 species of trees on planet Earth known as devalaya, devalaya meaning trees on which demigods eternally reside. I thought that was interesting. Here on the Earth, these 27 species of trees, uh, they are devalaya, meaning trees in which demigods eternally reside.

And one of these 27 trees is the illustrious kadamba tree. Now, there's a famous story that has been passed down from one generation to another here in Śrī Vṛndāvana, and that is that several centuries ago, when the Mughals attacked Vṛndāvana, most of the presiding deities were moved, as we know, to Rajasthan, particularly to Jaipur, for protection.

Now, after that happened, a little boy asked his grandfather, "Oh, elderly father, please tell me, whom shall we worship now?

The deities of Gauḍa tell me, whom shall we worship now?" Well, the grandfather smiled and he said, "Son, Krishna eternally resides in the Tāmal tree, and Śrī Rādhā in a tree.

Therefore, don't worry. We shall simply worship these transcendental trees." Wow. "Don't worry, we shall simply worship these transcendental trees." And in Vṛndāvana, to this very day, the Tāmal and the kadamba trees are still being worshipped.

Now, we also discussed last week that because the Tāmal tree has a dark complexion and the kadamba tree has a golden complexion, uh, whenever Krishna sees a kadamba tree, he's reminded of Śrī Rādhā, and whenever Śrī Rādhā sees a Tāmal tree, she's reminded of Krishna.

Now, we should always remember that actually, all trees in Vṛndāvana are special.

All trees, they're all called Vedic trees, all eternally liberated souls who, each and everyone, has a unique rāsa with Krishna.

A rāsa of, what, neutrality?

But we shouldn't think for a minute that such a rāsa as neutrality is anything less than the rāsas of servitorship, friendship, parental love, or even madhurya-rasa, conjugal love. Everything in Vṛndāvana only lives for the service of Rādhā and Krishna.

So everyone has their part to play. Variety is the spice of life. Krishna desires it like that.

So these trees, they have a rāsa with Krishna.

It's just as pleasing to him as any other rāsa. In Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, it says that just as devotees in servitorship or vātsalya, sākya, and mādhurya-rasa experience the eight symptoms of ecstatic love for Krishna, so do those in the mood of neutrality, such as trees.

And what is the stimulus for the ecstatic symptoms these trees sometimes exhibit?

The śāstras say, number one, is the simple fact that they are growing in the cintāmaṇi soil of Śrī Vṛndāvana, in the vraja-bhūmi.

We gave so many lectures on vraja-bhūmi. They're growing in that vraja-bhūmi, and actually, remember that the Dhāma is an expansion of Lord Balarāma, so they're growing. They get their ecstatic symptoms just from that. And that fact alone causes ecstatic feelings to manifest from within their hearts.

What's more, such trees get to witness the most confidential pastimes of Rādhā and Krishna, because those pastimes are performed more or less hidden, you could say, from everyone else in the kuñjas in the groves of Vṛndāvana.

Just like we sing "Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava kuñja-vihārī," "Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava kuñja-vihārī," that Rādhā and Krishna are enjoying in the kuñjas.

So the trees are surrounding them, so they see. Another proof that such trees know well of the confidential pastimes of Rādhā and Krishna is that in Gaura-gaḍā-deva by Śrī Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he writes that Mañjughoṣa, who introduced the concept of mādhurya-rasa-bhakti a little before the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is himself a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree, desire tree in the spiritual world. Śrī Caitanya-carita Ṭhākura confirms the same in his Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā, verse 26.

He writes, "Pūrva Vṛndāvanīya Mañjughoṣa was previously the Lord's desire tree in Vṛndāvana." And further, further research revealed that that desire tree is situated in Nanda-gāma, in Braja.

And Nanda-gāma, of course, we know is one of the places that Rādhā and Krishna have their very loving pastimes.

He stands as witness, so he knows about these um mādhurya-rasas, and he preached it on this Earth planet by his causeless mercy. Govinda-līlāmṛta describes that Krishna feels endeared to these trees, and as such, he sometimes speaks to them.

It's recorded. He says, "Oh, my dear friends, the trees, oh wise ones, is everything all right with you today?

Did last night's gentle rains quench your thirst and nourish your flowers and fruits?" And just so that we can understand how exalted these tree personalities are, the śāstras say that in the dark of night, the trees often faint because they are unable to see Krishna anywhere.

They faint because in the dark of night, there's no light, they can't see Krishna anywhere.

However, there's always a good ending. In Krishna Consciousness, later on, when they hear the soothing sound of Krishna's voice or the celestial music that flows from his flute, they come back to life and instantly blossom into many flowers and leaves.

Then they shake their leaves in ecstasy, or they shed honey tears. It's described they shed honey tears and honor Krishna with the smile of their blossoms, and they're swaying in happy breezes. Ārādhya are so poetic.

Haribol!

Now, this is all pure narrative. Another amazing detail is that these trees are very fortunate because, why?

It's described they get to touch Krishna.

How so?

Well, it's described, Śrīla Prabhupāda describes in Krishna Book, you know, Krishna and Balarāma, they're walking through the Vṛndāvana forest.

And when Krishna passes by or Balarāma passes by these trees in the Vṛndāvana forest, they bend down and touch their feet with the tips of their branches and their blossoming flowers.

It's described that by touching the lotus feet of Krishna, these trees experienced a heightened state of ecstasy, which causes a sap from within their trunks to drip from their pores, which muddies the ground everywhere.

We've heard of water or sometimes the cow's milk muddies the ground, but this, the sap of these trees in ecstasy muddies the ground. However, after Krishna passes by and leaves them behind, they lament for the fact they're not able to follow him, because they're trees and they're rooted in the ground.

One devotee puts it very poetically. He writes, "Thus the trees decry their lamentable state with inspired sentiments born of separation." Thus the trees decry the lamentable state with inspired sentiments born of separation. And in a mood of extreme humility, which is of course always demonstrated by advanced devotees of the Lord, the trees discuss amongst themselves as follows: "Oh, we are simply rooted in the mode of ignorance.

We must have previously committed some offenses because we can't follow Krishna." Of course, they're all liberated souls, or rather nitya-siddhas, so there's no question of any offense on their part or sin, but this is their humility.

However, there's always a good ending. It's described that before Krishna gets too far away, one of their great friends comes to their rescue.

And who's that?

Who's one of their great friends?

It's the wind. It's the wind. For the wind blows very strongly and helps them to bow down and stretch out at a great distance and again touch Krishna before he goes too far away.

Now, in order to remove any lingering doubt about these trees in Braja, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, 2.223, Śrīla Prabhupāda nicely glorifies them as follows: "These splendid trees of Braja-bhūmi are perfectly spiritual in nature.

They're full of all potencies and they're just like incarnations of the Lord." These splendid trees of Braja-bhūmi are perfectly spiritual in nature. They're full of all potencies and they're just like incarnations of the Lord. All glories to the trees of Vṛndāvana!

Now, another thing, I was reading another amazing feature of these trees is that they're constantly yielding ripe, juicy fruits. Took me a while to catch that because, well, you know, in the material world, trees ripen and produce fruits, you know, at a certain time of the year, but in Braja, they're yielding fruits all the time, eternally.

And we know that they can produce any kind of fruit from any kind of tree. So it's amazing. It's also said that the wives of these trees appear as vines wrapped around the trees and moisten the ground with their joyful tears of honey and perfume the air with pollen as they embrace their husbands, the trees.

The vines that these vines are the wives of the trees is nicely confirmed by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta, Śāstra text 11.

He writes, "With their soft flower petal hands, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Krishna carefully watered the trees and vines from the time of their first sprouting.

They nourished them and made them grow. At the proper time, married each vine to an appropriate tree, and at the proper time, married each vine to an appropriate tree. When they saw new flowers beginning to blossom, they became delighted and spoke many playful, joking words.

Let us bow down and offer obeisances to these trees and their wives, the vines of the Vṛndāvana forest." Wow.

So again, all trees in Vṛndāvana are important.

Just as, kind of, a side note to illustrate this, I was reading that when Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī bought a plot of land in Vṛndāvana proper from a personality called Ali Khan Qalmaq, he was at that point in history, 500 years ago, Emperor Akbar's local landlord, for 30 rupees.

He bought that property for 30 rupees. The original deed, which is now kept actually at the Vṛndāvana Research Institute here in Vṛndāvana, mentions that that particular attractive land included Sakunduli, Imali, Singali, and Radhakund.

This is all, for want of a better word, downtown Vṛndāvana, and its boundaries.

This is what I wanted to note, and its boundaries were marked and identified by four auspicious trees, four corners of this land which Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī bought: the Tāmal tree, the Banyan tree, the Pipala tree, and the Kadamba tree.

I just thought that was interesting to throw in. Now, in his Song Bhagavatam from his work, Kṛṣṇa-līlā-tarangiṇī, Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura glorifies the kadamba tree and its flowers in verse 6: "Nandana kamana nikunja-rasa-vāsī kadamba-rasāyana-vāsī." And gives the following translation and commentary wherein it's describing Krishna and the Kadamba. "Propāda writes, 'He is very much celebrated as the son of mother Yaśodā.

He is the killer of Kaṁsa. And nikunja-rasa-vāsī used to dance the rasa dance in the nikunja.' I used to dance the rasa dance in the nikunja." Goes on, "Nandana kamana nikunja-kadamba-rasa-parāyaṇa." "There are many kadamba trees. Kadamba-phala," says it's a kind of flower that is especially grown in Vṛndāvana, very fragrant and beautiful, solid flower, round.

So, "Kadamba-kānana he used to enjoy the rasa dance underneath a kadamba tree." Prabhupāda's glorification, well, Bhaktivinoda's glorification and Prabhupāda's beautiful purport to Narottama's writing.

So let us conclude today. I'm still have some jet lag from the China tour, and I'm going to Mayapur tomorrow for about a week, and then for five weeks, I'm going to be touring South India selling a new book which we've produced based on my earlier lectures in this series glorifying Vṛndāvana.

It's called the 12 Forests of Vṛndāvana: The Western Bank.

And the next book will be the Eastern Bank. But we printed it very, it's very beautiful. My disciples printed a very, it's got like a coffee table book, for want of a better word, and very beautiful. So we printed a thousand, and we're going to travel throughout South India and meet the wonderful devotees there and see their wonderful deities and give lectures and sell these books to further spread the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

So let us conclude today with one of my favorite poets, Śrīla Dasa, who writes in a poem as follows: "Whenever Krishna feels separation from Śrī Rādhā, he wears a kadamba flower garland around his neck, close to his heart.

The tenderness, the color, the fragrance, and the touch of the kadamba flowers feel exactly like Śrī Rādhā to him. When Śrī Rādhā becomes mānavī, or prideful in anger, Krishna sits under a kadamba tree and cries.

His tears go into the roots of the tree, and it appears as if Krishna is watering the kadamba tree with his tears.

Then he sends kadamba flowers with the gopīs to Śrī Rādhā. When these flowers touch the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā, the gopīs say, 'Oh, dear Śrī Rādhā, please feel the tears of Mohana, which are presented in the wetness of these golden flowers.

Oh, Priyā, dear, why have you so much māna or anger?

Please abandon it and run to Mohana.' Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, 'Oh friend, look now, Kadamba like Rādhā is running towards Tāmal like Krishna.'" What an ending! "Oh friend, now Kadamba like Rādhā is running towards Tāmal like Krishna." Krishna!

All glories to all the trees!

Yes. So we'll finish today, and, um, I think the next subject matter will be dancing, dancing in Vṛndāvana, and of course, we'll have to include dancing in Mayapur as well, because of Gauraṅga.

Not the Rāsa, but I'll study that this coming week. So thank you so much. All glories to the revealers of the Dhāma, all the trees of Vṛndāvana.

Haribol!

Haribol!

Pranam!