Hi Krishna, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

So we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 116. For several months now, we have been discussing various aspects of Krishna's name, fame, attributes, etcetera, basically those things that act as a stimulus for ecstatic love.

But starting today, I would like to move on to the various aspects of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's name, fame, attributes, etcetera, that, of course, are also a stimulus for ecstatic love. Now, I was inspired to do this in part by coming across the following verses by one of our favorite heroes, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

It's found in his *Rasa Sudhākara*, verses 26 and 68. He writes, "My thoughts rest in something that bears the name Rādhā, something that is the essence of beauty, the essence of nectar, the essence of happiness, the essence of mercy, the essence of charming and splendid forms, the essence of expert intelligence, the essence of playful amorous pastimes, and the essence of the best of everything.

A spiritual splendor that bears the name Rādhā, that is the most sweet, that showers a monsoon of glorious nectar, shines in the heart of a very fortunate person, a heart where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī stays." Wow. And so on this great adventure of discussing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's glories, we will begin with her Lotus feet.

As many of you know, this is very much in accordance with Śrīla Prabhupāda's instructions in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 2.2.13.

Therein he writes, guiding us, "The process of meditation should begin from the lotus feet of the Lord and progress up to his smiling face. The meditation should be concentrated upon the lotus feet, then the calves, then the thighs, and in this way, higher and higher.

The more the mind becomes fixed upon the different limbs of the Lord one after another, the more the intelligence becomes purified." The more the intelligence becomes purified. Now, the result, you could say the benefits of such meditation on the lotus feet of the Lord, or for that matter, any of His expansions, it's described in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, Sixth Chapter.

There, Nārada Muni is explaining how he attained his transcendental body. He states, "After that, under the shadow of a banyan tree in an uninhabited forest, I began to meditate upon the Supersoul situated within, using my intelligence as I had learned from liberated souls.

As soon as I began to meditate upon the Lord of lords, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, with my mind transformed in transcendental love, tears rolled down my eyes, and without delay, the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, appeared on the lotus of my heart." *Ojas* at that time, being exceedingly overpowered by feelings of happiness, every part of my body became separately enlivened, being absorbed in an ocean of ecstasy, I could not see both myself and the Lord.

Now, Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, in his composition *Ujjvala Nīlamaṇi*, he also lists the results and benefits of meditation on the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He writes, "I constantly worship Śrīmatī Rādhā, whose lotus feet have 19 symbols." These symbols are as follows.

This is really interesting. On the left foot: an umbrella, a *chakra*, a flag, a creeper, a flower, a bangle, a lotus, an upward-rising line. On her foot: an elephant, a go, a half-moon, and a barleycorn. On the right foot: a *vajra*, a weapon, a mace, a sign of a chariot, a *yajña* altar, an earring, a fish, a mountain, and a conch.

Well, then he gives the benefits of meditating on each and every one of these symbols. In other words, if you go online, you'll see Rādhā on His feet and various devotees have, you know, painted these symbols, printed these symbols on her feet.

So, he gives the benefit of meditating just on these symbols on her lotus feet. So, he writes, "Meditating on the symbol of the umbrella acts as a protection from the heat of the threefold miseries of this world. Meditating on the *chakra* destroys the enemies of the heart, such as lust, anger, greed, etcetera.

Meditating on the flag, the symbol of the flag, gives victory in all aspects of spiritual life. Meditating on the creeper gives support to one's superior spiritual life. Meditating on the flower and lotus bestows auspiciousness. Meditating on the sign of the bangle bestows good fortune.

Meditating on the upward-rising line bestows upward progress in spiritual life. Meditating on the go controls the mad elephant of the mind. Meditating on the half-moon bestows all joy, and meditating on the barleycorn bestows all prosperity. Meditating on the weapon protects against the calamities in spiritual life.

Meditating on the mace destroys obstacles. Meditating on the chariot gives unimpeded victory in all directions. Meditating on the *yajña* altar bestows completion of all *Vedic* duties. Meditating on the symbol of the earring makes one a devotee of the highest caliber.

Meditating on the fish gives the ability to swim freely in the ocean of *Bhakti Rasa*. Meditating on the mountain, the symbol of the mountain, gives one stability and firmness in life. Meditating on the conch gives one victory." Wow. Now, *ācāryas* say that these symbols on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's feet, along with Kṛṣṇa's, because He also has symbols on His feet, we don't have time to go into that now.

Actually, we just discussed those symbols on Kṛṣṇa's feet, the graceful deer. But, the symbols on both their feet form attractive patterns on the ground. That's how the *ācāryas* describe it. As they're walking, they form attractive patterns on the ground that allow their friends and associates to distinguish the Divine Couple's footprints from others, helping them to find Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa wherever they are in Vṛndāvana.

They go out to find them by seeing their footprints, distinct with distinct signs. For example, I was reading in Chapter 36 of *The Krishna Book*.

It describes there the Gopis searching for Kṛṣṇa in the Vṛndāvana forest after He had left the *Rāsa* dance.

And Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, "They inquired about Him from the trees and plants, and in some places they found the imprints of the marks on the soles of His feet, namely, well, here we go, the flag, the lotus flower, the trident, the thunderbolt, etcetera.

After seeing these footprints, they exclaimed, 'Oh, here is the impression of the marks on the soles of Kṛṣṇa. All the marks, such as the flag, the lotus flower, the trident, and thunderbolt, are distinctly visible here.'" So they found Kṛṣṇa.

Thus, Prabhupāda writes, "They began to follow the footprints because He left, and they're trying to follow Him.

They followed the footprints, and shortly they saw another set of footprints beside them, and immediately they became very sorry. The Gopis say, 'Dear friends, just see, who are these other footprints?

They are beside the footprints of the son of Mahārāja Nanda. It is certainly Kṛṣṇa passing through, resting His hand on some other Gopi, exactly as an elephant goes side by side with his beloved mate. We must therefore understand that this particular Gopi served Kṛṣṇa with greater affectionate love than ourselves.'" We're being introduced to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, is that special Gopi who left Kṛṣṇa with during the *Rāsa* dance, and of course, that Gopi is Rādhā. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī has another distinguishing feature on her feet besides those specific marks that we described.

And what could that be?

Because we receive so much detail, what, what other specific mark is there on her feet?

It's the red *lākh*. The red *lākh* on both her feet. One time I was reading, while in the forest of Kāmvan, Rādhārāṇī was resting in a *kuñja* in a grove when she noticed that this beautiful red *lākh* on the soles of her feet had been worn away by dancing.

So she called her Gopi friends, and they came and they painted more red *lākh* on her feet again. But then Rādhārāṇī suddenly realized that she was late for a rendezvous with Kṛṣṇa. So she jumped up, and on her way out of that *kuñja*, she walked over some stones, you know, with a wet red *lākh*.

And as a result, those stones turned reddish because of the red *lākh* on her feet. And to this very day, those stones are still there, and they have a special name. They're called Citra-Vicitra Śilās. Citra means painted, and Vicitra means with footmarks.

And actually, pilgrims go to Kāmvan, Kāmvan is pretty far from, you know, Vṛndāvana town, it takes about two hours to drive out there these days.

So pilgrims actually go to Kāmvan simply to see and worship those Citra-Vicitra Śilās, and they're worshipable because the red *lākh* on Rādhārāṇī's feet is worshipable. Why are they worshipable?

Because the red *lākh* on Rādhārāṇī's feet is worshipable. And that's what had they're painted because they painted that. Well, she walked over them, they became that color. Now, Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī prays in *Vrindāvana Mahimāmṛta*, verse 14, so beautifully in reference to this particular fact of the red *lākh* on her feet.

He writes, "Famous verse: Oh, Queen of Vṛndāvana, ever since Rūpa Mañjarī has filled my eyes with light, I have yearned to see the red *lākh* decorating your Lotus feet." It's such a famous verse.

We should just recite it again. "Oh, Queen of Vṛndāvana, ever since Rūpa Mañjarī has filled my eyes with light, I have yearned to see the red *lākh* decorating your Lotus feet." And following in his footsteps, we also yearn one day to see and to serve her Lotus feet.

Then, in *Rasa Sudhākara*, we hear Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura take shelter of those Lotus feet of Rādhārāṇī. Another famous verse. He writes, "Oh, Supreme Goddess of the Vṛndāvana forest, your Lotus feet are brimming full of flowing *rasa*, extract the essential honey of full-blown love nectar.

Holding such feet to his chest, Mahāprabhu Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of all sweetness, extinguishes the burning fever of Cupid, supremely cooling. I now take shelter of them as well." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, our focus today has been on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's Lotus feet. But realistically, that meditation is done in our minds only. Why do I say that?

Because Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's feet are rarely visible. She's often described as the most chaste of all women, and therefore, she keeps her Lotus feet hidden from view. Regarding her chastity, one of her qualities, what regarding her chastity?

I was reading in *Teachings of Lord Chaitanya*, Chapter 31. Prabhupāda writes, "Arundhatī, who is known as the most chaste lady in the universe, desires to learn the standard of chastity from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." Since even Lord Kṛṣṇa cannot estimate Rādhārāṇī's highly transcendental qualities, it is not possible for an ordinary man to estimate them.

As a result, we see that in all the temples in Vṛndāvana, as well as in all the ISKCON temples around the world where we have deities of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the feet of the deities of Rādhārāṇī are always covered by her skirt or by her *sari*, as it may be.

However, by her special mercy, traditionally once a year, on the day of Govinda Dwadashi, which is the day when Kṛṣṇa takes charge of the cows, Rādhārāṇī is dressed as a cowherd boy, and her Lotus feet are shown in the temples.

Actually, it's based on a wonderful pastime that I think I'll share today. Let us say it was big news in Vṛndāvana 5,000 years ago when Kṛṣṇa became old enough to start taking care of the cows and the calves. *Go-pālas*, as he and his cowherd boyfriends took the cows from their *goshālā* to the pasturing grounds for the first time.

There was a huge festival, and all the happy residents of Vṛndāvana assembled and waved goodbye with tears in their eyes, because Kṛṣṇa's going away and they can't stand to be separated from Him for even a moment.

They waved goodbye to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma as they left. They were happy to see Kṛṣṇa happy, but who was the most happy?

The cows. They have their *rasa* with Kṛṣṇa, and they finally got to be with Him all day long. You think about it, they get the most time with Kṛṣṇa. They don't have to hide it and do it in secret.

They're with Him all day long. In fact, they were so happy, it's described that milk was flowing freely from the bags of the mother cows. It's described just like rain. You just, in your mind, you close your eyes, and you just think of a downpour of rain.

That's how much milk there was falling on the ground. And as such, there were many puddles of milk, milk puddles, milk puddles. And on that day, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her Gopi friends, they were walking, as they do, from village to village selling their milk products.

And as they approached that particular scene of Kṛṣṇa and the cows, they saw the ground was full of milk puddles everywhere, milk puddles everywhere. As a result, they were obliged to pick up their skirts, lift their skirts just a little so that they didn't get wet.

And in doing so, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her friends slightly revealed their Lotus feet. So, further on towards the afternoon in the pasturing grounds, Kṛṣṇa suddenly started crying. And Subala, one of his dear most friends, asked Kṛṣṇa, "Why are you crying?" Kṛṣṇa replied, "Because I missed, I missed my Rādhā, I miss my Rādhā." So Subala thought for a minute and said, "I have a plan." And he immediately started off for Yavata, where Rādhārāṇī lives with her in-laws, including her so-called husband, Abhimanyu.

Abhimanyu is actually described as the shadow of Kṛṣṇa. Now, we have to mention here that Subala is actually Rādhārāṇī's brother, and he looks very much like her, very much like her. So when he arrived at Yavata, at the home of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he knocked on the door of the palace, and who answered the door?

Jatilā. Jatilā is Rādhārāṇī's mother-in-law, and as we've discussed many times, she's always an obstacle to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's meetings. She's always suspicious that something's going on. So she said, "Subala, what are you doing here?" And crying, Subala said, "I lost one of my calves.

I'm looking for him everywhere. I just can't find him. Is he here somewhere?" So Jatilā said, "I don't know, maybe he wandered in this area, so you can look around." So after Jatilā went back to her housework, Subala immediately went straight to Rādhārāṇī's quarters and somehow he was able to slip inside.

And surprised to see her brother, Rādhārāṇī said, "Subala, what are you doing here?" So Subala passed the message to Rādhārāṇī that Kṛṣṇa was missing her more than his own life, he would like to see her.

So Rādhārāṇī said, "Yes, I'm thinking of Kṛṣṇa all day. Subala, can you help us meet?" So Subala smiled and said, "Yes, Rādhikā, I have a plan.

That plan is, you put on my cowherd clothes and walk calmly out the door to the fields where Kṛṣṇa is. You look so similar. It's as simple as that, because we look so similar. Jatilā will be fooled. I'll put on your dress and I'll stay here in this room all day long." So they exchange clothes, and Rādhārāṇī, in the clothes of Subala, walks out and immediately she meets Jatilā and says, "Um, Jatilā, through the window I saw my calf is just outside, so I will take him now and be on my way." In Subala's voice.

So Jatilā said, "All right, young man, go quickly." So meanwhile, Subala, in the dress of Rādhārāṇī, sat in the room and just waited. Now, writing about this pastime, Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī says, "Subala, that Rādhikā had invested her own form in Subala." So he's sitting there, no one questions.

So when Rādhārāṇī, dressed as Subala, got to where the cowherd boys were, she decided, she decided to test Kṛṣṇa. What she decided to test Kṛṣṇa. So approaching him, she said, in again, in the voice, well, in the voice of Subala, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, I didn't manage to bring Rādhā back to you.

I'm so sorry, but don't worry, I met Chandrāvalī on the way, and she said she'd be happy to meet you today." I remember Chandrāvalī is Rādhā's chief competitor. But fortunately, Kṛṣṇa passed the test when He said, "Subala, I will never go to see Chandrāvalī.

I just want my Rādhā." So at that point, Rādhārāṇī took off her cowherd boy's turban and she said, "My beloved Kṛṣṇa, here I am." And then they embraced and spent the afternoon and evening together. And the real Subala, still dressed as Rādhārāṇī, back at Yavata, had to wait till the evening to come back with the cowherd boys.

So in honor of this nectarian pastime, on Govinda Dwadashi, in all the Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa temples in the world, pujaris dress Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī like a cowherd boy with a turban and slightly uncover her Lotus feet on that one day for all of us to see and worship.

This is her special mercy. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So let us finish today with some selected verses, once again from Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, this time from his *Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta*, beginning with *shataka* 9. *Shataka* that's how he describes chapters.

Beginning with *shataka* 9, we'll begin with text 24. He writes, "May I pass the moments of my life in the land of Vṛndāvana, always meditating on the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhā's Lotus feet, which are decorated with sweetly tinkling jeweled ankle bells." And he writes, "I pray that Śrīmatī Rādhā's Lotus feet, which are decorated with sweetly tinkling ankle bells and are filled with limitless beauty, delicate softness, sweet fragrance, a flood of transcendental splendor, and a host of other transcendental virtues, may one day appear before me." Then he writes, "May my mind chant the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhā's beautiful Lotus feet, which are golden above their reddish soles, and which steal away the heart of Lord Hari with their sweet transcendental Splendor." And finally, it's verse 930.

It's a beautiful way to finish today. He makes fun of the flute of Kṛṣṇa. He writes, "Everyone, please meditate on Kṛṣṇa's flute, which is now completely silenced by the tinkling jewel ankle bells on Rādhārāṇī's feet. All its hissing, all its hissing is now useless.

Now it is simply an object of laughter for all of Śrīmatī Rādhā's friends." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, yes, we're beginning all the different attributes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, beginning with her feet. And we have, I think, a few more classes just on her feet and things related to her feet, like her ankle bells, etcetera. So, I'll see you next Friday.

Hopefully, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, J.J.C. Śrī Kṛṣṇa.