Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulations for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 149, in which we'll continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's disguises.

In this lecture we will discuss another very unique disguise in which Kṛṣṇa assumed the form of his devotee, and that devotee is Jayadeva Gosvāmī.

Jayadeva Gosvāmī was a great Vaiṣṇava author and poet who appeared in the 12th century, about 300 or 350 years before the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is most famous, of course, for his work Gīta-govinda, wherein he describes the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Now this very historical pastime is as follows.

One day, in the late morning, as Jayadeva was writing Gīta-govinda, Padmāvatī was cooking their lunch. This is taking place in Bengal.

At one point, Jayadeva started writing how, in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, it appeared Kṛṣṇa was controlled by the love of the gopīs, in particular Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and as a result he was subordinate to them.

So Jayadeva started thinking how to write a particular sentence in this regard, but he stopped short, saying to himself:

“How could I write such a thing? Kṛṣṇa is the supreme controller.”

By definition, actually, God is the supreme controller. But he was thinking:

“How can he be controlled by the gopīs and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī?”

So he called that righteous doubt.

So he decided to take a break from his writing to think about it. He told his wife Padmāvatī that he was going out to take a bath in the Ganges and would be back soon, in time for lunch.

So then one of the most amazing things in our Gauḍīya history took place.

While Jayadeva was away, Kṛṣṇa disguised himself as Jayadeva Gosvāmī. He looked exactly like Jayadeva Gosvāmī. He came back into Jayadeva's house, and he walked in while Padmāvatī was cooking. She didn't see anything unusual.

And Kṛṣṇa, in this disguise, went to Jayadeva's desk, picked up that special pen for writing, and wrote at that place where Jayadeva had hesitated to write:

*smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ mama śirasi maṇḍanaṁ dehi pada-pallavam udāram*

Speaking to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was displaying jealous anger toward him, Kṛṣṇa implored:

“O beloved, your tender sprout-like feet are the antidote to Cupid's venom. Please place them on my head as my ornament and glory. The scorching fire of Cupid's poison is unbearable. Please therefore let the touch of your feet quell the torment of my love.”

Now the most famous line is *dehi pada-pallavam udāram*, meaning:

“Please place your feet on my head as my ornament and glory,”

indicating very clearly that Kṛṣṇa is controlled by Śrī Rādhā's love.

So with that, Kṛṣṇa, disguised as Jayadeva, sat down and took the prasādam that had been prepared as lunch by Padmāvatī.

And after finishing this prasādam, Kṛṣṇa, as Jayadeva, told Padmāvatī:

“I'm a little full now. I'm going to go for another walk.”

So he left.

And just a few minutes later, the real Jayadeva Gosvāmī returned from bathing in the Ganges.

As he walked in, he asked his wife Padmāvatī:

“When will prasādam be ready?”

And Padmāvatī was shocked.

“What do you mean? You came in an hour ago, and then you walked over and wrote something, and then you took prasādam, and you told me you were going to take another walk.”

So when Jayadeva heard this, he was astonished. He went over to his desk, and he saw there, in wet ink particularly, that verse with the famous line:

*dehi pada-pallavam udāram*

“Please place your feet on my head as my ornament and glory.”

And he realized what had happened.

He screamed very loudly:

“It's a miracle! It's a miracle! It's a miracle!”

And tears of ecstasy flowed from his eyes.

He called out:

“Padmāvatī, you were most fortunate, for Kṛṣṇa Himself has visited our house, obviously. And He has written the line *dehi pada-pallavam udāram* and accepted prasādam from your own hand.”

And realizing this historic event, they both fainted in ecstasy.

So Kṛṣṇa intervened. He took the disguise of Jayadeva Gosvāmī to reveal to the world how Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the love of His devotees, in particular the Vrajavāsīs, and in particular Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, because she has the greatest love for Kṛṣṇa.

So when Jayadeva Gosvāmī finally finished Gīta-govinda, he concluded it with a very beautiful prayer as follows:

“Whatever is delightful in the varieties of music, whatever is graceful in fine strains of poetry, and whatever is exquisite in the sweet art of love—the sweet art of love—let the happy and wise persons learn that from the songs of Gīta-govinda.”

Of course, it's a very advanced work. It's actually meant for very advanced devotees, but very beautiful.

So our ācāryas have written that after Jayadeva Gosvāmī completed Gīta-govinda, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared to him and gave him His blissful darśana, revealing to him that He would one day appear in Navadvīpa to inaugurate His saṅkīrtana movement.

Remember that Jayadeva appeared before Lord Caitanya, and then Mahāprabhu instructed Jayadeva Gosvāmī to shift from Bengal to Orissa, to Jagannātha Purī, and that He Himself, Lord Caitanya, would later come to Jagannātha Purī and relish Jayadeva Gosvāmī's Gīta-govinda.

So Jayadeva moved with his wife to Purī, and from there the fame of Gīta-govinda spread first throughout Orissa, then Bengal, and then throughout all of India, and now, in many ways, around the world.

And as time went on, Gīta-govinda was being read and sung to Lord Jagannātha every day. It became a standard practice, actually.

And I was reading that many years after the departure of Jayadeva Gosvāmī, a king of Purī, specifically King Puruṣottama Deva, insisted that his own work, called Abhinava Gīta-govinda, was superior to Jayadeva Gosvāmī's Gīta-govinda.

And he's the king.

So he said that his work should be read to Lord Jagannātha every day, and not Gīta-govinda.

So there were some objections, and due to the politically sensitive nature of the challenge—because it was the king—the temple priests, who were very powerful in Purī, decided to let Lord Jagannātha judge for Himself.

How did they do that?

Well, one evening they placed both books before Lord Jagannātha—the king's work and Jayadeva Gosvāmī's Gīta-govinda—and then they locked the temple for the night.

They placed the two books right before Lord Jagannātha, closed the doors, and locked them.

And the following morning, when those priests opened the temple doors, lo and behold, they found the pages of the king's book scattered all over the floor and Jayadeva Gosvāmī's Gīta-govinda nestled under Lord Jagannātha's arm, close to His heart—close to His heart.

So the Lord had given His verdict.

Jayadeva Gosvāmī kī jaya!

Gīta-govinda kī jaya!

Kṛṣṇa disguising Himself as Jayadeva Gosvāmī to give that important line kī jaya!

So there's another pastime which I'll share with you that took place about 300 years after Jayadeva Gosvāmī had departed this world.

On that occasion, Lord Jagannātha in Purī had been laid down to sleep after His midday meal, when a florist started singing Gīta-govinda in a garden near the temple grounds.

Now Lord Jagannātha was so eager to hear this spontaneous performance of His favorite work—because He hears it every day—that He actually left the temple and hid in a bush nearby where this florist was collecting flowers.

He hid there.

But the thing is, at that particular kuñja there were lots of thorns, brambles, and bushes.

So as Jagannātha was hiding there, these thorns and brambles were ripping His cloth and actually scratching His body.

He was oblivious to this because Jagannātha was relishing Jayadeva Gosvāmī's Gīta-govinda being sung by this florist.

So a little while later, Lord Jagannātha returned to His altar in time for the late afternoon opening of the temple and altar for the pilgrims to come.

And when the doors opened, the priests were shocked at the sight of their ragged and wounded Lord.

“Wait a minute. We closed the doors a few hours ago. Now we're opening them. What happened to Jagannātha?”

So afraid, they all ran to tell the king, who at that time in history was the famous Mahārāja Pratāparudra.

And he was unable to determine what had happened to Lord Jagannātha until a few nights later, when Jagannātha appeared to him in a dream and explained exactly what had happened.

So in that pastime, Lord Jagannātha once again revealed His exclusive attachment to Gīta-govinda.

So historically, at that time, Mahārāja Pratāparudra issued the following royal edict exactly a decade before Lord Caitanya arrived in Purī.

It was a royal edict to everyone in Jagannātha Purī, a declaration by the king, and here it is:

“According to all citizens of Jagannātha Purī, performances of song and dance for Jagannātha and Balarāma will consist solely of Gīta-govinda and no other work. Performers are therefore instructed to learn the songs of Gīta-govinda exclusively. Four musicians will accompany the dancers who enact Gīta-govinda. Others may follow in chorus.

Temple officials who allow any other song to be performed will be deemed enemies of Jagannātha.

Temple officials who allow any other song to be performed will be deemed enemies of Jagannātha.”

The king's decree.

So to the credit of the temple management in Jagannātha Purī, this tradition is still being carried on to the present day.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

I thought that was an interesting disguise that our beloved Kṛṣṇa assumed—Jayadeva Gosvāmī.

So thank you, Prabhus.

We'll be back again next Friday, as always.

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa ki jaya!

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī ki jaya!

Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya!
