Dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Vrindavan Dham. So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 36. Last Friday, we discussed, as you remember, Śrīmati Rādhārāṇī's ornaments, and we will continue with that topic today.

So, in the last lecture, we discussed in great detail two kinds of śṛṅgāra, or ornaments, that Śrīmati Rādhā Rāṇī wears: traditional ornaments of jewels like diamonds, rubies, emeralds, gold, etc., and the other one was flower ornaments. Now, one important thing to understand is that all of these ornaments are not simply decorative items, but are themselves, in and of themselves, pure devotees, fully enlightened souls serving the Lord in that way, in that capacity.

Why?

Because everything in the spiritual world is a person, everything is conscious, and is purported to be, [9:38] Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, "In the spiritual world, everything is full of knowledge, and therefore everything there is personal.

Nothing is impersonal. The land, the water, the trees, the mountains, the rivers, the men, the animals, the birds – all are of the same quality, namely, *caitanya* [conscious]. And therefore, everything in the transcendental world is individual and personal." Property explains it so nicely.

And then, Vrindavan: Memories of an Indian Holy Town, a book by Hayagriva das, one of Śrīla Prabhupada's early disciples. Hayagriva says to Śrīla Prabhupada, "Prabhupada, you speak of Vrindavan as a person." And Prabhupada replies, "Yes, in spiritual consciousness, everything is personal." Even the city of Lanka appeared before Hanuman as a gigantic rakshasi, and Hanuman knocked her down because she challenged him.

An interesting example Prabhupada gave there. Now, how about Jiva Goswami, a famous commentator on Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, says in one of his commentaries on the Tenth Canto that once, when Mother Yaśodā was breastfeeding Krishna, the milk that was boiling on the stove became jealous.

The milk became jealous and started thinking, "Oh, what use is my life?

Let me commit suicide." Thinking in this way, the milk on the stove started boiling over and flowing towards the fire. So, everything's personal, everything's a person. In this regard, there is one fully conscious ornamental piece of Rādhā that is especially imbued with devotion, and what is that?

Rādhā Rāṇī's anklets, her ankle bells. Śivarāma Swami, my dear godbrother, shares the realizations of one ācārya in his commentaries on Raghunātha dāsa Goswami's *Dainyā Śataka*. That when Śrimati Rādhā Irāṇī walks on the path leading to Yavat, on the way to see Krishna, her anklets surge with the excitement of her eminent meeting with Krishna.

When she returns back to Yavat, she's feeling some separation, so those anklets sing her songs of consolation. And when she is dancing with Krishna, those anklets are most joyful.

But when she's restrained from seeing Krishna by her in-laws, those ankle bells become overwhelmed with sorrow.

It's also described that when she is stealing out of the house at night to meet Krishna, Rādhā stifles the sound of her anklets by covering them with a cloth, so they can't sing and give her away.

And then they become disappointed. And sometimes, when they're in her jewelry case and they're taken out and replaced by flower anklets, they become sad. And I was reading once, when one anklet was lost near Sabokunj, it felt neglected until it was found by the Gopi Kaṇaka Mañjarī.

All right, Krishna.

So, as such, many great devotees praise these anklets in their writings. One such place is expressed by our Śrī Rūpa Goswami in his *Lalitā Mādhavā*, sayana 2.79. He writes, "Moving through the air in waves of sweetness, the tinkling sound of a certain pair of ankle bells has silenced the cooing of the passionate sārasa birds and filled my heart with a host of ecstasies.

Such influence can only be accomplished by Śrī Rādhā's ornaments." And I was reading that Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura expresses his own desire to hear those very same ankle bells. He expresses that desire in his *Rādhā Rasa Sudānidhi*, verse 16.

He writes so beautifully, "When will I behold how graceful Rādhā shyly gazes at her toes and then at the full moon face of the King of Rasikas, standing at a distance?

And when will I hear her anklets tingling as she eagerly runs to meet Him?

And when will I hear her anklets tingling as she eagerly runs to meet Him?" So, now I would like to share one of my favorite anklet pastimes of Rādhā rāṇī.

I shared it, I think, three years ago in another lecture, but it's so sweet and applicable at this time. And of course, we never tire of hearing nectarine topics of Rādhā and Krishna.

Tamāla Kṛṣṇa: "As you often hear devotees, 'Keep, keep speaking.'" So, what is the translation? "We never hear, we never tire of hearing the transcendental pastimes of the Personality of Godhead, who was glorified by hymns and prayers.

Those who enjoy association with Him relish hearing His pastimes at every moment." That's *Bhāgavatam* 11.9.12. So, this pastime that I want to share with you, it's recounted in Rājaśekhara dāsa Brahmacārī's *Bṛhad Bhagavatamṛta*, Maṇḍala Parikramā, book one of the first Parikramā books.

Some years ago, that once upon a time, on one fine spring day, it is described in *Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma*, Rādhā and Krishna made a plan to meet at Sarobara-kuṇḍa.

Now, to avoid attracting attention, the plan was that Krishna would come alone from the south, and Rādhā, with one maidservant, would come from the north to meet at Sarobara-kuṇḍa.

Now, according to the ācāryas, when Krishna arrived at the appointed time, Rādhā was not there.

So, He thought, "Never mind, ladies are sometimes late." But as time went on, it turned out that Rādhā was very late, very late. And at first, Krishna was a little impatient, but as time went by, He became concerned, actually, for Rādhā rāṇī's safety.

For a rumor was spreading around that Kaṁsa had heard of Rādhā rāṇī's breathtaking beauty and had been making plans to kidnap her and take her to Mathurā. So, our hero Krishna thought, "I cannot wait any longer.

I must look for Rādhā." And so, He set out in the northern direction. However, Rādhā rāṇī was not late because of Kaṁsa or any danger. Rather, she had taken a detour through the sub-forest of Bilāsa-vana, why?

To collect some flowers for Krishna.

And while doing so, she had lost one of her ankle bells. And after searching everywhere in Bilāsa-vana, she said to her companion, her friend, "I'm sure I lost it somewhere here amongst these trees, but where I do not know.

See if I like that, where I do not know." Now, Rādhā is a princess, and she has many ankle bells at her home in Varṣāṇa, and she wouldn't ordinarily, you know, feel the loss of one of them. But she was particularly fond of this ankle bell because Krishna had given it to her at a very special moment.

It was a delicate golden chain with studded jewels and tiny little, tiny golden bells hanging from it. So, she was determined to find that anklet. So, at one point, she called out, she called to it by name. She called out by name, "Ratna Gopu, O Ratna Gopu, where are you?" Just see, because everything in the spiritual world is personal, so she is calling out to her ankle bells, "Where are you?" But heard no reply.

So, just at that moment, of course, by Pūrṇamāsī's arrangement, Krishna happened to be walking by Bilāsa-vana, and He heard a woman's voice coming from the forest, "Ratna Gopu, Ratna Gopu, where are you?" And of course, He recognized it as Rādhā's voice.

So, He turned and He ran into the forest, where He found Rādhā and her girlfriend intensely searching the woods. It is described with their eyes fixed on the ground, they're just looking at the ground. In fact, Rādhā rāṇī was so absorbed in her search that she didn't notice Krishna until she came upon what?

His two bluish lotus feet. And sitting there, she comes across His two bluish lotus feet. So, at that point, she looked up and she said happily, "O Śyāma, O Śyāma, I'm so happy you've come!" So, Krishna said, "Well, Rādhā rāṇī, what are you looking for?" She answered, "I've lost my favorite ankle bells, the ones that You gave me, and I'm determined to find them." So, then Krishna, He looked left, or they looked right, they looked back at Rādhā, and He said, "It doesn't seem to be here.

So let's go now to Sarobara-kuṇḍa as we planned. Later, we'll have another anklet made to replace this lost one." But Rādhā rāṇī replied, "Absolutely not, Krishna.

I will not leave my dear anklet alone in these woods." "They're in, they're in." We see again, she's addressing it very personally, as a person. "I'm not going to leave my dear anklet alone in these woods." So, Krishna tried again, saying, "But Rādhā, let's just look for it another time." But when Rādhā rāṇī frowned, you know, if he's mad, Krishna immediately surrendered and said, "Okay, I hope you find it." So, He took out His hand, and side by side, they searched the forest floor.

They looked in the dust, in the grass, under bushes, around the roots of trees, but with no success. They simply couldn't find it. Rādhā let go of Krishna's hand and pointing said, "You look in the flower garden over by the side of that lake.

It's called Bilāsa-kuṇḍa, and I'll look here with my maidservant. We'll search one more time on this path." But Krishna was getting impatient.

He wanted to bring this, how can you say, lost anklet saga to a conclusion. So, while he was searching in the flower garden at Bilāsa-kuṇḍa, He came upon a beautiful desire vine that had different colored flowers. It was extremely aromatic.

Now, we've heard of desire trees, but a desire vine, wow!

I think, just like you can pray to a, to a desire tree, you can pray to a desire vine because it's also fully conscious, it's a person. I've been talking so amazing. So, Krishna cut off a piece of the vine and made it into a flower anklet, because it was covered by flowers, so he made it into a flower anklet.

Then he called out, "Hey Rādhā, hey Rādhā, look at this!" And he ran over to where Rādhā and Rādhā rāṇī was, and he tied it on her ankle.

He thought, "Well, that's it. Now we can go." But when Rādhā rāṇī looked down, expecting to see her favorite anklet, all she saw was, it's described, a floral substitute, and she was completely unimpressed. So, at this point, she chastised Krishna, saying, "Krishna, why did you look for my precious jewelry instead of playing with flowers?" So, Krishna went back to the lake to keep looking for that precious anklet, and He thought, "She's so absorbed in this anklet, the entire day is going to be lost.

I have to think of a better plan." So, of course, Pūrṇamāsī arranged all this. So, Krishna knew what to do.

He took His flute from His belt, His baṁśī, and He dug the ground with it. He sometimes, you know, He digs the ground to bring water forth for His thirsty cowherd boys. This time, He dug the ground with His flute, and as He did so, He prayed.

Krishna prayed, "Dear Mother Earth, please return my beloved's lost ankle bells at once." And amazingly, or maybe not so amazingly, as Krishna said this, the hole He had dug with His flute became filled with anklet bracelets, some of which were identical to the one that Rādhā rāṇī had lost, but other anklet bracelets were even more beautiful and more opulent.

So, Krishna called out again, "Rādhā, Rādhā, look, look!

I found it!

It's over here!" So, immediately Rādhā rāṇī and her close friend, they rushed over to where Krishna was kneeling, and when they looked on the ground, they looked at the ground, their mouths dropped open.

What ācārya very nicely describes the scene as a greedy king would revel in his treasure chest of royal jewels. Krishna was running His fingers through heaps of ankle bells in the ground, each one more dazzling and ornate than the one before.

So, at this point, Rādhā rāṇī was speechless. And so, Krishna, you know, not willing to take any risks, dropped all the anklets in His hands and picked out one that perfectly matched Rādhā rāṇī's lost ankle bracelet.

Then He said loudly, "Here it is!

I found it!" So, Rādhā took the ankle bell from Krishna's hand as she asked, "Krishna, where did all the other ones come from?" So, this is so nice, nice pastime.

Krishna smiled and He replied, "Rādhā rāṇī, by the constant touch of Your lotus feet, the lost anklet became a cintāmaṇi gem that transformed the earth it touched into many millions of ankle bells." Then He said, in a joking way, "Dearest, if you don't put it on at once, then the whole event will be paved with ankle bells." So, Śivarāma Swami smiled for the first time that day, and gracefully put her lotus foot forward and said, "Krishna, then you had better secure it on my foot yourself, so it doesn't fall off again." So, Krishna took the anklet from Rādhā rāṇī's hand and carefully fastened it around her ankle, it's described, taking as much time as he possibly could.

Now, some Vaiṣṇavas say that many anklets with tiny golden bells can still be found on the banks of the Yamunā in the forests of Bilāsa-vana. So, let's go. But they also say such anklets can only be found by those who have unflinching and deep faith in the Divine Couple.

And how to achieve that faith and love?

The *sādhana* says it's so beautiful. "All things lost are easily found in Bilāsa-vana. There, even souls who have lost their eternal identities as servants of Krishna can find them with the grace of this forest and the Holy Name." So beautiful.

This is one reason, of course, Śrīla Prabhupāda constructed the Krishna-Balarāma Mandir, and in a purport to *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam*, he's inviting all his followers, or anyone, to come there to spend some time or to live in Vrindavan, because one can become Krishna conscious just by the grace of the holy forest itself, and a double effect will be if you're there and you're chanting.

So, either one or both, but both is best. But if we can't live in Vrindavan, we can meditate on Vrindavan from afar, wherever we are in the world, chant the holy names. And one day, by Prabhupada's grace, we may live in Goloka Vrindavan in the spiritual world.

So, that pastime happened, of course, five thousand years ago, but of course, we know it is still happening in Vrindavan today. All of Krishna's pastimes are eternal, they are repeated again and again and again, but always ever fresh.

So, we know it's still happening in Vrindavan today, but we can't, we don't have the eyes to see it. And how to achieve what is required?

Spiritual eyes, by mercy only. I was thinking that in the Bible, in Matthew 6:17, Jesus is speaking, He says, "Blessed are you, Simon, son of Jonah, for this was not revealed to you by flesh and blood, but by my Father in heaven." And as our Lord Krishna says to Arjuna in *Bhagavad-gītā* 11.8, "But you cannot see Me with your present eyes.

Therefore, I give you divine eyes. Behold My mystic opulence." But even though we may not yet have been granted spiritual vision, we should accept all these pastimes as real, as true, and they're still going on, based on the authority of Guru and Gauranga.

There's that famous verse from the Upaniṣads, I think it's 6.23, yes... "Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiritual master are the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically revealed." And I'll quote the Bible again, John 20:29.

Jesus said to him, "Because you have seen Me, Thomas, you have believed. But blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed." Again, Jesus said to him, "Because you have seen Me, Thomas, you have believed. But blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed." So, our good fortune is that we're being trained up by someone who sees Krishna face to face.

Him, a *Bhāgavatam* class in Hyderabad, India, on April 15, 1975. He asked for questions. I've read this recently. So, one man raised his hand and asked, "Swamiji, do you ever feel Krishna's presence, or have you seen Him?" So, Prabhupada emphatically said, "Yes, I feel His presence, and I have seen Him.

You can too." And Prabhupada said that famous verse. Prabhupada went on, "This is the formula for seeing Krishna.

If you have developed your love of Krishna, then you'll see Him 24 hours a day.

Just like if you love somebody, you always think of them, and the love will come. That is natural." So, the first qualification is, whether you have developed that love for Krishna?

Then Prabhupada said, "You'll see Him 24 hours a day." Hare Krishna.

So, that's all for today, Prabhus. We, I'm still on the Baltic Sea coast here in Poland, and we have, we're in a new town today, and the devotees went out 45 minutes ago to go on Harināma. They want to catch up with them and invite people to our festival, that I always call "The Wonderful World of Hare Krishna," so they can begin their spiritual journey.

And one day, they can also hear these sweet pastimes of the Lord as a stimulation for ecstatic love that's there deep within our hearts, and we can take them back on, back to Godhead as well. Now, we'll have one more lecture on Rādhā rāṇī's ornaments next week, three lectures on Rādhā rāṇī's ornaments.

But for now, let us finish with the following verses by Śrī Rūpa Goswami from *Stava-Mālā*, the part entitled *Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta*. "Very, very, very beautiful," he writes, "O Rādhā rāṇī, O Queen of Vrindavan, Your complexion is like molten gold.

Your *dola* [large] eyes are very restless. A million full and brilliant moons weighing before Your lustrous countenance. And a blue sari, having stolen the hue of a fresh rain-laden cloud, has enwrapped Your exquisite form. Jewel of all the darling damsels of Vrindavan, fragrant and pristine like a budding jasmine flower, Your sublime form is adorned with priceless jewelry, and You are the best of all the charming and intelligent Gopis.

You are decorated with all wonderful excellences and surrounded by eight dedicated and beloved cowherd girls known as the Aṣṭa-sakhīs. The Ambrosia of Your beautiful lips, red as the bimba fruit, is a life-giving syrup to Krishna.

O Rādhā, I am rolling on the banks of the Yamunā, my poor heart filled with anticipation, praying to You with all humility. I am guilty of being an offender, a rascal, a useless wretch, yet I beg You to kindly engage me in even the smallest service to Your lotus feet.

O most merciful lady, it will not become You to ignore this most distressed soul, for Your heart is always overflowing with compassion and love." Thank you. See you next Friday. Śrī Śrī Rādhāvallabha ki Jaya!

Thank you.