Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone. Welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. But first:

oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale
śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine

Namaste. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 129. Today we will continue our discussions on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's dress and attire, but I'd actually like to begin today with a verse glorifying the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa in the hope of pleasing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

It's a very beautiful verse composed by the renowned Vaiṣṇava poet whom we've quoted many times, Śrī Hari Sūri, found in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta commentary on the Tenth Canto. He writes as follows:

"I bow down to the Lord of Ramā-devī. His feet are adorned with three distinct kinds of effulgence:

Number one, the deep blue glow of the sapphire jewel embedded in the crown of Lord Indra, who bows down to Him with great devotion.

Number two, the striking red luster of the ruby-studded anklets that ornament His feet.

And number three, the soft white shine of His moonstone-like toenails, which glisten like clouds lit up by moonbeams."

Hari Sūri goes on to say that even the holy place of Prayāga, which is modern-day Allahabad, considers these resplendently adorned feet of the Lord to be superior to itself.

So why does he say this about Prayāga?

Well, at Prayāga there is the famous confluence, saṅgama, of three rivers: the Gaṅgā, the Yamunā, and the Sarasvatī.

So Hari Sūri describes the colors of these rivers. Many of us know the Gaṅgā is white. The Yamunā is dark blue, and the Sarasvatī is actually reddish owing to her association with the river Aruṇā, whose reddish waters mix with her own.

So Hari Sūri then poetically compares these three colors to the effulgence surrounding Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet.

He writes:

"The blue aura from the sapphire of Indra's crown as he bows down corresponds to the color of the Yamunā.

The red glow of the rubies on Kṛṣṇa's anklets corresponds to the Sarasvatī River.

And the white brilliance of His moonlike toenails corresponds to the white color of the Gaṅgā."

So in this way the colors of all three sacred rivers are reflected in the Lord's feet.

Therefore Prayāga feels humbled in the presence of these divine feet. Although it boasts, you could say, the meeting point of these three rivers, in reality only the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā are visible today. The Sarasvatī long ago went underground and is no longer seen.

Thus, in conclusion, Prayāga acknowledges the superiority of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, where all three rivers—not just their waters, but their divine colors, their divine hues—are manifest, as we described, in full splendor.

Right? Kṛṣṇa. Isn't that wonderful?

Now back to the attire and dress of Śrī Rādhā.

You may remember last week we spoke about the dress and attire that decorate her waist. So today I would like to share with you a very beautiful pastime described in the Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Arcā-Dīpikā by our beloved Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, verses 120 to 127, where he refers to her beautiful waist.

Well, we all know the pastime of Dāmodara-līlā that took place with Mother Yaśodā and little Kṛṣṇa. Few devotees who haven't read this piece by Jīva Gosvāmī know, however, that the original Dāmodara pastime happened where? In Gokula Vṛndāvana, between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Yes, this incident involves a golden waist belt of Śrī Rādhā.

So here it is.

Jīva writes:

One day in the month of Kārtika, on the day of Pūrṇimā actually, there was a festival at the home of Nanda Mahārāja in Goloka Vṛndāvana. Because Kṛṣṇa could not meet Śrī Rādhā during their daily pastimes because of the festival, that evening He went secretly to her home in Varṣāṇā to meet her. He escaped and somehow got into the palace.

But because He had missed their daily pastime that day, Rādhārāṇī was very angry upon seeing Him. Māna. Her māna, her loving anger, is very powerful.

And what did she do in her anger?

She took her golden waist belt and tied Kṛṣṇa up.

She has a golden waist belt. She tied Kṛṣṇa up.

But then Kṛṣṇa explained everything about the festival that day, why He was in Nandagrāma and couldn't come, and so she forgave Him, untied Him, and set Him free.

So at that point Kṛṣṇa famously said to her:

"The dāma, the waist belt, that you have tied around My udara, meaning waist, has now given Me a new name: Dāmodara. Dāmodara.

This name is very dear to Me. In fact, there is no name of Mine that is as dear to Me as this one, Śrī Rādhe.

For those who constantly chant this name, Dāmodara, all perfection will be assured. Such people will attain My devotion, which is rarely attained, and will then be glorified in My eternal abode."

He continued. Here's the Sanskrit:

"When I will be bound up by My mother in the future, here on the earth, then My name will be renowned in all the worlds."

Śrīla Kṛṣṇa continued:

"One who worships you, Rādhā, and Me, Dāmodara, with these names in Kārtika and with proper regulations, will obtain all desirable goals."

Now it's interesting. As I was doing research, I found the same pastime also mentioned in a verse from the Bhaviṣyottara Purāṇa, which Kṛṣṇa-kavirāja Gosvāmī shares in verse 110 of his commentary on Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta.

There, explaining the same pastime:

"Having missed a rendezvous with Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa was lovingly frowned upon by her and was subsequently bound up by her golden girdle."

Same thing—sash or rope.

"He then proceeded to offer an explanation that His delay was due to the great festival of the Kārtika month that was being celebrated by His mother.

I meditate on Him who thus became known as Dāmodara, who in this bound condition offered many excellent words of flattery, with erect goosebumps on His body."

Wow.

Kṛṣṇa is feeling ecstatic symptoms, with erect goosebumps on His body in the presence of Śrī Rādhā.

Now there's another beautiful pastime I found described by Tribhaṅga Ṭhākura.

So who is Tribhaṅga Ṭhākura?

He was an advanced devotee, a famous poet actually, of the late 18th century.

So he describes very nicely about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's waist.

He writes:

"One day Kṛṣṇa was playing with His cowherd friends near a pond of lotuses where many cows were mooing in bliss."

What?

Many cows were mooing in bliss.

I mean, we see cows mooing here on earth. These cows were mooing in bliss because they're all fully self-realized pure devotees of the Lord. So in their own way they're glorifying Kṛṣṇa.

So Kṛṣṇa heard them mooing, and then He also heard sounds of talking and laughing.

"Where's this coming from?" He was thinking.

So He climbed a tree and He saw nearby a group of gopīs who were placing water pots firmly on their waists to transport them.

So Kṛṣṇa jumped down from the tree and asked one of the gopīs:

"Dear one, where are you coming from? Your beautiful face shows that you're not an ordinary gopī in Vṛndāvana. You look like a king's daughter. Could it be that you are Śrī Rādhā, the one whose name brings Me the greatest satisfaction in life?"

I love that part.

"The one whose name brings Me the greatest satisfaction in life."

When will that day be ours?

So this particular gopī nodded in shyness.

So then Kṛṣṇa understood.

He said:

"Oh Rādhā, let Me help you hold your water pot. This long-necked water pot is causing your soft and delicate belly so much inconvenience.

The sides of your waist are meant for flowers upon which your waist can rest, like a queen rests on soft cushions.

The perspiration on your waist is making Me uneasy. Therefore let Me apply sandalwood from My forehead to your waist so it can cool you.

Dear Rādhā, let Me fan you and thus cool you in the heat of this blazing summer."

So speaking in this way, the poet says, Kṛṣṇa took the water pot from this special gopī, Śrī Rādhā, and turned it upside down on top of both of them.

In your mind's eye.

As a result, the poet says, both forms of the Divine Couple were drenched in the refreshing water of the Yamunā.

Drenched in the refreshing water of the Yamunā.

And then Kṛṣṇa held Śrī Rādhā's waist and took her to a boat in a pond of lotuses for joyful boating pastimes.

So witnessing such a scene, all the sakhīs sang a melody of love in higher notes.

That's poetry.

"A melody of love in higher notes."

Then the poet writes:

"Tribhaṅga sings the glories of Dita Rādhā and her lover Kṛṣṇa with eyes filled with tears of love."

Referring to himself, he's singing the glories of Dita Rādhā and her love for Kṛṣṇa with eyes filled with tears of love.

That's the goal.

So I have some duties today, so we'll conclude here with a few verses glorifying Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, found in the illustrious Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi by our beloved Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, from the part called Dhanya Dhanya Rādhikā-caraṇa.

Dhanya Dhanya Rādhikā-caraṇa literally means, "The lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā are my only treasure."

So he writes:

"May my mind always float in the ocean of divine nectar emanating from the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

No more fear of millions of hells. Studying the scriptures has become simply troublesome. Merging into the Brahman effulgence is terrible. The ecstatic symptoms of devotion to the Lord that are felt by great devotees like Śuka have lost their charms.

O Rādhe, You are my sole ruler and my only shelter.

Countless gopīs of Vraja swarm around Your lotus feet and worship them wholeheartedly.

Your lotus feet are an inexhaustible fountainhead of the quintessence of universal love—the quintessence of universal love—and are inconceivable even to great saints.

That is perhaps the reason why great devotees are striving with ever-increasing courage and hope to catch the sweetness and beauty of the grace that flows from Your lotus feet.

O Queen, will You be pleased to show me the particular manner in which I should serve Your lotus feet?

The lotuslike chanting of the holy names of Lord Hari with love attracts my mind towards Śrī Rādhā's feet. This attraction becomes very strong as soon as the delicious ingredient of Śrī Rādhā's service is added to the chanting.

Meditation on blissful Kṛṣṇa as He roams about in Vṛndāvana has put me under the shade of the tender feet of Kiśorī.

My only shelter is Śrī Rādhikā's lotus feet, which I now yearn to worship with love and devotion.

These lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā are painted by Kṛṣṇa's soft fingers with a feather dipped in the most fragrant red-colored lac.

The gopīs follow Kṛṣṇa's example and worship the same feet for the happiness of all living entities.

These feet are glorified in the Upaniṣads and are found in the depths of the hearts of pure devotees."

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Well, we thank that poet of yore for inspiring us in stimulation for ecstatic love.

So thank you, Prabhus. We'll finish here.

I think maybe we can get one more class about Rādhā's dress and attire. Let's see. We'll study. Seek and you shall find.

May Śrī Kṛṣṇa transcendental book distribution go on.

Jaya Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāma.
