""Hi Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing lecture series entitled "The Glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma."

*Namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vānī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.* 

Glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and today this will be part 172, in which we will carry on with our present theme of the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and continue, of course, with our new discussions on her glances. 

I would like to open up with verse 47 of the first śataka of Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura’s illustrious *Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta*. It’s very pertinent here: 

"We are searching for that person who has stolen the effulgence of thick clouds, who has grown a bit languid from playing so much, who wears a crest made from the playful feathers of an impassioned peacock, whose lotus face is so fascinating, who has become stunned by long and close contact with the upward-pointing sidelong glances of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and who is the very overabundance of perfection of all the sweet beauty in the universe." 

All the sweet beauty in the universe. *Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta*. 

So, today I would like to go directly into narrating a very beautiful pastime demonstrating once again the potency of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's merciful glance. It’s taken from a combination of two śāstras, *Govinda-līlāmṛta* and *Vidagdha-mādhava*. And I’ll begin as Prabhupāda did on a couple of occasions. 

Once upon a time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was becoming restless due to separation from Kṛṣṇa. So, Lalitā Devī suggested that her feelings of separation could be mitigated by what? By writing a letter to Kṛṣṇa. So, Rādhārāṇī agreed and, taking a pen dipped in ink, started to write this letter to Kṛṣṇa on the petal of a lotus flower. I thought that was wonderful—on the petal of a lotus flower. But as tears fell from her eyes, she only got as far as penning the syllable *kṛṣ*. And that was all. K-R-Ṣ, *kṛṣ*. That’s as far as she got. And when she finished writing *kṛṣ*, a number of ecstatic emotions just overpowered her. It’s described that in the syllable *kṛṣ*, Rādhārāṇī saw Kṛṣṇa’s form, qualities, pastimes, and sublime abode. What’s more, she entered into Kṛṣṇa’s heart, saw his love, understood his feelings of separation, and felt his love for her. Right there in *Govinda-līlāmṛta*. Wow. And in the syllable *kṛṣ*, Śrī Rādhā saw the one who attracts the gopīs, gopas, cows, calves, birds, beasts, plants, and the rivers of Vṛndāvana. And upon seeing and perceiving all these things, she sat still for an entire prahara. 

Now, I researched, a prahara is three hours long. So, of course, all this is very deep and very esoteric. But even we as aspiring devotees can appreciate this syllable *kṛṣ*. By a famous verse by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī quoted in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Antya 19.9: 

"I do not know how much nectar the two syllables 'Kṛṣ-ṇa' have produced. When the holy name of Kṛṣṇa is chanted, it appears to dance within the mouth. We then desire many, many mouths. When that name enters the holes of the ears, we desire many millions of ears. And when the holy name dances in the courtyard of the heart, it conquers the activities of the mind, and therefore all the senses become inert." 

So, after Śrī Rādhā had written *kṛṣ* and nothing more, many, many hours passed. So finally, Viśākhā-sakhī said to Lalitā-sakhī, "Friend, at this rate the letter will take millions of years to write." So, Lalitā turned to Śrī Rādhā and said, "Oh Rādhā, beloved of Kṛṣṇa, you have composed a very nice letter. I think you have actually included everything that needs to be said and more. And only after repeated lifetimes as such, Kṛṣṇa will possibly come to the end of this letter." Encouraging Śrī Rādhā. 

And Viśākhā added, "Yes, Rādhā, it’s more than enough. To the wise and learned, just a few syllables of Kṛṣṇa’s name says everything." So true. "Let us send this excellent letter to Kṛṣṇa through a reliable messenger." 

So, Viśākhā called for Rati Mañjarī, and taking this letter written on the petal of a lotus flower from Śrī Rādhā’s hand, Viśākhā rolled it, put it into a golden container, and handed it to Rati Mañjarī, who touched the container to her forehead and then hid it in her cloth—like she was actually wearing like an apron. 

So then, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī reached out and took Rati Mañjarī’s hand. It’s described that neither of them spoke. Rather, Śrī Rādhā simply glanced into Rati’s eyes for a very long time. Just glanced. Now, in Vṛndāvana-līlā, it’s said that the senders of hand-delivered letters usually give instructions to their messengers in the silent language of glances. Wow. In the silent language of glances. So then, Śrī Rādhā let go of Rati Mañjarī’s hand, and Rati Mañjarī, along with a few close friends, left to find Kṛṣṇa somewhere, as described, in the pasture lands of Vṛndāvana. Now, it’s written that Rati Mañjarī had no idea where Kṛṣṇa was, but she was convinced that from within her heart, Śrī Rādhā would guide her so that not a moment would be lost. 

Now, that day, Kṛṣṇa was also overwhelmed with feelings of separation from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He was with his friends, herding cows somewhere in the Vṛndāvana forest, but his mind and heart were with Śrī Rādhā. So, at one point, Kṛṣṇa’s friend Subala, he noticed Kṛṣṇa’s dejected state, and he said, "My friend, what’s wrong? Obviously, you’re distressed. Please tell us what’s wrong." And Madhumaṅgala, he added, "Kṛṣṇa, your peacock feather and flower garland fell to the ground some time ago, but you didn’t even notice. Gopāla, what’s going on?" 

So, Kṛṣṇa, a little defensive, he said, "Nothing’s wrong. Nothing’s wrong." But Subala insisted, "Kṛṣṇa, we’re your friends. You can’t hide from us. We can see your heart." Wow. Such intimate exchanges with the Lord in Vṛndāvana. 

So, at that point, tears began to roll down Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks. And startled, Subala called out, "Hey Govinda, what are these tears? Why are you crying? Oh friend, you are my life. Seeing you in such a state breaks my heart into a hundred pieces. For your happiness, Kṛṣṇa, I would walk to the ends of the earth and back and give up my life a thousand times. Tell me what it is you want, and I will get it. Reveal your pain to me and I will cure it." Wow, these cowherd boys. 

So, rubbing his eyes, Kṛṣṇa said, "Friends, actually every morning as I enter into the forest, a girl comes into my vision. Endowed with magical charms, she enters my heart and enchants my mind. Though I play my flute and tend the cows, I can think of nothing but her." 

So, Subala said, "Who is this girl? What does she look like?" 

So, Kṛṣṇa closed his eyes and said, "Friends, listen. I can say that she shines like lightning. Her sarī is like a blue cloud. Her ornaments are like swans, and her beauty is unlimited." 

So then, Subala, he just laughed. He said, "Śyāma, I know who your beloved is. Who else could it be but Śrī Rādhā, the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu? The beauty you speak of is to be found in her alone and no one else." 

So then, Madhumaṅgala, he said, "Kṛṣṇa, fear not. With my command of Vedic spells and skill in mixing potions, I shall bring this girl to you without delay. I will gather herbs from the forest and chant special mantras at once." 

And Subala added, "Kṛṣṇa, on the strength of my arms, which never fail in subduing demons, I will vow to you that we will arrange a meeting with your beloved. She will soon become a flower garland around your neck." 

But by Paurṇamāsī’s arrangement, just at that very moment as the boys were speaking, who arrived? Rati Mañjarī and her girlfriends. They found Kṛṣṇa in the forest. So, seeing them, you know, he looked—Madhumaṅgala, he just saw them. He started bragging. "You see, my friend? Just witness the mystic power of a pure brāhmaṇa like me. Simply by my desire, these girls have appeared." 

So then, pausing a little bit, Rati Mañjarī came forward, and from the basket on her arm, she handed Madhumaṅgala a garland that was prepared by Śrī Rādhā, and it was still fragrant, śāstra says, from her touch. It was still fragrant from her touch. Śrī Rādhā’s touch. So then, Madhumaṅgala, he placed the garland around Kṛṣṇa’s neck. 

Then Kṛṣṇa eagerly asked Rati Mañjarī, "My dear young lady, please tell me, how is my dearest Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī? And what is she doing?" 

So, Rati Mañjarī replied, "Kṛṣṇa, in her madness of separation from you, she is churning water in a yogurt pot. But oh joy of Braja, don’t be sad. Your beloved desires to meet you and for that reason, she has written you a letter." 

So, hearing this, Kṛṣṇa suddenly jumped up and said, "A letter? Rādhā wrote me a letter?" And while Kṛṣṇa watched excitedly, Rati Mañjarī reached into her apron, her cloth, for the golden container and pulled out the lotus petal letter that Rādhā had written and passed it to Kṛṣṇa as if it’s described as if it was some priceless treasure, which it was, of course. 

So, Kṛṣṇa looked at the lotus petal in awe. Then he removed a guñjā necklace from his neck and garlanded Rati Mañjarī in appreciation. Then, in great anticipation but overwhelmed by emotion, Kṛṣṇa handed the letter to Madhumaṅgala and said, "Dear friend, please read this letter. I have no doubt it must be a reservoir of nectar for the ears." 

So, Madhumaṅgala eagerly accepted the letter, but upon reading it, all he saw was the syllable "Kṛṣ" and nothing else. Now, it’s described that although Madhumaṅgala is, as we often recount, he’s always greedy for sweets, but it’s also said, bear in mind, he is a peerless connoisseur of rasa. He’s the funny brāhmaṇa boy, but he’s a peerless connoisseur of rasa. So, he thought, "Only Kṛṣṇa’s qualified to read this letter." Then he said out loud, "Kṛṣṇa, my friend, this is an exceedingly long letter." 

So, Kṛṣṇa just responded, "Then read it." 

But Madhumaṅgala handed the letter to Kṛṣṇa, saying, "Friend, better you read it. For this sort of letter is best read only by the one for whom it is meant." Wow, these Braja līlās. 

So, as Kṛṣṇa took the letter, his heart began to beat very strongly. And he said, "As the full moon in the month of Jyeṣṭha causes violent waves in the Gaṅgā, so does Rādhā act upon my heart." Well, what an analogy. And seeing Kṛṣṇa’s excitement, Madhumaṅgala said, "Kṛṣṇa, there are so many beautiful gopīs in Vṛndāvana. Why do you love only Rādhā with such feeling?" Interesting question. 

So, smiling slightly, Kṛṣṇa answered, "Madhu, my dear Madhu, in Rādhā, there resides such sweetness that upon seeing her beautiful lotus eyes, I feel like rejecting the moon. If you simply think about Rādhā, you too will know something of her glory." It’s a cue for us. 

So, by this time, Subala was getting impatient, so he said, "Kṛṣṇa, what does the letter say?" 

So, Kṛṣṇa looked lovingly at the letter and saw before him the syllable "Kṛṣ" and nothing more. However, to him, that syllable was as effulgent as a hundred suns and as cooling as a hundred moons. The śāstra. 

Now, not getting an answer to his question, Subala again inquired, "Friend, what does the letter say?" 

But when Kṛṣṇa tried to speak, his throat choked up with emotion. And after some time, he cleared his voice, wiped his eyes, and he read aloud what Rādhārāṇī had meant to convey with the syllable "Kṛṣ." He understood very deeply. He said, "Subala, this is what Śrī Rādhā has actually written: 'Oh supremely beautiful Śyāma Sundara, this letter is not made of words. Your humble servant, Śrī Rādhā, petitions you from the innermost core of her heart. Please spare a few moments to hear her plea. Oh Kṛṣṇa, the artistic loveliness of your form is permanently etched in my mind because your beauty causes me constant distress. I run here and there for relief, but wherever I go, you block my path. Kṛṣṇa, this is my dilemma. Tell me what to do. Your youthful beauty surpasses all things in this world. If the gently splashing waves of your smile make Kamalā Devī faint from bliss, what will become of me? Each time you smile, your limbs sway to and fro. Sharp arrows shoot from your eyes. Jasmine garlands sway on your chest and tilaka glistens on your forehead. Oh, what a wonder. Oh, what a wonder. I do not know what happened when I first saw you. It felt as if an arrow had pierced my life’s breath. My normally peaceful composure fled to a faraway place and restlessness took hold of me. Now for no apparent reason, I constantly weep. Fearful of what my elders might say, I’ve told no one about my plight. I simply hide in my room. No one knows what has happened to me. Not even I. Not even I.'" 

Now, when Kṛṣṇa finished reading—because it was only "Kṛṣ," but he understood the deeper message—Madhumaṅgala said, "Friend, her love is indeed great. You are uniquely fortunate. Such a heartfelt letter soaked in emotion deserves a proper reply. A proper reply. Kṛṣṇa, now you must write to Rādhā and fulfill her heart’s desire." 

Now, taking that cue, Rati Mañjarī reached into her basket and produced another lotus petal, pen, and ink, and gave them to Kṛṣṇa. So, Kṛṣṇa thought for a moment and then slowly on that lotus petal, he wrote "Ra." R-A, the syllable "Ra," and he stopped. That was all he wrote. As Rādhā had only written "Kṛṣ," all he could write was "Ra." 

But why? The ācāryas explain—because this is very mystical—because the syllable "Ra" was a crystal ball in which Kṛṣṇa could see dance-fatigued gopīs, water sports in the Yamunā, a dinner beneath the stars, and the calm before sunrise that only lovers know. That’s how it’s put. What’s more, the ācāryas say, those letters, "Ra," shaped like a string of pearls, were a hidden path to Śrī Rādhā, a bridge that spanned the chasm between separation and meeting, a mantra that would award Kṛṣṇa freedom. 

So finally, the ācāryas say, "Ra" acted like a wise sage who detected Kṛṣṇa’s heart’s longing, who knew of his love for her, who championed his eagerness for meeting her, and who advised Kṛṣṇa how to realize his goal. Deep. But most important—more important than anything else—"Ra" declared Kṛṣṇa’s submission to Rādhā. Jai. "Ra" declared Kṛṣṇa’s submission to Śrī Rādhā. 

So, convinced that this syllable "Ra" alone would secure a meeting with his beloved, Kṛṣṇa handed his letter on a lotus petal to Madhumaṅgala. Then it’s described that as birds in their perches jostled with one another for vantage point from which they could read the letter, Madhumaṅgala rolled it up, the lotus petal, touched it to his forehead, and gave it to Rati Mañjarī, who received it with great respect. Then placing the lotus petal into the golden container, Rati Mañjarī bowed down before Kṛṣṇa and his friends and then, like the morning mist, vanished along with the other girls, leaving only dainty footprints behind. Leaving only dainty footprints behind. 

Then Kṛṣṇa left to go back to his friends and cows, confident that the power of Rādhā’s name would fulfill his desire to be with her again. 

And in due course of time, Rati Mañjarī returned to Yāvat, where she gave Kṛṣṇa’s letter to Rādhārāṇī. 

So, Śrī Rādhā slowly unrolled the lotus petal. And although it only contained the syllable "Ra," she too understood its deeper purport. And when her friends asked her to read the letter to them, she said, "Kṛṣṇa has written as follows. Śrī Rādhā. Kṛṣṇa has written as follows: 'Oh beautiful princess of Varṣāṇā, from the day I first saw you my life changed. I was a carefree cowherd boy playing in the fields of Braja, but now I’m held captive with the tiny hope that you may bless me with a casual sidelong glance. Now I am held captive with a tiny hope that you may bless me with a casual sidelong glance. What wings are to a bird, what the sun is to the world, what the soul is to the body, you are to me. If you think I should live, if you think I deserve to see you in person, please meet me by the bank of the Yamunā beneath the Kadamba trees where cuckoos sing and bees hum. Please allow me to serve you, for you are the queen of my heart. You are my Rādhā Rāṇī. You are my worshipable deity. I am your servant eternally.'" 

Then Śrī Rādhā fell silent. And placing the letter gently on her lap and looking around, she said happily, "He has accepted me. He has accepted me, oh friends. I must meet Kṛṣṇa by the Yamunā tonight. Please help me to look my very best." 

And after selecting clothes and ornaments that would be most pleasing to Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā was bathed, anointed, dressed, and ornamented by her happy friends. And when the gopīs had finished—this is cute—they all stood back to see their work. So then, Śrī Rādhā said, "My friends, do you think he will like me?" That was Braja līlā. "My friends, do you think he will like me?" Now it’s described at that point, hearing that, Viśākhā just wiped tears of wonder from her face. "Rādhā, what did you say? Do you think he will like me? Did you say that?" Just wiped tears of wonder from her face, Viśākhā. That was her reaction. 

Now, that night at Nandagrāma, after Mother Yaśodā had put Kṛṣṇa to sleep, what did he do? He climbed out of his bedroom window and, chanting Śrī Rādhā’s names, went alone to the shore of the river Yamunā. The ācāryas write, just as the written syllables of the divine couple’s names had conveyed their mutual affection, those same syllables when sung directed both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to a meeting place on the banks of the Yamunā, where they exchanged loving glances and in an atmosphere of laughter and joy, they mitigated their feelings of separation during a night time of Brahmā. 

Hare Kṛṣṇa. What a pastime. So much Braja emotions of love between the divine couple and all of their friends. When, oh when will that day be ours that by Prabhupāda’s grace we can participate in some degree? This is our heart’s desire. This is our focus: *ekākī kīrtana ānandana*, going back to Godhead. 

So this beautiful pastime not only shows that by her unique love of Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā is without doubt Madana-mohana-mohinī, the attractor of the attractor of Cupid. It also reveals that their transcendental names again are full of unlimited wonders. And I was thinking, most important today, what is significant is that Kṛṣṇa prays earnestly to always be held captive by the tiny hope that Śrī Rādhā may one day bless him with a casual sidelong glance. Bless him with a casual sidelong glance. We also pray for that glance from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. That’s our goal. 

So let us finish today with a verse from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *Padyāvalī* 2.51: 

"Whenever I gaze upon that girl whose lips are red like bimba fruit, whose flowering eyebrows tremble like restless vines, and whose countless sidelong glances wander playfully in every direction teaching even the graceful deer the art of casting crooked waves of glances, at that very moment the cruel and angry god of love, Kāmadeva himself, takes up his incomparable bow of flowers and aims it straight at my heart." 

Kṛṣṇa’s saying like that. 

"Whenever I gaze upon that girl whose lips are red like bimba fruit, whose flowering eyebrows tremble like restless vines, whose countless sidelong glances wander playfully in every direction teaching even the graceful deer the art of casting crooked waves of glances, at that very moment the cruel and angry god of love, Kāmadeva himself, takes up his incomparable bow of flowers and aims it straight at my heart." 

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you Prabhus so much. Wow, these are really special pastimes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's glances, and I think by her grace we have a couple more classes on those glances. Thank you so much. 

Śrī Śrī Gaura Nitāi kī, Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarām kī, Śrī Śrī Rādhā Śyāmasundar kī, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhā Rāṇī kī, her glances kī, Māyāpur dhāma kī, Gaura Nitāi kī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-yajña kī, Nitāi Gaura premānandī Jai Jai, Śrī Śrī Rādhe Śyām. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda kī, Jai Śrīla Prabhupāda.""