Hari Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Viṣṇupāda.

Kṛṣṇa Gauravaṁ deśa. All glories to you. So, we're continuing with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love. And this will be part 154, in which we will continue to discuss the various disguises Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa use in their pastimes.

In this episode, Kṛṣṇa cleverly disguises himself as a daring thief. Now, of course, we know Kṛṣṇa is famously known as Makhan Chor, or um, a butter thief in his childhood pastimes in Gokul. We just finished that month. But in this pastime, he steals from his dearest Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Now, it's authoritative. This pastime is mentioned by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his Gopāla Campū, uh, as have all the other disguises we've been discussing actually last month or so. In his first choo, 29th purāṇa, uh, verses 89 and 90, he writes, "While the people of Gokula were on pilgrimage, Kṛṣṇa, disguised as a girl, would meet with the gopīs and enjoy pastimes with them.

Night after night, Kṛṣṇa, disguised in various ways, would meet with Rādhā, who was anguished, anguished in separation from him, and converse with her, chasing away her feelings of separation." So poetic. When Kṛṣṇa came disguised as a girl thief, Rādhā said, "This dark, uh, girl is not honest.

Unseen by others, she has switched her necklace for one more valuable. Now she yearns to steal that pearl necklace." Just giving us an introduction. Then in verse, uh, 105, he writes, "In this way, he disguised himself as a bangle seller, an applier of cosmetics, a gem seller, etc.

The gopīs enjoyed many simple and crooked pastimes with him, which we cannot describe here in detail, which we cannot describe here in detail." Now, in the mid-16th century, a well-known and famous Vaiṣṇava poet named Raya Gopāla elaborated more on this particular līlā, this very pastime of Kṛṣṇa stealing from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, ultimately, of course, to have her darśana, as we'll see.

Now, Raya Gopāla came from a from a Rajput dynasty and later took shelter in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. And I was reading, he spent his last days simply writing about the pastimes of Lord Nityānanda and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. All glories to him.

And he describes, uh, this pastime of Kṛṣṇa in disguise stealing from Śrī Rādhā in his book called Kavita Kāvya, which means the meaning of that title: "Beware, that girl is an expert thief." Right, Kṛṣṇa. So one day, Śrī Rādhā was playing on a swing in a garden near to Premarova Lake.

The swing was, he describes, decorated with many newly blossom flowers and vines. And some gopīs nearby were singing, and some were showing their expertise in spinning in a circle without stopping, and some were dancing, some were playing musical instruments, while others were chatting with Śrī Rādhā.

He describes the atmosphere in that garden was magical. Cool winds mixed with droplets of rain from the clouds filled everyone's hearts with bliss and happiness. Water from fountains in Premova, the lake, were dancing like Gāndharvas from Lokā. Raya Gopāla says, "Balihāra, balihāra," meaning "I sacrificed my everything to behold the matchless beauty of Vṛndāvana." So do we.

Now, Kṛṣṇa, who happened to be strolling nearby, passed by this beautiful garden and upon seeing Śrī Rādhā swinging on a swing, he became filled with a strong desire to embrace her. However, he noticed that many gopīs were standing guard and surveying the area, making it impossible for him to approach her.

So he quickly went to Vṛndā Devī's kuñja nearby, where all of Vṛndā Devī's parrots were singing the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And as soon as Vṛndā Devī saw Kṛṣṇa, she stood up and welcomed him. She said, "Oh Nāgara Kṛṣṇa, oh Nāgara Kṛṣṇa, my grove is fortunate today to have your lotus feet step in its dust.

How can I serve you?" So Kṛṣṇa smiled and he said, "Oh Vṛndā, you are the best amongst all servants.

Today, after seeing the beautiful scene of Cupid's playground near Premarova, that's how he perceived it, my mind and heart were stunned by the beauty of Śrīdhā's swing pastimes. I have a strong desire to be with her. However, something happened last night." So Vṛndā asked, "And what was that?" So Kṛṣṇa replied, "Well, returning while returning from the pasturing grounds with my cows, I happened to meet Lalitā, Lalitā Sakhī, and I gave her my Līlā Kamala, my play lotus toy, to her and asked her to give it to give it to Śrī Rādhā and tell Rādhā I would come later in the evening to her kuñja." So he gave a present, and he delivered this present, and he set up a rendezvous later that evening in her kuñja.

And he continued, "But when I was on my way to that rendezvous in the evening, suddenly Padma, the very dear friend of Candrāvalī, met me and told me that Candrāvalī, who we know is, you know, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's competitor, wanted to meet me because she had something to give to me." Now, when I arrived at Candrāvalī's kuñja, she was playing a game of chess.

So I decided to play one round of chess with her. But time flew by, and when I looked at the sky, it was almost the end of night, well past my rendezvous was for. So Vṛndā, I got up and immediately ran to to Rādhā's kuñja.

But she, Rādhā's kuñja, had witnessed Kānḍitā nāyikā, Kānḍitā nāyikā means one who waits the whole night for her beloved, one who waits the whole night for her beloved. And that Kānḍitā was none other, none other than Śrīdhā herself. And I saw Śrīdhā's eyes were filled with tears, dripping with the nectar of separation, dripping with the nectar of separation, and her body was fatigued from waiting.

Her mind was lost in thoughts of our failed meeting, and her heart was lost in hope. When she saw me, she said sharply, "Kṛṣṇa, just go back to Candrāvalī's kuñja and never show your face to me again." That all her sakhīs pulled me away from the kuñja.

I know Lalitā and Viśākhā are now trying to divert her thoughts from last night's betrayal, but I want to appease her. Vṛndā, can you help me to meet her?" Sorry, Kṛṣṇa.

So at that point, Vṛndā Devī paused and then clapped her hand three times, causing all of her parrots to fly up into the sky on a secret mission. Then she took out a big golden box, which was filled with um gold embroidered skirts and blouses and sashes and cosmetics and ornaments, and what she dressed Kṛṣṇa as a princess from the heavenly kingdom.

Then, as thousands of Vṛndā's parrots began distracting the gopīs, who were safeguarding the gardens of Premānsarova, from Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa took his chance and he walked swiftly to Premānova to where Śrīdhā was swinging in the kuñja. And after the parrots had left, you know, creating all this distraction, etcetera, everything had quieted down, but suddenly a soft sound of lamentation reached Śrīdhā's ears.

It was a soft sound because the parrots had created this big commotion so Kṛṣṇa could come in and distract the other, the gopīs, so he could come in and be with Rādhā. And everything calmed down, and as a result of everything being quiet, suddenly a soft sound of lamentation reached Śrīdhā's ears.

She hadn't seen Kṛṣṇa yet. At first, she ignored it, but when the lamenting became louder, she told Viśākhā, "Viśākhā, please find out who's lamenting in my garden." So Viśākhā looked around, and she came back to to Śrīdhā and she said, "Śrīdhā, it appears that there's a new gopī sitting next to the Sarovara lamenting pitifully." The plot thickens.

So Śrīdhā, whose heart is even softer than melting wax, immediately went to that place. She's always taking care of her gopīs. And there she saw a beautiful, new, dark-skinned girl, wearing golden colored robes and crying. So Śrīdhā reached out to that gopī and said, "Dear one, who are you and and why are you lamenting in my garden?" So this new gopī replied, "Oh, I am Chandra Prabhā.

Chandra Prabhā. I'm a princess from the heavenly kingdom, Svarga Loka. I'm in my youth, but in my kingdom, there's no girl of my age to play with me. I have no friends where I come from. So I came here to play with your young gopīs.

Unfortunately, your gopī guards hesitated to to let me in, but I, I made it. And finding no compassion in them, I'm sitting here crying for the misfortune of being born in Svarga Loka." So at that moment, Śrīdhā's eyes filled with tears, and she extended her hand to Chandra Prabhā.

Without a second thought, Chandra Prabhā held Śrīdhā's hand and followed her as they left that place. Śrīdhā said, "Oh, pretty girl, you're very beautiful. Please do not cry. Please sit next to me on this beautiful swing arranged by my gopīs." Wow.

So then they both sat next to each other on the swing. This new gopī and Rādhārāṇī. But this new gopī pretended that she didn't know how to swing. So understanding the situation, she said, "Oh Chandra Prabhā, please do not hesitate.

Feel comfortable on this swing." So the poet says, the cunning Chandra Prabhā said, "But this is the very first time I'm swinging with someone. Please hold my hand tighter." And Śrīdhā tightened, uh, her, her, her grip on Chandra Prabhā's hand to comfort her.

So then Chandra Prabhā started, you know, some small talk with Śrīdhā, and very soon they became more acquainted with each. So then Chandra Prabhā said, "Oh Rādhā, would you like to exchange necklaces with me?" Really, the plot thickens here. "Oh Rādhā, would you like to exchange necklaces with me?" And agreeing, Śrīdhā enthusiastically took off her necklace and gave it to Chandra Prabhā.

However, Chandra Prabhā didn't give her necklace to Śrīdhā. But Rādhā hesitated to say anything to her, but she didn't want to disturb the situation. Didn't want it to bother. She said, "Okay, all right." Silently to herself. And after swinging together and chatting for some time, Śrīdhā gave some sweets and her flower garland to Chandra Prabhā and said, "Oh my dear new gopī friend, please come and associate with us at any time." So lo and behold, the very next day, Chandra Prabhā came again to be with Rādhā in her garden, in her kuñja.

And at one point, again she turned to Śrīdhā and said, "Dearest Rādhā, can we exchange rings today?" So Rādhā hesitated for a moment, remembering yesterday, but then with a smile, she gave Chandra Prabhā a ring from her hand.

But then Chandra Prabhā feigned distraction and didn't give Śrīdhā her ring in return. Thief, thief. So the following day, Śrīdhā shared her worries with Lalitā Sakhī. "Oh my dear Sakhī Lalitā," she said, "I agreed to exchange some of my jewelry with this new gopī Chandra Prabhā.

But when I gave her some of mine, she never actually gave me any of hers." So Lalitā Sakhī, always concerned about Śrīdhā, she paused and she replied, "Dear Rādhā, beware, that girl must be an expert thief." The title of this lecture, "That girl must be an expert thief." So that evening, I just left it at that.

That evening, when Chandra Prabhā came to be again with Śrīdhā, Śrīdhā asked her, "Oh my dear new gopī, Chandra Prabhā, where is the necklace and the ring I gave you?

I don't see you wearing them." So Chandra Prabhā wasn't so prepared. She became embarrassed and said, "Oh, how foolish. I have forgotten them. I have forgotten to wear them today. I have forgotten to wear them today." But then, while studying Chandra Prabhā's clothing, Lalitā noticed a suspicious pocket in her blouse, in her choli.

So she said, "Oh Chandra Prabhā, what is that in that large pocket in your choli?

I, I can see something glowing. It's glowing very bright. It must be something very special." So Chandra Prabhā replied, "Oh, oh, no, no, it's nothing." So suspicious Lalitā came closer to Chandra Prabhā, and there she suddenly saw what, looking very closely in the pocket, a small golden flute hidden in the choli.

Ah, Kṛṣṇa. So Lalitā clapped very loudly, blissfully, here, because of course, the gopīs, the sakhīs, they always want to unite. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, somehow or other. She called out, "Rādhā, look what I found!

A golden flute is hidden in Chandra Prabhā's pocket." Obviously, this is not Chandra Prabhā, a princess from the heavenly planets. Clearly, it can only be the betrayer. They talk like that. Betrayer Kṛṣṇa, who sits on every lotus flower like a maddened bumblebee.

Who sits on every lotus flower like a maddened bumblebee, you know, indicating that Kṛṣṇa is associating with many gopīs. So hearing this, Śrīdhā became extremely angry and upset to be tricked. This was her mood, and she left to sit under her tree.

Of course, internally she was relishing, but this is how the pastime unfolds, where Kṛṣṇa soon came and tried to appease her, man. How many pastimes have we been discussing these last few months where Kṛṣṇa tries to appease her, man?

So nectar. He said, "Oh Rādhā, you are my only happiness. Without your association, I cannot find happiness anywhere else. When I'm not present with you, my mind roams in meditating on you. When I'm not present with you, my mind roams in meditating on you.

Please grant me your forgiveness for missing a rendezvous." But Śrīdhā replied very coldly. You know, the rasa is getting deeper here. "Lalitā will serve you justice, Kṛṣṇa. She will decide whether you, Kṛṣṇa, can have my forgiveness or not." So then Kṛṣṇa turned to Lalitā. "Such a sweet word, jī.

It means it's a very affectionate way, like we say, dīnd sometimes they say, so. Oh, Lal, oh, Lalitā jī, you are the fragrance of the flower of our love. Be merciful to me, oh justice of love, please grant me forgiveness and reunite me with my beloved.

Bind me with the chains and ropes of attachment and throw me in the prison house of Rādhā's heart, where I will live out my sentence in great pleasure." Wow. So smiling, Lalitā said, "Granted, granted." Then all the Vṛndāvana erupted in bliss, because everything's connected there, everything serving Mādhura rasa, actually.

Bells started ringing, gopīs started singing, cowherd boys started jumping in happiness, cows were mooing, conches started blowing as the divine couple were reunited in Svarga once again. And the poet concludes, Raya Gopāla praised to the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who awaken endless love in the hearts of their devotees by performing such a beautiful and incomparable pastimes.

Hari Krishna.

Yes. So all glories to Prabhupāda, the revealer of the nāma.

I would like to finish today with eight verses, beautiful verses dedicated to the expert thief Kṛṣṇa, written by Śrī Baṅgala Ṭhākura. I offer obeisances to that foremost of thieves, who is famous in Braja as the thief of butter. He who steals the gopīs' clothes and he who, for those who take shelter of him, steals the sins which they have incurred in many lifetimes.

I offer my obeisances to the foremost of thieves who steals Śrīmatī Rādhikā's heart, who steals the dark luster of a fresh raincloud, and who steals all the sins and sufferings of those who take shelter of his lotus feet. He turns his surrendered devotees into paupers and wandering homeless beggars.

Aho, such a fearsome thief has never been seen or heard of in all these three worlds. Oh thief, having stolen my wealth, my honor, my senses, my life, my everything!

Where can you run to?

I have caught you with the ropes of my devotion. The mere utterance of your name purges one of a mountain of sins. Such an astonishingly wonderful thief I have never seen or heard of anywhere. You cut the terrible noose of Yamarāja.

You sever the dreadful ropes of material existence and you slash everyone's material bondage. But you are unable to cut the knot fastened by your own loving devotees. What a line!

Oh stealer of my everything!

Oh thief!

Today I have imprisoned you in the miserable prison house of my heart, which is very fearful due to the terrible darkness of my ignorance. And there, for a very long time, you will remain, receiving appropriate punishment for your crimes of thievery in my heart.

Oh Kṛṣṇa, thief of my everything, with the noose of my devotion remaining forever tight, you will continue to reside in the prison house of my heart, where I will not release you for millions and millions of eons. Our greatest gratitude, our uh, thanks goes out to Śrī Baṅgala Ṭhākura for that wonderful, perfect ending to this pastime, where Kṛṣṇa stole Rādhārāṇī's jewelry just in order to appease her, just in order to appease her, man.

So thank you so much, Prabhuz. Um, according to Gopāla Campū, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, we have a few more, he has a list there of, of the different types of thieves, uh, the different types of disguises, rather, that Kṛṣṇa has, um, assumed for various purposes, and we have a few more to, to discuss.

So I'll see you, uh, next Friday. All the mercy of Śravaṇa Śiśira Gaurāṅga Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Vṛndāvan. Mayāprabhupāda, all around the world, jī. Glorious to Prabhupāda.

Har Krishna.