Hare Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma. But first, Kṛṣṇa namaste, gorāvani. So, of course, we're continuing with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 131 in which we will continue our discussions on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's dress and attire. So let us begin with two verses, 183 and 184, from Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, chapter 8, revealing to us that Rādhārāṇī is the best dresser and she teaches the art of dressing to all the other gopīs in Vṛndāvana. Here's the quote: "Even Satyabhāmā, one of the queens of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, desires the fortunate position and excellent qualities of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. All the gopīs learn the art of dressing from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and even the goddess of fortune Lakṣmī and the wife of Lord Śiva, Pārvatī, desire her beauty and qualities. Indeed, Arundhatī, the celebrated chaste wife of Vasiṣṭha, also wants to imitate the chastity and religious principles of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." So she's the best dresser, we heard, and she teaches all the other girls the art of dressing.

Now, Śrīla Prabhupāda in Nectar of Devotion, chapter 42, entitled "Fraternal Loving Affairs," relates a really interesting pastime where Kṛṣṇa once dressed up as Śrī Rādhārāṇī. He writes: "Kṛṣṇa once dressed himself up exactly like Rādhārāṇī just to create fun amongst his friends. He put on golden earrings and because he was blackish, he smeared the pulp of kuṅkuma all over his body in order to become as fair as she. By seeing this dress, Kṛṣṇa's friend Subala became very astonished." Nectar of Devotion.

Now the present day Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scholar Śvetadvīpa Swami relates in his book The Divine Consort, page 87, how once both Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā dressed up in each other's attire. This pastime is known as Māṭukī Līlā. M-A-T-U-K-ī. Māṭukī Līlā. I never heard that word before. Māṭukī Līlā. So once in order to get close to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī who was upset with him in māna, in anger, Kṛṣṇa dressed up like a heavenly kinnerī goddess. Kinnerī, K-I-N-N-A-R-ī. He dressed up as a heavenly kinnerī goddess holding a beautiful gold and silver veṇu. Then he approached Śrī Rādhā. Seeing him coming, the gopīs asked this kinnerī goddess what her name was and if she could sing a song to cheer up Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So this goddess replied that her name was Śyāmasakhī because she was the color of a fresh raincloud. Then she began to sing a song that plunged all the gopīs present into ecstatic bliss. Actually this pastime is repeated in different ways and different varieties, but this is the particular one we're describing today. So to reward Śyāmasakhī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was about to give her a jeweled locket from her own neck. But suddenly Lalitā Sakhī noticed that this new gopī was bent in three ways – her neck, her waist, and her legs – and so she pointed it out to Rādhā. So seeing her beloved Kṛṣṇa dressed up in this funny way – because then she realized dressed up in this funny way – Rādhārāṇī could no longer maintain her anger and she smiled at Kṛṣṇa. Then she took Kṛṣṇa's flute which was hidden in his waist and put it to her lips. Then, donning her lover's peacock feather crown (because she had to take away the disguise), donning her lover's peacock feather crown and saffron colored dhotī, she stood before Kṛṣṇa bent in three places – her neck, waist, and legs – while her eyebrows danced. Now a note here: this particular stance of Rādhārāṇī is confirmed in Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, chapter 14, verse 190. Here it is: "When Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī stands before Kṛṣṇa, she stands bent in three places – her neck, waist and legs – as her eyebrows dance." Same thing confirmed.

So the author continues: then blue-complexioned Kṛṣṇa in turn took Rādhārāṇī's earrings, red skirt, blouse, and transparent shawl, and smiling, dressed himself up in those translucent items. Kṛṣṇa took her clothes. Then holding hands, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa gazed into one another's eyes. So seeing this unique sight, one gopī expressed her wonder. They're dressed in each other's clothes, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This gopī expressed her wonder. She said: "She wears his peacock feather. He dons her lovely delicate crown. She sports his yellow garment. He wraps himself in her beautiful sari. How charming is the very sight of it all. The daughter of Viśabhānu, Rādhā, turns into Nanda's son Kṛṣṇa, and Nanda's son Kṛṣṇa turns into Viśabhānu's daughter Rādhā." A note here: this particular pastime is actually reenacted as a play every year in Vṛndāvana during the Bhūri Līlā festival. I discovered that Bhūri Līlā festival which takes place on the 10th day of the waxing fortnight, śukla pakṣa, during the month of Bhādra, in case you want to see it while you'll be in Vṛndāvana at that time.

Now in Śrī Kṛṣṇa Bhajanāmṛta, page 102, our beloved Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, in order to help us get a deep impression of the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he compares her beauty to things which we associate with beauty in this world. Just so we can get an idea. It's really interesting. He writes: "To make the young desire-play vine named Śrī Rādhikā, for her feet he the creator collected lotus flowers smeared with liquid vermilion. For her legs he created a golden quiver for Cupid's flower arrows. For her knees two jeweled boxes. For her thighs, two downward pointing banana trees of equal height. For her navel, he created a well of nectar. For her waist, the sky. For her three-lined belly, three circular waves. For her arms, he created lotus stems. For her hands, sprouts. For her neck, a conch shell. For her lips, bandhūli flowers. For her teeth, fresh buds of kunda flowers. For her nose, he created a sesame flower. For her curly locks, he created black bees. For her ears, fresh sprouts. For her face, a full autumn moon. And for her hair, clouds with a thin drain of the Yamunā. All these to make the young desire-play named Śrī Rādhikā." Very poetic, just comparing so we can get an idea because, you know, the reflection of something is not like the original object. So this material world is a reflection of the spiritual world, but some things are very beautiful. So to help us get an idea, he compared those things to the transcendental limbs of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Now there's another amazing pastime called "Wagering on Clothes and Ornaments." It's found in Garga-saṃhitā Arcā of Śrī Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī. He writes as follows: In Śrī Kṛṣṇa, absolute and complete mādhurya is present, which is actually his līlā-śakti, the potency through which he performs his unlimited pastimes. In Vṛndāvana, expanding himself, he is able to simultaneously with his many gopa friends and sakhīs play with each of them separately. During the afternoon, Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs enter a lake and become absorbed in water sports, splashing, jostling, and bathing each other in the lotus-filled lake. Thereafter, upon the banks, the sakhīs decorate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with beautiful garments and ornaments, sandalwood paste, and fresh fragrant flower garlands. Then the divine couple are escorted inside to a gem-studded flower cottage on the bank of the lake and seated comfortably upon a beautiful throne mounted with pearls and rubies. Then Vindā Devī offers them fruits, berries, and herbal drinks that she has personally prepared. Kṛṣṇa takes first, served by Śrī Rādhā herself and surrounded by the sakhīs. Then Kṛṣṇa lies down on a soft cushion decorated with streams of flowers. There he falls asleep thinking of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, his most beloved gopī, who herself is most happy and satisfied to see Kṛṣṇa resting so comfortably. Having gone outside the cottage while Kṛṣṇa rests, Rādhikā and her sakhīs with great love and delight relish together the remnants of the food and drinks just relished by Kṛṣṇa. After taking just a little of the remnants, Rādhikā's mind suddenly goes elsewhere. Just as the female cakorī bird feels impatient to see the lotus-like face of the king of the night, the moon, she is anxious to again behold the blooming lotus-like countenance of her beloved Kṛṣṇa. So she hastens back to the cottage. She stands there for a while with her eyes feasting upon Kṛṣṇa's tranquil handsome face and his bimba fruit-like lips further reddened by the chewing of tāmbūla. Then she takes the tāmbūla remnants and returns to distribute it amongst her sakhīs, taking some of that prasādam herself. However, Kṛṣṇa, having awoken and dying of curiosity to discover what the sakhīs and Rādhikā are discussing, completely covers himself with a sheet, feigning deep slumber. The gopīs are under the impression that Kṛṣṇa is actually sleeping. So they freely talk about him, his exploits, and other confidential matters all within his hearing. They enjoy themselves by freely laughing and joking. Yet somehow or other they come to understand that Kṛṣṇa is only pretending to be asleep and has ingeniously overheard everything that they have said. So immediately they are embarrassed and they clamp their lips together, pressing their tongues between their teeth, overcome by beautiful feminine shyness. Bashfully they look at each other and sit quietly for some time, unable to speak. However, soon they recover their sportive mood and, exchanging clever glances, they silently glide over to where Kṛṣṇa is resting and suddenly lift up the sheet covering Kṛṣṇa, saying, "So this is how you have a good sleep?" Playfully they tease Kṛṣṇa and all start laughing. In this way, time goes by in joyful fun as Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa, and the gopīs all enjoy jokes and laughter, immersed in mutual divine love. I love that: mutual divine love. Eventually they all fall into an idyllic sleep for some time and, awakening intoxicated with bliss, they all move to a large area and sit comfortably upon it with an air of carefree exuberance. Deciding to play a game of dice with Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs set down the rules, the stakes being each other's jewelry, clothes, and embraces.

So joking and immersed in prema, they all roll the dice and within a short while Kṛṣṇa is defeated by Rādhā, but he demands the necklace of his beloved, falsely claiming that he is the winner. Then Kṛṣṇa approaches Rādhā looking to take away her necklace. But Rādhā declines and chastises him for cheating with a slight slap of her lotus hand. She slaps Kṛṣṇa in the face. Now looking sobered up and feigning that he might have to leave, Kṛṣṇa says, "O Devī, if you are the real winner, then I shall certainly award you my wager. So be ready to accept it. Here are the embraces that I wagered." So then he embraces her and, desiring to behold Rādhārāṇī's crooked eyebrows and hear her words of chastisement to her beloved Śyāma, the pet parrots of the divine couple, Śuka and Śārikā, and their respective flocks appear and soon engage in a vigorous verbal battle. Just like you see birds sometimes chirping loudly to each other. In loving glorification they insistently dispute the respective virtues of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Suddenly Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa fall silent, listening to the parrots as if there was a sign to them to prepare to go home. Then Kṛṣṇa bids farewell to his beloved Rādhikā, heading back to rejoin the cows, while Rādhikā also walks away with their gopīs in the direction of Sūrya Mandira to offer worship there. Hare Kṛṣṇa. They wagered their clothes and ornaments.

So we'll finish today with a beautiful verse by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his compilation called Ujjvala Nīlamaṇi, one of my favorites. He's addressing Rādhārāṇī: "All glories to your wonderful ruby red silk sarī. O Rādhārāṇī, this sarī has doubled the passionate love I bear for you in my heart. Moving through the air in waves of sweetness, the tinkling sounds of your ankle bells silences the cooing of the śārikā birds maddened with amorous passion. That tinkling sound fills my heart with a host of ecstasies." Hare Kṛṣṇa. There we go. More stimulation for ecstatic love somewhere deep within our hearts.

Okay. So see you again next week. Dear devotees.

Śrī glories to Vraja. Bye-bye.