

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing lecture series entitled “The Glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.” Namaḥ oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 171, in which we will carry on with our present theme: the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, continuing with the second class on her merciful glances. But before beginning this class, I would like to pray for the blessings of my spiritual master. This prayer was composed by the poet Govinda-dāsa of the Gauḍīya Sampradāya. He prays:

“O Gurudeva, ocean of knowledge and divine wisdom, when will you call me your own and engage me in service at your lotus feet? When will I behold your divine form as you lovingly serve your beloved Lord? When will I see you absorbed in the nectar of divine love? And when will your merciful glance release the arrow of prema and pierce my heart with love of Kṛṣṇa? O Gurudeva, that is my only desire. Govinda sings your glories day and night. Govinda sings your glories day and night.” Hare Kṛṣṇa. Jai Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Now, as we have discussed, Śrī Rādhā’s eyes are wonderfully beautiful and divine, but as we are beginning to see, so are her glances. The poet Nandadāsa explains this with a charming metaphor. He writes as follows: “Her graceful eyebrows form Cupid’s bow. The straight line upon her forehead becomes the bowstring. The dark collyrium decorating her eyes becomes the polish of that bow, and her eyelashes form its delicate ornaments. But her glances—oh, those are the arrows! With those arrows, she mercilessly strikes the heart of Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Nanda.” Haribol. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, in devotional poetry, we often see that glances are compared to arrows, spears, and tridents, but eyes are compared to very soft and gentle things like lotuses, crescent moons, the eyes of a doe, or the waves of the milky ocean. So why are glances compared to weapons? The answer is because they pierce directly into the heart of Kṛṣṇa. If Kṛṣṇa’s heart is the target to be conquered, then Śrī Rādhā’s glances are the arrows to strike that target. Therefore, poets compare them to arrows called kaṭākṣa, or sidelong glances.

Now, let us consider the science of glances. In the Viṣṇu-dharmottara-purāṇa and in the Nāṭya-śāstra, there is a description of many types of glances. In fact, Bharata Muni describes 36 different glances. Some examples—and he is actually describing them in relationship to theatrical performances, but of course, everything comes from Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—are sama, a straight and level glance used at the beginning (he actually uses the example of the rāsa dance); ālokita, wide circular glances expressing wonder or curiosity; sācī, a sidelong glance used to convey hints or secret meanings; pralokita, glances moving from side to side; nimīlita, meaning half-closed eyes in a glance showing meditation or contemplation; ullokita, glances looking upwards; anuvṛtta, rapid up-and-down glances showing excitement or fear; and avalokita, glances looking downwards. Yes, those are some.

The Nāṭya-śāstra, in verses 40 through 44, further describes glances expressing many moods. Just as we have moods in this world, there are moods in the spiritual world; in fact, the moods in this world are the perverted reflection of the moods in the spiritual world. Prabhupāda said everything is there in the spiritual world except envy. So, the following are glances expressing moods: graceful glances, fearful glances, humorous glances, compassionate glances, wonderous glances, furious glances, heroic glances, and even disgusted glances. And there are affectionate glances, joyful glances, sorrowful glances, angry glances, proud glances, and astonished glances. Then he describes bashful glances, tired glances, doubtful glances, bewildered glances, intoxicating glances, and many more. In theater, the artists have to learn all of this. Altogether, these form 36 varieties of glances used in classical drama.

But then a question comes: how do we know that these glances actually exist in Śrī Rādhā and her compatriots in the spiritual world? Well, a medieval South Indian scholar named Mādhava Bhaṭṭa, in his book entitled Ānanda-vilāsa-līlā, explains that all the glances described by Bharata Muni in classical aesthetics find their perfect and complete expression in Śrī Rādhā and her pastimes with Kṛṣṇa. He describes that she is the treasure house of all beauty, all art, and all expression. Thus, we can understand that all these glances ultimately belong to Śrī Rādhā.

Now, when speaking about her glances specifically, I remembered a beautiful poem by the poet Raskhān. Remember, he was a Muslim who came to Vṛndāvana and became a Vrajavāsī. In one of his poems, he describes a gopī saying to her friend: “O sakhi, I have witnessed something very unusual in the forest today. The groves of Vṛndāvana seem to display many different moods—some trees appear crooked, some appear filled with love, some look astonished, others seem fearful. I concluded that all the forests have absorbed the different emotions of Śrī Rādhā’s glances. O friend, the eyes of Rādhā are the very life of the forests of Vṛndāvana; they welcome Mohan, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and serve him. In the same way, her glances nourish the endless pastimes of Braj.” Raskhān says that when he sees the forests of Vṛndāvana, he sees them as reflections of the glances of the queen of Vṛndāvana. How beautiful. The beauty of this world just pales before you as you hear these transcendental topics. This is a medicine for the disease of being alive.

So, we can conclude: even the forests of Braj catch the mood of Rādhārāṇī’s glances. Braj is truly magical and mystical. Now, another poet writes: “O lotus-faced Rādhā, with your glances and your charming, teasing words, how long will you continue to bewilder Murāri, Śrī Kṛṣṇa?” So, of course, that verse again reveals an important truth we discussed last week: Kṛṣṇa himself becomes controlled by the glance of Śrī Rādhā. Therefore, once again, devotees pray to have one of those glances—that Rādhā may look at them. That is very much in line with the famous saying: Oṁ sarvataḥ cakṣuṣe namaḥ—I offer my obeisances to the one whose eyes and glances see everywhere.

So, I would like to share now a beautiful pastime described by another great devotee of Braj, Bālavadāsa. He writes: “One day Lalitā and Viśākhā were walking near Varshana, and suddenly they heard a large crowd gathering somewhere nearby. Curious, they went to see what was happening and found that under a banyan tree there was an extraordinary sight. There was this radiant—it is described—siddha sage, a perfected sage, who sat there in meditation in a perfect lotus posture. The sage’s body glowed with spiritual brilliance and was covered with dry sandalwood ashes.” And what is really interesting: many Vrajavāsīs were circumambulating him with great respect.

So afterwards, Lalitā and Viśākhā went to see Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and shared that scene with her. They said, “O Rādhē, we have seen a great self-realized sage beneath the banyan tree. He seems ancient, perhaps hundreds of years old. People are saying that he grants whatever blessing someone asks from him. So, we think you should go and seek his blessings to always have the association of your beloved Kṛṣṇa and never be separated.”

Hearing this, Rādhā became very excited. She thought, “Oh, this is a rare opportunity.” Taking offerings, garlands, and a water pot, she went with her friends to meet the sage. When she arrived, she saw that Lalitā and Viśākhā had spoken truthfully, for the sage shone with extraordinary radiance. With folded palms, she approached him, bowed, and respectfully addressed him: “Oh great sage, please accept my respects. My name is Rādhā, daughter of Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu. I only have one desire in my heart. Please understand it and grant your blessing.”

But the sage remained silent. Rādhā’s friends began guessing: “Perhaps he is absorbed in samādhi,” they said out loud. “Perhaps he does not speak to women,” or, “Perhaps he is meditating on Mount Kailāśa. Perhaps he can’t speak at all.” Rādhārāṇī gently stopped them: “My dear friends, do not mock such an elevated sage.”

Again, she turned to the sage, asking him very respectfully for his blessings. Finally, the sage gestured that if she wanted his blessings, she must compete with him in a contest of glances. He gestured because his eyes were closed in samādhi. It was to be a contest not with weapons, but with glances. He indicated that when he opened his eyes, a very powerful energy would emerge, and only if she responded perfectly with different glances would that energy become peaceful. In other words, he would come up with some powerful glance, and she had to counter it with a peaceful glance. If she could, she would win and her desire would be fulfilled. So, she agreed.

The sage opened his eyes, and they blazed like burning coals. He cast a fearful glance at Śrī Rādhā, but she countered it with a fearless glance. Then he cast a moon-like glance—the moon can be very overpowering—but she answered it with a very shy glance. She defeated him! Then he cast a very passionate glance, and she answered it with a heroic glance. Finally, from the sage’s eyes came a merciful glance. It had been a big battle, and now this sage was looking at her with mercy—or even, you could say, wanting mercy. At that moment, Śrī Rādhā responded with a receptive glance. The sage was showing a merciful glance, and she was receiving it.

The sage became pleased and at last he spoke: “Oh young girl, ask whatever you desire.” Rādhā replied, “Dear sage, I already have everything by the grace of the Sun-god, but please bless me that I may remain always with my beloved Kṛṣṇa.”

The sage sat up straight, shoulders back, eyes open. He put his hand up: “Tathāstu. Tathāstu. Tathāstu.” Means, “So be it.” Everyone was watching. So be it—so what? At once, he removed the disguise he was wearing, and he embraced Śrī Rādhā. Everyone was shocked, but then they looked closely and saw it was none other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He had disguised himself as the sage for what reason? To relish the beauty of her glances. It was just a transcendental pastime. When everyone saw that, they all burst into laughter. Thus, Kṛṣṇa became enchanted and conquered by the glances of Śrī Rādhā.

Our author, Bālavadāsa, glorifies Rādhā as the mistress of divine glances and the beloved of Govardhana-dhārī Kṛṣṇa. What a pastime! In Braj, pastimes happen over and over, but by the mercy of Paurṇamāsī, they are ever-fresh, like the first time.

So, let us conclude today, Prabhus, with a verse by our beloved Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī from his prayer Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍāṣṭaka, verse number three: “For the pleasure of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, even Kṛṣṇa himself, yearning to attain her merciful sidelong glance, performs difficult austerities at the very precious and fragrant Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Regularly bathing and carefully observing all the appropriate rituals, may that supremely enchanting Rādhā-kuṇḍa always be my shelter.”

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has spoken; I have no right to say anything more. We are all subservient to his grace and his mercy. Thank you, Prabhus. There is more on glances—you know, there is a treasure chest with lots of jewels, and we have just opened the top. We are just peeking in at this point; there is so much nectar in this particular subject, Rādhārāṇī’s glances. See you next Friday.

Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvanēśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya—her wonderful sidelong glance kī jaya! Māyāpura-dhāma kī jaya! Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-yajña kī jaya! Nitāi-Gaura-premānande, Hari Haribol! Jai Jai Śrī Śrī Rādhē Śyām. Glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.
