

Hari Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, before we begin today, I would like to set the mood by calling upon the all-merciful Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu by way of a beautiful poem by a poet whose name was Kavirāja Śikhara. He lived in the late 17th century. He was born in the village of Pāṅ in the Bardhaman district of West Bengal, and he was a very intimate disciple of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in the line of Lord Nityānanda. One day he wrote:

Madhura madhura gaura-kiśora, madhura madhura naṭa; madhura madhura sabhā-sārā, madhura madhura haṭa. Sweet is the youthful Gaura, sweet is his dancing. Sweet, sweet are all his companions, sweet is his marketplace.

Madhura madhura mṛdaṅga bāje, madhura madhura tāna; madhura rasete mātala bhakata-gaṇa, madhura ghana. Sweet, sweet are the sounds of the mṛdaṅgas. Sweet, sweet are the rhythms. His devotees are wild with the sweet nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Sweet, sweet is their singing.

Madhura helana, madhura dolana, madhura madhura gati; madhura madhura vacana sundara, madhura madhura dyuti. Sweet is his leaning on a companion, and sweet is his swaying to and fro. Sweet, sweet are his actions and motions. Sweet, sweet are his beautiful words. Sweet, sweet is his effulgent glory.

Madhura adhara jini śaśadhara, madhura madhura hāsa; carita madhura madhura muralī-bāśā. Sweet are his lips that defeat the moon. Sweet, sweet is his laughter. Sweet is his āratī, his spiritual love, and his character. Sweet, sweet is his talking.

Madhura yugala nayana ratula, madhura īkṣita-cāya; madhura prīmera madhura bāḍita, śikhara śikhara gāya. Sweet are his reddish eyes, sweet are his sidelong glances, but unfortunately, Śikhara has not attained his sweet loving service.

We thank that poet.

So, we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 126, and herein we will continue discussing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s dress and attire. Fortunately, a lot of detail on this subject is given by Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī in his Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā, beginning from text 143, specifically in regards to decorations worn by Śrī Rādhā along with her dress and attire.

He begins with her crown: Bhūṣaṇam. Lalitā-devī makes a crown using flowers and buds of five colors. This crown is used to decorate Śrī Rādhā.

Number two: A string of flowers tied around the braids of her hair. Flower buds and similar ingredients closely strung together and placed on her hair are known as bālā-pāśyā—that’s a hair-braid ornament.

Then, earrings: Skilled craftsmen say there are five kinds of earrings she uses. They are known by the names Taṭaṅka, Kuṇḍala, Puṣpī, Karṇikā, and Caravehaṇa. Taṭaṅka: A hollow gold post worn in the ear is called taṭaṅka. This kind of earring is of two varieties: in the first variety, the petal of a golden ketakī flower is attached to this earring. In the second kind, the petal of some other color of a flower is attached. Kuṇḍala: When the earring is fashioned from flowers in order to resemble a certain object, the earring is called kuṇḍala. There are many different kinds of kuṇḍala earrings; the flowers may be arranged to resemble a peacock, a shark, lotus, a half-moon, or many other things. Puṣpī: The puṣpī earrings are fashioned from four different kinds of flowers placed in a circle with a large guñjā-berry in the middle. Four kinds of flowers circle around the guñjā-berry. Karṇikā: The karṇikā earring is fashioned from the whorl of a blue lotus surrounded by yellow flowers. In the middle are a bṛṅga flower and a pomegranate flower. Caravehaṇa: When the flower earring is so large that it completely covers the ear, the earring is known as caravehaṇa.

Then Latikā: An ornament of flowers placed on the upper forehead along the hairline is called latikā. Such an ornament should have flowers of two colors—red in the middle of the ornament, and other colored flowers on the two sides.

Number five: Grīvaka. A flower collar made of a single kind of flower. This is a necklace strung four times around the neck and it is called grīvaka.

Six: Aṅgada. An armlet. A flower armlet. An aṅgada may be fashioned of three kinds of flowers strung one after another to resemble a little flower creeper.

Seven: Kaṭī. A sash. A sash made of flowers of five different colors artistically strung together in a gently waving pattern is called a kaṭī.

Eight: Kaṭaka. Flower anklets. Anklets made of many different flower buds are called kaṭaka. These are of many different varieties.

Number nine: Maṇibandhanī. A bracelet made of flowers of four colors with bunches of flowers hanging down at three places is called maṇibandhanī.

The number 10: Haṁsaka. Flower shoes. It appears that Rādhārāṇī is decorated with flower shoes. When the decoration of flowers covers the entire top and side parts of the feet and there are bunches of flowers in four places, such a decoration is called haṁsaka.

Then Kūṇuli: A flower bodice. A bodice made of flowers of six colors artistically arranged and perfumed with musk, which begins from the neck, is called kūṇuli.

This is really the scientific approach to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the wonderful details of how Rādhārāṇī is dressed in Vṛndāvana using a lot of flowers. There are several nice pastimes about Śrī Rādhā’s attire. In Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, chapter 8, he writes that once Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī returned home forgetting that she was wearing Kṛṣṇa’s yellow cloth around her shoulders. When Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law, Jaṭilā, saw this yellow cloth instead of the customary cloth of another color, Rūpa writes, she sensed foul play and angrily stared at her daughter-in-law. At that time, Viśākhā-sakhī tried to protect her friend Rādhārāṇī by speaking the following words to Jaṭilā: “Dear Jaṭilā, at the festival, all us young girls, our hearts fluttering with happiness, playfully doused Rādhārāṇī with a strong mixture of turmeric and water, which dyed her silken shoulder cloth yellow. That is the reason the cloth is now yellow. Oh noble Jaṭilā, why do you stare at my friend Rādhārāṇī from the corner of your crooked eyes?”

In another poem by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, he relates once how, after cooking and serving Kṛṣṇa prasādam at Nandagrāma, Śrī Rādhā came out of the kitchen and sat down nearby. At that point, Mother Yaśodā appeared and began to dress and ornament her by first retying Rādhārāṇī’s hair into a graceful braid. You see that in India, sometimes the mothers of the young girls will be sitting in the morning sunshine braiding their daughter’s hair from behind. Then she applied fresh vermilion in the part of Rādhā’s hair, tilaka on her forehead, collyrium on her eyelids, and then she replaced the nose ring with her own most precious golden pearl she gave to Rādhā. Then she dressed Śrī Rādhā in a beautiful blue sari, its color matching Kṛṣṇa’s complexion, which caused Rādhā to blush. Meanwhile, one of Mother Yaśodā’s maidservants delivered a full tray of ornaments that it’s described “glittered like a thousand suns.” So, Mother Yaśodā selected a string of diamonds and hung it around Śrī Rādhā’s neck. Then again, moving behind Śrī Rādhā, Mother Yaśodā took Rādhā’s braid in her hands and decorated it with various hairpins. One hairpin was made of gold, one was made of diamonds, one was made of pearls, and others were made of jewels like rubies and emeralds. And while this intimate exchange took place between Śrī Rādhā and Mother Yaśodā, Rādhārāṇī’s girlfriends looked on. Then Yaśodā said, “Oh my precious little girl, your form and quality soothe my heart. I dream of them always. What sins have I committed that I cannot have you as my actual daughter? You and my son are like the two halves of my life, or the pupils of my two eyes. The King of Vraja also shares this sentiment, just as we share the sadness that you are not the wife of our dear Kṛṣṇa.”

At this point, I’d like to mention that Śrī Rādhā has dresses for specific occasions. She wears certain dresses for specific occasions. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in his Gītāvalī, verse 5, that sometimes Rādhā dresses herself according to her mood. Dhīrā-dhīra-patavāsa—he writes, “She is clothed in a two-part silken garment of both sober and non-sober emotional ecstasies.” That’s pretty deep. She is clothed in a two-part silken garment of both sober and non-sober emotional ecstasies. She has decorated herself with those moods.

We could say, as an example of different clothes for special moods or purposes, she has clothes for bathing and she has certain clothes for nighttime pastimes. Regarding bathing, Śrīla Kavi-karṇapūra writes in Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū, chapter 12: “Upon arriving at the Yamunā, Rādhārāṇī and her impatient Vraja-kumārīs—meaning her gopīs—immediately threw off their woolen shawls, covered by thin white cotton bathing outfits.” Their blissful bodies looked more beautiful than a stream of falling snow.

Now, in his book The Color Guide to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, by one of ISKCON’s first parikramā paṇḍitas, you could say, Rādhā-śekhara dāsa Brahmacārī—we owe a lot to that devotee—he relates that when Śrī Rādhā and her gopīs swim in Śyāma-kuṇḍa, they first place their clothes carefully on a nearby pilu bush. They put their clothes over that pilu bush and then they enter the water. And as we’ve many times discussed, such plants or trees or flowering bushes are all fully conscious devotees serving the Divine Couple in their own unique ways. Everything, every living entity in Goloka Vṛndāvana is a fully realized devotee; they’ve always been fully realized. Thus, this pilu bush that holds the gopīs’ clothes while they bathed also witnesses their pastimes. So, this pilu bush, in particular, was formerly a Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇa from Lord Śiva’s holy city of Kashi who executed severe austerities, hoping to ask a boon from the Lord face to face. Pleased with his devotee’s resolve, Kṛṣṇa eventually appeared to him. Thus, this brāhmaṇa requested that he be allowed to participate in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and so the Lord fulfilled his desire in this particular way. So thereafter, that brāhmaṇa became that pilu bush by the bank of Śyāma-kuṇḍa and served the gopīs by holding their clothes as they bathed daily. Presently, there is a bhajana-kuṭīra—you could say a Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura—just beside that pilu bush in Śyāma-kuṇḍa in Vṛndāvana; you can take darśana there. Actually, it’s said that while Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura resided there in that bhajana-kuṭīra on the banks of Śyāma-kuṇḍa, next to this pilu bush, he would sometimes discuss the Divine Couple’s pastimes with the bush. They would have conversations; fully Kṛṣṇa-conscious, pure devotees, or Vrajavāsīs.

Now regarding Rādhārāṇī’s dresses for nighttime pastimes, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his commentary on Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 5.74 writes: “Sometimes Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī takes on the role of abhisārikā.” An abhisārikā is a nāyikā, or heroine, who is eager to meet her beloved and she decides to meet him by leaving her home at midnight. Jīva Gosvāmī writes that usually an abhisārikā selects the full moon day for her abhisāra—rendezvous—with Kṛṣṇa, tatra priyā śuklam avāpnoti. On such days, Rādhā’s cloth is usually pristine white; we touched on this in a couple of classes years ago. This, of course, allows her to blend in with all the surroundings so no one can see her going to a rendezvous with Kṛṣṇa. To facilitate that meeting, Vṛndā-devī arranges that everything in the forest is also of a whitish color, including the trees, the leaves, the flowers, and even the grass. I think I mentioned one time this is transcendental choreography.

Then in Padyāvalī, verse 194, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that on a moonless night, when it’s dark, she wears dark bluish cloth to blend into the darkness on her way to a rendezvous with Kṛṣṇa, so she won’t be seen. On that dark moon night, Vṛndā-devī arranges that the whole forest is also dark while she’s on her way to her transcendental secret meeting with Kṛṣṇa. Deep spiritual emotions!

Now the ācāryas point out that of course Kṛṣṇa is also dark like a monsoon cloud, which also ensures during those nighttime pastimes that no one can see Him or their meeting; only their immediate helpers, the mañjarīs and the sakhīs, can witness their meeting. So much nectar!

So I would like to end today with another beautiful poem, this time by Kholāna Rāya. It reveals that although Śrī Rādhā is so beautiful in all these various clothes and ornaments we mentioned today, she is not dependent on those decorations for her beauty, for she herself is a reservoir of all beauty. Here it is: “Oh Rādhē, your beauty is beyond comparison. Your eyes do not need collyrium to be black. Your skin does not need oils to be soft. Your lips do not need pān—betel leaf—to be red. Your teeth are bright without polishing, and you are gorgeous without any ornamentation. You do not need any perfume to be fragrant, and you know all the art of loving pastimes without having to study the scriptures about such sublime līlās.” The poet Kholāna Rāya concludes: “You are the very breath of my Lord, the one who lives on Govardhana Hill.” He’s addressing Rādhā: “You are the very breath of my Lord, the one who lives on Govardhana Hill.”

Hari Kṛṣṇa, all for today, and we’ll be back next Friday. All glories to the revealer of the dawn!

Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! All transcendental book distribution kī jaya! All those who are grown in Kṛṣṇa consciousness!
