Hi Krishna everyone, welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of my most beloved Śrī Viṣṇu Kṛṣṇa.

Namaste. All glories to. So, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 66. In this lecture, I would like to continue analyzing Kṛṣṇa conscious poetry, again, as a means to awaken our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So far, in doing so, we have discussed the life and poetry of Vidyāpati, a medieval poet who was very much a favorite of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. I'll remind you of the famous verse by Kṛṣṇadās Kavirāj Goswami in Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya 10.115: "Vidyāpati-candidas, śrī-govinda, śrī-rūpa, dadāsa, gorā prora ananda." Śrī Sūrup Dās used to read the poems of Vidyāpati and Chandidas and Jīva Goswami's Śrī Govinda.

He used to make Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu very happy by singing these songs. And by a stroke of good luck, or better yet, an act of mercy, my good friend Hari Parshad Dāsa of the GBC Śāstra Committee led me to a Śāstra entitled Vaiṣṇava Pāvalī, where the Vaiṣṇava poet, whose name is actually Narottam Dāsa Ṭhākura, is quoted in his Dāna Caritra.

In his Dāna Caritra, he writes: "All glories to Śrī Vidyāpati, the crest jewel amongst poetic kings!

All glories to Śrī Vidyāpati, the abode of rasa!

All glories to Chandidas, the great connoisseur of rasa!

These poets are unparalleled in their excellence in the three worlds. The creation of these poets were pristine songs describing mādhurya rasa. These songs were written in prose and verse, and they were relished by my Lord Gaurāṅga along with Ray Rāmānanda and Sūrup Dās.

When Ray Rāmānanda and Sūrup Dās desired to awaken a particular mood within the Lord, they would sing these songs. Hearing their singing, their poetry, even wood and stones would melt. Such were the sweet pastimes of these three individuals. Those moods and emotions of Śrī Rādhā, which were hidden from the general mass of people, were demonstrated with great effort by my Lord Gaurāṅga to one and all.

But these rasas do not touch my heart even on listening to these songs." Thus Narottam Dāsa simply cries, "What a humble Vaiṣṇava!" So I was thinking, as we discussed Vidyāpati last week, let's discuss today the life and poetry of Chandidas, and we'll conclude next week with the life and poetry of Jīva Goswami.

Now, I researched a lot for this talk, because historically, some of you may know, there were four very famous poets in India named Chandidas. But with the help of several devout scholars, we were able to determine the original, or the most famous, or we could say, our Chandidas, whose poetry Mahāprabhu relished.

And apart from his amazing poetic contributions, some of which you'll hear tonight, his life history is equally interesting. I'll begin with that. So, this poet Chandidas was born in a Brahman family at the beginning of the 14th century in the village of Nanu'ra, actually, which is in the same Birbhum district of Bengal, I believe, that Jīva Goswami appeared.

His parents were Śākta or Durga worshippers. Thus, the ācāryas say that Chandidas was initially a materialist, because along with his parents, he worshipped the goddess Chandi, or Durga, who was actually one of the most ferocious forms of Kāli. Hence his name, Chandidas.

It's a full-on Śākta worshipper. Now, it's really interesting. In his purport to Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 5.18.22, Śrīla Prabhupāda, the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī Devī, clearly states that she does not bestow her favor on any materialistic person.

Although sometimes a materialist becomes very opulent in the eyes of another materialist, since opulence is bestowed upon him by the goddess Durgā, a material expansion of the goddess of Fortune, not by Lakṣmī Devī herself. Haribol!

So, I was reading that Chandidas coined a famous mantra which is used even today by worshippers of Durgā. We used to quote it. I remember during our some of our parikramas here in Vṛndāvana, when we came across a deity of Durga, it's a famous mantra: "O worshipable mother Durgā, please give me wealth, strength, fame, a good wife, and so on." Because there are unlimited material desires and so on.

So, Chandidas was engaged in Durga worship, specifically Chandi worship, and naturally, when one worships Durga or her expansions, so much material opulence comes. So it is said, you know, as he was growing up, he lived in a veritable palace.

It's also mentioned with a big garden. But I was very interested to learn that as his brother was a Vaiṣṇava who worshipped a Śālagrāma Śilā, yes, kind of, you could say for them, the black sheep in the family. And in those days, Vaiṣṇavas were generally very poor.

As such, Chandidas's brother never had any flowers. It's interesting to offer to his Śālagrāma Śilā, he was that poor. It's said he would often look at his brother Chandidas's garden, which wasn't far away, and complain, "My brother has so many flowers, but my Śālagrāma Śilā never gets any.

They all go to Chandi." So one day, while this brother was looking at the garden of Chandidas, he mentally offered a flower from that garden to his Śālagrāma Śilā. Now, somehow or other, the next day, Chandidas, his brother, picked picked the very same flower that he offered in meditation and offered it to the demigoddess Chandi, the family deity.

And when he did that, she appeared to him and she said, "I am very pleased with you, Chandidas. What benediction do you want?" So, Chandidas was like amazed.

He said, "Dear goddess, I am worshipping you every day. Why is it that today you finally appeared to me?" So Chandi, the demigoddess, she replied, "Because you have offered me a flower which has been offered previously to the Śālagrāma Śilā in meditation.

By seeing that flower, which is the pādma, which became the pādma of the Supreme Lord, I am pleased with you and so I have appeared before you." So she identified the Śālagrāma Śilā as the Supreme Lord as Kṛṣṇa. So Chandidas said, "My dear goddess Chandi, why have you never told me that the Śālagrāma Śilā, who is Kṛṣṇa, is superior to you?

I thought you were supreme." So Chandi smiled and said, "My dear Chandidas, you never asked me who was supreme. If you did, I would have replied that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Śālagrāma being nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa is thus worshipable." So, you know, when you come in contact with great personalities, you have a change of heart.

So when Chandidas heard this, he immediately said, "I'm so sorry. I've wasted my life. Please excuse me. From now on, I'm going to worship Kṛṣṇa and his consort Śrī Rādhā. Do I have your permission?" So Chandi said, "Yes, yes, that will make me very happy.

Happy because she's a demigoddess, she worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Go now and worship the Divine Couple." It's a wonderful story, a pastime. So after this, Chandidas wrote many, many beautiful poems and songs, all about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Previously, he was writing about Chandi. He had a change of heart. Some scholars say, I was reading, he wrote more than a thousand poems about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Isn't that wonderful?

And he was an accomplished poet even before then, he was famous. And how do we know that they were wonderful?

Again, as we heard in the beginning of this lecture, Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to listen to those poems and songs when he was in Jagannāth Purī, in the Gambhīr, in order to experience the higher states of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. Specifically, he appeared to try to understand Kṛṣṇa, appeared as Caitanya Mahāprabhu to try to understand the love that Rādhā had for Him, Kṛṣṇa.

So Chandidas was instrumental in that, from the worshipper of a demigod to a pure devotee. But unfortunately, our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas say that many people have distorted his poems and songs, not understanding their true meaning and purpose. They compare them to the loving sentiments of materialistic people, like as a boy loves a girl and a girl loves a boy.

Therefore, in the book Śrīmad Bhāgavata Parva, which contains, let me see, 32 excerpts from lectures on Śrīmad Bhāgavata given by Śrīla Bhakti Siddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and printed in The Harmonist and translated by my Godbrother Bhakti Prapanna Swami, Bhakti Siddhānta Sarasvatī comments.

As a result, he writes, "Many of our friends have forgotten the subjects pertaining to the Supreme Lord. They imagine Kṛṣṇa to be an angel or historical personality, and thus they speak in a way that is not for hearing, and they paint pictures that are not fit for seeing.

In this way, they are ruining themselves and others as well." These people have distorted Kṛṣṇa and Chandi's writings, he says it right there. Bhakti Siddhānta Sarasvatī's writings, which Mahāprabhu relished in the company of His most intimate associates. Thus, they have transformed these transcendental books into objects of their sense gratification.

It is very unfortunate and unjust that subject matters meant for discussion by high-class personalities are now talked about by ordinary people who lack the necessary qualifications. He goes on, "By proudly attempting to discuss these topics, such people have brought about their own ruination as well as those of others." Haribol!

Nowadays, he said, people are only interested in hearing things that appear pleasing to them. For this reason, they like to hear the teachings of impersonalists. It is very difficult to find people who are truly interested in hearing harikathā. People who are adverse to devotional service and yet advertise themselves as devotees, as learned scholars, as great renunciates, as qualified brāhmaṇas, or as Māyāvādīs, simply deceive people by claiming to be devotees or learned scholars.

They bring inauspiciousness upon the ordinary people. Unfortunate people thus fall into illusion. What quite a discord, of course, he gave on that point. And so we, as followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and followers of him, we feel very grateful, indebted to them, that in modern times, in the age of Kali, by their mercy, we can understand the transcendental nature of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's loving pastimes.

Of course, we're all works in progress. But if you read Kṛṣṇa Book, Prabhupāda openly discusses many amorous pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but with the proper purport.

And our duty is to repeat in the same way. But we have access to those pastimes. Of course, we're going slowly through the nine cantos of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, which Prabhupāda said is the qualification for understanding the Tenth Canto.

In the Ninth Canto, we hear, we come to learn that God is very great and very, very small, and we hear about His pastimes, and we understand He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead, above the modes of material nature, and His pastimes are pure and not touched by the impurities of this material world.

So Prabhupāda is leading us by the hand, gradually, and we can understand these transcendental subject matters, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana, all by his mercy.

So we owe so much to Prabhupāda.

Everything, everything we owe to Prabhupāda.

So, in that light, let us hear some appropriate work by Chandidas. As we mentioned last Friday, the works of these scholars are very, very deep, but there are also works that are appropriate for us to hear. For example, in the following poem, Chandidas composed, we learn on hearing the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute, Śrī Rādhā became very distressed.

She loves Kṛṣṇa. She hears the flute, so she gets distressed, and she addressed her friend and chaperon, who happened to be an old lady, as follows. It's really nice, really sweet: "Oh grandmother, who is it that is playing a flute?

Jendī dī starts off on the bank of the river, Jendī Yamunā. Oh grandmother, who is it that that is playing a flute in the grove of Gokula?

My body is paralyzed and my mind has become mad. I have made a mess of my cooking all because of the sound of that flute. Oh grandmother, who is it who plays that flute?

What sort of man is he?

I shall become his slave and offer myself at his feet. Oh grandmother, who is it that is playing the flute with such joyfulness of heart?

Oh grandmother, what offense have I done at his feet?

Rivers of tears flow down from my eyes. Oh grandmother, I have lost my soul at the sound of his flute. Is it the son of Nanda playing the flute so sweetly simply to destroy that the tranquility of my mind?

I am not a bird that I can fly to him. Thus, let the let the Earth split open so that I may enter into it and hide myself. Oh grandmother, everyone can see when a forest is on fire, but no one can see my heart which is burning like the potter's oven.

Wow. My heart is drying up with the desire for Kṛṣṇa." So sings Chandidas, bowing his head to his Devī Śālinī. A note here, Śālinī is another name for the goddess Chandi. So he still has reverence for her. So wonderful, so sweet.

Now, here at this point of the lecture, like we did last Friday, just to kind of understand the science of transcendental poetry, I'd like to introduce a poetic technique which Chandidas and other famous poets used, you could say, to decorate their poetry, to make it especially sweet and awaken emotions deep within our hearts, and once again fulfill the maxim: "What is it?

Kim kimanda Matas." I just love it. What is the use of a Bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?

If they penetrate the heart, but do not cause the head to spin, I mean, like all the way. Haribol. So last week, you may remember it was a bit technical, but again, it's required. We discussed Anuprāśa. Remember, using similar syllables in a poem or a verse, using them continuously, similar syllables.

It's a technique poets use. So this week, I'd like to introduce all of you to the technique of Ananvaya. Ananvaya, it's called the ornament of self-comparison. Interesting. The ornament of self-comparison. I'll explain which literally means "that which cannot be compared to anything but itself." That's the essence.

That which cannot be compared to anything else but itself. In this technique, a particular object is compared to itself. It's described thus, imparting the author's intent that the object cannot be compared to anything else. It's so wonderful. What else can compare to it?

That's the gist. Now, Śrī Jīva Goswami gives an example of this in a verse in his *Candrodaya*, chapter 5, text 12, as follows. He writes, "When an object finds itself being expressed as both *upamāna* (means the standard of comparison) and *upamāna* (the object of comparison), the resultant ornament is known as *anvaya* or self-comparison." So don't get lost here.

We're going to give some examples. And as an example, he writes, "that'll become very clear." The moon is like what?

The moon is like the moon. The moon is like the moon. The moon is like the moon. What can compare to the moon?

So, the poets use this technique. Let's say, make up something here in the English language. An example of this could be a poem like this: "A father is like a father, a mother like a mother, a brother like a brother, there cannot be another." I'm a poet, I didn't know it. "A father is like a father, a mother like a mother, a brother like a brother, there cannot be another." I mean, that's very simplistic.

It's not anywhere on the transcendental platform like these authors. But Śrī Jīva Goswami, now that you have an understanding, gives an example of Ananvaya in his Bhakti Rasāmṛta Sindhu, this book, "Seek and You Shall Find," Bhakti Rasāmṛta Sindhu, in chapter 4, he writes as follows: "Now it becomes very clear through their transcendental poetry.

Kṛṣṇa appears effulgent like Kṛṣṇa, and Rādhā appears fulgent like Rādhā. What else can one compare both of them to in order to highlight their qualities?

Nothing else, because they're the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Now, more examples by Rūpa Goswami in his *Alaṅkāra Kaumudī*, 8.233. Śrī Kavi Karṇapūr defines this Ananvaya in a similar way as did Jīva Goswami. His example is as follows: "Having once seen that beautiful Rādhā like Rādhā, unparalleled in the worlds, my mind carries even today the deep impression of her sidelong glances, which are unparalleled like her sidelong glances, which are unparalleled like her sidelong glances." Such a wonderful example.

We keep going. Śrī Balarāma Dāsa, I found this book in Vṛndāvana Research Institute, in his *Sahitya Kaumudī*, 106.

He quotes another example in chapter nine, that chapter is entitled *Kāvya Kaumudī*. He writes, "I really like this one: The ocean is as great as the ocean, and the moon is as effulgent as the moon." What a wonderful technique.

It's just like you're relishing it. Some other examples of Ananvaya in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava literature are as follows. Um, Haribol, help me with this part. In *Gopāla Campū*, PV 2231, we hear, and he gives the Sanskrit, but it's very complicated.

So the translation: "The wives of the brāhmaṇas said to Kṛṣṇa, 'You should not speak in this way, O Lord. We always say that Your good self is as merciful as Your good self. Therefore, kindly be merciful to us. You asked us earlier as to what You could do for us.

Kindly accept us as Your own and make us attain that state of being servants of Your lotus feet.'" So we heard that technique there. And in *Gopāla Campū*, purport 3154, on the moonlit night of the Rāsa-līlā, "The night appeared as effulgent as the night.

The arena for the rasa dance was comparable only to itself. The beautiful-eyed gopīs were like themselves, and Kṛṣṇa too was comparable only to Himself." So many examples. A little more. *Gopāla Campū*, Uttara 3449: "Kṛṣṇa is the topmost amongst all bluish objects, beginning with the sapphire jewel.

He is the king of all greatly beautiful objects. During His marriage, He was bathed very well, and through His naturally very radiated effulgence, He conquered even His own beauty. In other words, He was like Himself, and there was nobody like Him." And finally, the same book, *Gopāla Campū*.

Excuse me, this is *Govinda Līlāmṛta* actually, 11.118: "Sufficiently endowed with good qualities that give pleasure to Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā can only be compared to Śrī Rādhā Herself. And as the beauty of her bodily limbs defeats the beauty of all beautiful objects of comparison such as the moon or the lotus, that beauty can be compared only to the beauty of her bodily limbs." All Kṛṣṇa!

I think we have enough examples there to probably understand that poetic technique. So, one last week, one this week. We did it. And next week, I have a couple more with Jīva Goswami. We're getting some lessons here in transcendental poetry, which is so much a part of our Gauḍīya tradition.

It's interesting to go into detail. So, I thought, let us finish today with another poem by Chandidas. It's also from that book, *Vaiṣṇava Pāvalī*. I'll just recite the verses again, and not the Sanskrit. It's so nice. Here's Chandidas appearing before us.

It's like his heart, he's revealing his heart. "Oh dear, what is disturbing Śrī Rādhā's mind?

Sitting alone in a solitary place, she doesn't listen to anyone or anything. In her meditation, she always desires to drink nectar from the dark cloud of charm. Such is her meditation that even her eyes don't move a bit. Rejecting food and wearing a saffron cloth, she appears just like a great yogini.

Unraveling her braids and removing the flowers from her hair, she looks at her loosened hair with a smiling face. She then looks at the moon. Who knows what she says while raising her hands, fixed on each other?

The peacock and the pan, Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā, gaze at each other's necks. Chandidas says that all this is the effect of *pūrva rāga*, the budding of affection for one another." Remember we discussed *pūrva rāga*, it means before Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet.

So here, in this poem, Rādhā's hankering for Kṛṣṇa, even though she hasn't just met Him, right?

Chandidas says that all this is the effect of *pūrva rāga*, the budding of affection for each other. I'll finish there. Wow. So relishable. What else do we want to hear or read or see or look at?

The Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Okay, so I'll finish there. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the *dhāma*.

Be ready next week for Jīva Goswami. I'm already researching it. It's going to be pure nectar. May all glories to Śrī Guru and Śrī Gaurāṅga!

Jay Jay Śrī.