

Hari Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, we’re continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 158, in which we will continue to discuss the various disguises Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa use in Their pastimes. In this episode, Kṛṣṇa cleverly disguises Himself as a seller of mirrors—a mirror merchant, I guess you could say. But I would like to begin today by offering a prayer to Śrī Kṛṣṇa by Śrīla Vyāsadeva in his composition Viṣṇu-sahasra-nāma-stotra, meaning the thousand names of Lord Viṣṇu, because there he mentions that Kṛṣṇa, the creator of the universe, takes on various disguises. He mentions He takes on various disguises. It is two verses; he writes:

Viṣṇave viṣṇave. By the mere remembrance of Him, one is freed from the bondage of birth and transmigration. I bow to that Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, the creator of the universe.

And then the second verse: Bhūtānām abihaya bhu ana rūpa rūpāya viṣṇave prau viṣṇave. So here it is: “I bow down to the first manifested of all manifestations. Who upholds the earth? Who takes different forms and disguises? The creator, Lord Viṣṇu Kṛṣṇa, who takes different forms and disguises, the creator, Lord Viṣṇu Kṛṣṇa.”

And I was thinking, what is the result of preparing and listening to these many lectures on Kṛṣṇa’s disguise pastimes that we’ve been giving? Well, the Vrajavāsī poet Vyāsadāsa, whom we often quote, he enlightens us. He writes—he’s so kind—”Oh brothers, hearing the disguised pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, wherein He hides His identity in order to approach Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, breaks the knots of birth and death. He can hide from the sun, the moon, the earth, and even from the sky, but He cannot hide His identity from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.” Vyāsadāsa sings the glories of the players in the game of disguises, Śrī Śyāmasundara and Madanamohana.

Wow. So again, this would be Kṛṣṇa’s mirror-seller disguise pastime. Now, in Sanskrit, mirrors are known as darpaṇam, darpaṇam, which literally means “that in which one can see his own reflection.” Now, śāstra says that such mirrors can take special forms. I mean, we have a standard mirror, but special forms are like the quiet water of a lake. Water in a pot can act as a mirror, a plain sheet of silver, gold, or brass, or the poet describes even drops of morning dew. I thought that was cute—even drops of morning dew. And all these types of mirrors are actually used in different pastimes of the divine couple in Vraja. The lesser-known poet Bhānudāsa describes in one of his poems as follows: “Oh gopī, just look at those blissful cows. When Mohana plays His flute, the cows gather around Him like bees circling a fragrant flower. Gopāla’s form is reflected in their eyes just like in a mirror. And when they close their eyes, that reflection remains forever imprinted within their hearts. Just as Gopāla is perfect, so are His cows. Oh, my mind remains steady at heart, for all of Vraja trembles with excitement when Govinda’s countless cows race towards Nanda-grāma.” The poet Bhānudāsa dives deep in the evening bliss of Vraja. Hari Kṛṣṇa!

So therein we hear how even the eyes of cows work as mirrors, reflecting the image of Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. So the following pastime is described by the poet Govinda Dāsa. Sometimes he’s referred to as Govinda Svāmī, who was one of the eight Aṣṭachāpa poets in the Puṣṭimārga tradition, who were or are followers of Vallabhācārya. We may quote these poets of Vallabhācārya with authority, for Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in his purport to Bhāgavatam 1.1.1—I’ve quoted it before: “Within the past 500 years, many erudite scholars and ācāryas like Jīva Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Vallabhācārya, and many other distinguished scholars, even after the time of Lord Caitanya, made elaborate commentaries on the Bhāgavatam, and the serious student would do well to attempt to go through them to better relish the transcendental messages.” So therein we hear the name of Vallabhācārya. So this pastime, related by his disciple Govinda Dāsa, is called “A Mirror, the Playground of the Eyes.” The poet describes—you’ll see—but it’s entitled “A Mirror, the Playground of the Eyes.”

One day, he describes, in her courtyard in Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the Queen of Vraja, sat feeding her parrots, offering them what? Seeds of love and grains of hope. Wow. She feeds her parrots what? Seeds of love and grains of hope. And as the morning sun entered her chamber, you could say, and as its rays spread across the room, her gopī friends gathered to begin decorating her, because it was time to prepare her to meet Kṛṣṇa. So they lit the lamps, they drew the curtains, and they had brought baskets filled with flowers of what? Mālatī flowers, Mallikā flowers, campā flowers, jasmine flowers, mango blossoms, and night-blooming lotuses. So they adorned Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s hair with these flowers, and soon, as a result, bees gathered around her crown, humming in bliss; the poet describes forming a living garland. Wow.

And after being dressed, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī began walking towards Mohanakunda. I never heard of that before, Mohanakunda. I looked it up; it means “the lake of attachment.” Mohanakunda. It’s actually a lake near or on Govardhana Hill where Kṛṣṇa, at that time, was herding His cows. Now, the poet describes the perspiration on Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful body shimmered like diamonds as sunlight filtered through the forest, and as those drops of perspiration fell upon the ground, Govardhana himself seemed to dance in joy just from the perspiration falling on him. Kṛṣṇa!

Now, the moment that Kṛṣṇa saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s beauty as she was wandering nearby, He forgot all His cows—forgot all His cows altogether—and His body became stunned. In fact, the poet describes He couldn’t take His eyes off Śrīmatī Rādhikā. But unaware of Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sat beneath a tree with her gopī friends, who began telling her a story to amuse her. It appears this is what gopīs do; they tell her stories to amuse her. So, in this story, they spoke of a handsome deer—meaning a male deer—wandering in the forest, who became enchanted upon seeing a beautiful doe, a female deer. But suddenly, a hunter appeared, hunting with a bow and arrow. And the male deer, unaware of the danger, just continued roaming freely. So seeing this, the doe—the female deer—became terrified. And as the hunter aimed his arrow at the handsome deer, the doe leapt forward and took the arrow upon herself—it’s described like that, upon herself—the poet, saving the male deer. And with that, the male deer fled into some grassy fields and began lamenting bitterly, lost the doe. But after some time, another doe passed by and again the deer became attracted, attached. So the gopīs concluded in the story they’re telling; they said, “Oh Rādhā, such is the nature of the heart: restless, dissatisfied, and always moving on.”

So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said, and it’s very enlightening, she said, “Therefore, one should give one’s heart to Kṛṣṇa, who makes the heart His home and never leaves.” What advice! Let us take it to heart. She said, “Therefore, one should give one’s heart to Kṛṣṇa, who makes the heart His home and never leaves.” Hari Kṛṣṇa!

So there was a pause as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s gopī friends pondered her deep sentiments of love for Kṛṣṇa, and then Lalitā approached Rādhārāṇī and said, “Oh Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Kṛṣṇa has sent you a riddle.” Now, riddles are very much a part of Vraja pastimes. I think at some point we’ll have classes on the Vraja riddles. So, here’s one: Kṛṣṇa sent you a riddle. Lalitā said, “If you can solve it, He promises to become your lifelong servant.” The gopīs would love that! If you can solve this riddle, He says, “He’ll become your lifelong servant.”

So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī replied anxiously, “So, tell me, what is the riddle?”

So Lalitā replied, “Kṛṣṇa’s riddle is: What is that place where one’s eyes playfully delight in beauty?”

So think about that. Riddles are written in such a way that you don’t get the point maybe immediately, but there’s some deep substance. So the riddle is: What is that place where one’s eyes playfully delight in beauty?

So Viśākhā-sakhī, she laughed and said, “Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, solving this riddle will make Kṛṣṇa your servant. Come on!” Which caused all the gopīs to laugh. But after much thought, neither Rādhārāṇī nor any of her gopī friends could solve the riddle. So what did they do? They all went to Vṛndādevī to ask Vṛndādevī for her help. But the poet says even she could not solve the riddle. So distressed, Rādhā returned to the kuṇḍa where she was and she began to cry. And there the gopīs comforted her by saying, “Dear Rādhā, do not strain your beautiful eyes over a riddle. Your beauty has already made Kṛṣṇa your servant.” And then they began decorating her again, chanting, “All glories to the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī! All glories to the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī! All glories to the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī!” And the poet Govinda Dāsa says—he writes—”Decorating Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was like offering a lamp to the sun. Her ornaments, flowers, and garments only enhanced her natural splendor.” And the radiance of beauty reached Kṛṣṇa even though He was far away. And the radiance of beauty—he’s describing, you know, radiance—the radiance of beauty somehow reached Kṛṣṇa, although He was some distance away. Then he goes on to describe that although Kṛṣṇa experienced her beauty in this mystical way, He lamented, thinking, “Alas, I still can’t meet Rādhā until she solves the riddle. I cannot meet Rādhā until she solves the riddle.” So, anxious for her association, He sat down and devised a plan, how He could easily approach her. That’s the purpose of all these disguises, to get closer.

And what was that plan? Well, Kṛṣṇa disguised Himself as a gopī selling mirrors. A gopī who sold mirrors. Then He decorated Himself with a veil over His head with small, coin-sized mirrors shining like moons. Can you imagine a veil like that? Small, coin-sized mirrors, all of them shining like moons. So then, carrying large mirrors—or bigger mirrors, of course—He left and soon arrived at Rādhā’s kuṇḍa, and upon seeing many gopīs present, He called out, saying, “Oh beautiful ladies, buy these mirrors today! For the price of one, you can take them all.” He’s so anxious!

So, Viśākhā-sakhī approached and inquired about what appeared to be the finest mirror. But Kṛṣṇa, in the guise of the mirror-seller, He said, “That mirror is most precious. First let your Queen see it before I sell it.” The plot thickens. So, always, you know, with Rādhā’s interest in mind, Viśākhā happily agreed and led the mirror-seller Kṛṣṇa, in disguise, to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who sat surrounded by her gopī friends, absorbed in trying to solve the unsolved riddle. Riddles are like that.

Now, it’s described that upon seeing this gopī mirror-seller, Rādhārāṇī felt a sudden, unexplainable joy. I wonder why. Then the mirror-seller gopī said, “Oh Rādhā, please behold your beauty in this mirror.” He wanted her to take the mirror and look. “Please behold your beauty in this mirror.” But then He added, “There is one concern, however. The elders say that when a beautiful woman looks alone into a mirror, the influence of the evil eye may diminish her beauty.” Wow. He said, “There’s one concern. The elders say that when a beautiful woman looks alone into a mirror, the influence of the evil eye may diminish her beauty.”

So concerned, Viśākhā asked, “Then what is the solution?” Because, you know, you want to give the mirror for her to look. “So what is the solution?”

So the mirror-seller, with a smile, replied, “But if an unattractive woman like me looks into the mirror at the same time, the evil eye is neutralized.” She’s just making all this up. “But if an unattractive woman like me looks into the mirror at the same time, the evil eye is neutralized.”

So at that point, all the gopīs present encouraged her to look into the mirror along with the mirror-seller, that gopī. So seizing the moment, Kṛṣṇa, smiling within His disguise, took the cue. So He stepped alongside Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, holding the mirror in such a way as they gazed into it together, and as their eyes delighted in one another’s beauty, they were caught in a playful exchange of glances.

Then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī suddenly exclaimed, “I know it now! I know it now! I know the answer to the riddle!”

What was the riddle? Where is that place where the eyes playfully delight in beauty? “Ah, it is a mirror!” Just see how the mirror is a playground for her eyes, because she realized it was Kṛṣṇa’s eyes—obviously her lover. So at that point, the gopīs burst into a happy applause as Kṛṣṇa quickly cast aside His disguise, revealed His true form, and what? He bowed at Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s feet, declaring, “Now I am your eternal servant.” The gopīs loved it. So with that, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī embraced Him, and all the gopīs laughed while enjoying their own reflections in the mirror. The poet concludes, Govinda Dāsa sings of Vrajendrahari, his very life and soul.

Wow, the mirror pastime. Interesting how it unfolded. Kṛṣṇa is so tricky! So let us conclude today with a prayer by the poet Vyāsadāsa again. Vyāsadāsa, a beautiful prayer—actually, it’s, I could say, maybe one of my favorites now. He writes: “My chanting beads, my simple robes, and the sacred nights of Vṛndāvana are all precious, yet my greatest wealth is to sit in the company of Rasika devotees. The milk of the cows is sweeter than jaggery—so like sugar—the forest groves more luxurious than palaces, and seeing the lotus face of my Guru is more desirable than seeing the lotus face of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Kṛṣṇa! Thanks to these poets for enlightening us, but let us remember: for us, Prabhupāda is the revealer of the dawn. He’s so kind. I hope you enjoyed this mirror pastime, Kṛṣṇa disguising Himself as a mirror-seller. I did more research—I’m actually in Vṛndāvana, I’m back home in Vraja—and I looked in the books behind me and I found some more disguise pastimes. Just going to go on! I don’t know how many there are; Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are unlimited. So we’ll prepare for next Friday.

Hari Kṛṣṇa! Now, especially in the December marathon, get out and distribute those books! Kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda! Thank you for Kṛṣṇa!
