

Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing lectures on the glories of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda. All glories to him. So, we are continuing with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 155, in which we will continue to discuss the various disguises Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa use in Their transcendental pastimes. In this episode, Kṛṣṇa cleverly disguises Himself as what? An artist. An artist.

In his list of Kṛṣṇa’s disguises in Gopāla-campū, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī mentions Kṛṣṇa assuming this particular disguise of an artist. It is in the first chapter of Gopāla-campū, 29th pūraṇa, verse 93. He writes: “When Kṛṣṇa came as a girl artist, Rādhā said, ‘Oh gopī friend, this dark girl is an artist. In a secluded place, she showed me a colorful picture of a girl just like me standing next to a peerlessly handsome boy.’” And we’ll see how that unfolds later on.

Now, in Sanskrit, art is called kalā, or literally the performance of art such as singing, dancing, writing, painting, or it is described even as debating; it is an art. And what’s really interesting is that amongst the innumerable names of Kṛṣṇa, one is sarva-kalā-paripūrṇa, which means “one who is the abode of all art forms.” Another name we can meditate on: sarva-kalā-paripūrṇa, one who is the abode of all art forms. That is Kṛṣṇa.

In February 1973, I was reading, Śrīla Prabhupāda was invited to speak at an art gallery—interesting, at an art gallery—in Auckland, New Zealand. And there, he invited his listeners to contemplate the works of the supreme artist, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He said, “The rose is created out of the energies of the Supreme Lord, but these energies are so subtle and so artistic that a nice flower can bloom overnight.” That a nice flower can bloom overnight. So Prabhupāda concluded, “Kṛṣṇa is the greatest artist.”

Now, the famous Vrajavāsī poet Vṛndāvanadāsa, he writes: “The art of pastimes presides over the land of Vṛndāvana. The forest grove of Vṛndāvana is like a painting in a royal palace. The cows, Govardhana Hill, and the milky waters of Mānasī-gaṅgā are all artistically decorating the Vṛndāvana forest. Roaming in the dust of Vṛndāvana is a greater boon than even roaming in the heavenly planets.” Vṛndāvanadāsa offers his respects to the forest of Vṛndāvana, which is a piece of art painted and maintained by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī herself. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, the pastime in Gopāla-campū by Jīva Gosvāmī, wherein Kṛṣṇa disguises Himself as a female painter, is elaborated on by the Vaiṣṇava poet Kumbhādāsa. Kumbhādāsa—we’ve quoted him several times in the years before. But before he begins to describe the pastime, he glorifies his spiritual master. So nice. As follows, he writes: “Worship the lotus feet of the guru, who is the embodiment of bliss and who grants permission to reside near rasika-ācāryas. Glories to the words manifested from the guru’s lotus mouth, which alone are able to save one from the whirlpool of the illusory energy. Without service to one’s guru, one cannot develop the taste for Kṛṣṇa’s names. I offer my respects to the guru who allows one to glance at the pastimes of Govardhana.” Hare Kṛṣṇa. Wow.

So he continues, he tells the pastime now. He addresses all of us. “Oh brother”—so sweet, he addresses us all—”Oh brother, one day the moonlike face of Śrī Rādhā was eclipsed with social rules. She was sitting in her chambers in her palace under the surveillance of her in-laws. Her heart was shivering from the coldness of separation, and her limbs were craving association with Śyāmasundara.” So at one point, he describes Lalitā came to see Śrī Rādhā, and she said, “O Pārī”—I love that name, pārī means dear one—”O Pārī, the crown jewel of all gopīs, why does your glowing golden face look like a piece of tarnished copper? What is bothering you?”

So Śrī Rādhā placed her head on Lalitā’s shoulder and she said, “Oh, the knower of my heart’s desires, I cannot hide anything from you. The separation from Kṛṣṇa is fading the radiance of my face. Without Kṛṣṇa’s darśana, my life feels like a day without Sūrya, the sun. Every breath for me feels like a curse put upon my body. The pores on my skin feel like scorpion bites, and these soft silken robes of mine feel like the bites of venomous serpents. Oh Lalitā, do you know any herb to cure this disease of mine?”

So Lalitā replied, “Oh Śrī Rādhā, the only cure for this disease is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names.” Wow. “Oh Śrī Rādhā, the only cure for this disease is Kṛṣṇa’s names.” So Śrī Rādhā agreed. She said, “Indeed, do not delay, Lalitā, and sing with me Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names.” Then Lalitā and all of Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants, along with their sakhīs, started kīrtana in Śrī Rādhā’s quarters, singing: Mukunda Mādhava citta-cora vaṁśīdhara Gopāla manohara. Wow. Mukunda Mādhava citta-cora vaṁśīdhara Gopāla manohara. And every single pore of Śrī Rādhā’s transcendental body was chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names. The poet describes tears were flowing from her lotus eyes like waterfalls from the cliffs of the Himalayas.

Wow. When her body started to regain her usual golden radiance, her mind became fixed on the threefold bending form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. And as the sounds of His names being sung reached Kṛṣṇa’s ears—who by Paurṇamāsī’s arrangement at that time was playing in the forest with His cowherd friends—His heart, Kṛṣṇa’s heart, became restless hearing this call of the gopīs. The gopīs are engaged in kīrtana; it’s the poet describes it as a call to Kṛṣṇa. His heart became restless hearing this kīrtana, this call of the gopīs. So He created a ruse, and He immediately ran away from the pasturing grounds, leaving His cows behind with the gopas.

Now, when Kṛṣṇa reached the stairs leading to the palace and eventually into her chambers, He realized that her in-laws might be there at that time of the day guarding her as they often do. So He secretly came into the palace somehow or other, and He began searching frantically around the palace and eventually came to one room where He found what? A sarī of Jaṭilā, Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law. He’s actually looking for a disguise. So He came to one room, and there’s a sarī of Jaṭilā. So an amazing disguise. And He puts it on, and He makes His way to Rādhā’s chamber.

Now, when He arrived there, seeing this now beautiful, dark-skinned gopī wearing a white silken sarī, Jaṭilā stopped this gopī and said, “We haven’t seen you before; who are you?” So Kṛṣṇa, with the beautiful feminine voice, He said, “I am Raṅgelī-sakhī,”—beautiful name—”a very famous painter. I have been sent here by King Vṛṣabhānu to bring a beautiful painting for his daughter, Śrī Rādhā.” So Jaṭilā looked at this new gopī, very—it’s described suspiciously—and said, “Now wait a minute, is that my sarī you’re wearing?” So Raṅgelī-sakhī replied, “Of course not! Why do you think so? Do you think that such a sarī is so rare that only you can own one? Please do not waste my time anymore. I’ve come to see your daughter-in-law.”

Now, the poet describes, hearing such a bold answer, Jaṭilā showed this painter gopī the way to Rādhārāṇī’s chambers. And covering His head with a sarī and hiding this painting that He was carrying, Kṛṣṇa disguised as Raṅgelī-sakhī entered Śrī Rādhā’s chamber. He made it again. And there, the poet describes, He heard musical sounds played on different instruments forming a melody to accompany the slow singing of His names, the kīrtana. He describes that Śrī Rādhā’s chambers were filled with dewy, fragrant air mixed with chanting of the holy names of Kṛṣṇa. In your mind’s eye: dewy, fragrant air mixed with the chanting of the holy names of Kṛṣṇa.

So the gopīs were all having kīrtana, and in the middle of it all sat Śrī Rādhā, whose face was glowing like the morning sun as tears flowed like streams down her cheeks. And as the sounds of disguised Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells disturbed the music and Śrī Rādhā’s meditation, she opened her eyes and saw Raṅgelī-sakhī standing there with a painting in her arms, immersed in hearing His own sweet holy names. So, seeing this beautiful gopī, there’s something about her that Śrī Rādhā’s throat became choked with rasa, and this made her efforts to speak useless. So Lalitā had to speak on her behalf. Lalitā addressed this new gopī: “Oh young gopī, who are you? You disturbed us while we were worshiping the God of Love. While we were worshiping the God of Love, by kīrtana, when we were reaching the stage of the approaching meeting, sambhoga, you disturbed our meditation. What is the reason you have come here?” They were chanting to remember Kṛṣṇa, to come close to Kṛṣṇa.

So Raṅgelī-sakhī said, “Well, please forgive me, but I have been sent here by King Vṛṣabhānu. My name is Raṅgelī-sakhī, and I’m an artist. I paint the sun, I paint the moon, I paint trees, I paint flowers, and I paint demigods. And I have a painting that I would like to present to Śrī Rādhā.” So Lalitā said, “This is not a good time for such things. You know, we’re having our session, chanting, please come again later.” But Raṅgelī-sakhī protested. She said, “No, it’s very important. You see, my art is magical, and if your queen does not look at the picture, the painting, very soon the colors will fly away to the sky. The colors that I use for this painting have been mixed with camphor and other herbs. Thus, they look magical. And when one looks upon a picture painted with such colors, all their diseases, all their worries, even untold ones will be cured.”

Wow. So hearing this—because everyone wants, you know, Rādhārāṇī is in great despair—so the gopīs wanted to calm down. So Lalitā, hearing this, allowed this gopī to give the painting to Śrī Rādhā. Now, when Śrī Rādhā looked at this beautiful painting, she saw that the banks of the Yamunā in the painting were filled with silver-white crystal dust, with the trees and dense forest in the background and the full moon in the sky. And in the middle of it all, she saw herself holding a lamp in her hand and waiting for Kṛṣṇa. And looking at the painting more attentively, Śrī Rādhā noticed that there was a painted figure who looked almost hidden in the forest grove. And looking at it even more closely, she saw that it was a dark-complexioned gopī standing there. Hmm. A dark-complexioned gopī standing there. And this gopī was wearing a peacock crown and holding Kṛṣṇa’s flute.

So thinking it unusual, the painter had painted it like that, Śrī Rādhā said to Lalitā, “Oh Lalitā, please look at this sakhī painted in the picture, gopī in the picture. She looks like Kṛṣṇa.” So then Rādhā looked at Raṅgelī-sakhī and asked her, “O sakhī, who is that gopī that you painted hidden in the grove who is wearing Kṛṣṇa’s paraphernalia?” And at that point, Raṅgelī-sakhī winked at Śrī Rādhā in response. A hint—through the winking she passed on the message—causing Śrī Rādhā’s eyes to open wide as she exclaimed, “Oh, I see now! It’s you, Kṛṣṇa, my very heart and soul! It’s you, Kṛṣṇa, who are my very heart and soul!” By the wink, she understood everything.

So then Kṛṣṇa removed His disguise, and as often happens at the conclusion of these pastimes, He embraced Śrī Rādhā. So moments later, all the sakhīs, so enlivened, they took that painting and they hung it up in Rādhārāṇī’s chambers, and they placed the divine couple on a beautiful couch and worshiped Them there with auspicious articles. Kumbhādāsa says, “The pastimes of the Lord are all unique and beyond anyone’s imagination. This Kumbhādāsa sacrifices his everything to the playful Lord Śrī Giridhārī.” Hare Kṛṣṇa, what a wonderful pastime, Gopāla-campū, and elaborated on by this one fully enlightened poet.

Bhakta-vṛnda, today I would like to conclude this short lecture with a nectarian verse by Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī from his Stavāvalī, volume 4, text 9. It’s entitled Abhīṣṭa-sūcīnam. It’s actually a conversation between Śrī Rādhā and a sakhī. So you have to listen carefully. Um, I’m going to summarize it. Śrī Rādhā asks, “Oh my dear friend, who is this girl we have never seen before?” Her sakhī replies, “Oh, she appears to be a Vraja gopī.” So Rādhā asks, “From where has she come and why has she come?” Her sakhī replies, “Um, she has come from Mathurā to worship you.” Then Śrī Rādhā heard the playful words of another sakhī who understood everything. That sakhī said, “Rādhā, now you may enjoy with the incomparable Lord Hari.” Rādhā then understood that this girl was none other than Kṛṣṇa in disguise. And at once, Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī says, she burst into a smile.

Always a happy ending in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and our lives as well. If we stick to this straight and narrow path of Kṛṣṇa, one day, back home, back to Godhead. Bhaktas, thank you so so much. Um, as you know, I just enjoy researching the books and taking guidance from senior devotee scholars to present to you these humble lectures. See you next Friday.

Jay Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dham. Thank you.
