

Hari Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-kṛṣṇa. We are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 124, and this will be our second lecture on the red lac that decorates Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet.

Now, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī writes in his book Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi, verse 206, as follows: “Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, that are willingly marked with lac with a brush by Hari’s own hand, that are praised by the gopī girls that are very clever at different loving pastimes, that are hidden in the heart of the Upaniṣads, and that are full of dancing playfulness, are my only shelter.”

And in his recently published book, Tava-kathāmṛta, chapter 16, my dear godbrother, Śivarāma Swami, shares a pastime where the gopī Rati-mañjarī—who, of course, appears in this world as Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, as we discussed last week—receives special mercy from the red-lac feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Rati-mañjarī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, actually hints at this pastime in his Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, verse 17. In the mood of Rati-mañjarī, he addresses Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as follows: “O damsel whose golden complexion defeats the pride of the turmeric bulb scratched by fingernails, when will you be pleased to stamp my arm with the auspicious symbols embraced by the red lac on your soles, thus certifying me as a servant of your lotus feet?”

I’ll recite that one more time; it’s a very important part of this lecture: “O damsel whose golden complexion defeats the pride of the turmeric bulb scratched by fingernails, when will you be pleased to stamp my arm with the auspicious symbols embraced by the red lac on your soles, thus certifying me as a servant of your lotus feet?” So this will become more clear as we go on.

The pastime, as it’s given by Śivarāma Mahārāja, I will summarize. It’s quite long. Beginning with, “Once upon a time”—Prabhupāda starts some of his talks like that. Once upon a time, after Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had enjoyed a playful day together singing, dancing, eating, and swimming, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s meticulously arranged appearance had become messy. Flowers had fallen from her hair, her sarī was disheveled, and some of her necklaces had broken. And as she sat down on a jeweled seat under a flowering tree, Kṛṣṇa looked at her with deep devotion. It’s described as a worshipper would look at a deity. He thought, “She is unbelievably beautiful. Her golden skin is soft and soothing. It can only be compared to itself. But if I had to compare it, I would say it is like fresh turmeric pulp. Still, her glow heals everything, even my own aching heart.”

Now, Rādhā had understood Kṛṣṇa’s thoughts and felt pleased, but she wanted more than admiring glances. Acting like a proud heroine, she stamped her foot and said, “I dance for you, and now look at me. If my friends see me like this, they’ll laugh. My relatives might question my character. Kṛṣṇa, you must fix my appearance right away.”

Hearing her, Kṛṣṇa became overjoyed because serving Rādhā in that way—dressing and decorating her—was something even he rarely had the chance to do. As we discussed last week, the gopīs, and especially the mañjarī maidservants, they usually have this privilege. So even Kṛṣṇa, who is the Supreme Lord, longed for such a service. So he began by starting to pick flowers to decorate her hair. But Rādhā stopped him. She said, “Kṛṣṇa, start from my feet. The red lac of my soles has worn off. Reapply it immediately.”

Now Kṛṣṇa was thrilled. Rādhā was treating him like her servant. He is submissive to her prīti, her love. So he remembered how once she had lovingly worshipped his feet. Now it was his chance to return the favor. He knelt down and placed her soft, pinkish feet in his hands, and looking at her feet and then into her eyes, he waited for permission to begin. Rādhā frowned slightly, silently urging him to begin. So though she looked stern, a faint smile on her lips showed how she was pleased. She was happy that Kṛṣṇa was now expressing his love by serving her humbly. But at that point, it’s described Kṛṣṇa became overwhelmed and he forgot what he was doing—love. So Rādhā nudged him with her foot to bring him back to focus. And gazing at her feet again, he marveled at how his dark blue hands contrasted with the golden color of her delicate feet.

Now, Rādhā’s maidservants were watching closely, ready to help. To begin, Rati-mañjarī quietly brought a tray holding red lac, cotton swabs, and a golden stick for applying the red lac. Now remember, she’s Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in the earthly pastimes. So she placed it beside Kṛṣṇa and sat beside him. Kṛṣṇa gently at that moment touched Śrī Rādhā’s feet and adjusted her right foot again to apply the red lac with care. He began by painting her toes, then he covered the entire sole of that foot with a neat border at the heel. Though it’s interesting that Kṛṣṇa creates countless universes effortlessly, he now took immense care in performing this humble service—something usually done by Rādhā’s maidservants. Yet for him, it brought more joy, it’s described, than ruling the cosmos. Who can understand the heart of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, when he engages in such loving pastimes?

After finishing that one foot, he moved to the other and he kept checking his work, smiling proudly, it’s described, making his peacock feathers sway with the movement of his head. When both feet were done, he leaned back to admire them as if they were a work of art. Then he looked at Rati-mañjarī as if asking for her opinion, as the fresh red lac glowed on Rādhā’s feet with Kṛṣṇa’s love. It’s described that the red lac looked like the red sky at sunset before a full moon night, boldly expressing Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s intimate love, and the red lac on her feet became even more beautiful than before. Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, like playful fish, swam in its beauty. He thought, “O red lac, do you realize how lucky you are? Great sages and demigods perform austerities for just a glimpse of these feet. A single dust particle from them touching my head would make my life perfect. Yet you cover them entirely.” Addressing the red lac—remember, everything in Vṛndāvana is conscious—but the red lac remained silent. It didn’t dare reply and make Kṛṣṇa feel second best.

Kṛṣṇa, however, wasn’t satisfied. He wanted to be present on Rādhārāṇī’s feet himself. It’s described at this point he wanted to be present on her feet himself. So he looked at Rati-mañjarī, who looked down, understanding his desire. She could fulfill it, but she hesitated. In this situation, Kṛṣṇa was the teacher and she was the student; she didn’t feel it was her place to instruct him. Still, she closely observed him, wanting to learn how to apply the lac just like he did. One day when her turn came to serve in that way, she wanted to replicate his method perfectly to please Śrī Rādhā. So then, Kṛṣṇa remembered, “I am not different from my name. If I write my name on her feet, on Rādhā’s feet, it will be as good as being there myself.” Very instructive to all of us. Kṛṣṇa remembered, “I am not different from my name. If I write my name on her feet, it will be as good as being there myself.”

So, excited, Kṛṣṇa picked up the golden stick, dipped it in the red lac, and began writing his name. What about her soles? First across the soles, then across the sides. But two signatures weren’t enough. He furrowed his brow and kept writing wherever he found space, smearing the smooth surface of the lac into a blur of red lines. But he was too absorbed in bliss to notice, like a bee collecting nectar. Kṛṣṇa was completely engrossed in tasting the sweetness of Rādhārāṇī’s feet through his name. The sweetness wasn’t just soothing, because Rādhā’s feet, it’s described, had a mysterious mix of moonlike coolness and fiery heat. At first, Kṛṣṇa felt relaxed like a cool breeze, but then a burning passion made him tremble and sweat. He felt both comfort and turmoil, calm and excitement, pleasure and confusion. His love for Rādhā made his emotions unpredictable. His eyes rolled, his lips trembled, and his hands shook. And the maidservants, the gopīs, they were just giggling, watching him go through all these emotions.

And then Rādhā looked at him and asked, like this described, half annoyed and half amused, “Kṛṣṇa, what are you doing?” He’s writing over his name, “What are you doing?” But Kṛṣṇa tried to answer, but he could only stammer with tears in his eyes, “My service, my service.” He just managed to say that. So then Śrī Rādhā lifted her foot to inspect his work, but the careful painting was now a mess of red scribbles because he’s writing his name here or there. She said, “What have you done? It was going well, and now you’ve ruined everything. My friends will laugh at me. What were you thinking?”

So Kṛṣṇa looked ashamed. These are deep Vṛndāvana pastimes, transcendental loving pastimes. Kṛṣṇa looked ashamed. He had meant to please her but instead caused displeasure. He knew that Śrī Rādhā’s fiery moods could end their pastimes if he didn’t act quickly. So he pleaded, he pleaded, “I’m sorry, please forgive me.” But Rādhā remained silent, Rādhārāṇī remained silent. So Kṛṣṇa looked at Rati-mañjarī, hoping for help. She understood and stepped in. She said to him, “You don’t know how to do this, it appears. Let me show you now.”

So Kṛṣṇa gratefully placed one of Rādhā’s feet into Rati-mañjarī’s small hands, and Rati teased Kṛṣṇa, “Shame on you for trying to serve Rādhā without actually knowing how to do it.” And all the other maidservants, they continued giggling, but it’s described Śrī Rādhā didn’t share their amusement. She turned her gaze on Rati-mañjarī and said sharply, “Why are you laughing? Who asked you to help?” But before Rati could respond, Śrī Rādhā, in a mood of transcendental, a fit of transcendental frustration, kicked Rati-mañjarī lightly on the arm and Rati lost her balance. Śrī Rādhā scolded, “You teamed up with him to embarrass me. You teamed up with Kṛṣṇa to embarrass me. Who can I trust?”

So Rati sat beside Kṛṣṇa now, stunned. Her heart pounded and her hands shook like leaves in a storm. And with Lalitā and Rūpa not present, Kṛṣṇa was her only support. So she turned to him but noticed that he was staring at her arm, the one that Rādhā had kicked. Rati followed Kṛṣṇa’s gaze and saw it—it was a perfect imprint of Rādhā’s foot on her arm, and within it, a messy script: Kṛṣṇa’s name, repeated over and over and over. And at this point, even Rādhārāṇī was surprised. Everyone stared at the mark, Rādhā’s footmark on Rati’s arm. It was described it was shining like sunshine with Kṛṣṇa’s names like birds flying in its light. So Rati stared at the mark, overcome with emotion, and as she did, her body glowed with happiness. She had received Rādhā’s touch, a rare gift even the senior gopīs didn’t get. She thought, “Now I belong to her. I’ll never wash this arm. Now I belong to her. I’ll never wash this arm.”

And nearby, Kṛṣṇa thought, “I don’t even have such a mark.” Rādhārāṇī was thinking, “How wonderful.” The maidservants thought, “Now Rati-mañjarī is the certified servant of the goddess Kṛṣṇa himself serves. Now Rati-mañjarī is the certified servant, the stamp of the goddess Kṛṣṇa himself serves.” So Kṛṣṇa looked at Rati-mañjarī, then Rādhā, and then the others, and they all began to laugh. A pure, joyful sound, it’s described, like the Yamunā’s water mixed with Vṛndāvana’s honey. I like that: a pure, joyful sound, everyone’s laughing, like the Yamunā river’s water mixed with Vṛndāvana’s honey. And because of Kṛṣṇa’s grace, Rati-mañjarī had received a visible token of Rādhā’s mercy; because of Kṛṣṇa’s grace, it’s described even Lalitā hadn’t received such an intimate sign. This was a special gift from Śrī Rādhā to her dear mañjarī, and everyone, without exception, was more than pleased. This was Vṛndāvana. Everyone, without exception, was more than pleased. Such is Vṛndāvana, where envy simply doesn’t exist.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, what a wonderful, wonderful pastime. So in his book, Śivarāma Swami writes that devotees who hear this pastime may feel great joy and silently hope, “Maybe one day, by Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, I too will receive such a sign, a mark that shows I am Śrī Rādhā’s servant, I am Śrī Rādhā’s servant,” or a mañjarī. Some devotees, I was thinking, may even compare this with another pastime like we discussed last week, where Kṛṣṇa took the red lac from Śrī Rādhā’s feet and remember, touched it to his heart. They may wonder who was more fortunate, Kṛṣṇa or Rati. Kṛṣṇa’s followers may say it was him. In a famous poem by Jayadeva Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇa places his head at Rādhā’s feet and begs her to put them on his head, and she did. And the red lac, the red lac stained his hair, making him even more beautiful. So was that not a sign of his greater fortune?

The devotee of Śrī Rādhā might respond with a smile: “In Rādhā’s realm, everyone who receives her grace is most fortunate. But still, Rati was more blessed. Rādhā placed her foot on Kṛṣṇa’s head only after much begging.” We’ve told the pastime before; Rādhā placed her foot on Kṛṣṇa only after he was begging. But she kicked Rati spontaneously, out of deep love. And though Kṛṣṇa received her touch many times, Rati received it once, making it more rare and more special. Rati didn’t ask for it; Rādhā gave it freely. Kṛṣṇa himself once said, “The joy Rādhā and the gopīs feel is far greater than what I experience. I want to taste it but cannot, no matter how hard I try.”

So let us finish with a short but very deep and precious verse. It’s a short but very precious verse by Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī again, in his illustrious Vilāpa-kusumāñjali. It’s verse 17: “O Queen of Vṛndāvana, since Rūpa-mañjarī filled my eyes with the light in the land of Vraja, I have yearned to see the red lac decorating your lotus feet.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa, deep subject matters, but all meant to bring forth some feeling for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in their transcendental abode of Goloka Vṛndāvana. And one day, by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy, only serve those lotus feet. That’s the means by which we get home, back to serving the Śrīmatī. Once again, glorious, Hare Kṛṣṇa.
