Hello Krishna everyone, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Viṣṇupriya-kṛṣṇa.

Namaste!

All glories to You!

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 77. In this lecture, I would like to continue with our discussions on famous Vaiṣṇava poets. Actually, while preparing this lecture, I was thinking, how did these poets manage to write as they did in the difficult conditions they lived in four or 500 years ago? Śrīla Prabhupāda gives us some indication in his Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, Chapter 6, verse 226: "I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs, who kicked off all association of aristocracy as insignificant and, in order to deliver the poor conditioned souls, they accepted loincloth and treated themselves as mendicants.

But they are always merged in the ecstatic ocean of the gopīs' love for Kṛṣṇa and bathed always in the waves of that ocean." So, they lived like mendicants, actually. We often hear how, living in Vṛndāvana and writing their books, they lived under a different tree every night, writing on crude paper in the blazing sun of the summer and the freezing cold of winters.

But they did it, and why?

Out of their deep love for Lord Caitanya, who ordered them to go to Brahmāṇḍa and, in a humble state of mind, write about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes for all of humanity, for all time. And that mood, that particular mood of writing under such conditions for the pleasure of the Lord, is nicely expressed by the illustrious Narahari Cakravartī in his book called *Bhakti-candrikā-pāṭalā*.

I found this verse, it's so beautiful. He writes: "On seeing the activities of Gaurāṅga, there comes a great desire to put them in writing. But I am extremely dull; I do not know the proper order of writing. How then can I write?

The person who will actually write this book is yet to be born. When will my master, Śrī Gaurāṅga, fulfill this desire?

The activities of Gaurāṅga and Gadādhara melt even stone. Who can describe them fully?

Except when Śiva and the five-faced Sadāśiva go on writing incessantly forever, I write a few poems, so that someone upon reading them might publish the life of my master. At that moment in time, Narahari will be immensely delighted, and all his sorrows will vanish.

Even stone will melt when this book will be sung." Wow!

Even stone will melt when this book will be sung. And there are many such poets who wrote under those conditions with so much devotion. Some we know about, and others, they are not so well-known, or not known. In my research this last week, I discovered such a poet whose poetry, as yet, is unpublished.

His name is Vālmīki Vāṅdāsa, and it's interesting, he was the neighbor of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu when Mahāprabhu was a gṛhastha, living with his wife, Viṣṇupriyā, in Nadia. He lived next door, and he wrote poetry about Lord Caitanya. Scholars say he was actually the first poet to write about Lord Caitanya, and he wrote in the famous Brajaboli language.

And I was able to find someone to translate one of his poems. Please listen to it. He's describing Mother Śacī's lamentation when her son, Lord Caitanya, left home to take *sannyāsa*. It's going to break your heart. He wrote: "Mother Śacī speaking: 'No more shall we see the sandalwood decorations on his broad forehead, nor more shall we behold the dance of the lotus-like eyes on the golden lotus of his face.

No more will he sing and dance in the house of Śrivāsa in the company of his cakora-like followers, nor more will he sing and dance in my own house, so that we may look and see. Will the two brothers Nimāi and Nitāi ever dance here together again?

I'm always shouting for Nimāi, but he's nowhere to be found now. The relentless Keśava Bhāratī came and hurled a thunderbolt over our heads. How can they live at Nadia without seeing my beautiful, beautiful Gaṅgā?

Where is the man who can bring back my prince, Gaurāṅga?'" On hearing such laments of Gaurāṅga's mother, her daughter-in-law, Viṣṇupriyā, rolls on the ground in grief.

Viṣṇupriyā rolls on the ground in grief. The first poet wrote that. The first poet of Lord Caitanya. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, today, I will take great pleasure in sharing with you the glories of one of our very own Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava poets, and that is the illustrious Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra. Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra, actually, this devotee can actually be counted alongside great Vaiṣṇava authors like Śrī Rūpa and Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī.

In fact, in the summary to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā, Chapter 16, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes something very profound about Kavi Karṇapūra.

It's short but very significant. He writes: "He later became the greatest poet amongst Vaiṣṇava ācāryas." Prabhupāda writes, "He later became the greatest poet amongst Vaiṣṇava ācāryas." And that great devotee, Jagannātha Paṇḍita wrote about him.

He wrote: "All glories to the greatly blessed Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra. We both hail from the same village. He has revealed in his writings some of the marvelous qualities of the Holy Name. A recipient of Lord Gaṅgā's mercy, he is surely the most fortunate soul in the universe." Having been thus blessed at the tender age of seven, Kavi Karṇapūra was respected by all as a great poet.

Now, Kavi Karṇapūra was born in 1527 in the town of Kumārahaṭṭa in Bengal. And his father was the very famous Śivānanda Sena, who, as we know from reading *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, was a faithful follower of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And it's interesting, later on in his writings, Kavi Karṇapūra actually reveals who his mother and father were in Kṛṣṇa-līlā.

It's there in *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, verse 176. He writes: "The two gopīs, Veṇudēvī and Dēvī, who acted as messengers to arrange the gopīs' meetings with Lord Kṛṣṇa, combined to appear as my father. My mother was known as Vindumati." Wow!

Now, just how dear Śivānanda's family was to Lord Caitanya is stated by Lord Caitanya Himself in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā, Chapter 12, verse 53. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja quotes Lord Caitanya here: "As long as Śivānanda's wife and children stay in Jagannātha Purī, Mahāprabhu said, 'They must be given the remnants of my food.' He made that order." "As long as that family stays in Jagannātha Purī, they must be given the remnants of my food." So, that family was very dear to Mahāprabhu.

Now, speaking about the family, Śivānanda's wife gave birth to three sons, and Kavi Karṇapūra was the youngest. And one time, in Jagannātha Purī, before he was born, Lord Caitanya said to Śivānanda Sena, "The next son born to you must be named Purusottama." He gave him a name before he was even born.

Scholars say that name was given after one of Mahāprabhu's associates, Purusottama Paṇḍita. So, as Purusottama grew older, and the devotees learned of his poetic skills, he became known as Kavi Karṇapūra. Kavi Karṇapūra. And I found in his commentary on Kavi Karṇapūra's famous *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*, Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura says it was Lord Caitanya Himself who bestowed the title of Karṇapūra upon Kavi Karṇapūra.

And Karṇapūra literally means "he who adorns the poet's ears." That's poetry in itself. He who adorns the poet's ears with what?

Poetry, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. And Kavi Karṇapūra himself wrote that Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu's compassion on him was the source of his *vaidagdhī*, which means "splendor of speech." As he called it, his—he called that his own style of poetry, *vaidagdhī*, splendor of speech.

And scholars say that in his poetic writings, he mastered *śabda-vaidagdhī*, which translates as "marvelousness of sound and sense." The marvelousness of sound and sense. Also poetic, that acts as a stimulus for ecstatic love in the hearts of his readers.

So, we're speaking about him in our series of stimulation for ecstatic love because his poetry stimulates ecstatic love in the hearts of his readers. Now, when Kavi Karṇapūra was one year old, his father came and presented him to Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Jagannātha Purī. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā, 12:50, reveals what happened at that time: "When Śivānanda Sena introduced the child to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Lord put His toe in the child's mouth." The Lord put His toe in the child's mouth.

And the ācāryas say that at that moment, the baby boy began sucking on the Lord's toe. Now, when I first read this verse many years ago, I thought, "Who else has received such mercy from Lord Caitanya?" Now, on another occasion, when he was very young, Purusottama, Lord Caitanya said, "Hare Kṛṣṇa," and asked him several times to repeat those names: "Say Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Say Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Say Hare Kṛṣṇa." But the boy wouldn't speak.

Even when his father, Śivānanda Sena, insisted for him to repeat "Hare Kṛṣṇa," Purusottama remained silent.

And at that time, Caitanya Mahāprabhu was perplexed, and He said, "I have made the whole world sing the names of Kṛṣṇa, but I have failed with this child." Actually, only Svarūpa Dāmodara, Lord Caitanya's secretary, was able to comprehend that the boy was not reciting Kṛṣṇa's name out loud because some scriptures say one should not pronounce the mantra given by one's spiritual master out loud.

Of course, we don't think like that in the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, but for example, Gāyatrī, like that, and other mantras as well, one should not pronounce the mantra given by the spiritual master out loud. *Ādi-līlā*, Chapter 16, verse 71-72, quotes Svarūpa Dāmodara revealing this: "My Lord, You have given him initiation of sorts into the name of Kṛṣṇa, but after receiving the mantra, he will not express it in front of everyone." Interesting.

On yet another occasion, when Purusottama was seven years old, Lord Caitanya requested him, "Recite, my dear Purusottama." That's right, out of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. "Recite, my dear Purusottama." This time, the young boy broke his silence at seven years old, and he amazed everyone by spontaneously composing a very beautiful Sanskrit verse in the Ārya meter.

And this is the translation of that verse that he quoted in Sanskrit: "At seven, Kṛṣṇa is just like a bluish lotus flower for the ears, He is ointment for the eyes, a necklace of Indra-nīla gems for the chest, and a universal ornament for the gopī damsels of Vraja.

May He be glorified." The Sanskrit is a little long, so I couldn't memorize it, but that's the translation. About this, *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā, Chapter 16, verse 75, says: "Although the boy was only seven years old and still had no education, he composed such a nice verse.

Everyone present was struck with wonder." So, in this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he begins his commentary on Kavi Karṇapūra's *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū* by writing that Lord Caitanya's toe, Lord Caitanya's toe, "invested the child with poetic powers by giving him the essence of true poetry, devotional rasa." Although the skill of divine poetry was not revealed until he was asked by Lord Caitanya to speak, and the boy composed spontaneously the couplet in praise of Kṛṣṇa.

So, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says the boy got the ability to compose such Sanskrit poetry at seven years old because he sucked on the toe of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. What a wonderful pastime. Now, one reason our scholars say that Kavi Karṇapūra advanced so quickly in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and was able to express such devotional sentiment was this is interesting, that he lived in close proximity to many saintly and historical personalities in the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Because in or near Kumārahaṭṭa, where he lived, many great devotees were living, and as he grew up, he had their association. For example, Śrīnātha Paṇḍita, whom Kavi Karṇapūra later took initiation from. This Śrīnātha Paṇḍita was a very eminent disciple of Advaita Ācārya.

Also, in that area lived Bhagavān Dāsa Ṭhākura, the author of *Caitanya-maṅgala*. Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita lived there. Actually, I was reading, after he retired because previously we know he lived in Navadvīpa, where Lord Caitanya's famous nocturnal saṅkīrtanas were held. But he retired to that other village.

Also, I found out Jīva Gosvāmī's mother lived there. After the death of her husband, she raised Jīva there, which was once, it's described, her ancestral home. Jagāi and Mādhāi lived there. We know he was an intimate companion of Lord Caitanya in Purī.

And Vāsudeva Datta, the gifted singer known for requesting to take the world's sins upon himself, he also lived there. So, what a neighborhood he lived in. Now, in 1542, as a mere 15 or 16-year-old teenager, Kavi Karṇapūra completed his first book called *Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caitanya-carita-mahākāvya*.

It's a Sanskrit poem wherein devotees mourn Lord Caitanya's absence and share, how can I say, consoling memories of His life. In two important verses in that work, I found Kavi Karṇapūra identifies himself as the youngest son of Śivānanda and a mere child, which is very clear.

He's the author. There are two verses, he identifies himself as the youngest son of Śivānanda and a mere child. I mean, he's a teenager, but a child in spiritual life. He may be thinking, "Now, no other book is attributed to Kavi Karṇapūra until 1572." In other words, he began writing again, or he began writing in earnest, when he was in his early 40s.

It's interesting. And at that time, he wrote *Caitanya-candrikā-nāṭaka*. This book is actually one of the principal sources of information upon which Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī relied on for his account of the life of Lord Caitanya when He was in Purī.

His *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, a great portion of the *mūla* and some of the *antara* is based on it, that book by Kavi Karṇapūra. And Karṇapūra continued writing books in earnest until 1576. Besides the ones I mentioned, they include *Kṛṣṇa-līlā-kautuka*, *Kumāra-līlā*, *Śrī-gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, *Kṛṣṇa-līlā-kautuka*, and *Caitanya-candrikā-nāṭaka*.

Now, because I had to read some of those books, *Śrī Caitanya-candrikā-nāṭaka* is one of my favorites. Everyone has a favorite, right?

It translates as "The Rising Moon of Lord Caitanya." The Rising Moon of Lord Caitanya. It's actually a play, a drama about Lord Caitanya. Now, there's a very special part because we can't describe the whole book, but there's a very special part where we can appreciate Kavi Karṇapūra's genius and devotional writing skills.

For in his introduction to this drama, he alludes to the pastime of—you remember Lord Caitanya dancing in front of Lord Jagannātha's cart during Ratha-yātrā in Jagannātha Purī and calling out a verse from the Sanskrit book *Gīta-darpaṇa*, *Gīta-govinda*. He was quoting a mundane love song.

Actually, this is described in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. He was singing that: "The very personality who stole my heart during my youth is now again my master. These are the same moonlit nights of the month of Caitra. The same fragrance of mallikā flowers is there, and the same sweet breezes are blowing from the kadamba forest.

In her intimate relationship, I am also the same lover, yet still my mind is not happy here. I'm eager to go back to that place on the bank of the Yamunā, under the vakula tree. That is my desire." Now, this is a romantic song.

It's not—it's not a devotional song. But at that time, as a result, at that time, no one could understand what Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu was doing, singing, you know, for all practical purposes, a mundane love song. There wasn't anything transcendental about it.

However, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī understood the Lord's heart, His heart. And he recomposed the song to reveal what Lord Caitanya was actually feeling. Remember, one reason why Kṛṣṇa came to this world in the mood of a devotee, as Lord Caitanya, was to experience Rādhā's love for Him.

So, Rūpa Gosvāmī recomposed Caitanya Mahāprabhu's words as Rādhā calling out to Kṛṣṇa. Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote in *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*: "Now we can understand it in a transcendental way. My dear friend, now I have met my very old and dear friend Kṛṣṇa on this field of Kurukṣetra.

I am the same Rādhārāṇī, and now we are meeting together. It is very pleasant, but still, I would like to go to the bank of the Yamunā, beneath the trees of the forest. There, I wish to hear the vibration of a sweet flute playing the fifth note within the forest of Vṛndāvana." Very famous.

So, Kavi Karṇapūra begins his *Caitanya-candrikā-nāṭaka* by writing how Mahārāja Pratāparudra, the king of Purī and a great devotee of Lord Caitanya, felt extreme separation from Lord Caitanya. In a similar way, in text one, he begins: "Today, like splendid sapphires scattered by sea waves on the shore, like a great forest of many *tāla* trees seen from a cave on the Malaya Mountain, like an intoxicated elephant playing deep in a banyan forest, Lord Jagannātha went on procession to Guṇḍīcā as the entire universe became filled with jubilant calls of 'Jaya Jaya!' as blissful-hearted devotees filled the directions with the tumult of bhāgavata-kīrtana, as women filled the directions with shouts of joy, and as there was a deafening tumult of sweet mṛdaṅgas, vigorous paṭhas, paṇavas, etc.—these are instruments.

Mahārāja Pratāparudra, his heart wounded by the disappearance of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, said to me, 'Oh, playwright, here is the same all-powerful Lord Jagannātha, here is the same Ratha-yātrā festival, here is the same Guṇḍīcā Temple, here are the same pilgrims who have come from all directions to see the Lord, and here is the same garden that eclipses the beauties of Nandana.

Still, without Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, I think everything here is a desert.' Let me recite that again: 'Oh, playwright, here is the same all-powerful Lord Jagannātha, here is the same Ratha-yātrā festival, here is the same Guṇḍīcā Temple, here are the same pilgrims who have come from all directions to see the Lord, and here is the same garden that eclipses the beauties of Nandana.

Still, without Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, I think everything here is a desert.'" So beautiful. Now, Kavi Karṇapūra's poetic masterpiece is recognized by many, many scholars as *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*. It's his longest, you could say, most sophisticated poem filled with devotion about Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana.

And in his illustrious *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, which we quoted earlier, Kavi Karṇapūra gives identities of Caitanya Mahāprabhu's associates, who they are in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. But as a humble soul, he kept his own identity secret. Now, no one knows for sure the date of his departure from this world.

But the book *Nṛsiṃha-prapanna* says that he was at the Karṇapūra festival, which was organized by Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. So, yes, he obviously lived after the pastimes, after Lord Mahāprabhu moved back to the spiritual world. So, dear devotees, we shall conclude today with a verse from Kavi Karṇapūra's *Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caitanya-carita-mahākāvya*.

It was difficult to choose a verse because they're all wonderful, but this one really resonates with my heart, and I'm sure it will also resonate with your heart. "Kṛṣṇa is a personification of condensed eternality, consciousness, and bliss. Previously, in the land of Vṛndāvana, He danced along with the golden-hued damsels of Vraja.

Now it so happened that due to tightly embracing these gopīs, He Himself turned into gold and is now ever victorious in the land of Navadvīpa." All glories to Kṛṣṇa!

Thank you all!

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So, so, see you next Friday. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Bless you.