Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.

So once again, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 111.

Today we will continue to discuss the fourth quality of Kṛṣṇa that distinguishes Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa, namely rūpa-mādhurī, His extraordinary beauty. And like last week's lecture, we'll focus specifically on Kṛṣṇa's special facial features.

As an introduction, Gokulapati, a renowned poet and scholar from the Vallabha-sampradāya, wrote that—this is really interesting—Kṛṣṇa has twelve distinct features that differentiate His transcendental body from normal human bodies. Twelve different features that differentiate His transcendental body from normal human bodies. And they are as follows:

His transcendental body releases fragrant perspiration.

Number two, His transcendental body does not need any rest.

Number three, there is no need for cutting His nails because His nails don't grow.

Number four, His tears distress the three worlds. I like that one. His tears distress the three worlds.

Number five, He can uplift mountains effortlessly.

Number six, His voice never trembles or shivers.

Number seven, He can play while He's sleeping. He can play while He's sleeping.

Number eight, His yawn knows no sign of lethargy or laziness.

Number nine, He does not get afflicted by any disease, and if disease shows in His body, it's just part of His pastime.

Number ten, all the nine types of rasas can flow in His body at the same time.

Number eleven, He's never influenced by lust.

Number twelve, whatever He touches with His hands converts into gold, meaning it becomes very precious.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, regarding Kṛṣṇa's special facial features, we can begin today by discussing His ears.

In his Stavāvalī, in the section called Śrī Gopāla-rāja-stotram, Verse 8, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī writes:

“The powerful Gopāla-rāja Kṛṣṇa, who extends the soothing moonlight of His makara earrings from His ears that are like Cupid's ropes eager to bind up the two adolescent cakora birds of bashful Rādhikā's restless eyes, is beautifully shining on a throne on Govardhana Hill.”

Just imagine Kṛṣṇa sitting on a throne on Govardhana Hill.

And Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī describes Kṛṣṇa's ears in the following verses from Govinda-līlāmṛta. He writes:

“The small holes in Kṛṣṇa's ears, that became slightly elongated by carrying His earrings, are like nets that catch the eyes of all the ladies of the world, a trap that the hunter Cupid spread out to catch the gopīs' dṛg-antelope minds, or ropes that bind the wagtail birds of Śrī Rādhā's eyes.

May Mādhava's ears, that are always eager to hear Gandharikā's proud jokes and criticisms and the nectarean elixir of her crooked words, that are beautifully reddish inside His ears and that are equal in height, be manifest always in my heart.”

So beautiful.

Now, I was reading that both of Kṛṣṇa's earlobes were pierced by His father, Nanda Mahārāja, when He was a baby in Gokula. And that ear-piercing ritual is called karṇa-vedana-saṁskāra in Sanskrit.

For Kṛṣṇa, it took place on the bright eighth morning of the month of Pauṣa in Gokula, specifically on the banks of the Yamunā River. It began with Mother Yaśodā, along with other ladies in Vraja, whispering sacred mantras in Kṛṣṇa's ears for protection and then placing diamond and gold earrings in Kṛṣṇa's earlobes.

After the earrings were put into Kṛṣṇa's ears, some brāhmaṇas came and applied a soothing ointment made from kuśa grass and cotton on His earlobes because they had just been pierced.

Then—this is really nice—Mahārāja Nanda showed Kṛṣṇa a silver mirror, His reflection in a silver mirror. And Kṛṣṇa, upon looking at Himself decorated so beautifully with such diamond and gold earrings—what did He do?

It's so sweet.

He kissed His reflection in the mirror.

Kṛṣṇa kissed His reflection, which, it's described, made all the Vrajavāsīs laugh very blissfully.

Wow.

And afterwards, Mahārāja Nanda distributed sweets to all the residents of Vraja for the whole rest of the day.

And one ācārya concludes:

“One who hears the pastime of Kṛṣṇa's ears being pierced will never be pierced by the dagger of māyā.”

And the poet Govinda Svāmī concludes:

“Kṛṣṇa's face is the kingdom of all beauty, where Cupid serves and love accompanies, and all the loving moods serve the beauty of His face. His ears are the fans in the beauty of the goddess of that beautiful face.”

Govinda Svāmī concludes:

“May this beauty always be glorious.”

Poetry. You have to listen carefully to relish.

The scholar Viśvadāsa kindly writes about the jewelry that Kṛṣṇa wears in His ears when He grows a little bit older. I found this. He writes:

“His beautiful shark-shaped earrings are known as matsya-kuṇḍalas, which catch the fish-like restless hearts of the gopīs.

His beautiful crocodile-shaped earrings are known as makara-kuṇḍalas, which capture Cupid's mind, who is floating above on his flower airplane.

His earrings with faces of elephants are known as indu-kuṇḍalas, which churn the minds and hearts of the demigods and the demigoddesses.

His peacock-shaped earrings are known as mayūra-kuṇḍalas, mayūra-kuṇḍalas, which spin the hearts of sages and yogīs.”

Wow.

Spin the hearts of sages and yogīs.

“His round-shaped earrings are known as cakrākāras, which endlessly entertain the forest of Vraja.”

Wow.

Which endlessly entertain the forest of Vraja.

Viśvadāsa concludes:

“Worship the ears of Kṛṣṇa, who blissfully enjoys the ankle-bell sounds of the queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rādhikā.”

Thank you to that poet.

Now at this point, let's discuss the tilaka markings on Kṛṣṇa's face.

We did this in great detail a few years ago, but in time we found more details.

It's described that the tilaka markings on Kṛṣṇa's high forehead are sometimes yellow and sometimes red. From the time Kṛṣṇa was a little baby, Mother Yaśodā, I was reading, would mark His forehead with the symbol of Lord Viṣṇu. She would use auspicious yellow gorocanā, uttering “Oṁ Keśavāya Namaḥ” as she applied it.

And we're all familiar with the pastime of how Kṛṣṇa overturned a heavily loaded cart with a kick when He was a baby. So śāstra says that His mother was convinced that He had been unharmed because of this yellow gorocanā tilaka, yellow-colored tilaka. She was convinced because this gorocanā comes from a cow.

Also, although we know there are different types of tilaka, because Nanda Mahārāja's family, due to social custom, worshiped forms of Lord Viṣṇu like Varāha and Nṛsiṁha, and they had śālagrāma-śilās, they wore Vaiṣṇava tilaka, just as we do.

And it's interesting that with that in mind, Śrīla Prabhupāda instructed us to paint Vaiṣṇava tilaka on all our Deities of Kṛṣṇa. That's the proper way.

Now, śāstra describes that along with tilaka, Kṛṣṇa's forehead also sports a dot of sandalwood paste. This spot of sandalwood paste is in between the two vertical lines of His tilaka, specifically just above His eyebrows.

And this dot, it's described, serves as a mystical charm that hypnotizes the gopīs, who become attracted to gazing at Kṛṣṇa's beautiful face.

And it's also written that, to keep Him cool during the summer, Kṛṣṇa's cowherd friends also apply sandalwood paste to the two outer portions of His brow, which makes His forehead resemble a mystical gemstone. That's how it's described. It makes His forehead resemble a mystical gemstone.

And in Vidagdha-mādhava, Part 2, Verse 42, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that Viśākhā once warned Śrī Rādhā of three things that have inconceivable power to attract people to Kṛṣṇa. Three things that have inconceivable power to attract people to Kṛṣṇa.

One is His flower garland.

Second is His name, Kṛṣṇa.

And the third is this mysterious sandalwood paste on His forehead.

We can all meditate on those three things.

I also read that both the gopīs and the gopas, the cowherd girls and the cowherd boys, are fond of drawing designs between Kṛṣṇa's eyebrows and His curly locks when they're decorating Kṛṣṇa.

But this is interesting.

The boys draw calves or birds, while the gopīs prefer Cupid's marks, like dolphins or vines.

Cupid's marks—dolphins or vines.

So the boys are boys and the girls are girls, even on that transcendental platform. They draw different designs.

Another mark on Kṛṣṇa's forehead, because we're discussing facial features here, though rarely seen, appears to some like nectar and to others like poison.

Wait a minute.

Another mark on Kṛṣṇa's forehead, although rarely seen, appears to some like nectar and to others like poison?

What could that be?

The ācāryas say that it's the smudge of red lacquer from the sole of a fortunate cowherd girl's foot.

If that smudge is from the sole of Śrī Rādhārāṇī's foot, then her girlfriends feel that it's as if nectar is pouring into their eyes, for it proclaims Śrī Kṛṣṇa's complete submission to His one true beloved, Śrī Rādhā.

But if that smudge is from the feet of some other girl than Rādhā, then her friends see it as poison, for it reminds them of the lonely long night vigils Rādhārāṇī sometimes spends waiting for her unfaithful lover.

And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes about this, actually, in his Padyāvalī, Verse 218. Śrī Rādhā says:

“Kṛṣṇa, why do You insist on lying to me? Go back to the girl who decorated Your body with those beauty marks. Don't contaminate me or my reputation by Your presence.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So let us conclude today—this is a short one today because I have other duties—with a short but very beautiful verse by one of our great heroes, Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura, from his immortal Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, Verse 80:

“All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, benefactor of the three worlds, whose forehead is marked with musk tilaka and whose love and joy increase with the love sports of Vraja's milkmaids.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you.

We'll be back next Friday, as always, with more things to discuss about stimulation for ecstatic love, all by Prabhupāda's grace.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa's special facial features—may their glories shine forever.

Thank you all.
