Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale
śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine
namas te sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 147, in which we will continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's disguises.

In this lecture we will discuss a very unique and interesting disguise that Kṛṣṇa once assumed to appease Śrī Rādhā's māna, or anger, and that is the disguise of a female poet.

Scholars often refer to a female poet, at least in the Sanskrit language, as a poetess, or actually in the West as well, a poetess. It's not so much used anymore, but I think it's nice to use it here. Poetess, female poet.

In my research I discovered that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī mentions fourteen types of disguises in his Gopāla-campū. In that list, the third disguise of Kṛṣṇa is the disguise of a poetess, a female poet.

Actually, in the Purāṇas we see two types of poets described in ancient history. In the Mahābhārata, Bhīṣma, while lying on his deathbed of arrows, describes to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira the origin of these two types of historic poets, or sometimes they're called storytellers. He describes them as follows:

"It is famous in the groups of humans"—I like how it starts—"it is famous in the groups of humans that before the appearance of Pṛthu Mahārāja, who was born in the eighth generation of Lord Viṣṇu, two types of poets named Sūta and Māgadha appeared."

Sūta and Māgadha appeared.

So from this we know that very early, even before Kṛṣṇa appeared, these two poets manifested from the Lord Himself.

Actually, I was reading that there are eight famous poets in ancient India. I had never come across this before, but it's really interesting. Eight famous poets in ancient Bhārata: Lord Śiva, Nārada Ṛṣi, Vyāsadeva, Vālmīki, the demon Rāvaṇa, Bṛhaspati, Lava and Kuśa, and Kṛṣṇa, the singer of the Gītā.

That's how it's listed.

So once again today we'll discuss the best of those poets, our beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa, when He appeared to Śrī Rādhā as a poetess, as a female poet, to subdue her anger, to appease her.

Now this pastime is described by Parameśvaradāsa, whom we've quoted many times before. He was a poet who lived in Vraja at the same time as the Six Gosvāmīs, actually. And this particular pastime he calls "The Roaming Poetess."

The Roaming Poetess.

So one day Kṛṣṇa was sitting in a secluded grove in Vṛndāvana when He saw Lalitā-sakhī walking towards Him.

Kṛṣṇa greeted her by saying:

"O sakhī, you are the greatest gift of my time. You are the greatest gift of my time. I'm so glad you came here."

Lalitā then asked Kṛṣṇa:

"And why is that, Kṛṣṇa?"

So Kṛṣṇa replied:

"O Lalitā, you are the bright sun of the sky-like land of Vraja. Without your mercy and light, no one can see the pastimes of Śrī Rādhā.

I'm really anxious now about her māna. She's in māna. I'm very anxious about her māna, her anger.

O sakhī, today that māna is increasing, and tomorrow it will increase even more than it is today. And in every moment after that, her māna is ever increasing to the heights of the highest mountains.

Even the speed with which the stars twinkle in the sky is less than the speed with which her māna is rising.

To me, her māna is jvālā, fire. It is vedanī, a spear. It is viṣa, a poison. It is pralaya, destruction. Her māna is unbearable and ajanmā, ever victorious."

He knows better than anyone.

"Lalitā, you are the svāminī of this thunderlike kuñja. Please help me to pacify Śrī Rādhā's māna as it is now."

Lalitā replied:

"O Cittacora"—Cittacora means the stealer of everyone's hearts—"she is the queen and you are the nāyaka, the hero. You must find some way in which you can please her, and then the two of you can reunite once more."

While Lalitā was talking to Kṛṣṇa, the two parrots Śuka and Śārikā came and started singing songs of love while sitting on a branch of a mango tree.

Śārikā was upset with Śuka, and Śuka was trying to pacify her by singing poems to her.

Hearing those poems being sung, Śārikā pressed her beak to Śuka's beak, and they joined their beaks in a kiss of love. Then they flew away together in the open sky of Vraja.

Now seeing that, Kṛṣṇa suddenly got inspired about how to please Śrī Rādhikā in her māna, in her anger.

He then embraced Lalitā and went to the sakhī named Mṛduvalī.

Mṛduvalī.

Another sakhī.

Now Mṛduvalī is a famous poetess, a female poet in the court of Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu.

So inspired, Kṛṣṇa borrowed Mṛduvalī's attire and disguised Himself as a poetess called Śyāmavalī. He gave Himself that name, Śyāmavalī.

Then, singing poems in a sweet voice, Śyāmavalī started roaming the streets of Vṛṣabhānupura.

And her voice filled the whole area with the fragrance of poetry. And whoever listened or heard that singing, their hearts melted and their emotions flew upwards.

That's how it's described.

Hearing the singing of Śyāmavalī, their hearts melted and their emotions flew upwards.

Now some gopīs were stunned by this poetry, and others got tears in their eyes. For some, their hair stood on end, and others were simply mesmerized.

The sound of Śyāmavalī's singing poetry reverberated through the walls of Śrī Rādhā's palace.

It's described like that.

The sound of her singing poetry reverberated through the walls of Rādhārāṇī's palace, her father's palace.

So when two gopīs who were dancing in front of Śrī Rādhā heard the words of this poetry, they forgot their dance movements. And when Śyāmavalī's poetry reached the ears of the drummer gopīs—they're described like that, the drummer gopīs—they forgot their beats, and the whole palace became a repository of poetry.

Wow.

So whispering, Lalitā said to Rādhikā:

"O the sweet nectar of the magical vine of Vraja."

Lalitā is describing Rādhārāṇī.

"O the sweet nectar of the magical vine of Vraja, my dear queen, do you hear all that?"

And Śrī Rādhā closed her eyes and listened for a moment. And while she was meditating on Śyāmavalī's voice, her heartbeat started beating very fast.

Shaking in ecstasy, Śrī Rādhā held Lalitā's hand and told her:

"My dear friend, please hold me tight. I'm losing control over myself hearing this special voice. This poetess is untangling my love-knots. Please bring that poetess here."

And when Kṛṣṇa, of course disguised as Śyāmavalī, came in front of Śrī Rādhā and touched her feet, he said:

"Long live my queen."

Touched her feet.

"Long live my queen."

And saying that, he then kissed her feet.

So Lalitā then asked the poetess:

"Where are you coming from, dear poetess?"

And this magical poetess, the mysterious poet, replied:

"I am coming from the dense forest of the Vindhyācala mountains."

"I'm coming from the dense forest of the Vindhyācala mountains."

So Lalitā said:

"From where have you learned this special art of poetry, dear poetess?"

And Śyāmavalī replied:

"Well, I performed great austerity, and because of my penances the goddess Pārvatī appeared to me and gave me this beautiful voice and the talent of poetry. She gave me this beautiful voice and the talent of poetry."

So hearing that, Śrī Rādhā told Śyāmavalī:

"O Śyāmavalī, you are the enchanter of everyone's hearts. Your voice has pierced the very core of my heart. Please sing the best of your poems for us. Please sing the very best of your poems for us."

So then, sitting in a beautiful pose while holding a tambūra, a stringed instrument, the poetess sang.

What did she sing?

The melody of the fifth note.

She sang the melody of the fifth note.

Then she continued. She said:

"When your heart aches in the pain of your beloved, O beautiful one, go to the banks of the Kālindī.

When you want to spend time with your beloved, O doe-eyed one, listen to the flute of love.

When your eyes feel thirsty without seeing your beloved for so long, O Kiśorī, let your heart fly free and reach his lotus feet."

So hearing this poem, Śrī Rādhā started shaking from love in ecstasy, and she whispered to Lalitā-sakhī:

"O Lalitā, Śyāmavalī is unlocking the secrets of my love with the keys of her poetry.

Like a wild monkey jumps on a tree from one branch to another and all the flowers start falling on the ground, if Śyāmavalī continues with her sweet poetry, all the flowers of my tears will start falling from my eyes, and the secrets of my love will be exposed in front of all of Vraja."

Then, when Lalitā stood up to interrupt Śyāmavalī's poetry recitation, Śyāmavalī started asking Śrī Rādhā questions.

Śyāmavalī asked her:

"What is that fruit which fills you with the redness of love and the brightness of affection and pain when you are eating it?"

Śrī Rādhā replied:

"It is indeed the fruit of separation from my beloved. This fruit is filled with the redness of love, the brightness of affectionate memories, but it pains a lot when you partake of it."

Śyāmavalī then asked her:

"What is the night filled with intense desires of longing, immense pleasure of devotion, and unlimited bliss of association called?"

Śrī Rādhā replied:

"It is called the rāsa dance on the full moon night."

Śyāmavalī next asked her:

"What will you do if the one who holds your life in his hands, the beloved of your eyes and the life of your soul, comes in front of you?"

Comes in front of you.

Śrī Rādhā, with deep emotion, held her breath, closed her eyes, and replied to Śyāmavalī:

"Oh, I will embrace him and make my arms the garland around his neck."

And as soon as she finished her sentence, Kṛṣṇa threw off His disguise and, embracing Śrī Rādhā, He said:

"Long live the queen. Long live the queen."

And with wide-open eyes, Rādhā said to Kṛṣṇa:

"O Kṛṣṇa, once again You have defeated my māna."

Wow.

"O Kṛṣṇa, once again You have defeated my māna, my anger."

The poet Parameśvaradāsa says:

"May Śrī Rādhā's māna be ever victorious, for because of it Lord Giridhārī assumes many disguises to appease her and win these battles of love."

All right.

Kṛṣṇa.

So for myself, this very poetic pastime embodies a very famous verse from Caitanya-caritāmṛta:

*kiṁ kāvyasya kavestasya kiṁ kāṇḍena dhanuṣmataḥ*.

Very famous.

"What is the use of a bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?"

Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

So finally, I would like to pray to my spiritual master for everything he's given us, all this wisdom, all this knowledge, all this nectar, because he's the revealer of the dhāma, with a sweet poem written by a Vaiṣṇava poet named Navīna Madhurīdāsa.

He writes:

"Unlimited obeisances unto the great master of devotion. He owns the chariot leading one to the forest of Vṛndāvana. He breaks the clutches of Māyā and saves his disciples from it. Fighting the battles of Māyā, material illusion, and kāvya, bodily needs, he crosses over the realm of Kali-yuga.

Folding my hands in humility, I pray to my spiritual master to hold my hand just once and help me cross over this vast ocean of material existence."

Guru.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Wow.

I really enjoyed researching and sharing this pastime with all of you today.

Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ brings Kṛṣṇa, the love of our life.

I'm in Māyāpura. I've just arrived here actually to begin our one-month Kārttika parikramā. We have about 400 devotees who are registering today.

First stop will be Yogapīṭha tomorrow, and then on and on and on.

We'll be here a couple of weeks, actually, and then we go to Kolkata to visit all the pastime places of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and then we finish in Jagannātha Purī.

So please give us your blessings that myself and all these devotees can benefit from this wonderful parikramā.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

See you next week, next Friday.

Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma ki jaya.

All glories.
