Devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. I'd also like to include a prayer here by the famous Vaiṣṇava poet Sūradāsa. He writes very beautifully: "I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master who gave me a beautiful kaṇṭhī-mālā, a fortunate tilaka, the beautiful form of a devotee, and who offered me shelter. In one of his hands, he is holding my hand, and with his other hand, he is holding the lamp of knowledge which helps me to cross over this dark ocean of the material world." Sūradāsa says, "My Guru deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye. I bow down to him again and again and again." 

O Lord... So, exciting news today: we're actually starting a new series entitled "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love." And this will be Part 1. This is actually, as many of you know, the title of Chapter 26 of Śrīla Prabhupāda's *Nectar of Devotion*, which of course we know is a summary study of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. Chapter 26 of *Nectar of Devotion* is a study of things which help to stimulate or awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda introduces that chapter by writing as follows: 

"Some things which give impetus or stimulation to ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa are His transcendental qualities, His uncommon activities, His smiling features, His apparel and garlands, His flute, His buffalo horn, His leg bells, His conchshell, His footprints, the places of His pastimes such as Vṛndāvana, His favorite plant Tulasī, His devotee, and the periodical occasions for remembering Him. One such occasion of remembrance is Ekādaśī, which comes twice a month on the eleventh day of the moon, both waning and waxing." 

Prabhupāda continues: "On that day, all the devotees remain fasting throughout the night and continuously chant the glories of the Lord." 

This is Prabhupāda's description of that chapter of *Nectar of Devotion*. So in this new series, we will discuss a number of these articles, like Kṛṣṇa's flute, His peacock feather, His different types of crowns, His stick for controlling the cows, His buffalo horn—there are lots of things—as well as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's paraphernalia, like Her śṛṅgāra, Her jewels, Her braided hair, Her red foot-lac, etc. We will discuss the origin of all these things, what role they play in the Divine Couple's service, what our ācāryas like Rūpa Gosvāmī have to say about them, etc.

We'll also hear the glories of these articles in the poems of famous devotee poets like Sūradāsa, Mīrābāī, and many others. We'll do our best to study these things from every angle. Vedic scholars, I was reading, say there are three angles by which something can be studied or viewed. It's really interesting. The first one is known as *siṁhāvalokana*, or the view of a lion, whose vision is limited to seeing straight ahead or behind him. The second view that's mentioned in our Vedic literature is known as *kapotāvalokana*. It's the view of the pigeon, whose vision is a little more broadened because the pigeon is able to turn his neck quite liberally and see objects pretty much all around him. But the third and most perfect vision is the *haṅsāvalokana*. This is the bird's-eye view from above, in which one has the advantage of seeing everything below very clearly. And this is the view of our ācāryas, who, by dint of their pure hearts and, of course, the mercy of the Lord, are able to see and, what's more, realize all spiritual matters perfectly.

It is such ācāryas like Prabhupāda and Rūpa Gosvāmī who will enlighten us in our study of stimulation for ecstatic love. So we'll begin today with a most favorite article—you could say paraphernalia of Kṛṣṇa—and that's His flute. This flute we see here—I'm in Māyāpur now, but we see here in the temples of India, especially in Vṛndāvana, everywhere actually around India and ISKCON centers around the world—we see Kṛṣṇa standing on the altar in a beautiful *tribhaṅga*, threefold-bending form, playing a flute. Sometimes, when I'm standing in front of the deity, I say, "If only I could hear that flute." Maybe you've thought like that too. "If only I could... I've been seeing the flute for many years now; I'd like to hear the flute." 

There is another famous Vaiṣṇava poet whose name was Paramānanda Dāsa, and he has given us a hint of what happens to those fortunate souls who can hear it. If you can hear the flute, this poet describes what happens. He writes very beautifully: 

"O sakhī, when Kṛṣṇa places the flute to His sweet, nectarian lips, at that time all people, demigods, and living beings who are fortunate stop breathing in excitement. As He starts playing it, filling it with His transcendental breath, all living beings who can hear it properly and the demigods become intoxicated. When He comes to the fifth note, all the ecstatic symptoms start to appear in those fortunate enough to hear it properly. And when He plays the seventh and highest note—I didn't know there was a seventh and highest note of His flute—He enlivens the soul of everyone. O sakhī, what more can I say? With the last note of His flute song, all the kings place their royal crowns at the feet of the flute, beautiful ladies surrender their beauty to it, demigods offer their powers to it, and Sarasvatī becomes a maidservant to it. I, Paramānanda Dāsa, also offer my everything to that flute, which can drown the entire world in ecstasy." 

We have to thank that poet. We have so much gratitude to express in Kṛṣṇa consciousness now.

In the illustrious *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī describes Kṛṣṇa's flute as follows: 

"As far as His flute is concerned, it is said that the vibration of this wonderful instrument was able to break the meditation of the greatest of sages. Kṛṣṇa was thus challenging Cupid by advertising His transcendental glories all over the world." 

This is Rūpa Gosvāmī's description. And of course, Lord Brahmā, the first Guru in our sampradāya, also mentions the flute in his immortal *Brahma-saṁhitā* (5.30). He says: 

"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is adept in playing on His flute, whose blooming eyes are like lotus petals, with His head bedecked with a peacock feather, with a figure of beauty tinged with the hue of blue clouds, and His unique loveliness charming millions of Cupids." 

It's very poetic, but you know, it just resonates with our hearts after so many years. When you hear that, it's very poetic—a little difficult to recite because it's fancy English, but we know it because we've heard it so many times being devotees in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

So therein we hear about Kṛṣṇa's flute. Now, in my studies, I came to understand there are three principal kinds of flutes used by Kṛṣṇa. There's the *veṇu*. This flute is very small, not more than six inches long, with six holes for whistling, as described in the scriptures. Then there's the *muralī*. A *muralī* is about eighteen inches long, with a hole at the end and four holes on the body of the flute, and it is described that this kind of flute produces a very enchanting sound. Then there's the *vaṁśī*. The *vaṁśī* flute is about fifteen inches long, with nine holes in its body. Now, all these flutes are often bedecked with jewels; sometimes they're made of marble, sometimes they're made of hollow bamboo. And when the flute is made of jewels, it's called *saṁmohinī*. When the flute is made of gold, it's called *ākarṣiṇī*. 

An interesting point is that Kṛṣṇa plays different melodies on these flutes for different purposes. I didn't know this, but it's really nice. He plays different melodies on His flutes for different purposes, and actually, there's a specific order that He plays the melodies in to accomplish these different purposes.

His first melody that He likes to play causes demigods like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva to break their meditation, and they forget everything in astonishment. With this first melody, it's described that Lord Anantadeva sways His head like He's hypnotized. The second melody that Kṛṣṇa comes up with makes the Yamunā flow backwards. His third melody makes the moon stop moving. His fourth melody makes the cows run to Him and become stunned just by hearing the flute. The fifth melody, which actually we often refer to as a note, attracts the gopīs and makes them come running to Him. The sixth melody makes stones melt and creates the autumn season. Isn't this wonderful? The seventh melody that He plays specifically manifests all seasons. And the eighth melody is meant exclusively for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, in that it is described it takes the form of Her name and calls for Her.

So, Kṛṣṇa also has a flute named Mahānandā. It looks like a fish hook; it's described that it captures the fish of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's heart and mind. Another flute, which has six holes, is known as Madanajhaṅkṛti. And in *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, it's described that Kṛṣṇa has a flute called Saralā, which is very unique. This flute makes a very low, soft tone, like the sound of a softly singing cuckoo. Here in India, we hear the cuckoos, and you can hear them especially in the morning, singing very softly. So this Saralā makes a low, soft tone like the sound of a softly singing cuckoo bird, and Kṛṣṇa really likes this flute. He's very fond of playing this flute in the rāgas of Gaurī and Gurjarī. I don't know those rāgas, but those of you who are connoisseurs of music... He uses that flute for that purpose.

Now, an interesting phenomenon of Kṛṣṇa's flute playing is that the sound of the flute can only be heard by the person or the party for whom it's intended. You know, Kṛṣṇa plays for a particular person or a particular group, and only those persons or that person can hear. This is the mystical nature of Kṛṣṇa's flute playing; He's the master of all mystics. For example, if Kṛṣṇa plays His flute for His cows, only the cows can hear it and no one else. And if Kṛṣṇa plays His flute for the gopīs, only the gopīs can hear it and no one else. And when the gopīs hear the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute, they often abruptly leave their household duties and run out to meet Kṛṣṇa in the forest. And I was reading, other family members can't comprehend what suddenly happened to the gopīs and where they went. They just couldn't hear it, like, "Where are you going? Why?" I was reading that sometimes a gopī is only halfway through cooking a roti, for example, and when she hears Kṛṣṇa's flute, she runs out of the house, leaving her husband waiting for the roti to arrive on his plate. But the husband couldn't hear the flute, so he doesn't know what's going on. Really mystical—only Kṛṣṇa can do this.

For the cows, Kṛṣṇa uses the flute... We've discussed many times, Kṛṣṇa sits atop, for example, a tree at Ter-kadamba. Ter-kadamba, that's where Nanda Mahārāja's original barns or gośālās were. So when it's time for the cows to come home—there's lots of kadamba trees there at Ter-kadamba—Kṛṣṇa climbs up a tree at Ter-kadamba, a kadamba tree, and he plays his flute to call the cows home. But with his flute, he actually calls each and every one of them by their names. He can play their names on his flute. So he plays names like Candrikā, Dhavalī, Śyāmalī—these are some of the names that I remember of Kṛṣṇa's cows. And when he plays his flute for each cow, he plays her name. Only that cow is able to hear her name. All the other cows can't hear; she hears it through the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute. And I was reading, she gets delighted to hear her name being called by Kṛṣṇa and comes running towards him.

So we can see that Kṛṣṇa's flute plays a very integral part in his pastimes, so much so that he's known by names based solely, how could you say, on his relationship with this flute. Like, for example, he's famously known as Veṇu-gopāla, Vaṁśīdhara, or Muralīdhara. These were names connected to his flute like that. So now...

What else? Oh yeah, in Vṛndāvana, the flute is Kṛṣṇa's only paraphernalia—His significant paraphernalia. He has a buffalo horn, he has a stick, but they're just kind of used once in a while. The ācāryas say His flute really is His only paraphernalia. Like, when He's in Dvārakā or Mathurā, He has weapons like bows and chakras and things like that. What is it? When He has a bow, He's Dhanurdhara; when He has a chakra, He's Cakradhārī. But when He has His flute, He's... What would Kṛṣṇa be without His flute? Sometimes you see they take the flute out, the pujaris, when the Lord's on the altar for Him to take prasādam, and sometimes I've seen they forget to put it back in. I've seen on a few occasions, you're like, "Wait a minute, where's Kṛṣṇa's flute?" He's Veṇudhara, Vaṁśīdhara. So His favorite instrument obviously is the flute.

Her favorite instrument is a lute called the Kacchapī-vīṇā. But still, at the same time, I was reading Rādhārāṇī also likes to play a flute, and according to Her gopīs, She actually plays a flute better than Kṛṣṇa. I was reading Rūpa Gosvāmī says that the sound of Rādhārāṇī's lute is so beautiful that it blocks the holes of Kṛṣṇa's flute, making it go silent. Wow! And the music of Rādhā's lute not only silences Kṛṣṇa's flute but also charms its player, Kṛṣṇa, who is otherwise known to be unconquerable. So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa actually often play duets in performances. She plays the lute, Kṛṣṇa plays the flute, and it's described this nourishes their mutual love by playing these instruments together like a little concert.

Now, the Vrajavāsīs, especially the gopīs, in the rāsa dance... During the rāsa dance, they also play a rich variety of musical instruments. But Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, even though She's the best musician, during the rāsa dance She doesn't play instruments. You know, because the gopīs play instruments during the rāsa, it's just one of the details—She doesn't play, She just prefers to dance. And when Rādhā dances, it's described She is like a diamond surrounded by a golden band of smiling gopīs playing vīṇās, mṛdaṅgas, tālas, and karatālas, and other musical instruments. Isn't that beautiful?

But as much as the gopīs admire Kṛṣṇa's flute playing, they actually consider Kṛṣṇa's flute to be their enemy. And I thought, "Wow, why?" Because it drinks the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips without any obstacles. Why? Because for the gopīs, there are so many obstacles even to get to be with Kṛṣṇa, what to speak of enjoying the nectar of His lips. So the flute is always enjoying the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips, so the gopīs consider it their enemy. They actually consider Kṛṣṇa's lips to be their property, according to Rūpa Gosvāmī, not the flute's property. Transcendental, nectarian details!

Actually, a līlā: one time Kṛṣṇa had an idea to play his flute, how would you say, in a certain way so as to attract the gopīs to come where he was standing in the forest. He thought, "I will play a tune that will bewilder and attract the gopīs, especially Śrī Rādhā." Then he thought to himself, "I just need to find the notes to which those girls will be most susceptible and to which their senses will be attracted." So Kṛṣṇa is really cute—he began experimenting with different flute melodies to achieve this purpose.

So, one day he played a tune that stunned his cows, who gave up eating grass in favor of just sitting there relishing his flute song with their ears and tasting the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa's face with their eyes. So, that didn't bring the gopīs or Rādhā. So the next day, Kṛṣṇa experimented with another tune, and this time the forest animals and birds were stunned. Like the cows, they all stood still, as if they had been confined within invisible cages.

Still, it didn't attract the gopīs or Rādhā. On the third day, Kṛṣṇa's tune attracted the deer, which actually flocked to him in mass, and mesmerized by his attractive appearance, they worshipped Kṛṣṇa with love-filled eyes. Now, I was also reading that the gopīs were somehow aware of these practice sessions—Kṛṣṇa practicing, the Lord practicing—and they told Kṛṣṇa's mother, Yaśodā, that Kṛṣṇa was practicing. They said to Mother Yaśodā, "O pious Mother Yaśodā, your son, who is expert in the art of herding cows, has invented various novel styles of flute playing." They just mentioned that to Mother Yaśodā.

Now, on the fourth day, Kṛṣṇa played another tune which attracted the demigoddesses from Svargaloka, who were so bewildered by that sound that their clothes loosened and their ornaments fell off. And on the fifth day, Kṛṣṇa played a melody so powerful that all animate things became unconscious and inanimate things came to life. Wow! On the fifth day, Kṛṣṇa played a melody so powerful that all animate things—meaning moving things like you and me—became unconscious, and all inanimate things, like chairs and sofas and pots, came to life. So the ācāryas say that despite all of this, Kṛṣṇa's mystic potency playing his flute, the gopīs remained unaffected. Still, they remained unaffected. However, the ācāryas write, the River Yamunā was deeply moved. The River Yamunā was deeply moved. Actually, I was reading, when the Yamunā River heard this particular flute song on day five, I think it must have been, she stopped flowing and became completely bewildered. Her waves swelled and her waters trembled. Then, changing course, she flowed towards Kṛṣṇa and offered lotus flowers at his feet.

Pretty powerful flute tune, but unfortunately, that melody, like all the others, didn't attract the Gopīs. So Kṛṣṇa just kept trying new melodies day after day after day that mesmerized—I was reading—the clouds overhead and Vṛndāvana's mountains, even Govardhana Hill. So finally, finally, finally, Kṛṣṇa found the proper melody just in time, because feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, the Gopīs were becoming frantic to the point that their in-laws thought that their sons had married mad women. You know, Kṛṣṇa is trying to come up with a tune, but the Gopīs are waiting because they always want to be with Kṛṣṇa. So they're waiting: "What is this melody that's going to just drag us to His lotus feet?" So finally, He found their proper tune just in time, because feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, they were becoming frantic to the point that their in-laws were thinking their sons had married mad women—mad with ecstasy. 

And we can understand, it's described, the most disturbed of all the Gopīs was Śrī Rādhā, who at one point was thinking, "Well, how can I become a bamboo flute?" She thought, "Kṛṣṇa's flute is fortunate because, as a male, he doesn't have to be shy like us Gopīs. Thus, it rests in Kṛṣṇa's hands and transforms the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips into beautiful music that causes the rivers to swell and the bamboo along the rivers' banks to shed tears in the form of nectarian honey." It appears bamboo can produce honey! Then she said, "I pray for the body of a flute. I pray for the body of a bamboo flute." As if to say, "I reject this body of a supposedly respectable woman. No other type of body can relish what the flute does as Kṛṣṇa plays it with eagerness and affection." She continued, "The day I become a flute, my consciousness will surely ebb. No doubt I will forget my identity, but Kṛṣṇa will remember me as the Gopī who became a piece of wood from suffering and separation from Him. No doubt I will forget my identity, but Kṛṣṇa will remember me as the Gopī who became a piece of wood from suffering and separation from Him."

So eventually, Śrī Rādhā and the Gopīs' intense desire to be with Kṛṣṇa was fulfilled when they had a rāsa dance. For when Kṛṣṇa later played His flute at Vaṁśīvaṭa to call them for the rāsa dance, they all came running and eventually danced with the Lord for an entire night of Brahmā. Hare Kṛṣṇa! This is like... I'm really looking forward to this series. All this tadīya—it's called tadīya. Tadīya means those things in relationship to Kṛṣṇa, or His devotees, or the process of devotional service. Tadīya, and they can be a stimulus and awakening because of their potency, their attractive nature, their being connected to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They can help to awaken our love for the Divine Couple. So we're surrounded by all this paraphernalia, and yes, we began with the flute. Actually, we have more flute pastimes to cover, so let's just say this is part one, and part two will continue with these flute līlās next Friday. 

And I'd like to conclude today with a statement from Prabhupāda's Nectar of Devotion, Chapter 37, which is entitled, if I remember correctly, "Impetus for Kṛṣṇa's Service." Beautiful poem there. We find, quote: "In the Vidagdha-mādhava, there is the following statement: 'When Kṛṣṇa was playing on His flute, Baladeva very anxiously declared, "Just see how, after hearing the transcendental sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute, Indra, the king of heaven, is crying in his heavenly kingdom, and from his teardrops falling on the ground, Vṛndāvana appears to have become a celestial residence for the demigods."'"

Yeah, I'm in Māyāpur Dhāma. Today, I'm going up to Rāmakeli with a group of 50 devotees. I've never been there. That's where Nawab Hussein Shah had his capital here in Bengal, and they were in his service. So many pastimes! Sanātana Gosvāmī was in jail, I remember, for eight months there. That jail still exists. So myself and these wonderful devotees accompanying me, we're going to go to that jail. We'll have one mammoth Harināma saṅkīrtana, visit all these holy places there, spend the night, and come back tomorrow. And Vṛndāvana dāsa will be producing a wonderful video for all of you so you can also relish that līlā as well. Okay, so I'll be back in one week.

Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda ki jaya!

Oh.