Hi everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Shri Vṛndāvana.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So, we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 53. In this lecture, I would like to speak on the famous Śyāmantaka Jewel. The Śyāmantaka Jewel. As you may remember, last week we spoke on another jewel, the famous Cūḍāmaṇi Jewel.

Actually, I was thinking, Vṛndāvana is often referred to as cintāmaṇi.

Dhāma translates as the land of jewels and gems. And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in his *Padyāvalī*, in his famous song, *Vṛndāvanaṁ puruṣot-tamaṁ priyaṁ, Divya-cintāmaṇi-ratna-maṇḍitaṁ*. "Beautiful Vṛndāvana is filled with cintāmaṇi gems and many jeweled palaces and temples.

Many regal swans play in the waters of the Yamunā, and in those splendid waters, a golden lotus flower grows." So, jewels. And in Vṛndāvana, *Mahimāmṛta*, Sataka 14, verse 93, Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī describes that the trees of Vṛndāvana are made of jewels.

He writes, "May Vṛndāvana's most delightful and transcendental trees, which are filled with the rays of unlimited blissful moons, which are illuminated by the effulgence of the most precious lapis lazuli, which are covered with the effulgence of sapphires, emeralds, and diamonds, and which appear shining as unlimitedly beautiful golden mirrors, become the objects of my meditation." We thank him.

And in *Sataka* 15, verse 51, he writes, "The abode of Vṛndāvana is decorated with many jewel and diamond-studded altars.

It is beyond the description of millions of the best poets. There are many opulent transcendental golden mountains in Vṛndāvana.

It is filled with many jewel, mineral, and metal mines, and is beautified by many divine caves." Now, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, in his *Vṛndāvana Sataka*, *Cintāmaṇi verses*, 13 to 17, he writes in a similar way.

He writes, "In some places, the ground of Vṛndāvana is made of sandal dust.

In some places, it is saffron. In some places, it is made of ground musk, and in some places, it is made of the aromatic substances used in religious ceremonies. He goes on, 'In some places, the ground of Vṛndāvana is made of emeralds, and in other places, it is made of a variety of precious gems.

In some places, the ground of Vṛndāvana is a golden Yamunā River, and in other places, it is made of sapphires.

In some places, the ground of Vṛndāvana is made of emeralds, and the trees, bushes, and creepers are made of gold.

In other places, the ground is gold, and the trees are emeralds. In some places, the ground of Vṛndāvana is made of rubies, and the trees and vines are crystal.

In other places, the ground is crystal, and the trees and creepers are rubies.' Cintāmaṇi. Also, we explained in a previous lecture, you may remember, that the very dust of Vṛndāvana is made from the cintāmaṇi stones of Vṛndāvana.

Thus, it's described that dust shines day and night. Therefore, we hear that when the ornaments of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa sometimes fall into the dust of Vṛndāvana while they're performing their rāsa dance, it's very difficult to find those ornaments.

Therefore, one of the duties of the gopīs is to search the sparkling and glittering dust of Vṛndāvana to find the lost ornaments and return them back to the Divine Couple.

What a wonderful situation. So, then it comes as no surprise that Kṛṣṇa himself wears the famous Cūḍāmaṇi Jewel, which we spoke about extensively last week. And of course, no less famous is the renowned Śyāmantaka Jewel. Śrīla Prabhupāda’s *Kṛṣṇa Book* dedicates actually an entire chapter, I think it's chapter 56, to the history of the Śyāmantaka Jewel.

And of course, as we stated many times, *Kṛṣṇa Book* itself is a summary study of the 10th canto of *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam*. So today, I will speak on Śrī Śrīdhara Svāmī's commentaries on the portion of *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam's* description of the Śyāmantaka Jewel, and also we'll have commentaries by other illustrious ācāryas.

It's going to be really relishable today. But first of all, it's interesting that the famous Sanskrit dictionary *Amarakośa*, which I often refer to as an authoritative reference, it actually doesn't contain the term or the name of this jewel, Śyāmantaka.

I was really surprised by that. I had to turn to another ancient Sanskrit dictionary, the *Trikāṇḍaśeṣa*. It says, "Maṇi-śeṣaḥ viṣṇuḥ," meaning the Śyāmantaka is a gem found in Viṣṇu’s, Kṛṣṇa’s hand. And further details I found in the *Vallabha-ratnākara* commentary on a Sanskrit dictionary named *Abhidhāna-cintāmaṇi*.

This work is actually by a learned scholar from the Jain school of thought, and he says, "Viśva-maṇiḥ kṛṣṇa-hasta-sthitaḥ śyāmantakaḥ." The gem in Kṛṣṇa's hand, which divides the sky into two parts by its effulgence, is known as Śyāmantaka. So there we find some detail.

The gem in Kṛṣṇa's hand, which divides the sky into two parts by its effulgence, is known as Śyāmantaka. Now, that learned scholar, he goes on. He says, "In other words, when projected into the sky, the effulgence of the rays of this gem go so high that they appear to divide the sky into two parts." Clarifies even more.

So, this then is the meaning of the term or the name Śyāmantaka. It took some time to find that, you can imagine. Now, the origin of this gem in this world is Surya, the Sun God. This gem was originally, of course, originally it's Kṛṣṇa's, but we'll see later on who owned that gem.

But this gem was, in this world, originally owned by Surya, the Sun God, who gifted it to his devotee Satyajit, who lived in Lord Kṛṣṇa's capital city of Dvārakā when Kṛṣṇa was present 5,000 years ago. This Satyajit was a great devotee of the Sun God.

Now, in his commentary to *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* 10.56.3, Śrīdhara Svāmī says that even though Surya was the worshipable Lord of Satyajit, he would often relate with Satyajit like a friend. And thus, one day he gifted the Śyāmantaka Jewel to Satyajit out of affection for him. "Give it to your devotee." This valuable jewel.

Now, Śrīdhara Svāmī, in his commentary to the same verse of the *Bhāgavatam*, narrates the detailed history exactly how Satyajit got the Śyāmantaka Jewel from the Sun God, Surya. And I'll share that with you. One day, when Satyajit was performing worship of his *iṣṭa-devatā*, Surya appeared personally in front of him.

But the form of Surya was not clearly visible to Satyajit because of a strong effulgence surrounding or coming from Surya. So, at that moment, Satyajit said, "Oh, my master, you have appeared before me. Oh, Lord of all bright objects in the sky, I am seeing you here.

But this vision is almost the same as a vision when I see you up in the sky. There's nothing special about this vision of yours, even though I am here as your devotee and your friend." So, hearing this, Surya took the Śyāmantaka gem from his neck and placed it some distance away.

So, at that moment, Satyajit could see the personal form of Surya, not just this effulgence, like when he looks at the sun in the sky, you see this effulgence. So, with great joy, Satyajit spoke to Surya. They had a conversation for *muhūrta*, which is around 48 minutes.

Then, at one point, I was amazed to read that Satyajit requested Surya as follows: "Oh, my most worshipable Lord, kindly gift me the gem which illuminates you and all the worlds." Wow. "Kindly give me the gem which illuminates you and all the worlds." And hearing this request from his devotee, Surya kindly gifted him the Śyāmantaka gem.

Now, as soon as Satyajit put on this gem, he too started emanating this brilliant effulgence. And it's described that such was that effulgence that when he entered Dvārakā, he couldn't be recognized by anyone. Actually, everyone thought that Surya, the Sun God, was actually entering Dvārakā to meet Kṛṣṇa.

Now, at that time, it's interesting, Kṛṣṇa was playing a game called *cāṭur-aṅga*. *Cāṭur-aṅga*. I looked it up. This is a board game famous throughout Vedic history, and bets are often placed while playing this game. And actually, the Pāṇḍavas lost their kingdom in one such game against Duriyodhana and Śakuni.

They were playing this game. So, as Satyajit entered Dvārakā, glowing like the sun, the residents of Dvārakā ran to Kṛṣṇa, and they said, "Oh, Lord!

Oh, lotus-eyed deva!

Oh, Govinda!

All glories to you, Oh Lord!

The denizens in heaven constantly seek to have your *darśana*, and knowing you now to be present in the Yadu dynasty, the Sun God is coming here to see you." So, all-knowing and omnipresent Kṛṣṇa, he just laughed and he said, "That's not Surya.

That's not the Sun God. That's Satyajit, who was glowing because of the gem around his neck." So, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that although the Cūḍāmaṇi Jewel was around Kṛṣṇa's neck at this time, by the Lord's desire, its effulgence was reduced in comparison to the Śyāmantaka Jewel.

Now, when everyone came to know that Satyajit had obtained the Śyāmantaka Jewel from Surya by the power of his devotion, you could say they all began celebrating. And when the brāhmaṇas arrived, Satyajit gave them the jewel and after worshiping it, they placed it in a secure temple.

He actually asked them to do that. He was very attached. So, he said, "Take it to a secure temple, please, after worshiping it." Now, it's interesting, while they're in that temple, each day that gem would produce eight *bhāras*, which is approximately 4 pounds or 1.9 kilos of gold every day.

It would produce. This gem would produce four pounds or almost two kilos of gold. And in time, this gem became even more famous, for wherever it was properly worshiped, there would be no famine, pestilence, negative planetary influences, mental or physical diseases.

I think I covered everything. Now, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī comments that properly worshiped means offering it to Kṛṣṇa. He says, "Not offered to Kṛṣṇa, worship is never proper." And thus, the same Śyāmantaka Jewel can also generate ill fortune, as we'll see in later pastimes, because it's not properly being worshiped.

It has to be worshiped in relationship to Kṛṣṇa. Now, during all this time, Satyajit again considered this powerful gem to be his property and his property alone. However, Lord Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā felt that this gem and the gold it produced should be used for the welfare of the kingdom of Dvārakā.

Thus, it's said he requested Satyajit many times to give it to Mahārāja Ugrasena, who ruled over Dvārakā, to use it for the benefit of the general public. Satyajit, however, was very greedy and he wanted to keep it for himself.

Thus, whenever Kṛṣṇa would ask for it, Satyajit would say, "Now think about it. You don't say that, the Lord. I'll think about your request. That's not *amāyā*." So, he never gave it. So, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī says, and I quote here, "Kṛṣṇa requested for the gem in a very logical and just manner, but Satyajit was very selfish." Unquote.

Now, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, we're fortunate, there are many commentators on this pastime. He also comments at this point in the pastime, saying that even when Kṛṣṇa doesn't ask for something, one should offer a good thing to Him before using it for oneself.

Not doing so is a big fault. What then to speak of something that Kṛṣṇa has personally asked for?

And what to speak of something which Kṛṣṇa has repeatedly asked for?

Certainly, the faults of Satyajit were glaringly obvious. Nice commentary. Now, the *Bhāgavatam* goes on to describe that one day, Prasenā, Prasenā was the brother of Satyajit. He went and took that jewel and hung it around his neck and went alone for hunting in the forest.

He just went to the temple and took it and put it around his neck and went for hunting in the forest. Now, here Śrīdhara Svāmī quotes the *Viṣṇu Purāṇa*, that because Satyajit did not want to give the gem to Kṛṣṇa, Prasenā hung it around his neck and carelessly went alone for hunting.

One day. Carelessly went alone for hunting. One day, unfortunately, it's described it was Prasenā's last day on the planet. For instead of him hunting animals, he was killed by a lion that day. I read also the horse at Pākṣala was also killed by the same lion, but that's just a detail.

And while mauling Prasenā to death, the lion got hold of the Śyāmantaka gem and took it inside a cave some distance away. Now, the plot thickens. Just as the lion was entering the cave, Jāmbavān, the famous king of bears who lived in that cave, killed the lion and took the Śyāmantaka jewel and gave it to one of his sons, a little boy, to play with. Śrīdhara Svāmī gives the name of that son as Sumukha.

Sumukha. So many nice details. Now, when Satyajit in Dvārakā found out that his brother Prasenā and the Śyāmantaka jewel were missing, he was in great anxiety. He had learned that Prasenā had taken the gem and hung it around his neck and gone to the forest for hunting, but he didn't know what happened to him.

He was also well aware that Kṛṣṇa had repeatedly asked for the gem, because Kṛṣṇa was asking him. So, such a, you know, he was thinking, Kṛṣṇa repeatedly asked me for this gem. So, Satyajit did something very dishonest at that time.

He created a false rumor that Kṛṣṇa had his brother killed for wearing the gem. Now, some of the citizens of Dvārakā, who unfortunately were followers of Satyajit, also started perpetrating these, these rumors, false rumors. So, when Kṛṣṇa heard of these rumors, he wanted to clear his name.

So, he took a few gentlemen from Dvārakā and went on a search party to find Prasenā in the forest, to show that he hadn't killed him. But in the forest, they actually came across the dead body of Prasenā and the horse.

However, the bodies had the marks of a lion upon them. So, thus, it was confirmed ultimately that Kṛṣṇa was not the one who had ordered Prasenā killed. He had been killed, but not by Kṛṣṇa. Now, although this in itself was enough to remove these rumors that Kṛṣṇa was behind the slaying of Prasenā, Jīva Gosvāmī says that Kṛṣṇa also wanted to give a lesson to Satyajit.

Thus, he told the search party to trace the footprints of the lion. "Let's find the lion." So, the search party followed the footsteps of the lion and found that it had, of course, entered into a cave. But near the cave, they found the dead body of the lion that Jāmbavān had thrown after killing it.

Now, the cave that they had come upon was very deep and dark. They kind of looked in there, and it's interesting, Kṛṣṇa mercifully asked everyone to stay outside while he personally went in alone, probably to search for that gem.

So, Jīva Gosvāmī says, "This was the mercy of the Lord on the residents of Dvārakā, for he says he never put anyone into danger, not even Satyajit or Prasenā." Now, the plot thickens. Once inside the cave, he saw that the Śyāmantaka gem was in fact being used as a toy for one of the sons of Jāmbavān.

So, Kṛṣṇa stood in the corner, you know, waiting for an opportunity to trick the child and take the gem back. However, by the arrangement of *līlā-śakti*, meaning the pastime potency, a female servant of Jāmbavān, who took care of his children, happened to see this "never-before-seen effulgent person." It's an interesting way to describe Kṛṣṇa.

This "never-before-seen effulgent person" in the cave. So, she got frightened and shouted out very loudly, "Help!" Now, here it's interesting.

The ācāryas explained that her fear was because she didn't know Kṛṣṇa, not because Kṛṣṇa's form was frightening. You have to catch that. The ācāryas explain that her fear was because she didn't know who was this Kṛṣṇa, not because Kṛṣṇa's form was frightening.

And Jīva Gosvāmī, he concludes here. He writes, "Kṛṣṇa's form is most pleasing, but because Kṛṣṇa was unknown to her, that's why she shouted out, 'Help!'" So, hearing her cry, Jāmbavān rushed to the spot.

But he couldn't understand that this was the same Lord with whom he had built a great bridge to Laṅkā in Lord Rāmacandra's pastimes. So, Jāmbavān started attacking Kṛṣṇa, said throwing everything he could find at the Lord. And Kṛṣṇa, he also fought with great strength, and the fight lasted exactly 28 days without a break.

So, after 28 days of continuous fighting, each and every joint in Jāmbavān's body had become loosened, that's how it's described. And some joints had actually been broken. And at that point, he finally understood that here was his Lord Rāma in a new incarnation.

So, he glorified Kṛṣṇa, and then Kṛṣṇa very mercifully placed his hand lovingly on Jāmbavān's body. And Kṛṣṇa told him, "I have come into this cave for the gem, because the gem had caused negative rumors about Him, and He wanted to stop those rumors because Satyajit had used the gem in the wrong way.

So, remember, it can work both ways." So, hearing this, Jāmbavān happily presented the Śyāmantaka Jewel to Lord Kṛṣṇa. At the same time, he presented his daughter, Jāmbavatī, to the Lord as a new wife. Now, I was reading, Jāmbavatī was as beautiful as a gandharva.

And it's described this was because Jāmbavān himself was the son of Brahmā and he could assume many forms. Thus, his daughter was also divine, and thus she had a heavenly form, a very beautiful girl. Śrīdhara Svāmī goes on to describe that Jāmbavatī was actually born in Tretā-yuga during Lord Rāma's pastimes, and Jāmbavān had offered her to Lord Rāma in marriage.

But because Lord Rāma had taken a vow to only have one wife, Sītā-devī, he couldn't accept Jāmbavān's hand in marriage. So, at that point, back there in Tretā-yuga, Jāmbavān then performed great austerities. And I was so surprised to find out, at Gokul Hill, at Gokul Hill, and as a result, he obtained the benediction that the Lord would visit him in the future and marry his daughter.

And thus, that benediction was finally fulfilled in this pastime. Śyāmantaka Jewel. Kṛṣṇa. Now, it's also written that the search party had waited for the Lord outside the cave for 12 days. And after 12 days, they just gave up reluctantly and returned to Dvārakā.

And when the family members of Kṛṣṇa, who were many, came to know that he had not come out of the cave for 12 days, they were, how's it described, immersed in waves of sorrow. And they started cursing Satyajit, especially because it had been proven by now that Prasenā was killed by a lion.

So, the residents of Dvārakā started praying to their family deities, namely Candradēvī, a form of Durgā, to kindly send back the Lord of their lives, Kṛṣṇa. So, Durgā-dēvī blessed them that they will soon have good fortune, soon have good fortune.

That soon was just a few moments, because as soon as they got that benediction, Kṛṣṇa suddenly appeared there along with his new wife, Jāmbavatī, and he gave the Śyāmantaka Jewel to Ugrasena finally. And the residents of Dvārakā were in bliss.

It's written that their life airs had returned, their life airs had returned. Oh, for that day, they were blissful. Kṛṣṇa, however, there are lots of twists and turns to this pastime. Kṛṣṇa, however, wanted to humiliate Satyajit in a proper fashion.

Thus, he organized a meeting of all the Yadavas the next day, and in front of many of the residents of Dvārakā, he narrated all that had happened in regards to this mystical Śyāmantaka Jewel. Then, to everyone's surprise, he requested Mahārāja Ugrasena to give the Śyāmantaka Jewel back to Satyajit.

I was like, "What?" But then I read the ācāryas say that this was a great dishonor to Satyajit, because earlier Kṛṣṇa had requested Satyajit to give the gem to Ugrasena, but now, with the turn of events, Ugrasena was giving the greedy Satyajit the Śyāmantaka Jewel.

That's an embarrassing situation for Satyajit. So, greatly embarrassed, he went back home. And there he thought of himself, "Now, as a very shortsighted, wretched person." So, he thought of an idea to rectify himself. He thought, "I will give my daughter, Satyabhāmā, to Kṛṣṇa in marriage, and also the gift of the Śyāmantaka Jewel to Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā.

I'll give my daughter, and I'll give a dowry, and the dowry would be the Śyāmantaka Jewel." Now, it's not over. Kṛṣṇa accepted Satyabhāmā, but refused to accept the Śyāmantaka Jewel. He said to Satyajit, "This gem is yours now, and I will only accept the gold that it produces." So, Jīva Gosvāmī says, "In other words, the gold will come to the kingdom of Dvārakā, and the gem, with all its misfortunes, because remember, it can be used properly or improperly, and he used it improperly, will stay with Satyajit." And what happened next is a really amazing, like when I read it, I went, "Oh my God!" Hare Kṛṣṇa.

But you'll have to wait till next Friday when we recount how this pastime continues to unfold in part two, the Śyāmantaka Jewel. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

For us, actually, we have so much information that I realized I had to give this lecture in two different parts, maybe three, I don't know. It's such an amazing pastime. So, please bear with me. We'll be back in one week.

I wanted to say before concluding that these, the pastimes we've related today are mainly taking place in Dvārakā, of course. But next week, they'll move up to Vṛndāvana.

So, stay tuned. But let us not forget that such pastimes of the Lord, as we've heard today in Dvārakā, are also very dear to Him. Dvārakā is a special place, Dvārakā-dhīśa. We, of course, stress Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa's Vṛndāvana pastimes is topmost of all.

But the pastimes in Dvārakā exist because that's Kṛṣṇa's desire, and variety is the spice of life. So, I thought we could finish today with a beautiful verse from Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī's *Bhāgavatam* wherein Gopakumāra describes Dvārakā so sweetly, a very appropriate verse for finishing today. "The happiness found in liberation is said to be supreme, multiplied many millions of times.

It might be said to equal the joy in *Vaikuṇṭha*. And if any joy still greater can be conceived, it is that which is found in *Ayodhyā*. But the joy born in *Dvārakā*?

How can anyone even begin to describe it?

But the joy born in *Dvārakā*?

How can anyone even begin to describe it?" All glories to Dvārakā!

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

Thank you. Cliffhanger. We'll see you next week. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

Thank you, Mar.