Hi Krishna devotees, welcome back once again to our lecture series on our most beloved Śrī Viśvaka Sena.

Gloriously, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 106. Today, we will continue to discuss the fourth quality of Krishna that distinguishes Him from Lord Narayana, namely Rupa-madhurya, His extraordinary beauty, and it will be part two about Krishna's lips.

His lips. So let us begin by reciting a piece, a poem written by one of our favorite poets, Śrī Dasa, wherein he mentions Krishna's lips while describing the beauty of His entire body.

So nicely, it's so beautiful. He writes, while crying on the lap of Mother Yaśodā, Krishna says, "Oh Mother, Balarāma laughs at me in front of all the gopas and calls me dark blue." He says, "Look, he's so dark." Yaśodā replied, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, your darkness is a gift from the beautiful dark wives of the Moon.

Your eyes are the gift from the deep lakes of Kuvalaya. Your brows are gifted by our eternal protector, Lord Mahadeva. Your cheeks are a gift from the fruits of Svarga-loka. Your forehead is a gift from the mother of Fortune, Her name is Lakṣmī.

Your lips, your lips are a gift from the god of the queen of nectar, Samudra. Your ears are gifted to you by desire trees in the form of their leaves. Your chin is a gift from the chariot horses of the Sun God." Dasa says, "The beautiful face of Govinda is a gift from Mother Yaśodā, who received the best of gifts, upahara, from Divine Providence." Divine Providence.

Thank you. In Śrī Śuka Sahasra, 190, our Śrīla Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, who wrote that book, writes how once a parrot praised Krishna's lips.

The parrot said, "Krishna's lips are a treasure trove of all things desirable for the beautiful damsels of Braja and give the nectar of life to Viṣṇu's daughter.

May those lips, adorned with their teeth marks, shine forever in my heart." In Sanskrit, lips are known as oṣṭha. And the meaning of oṣṭha means "they who get burnt by hot food." One gets burnt by hot food. And now, the Sanskrit term for the lower lip is adhara or adharostha, and the upper lip is called uttarostha.

And Śrī Vallabhācārya begins his famous Madhurāṣṭakam with the phrase adharaṁ madhuraṁ, adharaṁ madhuraṁ, meaning literally, "His lower lip is very sweet. His lower lip is very sweet." And ŚB 10.21.5 describes that nectar flows from the lower lips of Krishna: "radhanaṁ venur adaraṁ subha yā panaṁ." He filled the holes of His flute with the nectar of His lips.

In fact, the gopīs have a transcendental quarrel over that lower lip nectar because in ŚB 10.21.9, we hear, "O my dear gopīs, what auspicious activities must the flute have performed to enjoy the nectar of Krishna's lips?

Adharaṁ means the lower lip, independently. And leave only a taste for us gopīs, for whom that nectar is actually meant. The forefathers of the flute, the bamboo trees, shed tears of pleasure. His mother, the river on whose bank the bamboo was born, feels jubilation, and therefore her blooming lotus flowers are standing like hair on her body." Now also, when the gopīs for the rasa dance, they desire His specifically lower lip nectar the most.

That's described in ŚB 10.29.35, where it said, "The gopīs, dear Krishna, please put the nectar of Your lips." And in that verse, it's described, "the lower lip upon the fire within our hearts, a fire You ignited with Your smiling glances and the sweet song of Your flute.

If You do not, we will consign our bodies to the fire of separation from You, O friend, and thus, like yogīs, attain the abode of Your lotus feet just by meditation." Also, ŚB 10.31.8, "adaraṁ sidhu, naparaṁ." "O dear Hero, please revive Your maidservants with the nectar of Your lips." Again, lower lip is mentioned there.

And as we mentioned last week, Krishna's lips are also often compared to the color of a bimba fruit, but especially the lower lip.

Say, focusing on the lower lip today, ŚB 10.35.4 states, "When He takes His flute to His bimba-lips, adharaṁ bimbe, lower lip, and sends forth the tones of the harmonic scale in variegated melodies." Tones of the harmonic scale in variegated melodies.

Brahmā, Śiva, Indra, and other chief demigods become confused upon hearing that sound. Krishna's lower lip nectar is beautifully described in Candrakānta Ācārya's Satya-vratīya, 15.2.3, with the words, "adharaṁ adharaṁ amṛtaṁ." It's described in the verse, it's a long verse, though.

Krishna's lips are so sweet when combined with the camphor of His gentle smile that they attract the minds of all women, forcing them to give up all other attractions.

If the sweetness of Krishna's smile is unobtainable, great mental difficulties and lamentations result.

That sweetness is the only wealth of the gopīs of Vrndavana. Now, the Ācāryas say that Krishna's lower lip is also His ideal choice for expressing anger.

It's kind of poetic, saying Krishna's lower lip is also His ideal choice for expressing anger.

How so?

Well, in Dāmodara, when Krishna was a young boy child, when Yaśodā left Krishna and went to save the boiling milk, Krishna showed His anger by biting His adhara, His lower lip.

He bit His adhara, lower lip. That's described in that verse, "very angry and biting His reddish lips with His teeth." And again, in that verse, it's mentioned, "lower lip." Krishna, with false tears in His eyes, broke the container of yogurt with a piece of stone.

Then He entered a room and began to eat the freshly turned butter in a solitary place. So we know, you know, we become angry or whatever we don't like, we bite our lower lip, and that's described. And in the commentary on this, the great devotee Haridāsa Thakura makes creative use of the term adhara, the lower lip, by composing a verse to explain why Krishna decided to bite His lower lip.

It's a long verse, but that word for the lower lip is there. Krishna is speaking.

You have to listen carefully to this one. Haridāsa is very deep. Krishna is speaking: "If I make the result of my anger, dharā, employed on adhara, the Earth, then my vow of protecting her will fail.

Moreover, dharā is one of the mothers, and it is incorrect to vent one's anger on her. The Earth." Thinking in this way, Lord Krishna was determined to give happiness, news, to the Earth and made His anger adhara, meaning employed on the lower lip, instead of getting angry on mother the Earth.

Oh, he bit his lower lip. He employed his anger on his lower lip. Now, the Ācāryas say that in fact, the best use of Krishna's adhara, lower lip, is to drink the nectar from the lower lip of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

For example, we have to back everything up. Pāṇḍava Vijaya, verse number two. "Mādhava, I offer my respectful obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose eyes are as beautiful as lotus petals, who delights in playing the flute, who drinks the nectar of Śrīmatī's lip, and who wears a garland of forest flowers." Vallabhācārya.

Now, it's poetically described by a scholar named Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura that Krishna's lower lip is bhu-maṇḍala.

He's describing like this, poets. His lower lip is bhu-maṇḍala, the earthly planets. Whereas His upper lip is mahat-ākāśa, meaning literally, the spiritual sky. And between them is His mouth, where the entire universe, planets, and stars are located. Thus, when Yaśodā asked Krishna to open His mouth to check whether Balarāma and the other cowherd boys were telling the truth that He had eaten the dust of Vṛndāvana, at that moment Krishna revealed all the planetary systems residing in His mouth to her.

Between the two lips, because a mouth means two lips. Now, of course, we know that Krishna's mouth, consisting of two lips, is also mentioned in Bhāgavata 11.28 and 29.

We've been discussing Gosvāmī literature here, but the lips are also mentioned, the two lips, the mouth, in Bhāgavata, where Arjuna says, "As innumerable waves of the rivers flow into the ocean, so do all these great warriors enter into Your blazing mouths.

I see all people rushing full speed into Your mouths, as moths dash to destruction in a blazing fire." Now, we had to do a lot of research in different places. Vaiṣṇava scholars compare Krishna's lotus lips to different objects so we can get an idea of what they're like.

Like we mentioned earlier, the redness of the bimba fruit. Krishna's lips are like the redness of the bimba fruit.

Interestingly enough, I found out the bimba fruit is described in the Mahabharata, the Purāṇas, and the Itihāsas as a very delicate reddish color. But I read the Ācāryas add that such bimba fruit as being described very much like Krishna's color, Krishna's lips, it is not seen or grown in this material world.

The description they're giving, they're using the bimba fruit, but the actual color of the bimba fruit, you can't see it in this world because these bimba fruits exist in the spiritual world. So we have to wait to get home to see the real color.

They also describe Krishna's lips as tulasī, described as the red color that comes from someone who's chewing betel nut.

You may have, if you've been in India, you know what I'm talking about. They, many people chew betel nut, and it gives a red tinge to their lips. So they compare Krishna's lips to that color.

Then ravi-maṇḍala, Krishna's mouth is also compared to the crimson red color of the dawning sun in the sky.

I like that. What do they say?

What's Krishna's lips' color like?

Ravi-maṇḍala, His mouth is compared to the red, crimson red color of the dawning sun in the sky. And finally, they're sometimes described as a-bhinna-a-varṇīya. What does that mean? Ācārya, it means they describe His mouth as a-bhinna, which means indescribable, something that cannot be described by the human mind or tongue.

These material bodies, these material minds or intelligence can't conceive it. Just like Śakti-śraddhā Sarasvatī said one time in The Harmonist, that the actual blue of Krishna's transcendental form cannot be perceived in this world.

It's a color that exists in the spiritual world. There are unlimited colors in the spiritual world, the reds, the blues, the greens, the yellows. They don't look anything like the colors of this world. So again, we have to get home to see the real color of Krishna's transcendental body.

Can't wait. Now, the famous poet Premānanda, who we quoted many times as well, he describes Krishna's lips in a very beautiful way in one of his poems.

Listen to this. He writes, "Two filled cups are situated in the form of His Krishna's lips, which the bee-like gopīs are always curious to taste and store within their hearts.

Those lips are the lives of the gopīs, the resting place of Krishna's flute, the magic of Braja is poured and filled in the form of these two beautiful lips." Premānanda says, "O sakhī, His lips make Cupid feel shame at all times." Just His lips make Cupid feel shame at all times.

And Rūpa Gosvāmī, our great poet, he writes in one of his poems how Rādhā Śrī Rādhā Rāṇī once cursed Krishna's flute, and he's actually paraphrasing a verse from ŚB.

She says, "O sakhī, please kill this flute of Krishna, for she, the flute is referred to as a she in this verse, for she is our biggest rival in the heart of Braja.

She drinks the nectar of Krishna's lips, which is only our right to do so.

She kills our rights and fills Braja with the rasa of hopes and desires. Oh sakhī, the endless sweet ocean, the endless sweet ocean of Krishna's lips is wasted by the touch of this bamboo flute." Transcendental jealousy. Śrīmatī Rādhā says, "Thus, Pāiyārī, sweet Rādhā revealed her heart's desire to Lalitā." Now, not only Krishna's lips, but also His chin is part of His unlimited and unmatchable beauty.

The Ācāryas mention that it is the chin, Krishna's chin, is the playground of Cupid and his army of loving desire.

That's some poetry for you. Krishna's chin is the playground of Cupid and his army of love and desire.

Mādhavācārya, a devotee scholar who I came across, Vrndāvanavāsī, writes that once in the dense forest of Kuṅjana, that small forest, the gopīs, after playing water sports, decorated Krishna like a lotus flower by binding His long hair in a topknot and adding many lotus buds in His tied-up hair.

Then they bound lotus stems around His strong arms as armlets and covered His lower body with large, beautiful, soft, soft lotus leaves. Soft lotus leaves. Then they rubbed sandalwood on a stone, and with that paste, they painted forest leaf designs on His broad chest and around His navel.

Then, while giggling and clapping, they painted His chin with a design resembling a group of bees. And the gopīs painted the bees so beautifully and so realistically that a small group of real bees came to talk to the painted ones.

A small group of real bees came to talk to the painted ones on Krishna's chin, and they started humming around Krishna's chin, which made Him laugh, you know, along with His cowherd friends, with the mooing of countless cows in the background.

Wow. In your mind's eye, just that humming and the mooing of the cows. Krishna's.

So Mādhavācārya concludes, "Balarāma, Balarāma, Balarāma, Balarāma, I sacrifice my everything, I sacrifice my everything to this beautiful scene in the Kuñjana forest." Haribol. So, according to many devotee poets and Ācāryas, when Krishna's body is compared to the universe, then His chin is described as Parivṛṅga.

That which always stands tall and is considered as the grace of Creation in the Universal form. Then they all, then they go on to say, this is nice, His chin is cool and calm like the Himalayan Mountains and strong like those mountains.

It is the residence of the yogīs who achieve that abode through their meditation. That chin lets many streams of rasa flow like streams from the mountains. Therefore, His chin is considered to be the mountain or peak of His beauty.

Every part of Krishna's body is transcendentally extraordinary.

The mountain peak, the mountain or peak of His beauty. Haribol. So I would like to conclude today with two very relevant verses to what we've been discussing today. The first is from Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta by our beloved Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.

He writes, "May my heart become fixed on dark-complexioned Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the charming transcendental abode of the Vṛndāvana forest, as He places His lips to a glistening golden flute studded with pearls and many colorful jewels and decorated with bunches of flowers, as He eternally plays songs describing the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhikā." And the second is from Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī's Gopāla Champū, first wave, Uttara-pūrvārdha, verse 114.

It's so sweet. "Those who can see into the future may say these words: Krishna's face is like the king of graceful smiling blue lotus flowers.

Krishna's eyes are like the king of graceful black bees resting in the king of white lotus flowers.

Krishna's nose is like the king of sesame flowers, splendid like the kings of dark monsoon clouds.

Krishna's lips are like the king of lips, red like red cindor, Gidiyā jaw roses, baṅdhuka flowers, or bimba berries.

Krishna's ears are like the king of the splendor of blackness that rules over dark anjana ointments.

Krishna's arms and hands are like the king of branches bearing blossoming twigs.

Krishna's chest marked with Śrīvatsa is like the king of dark clouds embraced by an unmoving lightning flash." Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī describing Krishna's form and gracefully mentioning Krishna's lips.

That beautiful verse from Gopāla Champū. Wow. Prabhus, that ends our description of Krishna's lips as a stimulus for ecstatic love.

I hope you've enjoyed these couple of classes, and we'll move on to another item of Krishna's transcendental form next Friday from Śrī Māyāpura here in India. Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya.

It's December now, so all glories to the devotees doing the Christmas marathon, distributing books all over the world. Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya.

All glories to the lips, all glories to the revealer of the dawn, Krishna.