Hare Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our series on the glories of our most beloved Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa. Namaste. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 54.

In last week's lecture, we discussed how the famous Syamantaka jewel was gifted by Sūrya-deva, the sun-god, to his devotee Satrājit in Dvārakā. You may remember we discussed how that gem was producing so much gold every day. I think we even gave the equations for what was being produced.

But I was reading this morning that Śrīdhara Svāmī, in his commentary on this pastime, actually says that the gem was producing about 780 kilos of gold daily. That calculates as 1,720 pounds of gold.

Anyway, we discussed how Kṛṣṇa wanted to use that gold in the service of the citizens in Dvārakā. Satrājit, however, was very greedy, and he didn't want to give the jewel to Kṛṣṇa.

Then one day Satrājit's brother Prasena went to the forest to hunt, you remember, with the gem hanging around his neck. But he was killed by a lion, who then took the Syamantaka jewel.

Then the plot thickens. That lion was subsequently killed by Jāmbavān, king of the bears, who then became the new owner of the jewel.

This is a very complicated pastime.

Now, some people in Dvārakā, mainly Satrājit, started blaming Kṛṣṇa, accusing Him and spreading a rumor that Kṛṣṇa had arranged for the disappearance of Prasena and the Syamantaka gem.

So, to clear His name, Kṛṣṇa took a search party out to the forest, where He found Prasena's dead body. Then, after fighting for twenty-eight days with Jāmbavān, He took the gem and brought it back to Dvārakā.

Now, at that point Satrājit became very remorseful, remember, over his actions, and he decided to give his daughter Satyabhāmā to Kṛṣṇa as one of His queens, along with the gem.

But not completely satisfied with Satrājit's actions and attitude, Kṛṣṇa only accepted his daughter and not the gem. Kṛṣṇa actually said the gem should stay with Satrājit, and the gold it produced would be used for the people of Dvārakā.

And we finished there.

So let's continue with our narration. This is like part two.

Sometime later, some terrible news arrived in Dvārakā. The news was that the Pāṇḍavas, the five Pāṇḍavas, had been burned in a terrible fire in a house made of lac.

Of course, we know it wasn't true because the Pāṇḍavas had escaped the fire, which was arranged by their enemies Śakuni and Duryodhana.

Being omniscient, Kṛṣṇa knew this, but as part of the līlā He immediately left Dvārakā with Lord Balarāma to go to Hastināpura to meet with Bhīṣma, Gāndhārī, and others, to offer His condolences.

Now, with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma out of Dvārakā, some deeply disturbing political events started happening.

Now, this may appear a little odd because, well, we know Dvārakā was one of the several homes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But the ācāryas say it was a big city, and big cities inevitably mean some politics.

Of course, we understand that any politics in Dvārakā are ultimately transcendental politics, but politics nonetheless.

The ācāryas actually say that the only place free from political desires when Kṛṣṇa was present was our beloved Vṛndāvana. This is because the associates of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana lived in an informal village atmosphere and had no political ambitions.

It was just Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.

There was no overflowing wealth, high-ranking posts, or struggles for power. In Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana, the Vrajavāsīs lived simple lives, free of politics and fully dedicated to Kṛṣṇa.

But Dvārakā and Hastināpura were not exactly like that.

And this was one reason we hear that Kṛṣṇa said to His father in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.2.24:

"My dear father, our home is not in the cities, towns, or villages. Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forests and on the hills."

Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya!

So, what were the politics that began in the big city of Dvārakā?

Well, the ācāryas explain—actually, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam explains—that two personalities started a conspiracy against Satrājit. They were Kṛtavarmā and Akrūra.

Now, Kṛtavarmā was a general, a great general, in Dvārakā's army. And, of course, Akrūra was the famous personality who took Kṛṣṇa from Vraja to Mathurā.

So Akrūra and Kṛtavarmā went to a warrior named Śatadhanvā and said to him, "Please steal the Syamantaka gem from Satrājit."

So Śatadhanvā agreed.

Unfortunately, with this opportunity for big money, he himself became overwhelmed with greed. One night he entered the home of Satrājit, killed him in his sleep, and stole the Syamantaka gem.

Now, when this news reached Hastināpura, where Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were, They left Hastināpura to return as quickly as They could to Dvārakā.

But back in Dvārakā at this time, Śatadhanvā started fearing for his life.

So what did he do?

He actually gave the Syamantaka gem to Akrūra, and then fled on his horse, which, I was reading, could run one hundred yojanas without stopping.

I thought, "Well, that must be very far."

So I did some research and found out that one hundred yojanas is approximately 300 kilometers, or 186 miles. He could run that without stopping.

Now, he ran like the wind, by the way.

So now, when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma finally arrived back in Dvārakā, They learned that Śatadhanvā had fled the city. So They immediately left Dvārakā on Their chariots to find him.

Unfortunately for Śatadhanvā, when he arrived in the kingdom of Mithilā, that poor horse, who was running like the wind, couldn't continue any further and actually collapsed dead on the ground.

So Śatadhanvā, fearful for his life, decided to continue fleeing on foot.

Now, it's very interesting. When Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma arrived at the spot where Śatadhanvā's horse had died, They tied up Their horses and chariots and pursued him on foot.

I thought, "Wow."

But then I read Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī's commentary at that point in the pastime, and he comments that it is not justified to chase someone running on foot while using a chariot. That's not proper.

You can't chase someone running on foot with a chariot.

So They got off Their chariots and started pursuing him on foot.

So when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma finally caught up with Śatadhanvā, Kṛṣṇa immediately took His Sudarśana cakra and cut off his head.

Meanwhile, back in Dvārakā, Akrūra and Kṛtavarmā themselves fled because they were afraid they might get caught up in an investigation into Satrājit's death.

I told you—it's complicated.

So Akrūra fled to his mother's home in Vārāṇasī. While staying there, the Syamantaka jewel began giving many kilos of gold daily, as we described.

But of course we know that ultimately Akrūra is a devotee. So after some time he started feeling guilty that he was personally acquiring so much gold.

So he began using that wealth to conduct huge yajñas, huge fire sacrifices, for the people of Vārāṇasī, and he started giving lots of charity to the brāhmaṇas.

As a result, he soon became famous as Dāna-pati, meaning "master of charity."

But then Kṛṣṇa sent a message to Akrūra that He wanted the jewel back.

So, being the devotee that he is, Akrūra came back to Dvārakā and immediately gave the Syamantaka jewel back to Kṛṣṇa.

So it's changed hands many times.

But then Kṛṣṇa did something really amazing.

He reached out and gave the jewel back to Akrūra.

Why?

Well, the ācāryas say—and I'll quote them here:

"Only a person who offers the Syamantaka willingly to Kṛṣṇa is eligible to keep it."

So Satrājit didn't willingly give it to Kṛṣṇa, but Akrūra did.

So Akrūra, in this particular version, ends up with the Syamantaka jewel.

So, dear devotees, the episode of the Syamantaka jewel ends with Śukadeva Gosvāmī declaring that anyone who studies, hears, or remembers this episode of the Syamantaka jewel will become free of any bad reputation in his life.

Actually, I'll recite the actual verse. It's a very authoritative way to finish today.

It's Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.57.42:

"This narration, rich with descriptions of the prowess of Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, removes sinful reactions and bestows all auspiciousness. Anyone who recites it, hears it, or remembers it will drive away his own infamy and sins and attain eternal peace."

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam kī jaya!

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So that's the conclusion of the version in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

But interestingly enough, there's another version by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Lalita-mādhava*, and I would be very happy to study that and give a lecture based on Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's version next Friday.

So stay tuned for part three, Syamantaka jewel.

It's really, really interesting, and we'll be back in Vṛndāvana.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu Nityānanda, Śrī Advaita Gadādhara, Śrīvāsādi Gaura-bhakta-vṛnda.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.
