Hi Krishna, dear devotees, welcome back again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Viṣṇu, all glories!

So, we're continuing with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 25. We will once again discuss the item of tilaka. In our two previous classes, we focused mainly on Krishna and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's tilaka, but today I would like to focus solely on devotees wearing tilaka because seeing Krishna's devotees wearing tilaka can also act as a stimulus for remembering Krishna.

You may remember in our last lecture, we quoted Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who writes in *Nectar of Devotion*, chapter six, the idea is that as soon as a person sees these marks on the body of a Vaiṣṇava, he will immediately remember Krishna.

Lord Caitanya said that a Vaiṣṇava is he who, when seen, reminds one of Krishna.

Therefore, it is essential that a Vaiṣṇava mark his body with tilaka to remind others of Krishna.

Now, in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, 4.203, Krishna says, "If a person adorned with tilaka eats in someone's house, I free the owner of that house from hell for 21 generations." And in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, 1972-200, we hear the following: "Simply by seeing a brāhmaṇa decorated with tilaka, a person is freed of all sinful reaction.

Simply by remembering the name of such a person with devotion, one obtains the result of giving all kinds of charity. The ancestors of that person who feeds a brāhmaṇa adorned with tilaka during the śrāddha ceremony become completely freed from millions of *kalpas*.

There is no doubt about this. Anyone who performs the śrāddha ceremony after applying tilaka will live eternally in Vaikuṇṭha forever. Any activity, including performing sacrifices, giving charity, performing austerities, or chanting mantras, performed after adorning the body with tilaka, will undoubtedly result in boundless piety." It's written, boundless piety.

So, to begin with, although as a matter of habit, we're used to putting tilaka on every day, sometimes twice or thrice a day, wearing tilaka has great significance and many benefits that we should remind ourselves of from time to time.

In the *Padma Purāṇa*, the Supreme Lord declares, "A wise person who wears 12 tilaka marks on the body every day knows what is religion (*dharma*) and what is irreligion (*a-dharma*). They understand the difference between religious and non-religious principles. One who sees the difference between religious and non-religious principles is called a Vaiṣṇava." In the *Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa*, it is said, "If a person is impure, lacks proper etiquette, or commits sins in the mind, they always remain pure if they wear tilaka." Therefore, we hear in the *Padma Purāṇa*, Yamarāja is warning his servants, "Oh, my messengers, listen carefully!

When you see someone with a tilaka made of Gopī-candana on their forehead, run away from them like from a blazing fire!

Run away from them like a blazing fire." In other words, leave them alone. And Lord Krishna declares again in the *Padma Purāṇa*: "If a person born in a family of dog-eaters adorns his body with tilaka and dies in an unholy place, in an unholy place, he will be transported on a celestial airplane to My transcendental abode, where he will enjoy eternal, blissful life." All glories!

So, exactly why does tilaka bring such great benefits?

Well, I found in *Līlā-smṛti*, Śiva explains to Pārvatī Devī this, we could say, confidential truth. Again, in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, we find 4.194 to 195. It's actually also quoted in the *Uttara-khaṇḍa* of the *Padma Purāṇa* twice, so important. "The beautiful place between the two parallel lines of tilaka is the abode of Śrī Lakṣmī and Janārdana, the Lord of lords.

The body adorned with tilaka is the sacred temple of the Supreme Lord, the sacred temple." So, as we can see from these quotes, again, wearing tilaka is very significant. However, it should also be noted that the absence of tilaka on the body is actually, I see, I was seeing, condemned by sacred scriptures.

The opposite is true. *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, 4.186, says, "It is inauspicious to see the face of a person who is not marked with Vaiṣṇava tilaka directed upwards like a flame. If someone happens to see such a face by fate, he should purify himself by looking at the sun." Now, again, *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, 4.178 and 182, which are quoted in the *Padma Purāṇa*, it states, "If a person performs a sacrifice, makes a donation, undergoes austerity, studies the Vedas, or offers oblations to one's ancestors without tilaka, then all of his actions will be in vain." Pain.

Moreover, one should not look at a person who does not adorn his body with tilaka because a body in that state is as impure as a crematorium. And in the *Ādi Purāṇa*, it is said, "The king should put a fallen brāhmaṇa whose body is not marked with tilaka, śaṅkha, and cakra—meaning different types of marks—on a donkey and send him outside the kingdom." And coming closer to home, in letters dated August 3rd and October 14th, 1967, I found Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote to his disciples about the significance of wearing tilaka.

Like soldiers, he wrote, "You know that each of you has a uniform in accordance with military etiquette and regulations. Therefore, the army of Krishna consciousness, regardless of circumstances, must have tilaka on the forehead.

All the soldiers have to have tilaka on the forehead. All of you, except sannyāsīs, can dress like modern American gentlemen, but everyone, as I mentioned, must have tilaka, etc." Śrīla Prabhupāda actually calls the wearing of tilaka *bhava-anukūla*, *bhava-anukūla*, meaning that which is conducive to devotional service.

Bhava-anukūla, that which is conducive to devotional service. Tilaka is conducive to devotional service. And as I mentioned in a previous class, urdhva-puṇḍra, of course, again, urdhva-puṇḍra, I also mentioned in this class, that which goes upwards in two vertical lines.

And according to *Śāstra*, urdhva-puṇḍra symbolizes the footprint of the Lord, which a Vaiṣṇava places on his or her forehead to declare his devotion to Krishna.

We are declaring our devotion to Krishna by wearing tilaka.

We should be proud to be devotees. But, as we know, there are a number of *sampradāyas*, and as such, the form and the appearance of their tilaka determine which *sampradāya* one belongs to. For example, the followers of the Rudra *sampradāya* apply tilaka in the form of a single red line, which actually symbolizes Yamunā Devī.

I was reading the process of worshiping Krishna in this *sampradāya* is done through Yamunā Devī.

In the Madhva *sampradāya*, the tilaka consists of two vertical lines representing Krishna's lotus feet.

And these followers of the Madhva *sampradāya* do a lot of daily sacrifices, a lot of ritualistic sacrifices. And a third black line in the middle of that tilaka, they take from the ashes of the *yajña* they perform. And below this, a yellow or red dot representing Lakṣmī Devī is added.

A lot of detail, but it's really fascinating, all the intricacies of tilaka. Now, in the Śrī *sampradāya*, the Rāmānuja *sampradāya*, the tilaka also consists of two white vertical lines symbolizing the feet of Lord Nārāyaṇa with a red line in the middle.

And also, the tilaka worn by followers of different Vaisnava traditions, it can actually, it can vary in shape and color. The different tilakas mentioned, they can vary in shape and color. For example, I was reading that the Kumāra *sampradāya* followers wear a tilaka consisting of two vertical lines representing the temple of God with Gopī-candana paste.

And there's a small white line on the nose which represents the guru, and a black dot between the eyebrows which represents the earth of Vṛndāvana, the earth of Vṛndāvana, the place described of Rādhā and Krishna's pastimes, actually symbolizing the union of Rādhā and Krishna.

Now, we, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, followers of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we wear a similar tilaka to that of the Madhva *sampradāya*. Of course, we consider ourselves part of the Madhva-Gauḍīya *sampradāya*. But instead of a black line made of ash, we draw a leaf of Tulasī on our nose.

There's also differences in the shape of this part of the tilaka in different branches of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava *sampradāya*. For example, the followers of Lord Nanda wear a tilaka in the shape of a bamboo leaf on the nose, while the followers of Gopala Bhatta, the followers of Acyutaānanda, let me remember, they wear a tilaka in the shape of a banyan leaf, a banyan leaf.

And the followers of our hero, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, wear a tilaka in the shape of a lotus bud. I read that all these forms of tilaka are considered authoritative and auspicious according to the *Padma Purāṇa*. Now, the color of the tilaka may also vary, as mentioned in the above examples, according to tradition.

Black tilaka provides peace. Red tilaka helps control others. Interesting. And yellow tilaka brings wealth, and the white tilaka leads to prosperity and liberation. Of course, as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, we wear tilaka simply for the pleasure of Krishna.

Proudly, we are devotees of Krishna.

Now, different materials can also be used to make tilaka. For example, followers of Lord Śiva usually use ash and apply it to their bodies in the form of three, well, their heads, we say three horizontal lines. To those who worship Gaṇeśa, they use red sandalwood paste, it's called *rakta-candana*. Śāktas, devotees of the Goddess Durgā, apply tilaka with red turmeric powder, with *kuṅkuma*.

They draw a red line or sometimes a dot between the eyebrows. I did a lot of research, took a lot of time. However, a red line on the forehead can also signify another type of tilaka. It's called *rāja-tilaka* and it's used during the coronation of kings or sometimes receiving important guests.

Now, one time in Vṛndāvana, the gopīs held a coronation for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

We discussed that in detail a few years ago in these lectures. And when the bathing was finished, the gopīs dressed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in royal clothes and adorned her with precious jewels and fragrant flowers. And sitting on a throne of precious stones, surrounded by her friends, it said that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī looked like the Empress of divine love, who governs the hearts of all purified souls.

I love that!

Surrounded by her friends, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī looked like the Empress of divine love who governs the hearts of all purified souls. Please govern my heart, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī!

When Krishna's younger sister, Yogamāyā, applied *rāja-tilaka* then on the forehead of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she exclaimed, "Jaya!

Jaya!

Jaya!" And at that moment, cries of "Jaya!

Jaya!" filled the air, reverberated throughout Vṛndāvana.

The sound of conch shells and musical instruments, and the *ulladhani*, you know, the *ulladhani* of the gopīs, we hear that a lot in Bengal here, caused the demigods to pour down from the heavens a stream of flowers that resembled a blissful waterfall of paradise.

That's how it's described, a blissful, a blissful waterfall of paradise. There's no poetry like in our Krishna conscious culture, a blissful waterfall of paradise flowers.

So, now we can discuss about the materials used for tilaka and which ones we specifically, we as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, use. So, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī cites the following quote: Lord Brahmā said, "Oh, Nārada, if a person's forehead is adorned with tilaka made of clay collected from beneath the roots of Tulasī Devī, even sins committed under duress will not affect him.

Such a devotee becomes free from the bondage of material existence." You have your tilaka from the clay collected, you know, the dirt collected under the roots of Tulasī Devī. In the *Guru Purāṇa*, the *Guru Purāṇa* said that if someone sees a devotee adorned with tilaka from clay from the base of a Tulasī plant, sins committed by that person in the last year will evaporate without a trace.

A person who wears tilaka made of clay touched by a cow's hoof achieves the result of bathing in a holy place. What's more, he becomes fearless at every step. The following materials are mentioned in the *Uttara-khaṇḍa* of the *Padma Purāṇa*.

There, it's written that it's really interesting. A devotee can collect clay for tilaka from the top of a hill, from the banks of a river, from the root of a bilva tree, from the bottom of a reservoir of water, from the shore of the ocean, from an anthill, and especially from a holy place associated with Lord Hari.

It's also written that clay for tilaka can be collected from a place where water has flowed, has washed the form of Rādhā or has washed the form of Lord Viṣṇu. Or a devotee can collect clay from the Vana-sthala, Śaṅkha-kṣetra, Dvārakā, Prayāga, Mathurā, Vṛndāvana, and then mix it with water that has washed the lotus feet of Viṣṇu.

Using this clay, a person should decorate his body with tilaka and appear before the Lord. We appear before the Lord. He can also collect clay in the transcendental abode of Lord Hari. Wow!

We can also collect tilaka in the transcendental abode of Lord Hari. Now, there are many other holy places where devotees can collect, we say, clay for tilaka. For example, we mentioned in a previous class or the previous class when Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu discovered the location of Ranḍāva and Kūriśākhana, he bathed in these lakes, well, they were little puddles at that time, but he bathed there and he applied that grayish tilaka that he had found in Ranḍāva and took some with him.

You remember?

But of all types of materials for tilaka, it's stated throughout the scriptures, Gopī-candana is the best clay for tilaka. Śrījīva Gosvāmī says the same in the *Padma Purāṇa*: "Any person, even if he is a killer of a brāhmaṇa, killer of a cow, a dry logician, or one who is contaminated by all types of sinful activities, can immediately be purified simply by touching the tilaka made from Gopī-candana." Just touching it!

I was reading that Gopī-candana is so powerful that simply by touching it, one can get free from all kinds of terrible sins. Which is really interesting is that it can even give more than purification and freedom from sins. Now, we're going back to, you know, *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, one of our scriptures that we closely identify with, 4.228.

There it said, "A person who donates a piece of Gopī-candana to a Vaiṣṇava liberates a hundred generations of his ancestors." You just donate a piece of Gopī-candana to a Vaiṣṇava, liberates a hundred generations of his ancestors. Again, do not think this is exaggeration.

Yamarāja says in the *Skanda Purāṇa*: "Why are you afraid of sinful reactions?

If you see a person adorned with tilaka, with Tulasī beads on his neck, and his body is anointed, say, anointed with Gopī-candana, you have nothing to fear." Yamarāja, one who has five things in his house, he goes on, "Gopī-candana, Tulasī, a conch shell, a *gārdabha-śīlā*, and a *śālagrāma-śīlā*, must not be afraid of sinful reactions." Yamarāja says in, well, we find his statement in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, 4.231: "The fragrance of Gopī-candana cannot be compared even with the aroma of flowers in the garden of Nandana Kānana Heaven.

Its color, consistency, and purity are incomparable to anything." *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, 4.232: "The flowers from Nandana Kānana garden are popular amongst demigods and celestial persons. These flowers enchant one with their intoxicating aroma, but even these heavenly fragrances cannot compare to the beautiful aromatic flavor of Gopī-candana." Śrījīva Gosvāmī says, "When a person decorates their forehead with clay from Dvārakā every day, which is where Gopī-candana comes from, they receive a million times more benefit from that activity than any other activity they perform." If a person decorates their forehead with tilaka made from Gopī-candana and engages in pious activities, they receive unlimited benefits, even if they make mistakes, chant mantras incorrectly, lack faith in the activity, or perform it at the wrong time.

Even if, *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, 4.236-237, says, "Gopī-candana is always pure, always pure. It destroys the contamination of the Age of Kali. One who regularly adorns his forehead with tilaka made of Gopī-candana will never see Yamarāja, even if he's the most sinful person.

One on whose hands, forehead, chest, and stomach are adorned with tilaka made of Gopī-candana, at the time of death, that person is transported to the transcendental abode of the Lord." You know, in our culture, if you say something three times, something authorized, if you quote something three times, how authorized, how important it is for our spiritual progress to wear Gopī-candana.

We've given more than three authorized quotes, like 33. So, why does Gopī-candana stand out amongst all materials for tilaka and why is it so celebrated in sacred scriptures?

Well, the following passage explains this in relation to the origin of Gopī-candana. Actually, there's no *śāstric* reference as to the origin of Gopī-candana, save and except a single reference in *Garga Samhitā*, Kanto 6, chapter 15, text 17, very relevant, where it says that Gopī-candana is the *aṅga-rāga*, the cosmetics of the gopīs of Vṛndāvana.

Gopī-candana. Quote: "In *Gopī-bhāva*, Gopī-candana was manifested from the gopīs' cosmetics. A person who marks his limbs with Gopī-candana tilaka attains the result of bathing in the Ganges." Now, just how did Gopī-candana appear in that way, as a result of the gopīs' cosmetics?

That's described in oral tradition, accepted in all Vaiṣṇava communities, regardless. And that is that after Krishna left Vraja and eventually settled in Dvārakā, the Vraja gopīs, as we've described so many times, were experiencing intense feelings of separation from Him.

Eventually, unable to bear the suffering, they actually decided to travel to Dvārakā, where Krishna was residing as Dvārakādhiśa at that time.

Hearing of their coming to Dvārakā, Uddhava, Krishna's friend and secretary, arranged for Dvārakādhiśa, for Krishna, to secretly meet with them outside the city precincts, within a very lush, dark, and secluded forest.

Now, before arriving, Krishna abandoned all His royal insignia, His robes, His opulent crown, other trimmings of a king, and arrived in His gopī-veṣa, means like cloth.

He arrived dressed as a simple cowherd boy with a red turban, peacock feather on His head, a silken, flowing, lightning-gold *dhoti*, and a simple chudidar, oh yeah, and a conch shell of flour was tucked over one of His ears.

He didn't do that as the king. And a *gaṅgā-berry* necklace swung from His neck. So, there in that secluded forest, Krishna met with the gopīs.

They didn't want to come into Dvārakā and see Him in all His opulence. That wasn't the Krishna that they loved and adored.

They loved the cowherd boy Krishna.

So, when they met in that secluded forest, Krishna reassured the gopīs that He and they would always be together on the transcendental platform because of their intense, unalloyed, pure devotion.

He told them that He had never forgotten them and was always thinking of them. So, He said, there's no question of separation from each other. With tears in His eyes, and His chest heaving from a heavy heart, Krishna told them that they were always residing in the core of His heart.

Of course, this didn't so much satisfy them anyway. He also sent a letter like that to Rādhārāṇī one time. But anyway, then Krishna and the gopīs, it's described, they celebrated one last rasa dance, one last dance, one last *rāsa* dance there.

And afterwards, because it was, you know, a long *rāsa* dance, a lot of activity, movement, emotion, Krishna manifested, He manifested a new lake for the gopīs to sport in, called Gopī-śovā, or often known as Gopī-tala.

And then together, Krishna and the gopīs, they bathed, and they splashed, and they had *jala-krīḍā*, means water pastimes, in those crystal clear waters, transcendental waters.

Now, as a result, all the gopīs' *maśurā*, their body oils, their ornaments, perfumes, tilaka, sandalwood paste, dots of musk, *kuṅkuma*, vermilion, it all washed off their transcendental bodies and slowly settled and mixed with a clay at the bottom of the lake.

This clay picked up the scent and the golden color of Krishna's most dearly beloveds and became transformed and spiritualized in the process.

It became Gopī-candana. And over time, it's described, Yogamāyā arranged to dry up that lake, so that devotees like us could take pieces of that special transcendental clay and apply it to our bodies as tilaka in remembrance of Krishna and the gopīs.

Hare Krishna!

The origin!

It makes it even more special. Even after all those verses from *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, which, you know, drove home the importance of Gopī-candana, here we hear about the origin. It's the cosmetics of the gopīs, the milkmaids of Vṛndāvana.

Wow!

So, remember that. Remember, try to remember all these things next time you stand in front of the mirror and put on your tilaka. So, we'll finish here with a passage from *Govinda-līlāmr̥ta*, chapter 8, verse 46, as follows: "Once when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was looking at the forest of Vṛndāvana, she was gazing at the forest of Vṛndāvana.

She thought it was, in fact, the desire-fulfilling transcendental form of her beloved Krishna.

She thought the splendor of the dark creepers in Vṛndāvana were actually the beauty of the transcendental limbs of her beloved Krishna.

She thought the beautiful sesame flowers with a tilaka marking, a tilaka marking on the forehead of her beloved. She thought the large Arjuna trees were Viśāla Arjuna and other cowherd friends of her beloved. She thought the fertile land was Lord Balarāma, the elder brother of her beloved, because actually, Rādhā is an expansion of Balarāma.

She thought the feathers worn by the peacocks were actually decorations on the crown of her beloved. She thought the flowers blossoming on the puṇnāga, amla, and campaka trees were flowers in the garland worn by her beloved. She thought the many kānana and vidura trees were gold and coral ornaments worn by her beloved.

She thought the splendid Tāla trees with the luster of the body of her beloved. She thought the glistening *gaṅgā* were an *añjana* necklace worn by her beloved. She thought the shade-giving kadamba trees had provided a place where her beloved had sat, had sat down to rest.

She thought the pleasant rustling sounds of the bamboos moving in the breeze with the sweet music her beloved played on his bamboo flute. This is all nectar!

She thought the resplendent *paṭalā* trees with the *kuṅkuma* powder worn by her beloved. She thought the many blossoming *mādana* trees were the intense loving desires of her beloved. She thought the charming sporting of the handsome forest birds with the beautiful pastimes of her beloved Lord Krishna." So, therein we heard many nectaring things.

We also heard about the tilaka. Thank you so much. Puruṣottama?

Yes, please remember these pastimes, these instructions, these verses, as much as you can. The next time and every time you put on, especially Gopī-candana tilaka. Thank you so much. Glories to Prabhupāda, the revealer of the *dharma*.

Mayur, back home, back to God. Jaya!

Jaya!

See you next Friday. All right. Thank you.