Hari Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our ongoing lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīmatī Rādhā Śrī Viṣṇupada Śrīla Prabhupāda.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So today we will continue with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part 162, in which we will carry on with our new theme of the glories of Vrndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and this, as many of you know, will be our second lecture on her transcendental eyes, her transcendental eyes.

So to begin with, in *Dainya Kṛmopala*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī gives a very beautiful description of Rādhārāṇī’s eyes. There are so many descriptions, but I found this one particularly beautiful. He writes, "Rādhā's eyes are a kīla kiṅkita bouquet of flowers, brightened by a repressed smile, with teardrops clinging like dew to the base of her eyelash petals, reddened slightly around the edges, overflowing with juices of amusement, or contracting like buds.

Ah, such are Rādhā's eyes, made more beautiful by their flashing sweet pupils as she is blocked on the path by Mādhava. May they bring you all good fortune." Thank you. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī, gives another description of her eyes in his *Govinda Līlāmṛta*, chapter 9, verse 42.

He writes, "As Krishna touches the corner of her garment, the dancing pupils of Rādhā's eyes reveal deep disdain.

But still she smiles, and her eyes, like hungry bumblebees, soar on their crooked cores towards Krishna's lotus feet, where their flight ends.

Tears surface, and those eyes turn angry red. All of which throw the dear one, Krishna, into an ocean of incomparable bliss." Very deep.

Now, getting into details, in *Rādhā Kṛṣṇa Gaṇa Deśikā Dīpikā*, verse 151, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī mentions how Śrī Rādhā's eyes are decorated with kañcana, or, uh, kājal, we would say black eyeliner in modern times. He writes, "Śrī Rādhā's wide lotus eyes extend to her ears and glow with the brilliance of kañcana.

It appears that the unparalleled beauty of her eyes has conquered all beauty in the three worlds." All beauty in the three worlds. Now, I was reading how, um, Rādhārāṇī’s eyes are always decorated with this kājal, not for ornamentation alone, but because it reminds her of Krishna.

Elsewhere, it's described that her lotus eyes are long, extending to her ears, with sharp ends like what?

Like parrots' beaks. Wow. And it's her girlfriends, especially the aṣṭa-sakhīs, the eight sakhīs, who lovingly apply kājal around her eyes every day. And why does she use kājal every day?

The ācāryas say, because it signifies that Krishna surrounds her eyes, and that her eyes exist solely for Him.

They say this is the deep secret of Rādhārāṇī's kājal. This is the deep secret of Rādhārāṇī's kājal. Now, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī describes the effect of her kājal on Krishna again in *Govinda Līlāmṛta*, it's, um, verse number 101. "O fair-faced girl, your kañcana-smeared eyes are like wagtail birds.

They shatter the pride of newly blossomed lotuses, delight the source of bliss, and humiliate the playfulness of fish." Now, amongst the sakhīs, I was reading it's mainly Sudīpa sakhī whose service it is to apply kañcana, or kājal, on Rādhārāṇī’s eyes.

And that, I found, it's described in *Govinda Līlāmṛta*, verse 199: "Svahaṁ ca, tasyāś ca, Corpī, Śrī Rādhā, Sudīpa sakhī always remains changed by Śrī Rādhā's side, adorning her hair, applying black kañcana around her eyes, massaging her limbs, and rendering every loving service." Well, Sudīpa sakhī.

Now, the books of our Six Gosvāmīs and other Gauḍīya ācāryas reveal a very confidential detail, a very confidential detail. And what is that?

It's that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s left eye is especially dear. Her left eye. How so?

Well, according to śāstra, when a woman's left eye quivers, it's an auspicious sign indicating eminent meeting with her beloved. Once, upon receiving the joyful news that she would be meeting Krishna, Rādhā’s left eye began to tremble.

In response, she closed her right eye, desiring to gaze upon Him only with the eye that had for, had foretold their meeting, that had foretold their meeting. And this incident is actually nicely described by the devotee Śrīdhara in his *Kurukṣetra Vrndāvana Dvārca Caum*.

This means Vrndāvana īśvarī's behavior at Kurukṣetra, in verse 383. I found he writes, "Closing her right eye, Rādhā joyfully gazed upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa with her left eye, which trembled like a blossoming red lotus jostled by a darting fish." I'll recite that again: "Closing her right eye, joyfully gazed upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa with her left eye, which trembled like a blossoming red lotus jostled by a darting fish." So, in that śloka, we hear Śrī Rādhā gazing upon Krishna, looking at Krishna.

And about this, the ācāryas comment that it's, it's quite deep. In *parākīya rasa*, meaning in Rādhā and Krishna's confidential loving pastimes, there's no straightforward, direct darśan between the divine couple.

At such times, Rādhārāṇī’s face often turns in one direction, while her eyes move in another direction. You have to listen closely to the lecture today. It's detailed, but it is what it is. Now, here's something very interesting. In *Ujjvala Maṇi*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states that Śrī Rādhā's eyes are *svayaṁdūtī*, *svayaṁdūtī*, meaning self-appointed messengers.

What does that mean?

This means she is expert in the art of communication just with her eyes. We communicate in different ways, particularly by speaking, but she's expert in the art of communication with her lotus eyes. And I was reading that Lord Brahmā once pointed out that in Krishna's pastimes, seeing is more important than speaking.

Seeing is more important than speaking. And he explains this in a simple way. He said, "Everyone in Braja has two eyes, but only one tongue. So you can communicate, communicate better because you have two eyes, but, but you only have one tongue to communicate with." This is his transcendental logic.

And from this, he concluded that vision is a deeper and more intimate way of communicating in Braja-līlā. You don't have to speak with one tongue; you can communicate with two eyes. So blissful. So, with this understanding, ācāryas conclude that without uttering a single word, glances from Rādhārāṇī’s eyes can convey the following.

She doesn't have to speak. She can speak with her eyes, communicate with her eyes, the following things they list. The ācāryas: invitations, rejection, anger, *māna*, forgiveness, longing, and, um, submission. And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī gives an example of this in his *pady*.

He's actually quoting Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She says, "Hey sakhī, yes, I have all the necessary skills for exhibiting my anger, *māna*. From the very beginning, I was expert in knitting my eyebrows. I know how to issue a disdainful glance with eyes half closed.

I have trained myself not to laugh and to control my smile. I have learned to remain silent, and I am determined not to lose my composure. I have vowed to maintain my *māna*, but I do not know how long I can keep it going, but I do not know how long I can keep it going.

My success lies only in the hands of providence." Wow. Now, an ācārya named Sadananda Sukadeva, Sadananda Sukadeva, he was in the line of Śrīnivāsācārya Prabhu, writes in his book called *Abhisāra Līlā* about Śrī Rādhā's *bangimas*. This was a new word I came across. *Bangimas*. *Bangimas* are her beautiful and attractive actions or, uh, like gestures that describe her different moods and her pastimes with Krishna.

She makes certain gestures that indicate her moods with Krishna.

She doesn't speak, she makes the gestures with her hands. And Sadananda Sukadeva says that because these moves or gestures are unique, they're very unique, they're given by Rādhā, they're not understood even by demigods or great siddhas. And he concludes thus, they make Braja-līlā even more confidential to the ineligible demigods.

And he describes that only by the mercy of Guru and Guranga, the seed of understanding these mystical *bangimas* can sprout. All glories to Guru and Guranga. Then he describes different types of *bangimas*, or gestures of Rādhā to communicate. And the first type of *bangima* is known as *mudrā*, *mudrā*.

It's with her hands. This type of *bangima*, yes, which literally means, like he says, poses, you could say gestures, and these *mudrās* are of different types. And I, we'll recite them here. There's the *hasta mudrā*, hand gestures, when poses are formed with the hand and using fingers in that gesture.

There's *mayūra mudrā*, it's a peacock pose with the hand, which she forms arms when she's in bliss. Just the gesture, it, her hands pose like a peacock, and she uses this *mayūra mudrā* when she's in bliss. Then he describes the *siṁha mudrā*, gesture, *mudrā*, a lion pose of the hand.

When Śrī Rādhā is in *māna*, she forms this *mudrā*. Then there's the *ānanda mudrā*, a blissful gesture or poise of the hand *mudrā* when Rādhā plays with her sakhīs or Krishna, she holds this pose with her hand when she's playing with her or playing with Krishna.

Then there's the *varada mudrā*, it's a blessing pose of the hand gesture of the hand when she gives blessings to her devotees, she holds one of her hands in this particular way. Right. Then there's the *bindu mudrā*. It's a, how does he describe it?

An accepting gesture. Accepting gesture. It means when, when Rādhārāṇī accepts somebody, she makes this pose with her hand. She doesn't have to speak. She just does. So amazing. Then there's *viraha mudrā*. It's a calling. He described a calling pose when one hand is up in the air and the other hand is down, like Mahaprabhu is sometimes depicted, you see paintings of Him.

And when Śrīmati misses Krishna's association, she makes this pose.

Everyone understands with this pose she's missing Krishna.

Then there's the *nṛtya mudrā*. It's a pose of a couple of dancing peacocks, in which both of her hands, with both of her hands, she makes the dancing peacocks. Then she holds this pose while dancing. She dances with this, like showing two dancing peacocks.

Now, moving on, another type of *bangimas*, *bangima* which are, I think, more relevant to our discussion today. Actually, I just wanted to cover the other ones because it's so interesting, but these are very relevant to our discussion today, are called *nayana bangimas*. *Nayana bangimas*. *Nayana bangimas* are different glances through which Śrīmatī communicates without speaking any words.

These are eye movements which deliver different messages, and they are as follows. What more do, what else do we want to hear about?

There's the *kutila nayana*. It's a complicated glance she shows to Krishna when she's angry.

The *kutila nayana*. It's a complicated glance she shows to Krishna, just with her eyes, when she's in *māna*.

Then there's *cañcala netra*. It's described as a restless glance. And Śrīmatī shows such a type of *bangima* when she's eager to see Krishna.

Then there's the *apālaka nayana*. It's a glance without blinking. And when she sees Krishna, she shows this type of *nayanam*.

She doesn't want to blink; she wants to see Him at every moment. Then there's *aruṇa nayana*. This is a, um, a crimson-tinged glance. And it's the, the author says, when in deep meditation on Krishna's love, Śrīmatī Rādhā's eyes become crimson red, like a new morning sun in the sky.

Then there's the *lajjuśam nayana*. He describes it like a bud-like glance. A bud-like glance. When Śrīmatī is shy in front of Krishna, her glance is like a shy flowering bud.

Then there's the *harṣita nayana*. It's the happiest glance. When the sakhīs of Śrīmatī win over the sakhīs of Candrāvalī, Candrāvalī, Śrīmatī glances at them with wide-open eyes filled with happiness. Candrāvalī is her competitor. And there's *sukha nayana*. It's described as a pleasurable glance.

When Krishna pleases Śrīmatī, her glances are pleasurable to all the residents of Vrndāvana.

Then there's *jala añjali nayana*. It's a glance which is like a cup of tears, a cup of tears. When she feels intense separation from Krishna, her glances become like cups of tears, blurry and tearful.

Now, another type of *bangima* glance. This is like a sub-sub-category, is done from the corner of her eyes. She glances from the corner of her eyes. This is called *kaṭākṣa*. These *kaṭākṣas* are as follows: *jugala kaṭākṣa*. It's a fierce sidelong glance.

Then there's *paśana kaṭākṣa*. It's a happy sidelong glance. Then *bhava kaṭākṣa*, a sidelong glance which reflects her tantrum. The word is tantrum. Then *bāṇa kaṭākṣa*, a sharp, like arrow, sidelong glance. A sharp, like arrow, sidelong glance. Then *manmatha kaṭākṣa*, an attractive sidelong glance.

Then *kṛpā kaṭākṣa*, a merciful sidelong glance. Then *carata*, an intoxicated sidelong glance. Then *sarabaka*, a talking or speaking sidelong glance. Again, speaking through her eyes, which delivers secret messages to her sakhīs or to Krishna, speaking through her eyes.

Now, according to Sadā Sukadeva, these *nayana bangimas*, these glances, are like different birds residing in the golden cage of her eyes, without his eyes. When needed, a specific type of glance flies out from the cages of her eyes, he writes, and soars in the sky-like reflection of others' eyes.

And soars in the sky-like reflection of others' eyes. Wow. Then he further states who's qualified to see and understand Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's glances. We described so many, or he describes so many. So he writes, who's qualified to see and understand these glances of Rādhārāṇī?

Here's the list: *priya narmasakhīs*, *antar-sakhīs*, *caurī sakhīs*, *sakhīs*, *mañjarīs*, *anāvartikās*, *nijadāsīs*, *dāsīs*, *kiṅkarīs*, and *anodāsīs*. All these, including Krishna, can understand the meanings of such glances of Śrīmatī.

And to everyone else, Śrīmatī’s glances look like simple eye movements with no deeper meaning. I don't know if any of us are on that list, but by Śrīla Prabhupāda's grace, if we follow in his beautiful footsteps, maybe it's possible one day.

Certainly, it is possible by Prabhupāda's mercy.

So, Sadananda Sukadeva concludes this section of describing the different glances of Śrīmatī with a prayer. So beautiful. He writes, "The dew-like eyes of Śrīmatī are the source of all meanings of līlā served by her maidservants. Those eyes blissfully reside in the vision of Krishna.

May the eyes of Śrīmatī protect one and all." Krishna, so deep today, but this is the subject matter of Śrīmatī Vrndāvanī’s eyes.

And the more we can learn about the divine couple, the more we can appreciate them, develop affection, and, and one day, prema. How can you love someone you know nothing about?

So, it's required to have these discussions. So, I would like to conclude today with a description of Śrīmatī Vrndāvanī’s eyes by the poet Vrndāvana Dāsa, who was from the Vallabhācārya sampradāya. He writes, "O Priya, the beautiful eyes of yours are intoxicating nectar to Krishna.

That nectar holds a very deep ecstasy. Drinking which, Krishna becomes intoxicated and controlled by your divine love.

The nectarian cups of your eyes are guarded by your eyelashes, which close like curtains when you are blinking your eyes, surrounded by boundaries of your bow-like eyebrows. These nectarian cup-like eyes are then gilded by the shine of the mascara of your eyes." Hari Krishna.

Vrndāvana Dāsa prays to be an object of those eyes of yours, to get a chance one day to serve you. Hari Krishna.

Thank you. Um, yes, we actually, there's, um, in our śāstra, śāstras, there's a lot about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes. So I, I think maybe we can get two more classes, all by the mercy of He who is the revealer of the dawn, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, see you next Friday. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Śrī Śrī Bindu Ji Śarm. All right, Paul. Thank you.