# Stimulation for Ecstatic Love Part 068 - The Lord’s Verdict

Hi everyone and welcome back once again to our ongoing series in the glories of our most beloved, Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī. All glories! So, we are continuing with our miniseries on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be Part 68. 

Last week, as you may remember, we discussed Jayadeva Gosvāmī, the poet, and I would like to continue today with Part Two of his life and poetry. Last week, we discussed his birth, his childhood, where he found his Iṣṭa-deva, Rādhā-Mādhava deities; we discussed his meeting King Lakṣmaṇa Sena and moving to that forested area; we discussed his service to the King of Oḍiśā and finally his marriage to Padmāvatī—that was really interesting—and then, soon after, we discussed his beginning to write his epic, *Gīta-govinda*. So, today we will begin from that point.

One day in the late morning, as Jayadeva Gosvāmī was writing his *Gīta-govinda* and his wife Padmāvatī was cooking the lunch, Jayadeva started writing how in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes it appeared Kṛṣṇa was controlled by the love of the gopīs, in particular Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and that He was subordinate to them. Jayadeva was thinking how to write a particular phrase in this regard, but he stopped short, saying to himself, "How can I write such a thing? Kṛṣṇa, by definition, is the Supreme Controller; how can He be controlled by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, His devotee, His consort?" We call that writer’s block for those of us who write. So, he decided to take a break from his writing to think about this deep spiritual subject matter. He told his wife Padmāvatī that he was going to take a bath in the Ganges and he would be back soon. He left, and then one of the most amazing things in our Vaiṣṇava history took place.

While Jayadeva was away, Kṛṣṇa Himself, disguised as Jayadeva Gosvāmī, came to Jayadeva’s house, walked in, went over to Jayadeva’s desk, picked up his pen, and wrote at the place that Jayadeva had hesitated to write. Kṛṣṇa wrote: *smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ mama śirasi maṇḍanaṁ dehi pada-pallavam udāram*.

The translation is just amazing. Kṛṣṇa wrote this, speaking to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was displaying jealous anger towards Him. Kṛṣṇa implored: "Oh beloved, Your tender, sprout-like feet are the antidote to Cupid’s venom. Please place them on my head as my ornament and glory. The scorching fire of Cupid’s poison is unbearable; please, therefore, let the touch of Your feet quell the torment of My love."

Very, very famous quote in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava history, and the most famous line is *dehi pada-pallavam udāram*. All Vaiṣṇava scholars, they know that, which means, "Please place Your feet on my head as my ornament and glory." Kṛṣṇa’s words to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—therein we see how Kṛṣṇa actually is controlled by the love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

So, with that, Kṛṣṇa, again disguised as Jayadeva, sat down and took the prasādam—the lunch prasādam—that was being prepared by Padmāvatī. And after finishing the prasādam, Kṛṣṇa, looking like Jayadeva, told Padmāvatī he was now going to go for a walk. Now, just a few minutes later, the real Jayadeva Gosvāmī returned from bathing in the Ganges, and when he asked his wife when the prasādam would be ready, Padmāvatī was surprised, of course, when she told Jayadeva that he’d just come back earlier, written something on his desk, had taken prasādam, and left again. Jayadeva was speechless. So, he went over to his desk and saw in the place that he had hesitated to write, the verse that Kṛṣṇa had written while he was bathing in the Ganges: *dehi pada-pallavam udāram*, especially that significant line, "Please place Your feet on my head as my ornament and glory." 

So, understanding this, Jayadeva exclaimed, "It’s a miracle! It’s a miracle! It’s a miracle!" And tears of ecstasy flowed from his eyes. He called out, "Padmāvatī, you are most fortunate, for Kṛṣṇa Himself has written the line and accepted prasādam from your own hand!"

So, when Jayadeva Gosvāmī finally finished *Gīta-govinda*, he concluded it with the most beautiful prayer; it’s one of my favorites. He writes at the end of *Gīta-govinda*: "Whatever is delightful in the varieties of music, whatever is graceful in fine strains of poetry, and whatever is exquisite in the sweet art of love, let the happy and wise persons learn that from the songs of *Gīta-govinda*." Har Kṛṣṇa. So, that’s an amazing pastime often repeated in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition.

There is another pastime of Padmāvatī and Jayadeva that I’d like to share with you today. It is said that once Padmāvatī was visiting the Queen of the King of Purī—because remember, they got married in Purī, Jayadeva and Padmāvatī—and knowing that Padmāvatī was cent-percent dedicated to her beloved husband, the Queen, she wanted to play like a trick on Padmāvatī, kind of a cruel trick, but a trick. She told her that Jayadeva just a few hours earlier had unexpectedly passed away while he was praying in the temple of Lord Jagannātha. So, it was a trick. But much to everyone’s shock, as soon as Padmāvatī heard these words, feeling great separation from her devotee-husband, she clutched her heart and suddenly fell down on the ground lifeless. She left her body.

So, the King was informed, and he called for Jayadeva to tell him the sad news concerning the mischief, it’s described, of his Queen. But to his surprise, Jayadeva didn’t seem at all disturbed. He merely asked to be taken to the remains of his wife. And when brought before the body of Padmāvatī, Jayadeva began sweetly singing a line from the *Gīta-govinda*: *priye cāruśīle, muñca mayi māna-madam...* "Oh beloved, oh graceful one, give up this causeless aversion." Speaking to his wife, but quoting from *Gīta-govinda*, "Oh beloved, oh graceful one, give up this causeless aversion."

So, I was looking up this line; it’s part of the 10th Sarga, described sarga, or part of Jayadeva’s *Gīta-govinda*. It was sung by Kṛṣṇa to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī when He was once trying to soothe her anger, but Jayadeva quoted it speaking to his wife. So, hearing Jayadeva reciting this line, Padmāvatī regained her external senses, and she got up and began singing the song with Jayadeva. This part of the song brought her back to life. And the ācāryas say that by bringing Padmāvatī back to life in this manner, Jayadeva brought further meaning to the gopīs' statement to Kṛṣṇa in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (10.31.9), which translated means, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, the nectar of Your *kathā* bestows life. Oh Kṛṣṇa, the nectar of Your *kathā* bestows life." So, she came back to life hearing the *kathā* of Kṛṣṇa.

Now again, although *Gīta-govinda* is a literature—we discussed this last week—meant for *paramahaṁsa*, swan-like devotees, there are some parts, a few parts, that we as aspiring devotees can also appreciate. Last week we read one of the poems of *Gīta-govinda*, and there’s one more nice example I found, that throughout *Gīta-govinda*, Jayadeva describes Kṛṣṇa’s body very often as bluish-black. He writes, for example: "With His soft, bluish-black limbs, which resemble blue lotus flowers, Kṛṣṇa has created a spring festival for Cupid." 

Now, in my readings, I’ve seen that Kṛṣṇa’s complexion is often described in three ways: as *nīla* (blue), as *śyāma* (black), and as *śyāmala* (bluish-black). Actually, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in a purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.21.3 as follows: "There is nothing comparable to the bodily features of Lord Kṛṣṇa when He was present in this world. The most beautiful object in the material world may be compared to the blue lotus flower or the full moon in the sky, but even the lotus flower and the moon were defeated by the beauty of the bodily features of Lord Kṛṣṇa." 

So, in his writings, in his commentaries, let us say, Śrīla Prabhupāda uses two colors interchangeably generally in describing Kṛṣṇa; this took some research. For example, he writes, "Kṛṣṇa’s complexion is like a dark blue cloud." Another example is, he writes, "Kṛṣṇa’s bodily color resembles a fresh black cloud." So, two colors there. And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written that the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s blue cheeks changed the color of His flute from its natural bamboo yellow to the deep blue-black color of a sapphire. Rūpa Gosvāmī kī jaya!

Now, Kṛṣṇa is not the only one who actually has the power to turn things blue. This is an interesting discussion we’re having. For Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she can as well. I read that once Kṛṣṇa placed a white lotus bud in the curly locks of Rādhārāṇī’s hair, and the flower at once turned blue. Actually, many things are infused with the color of Kṛṣṇa’s body. Śrīla Prabhupāda once said that Kṛṣṇa’s bodily effulgence, the *brahma-jyotir*, is responsible for tinting the sky with its bluish rays. Wow.

Now, following on this topic, one time Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura said that the actual bluish-black color of Kṛṣṇa’s form can only be perceived with spiritual eyes, because that real bluish-black color is one of the unlimited colors of the spiritual world, not present in the material world. So, if we really, really want to see Kṛṣṇa’s bluish-black shining form, we have to become pure devotees and have spiritual eyes.

But to give us some idea of the Lord’s bodily hue, it’s often compared to the following, just to give us an idea again: blue lotuses, sapphires, rainclouds, the tamāla tree, collyrium, a swarm of bees, and the Yamunā River.

So moving on, ācāryas have written that after Jayadeva Gosvāmī completed *Gīta-govinda*, again in Māyāpur, actually, Lord Caitanya appeared to him and gave him His blissful darśana and revealed to Him that He, Mahāprabhu, would one day appear in Navadvīpa and inaugurate the *saṅkīrtana* movement of chanting the holy names. And then, Mahāprabhu instructed Jayadeva Gosvāmī to return to Jagannātha Purī. Mahāprabhu also revealed to him how He Himself would later move to Jagannātha Purī to relish His, Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s, *Gīta-govinda*. This is before the appearance of Mahāprabhu. He told Jayadeva, "I’m going to go to Purī, and in the Gambhīrā I’m going to relish your *Gīta-govinda*." This is written by ācāryas; this was 400 years before the appearance of Lord Caitanya.

So, after his darśana with Mahāprabhu, that’s what Jayadeva Gosvāmī did; he returned to Jagannātha Purī. And from there, the fame of his *Gīta-govinda* spread, first it’s described throughout Oḍiśā and then throughout India. And at one point, *Gīta-govinda* was being read, actually, to Lord Jagannātha every day. This actually became a standard practice, that the pujārīs would read *Gīta-govinda* to Lord Jagannātha. We mentioned, you remember earlier, that Jayadeva Gosvāmī had actually written *Gīta-govinda* for this purpose, remember, for the glorification and for Lord Jagannātha to hear. 

So, Jayadeva Gosvāmī lived in Purī and he continued with his writings. He wrote so many poems about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It’s described that he also took time to visit various holy places around India, including Śrī Vṛndāvana. And when Jayadeva actually visited Vṛndāvana, he brought with him his Rādhā-Mādhava deities, and he worshipped them. It’s described in a small grass hut on the banks of the river Yamunā, where at Keśī-ghāṭa—nice detail—and every day he would sing his *Gīta-govinda* to his deities and melt the hearts of the few sādhus who were living in Vṛndāvana forest at that time. Fortunate were those sādhus.

Now, honoring Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s visit to Vṛndāvana, there’s actually a *puṣpa-samādhi* of his; I saw it on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Some say his Rādhā-Mādhava deities are presently being worshipped in Jaipur; other scholars say they’re being worshipped at his birthplace in Kenduli-bilva in Bengal, in the temple of Rādhā-vinoda, constructed by a king named Kīrti Chandra of Burdwan in order to preserve the birthplace or the importance of the birthplace of Jayadeva Gosvāmī.

Now, there are a few noteworthy pastimes connected to his epic work *Gīta-govinda* I think are worth mentioning. Many years after the departure of Jayadeva Gosvāmī, a certain King of Purī, his name was King Puruṣottama Deva, he insisted that his own work, which he called *Abhinava Gīta-govinda*, was superior to Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s *Gīta-govinda*—you can imagine—and that his work should be read to Lord Jagannātha every day instead of Jayadeva’s. Well, he was the King, so he tried to get away with it. So, there were some objections, and due to the, how could you say, politically sensitive nature of the challenge, the temple brāhmaṇas decided to let Lord Jagannātha judge for Himself. 

So what they did is they placed both books before Jagannātha, before Lord Jagannātha—this King’s and Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s *Gīta-govinda*—and they locked the temple for the night. Now, the following morning, when the pujārīs opened the temple doors, they found the pages of the King’s book scattered all over the floor and Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s *Gīta-govinda* nestled under Lord Jagannātha’s arm, close to His heart. That’s how it’s written. It’s said the Lord had given His verdict. I like that; the Lord had given His verdict, and rightfully so.

Now, there’s another pastime that took place around 300 years after Jayadeva departed this world. On that occasion, Lord Jagannātha had been put to sleep after His midday meal, when the florist started singing the *Gīta-govinda* in a garden nearby on the temple grounds. And Lord Jagannātha was so eager to hear this spontaneous performance—it’s described, out of His favorite work—that He actually woke up, because when He’s asleep He’s also awake, *yoga-nidrā*, and He actually left the temple and He hid in a bush nearby, not caring for the thorns that were, you know, ripping His cloth and scratching His body, just to hear this pure devotee sing *Gīta-govinda*. 

So, Lord Jagannātha, after some time, returned to His altar, actually just in time to give His blessings to the devotees. But His pujārīs were shocked when they opened the curtain at the sight of their ragged and wounded Lord. It’s written, their "ragged and wounded Lord." So, they at once ran to inform the King, who at that time in history was the famous Mahārāja Pratāparudra. So, the King was somewhat confused by this news until the Lord appeared to him in a dream one night and explained exactly what had happened. 

So, in that pastime, Lord Jagannātha once again revealed His exclusive attachment to *Gīta-govinda*. So, Mahārāja Pratāparudra, because the Lord had, you know, appeared to him in a dream and told him what had happened, Mahārāja Pratāparudra actually issued the following, how could you say, Royal Decree. This is the Royal Decree to all the citizens of Jagannātha Purī: "Performances of song and dance for Jagannātha and Balarāma will consist solely of *Gīta-govinda* and no other work. Performers are therefore instructed to learn the songs of *Gīta-govinda* exclusively. Four musicians will accompany the dancers who enact *Gīta-govinda*. Others may follow in chorus. Temple officials who allow any other song to be performed will be deemed enemies of Lord Jagannātha." The King made a decree. So, to the credit of that temple management in Jagannātha Purī, this tradition is still being carried on to the present day. Har Kṛṣṇa.

It’s nice to hear how these traditions have been carried on for thousands of years, and we hope also within our institution, International Society for Krishna Consciousness, the standards that Śrīla Prabhupāda set, especially with deity worship, we could say, will continue as they are. Har Kṛṣṇa.

So, we will finish today actually with a verse by Rāmānanda Rāya glorifying the poetry of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī—because we’re speaking about poets, and as we know, Rūpa Gosvāmī excelled in transcendental poetry—so I thought it would be fitting today to finish with, after reading Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *Lalita-mādhava*. Rāmānanda said: *kavayaḥ... āmarakṣa-lakṣaṇa-śabda-śuddhy-ādi...* 

"This is not simply a poetic presentation; it is a continuous shower of nectar. Indeed, it is the essence of all ultimate realization appearing in the form of plays. The wonderful descriptions of Rūpa Gosvāmī are superb arrangements to express loving affairs. Hearing them will plunge the heart and the ears of everyone into a whirlpool of transcendental bliss." Into a whirlpool of transcendental bliss! All glories to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī! All glory to Śrīla Jayadeva Gosvāmī! Har Kṛṣṇa.

So, that was Part Two of this illustrious devotee. I really enjoyed reading and preparing this lecture, and I hope you relish the subject matter in your hearts. Yes, so, we’re now in Vṛndāvana, and we’re leaving tomorrow morning for R̥ṣīkeśa for our 3-week R̥ṣīkeśa Kīrtan Fest, and I heard there’s many westerners; actually, I heard that the people of R̥ṣīkeśa are waiting for us because they remember how wonderful our festival was the past few years. So...

Har Kṛṣṇa. Jayadeva Gosvāmī kī jaya! Śrī Jagannātha kī jaya! Har Kṛṣṇa.