Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing lecture series entitled *The Glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma*.

Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale
Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine
Namaste Sarasvate Deve
Gauravāṇī-pracāriṇe
Nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-
Pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 177, in which we continue with our present theme of the glories of Śrīmatī Śrī Rādhārāṇī.

And today we'll begin a new and exciting topic, and that is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's tears—her tears.

A teardrop in Sanskrit is called *aśru*. The word literally means *aśnute vyāpnoti netram*—that which fills and covers the eyes. That which fills and covers the eyes.

In other words, tears naturally rise and overflow from the eyes.

Now, in devotional service, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, such tears are not ordinary, for they are one of the eight *sāttvika-vikāras*. *Sāttvika-vikāras* means the natural bodily signs that appear when the heart is deeply moved by spiritual emotion.

Now, Bharata Muni kindly lists these eight symptoms of ecstatic love in his famous *Nāṭya-śāstra*. And interestingly enough, the same exact verse has been quoted by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.3.16:

*Stambha sveda romāñca svara-bheda vepathuḥ*
*Vaivarṇyam aśru pralaya ity aṣṭau sāttvikāḥ smṛtāḥ.*

There are eight natural physical reactions that arise when a person experiences deep spiritual emotion.

And they are as follows:

Becoming stunned or still, perspiring, the hair standing on end, the voice choking or breaking, trembling, the skin becoming pale, and today's subject, the tears flowing from the eyes.

Tears flowing from the eyes.

Now, these eight symptoms of ecstasy can appear in a pure devotee while experiencing the nine principal moods of devotional service.

What is the source of these ecstatic symptoms?

The nine principal modes in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We call these modes *rasas*.

And they are as follows:

Śṛṅgāra, which means love; hāsya, which means joy; karuṇa means compassion; raudra means anger; vīra means heroism; bhayānaka means fear; bībhatsa means aversion; adbhuta means wonder; and śānta means peace.

So these different moods, these different rasas, have different symptoms that arise.

But there's only one symptom that remains constant in all these moods, all these rasas, and that is tears.

Tears.

Thus, you could say tears reign supreme over all other expressions.

Now, in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.3.53, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī goes into even more detail about tears in devotional service, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He writes:

“When water flows from the eyes, whether due to joy, anger, or sorrow, it is called aśru.”

Again, tears.

“Tears that come from joy are cool, whereas tears that come from anger are warm.”

And he continues:

“And in all cases, certain physical signs may be seen. The eyes may move restlessly, they may become red, and one may rub the eyes.”

This is the detail of the science of love.

Now, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī further explains in his commentary on this exact verse of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī that along with tears there may also be other natural bodily responses.

For example, the nose may begin to run.

Wow.

It might be important to note here that while we often hear there's no real sorrow in the eternal abode of the Lord, we know there are many instances where the residents of Vṛndāvana are crying.

So how is that?

Well, one of the ācāryas in the Nimbārka sampradāya, whose name was Madhvācārya and who was a well-known poet in Vṛndāvana, makes it quite clear.

He writes:

“The tears shed in the Lord's abode are not caused by any of the threefold miseries—adhyātmika, adhibhautika, and adhidaivika. Māyā has no role there. Rather, these tears are the pure nectarean expressions of transcendental love for Kṛṣṇa, arising from ecstatic devotion.”

And in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, many of you know it is said:

*Kṛṣṇa sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra*
*Yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra.*

“Kṛṣṇa is like the brilliant sun, and māyā is like darkness. Where there is Kṛṣṇa, there is no influence of māyā.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So like this we can understand that the tears of the Vrajavāsīs, and especially those of Śrī Rādhā, because she is the best devotee and Kṛṣṇa's dearest lover, are not born from suffering but out of pure, unalloyed love.

Born of pure, unalloyed love.

Now, the Vrajavāsī poet Nāgarīdāsa wrote very beautifully:

“The tears of Śrī Rādhā are the precious jewels of Gokula. They are preserved within the mother-of-pearl hearts of the gopīs. The reward of love itself appears as her teardrops. Pearls and gems are insignificant in comparison. Her tears are the beads adorning Kṛṣṇa's neck.”

Wow.

So let's take some time now to look at some specific examples of Rādhārāṇī's pastimes of crying tears—some instances where she cries and why she cries.

In Rūpa Gosvāmī's play *Vidagdha-mādhava* 5.32, we find a very beautiful scene.

After Kṛṣṇa tries to pacify Śrī Rādhā, her *māna*, her loving anger, is described as softening.

But instead of becoming peaceful, she starts to cry.

So at that time her beloved Lalitā-sakhī gently rebukes her and says:

“Rādhā, if you choose to love Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda, then your tears will never stop. I have warned you again and again not to become so attached, but you don't listen. Now tell me, what is the use of your crying?”

Transcendental.

And in *Gīta-govinda* 11.32 by the famous Jayadeva Gosvāmī, we find an example of her tears of joy.

Tears of joy.

Therein, upon seeing Kṛṣṇa in a secluded grove, Rādhārāṇī became overwhelmed with happiness, and her eyes became so restless—as if they were stretching beyond their limits, it's described—just to see Him more.

And from that intense joy, streams of tears began to flow from her eyes like drops of perspiration pouring out.

Jayadeva Gosvāmī.

Now, here's an important note about tears of joy.

Jīva Gosvāmī explains something very interesting in his commentary to *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.3.54.

He writes that sometimes too many tears, even tears of joy, can become an impediment.

Why?

He writes:

“Because if the eyes are filled with tears, one cannot clearly see Kṛṣṇa.”

And he notes that Rukmiṇī and the queens in Dvārakā criticized flowing tears of joy, calling them “creators of obstacles.”

Creators of obstacles.

So poetic.

Now, in another verse in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, attributed to Śrī Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura, Kṛṣṇa speaks to Rādhārāṇī about her tears that arise from loving anger.

He writes:

*Rādhe padāthena kasmāt asmasu vatsa paruṣute*
*Oho kathaṁ te kuchayoḥ patante karuṇā-karāḥ.*

While sporting in the kuñja, Śrī Rādhā became angry and resentful.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not determine the reason for it, and He asked:

“O beloved, why are you angry and speaking harshly to Me? And why are these streams of tears, shining like a necklace of pearls, falling upon your chest?”

Wow.

These are all meditations.

And Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī describes Rādhārāṇī's crying tears out of distress, or separation.

In his *Padyāvalī*, one of our favorite books, Verse 349, it is written:

“When Kṛṣṇa left for Mathurā, Śrī Rādhā began to cry intensely, overwhelmed by the agony of separation. Seeing her condition, her friend Viśākhā tried to console her:

‘O Rādhā, whose thighs are as graceful as a baby elephant, do not stain your moonlike face with tears mixed with the mascara from your eyes. Śrī Hari, the ocean of mercy, will surely bestow His grace upon you once again.’”

Wow.

And an unknown poet expresses these tears of Rādhārāṇī in the mood of separation most beautifully as follows:

*Yādava yāti Govindo*
*Mathurātaḥ punaḥ sakhi*
*Rādhe yāna yāna tvam de*
*Rādhā-nāma viparyayaḥ.*

“Alas, O dear friend, Govinda has left us to go to Mathurā. Now if Govinda goes further beyond Mathurā to another place, then in Rādhā's eyes we shall see the opposite of Rādhā.”

And he clarifies this.

The opposite of Rādhā is *Dhārā*.

You simply reverse the name.

*Dhārā* meaning a stream of tears.

Isn't that beautiful?

A stream of tears.

The opposite of Rādhā is *Dhārā*—a stream of tears.

So in this way, so many examples are given in the scriptures to show how Śrī Rādhā expresses herself through tears.

Tears from attachment, tears of joy, tears of anger, tears of jealousy, and tears of separation.

All transcendental.

So we will continue discussing the tears of love of Śrī Rādhā next Friday.

Let me conclude with a prayer by the poet Bhagavat Mudita. First time we're quoting him.

He writes:

“O Rādhā, when will You cast Your merciful glance upon me? Who in the three worlds can grant me a vision of Your beauty? When will I taste the fruit of devotion? Who will take my hand and engage me in Your service?

With tearful eyes, Bhagavat Mudita prays to the guru who alone can fulfill these desires.”

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Śrīla Prabhupāda, these desires are present somewhere deep within our hearts. Please bring them out by your mercy so we can participate one day in these pastimes of Śrī Goloka Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ki jaya!

Her tears ki jaya!

Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi ki jaya!

Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma ki jaya!

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara ki jaya!

Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ki jaya!

Māyāpura Dhāma ki jaya!

Gaura-Nitāi ki jaya!

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-yajña ki jaya!

Nitai Gaura Premānande!

Jaya Jaya Śrī Rādhe Śyām!

See you next Friday.

Bye-bye.
