Everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śivānanda. So, first of all, you have to, um, forgive me. I have a cold, and we have a seasonal change here in Vṛndāvana.

We went from winter to springtime very quickly, so I caught a cold, but I'm determined to go on with this lecture. So, we are continuing with our mini-series on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," a title that Śrīla Prabhupāda gave to chapter 26 of his *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*.

This chapter focuses on the stimuli that helps to awaken our love for the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. In our last lectures in this mini-series, we discussed the role of Vṛndāvana flowers in this regard, namely the Kadamba flower and the rose flower.

So, today, we'd like to continue with that same theme by discussing the glories of the lotus flower, the lotus flower in Kṛṣṇa's līlās. Those familiar with Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, or even those of His great devotees, will know how often lotus flowers are depicted in such līlās.

For example, Lord Brahmā, the first created being in this universe, he's he's often depicted sitting on a thousand-petaled lotus, and of course, Lakṣmī Devī, the wife of Lord Viṣṇu, is often shown either standing or seated upon a lotus flower, as well as bearing a lotus in either one or both of her hands.

In fact, Lakṣmī Devī herself is known as Padma or Kamala, which are both Sanskrit terms for the lotus. And I was reading that the Ṛg Veda says that Agni Deva, the god of fire, he emerged from a lotus flower, and the Atharva Veda says that the scent of the earth resides in the lotus.

I found that the scent of the earth resides in the lotus. Yesterday, the little meaning being: "Thy sweet scent which entered the Puṣkara." Now, in describing the birth of Chandra, the moon, *Śāstra* also gives reference to the lotus flower.

It's very beautiful. I found this as follows: "When the East gave birth to the Moon, Love was the dancer at the feast. The heavens smiled with joy, and the wind scattered the perfumed dust of lotus pollen in the courtyard of the sky." Isn't that nice?

Describing the birth of the moon: "When the East gave birth to the Moon, Love was the dancer at the feast. The heavens smiled with joy, and the wind scattered the perfumed dust of lotus pollen in the courtyard of the sky." Now, our *śāstras* even use analogies of the lotus when giving spiritual lessons.

A most excellent example is when Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā* 5.10: "One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results unto the Supreme Lord, is unaffected by sinful action, as the lotus is untouched by water." As the lotus is untouched by water.

Now, to *fact* the lotus flower, the stem of the lotus flower goes deep within the water and is embedded in the mud. But if you look very carefully, although the lotus flowers in the water or in the mud, you could say it's always a little bit above the water, maybe two inches.

I've seen many times here in India lotus flowers a little bit above the water. So, we can be in this world, but not of this world, in the same way, by practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A perfect analogy utilizing the lotus.

Now, of course, for devotees, the very best use of the beauty of this amazing flower is when it's used in relation to our Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself. Queen Kuntī famously says, as many of you know in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.8.22: "My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, and whose glance is as cool as the lotus, and whose feet are engraved with lotuses." All right, Kṛṣṇa.

Now, in Sanskrit, the lotus has various names like Padma, Rajiva, Kamala, Ambujā, etcetera, etcetera. There are so many names, and from *śāstras* like *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* and *Govinda-līlāmṛta*, we hear how many, if not all, of the ponds, lakes, rivers, and other water sources in Braj are often decorated with lotus flowers.

There are so many paintings like that, or nowadays photos, you can see. And of course, the river Yamunā personified, Yamunā Devī, she's famously portrayed wearing garlands of lotuses and holding lotus stems with the flowers open, or sometimes just as a bud.

Famous paintings of Yamunā Devī like that, very beautiful. And I found a beautiful verse by the Vaiṣṇava poet Kumban, Kumban, who we've quoted before about Yamunā Devī in particular. It's a verse from his poem called *Dayaṅpārko Kāṇu* (Dayankor Kanu), he writes in this particular verse: "My dear friend, look at the daughter of the Sun God, who wears a dress made of soft leaves, lotus leaves, embedded with pearls and shells.

She holds lotuses which spread happiness on her banks." Kumban says, "O Lord!

Aside one, please give me residence on Your banks, birth after birth." It's a beautiful verse for becoming a resident of Vṛndāvana.

We can take birth on the banks of the Śimuṇā river, Kalindī, who is herself an expansion of Īśvarī in the spiritual world. Now, I found another beautiful verse by Sūradās from his poem entitled *Yamunāṣṭakam*. Therein he writes: "O Āśrayā, I saw the merciful form of Yamunā Devī, who was most compassionate.

The green plants growing in her waters are her hair. Her blossoming lotuses are producing a divine fragrance which makes bumblebees go mad with intoxication." Says: "I pray unto the lotus feet of Yamunā Devī, she who is very dear to the Lord because of her cooling touch, pleasant waves, and fragrant lotuses." She's very dear to the Lord because of her cooling touch, pleasant waves, and fragrant lotuses.

Now, in my research, in *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-gaṇodēśa-dīpikā* by Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī Prabhupāda mentions therein many of the different talents, talents of uh Lalita Devī, Lalita Sakī.

She has many different talents, including how expert she is at making outfits. She makes umbrellas, she makes jewelry, as well as using the stems and leaves of the lotus flowers to decorate the Divine Couple. It's one of her expertise.

She can take lotus flowers, the stems of those flowers, the petals of those flowers, and decorate Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in a very beautiful way. Now, regarding decorating the Divine Couple with lotuses, in the Govindājī temple here in Vṛndāvana, whenever there's a big festival for the *pratibhu* deities, meaning that as we know, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were taken at one point to Jīva, so the devotees installed another set of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities here in Vṛndāvana, in the same temple, that's called *pratibhu*.

Whether there's a big festival, these *pratibhu* deities of Rādhā-Govinda here in Vṛndāvana, they hold lotuses made out of pure gold.

It's just a tradition they have in the Govindājī temple. On a big festival day, you'll see them holding lotuses of gold. And in Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Goswāmī's temple, Kṛṣṇa often holds a *kamal chaṛi*, a *kamal* means a stick of lotuses, and that stick is made of gold around which fresh lotuses are strung onto with a thread.

Now, I asked the *pujārīs*, you know, there to that temple, where actually Goswāmī's temple, the main deity is the *Bhāgavatam* which he worshiped, but there's also a lot of Kṛṣṇa deities. So I asked, you know, what on those on prominent days, why is Kṛṣṇa holding a stick with a golden stick with lotuses attached to it?

And they said, very, you know, nonchalantly, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa uses that stick as a cane whenever he goes to meet Śrī Rādhā." I went, "Okay, Kṛṣṇa has a cane when he goes to meet Śrī Rādhā." That particular deity, wow. Different deities have different pastimes.

Now, in the Rādhā Vallabha and Nanda Ji and Raman temples, there still exists today a traditional way of making dresses from lotuses and their petals on special days. You can go to in those temples and you'll see the deities are dressed in lotus flowers, and these dresses are offered to the Lord actually during the rainy and summer seasons, in order to make the Lord more comfortable with the soft and it's described cooling touch of the lotus flowers.

Now, it's also interesting to note that according to *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Bhatta Goswāmī and *Vrajabhakti-vilāsa* by Nārāyaṇa Bhatta Goswāmī, Vṛndāvana, if if seen from above, like if you, you know, you're above Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana will look like the shape of a lotus flower.

The eight petals of this lotus flower are the eight villages of the Aṣṭa Sakhīs, and in the middle of the lotus flower are the villages of Nandagrāma and Varṣāṇā. So, in your mind's eye, you could just imagine, like a bird, or here in a helicopter, you look down, Vṛndāvana shaped like a lotus flower, and those petals are the villages of the Aṣṭa Sakhīs, and right in the middle is Nandagrāma and Varṣāṇā.

So beautiful. Now, there are many pastimes of the Lord in which lotuses play a very integral part. In fact, so many, it would actually require an entire book just to name them all. But for today, we'll recount one very short but very sweet pastime found in a poem of Sūradās.

It's called *Kamala Ki Chhatri*, *Kamal Ki Chhatri* translated from it means the Lotus Umbrella Pastime, the Lotus Umbrella Pastime. Now, in our series, we're often quoting Sūradās, and rightfully so, because he was the 15th-century saint known for his devotional songs dedicated to Kṛṣṇa.

And Sūradās is said to have written and composed, listen to this, over 100,000 songs. Many of them have been lost, but fortunately, we have a large number. One hundred thousand songs. And he was born in Vṛndāvana in the year, um, 1478.

And much of his life history is found in a book called, it's a Mughal book written during the reign of Emperor Akbar, who was favorable to the Vaiṣṇavas. Now, I was reading that Sūradās, he could play a number of musical instruments and he became the chief singer in the Gopal temple at Govindā when Gopal was present there at his temple, you know, hundreds and hundreds, 500 years ago.

Um, Sūradās, he would sing in the temple. He was the main singer at Govindā. And the legendary musician Tansen, who we mentioned in the series a few months ago about Govindājī, Tansen, he was the main singer in the court of of Akbar.

So, one time, Tansen, who would often come to Vṛndāvana, he sang one of Sūradās's songs to Akbar, and Akbar was overwhelmed by the melody, by the music, by the poetry, by the mood of that song.

So, he said, "That's such a beautiful song." He's a devotee, very humble, very humble. He said to the emperor, "That tune and the lyrics are those of Sūradās." And then he glorified Sūradās. He said, "Kin Dāsa Sora." "Kin Dāsa Sora." That's very beautiful.

Listen, this is his glorification of, um, of Sūradās: "Some are hurt by a warrior's arrow, some are tortured by pain, but those whose hearts are touched by Sūrā's lyrics are pierced through again and yet again." Wow. "Some are hurt by a warrior's arrow, some are tortured by pain, but those whose hearts are touched by Sūrā's lyrics," means Sūradās's lyrics, "are pierced through again and yet again." With what?

With devotion, with bhakti. So, hearing this glorification of Sūradās and appreciating the music and etcetera, Akbar actually sent an invitation to Sūradās to join his court permanently as a chanter, as a singer. But, as you can imagine, Sūradās famously declined, saying he would only sing for his master Kṛṣṇa and no one else.

That is bhakti. He would only sing for his master Kṛṣṇa, nobody else. Out there at Govindā Hill, why would he leave Govindā to go to the court of a king in Delhi?

Hmm-hmm. So, in his *Kamal Ki Chhatri*, Sūradās begins by writing that Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are beyond meditation and understanding. A profound statement. Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are beyond meditation and understanding. Then he poses the question, "And how is that so?" And he answers the question by saying, "Because the one who lifted Govardhan Hill said to his mother, 'O Māyā, I cannot hold your pots of butter to help you because my wrists are hurting.' He lifted Govardhan Hill, but he says to his mother, 'I can't help you with the pots.'" Who is this Kṛṣṇa?

You know, what's what's going on here?

Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are beyond meditation and understanding. Then Sūradās goes on. He says, "Because he who dances on top of the Kāliya serpent fears looking at the paintings of serpents on the door of Nanda Mahārāja's palace." Because the one who killed the whirlwind demon Tṛṇāvarta said to his friends, "My dear friends, I'm afraid of swings.

Please do not sway me so fast." Because the one who uprooted the very old and strong Yamala and Arjuna trees in just one stroke said to his brother Balarāma, "O elder brother, please break the little leaves that are covering these yogurt pots so I can feed my friends some sweet yogurt.

Help me, I do not have enough strength to break these leaves." How do we understand the Supreme Lord?

Repeats: "O Lord, Your divine pastimes are beyond meditation and understanding. You're so amazing." So then Sūradās begins narrating a pastime that on one of the days that Śrī Rādhā went to worship the Sun God at Suryakunda, which is actually a very beautiful lake filled with unlimited varieties of beautiful lotus flowers. Śrī Rādhā asked Lalita Sakī, "O Lalita, you were famous as the knower of all lotuses.

Please describe to me the different types of lotuses that we see here in this beautiful Suryakunda." So, Lalita took the opportunity to describe the lotuses, but in such a way as to to glorify her dear most friend Śrī Rādhā.

She said, "Yes, Śrī Rādhē, listen with love. For there are many different types of lotuses present here today. First, there is the white lotus, which is a reflection of Your compassion and mercy, on which the bumblebee Kṛṣṇa, always eager for Your mercy, roams around.

Then there are the pink lotuses, which are a reflection of Your sweetness, opulence, and greatness, on which Kṛṣṇa, who always hankers for Your service, rests upon like a bumblebee. The blue lotus is here, a reflection of Your beauty, which takes away all the fatigue of the bumblebee Kṛṣṇa.

The yellow lotus is present, a reflection of Your love, which makes Kṛṣṇa, the bumblebee, intoxicated with love and affection for You. O dearest Rādhē, all these special lotuses are representatives of Your form and are supported by Your leaf-like Gopis and the lotus stems of different moods." That's deep.

All these special lotuses are representatives of Your form and are supported by Your leaf-like Gopis and the Lotus stems of different moods, or feelings, or emotions, bhakti. Now, just at that moment, Viśākhā Sakī, by the arrangement of Pūrṇamāsī, arrived on the scene and said, "Dearest Rādhā, today Yamunā Devī and other Gopis have made arrangements for a boat festival tonight with Kṛṣṇa on an island of lotuses in the Yamunā river." But I read that I was amazed.

There's the Yamunā River, but in the Yamunā River is an island, and on the island there's just lotus flowers everywhere, growing. So, excited at the prospect, all the Sakīs dress Śrī Rādhā like what?

Like a fragrant blooming lotus flower. And under the cover of darkness, they they all proceeded to the banks of the nearby Yamunā River where Kṛṣṇa was waiting for them on the banks. Actually, the other day I read another poet's description of those banks of the Yamunā, because everything, even, is extraordinary.

Nothing is ordinary. Everything is extraordinary. So I came across a description of the banks of the Yamunā, and that poet, he describes them as a stage upon which Kṛṣṇa and the Gopis often perform their renowned residents. He writes that "some banks are open and expansive, while others are secluded and concealed by gardens and groves.

He describes that the sand on the Yamunā's shore is naturally cooling like powdered camphor." So, when I hear these things, I try to imagine no camphor, which we often use in *pūjā*. If you powder it, yes, it has a cooling effect.

So, he describes that "the sand on the Yamunā's shore is naturally cooling like powdered camphor, and kissed by moonbeams and the touch of Kṛṣṇa's soft lotus feet, that fine sparkling powder is made doubly soothing." Because it's kissed by by moonbeams and the touch of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, that powder, the sand, it becomes doubly soothing.

This is the way in which we have to engage our minds. So, he, he goes on to describe that "the dark water of the Yamunā River is pleasing to the touch, and its current gently massages one's body. And it varies in depth." Here's the detail: how deep is the Yamunā River?

It varies in depth, reaching in some places to the knees, and at other places to the navel, to your chest, or up to your neck. And he describes colorful lotuses like the red Kuvalaya, or the white Puṇḍarīka, and the blue Indivara, and the golden Nalini, dance upon the waves of the river.

There are lotus flowers there, and the river is flowing, it appears that all these flowers are dancing. And not only that, but they're scenting the water with their pollen and attracting playful honeybees. Honeybees are coming around this, wow. Now, back to Sūradās, that pastime he's describing.

Sūradās goes on to explain that as soon as Yamunā Devī personified saw Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa there and the Gopis on the the banks of the Yamunā at the dock, actually, ready to take a boat to the, uh, island of lotuses, she came walking on top of her waves.

Yamunā Devī, she's seeing all these Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā and the Gopis. So she came to receive Śrī Rādhā walking on the top of her waves, and she offered a variety of lotuses to Śrī Rādhā to welcome her. Just see how often the lotus is depicted in these pastimes.

Then Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, according to Sūradās, accompanied by all the Gopis, they boarded the boat, and he describes they sailed towards the island of lotuses. Wow, they sailed, the beautiful billowing sail, where they're going to an island of lotuses.

And upon arriving, Yamunā Devī herself, she was there to welcome everybody, and then she took them to rest and relax where, under a huge umbrella made of lotuses and their stems. Now, in your mind's eye, try to see that.

On the island of lotuses, there's an umbrella, and it's made of beautiful, different colored and different scented lotuses and their stems, and they were resting there. So, then they enjoyed delicious foodstuffs that were served to them by younger Gopis called *mañjarīs*.

And at that point, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they began enacting the main pastime for the night, which was what?

A drama entitled, "The Lotus and the Bumblebee." Someday, some devotee can make a film and it can be entitled "The Lotus and the Bumblebee." And in this drama, which played out during the entire night, Rādhā, it's a very simple drama, but the beautiful, the beauty is not only the simplicity but the extreme deep devotion that that overwhelmed everyone.

Rādhā would throw a lotus flower, because the island's full of lotuses, entered the Yamunā, and it's described bumblebee Kṛṣṇa, because bumblebees like lotus flowers, bumblebee Kṛṣṇa would swim out, grab that lotus flower, and then come back and offer the same lotus flower to the lotus feet, the red-laced lotus feet of his beloved Śrī Rādhā.

So, Sūradās says that towards the end of the night, there was this enormous pile of all the colors in the rainbow, and more, beautiful lotus flowers, each of them with a different scented perfume, because they're all unique in their own way, decorating the beautiful, the beautiful feet of Vṛndāvana's Queen, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

And that alone gave the greatest pleasure to all of her Gopi girlfriends, to see her glorified in that way, and to see Kṛṣṇa controlled by her *prema-bhakti*, her love for Him, and His love for her. Jaya Śrī Rādhā!

Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa!

So, then at the first rays of dawn, as the first rays of dawn started to appear, everyone got back into the boat and sailed to the shore of the Yamunā River. And arriving, everyone quickly departed for their respective homes.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

That is the pastime. So beautiful. Thank you, Sūradās. So, we have many more lotus flower pastimes to share with you, and we'll continue next week. Somehow, I made it to this point with my cold. I'm very happy I did so.

But for, uh, now, we can finish this lecture with some words from our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

A perfect way to finish. Um, we will quote chapter 5 of *Teachings of Queen Kuntī*, which is a compilation of Śrīla Prabhupāda's lectures.

Therein, we hear Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "So, here are these prayers.

Queen Kuntī Devī, a great devotee, is giving us an opportunity to become Kṛṣṇa conscious simply by concentrating our mind on *paṅkaja*, the lotus flower. *Paṅka* means mud, and *ja* means generate. Although the lotus flower is generated from mud, it is a most important flower, and Kṛṣṇa likes it very much.

Queen Kuntī Devī, therefore, describes all the parts of Kṛṣṇa's body with reference to lotus flowers so that as soon as one sees a lotus flower, one will immediately think of Kṛṣṇa. Oh, Kṛṣṇa's navel is just like a lotus, and from Kṛṣṇa's navel grew the stem of the lotus upon which Brahmā, the creator of this universe, was born.

The universe includes so many planets, seas, mountains, and cities with motor cars and other paraphernalia, but the entire universe began from that lotus." Thank you. So, finished there. And, um, yeah, we'll be back in a week. I hope during the week you can remember some of the glories of the lotus flowers and how they play an integral part of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's līlā, or pastimes, and that will help stimulate our love for the Divine Couple.