

Hare Kṛṣṇa, my very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Namaḥ oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.

Actually, today I am addressing you from Hong Kong in China. As many of you know, we are traveling here in this beautiful country, meeting so many nice people. There are some restrictions here—I can’t go into detail—but as a result, I am not preaching directly from the Bhagavad-gītā. I have a new technique: I lecture from the teachings of Confucius, and his teachings are much like the teachings of Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita—one of his books was called Nīti-śāstra, or how to live in a logical way, kind of like how to be a civilized person. And when one becomes civilized, one can begin to practice transcendence. So, I found reading the teachings of Confucius very similar. Prabhupāda often quoted Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, so I thought it appropriate to quote Confucius here because people know him; he is one of their saints, they respect him, and they love him. So, I am learning his teachings, and as I speak that practical wisdom, I throw in some droplets of transcendental knowledge to innovate sometimes in our preaching around the world. But I really love China; the people are very warm and actually very friendly here, and we are enjoying sharing Kṛṣṇa consciousness with the people of this country.

So, we are continuing now with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 58. In this lecture, I would like to discuss the role of Tamāla trees in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The Tamāla tree—scientific name Cinnamomum tamala—is also called on the internet the bay leaf tree, and it is famous as a beautiful evergreen tree which grows to approximately 20 feet in height, and its flowers are greenish-yellow in color. As devotees know, the wood is blackish—black in Sanskrit is tamāla—so being black, actually a bluish-black, it is named the Tamāla tree. In India, during the months of April and May, it produces very fragrant flowers. I was reading that it also produces small fruits which are tasty despite being a little sour, and these fruits ripen in the monsoon season.

Now, in his Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam purport to 10.13.49, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes about a very special Tamāla tree in Vṛndāvana which many devotees know is very dear to their hearts as well, because it was dear to Prabhupāda’s heart. He writes in that purport to that verse of the Bhāgavatam: “In our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Temple in Vṛndāvana, there is a Tamāla tree that covers an entire corner of the courtyard. Before there was a temple, the tree was lying neglected, but now it has developed very luxuriantly, covering the whole corner of the courtyard.” So, Prabhupāda made note of that. He got the land in Vṛndāvana, in Ramaṇa-reti, to build his temple for his beloved deities, Gaura-Nitāi, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, but he noted on the land there was a Tamāla tree.

Now, my dear godsister Yamunā Devī, one of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s first disciples, related in her memories of Śrīla Prabhupāda that long before our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir was constructed in Vṛndāvana, that actual tree was a place of pilgrimage for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Because she was there in the early days of the movement—actually in the early 1970s—I was reading it was reported that very few Tamāla trees were actually still existing in Vṛndāvana. One was at the holy site of Rāsa-līlā, another was at the samādhi of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī at the Dāmodara Temple, and our Tamāla tree in the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir.

So, when Śrīla Prabhupāda first noted that our land where we would begin construction of our present-day Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir had a Tamāla tree, he was very, very pleased. Before construction began, he said, “We will often have kīrtana under this tree, and each day the tree should be worshiped. And a teaspoonful of soil from under the tree should be taken, mixed with sand and water from the Yamunā River, and that holy substance, he said, along with the husk of a coconut, should be used to clean the Āratika paraphernalia after each and every Āratika in our temple.” Let’s hope that this expressed desire of Śrīla Prabhupāda is still being fulfilled and pray that our devotees in Vṛndāvana will continue the worship of that particular Tamāla tree for many generations to come.

Now, amongst all Vrajavāsīs, the Tamāla tree is most famous because whenever Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī or her gopīs see its dark blackish color, they remember Kṛṣṇa out of love. They see Kṛṣṇa everywhere. And whenever Kṛṣṇa sees a golden flower vine or especially a yellowish kadamba tree, he remembers his beloved Śrī Rādhā. That their colors are such—golden and blackish—is actually confirmed in Govinda-līlāmṛta; I found chapter 10, verse 18, where Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes: “Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is as beautiful as a blossoming golden creeper and Lord Kṛṣṇa is as handsome as a blossoming Tamāla tree; who would not become delighted by seeing this very handsome divine couple?”

Now, there is a Sanskrit phrase I found referring to the Tamāla tree: taṭi-tamāla, meaning “that which causes distress.” Distress to whom? To the gopīs who remember Kṛṣṇa by seeing that blackish tree. Now, Bhīṣma confirms that Kṛṣṇa’s complexion resembles the Tamāla tree in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.33. He says, tamāla-nīlaṃ: Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body resembles the dark bluish color of the Tamāla tree. There, it’s confirmed.

And I was reading in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, chapter 4, verse 251, where Kṛṣṇa says that in divine madness, his consort Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sometimes confuses a Tamāla tree for him. Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes there: “The flute-like murmur of the bamboos rubbing against one another steals Rādhārāṇī’s consciousness, for she thinks it to be the sound of my flute—Kṛṣṇa is speaking—and thus she embraces a Tamāla tree, mistaking it for me.” We recite that again; Kṛṣṇa is speaking: “The flute-like murmur of the bamboos rubbing against one another steals Rādhārāṇī’s consciousness, for she thinks it to be the sound of my flute, and thus she embraces a Tamāla tree, mistaking it for me.”

Now, Govinda-līlāmṛta, chapter 8, verse 52, says something very similar: “When Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī saw a dark Tamāla tree, its roots covered by a flowering golden jasmine creeper and its top branch the home of a dancing peacock, she became convinced that she had just seen her lover Kṛṣṇa with his dark complexion, yellow dhoti, and peacock feather crown.”

Now, we are quoting a lot from Govinda-līlāmṛta because there is a lot of nectar there. In Govinda-līlāmṛta, chapter 8, Kavirāja Gosvāmī, of course, the author, describes a very beautiful Vṛndāvana pastime involving a sacred Tamāla tree; it’s one of my favorites. He writes: “One time when Śrī Rādhā entered the Vṛndāvana forest for a secret meeting with Kṛṣṇa, she was so beautiful; she heard every sound as a vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, every Tamāla tree as the form of Kṛṣṇa, and every scent as the fragrance of his glorious limbs. Then, after some time, she actually came upon Kṛṣṇa himself standing not far away. But, overwhelmed by love and divine madness, she mistook him for a Tamāla tree. And in that state of ecstasy, she said to herself—of the many Tamāla trees I have seen in the forest of Vṛndāvana, none resemble the unique luster of the Prince of Vraja as does this fortunate tree.” It’s actually Kṛṣṇa, which she is seeing as a Tamāla tree.

So, folding her hands, she continued: “Oh incomparably beautiful Tamāla tree, how can I describe your glories? For me, you are not just a tree, but you are Kṛṣṇa himself. Oh, king of trees, I am burning in the great forest fire of separation from my beloved Kṛṣṇa. As I firmly embrace you, please shower me with your sweet honey and immerse me in the waves of an ocean of bliss.”

So now, going deeper into a mood of ecstatic love, she continued—we are very fortunate to be able to see the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī through our ācāryas—she continued: “Is this a dark Tamāla tree, or is this a fresh raincloud? Is this a sapphire mountain peak, or is this a mountain range of black cosmetics? Is this a swarm of intoxicated bumblebees, or is this the dark current of the Yamunā River? Is this a cluster of blue lotus flowers, or is this the sidelong glance of the dear gopīs? Is this the handsome demigod Cupid, or is this the pious monarch of all sweetness? The pious monarch of all sweetness—is this the expanded ocean of nectar? Is this a blossoming amara tree? I think rather this is my lover Lord Kṛṣṇa. How is it that I have become so fortunate as to meet him in this place, in the sacred Vṛndāvana forest?” Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Then turning to Viśākhā-sakhī, she said: “Oh, my friend Viśākhā, I am bewildered. I do not know whether this is my lover Kṛṣṇa or a blue lotus flower standing before the two bumblebees of my eyes. My dear assistant, please tell me the truth; what is this beautiful object standing before me?”

So, after speaking these words, Kavirāja Gosvāmī described her bodily hairs stood up in ecstasy, her voice became choked up, and her eyes moved restlessly about. Then Viśākhā-sakhī answered her question in the following words: “My dearest Rādhā, standing before you is the dark tilaka marking that will be drawn in musk on your forehead. Standing before you is the series of designs and pictures that will be drawn in musk on your chest. Standing before you is the musk dot that will be placed on your chin. Standing before you is the black mascara that will adorn your eyes. Standing before you is the pair of blue lotus ornaments that will adorn your ears. Standing before you is the garland of blue lotus flowers that will rest soon upon your neck. My dear friend with the beautiful face, standing before you is your lover Lord Kṛṣṇa. Standing before you is your supreme good fortune.” Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, Kavirāja Gosvāmī goes on to say that by seeing each other, the divine couple became overwhelmed with ecstatic love, and their hearts, minds, and bodies became full of bliss. For a moment, he says, they stood stunned, unable to move or to act. And furthermore, ācāryas say that at that moment, time stopped so that the divine couple could savor their love, so that their girlfriends could satisfy their eyes, and that Vṛndāvana could record another episode in its eternal annals of wonder. Wow.

So, such is the glory, or some of the glories of the Tamāla tree in Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Actually, I was thinking that all the trees in Vṛndāvana are special. We know they are all kalpa-vṛkṣa (wish-fulfilling) trees. The Vaiṣṇava poet Braja Rasik Das writes in his book Braja Rasik Gāṇī, which I found in the Vṛndāvana Research Center, he writes: “No one knows the true glory of a tree in Vṛndāvana because every branch and leaf are irrigated by the name ‘Rādhā’.” Also, I found in Bengal the sādhus say, vana-vṛkṣa-latā-vṛndāvana: The trees and vines of Vṛndāvana are the extensions of the divine couple’s pastimes in Kali-yuga. Wow. The trees and vines of Vṛndāvana are the extension of the divine couple’s pastimes in Kali-yuga.

So, it’s for these reasons and more that the residents of Vṛndāvana are known as vana-upāsakas. Vana-upāsaka—what does that mean? It means the residents of Vṛndāvana are the “worshipers of the forest.” I’d like to become a vana-upāsaka; I’m sure you would too.

Now, continuing with my research, I came across a very beautiful poem by King Savant Singh of Kishangarh, Rajasthan, also in the Vṛndāvana Research Center—it’s a gold mine of nectar there in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava section. He wrote—this is so beautiful: “The vines of Vraja are our family goddesses, the trees are the lords of our life, the flowers of Vraja are our only decoration, and the leaves our only medicine. The earth of Vraja is our only residence, and the river Yamunā is our only shelter.”

And I’d like to quote the poets because they capture the emotions of the heart, hṛt, for the divine couple. The poet Sūradāsa says in one of his poems that after the Lord went to Mathurā, everything but the trees in Vṛndāvana dried up, but the trees were flourishing because the gopīs were hugging them in lamentation and showering them with their tears which went to their roots and kept them alive. “Who wants to hear anything else?” Sūradāsa says, “I sit in the shadow of those trees which are the shelter for souls separated from Kṛṣṇa.”

So, I have to keep it a little short today because we have a program I have to go to and speak from the teachings of Confucius and meet the people there. This beautiful agate necklace was given to me by a Buddhist priest; we had some discussions and we shared our realizations in spiritual life, and he gave me his agate necklace.

So, I’d like to finish today with an all-time favorite verse of mine by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. It is found in his Utkala-vallarī, text 66:

“Oh, handsome, fragrant Tamāla desire tree, blooming in Vṛndāvana forest and embraced by the mālatī vine of the Goddess ruling this forest; oh tree, the shade of whose glory protects the world from a host of burning sufferings, what wonderful fruits do the people find at your feet?”

So, today we captured a few of those fruits, and we were able to share them with you. Vṛndāvana has unlimited fruits of nectar, and by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace, all that awaits us. And by hearing these types of discussions, hopefully, it is a stimulation for one day getting some ecstatic love by which we can please the divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, under Śrīla Prabhupāda’s direction.

So, thank you so much. We’ll be back next week with more. Going to Hong Kong now for a few days, we can do harināma-saṅkīrtana there and book distribution, so it’s going to be nice. See you next Friday. Śrīmatī, the Tamāla tree, Rādhā, Mayura, Kṛṣṇa, the December marathon all over the world, Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya!

Haribol.
