Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back again to our ever-ongoing lecture series entitled *The Glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana*.

But first:

$$nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale$$

$$śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine$$

$$namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe$$

$$nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe$$

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 178, in which we continue with our present theme: the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and specifically today, Her tears. This is the second class on Her tears.

Now, Śrīmatī is known as Vraja-śiro-maṇi, meaning the crested jewel of the land of Vraja-maṇḍala. And She is often decorated with many different varieties of gems and jewelry, but actually, Her most precious decoration, of course, is Her love for Kṛṣṇa. And the poet Paramānanda Dāsa explains this as follows: "The *rīti*—the way of love in Vṛndāvana—is certainly very different. The love in the heart of Śrī Rādhā is an endless ocean of happiness. Her sentiments of separation are the bright sun which shines in the crimson dot on Her forehead. When Her eyes are unable to see the Lord, Her heartbeat appears to be like flashes of lightning, which cause a heavy rain of tears to pour down from Her eyes." Paramānanda says, "Her teardrops falling on the ground are like the sorrowful notes of the vīṇā of Mother Sarasvatī."

So, there in that last line he says, "Her teardrops falling on the ground are like the sorrowful notes of the vīṇā of Mother Sarasvatī." And the poet Vidyāpati writes about those same teardrops as follows: "The teardrops of Śrī Rādhā are considered very pure, sublime, divine, and merciful in nature. And when the ground of Vraja absorbs the tears of Śrī Rādhā, it grows beautiful trees, which blossom with fragrant flowers and thorns at the same time." The reason flowers and thorns grow together is because Her tears arise from separation from Kṛṣṇa, and that separation is like thorns. But at the same time, the soft and sublime nature of Her tears gives rise to fragrant flowers.

Another beautiful verse found in *Uddhava-sandeśa* by Rūpa Gosvāmī reveals—how could you say?—the potency of Rādhārāṇī's tears on the foliage, the foliage of Vṛndāvana. There Kṛṣṇa says to Uddhava, "If it were not for the crying of Rādhārāṇī and the other gopīs, if they were not always drenched in a flood of tears flowing from their eyes, all of Vraja's trees would have been burned in the great fire of separation from Me."

Now, in chapter 8 of the *Nāṭya-śāstra* by Bharata Muni—we quoted him last week—he explains that the Sanskrit word *añjali* means an offering. And he describes different kinds of offerings: *kusumāñjali*, an offering of flower buds; *puṣpāñjali*—we've heard that word many times—an offering of flowers; *svarṇāñjali*, an offering of gold; and *āśru-añjali*. *Aśru-añjali* means an offering of tears. And one of the most beautiful examples of offering tears is given by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who offers prayers in his work called *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*, which literally means an offering of flowers in the form of heartfelt lamentation—an offering of flowers in the form of heartfelt lamentation.

Now, an interesting angle I found in these pastimes of love involving tears is that sometimes devotees hold back or block their tears so as not to disturb Kṛṣṇa. And an example is given in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, Tenth Chapter, Verse 14, describing Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Hastināpura. He has left Vṛndāvana, He is going through Hastināpura down to Dvārakā, and the verse is like this: "The female relatives whose eyes were flooded with tears out of anxiety for Kṛṣṇa came out of the palace. They could stop their tears only with great difficulty. They feared their tears would cause misfortune at the time of departure." That's the verse.

And in his purport to that verse, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes and makes it even clearer. He writes, "There were hundreds of ladies in the palace of Hastināpura. All of them were affectionate to Kṛṣṇa. All of them were relatives also. When they saw that Kṛṣṇa was going away from the palace for His native place, they were very anxious for Him, and as usual, tears began to roll down their cheeks. They thought at the same time that tears at that moment might be a cause of misfortune for Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, they wanted to check them. This was very difficult for them because the tears cannot be checked." There is an example in the *Bhāgavatam* of devotees holding back their tears. That must be really difficult.

Now, back to the special nature of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's tears. Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī reveals—how can I say?—the volume, the volume of the tears She cries in separation from Kṛṣṇa. How much? In verse 49 of his *Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi*, he writes, "Oh, may that Śrī Rādhā, who passes what seems like endless days in the pain of separation from the crown jewel of all heroes, who sheds streams of tears, singing of His deep and tender love, and who takes into Her hands Her sweet-sounding vīṇā, Madhumatī, appear within my heart." So, therein he describes Her crying—obviously it is not ordinary crying—he describes it as *varṣai* or *varṣā*, literally meaning a torrential downpour. When She cries, it's a torrential downpour.

Now, another verse attesting to the powerful flow of Rādhārāṇī's tears is verse 318 of *Padyāvalī*. As Kṛṣṇa departs from Mathurā, Śrī Rādhikā speaks of deep separation from Her own life-airs. She says, "In separation, I become so weak and thin that all my companions are leaving me behind. My bangles have slipped off and seem to be running after Kṛṣṇa. My dear friends, my tears are also rushing away in streams in that direction. Forbearance will not stay with me even for a moment; it immediately departed along with Kṛṣṇa. My heart itself has already marched ahead of His chariot. So, what more can I say?" Streams, as She says. Her tears come out in streams, following Kṛṣṇa. The tears follow Kṛṣṇa in streams.

Now, the influence of Rādhārāṇī's girlfriends' tears is seen in verse 348 of *Padyāvalī*. It's also interesting to note. Therein it's stated, "Every day the Yamunā used to become muddied with the black musk anointing the bodies and breasts of the Vraja gopīs. Alas, now that Muralī-rūpa—Muralī-rūpa Kṛṣṇa—has departed, the water is twice as dark. But this time, from the kajal washed away by the gopīs' constant tears." Washed away by the gopīs' crying, crying, crying.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. So, prabhus, today I would like to conclude with a well-known pastime that gives us insight—we're so blessed—gives us insight, a very deep impression of Rādhārāṇī's tears. Actually, not only Her tears, but the tears of Kṛṣṇa as well, and not only that, but the combination of their tears. It's an exciting pastime. It's described elaborately in *Bhakti-ratnākara* by Śrī Narahari Cakravartī, but I also found it in *Sārārtha-pradīpikā* by a Vaiṣṇava poet, Mādhava Dāsa, whom I've quoted a number of times through the years. It's called the pastime of the lake of tears, Prema Sarovara. It's there in Vṛndāvana, that Prema Sarovara, that lake. You can visit it when you go to Vṛndāvana next time. Very famous place.

So, here it is. Once, on a most beautiful evening, Madhumaṅgala and Lalitā Sakhī arranged a meeting of the Divine Couple. They invited Śrī Rādhā from Varṣāṇā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa from Nandagrāma to a secluded forest known as Dhavalīvana. I never heard of that forest before. I love that name, Dhavalīvana. It means the forest where the two meet. Nearby stood a dense grove of fragrant kadamba trees. So, there Lalitā and Madhumaṅgala lovingly sat Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together. And as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa began to speak sweetly to one another, a bumblebee suddenly began buzzing near Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in a restless and disturbing way—a bee came *zzz* taking the nectar, the honey of Rādhārāṇī's association, and he was creating a disturbance.

So, Kṛṣṇa asked Madhumaṅgala to shoo it away, drive it away. So, Madhumaṅgala chased the bee and then returned saying, "Madhu is gone. Madhu is gone." Now, in Sanskrit, *madhu* means bee, but it is also one of the names of Kṛṣṇa, as we know, Madhu. So, hearing this, Śrī Rādhā thought, "Kṛṣṇa has left." And at once She was overwhelmed with separation, and tears began to stream from Her eyes again like torrents of rain. Thinking that Kṛṣṇa, whom She had just met after so long, had now disappeared, She cried out again and again, "Oh Prāṇanātha, where have you gone? Oh Prāṇanātha, where have you gone?"

Absorbed in Mahābhāva, She couldn't perceive that Kṛṣṇa was still sitting beside Her. So, Kṛṣṇa tried to console Her. But seeing the depth of Her separation, He Himself became overwhelmed, and forgetting that She was in His presence, He too began to weep. And from their tears of love combined, their tears of love, a sacred lake was formed: Prema Sarovara, the lake of divine love. And when the sakhīs saw Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's condition, they became stunned and overwhelmed themselves. Even the parrots joined in that moment. For example, Rādhārāṇī's female parrot loudly cried, "Rādhe! Rādhe!" and Kṛṣṇa's male parrot called out, "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" And hearing each other's names, Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa gradually returned to their so-called external awareness, and they gazed upon one another with deep longing and affection. Thus, even while together, the highest love expressed itself in separation. It's very deep.

This is known as *prema-vaicittya*. *Prema-vaicittya* means the feeling of separation even in union. I gave a lecture about that a couple of years ago. So, from this divine exchange, Prema Sarovara manifested—a lake born from the combination of their tears of love.

Now the poet Kumbhana Dāsa glorifies that place as follows. He writes, "Prema Sarovara is always filled with divine love day and night. Wherever Śrī Rādhā places Her lotus feet, Kṛṣṇa longs to place them within His vision." Another poet, Priyā Dāsa, describes, "Prema Sarovara in Vraja is an abode of pure love, a supremely blissful lake formed from the loving tears of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Simply by touching its waters, the mercy of the Divine Couple awakens within one's heart." In the *Bhakti-ratnākara*, it is said:

*"ei prema-sarovara dekho śrīnivāsa*
*ethā prema-vaicittya-bhāvera prakāśa"*

"O Śrīnivāsa, behold this Prema Sarovara, the place where the highest mood of love in separation was revealed."

Hare Kṛṣṇa. A most beautiful and profound pastime revealing how the deep love of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa flows as tears and becomes an eternal place of pilgrimage. And once again, it still exists. It's there in Vraja. Sometimes on our Kārtika Parikramās, we go there and we bathe in those sacred waters. So, please put it on your transcendental bucket list to bathe in Prema Sarovara. Tears—crying, crying, crying.

So, that's all for today, prabhus. I'm in Delhi on my way to London, and then America, and then to China, but I will find time to research about these transcendental subject matters and get back to you next week with another lecture about Rādhārāṇī's most beautiful tears. Thank you so much, and all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! Māyāpura-dhāma kī jaya! Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-yajña kī jaya! Jaya Gaura-premānande! Jaya Jaya Śrī Śrī Rādhe Śyāma! All glories to you, all glories.