

Hari Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. Nama oṁ viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we’re continuing our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 89. Today, we will shine light on the ghanṭā, which is also a musical instrument used in ISKCON. Because we have been discussing musical instruments in Sanskrit, the word ghanṭā is often used to indicate bells, but in Bengal and in Vṛndāvana proper, the word ghanṭā can also indicate a gong, meaning it is described as a circular brass or bronze plate which has a hook to tie a thread on top of it for holding and is played by striking it with a wooden hammer or sometimes a thick wooden stick. Now, the Bengali dictionary called Śabdakoṣa describes the gong or the ghanṭā as a percussion instrument consisting of a metal plate that is struck with a soft-headed drumstick. Then it gives the synonym as “bells,” so they are interchangeable. So, the word ghanṭā can be used to describe bells or a percussion instrument consisting of a metal plate that is struck with a soft-headed drumstick. So, we will discuss the ghanṭā in that context today, referring to it as a gong as we do in ISKCON.

Now, we often hear of such a ghanṭā or a gong in the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The poet Rasa Kiśor, who lived around the time of Narottama, Śyāmānanda, and Śrīnivāsa, he wrote: Ghanṭā ghanṭā meti gaja-maṅgala-sati. A ghanṭā sounds like the thundering of the clouds, ghana-ghana, when it is played along with the mṛdaṅga.

So, originally in the havelīs, which means the home-style temples in Vṛndāvana, there wasn’t the culture of making a dome on top of the temple as was, or you could say is still, traditional in India. This is because it is a historic thing; during the Mughal period in India—the Mughal period lasted several hundred years—such domes on top of Hindu temples attracted the attention of invaders who would demolish and loot the temple. So, the Vrajavāsīs decided to make temples to look more like houses, in the shape of what they call havelīs. A havelī is like a house which is a temple. So, these structures were often built with an oval-shaped hollow arch on top and a heavy iron hook where these large ghanṭās or gongs were hung. It’s really interesting, isn’t it? These old and heavy metal ghanṭās can still be seen on top of havelīs or even temples, specifically at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. I know of one at a Manipur King’s temple named Rādhā-govinda Mandir, where we often do kathā and kīrtana during our Kārttika parikramās. There are also such ghanṭās or gongs at the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple, the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple, the Rādhā-vallabha temple, and the Rādhā-Śyāmasundara temple in Vṛndāvana proper. If you look carefully, you’ll see those big gongs.

In olden days, a devotee would stand on top of the temple and hit the ghanṭā with a large wooden hammer after every hour of the day. This helped the pūjārīs—those taking care of the deities or doing temple activities—to follow the strict time standards of service of the Lord in the temple. Similar to this, I was thinking, a tradition was established by our Prabhupāda at our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir temple in Vṛndāvana. As many of you know, he established the place at the entrance of the temple where a large bell rings every hour—not a ghanṭā, not a gong as we are discussing today, but a bell. But previously in Vṛndāvana, these gongs were used in the same way. The poet Sadāśiva, one of our favorite poets, mentions the ghanṭā in one of his poems describing Nandagrāma, where Kṛṣṇa lived. He wrote:

“Oh dear friend, look at the mountain of gold, Śrī Nandīśvara, which stands high and straight with the beautiful white palace on its peak, with countless stairs reaching the throne of Mahārāja Nanda. In his courtyard, there are thousands of gopīs who roam and play along with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. The servants stand on high-raised arches and play ghanṭās which resonate with bliss in the hearts of the residents of Vraja. The sound of churning thousands of butter pots complements the sound of these ghanṭās.”

Sadāśiva prays to the lifter of Mount Girirāja to make him a servant at these doorsteps of Nandagrāma.

In another of my favorite poets, Vyāsadāsa, he describes this ghanṭā or gong being used in Vṛndāvana very beautifully in a poem he wrote as follows:

“Oh sakhī, do you hear the sound of the ghanṭā? The cowherd boys are returning from the pasture grounds, taking their cows back to the gośālā. They are all playing loud ghanṭās along with bugles, horns, ḍuṇḍī (big drum), and conches, and Kṛṣṇa is playing His flute. The sound of the ghanṭā makes my heart excited to see Kṛṣṇa coming home. The sound of the ghanṭā is like tiny droplets falling into the Yamunā River, the ankle bells of Goddess Sarasvatī, the sound of claps of playing gopīs, and the heartbeat of the Queen of Vṛndāvana.”

Vyāsadāsa says, “Oh sakhī, life is too short; we should run to see the Vṛndāvana procession of Kṛṣṇa coming home.” Wow!

Historically, the playing of these ghanṭās or gongs was not only reserved for temples, because as we know, Gaurāṅga—Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu—brought them out from the temples onto the streets and to the villages of Bengal. During His kīrtanas, thousands of devotees used to dance to the beats of the karatālas and the ghanṭās—the gongs. Holding the gong in one hand, devotees would hit it with a stick in the other hand, making a beautiful, loud sound which you could say reverberated and balanced the kīrtana. A medieval poet named Gadādhara wrote as follows—I really love this one:

“The army of Mahāprabhu is attacking the kingdom of Māyā with burning torch lights in their hands. Countless yet meaningful beats of the khole-mṛdaṅga and devotees leading the procession playing ghanṭās. The kīrtana is most blissful. In the middle of this procession, the Incarnation of Mercy Himself, Śrī Gaurasundara, is dancing with one hand up and the other down. His associates are diving deep into the ocean of bliss and love while staring at His incomparable beauty.”

The poet Gadādhara says, “Accompanied by the sounds of hulu-hulu—or I don’t know how to say it, those traditional sounds of the Bengali women—I sing the glories of Harināma day and night, as we should.”

Vṛndāvana Dāsa Ṭhākura also mentions the use of these ghanṭās or gongs in Caitanya-bhāgavata, Antya-khaṇḍa, Chapter 4. While describing a festival taking place at the home of Advaita Ācārya, he writes:

“Everywhere, the devotees were very busy. Some were spreading multicolored cloth awnings overhead and tying the corners to nails. Others hurried to bring vegetables, oil, and so on to the kitchen. Many devotees began kīrtana and dancing, and some joined in playing the gong and blowing conches. The devotees were jubilant, loudly chanting ‘Hari, Hari’ while they enthusiastically performed their various services. The festival mood had everyone in its grip, and a happy tumult echoed everywhere. The loud chanting of the Holy Names, the blowing of conches, and the sounds of cymbals, gongs, and drums transformed the house of Śrī Advaita into Vaikuṇṭha.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura also describes the ghanṭā or gong in the pastimes of Lord Caitanya in his famous Gītāvalī, Āratī-kīrtana, song two, which we sing in the evening time: Śaṅkha bāje, ghanṭā bāje, karatāla, mṛdaṅga bāje rasāla. Bells resound, ghanṭās resound, cymbals ring, and the mṛdaṅgas play very sweet in that kīrtana; so melodious and relishable to hear.

And even today in Jagannātha Purī, we see that when Lord Jagannātha comes out from His temple each year for the Ratha-yātrā festival, a large group of paṇḍās or priests play hundreds of ghanṭās or gongs. Actually, it has been going on for thousands of years, and I’ve been to that several times—to that Ratha-yātrā in Purī. Usually, it happens in our summertime here in Europe, but as Jagannātha comes out, there are long rows of priests, you know, boom, boom, playing these gongs very loudly. It’s overwhelming. And in the South, at the Śrī Raṅgam and Tirupati temples in South India, there’s a ceremony known as Ghanṭā-nādam—let me remember—it’s a 32-minute-long event during which a large gong, along with 108 small gongs or ghanṭās, are played by the pūjārī every evening. A special ceremony.

Now, in the temples of Orissa, Bengal, and Vraja, there is a tradition of playing ghanṭās of two different sizes—one smaller in size and another bigger one—both of which have, of course, different sounds. Oral tradition says that during the morning āratī, their sounds represent gopīs churning yogurt, and during nighttime, these two different-sounding ghanṭās or gongs represent the sound of gopīs running towards the place of the rāsa dance, having stuffed their ankle bells with the dust of Govardhana to stop them from making too much sound, so that no one will know about their secret meeting with Kṛṣṇa. They put, you know, dhūli (dust) in their ankle bells. So, following this bhāva or this mood, in the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple during Śayana Āratī, the pūjārī ties a cloth around a wooden hammer when playing the ghanṭā so that the sound will not be too pronounced. It’s in the same mood.

Now, as many devotees know, Śrīla Prabhupāda very much liked playing a ghanṭā or a gong in his kīrtanas. There are a number of photos, actually, of him doing so—one I remember now, with him smiling. He’s on the vyāsāsana, big smile on his face, he’s playing the gong. And Hari-śauri, my dear godbrother, writes in his book Transcendental Diary, volume 2, that once on Bimali, near Jalpaiguri, during Guru-pūjā, Śrīla Prabhupāda played a gong. He writes:

“The devotees have supplied him a small gold-painted hammer with a decorative jeweled handle. As the kīrtana went on today, he tapped the brass, koḷā-shaped gong, producing a vibrant, hollow tone as it rested against the ā sana’s left front rail. Prabhupāda has an elegant way of sitting—upright, not slouched. His head tipped slightly up, moving from side to side in time with the rhythm. His alert eyes and mood of concentration and sobriety give him a distinct, regal aspect; yet in his face, there is a subtle blend of soft approachability which invites us one and all. He is our Supreme Commander and at the same time one of the troops.”

Hari-śauri is a poet, and it’s a nice poem. Thank you, Hari-śauri.

Now, there’s a wonderful pastime—a pastime of the sound of a gong being played at an historical moment in ISKCON’s history. Yes, at an historical moment in ISKCON’s history! My dear godbrother Gurudāsa describes it in his book By His Example—it’s the title of his book—writing about his times with Śrīla Prabhupāda. By His Example, I read that book, it’s wonderful. If you can get it, you would just appreciate so much how Gurudāsa writes about Śrīla Prabhupāda. Now, this historical moment happened in 1971, when the devotees in London were recording a record album entitled The Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Temple, with the help of George Harrison of The Beatles. And the album was actually recorded at the same recording studio where The Beatles recorded their famous album—I think it was called Abbey Road, yeah, Abbey Road. And the devotees’ album, The Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Temple, was later released on The Beatles’ Apple record label. And one of the recordings was entitled the “Hari Kṛṣṇa Mantra.” So Gurudāsa writes in his book, “So nice, historical moment.”

“The recording went well, with Yamunā and Śyāmasundara leading and our backup rhythms supportive but not overpowering. After George laid down a beautiful harmonium and guitar introduction, he wanted a large chorus. So, adding myself, Jānakī, and Mukunda, he rounded up the secretaries, janitors, accountants, mailroom employees, switchboard operators, and executives and taught them the Hari Kṛṣṇa mantra. They were our chorus, and the chanting built up nicely in tempo and volume to a wonderful crescendo that ended with Mal Evans clanging a hanging brass gong. Clanging a hanging brass gong! Our collective hearts stopped because the clang sounded out of time. We hadn’t rehearsed it. We thought we’d have to do the whole recording over. But George was calm, and Mal Evans, the roadie, didn’t move a muscle. George then led us back into the engineering booth for a listen. I sat next to George as they put the earphones on. As we listened, the mantra sprang forth, sounding fantastic and inspiring. George began sliding the levers up and down, adjusting sounds on the various tracks. Paul and Linda McCartney then came into the booth, but we hardly noticed them as we were intensely waiting for the clang at the end. Once again, our chanting came to a crescendo climax, and the gong was perfect in its timing and added a nice, conclusive, exotic ending. It sounded great to me.”

The particular song was the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahā-mantra, and if you listen, you know, boom! If he plays that gong at the right time, he goes on. George called us back to the control booth to listen. The mantra rang out purely and joyously. I was completely encouraged and excited at the holy sounds we had rendered. Linda and Paul, too, were nodding with the beat and smiling; they indicated that they liked the sound and soon were singing along.

An historic moment, because that album—believe me, I remember at that time—that album was produced in England and became very popular. It became one of the hits actually in England itself, with the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mantra, and at the end, boom! All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

I would like to finish today with a beautiful quote from Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, 8th Vilāsa, verses 311 and 312. Again, the Sanskrit is quite long, so we’ll just quote the verse: “Oh King, please hear now about the benefits one achieves by playing a gong or cymbals in the temple of Lord Viṣṇu. Such a person becomes freed from all sinful reactions and, upon leaving his body, boards a celestial airplane to enjoy life in the association of Lord Viṣṇu. At that time, all the Gandharvas sing of his glories.”

Hari Kṛṣṇa! Thank you for the gong. It’s been played for a long time, and Śrīla Prabhupāda enjoyed very much playing it. In our International Society for Krishna Consciousness, I don’t see devotees play it so often, but perhaps after this lecture it will become more prominent in our ISKCON society, because we see Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana, the original kīrtanas—Mahāprabhu played those gongs, specifically the small ones with the wooden handle, and Śrīla Prabhupāda loved it.

Hari Kṛṣṇa, see you next Friday! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Vṛndāvana kī jaya! Brāja-dhāma kī jaya!

Hari Kṛṣṇa!
