Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Viśvambhara-dāsa-vīrya-kṛṣṇa-bhūtale, śrīmatī-bhakti-nāminī, namaste sarasvatī-devī gauravāṇī-pracāriṇe. All glories to you! So, we are continuing with our miniseries on “Stimulation for Ecstatic Love,” and this will be part 42.

For this lecture, I’ve chosen a very interesting and, you could say, a beloved item, namely the dust of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, known affectionately by devotees of the Lord as braja-reṇu. I say affectionately because there’s a well-known saying in Vṛndāvana that there are five personalities who grant eternal residence in Braja—and I’m sure most of you know: Govardhana Hill, Yamunā Devī, Gopīśvara Mahādeva, Vṛndā Devī, and number five, braja-reṇu, the dust of Vṛndāvana.

Now, of course, an uneducated or uninformed person may question what’s so special about the dust of Vṛndāvana, because after all, dust is such an ordinary thing. However, the dust of Vṛndāvana is not ordinary; it’s extraordinary. First of all, it’s special because it’s mixed with the impressions of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, Balarāma’s lotus feet, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, and all the residents of Vṛndāvana as they traverse the Vṛndāvana forest during the Lord’s pastimes.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.68.37 says about Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet: “The dust of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, which is the source of holiness for all places of pilgrimage, is worshiped by all the great demigods. The principal deities of all planets are engaged in His service, and they consider themselves most fortunate to take the dust of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa on their crowns.” So, when Kṛṣṇa walks around Vṛndāvana, His lotus feet are impressed in the dust; the dust is something very special.

But not only because of that. Another reason that Vṛndāvana dust is special is because, well, it’s made from cintāmaṇi stones; dust ultimately comes from stones. So, braja-reṇu is made from cintāmaṇi stones. Brahma-saṃhitā 5.29 describes the special nature of cintāmaṇi stones. We all know this verse: “I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor who is tending the cows, yielding all desire in abodes built with spiritual gems, surrounded by millions of kalpa-trees, always served with great reverence and affection by hundreds of thousands of Lakṣmīs or gopīs.”

Now, in Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s purport to that verse—which Prabhupāda recorded originally in our movement on a record album—he further clarifies the nature of the cintāmaṇi stone from which the dust of Vṛndāvana is made. He wrote: “By the word cintāmaṇi is meant transcendental gem. Just as Māyā builds this mundane universe with the five material elements, so the spiritual potency has built the spiritual world of transcendental gems. The cintāmaṇi, which serves as material in building of the abode of the Supreme Lord of Goloka, is a far rarer and more agreeable entity than the philosopher’s stone.” Such beautiful, eloquent writing.

Now, in medieval Europe, people would sometimes speak or fantasize about a philosopher’s stone which could apparently turn iron into gold; in other words, satisfy all one’s desires. However, the cintāmaṇi stone—or the dust thereof—is infinitely more valuable because it can be instrumental in satisfying our deeper spiritual desires to serve the divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I was reading—rather, I was listening on a morning walk in Māyāpur on April 17, 1975—Śrīla Prabhupāda said: “If you want something from ordinary dust, you cannot get it because it’s material. But in Vṛndāvana, even from the dust, if you want something, that dust will deliver it immediately for the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.”

I came across another wonderful poet; his name is Rāmadāsa, a Brajabāsī poet. He very beautifully describes the potency of Vṛndāvana dust, of braja-reṇu, in one of his poems. It’s very nice; he writes: “As the sun and the moon complete the cycle of day and night, as fire and water make complete the nature of this world, in the same way, the dust of Vṛndāvana and the dark waters of the Yamunā River bring to completion the cycle of birth and death and ignite pure love for Kṛṣṇa.” Beautiful poetry.

So therefore, throughout our scriptures, great devotees write about and worship the dust of Vṛndāvana. Just the other day, I was reading in Lalitā-mādhava, Act 9, entitled darśana—which means looking at pictures—in verse 148, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes: “On this Earth planet, the best place is Bhārata-varṣa. In Bhārata-varṣa, the best district is Mathurāpurī. In the district, the best place is Vṛndāvana forest. In Vṛndāvana forest, the best place is along the shore of the Yamunā. On the shore of the Yamunā, the best place is the arena of the rasa dance. The rasa dance arena is filled with dust that touched the two feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the lover of the gopīs. Therefore, the great sage Nārada worships those particles of dust with all of his heart.” Thank you to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Now, another poet, Paramānanda Dāsa, whom I often quote, says in one of his poems: “How can a poet describe the great fortune of Braja’s children who always play in the dust of Braja, where Kṛṣṇa has walked barefoot in ecstasy, in which Balarāma has fought wrestling battles with Madhu and Śrīdāmā, in which Kṛṣṇa killed all the demons, where Śrī Rādhā played with her sakhīs and where she soaked the dust of Vṛndāvana with their tears of love, in which the countless cows of Mahārāja Nanda run in ecstasy, where Lord Śiva resides as his service, and where the Lord of the three worlds plays happily? O brother,” Paramānanda says, “place the dust of Braja on your forehead, for it is the greatest wealth of all for the devotees of the Lord.”

Now, just how that cintāmaṇi stone or its dust, braja-reṇu, manifests—or let us say, looks like—in Vṛndāvana for those who have transcendental vision is very beautifully described by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his Braja-rīti-cintāmaṇi, verses 13 to 17. It’s a little bit of a long description, but it’s just pure nectar. He writes: “In some places, the ground of Braja is made of camphor dust. In some places, it is saffron. In some places, it is made of ground musk, and in some places, it is made of the aromatic substances used in religious ceremonies. In some places, the ground of Braja is made of emeralds, and in other places, it is made of a variety of precious gems. In some places, the ground of Braja is a golden Jambū River, and in other places, it is made of sapphires. In some places, the ground of Braja is made of emeralds and the trees, bushes, and creepers are made of gold; in other places, the ground is gold and the trees are emeralds. In some places, the ground of Braja is made of rubies and the trees and vines are crystal; in other places, the ground is crystal and the trees and creepers are rubies.” Very detailed description of the cintāmaṇi stones of braja-reṇu.

So, hearing like this, we should be eager to obtain some of that dust, that braja-reṇu. Actually, it’s recommended that when one goes to Vṛndāvana, the very first thing he or she should do is actually roll in the dust of Braja. Śrīla Prabhupāda makes that very clear. He writes in Chapter 37 of Kṛṣṇa book: “One who intends to visit Vṛndāvana should follow in the footsteps of Akrūra and always think of the pastimes and activities of the Lord. And as soon as one reaches the boundary of Vṛndāvana, he should immediately smear the dust of Vṛndāvana all over his body without thinking of his material position and prestige. Actually, one cannot go to Vṛndāvana by purchasing a ticket. The process of going to Vṛndāvana is shown by Akrūra.”

Now, I know in the old days—well, the old days when we’d go to Vṛndāvana in the 70s and the 80s—we would actually do that. We’d actually get out of the car and roll in the dust. So, perhaps we should continue with that tradition. We get distracted.

And what is the result of rolling in that dust of Vṛndāvana? Why should we do it? Well, again, that’s described by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his Braja-rīti-cintāmaṇi. Therein he writes: “If you roll about in the ground of Vṛndāvana, then you will attain an exalted position like the beautiful pearl necklace strung by Śrī Kṛṣṇa and worn by Rādhā. This exalted fate will not be difficult for you to attain.” I’m going to recite that again because it’s so important: “If you roll about in the ground of Vṛndāvana, then you will attain an exalted position like the beautiful pearl necklace strung by Śrī Kṛṣṇa and worn by Rādhā. This exalted fate will not be difficult for you to attain.” I can’t wait to get to Braja and roll in the dust!

Now, the glories of this dust, this transcendental dust of Braja, can be even more appreciated by an old custom that I was reading about. In the days of yore in Vṛndāvana, whenever a sādhu or a devotee would pass away, the Brajabāsīs would first smear his body with the dust of Vṛndāvana mixed with the water of the Yamunā River. In such cases, the Brajabāsīs never said that such a sādhu or devotee had left his body or passed away, departed—rather, they would say in the old days that that person attained the sacred dust of Braja for eternity. If you heard maybe someone had passed away, you’d ask one sādhu, “What happened to such-and-such?” “Oh, he attained the sacred dust of Braja for eternity.” It means he left. Such culture to prepare for leaving this world!

One anonymous poet has written very nicely: “Dear friend, for a meeting with the Lord at the end of life, take bath in the sacred river, comb your hair, and dress accordingly to meet your all-attractive Lord of utmost importance. Don’t forget to smear the dust of Vṛndāvana on your body, because that dust will be the source of all your good fortune. Throw a handful of Braja’s dust high in the air on the path of meeting your beloved Kṛṣṇa before you leave this body.” Hari Kṛṣṇa!

Now again, in the olden days, knowing the potency of the dust of Vṛndāvana, the devotees who were residing or who lived at Govardhana Hill, they used to celebrate a festival known as braja-luṭī-dhūlī. We should revive this as well. It means the “Festival of throwing dust.” During this festival, which took place on the day of the first Dvādaśī in the month of Kārttika, these Govardhana-vāsīs, they would sing the names of Lord Caitanya, Lord Nityānanda, Rādhā, and Kṛṣṇa, while throwing the soft, sandy dust of Govardhana Hill on each other. And I was reading, they would also throw it high in the sky, which gave the impression like—how is it said?—like a rain of dust. A rain of dust! We have raindrops of water, but these souls, they took relish in, you know, a rain of dust. And after that, they would do parikramā of Govardhana Hill and finally take baths in Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Again, so rich was the culture of Vṛndāvana. We have to keep these things; this is our tradition. We shouldn’t lose our tradition.

So, because we have two or maybe three more lectures on the glories of braja-reṇu, I’m going to finish today with a poem—lots of poets today—a poem by the poet named Nāgarī Dāsa. Nāgarī Dāsa, he was briefly a Rajput king who sacrificed his whole kingdom. He just walked away one day from his kingdom to Vṛndāvana to do what? To do bhajana, basically to sit under a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree and chant: “Rāma Rāma Rāma Hari Hari.” Actually, we gave—I remember now—an entire lecture about him in our series on historical Vṛndāvana. One of his poems is called, very simply, “Meditation”—and this, forsooth, this is real meditation—and it goes as follows:

“Oh my mind, always worship the dust of Vṛndāvana. When in the mornings the maidens of Braja sweep the front yards of their houses, the golden hue of that dust appears like clusters of golden clouds. When peacocks sing and the sky showers with rain, the beautiful fragrance of the rain soaks the dust of Braja, thus attracting the minds of all the residents of Vṛndāvana. When the cows are running back home in the evenings, the whirlwind of the dust of Braja smears everyone’s bodies, thus taking away all of their sins. When the sunlight shines on the dust of Braja, the dust appears like gold melted in love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Oh my mind, always reside in the dust of Braja, which is the only wealth left in this present age.” The poet Nāgarī says: “Sacrifice everything for a smallest particle of braja-reṇu and place it lovingly on your forehead. Oh, glory to braja-reṇu!”

Thank you, Prabhus. As mentioned, I’ll be back again next Friday with part two about the glories of braja-reṇu. Again, I was starting my research, and I thought, “How much will I find?” I found an unlimited treasure chest of information and glorification of braja-reṇu. So, I’ll be happy to share it with you next Friday. All glories… Hey, thank you!