Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and a warm welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Vande Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Viṣṇu-pādāya Kṛṣṇa-bhūtala-śrīmatī-bhakti-nāminī, Namaste Sarasvatī-devī gauravāṇī-pracāriṇe. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we are continuing with our miniseries on “Stimulation for Ecstatic Love,” and this will be part 122. Herein, we’ll continue discussing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, in particular again, the anklets that decorate those lotus feet. Now, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura very beautifully describes Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet in his Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi. Therein, he writes: “That which is present deep within the heart of all the Upaniṣads is a most well-hidden secret. And what is that? It is the pair of Rādhārāṇī’s divine lotus feet, which are my only refuge and are full of her own dancing playfulness.”

And the famous poet Paramānanda dāsa composed the following song, which may act as a stimulus for ecstatic love in the hearts of all sincere devotees. He begins—it’s really beautiful: “Listen to the music of the forest of Braja, causing that entire wooded area to attain bliss today. The forest leaves, flowers, stems, and vines are dancing today. The forest is filled with the beautiful sounds of two musical instruments. Inspired by the sweet melody of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, the queen of Braja dances today. Her ankle bells fill the emptiness of Kṛṣṇa’s flute and override the musical notes of that vaṃśī. Just see, the sun is marrying its rays, leaves are uniting with flowers, water is embracing its shores. Kṛṣṇa is dancing with Rādhā, and His flute melodies are dancing with her anklet bell sounds.” The poet Paramānanda dāsa says, “I sacrifice my everything for the jhaṅkāra sound of Rādhārāṇī’s ankle bells.” Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, there’s a beautiful pastime about Rādhārāṇī’s ankle bells described by Govinda dāsa—one of the principal poets in the Vallabha-sampradāya; he also writes very beautifully as follows: One day, Kṛṣṇa was playing with His friends in a cave on Govardhana Hill. He was the King; His advisor was Balarāma, His Rāja-guru was Madhumaṅgala, His chief minister was Subala, and His attendant was Viśākha—all the cowherd boys. So, at one point, Śrīdāmā came forward and said, “Oh Lord, please accept my respects. You are the food-giver to us. But look at what cruel Gopa Stoka-kṛṣṇa is doing in your kingdom.” (It’s all a kingdom pastime; Stoka-kṛṣṇa, of course, is another cowherd boy. The gopas are just playing a game here). “He is stealing our cows and painting them a saffron color to make them look like his saffron cows. I had 2,000 cows, oh King, but now only 500 are left. Oh my Lord, please do justice for us.”

So King Kṛṣṇa looked at Balarāma, then He nodded and winked at Madhumaṅgala, and then He said, “All right, by the decree of Mahā-mahim Baladeva and Rāja-guru Madhumaṅgala, I declare that—” but He stopped short. Because suddenly in the background, the divine sound of the ankle bells of Rādhārāṇī, who was on her way to Govinda-kuṇḍa to fetch water with other gopīs, reached Kṛṣṇa’s ears. His eyes, ears, nose, and other senses became inert and immovable, and He stopped speaking. And the cowherd boys, they were like stunned, and they just sat there waiting for the verdict on Stoka-kṛṣṇa stealing cows from King Kṛṣṇa. But as the sound of Rādhārāṇī’s ankle bells became louder and louder, the royal prince Madhumaṅgala shouted out, “Oh King Kṛṣṇa, please announce your verdict to the court! What is the verdict?”

But then Kṛṣṇa, overwhelmed by this transcendentally deafening sound of Rādhā’s ankle bells, instead of saying “arrest Stoka-kṛṣṇa,” He called out, “Arrest Kṛṣṇa and put Him behind the captivating bars of this beautiful sound of Rādhārāṇī’s ankle bells!” So, assessing this critical situation, Madhumaṅgala stepped forward and he said, “The decision of this court will be declared tomorrow because our King needs some rest.”

So, still inside the cave on Govardhana Hill, Kṛṣṇa and His friends watched as Rādhārāṇī very gracefully walked down the stairs of this lake, Govinda-kuṇḍa, to refresh herself by washing her lotus feet in its sacred waters. Overwhelmed seeing this, Kṛṣṇa turned to Madhumaṅgala and He said the following: “My dear friend, why am I here in this form? I should be the water of Govinda-kuṇḍa, which now comes in contact with the lotus feet of Rādhārāṇī and washes her tinkling ankle bells. I should be a lotus in the kuṇḍa, making its life successful just by being near those ankle bells. Oh my friend, take me to her, the wish-fulfilling tree of my life, my happiness, and my very own heart.”

So, Madhumaṅgala took Kṛṣṇa to Govinda-kuṇḍa. They came out of the cave and walked down to the kuṇḍa, where Kṛṣṇa sat on a large rock and started playing His flute. The poet describes that as He did so, the entire Vṛndāvana forest began dancing in bliss. And as the wind blew the trees to and fro, the leaves on the trees started getting greener and greener—vṛndāvana-kī-jaya—and the flowers showered themselves down on the ground, causing the dust, the braja-reṇu, to dance in a swirling way according to the directions of the wind.

And the water of Govinda-kuṇḍa made sounds of jala-taraṅga as Rādhārāṇī and her gopī friends began playfully splashing each other. And as they did so, her ankle bells resounded with sounds of jaṇa-jaṇā, making the goddess Pārvatī in Kailāsa dance in ecstasy. The sound of her ankle bells taṭaṇa-taṭaṇa made goddess Lakṣmī in Vaikuṇṭha dance in great happiness. And the sounds of her ankle bells, raṇaṇa-raṇaṇa, intoxicated the wife of Indra in Indra-loka. And the sound of haṇa-haṇaṇa made Sarasvatī dance in the sky. And the sound of the ankle bells, baṇaṇa-baṇaṇa, made Mother Earth, Bhūmī, dance in bliss on the hood of Śeṣa Nāga. And hearing the sound of her ankle bells, every roma, meaning the pores of Kṛṣṇa’s body, began dancing like puppets, filling the forest of Braja with prema, with pure love. The poet Govinda dāsa says, “May the sound of Rādhārāṇī’s ankle bells reverberate in the forest of Vṛndāvana every single day and every single night forevermore.” Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you, great poet.

Now, in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I found another poem by Paramānanda dāsa in which he describes how Kṛṣṇa once glorified the ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He wrote: Glorifying the beauty of Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, Kṛṣṇa said, “Oh Priyā, so beautiful—oh Priyā, you are as dear to me as my very life, but your tender lotus feet are even more dear to me than my life. They bear the heavy weight of ankle bells made by Tuṅgavidyā-sakhī. Oh, Tuṅgavidyā-sakhī, you are the true artist in this creation of Brahmā. Just by looking at the ankle bells you made for Rādhārāṇī, the wife of Indra cursed her husband to never get such a pair of ankle bells like that. The blue sapphires of your ankle bells are like me, Kṛṣṇa, who just want to be around your lotus feet. The bells hanging down towards your heels are like your devotees who worship your lotus feet daily. The gold and diamond chains of your ankle bells are the tears of lamenting souls who want to reach you. The joints of your ankle bells are the hopes of many goddesses who worship you. Your ankle bells are more precious than the stars in the sky.” Kṛṣṇa speaking so beautifully: “Oh my beloved Kiśorī, the jingling sounds of your ankle bells melt my heart. Upon reaching my ears, they don’t allow me to play with my friends, milk my cows, or play my flute. O Kiśorī, please ask your dear gopī Tuṅgavidyā what mantra she chanted to make the magical bells on your ankles.” The poet Hita Paramānanda says, “May my mind always meditate on the beautiful, sweet sounds of the ankle bells of Rādhārāṇī, who is the dearmost of Rādhā-vallabha.”

Now, Paramānanda mentions Rādhā-vallabha, who actually was his worshipable deity in Vṛndāvana 500 years ago. That deity of Vallabha worshiped today in Vṛndāvana is an exquisitely beautiful deity. I sometimes think he’s one of the best-dressed deities in Vṛndāvana. His eyes are made of a precious stone—black, but somehow translucent—very beautiful; you should visit that temple, the Rādhā-vallabha temple. And I recently discovered that near the Rādhā-vallabha temple in Vṛndāvana is another smaller temple known as the Rādhā-rasika-kiśora temple. What a beautiful name—Rādhā-rasika-kiśora temple—where a famous historical event happened to a famous Brajabāsī saint named Harirām Vyās.

Harirām Vyās was part of the Banke Bihari temple, and he wrote a number of poems actually about the glories and works of Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs in the Brajabhāṣā language. It’s believed he was an eyewitness to the Six Gosvāmīs. And one day he was chanting his Gāyatrī mantra, sitting in the forest of Kiśora-vana. Sitting in the forest—I never heard this moment before—sitting in the forest of Kiśora-vana in Braja, which actually is known today as that crowded area filled with many streets and alleyways where the Rādhā-vallabha and Banke Bihari temples are situated. If you’ve ever been down there, it’s really crowded now, but it used to be a forest, a vana.

So while chanting in Kiśora-vana, he was meditating on dressing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with precious jewels and ornaments. And in that meditation, while tying her nūpura—which literally means her ankle bells—he realized that the thread for tying those ankle bells was too short. And in this meditation, unable to find a suitable thread, he felt or he noticed a thread on his own body which he immediately took and tore into two and used to tie the ankle bells of Rādhārāṇī. However, as soon as he did so, his meditation broke, and he realized that the thread that he tore to tie the ankle bells of Rādhārāṇī was none other than his own Brāhmaṇa thread. And because of breaking that thread, the chanting of his Gāyatrī mantra and his meditation was disturbed.

So then suddenly, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī herself appeared to him and gave him a new Brāhmaṇa thread with a boon that that thread would never become torn, broken, burned by fire, dirty, or wet, and would remain ever-fresh on his body until his departure from this world. And I was reading that pilgrims often visit that place, which is now the place of the Rasika-kiśora temple. So perhaps during one of our Kārttika parikramās in upcoming years, we can take a group of devotees to that place. I haven’t been there yet. Vṛndāvana—so much nectar.

Let us conclude today with the words of Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura in his song Rādhikā-caraṇa-reṇu, which translates literally as the dust of the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā. He writes: “One who adorns his body with the dust of the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā will easily attain Lord Gīrīnārī (Govardhana) by taking the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā as his āśā, or sole refuge. He becomes an exalted devotee.” To him, I say: excellent, bravo! Oh, glories to Rādhārāṇī whose divine abode is Vṛndāvana. She is the wealth—she is the wealth of Kṛṣṇa’s blissful pastimes. If my ears never hear such glories as Rādhā’s, then I have been cheated by the hands of fate. One who is always in the association of devotees, who hears about and discusses prema-kathā—topics of divine love such as the rāsa-līlā pastimes in Vṛndāvana—he will attain the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, whose bodily hue is like a dark blue monsoon cloud. He who is adverse to hearing and discussing these topics will never achieve the goal of life, and nor do I ever want to hear his name. Harikṛṣṇa!

Oh brothers, by chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names, one gets Rādhikā’s lotus feet; and by chanting Rādhā’s names, one can get the moonlike Lord Kṛṣṇa. In a few brief words, I have expressed what gives relief to this aching heart. Other talks are simply full of misery with conflicting words and thoughts.

Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dhāma, kī jaya! Thank you, Prabhus. We’ll be back next Friday, as we’ve been doing for a number of years now, with more nectar, more items on helping us to develop stimulus for ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Śrī Gaurī-Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-jī. All glories, thank you!