Hi Krishna, very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Namaste!

All glories to our beloved. So, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will finally be part 100. 100 lectures!

And today, we'll continue with our discussions on the four transcendental qualities that distinguish, um, our beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa from Lord Nārāyaṇa. As we've covered the first two, uh, we shall now move on to the third, which is: Kṛṣṇa can attract living entities from all over the universe by playing on his flute.

By playing on his flute. So, to begin with, uh, that Kṛṣṇa can attract living entities from all over the universe by his flute playing is confirmed in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 21, uh, verse 141. Therein it's stated, "The sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute spreads in the four directions.

Even though Kṛṣṇa vibrates his flute within this universe, its sound pierces the universal covering and goes to the spiritual sky. Thus, the vibration enters the ears of all the inhabitants. It especially enters *Goloka-Vṛndāvana* and attracts the minds of the young damsels of Vṛndāvana, bringing them forcefully to where Kṛṣṇa is present." So, this verse also reveals that Kṛṣṇa's flute playing is appreciated even beyond this universe for its relish, not only in the spiritual world, but the topmost planet in the spiritual world, namely *Goloka-Vṛndāvana*.

In *Ujjvala-Nīlamaṇi*, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that Viśākhā Devī describes Kṛṣṇa's flute to Śrīmatī Rāṇī as follows: "There in *Goloka-Vṛndāvana*, and I quote her: 'As it touches his splendid teeth, Kṛṣṇa's flute looks like a crystal wand.

Where it touches Kṛṣṇa's red lotus palm, it looks like a ruby stick. And where it touches Kṛṣṇa's blue lotus cheek, it looks like a sapphire.' Look, in this way, Kṛṣṇa's flute looks like these three different jewels, three different jewels." And Śrīla Prabhupāda introduces us to Kṛṣṇa's flute very early in the movement, in chapter 21 of *The Kṛṣṇa Book*, wherein he writes, "Many of you know this because *The Kṛṣṇa Book* is so dear to all of us.

He writes, 'With the arrival of the beautiful autumn season, the waters in the lakes and rivers became as clear as crystal and filled with fragrant lotus flowers, and breezes blew very pleasantly. At that time, Kṛṣṇa entered the forest of Vṛndāvana with the cows and the cowherd boys.

Kṛṣṇa was very much pleased with the atmosphere of the forest, where flowers bloomed and bees and drones hummed very jubilantly, while the birds, trees, and plants were all looking very happy. Kṛṣṇa, tending the cows and accompanied by Śālagrama and the cowherd boys, began to vibrate his transcendental flute.'" So, for many of us, that was the first book, or one of the first books we had in in ISKCON, and therein we're introduced to this flute, this amazing flute, Kṛṣṇa's bansī. *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu* by Kavikarnapura says, "At this particular point in the autumn season, quote: 'This autumn season is raining just like a king.

Its bed is made of *śatdala* [pink hibiscus flowers]. In other words, the ground becomes full of pink hibiscus flowers during this season. Its open-air sea is studded with pearl-like stars above. Fully developed *śara* flowers sway around and act as chamaras [fly whisks].

During this season, all this gives the impression of the season being just like a king resting in an open tent.' Very poetic." So, in that description of autumn, we hear of pearl-like stars like a canopy in Vṛndāvana.

In other places, it is stated that Kṛṣṇa's flute is also studded with pearls. For example, I found in a letter to Karandhar, dated October 3rd, 1971, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, "My dear Karandhar, please accept my blessings.

Enclosed you will find one photograph of the deities there in Los Angeles recently sent to me. But why is Kṛṣṇa without a flute?

What is the difficulty to make a flute for Kṛṣṇa?

You can simply take a twig and wrap it in a golden lace with a pearl drop hanging down. With the pearl drop hanging down, that is a flute." Now, in his writings, the poet Harishuri asks the question, "Why exactly did Kṛṣṇa decide to take up the flute during that autumn season?" He poses a question, he'll give the reply too. "Why exactly did Kṛṣṇa decide to take up the flute during that autumn season?" And he composes a verse in reply: "Kṛṣṇa thought, 'Even though this flute may be born in a faulty *vṛṁha* [faulty vṛṁha meaning vṛṁha means like a lineage of bamboo reeds], yet there are *muktās* that have appeared here in Vṛndāvana.' Here, *muktās* can mean either pearls, or it can also refer to liberated souls." "Harīśvara continues, Kṛṣṇa says, 'I must give shelter to this flute.' Thinking like this, the Lord supported and elevated the flute using his own hands." So, essentially, Kṛṣṇa is saying that although his bamboo flute took birth amongst bamboo reeds, he gave it shelter because of its valuable pearl decorations, as stated, and the fact that it appeared in Vṛndāvana, where there are many liberated souls. *Mukti*, it's interesting, a little complicated, but it, uh, it's very beautiful.

Now, despite the bamboo's questionable origin, the Gopis of Vṛndāvana expressed some jealousy about its good fortune.

In a famous verse in *Bhāgavatam* 10.21.19, therein one Gopi says to another, "My dear Gopis," she addresses the group of Gopis, "My dear Gopis, what auspicious activities must the flute have performed to enjoy the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips independently and leave only a taste for us Gopis, for whom that nectar is actually meant?

The forefathers of the flute, the bamboo tree, shed tears of pleasure. His mother, the river on whose bank the bamboo was born, feels jubilation, and therefore her blooming lotus flowers are standing like hair upon her body." Wow. Now, interestingly, there are other verses in Vedic literatures which, um, glorify the birth or origins of Kṛṣṇa's bamboo flute because the Gopis glorified it.

There for example, there's a verse found in the *Śat-ratna-bhāgavata*. The *Śat-ratna-bhāgavata* says, "She, uh, is Vamsi, flute. She is bansī, flute. This flute is a lady. Even though she is held forcibly by hands, and even though she is kissed by *paramour*, a paramour meaning the Supreme Lord, she is born from a great *vṛṁha*, here again, a great *vṛṁha*, a lineage of bamboo, and hence she immediately started crying out as soon as she was touched in this way." But again, the Gopis have few kind words for that flute.

There were a few there, but actually, they have very few kind words for the flute that Kṛṣṇa often puts to his lips to enliven the residents of Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Harishuri expresses the hearts of these Gopis in his own words.

Here, one Gopi is talking to another. "If anyone steals even a little bit of the property of another person, then the Supreme Lord will never accept such a person immersed in the sin of stealing. How is it possible then that the flute, which has stolen our property, the lower lip nectar of Kṛṣṇa, is not accepted by him, but also supported by him using his very hands?" He then composes another verse where the Gopis again chide, um, Kṛṣṇa's flute.

He writes, "O *murali* flute, for your residence, you have the lotuslike face of Kṛṣṇa. And for your drinking, you have his lip nectar. His lower lip is your resting bed. His soft thumbs are your raised pillows. Various fingers, ladies, are engaged in pressing your feet.

What greater happiness can there be?

Alas, O flute, despite all these comforts, why don't you ever go to sleep?" Gopis are chiding. "Why don't you ever go to sleep?

You're getting all this nectar. Get out of the way. Kṛṣṇa is ours. It's ours. It's ours." So, in this way, the Gopis used to show transcendental jealousy towards the flute. Now, according to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.1.365, Kṛṣṇa's flutes have three names.

He writes, "Veṇu, Muralī, Vaṁśī." There's the Veṇu, there's the Muralī, and there's the Vaṁśī. He gives the definition of a a a veṇu flute in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.1.366 as follows. He writes, "Veṇu is also named *pārikā*. It is twelve fingers long, it is as thick as a thumb, and has six apertures, meaning holes." A little technical, but we often say love is in the details.

So, veṇu is also named *pārikā*. It is twelve fingers long. It's as thick as the thumb and it has six apertures or holes. And in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.1.367, he gives the definition of the muralī flute. He writes, "She, we heard how the flute, she, she has a length of two palms.

She has an aperture, a hole for the mouth. She has four other apertures for *svasa*, meaning notes. She is known as *Alari* and she sounds very sweet." Now, his definition of Vaṁśī is found in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.1.368 to 369. It takes two verses to describe the Vaṁśī.

He writes, "She has eight apertures for *saras* or notes, each separated by a length of a half a finger. Two and a half, uh, fingers away from the final aperture is another aperture for the mouth. Like you see the flute holes and then some distance away, the person plays the flute in a bigger hole.

In this way, there are a total of nine apertures. The end having the mouth aperture is three fingers long, and the other end is four fingers long. She is known as *Vāmi* and scholars have measured it to be a total of seventeen fingers." So, there you go.

Now, we'll move on. The Ācāryas say that when Kṛṣṇa plays with flute in Vṛndāvana, he plays different melodies to, how do they put it, accomplish various purposes.

It's interesting. They write that one melody he plays causes demigods like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva to break their meditation and in doing so, they forget everything in astonishment. With this first melody, it's described Lord Ananta always sways his head as if in hypnosis.

His second melody makes the Yamunā River flow backward. A third melody makes the Moon stop moving. A fourth melody with his flute makes cows run to him and become stunned listening to the flute. A fifth melody, often referred to, you know, actually in this case, fifth a note attracts the Gopis and makes them come running to him.

The fifth note. A sixth melody makes stones melt. And interestingly, it says, creates the autumn season. It's very mystical. A sixth melody makes stones melt, at the same time, creates the autumn season. A seventh melody manifests all seasons. We often read there are six seasons in Vṛndāvana, they actually exist simultaneously, by the way.

And an eighth melody is meant exclusively for who?

For Śrīmatī Rāṇī. It is stated that it takes the form of her name and calls for her. Wow. A melody is meant exclusively for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and it takes the form of her name and calls for her. Kṛṣṇa calls Rādhā with a melody.

Her name, her name is a melody. So, that's all very interesting. A side note here is that Kṛṣṇa also has a flute named Mahananda. He has a flute named Mahananda, which it's described acts like a fish hook, which is said to capture the fish of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's heart and mind.

How sweet. Of course, as we've heard today, Rādhārāṇī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is not the only Gopi to be captivated by Kṛṣṇa's flute. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 21, uh, verse 144 states, "The vibration of his, Kṛṣṇa's, flute is just like a bird that creates a nest within the ears of all the Gopis and always remains prominent there, not allowing any other sound to enter their ears.

Indeed, the Gopis cannot hear anything else, nor are they able to concentrate on anything else, not even to give a suitable reply. Such are the effects of the vibration of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa's flute." All the Gopis. Now, in the purport to that verse, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī makes a very interesting comparison of the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute to the sound of the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahāmantra.

This is my favorite part. In the purport to that verse in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Śrīla Prabhupāda makes a very interesting comparison of the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute.

In your mind, just think, the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute and the sound of the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahāmantra.

Listen to this. He writes, "It's so nice. The vibration of Kṛṣṇa's flute is always prominent in the ears of the Gopis. Since their attention is fixed on Kṛṣṇa's flute, they cannot divert their minds to any other subject. In other words, a devotee who has heard the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute forgets to talk or hear of any other subject.

This vibration of Kṛṣṇa's flute is represented by the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahāmantra.

A serious devotee of the Lord who chants and hears this transcendental vibration, the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahāmantra, becomes so accustomed to it that he cannot divert his attention to any other subject matter not related to Kṛṣṇa's blissful characteristics and paraphernalia." I'd like to hear Kṛṣṇa's flute.

You just chant. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

Because Prabhupāda said this vibration of Kṛṣṇa, of Kṛṣṇa's flute, is represented by the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mahāmantra.

We are so blessed. So, once again, we can conclude that yes, Kṛṣṇa can attract living entities from all over the universe by playing on his flute, the subject matter of today's lecture. But he also captivates the living entities in the spiritual world, namely the residents of *Goloka-Vṛndāvana*, with his flute playing.

In this regard, we will share one short pastime before concluding. I actually told this pastime, I think, one or two years ago, but as Śrīla Prabhupāda would sometimes say, he'd use this phrase, "Once upon a time." Once upon a time, Kṛṣṇa had an idea to play his flute in a certain way so as to attract the Gopis to where he was standing in the forest.

He thought, "I will play a tune that will be bewildering and attract the Gopis, especially Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I just need to find the notes or the melody to which those girls are most susceptible and to which their senses will be attracted." So, it's described, he began experimenting with different, you know, flute melodies.

One day, he played a tune that, uh, stunned his cows, who gave up eating grass in favor of relishing the flute song with their ears and tasting the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa's face with their eyes. Tasting the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa's face with their eyes.

The next day, Kṛṣṇa tried another tune. This tune, uh, made all the forest animals and the birds stunned, and like the cows, they all just stood still as if, it's described, they had been confined within invisible cages. They had been confined within invisible cages.

On the third day, Kṛṣṇa's melody that he was experimenting with to attract the Gopis, it attracted the deer who flocked to him in mass, and mesmerized by his attractive appearance, they worshiped Kṛṣṇa with love-filled eyes. It's one way you can worship Kṛṣṇa, love-filled eyes.

Now, the Gopis eventually became aware of these, how could you put it, practice sessions, and they went and told Kṛṣṇa's mother. They said to her, "Oh, pious mother Yaśodā, your son, who is expert in the art of herding cows, has now invented various novel styles of flute playing.

Like, what's going on?" So, on the fourth day, Kṛṣṇa played another tune that attracted the demigoddesses in Svarga-loka, who were so bewildered by that sound, that melody, that their clothes loosened and their ornaments fell off their bodies.

And on the fifth day, Kṛṣṇa played a melody so powerful that all animate things became unconscious, and all inanimate things came to life. All inanimate things came to life. The Ācāryas say that still, the Gopis remained unaffected. But the River Yamunā was especially deeply moved.

Actually, when the Yamunā River heard the flute song of Kṛṣṇa, it's described, she stopped flowing and became completely bewildered. Her waves swelled and her waters trembled, then changing course, she flowed towards Kṛṣṇa and offered lotus flowers at his feet.

But alas, the Ācāryas say again, that melody somehow didn't attract the Gopis. So, Kṛṣṇa just kept trying new melodies day after day after day. That, it's described in one place, mesmerized the clouds overhead and Vṛndāvana mountains like Govardhana Hill, but not his beloved Gopis.

But you know, try, try again until you succeed. One day, finally, Kṛṣṇa found the proper melody for attracting the Gopis, and it's described, just in time too, because feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, the Gopis were becoming frantic, as he's all day practicing melodies, they weren't having his association, so they were becoming frantic to the point that their in-laws thought that their sons had married mad women, mad women.

But most disturbed, we can appreciate, we can appreciate of all the Gopis was Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, of course, who at one point was thinking that she just wants to become a bamboo flute to have Kṛṣṇa's association. She thought as follows: "The flute is fortunate because it does not have to be shy like a *gopī*.

Thus, it rests in Kṛṣṇa's hands and transforms the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips into beautiful music that causes the rivers to swell and the bamboo along the river banks to shed tears in the form of honey." The bamboo along the river's bank, thanks to shed tears in the form of honey. "I pray for the body of a bamboo flute.

I reject this body of a supposedly respectable woman. No other type of body can embellish what the flute does as Kṛṣṇa plays it with eagerness and affection. The day I become a flute, my consciousness will certainly cease, no doubt.

I will forget my identity, but Kṛṣṇa will remember me as the Gopi who became a piece of wood from suffering and separation from him." But Kṛṣṇa will remember me as the Gopi who became a piece of wood from suffering and separation from him.

But eventually, as we know, as per Yogamāyā's plan, Purnamasi, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and the Gopis' intense desire to be with Kṛṣṇa was fulfilled that day when Kṛṣṇa played his flute at Vrindavan and all the young Gopis came running and danced with the Lord in Rāsa-līlā for an entire night of Brahmā.

Right?

Kṛṣṇa. So, let's finish with the words of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda in his *Lalitā-mādhava*, 10.38, a very appropriate way to finish today. By his grace, he writes, "Dear Kṛṣṇa, the fragrance of the mellows of Your pastimes is spread throughout the forests of the glorious land of Vṛndāvana, which is surrounded by the sweetness of the district of Mathurā.

In the congenial atmosphere of that wonderful land, You enjoy Your pastimes with Your flute dancing on Your lips and surrounded by us, the Gopis, whose hearts are always enchanted by unpredictable ecstatic emotions." Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and thank you, Śrīla Harishuri, the revealer of the dawn.

We'll be back, uh, next Friday. I think we'll put another lecture together on, um, how Kṛṣṇa can attract everyone in the universe with his flute playing and beyond, as we learned today. So, thank you. Praṇati, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Mayānanda, Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa, glorifies.