Hare Krishna everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa. Namaste. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be number four, in which we will continue our discussion on the fourth quality of Kṛṣṇa that distinguishes Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa, namely rūpa-mādhurī, His extraordinary beauty. This will be part three about Kṛṣṇa's hair.

So, the Pāñcāla Mahābhāṣya, an ancient Sanskrit scripture written by the sage Patañjali, describes different ways that Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd men of Vraja would tie their hair. He lists the ways as follows:

Jaṭi, which means twisted hair.

Keśa-cūḍā, which means long knotted hair in the form of a bun that tilts to the side in one direction on one's head. And I was reading that, in time, this keśa-cūḍā evolved into the shape of a crown called jūra, which actually is presently worn by the Deities of Govinda, Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana, and Rādhā-Ramaṇa in Vṛndāvana every Ekādaśī. You can check it out.

Then śikhī or muṇḍī. It's a tuft of hair worn on the crown of the head, and this hairstyle is worn by Kṛṣṇa when He plays wrestling games with the gopīs in Vṛndāvana or when He goes for a sacred bath in the Yamunā.

Then keśa or kākapakṣa, a hairstyle of letting one's hair hang down loosely around one's shoulders.

Now, in Vraja's oral tradition, it is said that when Kṛṣṇa was in Vraja 5,000 years ago, before leaving for Mathurā, He never wore pādukās, or wooden shoes, He never wore stitched clothes, and He never cut His hair.

The famous poet Sūrdāsa, one of our favorite poets, refers to this fact in one of his poems, where Kṛṣṇa is addressing His mother specifically about His hair. He says:

"Oh Mother, when will my braid grow longer? You said that by drinking milk it would make my braid grow longer, but nothing actually helps in growing my hair. But look at Daujī, my elder brother. He has a braid very big and very long, like a snake, while mine remains very small and thin."

Sūrdāsa says Yaśodā embraced little Kṛṣṇa and, smiling, said, "My dear son, may the goddess of hair give you nice long thick hair. My dear son, may the goddess of hair give you nice long thick hair."

Yes.

So, it's interesting that in ancient times, I was reading, in Vedic culture the cutting of hair for all males was only prescribed on a few occasions, which were as follows:

Cūḍākaraṇa-saṁskāra, shaving the head of a male child a few months after he's born.

Upanayana-saṁskāra, shaving the head of a boy when he accepts the sacred thread in guru-kula.

Samāvartana-saṁskāra, cutting the hair short—not necessarily shaved clean, but cutting the hair short—when the boy graduates from gurukula and enters into household life. Actually, he's not a boy any longer; he's 25 years of age.

Then antyeṣṭi-saṁskāra, meaning shaving the head when one's parents have died.

Now, if a boy or a man shaved his head at any other time, it was considered—let me remember—defaming, shameful, low-class, and devoid of manliness.

Of course, throughout Vedic history, this policy of growing one's hair long was not relevant in a number of spiritual traditions in India where men shave their heads, like the followers of Śaṅkarācārya, Lord Buddha, Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, and, of course, in our Gauḍīya tradition as well.

Just yesterday I was reading in Śrīla Prabhupāda-līlāmṛta, Chapter 22, entitled "Swami Invites the Hippies," and I'll quote here:

"One day Śrīla Prabhupāda asked Steve to shave his long hair and beard. But Steve protested, 'Śrīla Prabhupāda, why do you want me to shave my head? Kṛṣṇa had long hair, Rāma had long hair, Lord Caitanya had long hair, and Christ had long hair. Why should I shave my head?'

And Prabhupāda replied, 'Because now you are following me.'"

Pointing to a painting of the Six Gosvāmīs on the wall, Prabhupāda smiled and said, "You should shave your head like that. You should shave your head like that."

Of course, we know in Vedic culture ladies didn't shave their heads. There are some exceptions, of course, and one exception is the tradition of ladies shaving their heads as a sacrifice when visiting the temple of Balajī Veṅkaṭeśvara in Tirupati, in South India. It's a tradition that continues even to the present day. I've seen that.

But in general, ladies didn't shave their heads.

And I was remembering one time a male disciple asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, why don't the girls in our movement shave their heads?"

And Prabhupāda smiled and said, "Because we want them to look beautiful for Kṛṣṇa."

Prabhupāda said, "Because we want them to look beautiful for Kṛṣṇa."

Now, while researching for this lecture, I came across a poem by the poet Hari Rāma Vyāsa where he gives a very interesting description of Kṛṣṇa's hair. Really interesting.

He writes:

"The tangles of banyan trees are less than the tangles of gaṇanā-māyā. The tangles of gaṇanā are less than the tangles of illusion. The tangles of illusion are less than the tangles of ignorance. The tangles of ignorance are less than the tangles of karma. The tangles of karma are less than the tangles of māyā. The tangles of māyā are less than the tangles of the heavenly worlds. The tangles of the heavenly worlds are less than the tangles of Svarga, the topmost heavenly planets. The tangles of the heavens are less than the tangles of the Gandharvas' music. The tangles of the Gandharvas' music are less than the tangles of Kṛṣṇa's dances. The tangles of Kṛṣṇa's dances are less than the tangles of Vraja's kuñjas. The tangles of Vraja's kuñjas are less than the tangles of the hearts of the Vraja gopīs. But the tangles of the hearts of the gopīs are less than the tangles of Kṛṣṇa's tangled hair, less than the tangles of Kṛṣṇa's tangled hair."

The poet Hari Rāma Vyāsa says:

"May my mind never get disentangled from the tangles of Kṛṣṇa's hair."

What a conclusion.

"May my mind never get disentangled from the tangles of Kṛṣṇa's hair."

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, let us conclude today with another poem by Hari Rāma Vyāsa describing Kṛṣṇa's hair as follows. It's very beautiful.

"O my sakhī, look at the beautiful hair of Rādhā-vallabha. His untied loose hair is the life of Gokula. The coiled curls of His hair are the clutches imprisoning our hearts. The shine of His black hair makes His complexion less dark. The fragrance of His hair is a life source of jasmine flowers blooming at night."

The poet Hari Rāma Vyāsa says:

"When will that day come when I will see the hair of Kṛṣṇa flowing in the air of Vṛndāvana? When will that day come when I will see the hair of Kṛṣṇa flowing in the air of Vṛndāvana?"

Thank you to that poet.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, that's it for today. Actually, we have enough information to have one more class about Kṛṣṇa's hair—four classes just on Kṛṣṇa's hair.

So, thank you. See you next Friday.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Hare Kṛṣṇa.
