Hari Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Caitanya Viṣṇupada Kṛṣṇa-pāśraya Śrīmatī Bhaktivedanta Svāmī Mahārāja, namaste Gaurāṅgī-niśā.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our musings on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 152, in which we will continue our discussions on Kṛṣṇa's disguises. In this lecture, we will discuss another very interesting disguise that Kṛṣṇa assumed, and that is of a female doctor.

A female doctor. It's really interesting. It's from Śrī Viṣṇucakra Ṭhākura's book entitled *Chamatkara Chandrika*. So, one day in Yavat, Jāṭilā, Rādhārāṇī's mother-in-law, told her daughter, Kauṭilā, "The attachment Rādhā has for Kṛṣṇa is increasing day by day. By this, our family will be shamed.

So, I have a plan by which they cannot meet each other anymore. I've decided to keep my daughter-in-law, Śrīmatī, inside the house. I will not allow her to go to Pavana Sarovara nor to the Yamunā for taking bath, and I will even stop her going to the forest for Surya Puja." So, Kauṭilā, her daughter, replied, "Mother, you may be able to stop all these outings, but what about when Rādhā goes to your house to cook for Kṛṣṇa every day?

She goes to cook breakfast." So, Jāṭilā replied, "You go and tell Yaśodā that our Rādhā will not be able to come to her house anymore to cook for Kṛṣṇa. Tell her if she wants to feed Kṛṣṇa food cooked by Rādhā, then it must be cooked in our house.

It must be cooked in our house. The gopīs can come daily and take the food to Yaśodā's house." So that was the plan. So, Kauṭilā went to Nanagram and informed mother of Jāṭilā's decision, and from that day on, Rādhā was not allowed to leave her house, which meant that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were unable to meet.

Oh my gosh. Now, being deprived of seeing Kṛṣṇa, you can imagine Rādhārāṇī developed a fever. What type of fever?

A fever of separation. A very high fever of separation. And trying to stop this fever, her sakhīs had her sleep on cool lotus leaves. But immediately the leaves would dry up and turn to powder. Then they smeared Śrīmatī's body with sandalwood pulp and camphor.

But still, due to the excessive heat of the fever, it all dried very quickly on her body. It didn't work. So, by this time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī lay motionless on her bed and would not even respond when someone addressed her.

Very deep mode of separation. Now, meanwhile, in Nandagram, Kṛṣṇa ate food cooked by Rohiṇī, but he was unsatisfied. And when mother Yaśodā saw that Kṛṣṇa was not eating to his full satisfaction because the food was not cooked by Rādhārāṇī, she sent Deniṣṭhā, the gopī Deniṣṭhā, to Yavat to bring some cakes cooked by Rādhārāṇī.

So, when Deniṣṭhā arrived at Śrīmatī's home and saw Rādhārāṇī lying on her bed, she said to Lalitā, who always accompanies Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, "Because Rādhikā has not come to Yaśodā's house to cook for Kṛṣṇa, Rohiṇī Devī is cooking, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not satisfied.

So, mother has sent me to bring some sweets and cakes cooked by Śrīmatī Rādhā." Now, of course, Rādhā was nearby, and when she heard this, she immediately got out of bed and began preparing many varieties of cakes and sweets with great energy and enthusiasm.

And she said to Deniṣṭhā, "Being separated from Kṛṣṇa, being deprived of His darśana and service, I have been suffering so much." So, Deniṣṭhā said, "As you have been suffering in separation from Kṛṣṇa due to your inability to see Him, so in the same way, He has suffered, deprived of your darśana and the food cooked by you, the source of his suffering." So, very soon, because there was a plan in motion here, she prepared sweets.

And as Deniṣṭhā prepared to leave, she whispered quietly in Rādhikā's ear. She said, "I have an idea. Pretend that you have been bitten by a snake, and I will bring Kṛṣṇa here disguised as a female snake charmer, or like a snake doctor.

Her name will be Vidyāvalī, Vidyāvalī. And when she comes here, then both of you shall meet. Finally, you'll be able to meet. And I will discuss this plan with Viśākhā and the gopī named Nandimukhī." So, Deniṣṭhā then departed for Nandagram, where she gave all these delicious preparations to Yaśodā for Kṛṣṇa's pleasure.

Now the plot unfolds. Transcendental pastimes, obviously all arranged by Pūrṇamāsī Devī. So, later on, early in the evening time, back at Yavat, Viśākhā, who's always with Rādhārāṇī as well, suddenly rushed towards Jāṭilā and started rolling on the ground loudly shouting out while weeping false tears.

So, surprised Jāṭilā asked, "My child, what has happened?

Tell me." So, Viśākhā said, "Dear mother, your daughter-in-law, Śrīmatī Rādhā, has been bitten by a snake." So, shocked Jāṭilā said, "Where and how was she bitten?" So, Viśākhā replied, "The snake was hiding at the base of a plum tree in the garden.

Rādhā saw the jewel on its head glittering through the leaves, and she extended her hand to take it when the snake suddenly bit her." So, when Jāṭilā heard this, she screamed, "Alas, alas!

A thunderbolt has struck me on the head!" and she immediately ran to Śrīmatī's bedroom and saw her lying on the ground, shaking and moaning.

So, Jāṭilā frantically called her daughter Kauṭilā and said, "Daughter, go quickly to the cow shed and bring your brother Abhimanyu, husband of Rādhārāṇī. Then go and fetch a snakebite doctor. By the chanting of his mantras, my daughter-in-law will be freed from the effects of the poison." So, then Jāṭilā said to Rādhā, "My dear daughter, how are you feeling?" So, very weakly, Rādhā replied, "My whole body is burning due to the heavy poison from the snake.

I'm not able to talk much, but I beg you not to call any man to treat me. Please, I'm a married woman, and I cannot be touched by any man other than my husband. If any man touches me, I will die." So, Jāṭilā said, "But my dear, at this dangerous time, it is not proper to consider these rules.

In Śāstra, it has been declared that for the purpose of medicine, one can even drink wine. For the purpose of medicine, one can even drink wine. When this kind of instruction is there in the scripture, why be so concerned that a man doctor will touch you to cure you?" Then, one lady, a neighbor of Jāṭilā's, who had come to see what all the fuss was about, said to Jāṭilā, "Why are you so worried?

Just call Kṛṣṇa, who has subdued the most poisonous snake, Kāliya. He knows all kinds of mantra, tantra, mantra, tantra. If He comes, then your daughter-in-law will be cured immediately." So, of course, Rādhā is there, and when she heard this, she pretended, because the plot is unfolding.

She pretended to be very angry and said, "I have been blamed for being unchaste, and my character is in question because of this person Kṛṣṇa. If I see Him, it will cause me more pain than the snakebite. What to speak if He touches me?

If He enters the house, I shall die. Those who are proposing to bring Him, I consider my life-killing enemies. Don't bring Him as a doctor, I'll consider it my life-killing enemy." So, then Jāṭilā told Lalitā and the other sakhīs, "Please stay with Rādhā.

I'm going to Pūrṇamāsī Devī, who is all-knowing. I will ask her how to solve this problem." Jāṭilā left to meet with Pūrṇamāsī. Now, by divine arrangement, at that time, the gopī Nandimukhī was visiting Pūrṇamāsī. So, when Jāṭilā arrived, she said to Nandimukhī, "You have learned all kinds of scriptures from your father, I have heard.

Do you know the process for removing poison from a body?

My daughter-in-law, Śrīmatī Rādhā, has been bitten by a snake." So, Nandimukhī replied, "Sorry, I... I... I don't know that, but my younger sister, Vidyāvalī, has learned mantras for curing snake bites. She is visiting our father's house in Mathurā." Now, when Jāṭilā heard this, she immediately fell at the feet of Nandimukhī.

And she said, "I humbly offer my obeisances to you and beg you to come to my house in Yavat along with your younger sister, Vidyāvalī. Let us go to your house now and take her with us immediately." Now, at this point, Kṛṣṇa was waiting in Nandimukhī's house, dressed as Vidyāvalī.

That was their plan. He's taken the dress of a female doctor, a snake doctor, Vidyāvalī, the so-called sister of Nandimukhī, who knew the science of curing snake bites. And so, accompanied by Jāṭilā and Kauṭilā, Nandimukhī hurried back to her house to fetch Vidyāvalī, her sister.

Entering the house, she explained the situation to Vidyāvalī and concluded, saying, "Please go at once with these two ladies and cure Śrīmatī Rādhā of her snake bite." Now, casting a shy glance at Jāṭilā and Kauṭilā, Vidyāvalī, Kṛṣṇa disguised, said, "My father-in-law's family is very aristocratic, and I am now a housewife in that family.

How can I go to another's house?

My family's reputation will be stained." So, Jāṭilā fell at the feet of Vidyāvalī and begged her to return to Yavat with them. But Vidyāvalī said, "You do not know the system of our Brahmanical family. In your cowherd family, ladies move freely from house to house.

But in our Brahmanical families, ladies do not go to other homes unaccompanied or uninvited. Besides, besides, I have heard that the ruler of this land, Nanda Mahārāja, has a very wicked and naughty son. He has a very bad character and attracts any beautiful lady he sees.

I'm very afraid of him, and I dare not go out of the house in this area." Then she paused for a moment and said, "However, I have now come to your house, and whatever you ask of me, I'm actually bound to do so.

If my going to Yavat will save the life of this girl, then I must go. But you must accompany me, Nandimukhī. Only then I will go." So, Nandimukhī replied, "Do not be concerned. We will accompany you to Yavat." Now, on the way, Vidyāvalī said to Jāṭilā, "I have memorized all the mantras for removing poisons.

And when this mantra is chanted upon a betel leaf and chewed, it becomes a very powerful medicine. As soon as your daughter-in-law eats that leaf that I have chewed, immediately all the poison will be removed. But will your daughter eat that which is chewed by me?" The doctor Kṛṣṇa.

Jāṭilā said, "My daughter is... very respectful to Brahmanas. She will never refuse to eat the remnants of a Brahmana. Rather, she will eat it with great devotion and respect." Wow. So, when all of them reached Jāṭilā's house, Jāṭilā and Abhimanyu both washed the feet of Vidyāvalī, Kṛṣṇa in disguise, sprinkling the remnants on Rādhā's head and holding it to her mouth to drink.

So, Jāṭilā told Rādhā, "I have brought with me the most powerful expert in removing snake poison. She's the younger sister of Nandimukhī. Her name is Vidyāvalī. She will offer you betel nut chewed by her. Please take it with love and devotion without any hesitation.

Then you will be cured immediately." So, then Jāṭilā brought Vidyāvalī to Rādhārāṇī's bedroom, and Vidyāvalī saw that Rādhā had covered her whole body with a cloth. So, she told Jāṭilā to uncover Rādhā so she could chant the mantra upon her whole body.

Then she told Jāṭilā, "Vidyāvalī, I will need to check her body to see which area the poison has gone in." Then Kṛṣṇa, disguised as Vidyāvalī, started to chant different mantras, touching the body of Śrīmatī Rādhā as she chanted. Then, turning to Jāṭilā, she said, "After chanting this very powerful mantra and touching her body, I see the poison has not left her.

This is very surprising." So, Jāṭilā said to Vidyāvalī, "Please give her the betel leaf that you have chewed. You told me it was the most potent cure. Please do this now." So, Vidyāvalī took one betel leaf and, making a show of chanting some mantra over it, and after chewing it, gave it to Śrīmatī Rādhā.

And after some time, Vidyāvalī turned again to Jāṭilā and said, "Even after giving her the chewed betel leaf, still the poison has not left her body." So, now Jāṭilā is really anxious. So, she said, "What to do then?

What to do?" So, Vidyāvalī hesitated, then she said, "Well, there's one more mantra.

It's the most powerful, but it must be chanted alone in a secluded place with the patient. Not everyone can hear this mantra. It's a special mantra that will actually bring forth the snake who bit her. Wow. That snake will then remove the poison from your daughter's body.

If someone is bitten by the snake, we can see now no mantra can save them. Only the snake himself can save them. So, all of you, please sit outside, and I will call the snake by mantra. Do not fear.

I will save your daughter-in-law. I require only three hours, then she will be cured. Three hours alone." So, everyone left the room and sat silently outside the door. And for some hours, they heard nothing. And then Vidyāvalī began an imaginary dialogue between her and the snake.

Wow. An imaginary dialogue between her and the snake. Speaking loudly, she, Kṛṣṇa disguised, said, "Oh, king of all snakes, where have you come from?" Then, in the voice of the snake, Vidyāvalī said, "I have come from Kailāśa." So, obviously, the snake's present now.

So, Vidyāvalī asked, "Why have you come here?

Who has sent you?" The snake replied, "I have come on the order of Lord Śiva to eat Abhimanyu, the son of Jāṭilā." So, Vidyāvalī asked, "What offense did Abhimanyu commit to warrant such an instruction from Lord Śiva?" So, the snake said, "Abhimanyu has committed no offense, but his mother, Jāṭilā, has committed two offenses." So, Vidyāvalī said, "If his mother has committed offenses, then instead of biting her, why did you bite faultless Rādhā?

Now, bear in mind, outside the door, others are listening." So, the snake said, "Due to the blessings of Durvāsā Muni and by the strength of her chastity, Rādhā's husband, Abhimanyu, can never be killed. But if she is killed, then her husband can be killed easily.

And when both her son and daughter-in-law have died, then Jāṭilā will die from the pain of separation." So, Vidyāvalī said, "Oh, king of the snakes, what kind of grave offense has the old lady committed to warrant such a reaction?" So, the snake replied, "Jāṭilā is making false accusations about Kṛṣṇa all over Vṛndāvana.

Also, she is preventing Śrīmatī Rādhā from going to Nanda Bhavan to cook for Kṛṣṇa." Hearing this conversation from outside the room, Jāṭilā called out, "Oh, Vidyāvalī, I beg you, please pacify this king of snakes. Subdue his anger. I will never again speak badly of Kṛṣṇa, and I will never prevent Śrīmatī Rādhā from going to Nandagram to cook for Him.

Let her go daily to Nanda Mahārāja's house. Please excuse me for my offenses. Everyone knows me as a mad woman. My daughter Kauṭilā is also ill-minded and is always unnecessarily accusing Rādhā of bad character. Please excuse both of us for our offenses." And when Kauṭilā, Jāṭilā's daughter, heard her mother speaking to Vidyāvalī in this way, she also prayed, "Oh, snake king, please do not bite my brother Abhimanyu.

I will never again give any trouble to my sister-in-law, Śrīmatī Rādhā. I will never stop her from leaving the house. Let her go wherever she wishes according to her desires." And when Jāṭilā and Kauṭilā spoke like this, the snake king said, "Hear me, oh women of Yavat. Śrīmatī Rādhā is the most chaste lady.

She is the crest jewel of all chaste ladies. Now, you both promise me, with your hands on Abhimanyu, that you accept Śrīmatī Rādhā as the crest jewel of all chaste ladies, as per my verdict." And Jāṭilā immediately said, "Oh, snake king, I have full faith in your words.

From this day on, I will never check Śrīmatī's movements. I beg that you please bless my son Abhimanyu and his wife to have a long life together." So, the snake, the imaginary snake, said, "Oh, dear old lady, now I am pleased with you.

I am taking back the poison from your daughter-in-law's body, and then I shall return to Kailāśa. But I leave you with this warning: if you or your daughter Kauṭilā give a bad name to Kṛṣṇa and stop Rādhā from going to Nanda Mahārāja's home, then on that day, I will return from Kailāśa and bite your son and daughter-in-law." So, after saying this, the snake disappeared.

Then declared loudly, "Śrīmatī Rādhā is cured. Śrīmatī Rādhā is cured. Śrīmatī Rādhā is cured." And everyone opened the door and came inside and went straight to see to check if Rādhā was cured. So, Rādhā told them, "It seems there's no trace of poison.

I'm cured." And everyone offered their humble respects to Vidyāvalī, the snake doctor, and said to her, "Dear Vidyāvalī, your knowledge of removing snake poison is so amazing. You are glorious, and you have become even more glorious by saving Śrīmatī Rādhā's life.

Your life is now blessed." Then, everyone present told Jāṭilā, "Vidyāvalī has saved the life of your daughter-in-law. You should take a necklace from the neck of Śrīmatī Rādhā and offer it to Vidyāvalī as a humble gift." So, Jāṭilā, enamored by Vidyāvalī, she said, "What is this talk of one mere necklace?

All the ornaments of Śrīmatī Rādhā should be offered to Vidyāvalī." Then she said to Rādhā, "My dear daughter, Vidyāvalī has saved you from death. You should personally give her all your ornaments with your own hand. Do not fear. Yaśodā and your mother Kiśorī will give you more ornaments to replace these." Then she told Vidyāvalī, "My daughter-in-law will decorate you with all her ornaments.

Please do not deny her and kindly accept." So, Rādhārāṇī happily removed all her ornaments and decorated Kṛṣṇa in the form of Vidyāvalī. Put it, make it very clear. And at that moment, Śrīmatī Rādhā was thinking that she was so fortunate that she could have Kṛṣṇa's association in private for all those hours together with the doctor, all those hours, and she was able later to decorate Him in front of all those who were her greatest obstacles in meeting with Kṛṣṇa.

Jāṭilā and Kauṭilā, they had approved it all. And after receiving the ornaments, Vidyāvalī said to Jāṭilā, "Now, dear mother, it is after midnight. May we two sisters have your permission to return to our home?" And Jāṭilā said, "Oh, Nandimukhī, Vidyāvalī, two sisters, you are both great ladies from an aristocratic family.

How can you go out in the middle of the night?

Please sleep happily in the house of Śrīmatī Rādhā, and tomorrow morning you can go back to your house." So, Nandimukhī said, "Dear mother, of course, we will follow your order, but we can perceive to some degree that the influence of the poison has not fully left Śrīmatī Rādhā's body.

We've concluded it would be wise that at least for one night, Vidyāvalī stay with your daughter-in-law." Then both Jāṭilā and Kauṭilā said, "Yes, Nandimukhī, let your sister Vidyāvalī sleep upstairs on the flower bed along with our Śrīmatī Rādhā." And so, by the order of Jāṭilā, Kṛṣṇa and Vidyāvalī rested soundly that night on a bed of fragrant flowers.

Krishna.

Such a wonderful pastime. I love the research and I love sharing it with you. Both the speaker and the audience are purified with Kṛṣṇa-kathā. Actually, I'm back in Vṛndāvana.

Our Kārtika finished, and our Kārtika vows have finished. All 350 of us scattered to different parts of the world, but I'm most blessed to be back in our home, eternal home, of Śrī Dhāma and Dāmodara. So, more disguise pastimes.

It's quite amazing, actually. We'll be back uh next Friday. Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn.

Thank you. Hare kṛṣṇa. [music] [music]