Hari Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our ongoing lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Shri Vrindavan Dham.

Om Vishnu Padaya Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya Ashtottara Shatashata Sri Sri Mad Bhagavatapadacharya Goswami Sri Sri Mad Prabhupada. Glorious to Prabhupada. Today we continue our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 160 and the final episode on the disguises that Radha and Krishna employ in their pastimes.

In this episode, we will hear a beautiful lila in which Krishna disguises himself as a tax collector.

I was thinking researching and sharing all these beautiful pastimes with all of you has been a really blissful journey. Krishna's disguises are, as we've seen, filled with so many surprises.

Actually, the Sanskrit word *utkantha* refers to deep curiosity and eager longing. And I pray that these pastimes of disguise have awakened within you that curiosity and the desire to know more and more about our beloved Krishna.

Acharyas have been so kind and merciful, carefully recording these detailed pastimes of disguise for our benefit. In particular, I would like today to offer our heartfelt gratitude and respects to Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī, by whose mercy we were able to relish quite a number of these disguised pastimes.

And the following prayer is by the Vrajavabsi poet Vyāsadāsa, glorifying Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī. He writes, "Śrī Jīva is my life; I am his servant, and he is my master. The dust of his lotus feet blossoms the flower of devotion in everyone's heart.

In the age of Kali, he is the son who brightens the whole world. His writings mark the hearts of the devotees with endless love for the Divine Couple. Every tree, every vine, and every leaf in Vṛndāvana glorifies him.

His hands composed the writings about the *kāmas*, the *tattvas*, *siddhānta*, *daśana*, *rasa*, *vakrana*, as well as *kāvya* in his works. All those writings of his untie the knots of doubts in the heart. Vyāsa sings Śrī Jīva's glories, the only refuge of his Śrīla.

I thank that poet. So, the following pastime is adapted from *Dāna-keli-kaumudī* by Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī and *Dāna-cintāmaṇi* by Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Goswāmī, as well as *loka-cāra*, meaning local traditions. So, one day, news spread throughout Vṛndāvana that Vasudeva, Krishna's father, had arranged to engage Mūri Muni and other Brahmanas in performing a fire sacrifice for the welfare of his two sons, Krishna and Balarāma, and the sacrifice was to take place at Govinda-kuṇḍa.

Now, the Brahmanas announced that anyone who donated ghee for the sacred fire would be blessed by the Yoga-purusha, Lord Vishnu, the enjoyer of sacrifices. Now, hearing this, a parrot named Śuka-mādhavī carried this news to Vṛndāvan-eśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was then sitting beside Rādhā-kuṇḍa with her gopī friends, enjoying a conversation about Krishna.

And when Śrīmatī heard that all the residents of Vṛndāvana were welcome to attend the sacrifice, she became delighted.

Why?

Because it meant an opportunity to see her beloved Krishna.

So she and her friends set out at once for Govinda-kuṇḍa, carrying golden pots of ghee upon their heads. And meanwhile, another parrot named Vicakṣaṇa, one of whom we always know him as Krishna's spy, he flew to Krishna and reported, "A group of cowherd girls was coming toward Govinda-kuṇḍa, led by Śrīmatī." And as soon as Krishna heard this, he decided to intercept the gopīs at Govardhan Hill.

So he and his cowherd friends, they rushed there. And what did they do?

They quickly set up a small toll station beside the path where the gopīs would take. And they all – it's funny – they all dressed themselves as customs officials, with Krishna, of course, playing the part of the chief tax collector.

Krishna was the chief tax collector, and it's described by the Acharyas that Krishna's outfit was irresistible.

An orange *dhoti* tied with a red belt, a yellow shawl, a blue turban, and a vaijayantī garland. Vaijayantī garland means a garland made of five different types of flowers that goes down to the ankles. His ankle bells, rings, necklaces, and bracelets, as described, all sparkled as he moved.

And when Subala placed a solid gold collector's staff in Krishna's hand, Madhumangal exclaimed, "That does it, my friend.

You look perfect. That does it, my friend, to Krishna.

You look perfect." So, soon enough, the gopīs appeared, while balancing their pots of ghee upon their heads, each pot meant for the fire sacrifice at Govinda-kuṇḍa. And as they approached the toll station that the boys had set up, Vṛndā Devī pointed towards Krishna and said to her friends, "Oh gopīs, I have seen Krishna many times before, but have never seen him dressed in such an adorable way, revealing such nectarian beauty." And while drawing closer, the girls shyly covered their faces and very carefully steadied the heavy pots of ghee on their heads.

Then the cowherd boy Subala, he called out, "Hey, gopīs, what are you carrying in those pots?

And where are you going?" But before the gopīs could reply, Krishna stepped forward and blocked their path and famously said, "Dear girls, endowed with youthful beauty, carrying pots of ghee upon your heads, know that we are representatives of King Daśaratha, who claims this forest.

Either pay tax for using this road, or take another route to your destination." And as Krishna spoke, ecstatic symptoms of love spontaneously arose in Śrīmatī's heart, born simply from the bliss of seeing him.

Now, Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī writes that the sight of these ecstasies in Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī were as enchanting to Krishna as a sweet mixture of yogurt, rock candy, ghee, honey, black pepper, camphor, and cardamom, all blended together.

And he continues, "May the sight of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's *kilāñcita-kilāñcita* ecstasy, like a bouquet of flowers, bring good fortune to you all." Thank you, Swami. Now, when Krishna blocked Śrīmatī's way to the *dhana-gati* (path of wealth), laughter stirred within her heart.

Her eyes grew bright, and fresh tears flowed, reeking them. Due to her sweet relationship with Krishna, her eyes were full of, it's described, eagerness.

And when her crying subsided, she appeared even more beautiful. This is the poetry of the Acharyas. Agitated by tears, Rādhā's eyes were tinged with this reddish-pink color, like the eastern horizon at sunrise. Her lips moved with jubilation and loving desire.

Her eyebrows curved, and her lotuslike face carried a gentle smile. And seeing Rādhā's face exhibit such emotion, Krishna himself felt a million times happier than when he embraced her.

Wow. So, from this, we can understand that his happiness is not mundane. Yet, in spite of all these ecstasies, Krishna remained determined to extract a toll.

He said to Rādhārāṇī, "Oh, beautiful one, at this outpost, not only your milk products, but your valuable youth, beauty, feminine pride, and even your ghee are all subject to tax." That's a very important part of this pastime. He said to Rādhārāṇī, "Oh, beautiful one, at this outpost, not only your milk products, but your valuable youth, your beauty, your feminine pride, and even your ghee are all subject to tax." So, Rādhā, she turned towards Krishna and replied sharply.

It's described, "How can a black snake enchant its enemy, the *śimśumāra*?

Better for such a snake to remain safely hidden at home rather than to venture out like this." Sharp words. Hearing that, Krishna snapped, "Enough of this nonsense!" And he grabbed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's wrist.

And at once, Lalitā cried out, "Krishna, you rascal!

Take your hands off this goddess at once!" And when Krishna quickly released Rādhā's hand, Lalitā continued, "Krishna, we have carefully bathed, anointed, and dressed our princess for the sacrifice taking place at Govinda-kuṇḍa, and now you want to defile her purity with the contaminating touch of your hands.

Away with you!" She's very strong.

And for a moment, it's described, Krishna seemed bewildered, unsure what to do next.

When suddenly, a beautiful green parrot flew onto Krishna's shoulder and whispered, "Oh friend, just flatter Śrīmatī with sweet words and then quickly collect your toll." So, hearing this, Krishna placed his left hand on his hip and smiled, saying, "Dear Śrīmatī, please stand here for a moment while my assistant calculates the taxes you owe for passing this way.

Do not quarrel. Make things easier for yourself and your friends and simply pay the toll." Then Krishna presented Rādhārāṇī with a plate of beautifully wrapped *tambūla* and said, "Sir, please take one or more as you like.

Sweeten your lovely mouth while you wait." Sweeten your lovely mouth while you wait. Then, for the next half hour, it's described, Krishna listed one by one all the milk products to be taxed.

And then, at last, he presented Rādhārāṇī with a special list: the value of her feminine charms. This was the list. It was the value of her feminine charms, each to be taxed accordingly. And this list of her feminine charms that were to be taxed declared, first of all, that Rādhārāṇī's face, like 100,000 full moons, was valued at 100,000 jeweled-studded mirrors.

Then Krishna said, "So arrange them quickly. 100,000 jeweled-studded mirrors." Then he added, "The arrow of your sidelong glance is valued at 1 million sapphire arrows.

So please arrange that tax at once for all." How are they going to do that?

And for the beauty of your two eyes, arrange a tax of 1 million emerald lotus flowers. And for the beauty of your chin, what's the tax?

Arrange thousands of precious gems. And for your beautiful forehead, I value it at 100,000 moonstones. And I want those today. And finally, he came to her – I love this part – he came to her auspicious name, Śrīmatī. He wants to tax her name.

He came to her auspicious name, Śrīmatī. And after much thought, Krishna said softly, "My dear Rādhā, the tax on your name is this: You must give me the splendid jewel of our playful pastimes.

You must give me the splendid jewel of our playful pastimes." That's the tax on Śrīmatī's name. Then, turning to the gopīs, Krishna declared, "Dear gopīs, for every pot of ghee meant for sacrifice at Govinda-kuṇḍa, each one of you must pay five palmfuls of sparkling diamonds." At this, Lalitā confronted him, "Who in Braja, Krishna, has ever heard of a tax on ghee?

This is a sham devised by the king of bandits to treat innocent girls." And Krishna replied, "If the great King Daśaratha hears that you have refused to pay the toll, he will become very angry and punish you severely, and then do not blame me for whatever suffering he inflicts." And as the argument, you know, they say, rose and fell, rose and fell, up and down, graceful Pūrṇamāsī, whom Rūpa Goswāmī describes as soothing as the moon, suddenly appeared in their midst.

Of course, she arranges all these pastimes, and now she's personally coming in. And with that, both boys and girls, cowherd boys and cowherd girls, everyone stopped and offered her their respects. Then Rādhā, smiling, said, "Oh mother Pūrṇamāsī, now that you have arrived, by God's grace, we can reach the far shore of this ocean of suffering." So then Pūrṇamāsī turned to Krishna and said, "Hari, why trouble yourself today with this petty toll business?

Allow these beautiful girls to proceed and deliver their ghee pots to the auspicious sacrifice at Govinda-kuṇḍa. Tomorrow, they can meet you at a nearby lake at that time, pay their toll in full, beginning with Śrīmatī." So, satisfied with this new arrangement, Krishna bowed his head in agreement, and he permitted the gopīs to pass, because the next day he'd get his taxes.

Thus, Śrīmatī and the gopīs proceeded as they had wanted to do from early morning to Govinda-kuṇḍa. But Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was the last to leave. And Rūpa Goswāmī writes so beautifully that as she did so, she gracefully turned her neck to gaze upon Krishna from the corner of her eyes, while her entire body tossed in the waves of the ocean of *amora's* love.

And for as long as the gopīs were still visible, the greedy bumblebees of Krishna's eyes drank the sweet honey of their faces.

So, his mother Pūrṇamāsī had suggested the gopīs met Krishna and his friends the next day to pay their tax, but it did not go exactly as the boys had hoped.

The place where they were to meet was a lake called, or is a lake called, Dāna-nartana-kuṇḍa. It's at the base of Govardhan. Where actually Krishna had stopped the girls.

It lay in a forested area filled with pleasant trees, fragrant flowers, and beautiful birds. And the Acharyas described very beautifully how cuckoos, intoxicated by nectar, warbled sweetly. Proud peacocks danced, and green parrots chattered as they pecked at ripen fruit.

Like that, it's described as they pecked at ripen fruit. But the gopī friends, her gopīs, Rādhārāṇī were furious that the day before Krishna had demanded tax from their queen in her own kingdom, the queen of Vṛndāvana.

So, all these girls met together and devised a plan to give Krishna what, in their eyes, he deserved.

First, Lalitā, well, here it goes. First, Lalitā sent Krishna a message to arrive a little earlier than Pūrṇamāsī had suggested.

So, that day, while Rādhikā was still at home applying her cosmetics for her meeting with Krishna, Lalitā, Viśākhā, and hundreds of gopīs hid themselves in the forest around this Dāna-nartana-kuṇḍa, this little pond.

And soon Krishna arrived with 10 or 15 of his friends, eager for his meeting with Rādhā and her girlfriends and for the taxes that they had promised the day before.

But when they reached the kuṇḍa, they found no one, only a strange, eerie silence. And while the boys began to suspect something, then suddenly hundreds of gopīs burst out from the forest and attacked the boys with soft flower whips.

Soft flower whips, thrashing them again and again. And four or five gopīs seized each boy and led them to trees where they tied them with flower ropes. And the boys could do nothing but hang their heads while the gopīs scolded them and teased them.

And of course, Lalitā made sure that Krishna received as much punishment as all his friends combined.

Angry Lalitā, and the Acharyas described, only when Krishna begged for mercy did the gopīs finally stop their flower whips.

I love it, flower whips and their sharp words. Then Lalitā Devī stood before Krishna, her feet planted wide, it's described, shaking her finger sternly, as she said to Krishna, "Oh, king of vagabonds, thieves, and daisies, what do you have to say for yourself now?" And Krishna lowered his head and replied softly, "I surrender.

I surrender." And then Lalitā held his chin between her thumb and forefinger and said, "You only surrender when there's no other choice." Then she shook his head back and forth and said, "Krishna, you must now give proof of your surrender.

Words come easily. But can someone as self-absorbed as you actually surrender at heart?

Can someone as self-absorbed as you are actually surrender at heart?" Then, giving Krishna a gentle slap on his face, she continued, "Every day you bring your cows to graze in this forest without permission of our queen.

And those voracious cows don't only eat grass, they trample flowers, uproot saplings, and ruin the queen's garden." Then, tugging hard on Krishna's ear, she demanded, "Don't you think that you should pay tax for grazing your herds and additional damages for destroying this beautiful forest of our queen?" And just as Krishna was nodding in agreement, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī appeared with her maidservants.

Remember, she stayed home getting ready to come. She suddenly came on the scene, and she studied the scene and was about to rescue Krishna until she noticed that Lalitā Sakhī was in a fiery mood.

And the Acharyas say here, her eyes were filled with both sympathy for Krishna and fear of Lalitā.

Sympathy for Krishna and fear of Lalitā.

And seeing that Śrīmatī had arrived, Lalitā Sakhī said to Krishna, "Here is your chance, Krishna.

First, admit that you are no king at all, and that Śrīmatī is the queen of this land of Braja. Then apologize for yesterday's outrage, and finally, beg permission to graze your cows here." And as Krishna looked into Rādhā's eyes, Lalitā untied him and, with a strong stare, she demanded, "So, what?" So Krishna folded his hands and said, "My dear Rādhārāṇī, in boy's play, my friends and I offended you yesterday.

I may be play-king of this land, but you are its true monarch. Please forgive me for demanding a toll. Please look upon me and my friends as your humble servants. Persecuted by demons, my family has had to move time and time again in search of green pastures for our cows and peace for our families.

Therefore, please accept us as refugees in your kingdom. Please therefore accept us as refugees in your kingdom. And if while tending our cows and executing our *dharma*, some harm has come to your forest, please tolerate it as a necessary evil.

Otherwise, we cowherd men will have no means of sustenance." So, Krishna's words softened the gopīs' hearts and, what's more, brought tears to Rādhārāṇī's eyes.

But Lalitā, whose hidden desire was to intensify actually the sweetness of love between the Divine Couple, was not yet satisfied. And taking a flower whip from one of her assistants, she ordered, "If you meant what you said, Krishna, then prove it.

Bow down before your queen. Bow down before your queen." So Krishna looked around, not only at the gopīs but also at his tied-up friends, who were watching with wide-open eyes.

And then, with a smile he could not conceal, he knelt with his palms joined before his chest, his eyes fixed upon the beautiful face of his beloved Śrīmatī. And he said to her again, very softly, "Dear Radha, I offer my obeisances to you today." Without a word, Lalitā prodded him with a flower whip, and Krishna, his heart beating with ecstasy, placed his head upon Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's bejeweled lotus feet and said again, most softly.

For a moment, this divine scene, it's described, it seemed to fall into complete silence. And neither the gopīs, gopas, birds, or insects, not even the wind, dared make a sound. All were transfixed by this confidential picture of perfection. That's how it's described.

This confidential picture of perfection. Rādhā-raṇī's ability to control Krishna with her love.

The deep secret of the god of Vaisnavas. Here was the Supreme Person before whom great Brahmas bow down, placing his head at the feet of a cowherd maiden whose spontaneous love makes him submissive to her. Here was the Supreme Proprietor of all that is material and spiritual, settling a debt he had incurred while joking with the Braja gopīs of Vṛndāvana.

Here was the Supreme Truth, worshipped by yogis, jñānīs, and bhaktas, whose own worshipable object was a beautiful young gopī. So, Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī concludes, thus ended the sweet, loving pastime of Radha and Krishna in the Dāna-keli-līlā to everyone's full satisfaction.

All right, Krishna!

Oh, such sweet pastimes!

All glorious to Prabhupada. So, to conclude, I would like to quote a beautiful glorification found in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā, 4th chapter, verse 131. Short, sweet, but to the transcendental point: "All glories to Rādhā's love for Krishna, the enemy of the demon Mura.

Although it is all-pervading, it increases at every moment. Although it is paramount, it is devoid of pride, and although it is pure, it is always beset with duplicity." Hari Krishna.

Thank you, Babaji. At the end of the disguise pastimes, I'm sure that in the spiritual world, they're unlimited, but these are all that I could find and share with all of you. So, thank you very much. We start a new series next week.

We're going to start discussing in detail the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, just like we did with Krishna a few months ago.

So, give me some time for that very deep and confidential subject matter. So, Śrīmad. Krishna. [music] Śrīla Prabhupāda.

See you soon. [music].