Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Vrindavan. Please bear with me today; I have a bit of a cold, but I'm going to give it my best. So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 29.

In our last lecture, we discussed the role of cows in awakening our love for Krishna.

Today, I would like to discuss in particular how Vrindavan's cows play an important role in increasing the residence of Vrindavan's love for Krishna.

It's an interesting angle. Of course, all the residents of Vrindavan are already pure devotees, and their love for Krishna is perfect and complete.

It doesn't need to be awakened; it's always been pure from time immemorial. However, it's always increasing; it's always increasing. The other day, we quoted the following verse from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā 4.131, a very famous verse about how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's love for Krishna is increasing moment by moment. Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī, he writes: "All glories to Rādhā's love for Krishna, the enemy of the demon Mura!

Although it is all-pervading, it tends to increase at every moment. Although it is important, it is devoid of pride, and although it is pure, it is always embellished with duplicity." So we hear about Rādhārāṇī's love is always increasing. Now, there are some nice details which demonstrate the role, the role that cows play in increasing the loving affairs of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

So, after churning milk and getting butter from the cows they milked each morning, the Gopis would put that butter into pots which, which they would place on the top of their heads and then they would proceed to, you know, various villages around Vrindavan to sell that milk and the milk products in the markets.

I was reading, the Gopis used various types of pots for carrying the butter and other milk products. In particular, Rāṇī used a golden pot called *kanaka khalsika*. In such a pot, the neck is very narrow, but the opening is very big.

And Lalita Sakhi, she used a silver pot, and the other Gopis, they use mainly clay pots like that. Now, the other type of milk products they carried in their pots, very interesting. They would carry *madhu dadhi*, which is described as a sweet curd, and then *dadhi*, which is a salted curd, *kṛṣṇa malai*, which is, um, sour cream, *ghṛta*, which is sweet butter, and *lavaṇa ghṛta*, which means literally a salted butter, and *śara*, or buttermilk mixed with cumin seeds and salt, like that.

So, externally, the Gopis would make all these milk products for *dāna*. For *dāna*, meaning money or wealth. If you go to the Sanskrit dictionary, *dāna* means money or wealth. And this they would get by going to the markets. But it's interesting, another translation of *dāna*, even more subtle, is treasure.

Treasure. Actually, there is a verse in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, where we hear the word *dāna*. Translation is "dreamed of the Rāsa dance. He was fully absorbed in transcendental bliss, but when his dream broke, he thought he had lost a precious jewel, a precious jewel." So in the word for word, I'm sure Prabhupāda translates *dāna*—it's actually the last word in the verse—*dāna* as something very precious, not just wealth, but he just, he translated it as something very precious.

And in the translation, Prabhupāda translates it as "a precious jewel, a precious jewel." So, the reason I'm saying this is because one ācārya has played very nicely on this word *dāna*.

He says that when the Gopis go to sell their various milk products, their real intention is not to obtain wealth, but rather to attain the *dāna*, the precious jewel of Krishna's association.

How so?

Because so often, when they're going, you know, to the markets, Krishna's waiting for them along the various pathway, pathways through Vrindavan on the pretext of taxing their wares.

Therefore, he says, wherever or whenever the Gopis' cows, by whose milk they attain the precious jewel of Krishna's association, it acts as a stimulus for remembering Krishna and increases their love for Him.

Isn't that sweet?

The cows help stimulate everyone's love for Krishna in a special way, like that, for the Gopis.

So, Vrindavan's cows, they, they love Krishna as much as everyone else loves Krishna in Vrindavan.

I was reading that one time, after some cowherd men had decorated and ornamented Nanda Mahārāja's cows and set them free to, to mingle with their cows as they always do, they then directed the cows to the best of grasses, the best of grasses.

And we've discussed this some years ago, actually, where the best of grasses in Vrindavan is Govardhana Hill. Nanda Mahārāja's cows are especially attracted to the grasses at Govardhana Hill. Why?

Because they're very soft, and they don't cut the tongues of the cows. Sometimes cows' tongues get cut when they take grass. Grass can be sharp on Govardhana Hill. And the milk that they give after eating that grass, mm-hmm, makes the best sweets in Vrindavan.

Down. So, if you're looking for the best sweets in Vrindavan, you have to ask the sweet maker, "Did you get this milk from cows that ate the grasses that Govardhana Hill?" "Yes." "Okay, I'll buy it.

No, I'm not going to buy." However, that day, you know, after the cowherd men had taken the cows to these special grasses at Govardhana Hill, they were shocked when they got there, and the cows refused to eat the grass.

Now, that's unusual, isn't it?

I've seen cows, you know, they're let loose into the fields, they, they're eating as they're running, they just love the grass. Here's the best grass in Vrindavan, and they refuse. Nope, we're not going to eat it. Fortunately, however, the wisest, it's described, the wisest of the cowherd men understood the situation and he suddenly called out to Krishna, saying, "Oh, Gopāl, our cows will not eat unless You sweeten these grasses with the touch of Your lotus hands.

Nothing else will satisfy them. Please, Krishna, come now and fill each cow with the light." And with that, Krishna, who is, you know, he was somewhere else herding another herd of cows, but he once appeared, and once appeared there at Govardhana Hill and expanded Himself into as many forms as there were cows.

It's like we hear on the Rāsa-līlā, Krishna expands Himself to dance with each Gopi.

And this is how dear the cows are to Krishna.

He expanded Himself to be with each cow, then He fed them all with His lotus hands, and then it's described, He scratched their heads with His hands. Cows love that. Now, it's so sweet. You know, cows play such an intricate role in stimulating love in Brahmāṇḍa.

It's described that when the cows saw Krishna, He entered their hearts, and with that, they were, they were, um, filled with such bliss that they became, uh, how would you say, indifferent to their calves, in the same way that yogis become indifferent to the world.

So, after that, out of affection, the cowherd men, they wanted to circumambulate their beloved herd of cows. Why?

Well, they love the cows, they're sacred, so much like, you know, we want to do, we want to go on parikramā, to circumambulate Vrindavan or Govardhana Hill. But there was a problem because there were so many cows, 90 to a thousand to be exact, and to go around them all was impossible.

So, Krishna was there, He suggested that they circumambulate just one cow, which He said would give the same auspicious benefit as circumambulating all of them.

In fact, Krishna said, "Just as one nourishes all the leaves and branches of a tree by watering its roots, so we can't simultaneously adore all our cows and bulls by circumambulating just one cow and one bull." Okay, how important is just one cow and one bull to Krishna?

So, they did that. They went around one cow and one bull, and then they worshiped. They had a ceremony for worshiping the cows and the bulls. So, at that point in the pastime, Krishna's herd of calves, who were also somewhere near Govardhana Hill, they arrived.

So, then, after worshiping the cows and the bulls, the cowherd men encouraged the boys to worship the cows. It's very nice how they did it. It's described they worshiped the calves by decorating them with cloth, painting pictures on their bodies, and then blissfully frolicking with them.

That was a mode of worship, they frolicked with the cows, the calves. So, then Krishna made the frisky calves lay down to rest by playing special sounds on His flutes, and then the cowherd boys, they circumambulated the calves like their fathers had done to the cows and then paid all of them respectful obeisances.

I thought that was interesting. After circumambulating their calves, the boys, what did they do?

They bowed down and paid respectful obeisances. And seeing as Krishna was really pleased with His friends when He saw them offering obeisances to the, to the calves, and He said something very significant.

He said, "At the heart of devotion to cows is the act of offering obeisances to them." This is from the lotus mouth of the Lord. "At the heart of devotion to cows is the act of offering obeisances to them." Wow.

So, I thought that's an instruction that those who take care of cows, bulls, and calves on our International Society for Krishna Consciousness farms, they might like to introduce, introduce that instruction: "At the heart of devotion to cows is the act of offering obeisances to them." The outsiders might find it strange, but not after you've heard this lecture.

Cows are so important in stimulating love for Krishna in, in the spiritual world.

Now, there's another nice pastime that took place after Krishna had saved the residents of Braja by lifting Govardhana Hill.

You know, as soon as, as Indra had given up, you know, trying to drown Vrindavan with water and had left back to his celestial kingdom for the time being, the residents of Braja they repeatedly shouted, "Jaya!

Jaya!

Jaya!" and they started coming out from under the hill.

And when they came out from under the hill, they were surprised to find Vrindavan had suddenly been restored to its original beauty. You can just imagine, you know, we hear the type of rain that Indra had sent to Vrindavan, it was, it was to devastate Vrindavan, and it must have looked really, the scene must have been very sad.

But when they came out, suddenly it was restored to its original beauty. And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī also describes how, so nice detail, the forest animals were already happily dancing about, bent-over trees were righting themselves, rivers were flowing peacefully again, and the wind, free of its destructive mode, was blowing gently.

Muddy roads and pastures had already dried up, and the air was filled with the sounds of singing birds and buzzing bees. Usually after a storm, there's the big snow, hurricane, there's devastation, but this is Vrindavan, Vrindavan Dhāma. Now, the first of the residents of Braja to walk out were the cowherd boys.

They walked out from under Govardhana Hill. Actually, Krishna's still holding the hill.

That's not just finished. The rain just finished. So, the boys are the first to walk out. All the while, it's described, encouraging the cows to follow them, "Come on, come on, cows, come on, come on, cows." However, the cows were reluctant to leave Krishna, who was still standing there holding up Govardhana Hill.

Actually, for seven days, those cows had continuously gazed upon Krishna's sweet face.

The *śāstras* say they had lost interest in the things that they had previously, no, they lost interest in the things that had previously brought them pleasure. In other words, they experienced the highest pleasure of being in Krishna's personal association, very close to Him, for seven days.

However, with some coaxing from the cowherd boys, the cows, it's described, shot out into the open air like a volley of arrows. They shot out into the open air like a volley of arrows, and running about, they jumped and they kicked in great happiness.

You may have seen this sometimes, you know, when cows are, you know, in the barn for a long time and they open the barn to go to pasture, you see the cows are so happy, they can eat grass, they're jumping and they're kicking, they're kicking the air, like, then their tails go up.

However, when these cows looked back, it's so sweet, and saw that Krishna was still beneath the mountain, still holding it up, because the pastime just finished, they ran back inside to be with Him.

And there, they surrounded Him, and what did they do?

They licked His body continuously. Animals do like that in this world sometimes, cats, you know, lick their owners, dogs lick the face of their owners. Transcendental personality, I'd like to get licked by that cow. So they surrounded Krishna and licked His body.

So, this time, Krishna took it upon Himself to, you know, the pastime has to move on now.

Everybody out to drive the cows out. And how did He do it?

It's so nice. It's written, "by means of compassion and glances and familiar flute melodies which set the cows streaming out from under Govardhana Hill in all directions at once." So, seeing this, all the residents of Braja were overjoyed to see their cows happy, back in the pasturing grounds around Govardhana.

So, then all the residents of Braja departed from Krishna's shelter.

They took their, it's described, their musical instruments with them, and while dancing under Govardhana Hill, what did they do?

They simply sang of Krishna's heroic feats.

And so should we. On our way to work, on our way to school, and back home, we should sing of Krishna's heroic feats.

And if you can't remember them all, everything's there in the Mahā-mantra. You can just sing. So, my voice is still working despite the cold. So, one more pastime. It's actually hard to choose. There's so many cow pastimes. If you're not, but again, because Krishna spends most of the day with His cows, so there is a pastime where Krishna and Balaram, they once hid from their friends only to be discovered by their own clever cows.

It's written, "They were, they were discovered by their own clever cows, not the boys, but the cows." Very sweet. So, one day, in the pasturing grounds of Vrindavan, while the cows grazed, the cowherd boys, they were busy playing different games.

And at one point, Krishna and Balaram decided to, to play a trick on their friends by walking away and hiding themselves in a very dense part of the forest.

Now, at first, the cowherd boys thought that the two brothers had gone to, you know, search for some stray cows, which happens sometimes. But later on, towards the evening, when all the cows were called, you know, to go back to the village, they were all accounted for.

But Krishna and Balaram weren't there.

So, the boys began to worry about Krishna and Balaram.

Krishna and Balaram are the very life and soul of the cowherd boys.

One ācārya says, "Like the air, the cowherd boys breathe. Like the air, the cowherd boys breathe." How dear to us is air?

You think about it. So, Krishna is, you know, as dear to the, the cowherd boys as air that they breathe.

So, it's described that in the absence of the brothers Krishna and Balaram, the boys felt that they were actually slowly suffocating.

No air. So, they began to call out repeatedly, altogether, the chorus, "O Krishna!

O Balaram!

O Krishna!

O Balaram!" As they searched throughout the forest, they actually were asking the trees, the deer, and the birds if they'd seen Krishna and Balaram.

But as hard as they tried, they couldn't find their brothers. If God wants to hide from you, no one's going to find Him. But if God wants to find you, you can't hide from Him. Don't you attend?

Even went out and set in Italia. They even found Jagai and Madhai. So, we're very grateful that Krishna sent Prabhupāda to find all of us, otherwise, we may not have made it.

Certainly would not have made it. So, panicking, the boys discussed amongst themselves that maybe a demon, some demons, have captured Krishna or Balaram.

But then they thought, "When did a demon ever exist who could defeat our two heroes?" They see Krishna like that, Krishna's their hero because every day, He kills a demon before they have lunch.

And the whole subject matter of lunch is, "I wish to kill the demon." He's their hero. So, "When did a demon ever exist who could defeat our two heroes?" They thought, they were thinking so far, every demon who's come to Vrindavan has been killed by either Krishna or Balaram, or the two of them together.

So, soon, the boys' concern for Krishna and Balaram became contagious, and all the cows, all the cows started.

What?

It's so sweet. What would they start doing?

Moving in separation from Krishna and Balaram.

I, I look forward to that day that I can hear a cow in separation from Krishna and Balaram.

I have to be in the spiritual world, I guess. And so, those cows, they also began searching through the forest. It's described as if they were searching for their own calves. Now, we've got the boys searching, and we have the cows searching.

Then, it's described that some especially clever cows took the lead and followed the transcendental scent of Krishna and Balaram's bodies.

Wow. So, seeing this, the cowherd boys, they just joyfully followed behind the cows, encouraging them on. And it's described that this herd of cows, followed by cheering cowherd boys, snaked its way through the forest until it reached Krishna and Balaram's hiding place.

Whereupon arriving, the cows began mooing very loudly in a special tone. I don't know what that tone is. They started mooing in a special tone while digging the Earth with their hoofs and looking into the bushes. So, with those sure signs, the cowherd boys, who were following them, started running to where Krishna and Balaram were hiding, shouting, "They must be in there!

They must be in there!" And as they approached, Krishna and Balaram came out of their hiding place, jumping up and down and dancing all around, ecstatic that they had played such a good trick on their friends, but especially because they had been found by their loving cows.

So, just see how the cows play such an intricate role, stimulating and awakening the Braja-basis' love for Krishna.

That was the theme of this lecture today. So, from that day on, that spot, that place has been called *Gopeshvara*, meaning "the place where the cows," *paśu* had found Krishna and Balaram while the cowherd boys had followed the cows' hoof prints.

Therefore, that place is called *Gopeshvara* or sometimes *Pāśupata* in Vrindavan. So, you know, maybe next Kartik, we should go there and we can, we can all play hide-and-seek, hide-and-seek. That's the theme of that place. So, um, this pastime actually has a spiritual message to it as well.

The *śāstras* say that Krishna is present everywhere, even in our hearts, but we could not know Him unless, like the cowherd boys, we follow in the footsteps of great souls who know how to find Krishna.

Now, in this pastime, it means the cows, they're all great, realized pure devotees of the Lord, fully conscious. Some souls want to be play that role in Krishna's lila.

Some want to be trees. Every living entity in the spiritual world is fully realized. They're all contributing a variety of wonderful, beautiful sentiments that make up the great love that is there for Krishna in the spiritual world.

So, Krishna is present everywhere, even in our hearts, but we cannot know Him unless, like the cowherd boys, we follow in the footsteps of great souls who know how to find Krishna.

And with that in mind, I thought we would finish today with a, it's a famous verse from the Mahābhārata with a similar theme. I think it's *Vana Parva* 313.117. "It is very difficult to understand the secrets of Krishna consciousness, but the truth of religious principles are hidden in the hearts of unadulterated, self-realized persons.

Therefore, one should follow in the footsteps of such *mahajanas*, or great souls." And we are doing that because we are all followers of our Founder-Ācārya, and he will lead us back to that world of love and bliss. We'll be able to see these cows and become inspired by their devotion to Krishna, the way it's contagious.

Bhakti is contagious. So, thank you for your report for leading us like a herd back to the spiritual world. We'll finish there. Purpose, that's about all we have on cows, just two classes. Um, unlimited. We'll, we'll look through *Nectar of Devotion* or *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* and find some more items or personalities who can inspire us in our bhakti to the Divine Couple.

So, thank you. I'll see you, see you in one week. Hope I don't have a cold then. She shouldn't. All of Krishna's cows. (Singing) Thank you.