Hello everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vr̥ndāvana. All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Namaste. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So today we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 75. And I would like to continue our discussions today on, uh, Vaiṣṇava poets. Actually, as you know, we've covered a number of them in the last couple of weeks.

And why?

Well, once again, we can quote that famous verse from Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, first chapter, 195, to explain why: "kṛṣṇa-kṛpā-kaṇe yadi laghe ghāmera gāy, tāhāi sphurē kṛṣṇa-bhakti, dainya-bhāva, āra sad-bhāva." "What is the use of a Bowman's Arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?" There's the answer.

So today, I would like to describe the life and poetry of yet another one of the Aṣṭa Chāpas, the eight famous poets in the line of Vallabhācārya. And that is Śrī Nandadāsa. As with, um, previous poets we've discussed, I found authorized information about him in Navadāsa's book, *Bhaktamāla*.

We described that last week, *Bhaktamāla*. And therein it's written about this illustrious devotee: Nandadāsa was always immersed in love for Lord Kṛṣṇa and became very proficient in composing nectarean texts of His divine pastimes. His heart was always filled with the nectar of devotion, and he was very proficient in rhetoric and singing.

He was a resident of the village Śrī Rāmpur and he became famous throughout the world. Despite being the best Brāhmaṇa amongst all Brāhmaṇas, he used to render menial service to the feet of devotees of the Lord. Nandadāsa was always immersed in describing līlās of his beloved Lord.

I thought that was a nice introduction to this devotee. So, Navadāsa was born in the year 1513, as we heard, in the village of, of Rāmpur, which I checked on a map, is a small village in the greater Braja Maṇḍala area.

His father's name was Jīvarāma, and his uncle's name was Ātmarāma. Now, what's really, really interesting is that his elder brother was the famous Gosvāmī Tulasīdāsa, or very often just called Tulasīdāsa, the author of that well-known book, *Rāmacaritamānasa*. It's a book about, uh, Lord Rāmacandra's pastimes.

Now, although that book was very famous and is still popular in India today, Śrīla Prabhupāda didn't approve of it.

In a letter, uh, to my godbrother, Rādhāvallabha, on September 6, 1969, Prabhupāda wrote, "Very clearly, the *Ramcaritamanas* by Gosvāmī Tulasīdāsa has a hint of Māyāvāda philosophy.

He belongs to the Ramananda Sampradaya. They are a mixed-up combination of personalist and impersonalist." So, apparently, Nandadāsa was also, um, a devotee, a great devotee of Lord Rāma. The whole family, actually. Obviously, Tulasīdāsa was a devotee of Lord Rāma, but, initially, Nandadāsa was also a great devotee of Lord Rāmacandra.

But later, he converted to worshiping Lord Kṛṣṇa, and that's the theme of our, uh, lecture today. Just how that happened is extremely interesting. As young men, Tulasīdāsa and Nandadāsa, they were, uh, studying in Banāras, or Vārāṇasī, or in ancient times it was called Kashi.

Now, one day they met some sādhu who were passing through Banāras on their way to Dvārakā to have Darśana of Śrī Śrī Rukmiṇī Dwārakādhīśa. And eager for their association, Nandadāsa asked his elder brother, Tulasīdāsa, for permission to join them.

But again, being an exclusive devotee of Lord Rāma, Tulasīdāsa refused to give permission for Nandadāsa to go to Dvārakā. Nevertheless, Nandadāsa decided to accompany the saints, telling his brother he'd return in a few months. And so, they all left the next morning, those sādhu and Nandadāsa.

But on the way, when the group reached Mathurā on their route to Dvārakā, the sādhu actually decided to stay in Mathurā for an extended period of time. But Nandadāsa, eager to visit Dvārakā, he set off alone on the journey after about a week in Mathurā.

But he didn't get very far. He actually just got as far as Nanda Grāma. So, there's Mathurā, then he entered Vr̥ndāvana, and then he came to Nanda Grāma. Uh, came to Nanda, and unfortunately, while he was in Nanda Grāma, staying a couple of days there, he became attached to the wife of a very wealthy merchant.

It happened when, uh, he was, uh, visiting their house while doing *bhikṣā*, begging for foodstuffs, as we have described previously, sādhu do. So, he knocked on the door. Nandadāsa for some *padya*. When this woman, the wife of the husband of the family, who is described as extremely beautiful, answered the door, and Nandadāsa, he couldn't take his eyes off her.

It's almost as if you could say, love at first sight. So, as a result of that one incident, he changed all his plans, and he decided to stay in Nanda Grāma, begging for foodstuffs every day, but only at that house of that family.

And he did so for months. And soon a rumor spread that a sādhu, you know, a sādhu, a visiting sādhu to Nanda Grāma, had fallen in love with another man's wife. So, because of the rumors, you know, the husband of that woman decided to move the family from Nanda Grāma to Gokula, where their spiritual master, Vallabhācārya, lived.

Of course, there was no fault on their own, but, you know, rumors are such. He decided, "We'll move, we'll go live with our spiritual master in Gokula." Now, when Nandadāsa got information about this idea to move to Gokula, he started following them.

On the day they left, in fact, he was so infatuated with this lady that the family could clearly see him following behind them from, from some distance away. So, when they reached the banks of the Yamunā, which they had to cross over to go to Gokula, they quickly, uh, boarded a boat across the river.

And as they plied across the river, the woman's husband gave some money to the boatman, requesting him not to take this Brāhmaṇa, Nandadāsa, who was following them across the river. So, as a result, Nandadāsa couldn't cross to the other side, couldn't make it.

He just sat on the shore of the Yamunā. Now, later, when that family reached, uh, Gokula, they came to see their spiritual master, Vallabhācārya. And, um, he, he said something to them quite amazing, actually. Listen to this. He said to them, "There was a Brāhmaṇa following you.

His name was Nandadāsa. Why didn't you take him on the boat so he could also cross over the river to come to Gokula?" So, the gentleman, the man of the family, he was shocked.

He didn't even know this Brāhmaṇa who was named Nandadāsa. So, he was thinking, "How did my spiritual master know?

First of all, that that person was following us?

What to speak of his name?" So, when I read that, it reminded me of the time a newspaper reporter asked Prabhupāda, "Because you know how to bother Prabhupāda, but Prabhupāda, you know, this..." So, it brought to mind a particular incident where a newspaper reporter asked Prabhupāda, "Sir, you have so many disciples all over the world.

How do you know if they're making progress in their spiritual lives?" So, Prabhupāda paused for a moment, then he replied with a little smile, "How do I know?

Kṛṣṇa tells me. Kṛṣṇa tells me." Right?

Kṛṣṇa. So, meanwhile, Nandadāsa was sitting on the bank of the Yamunā River. It's described, he was just gazing at her dark blue waters, and in doing so, he started having a change of heart. He was thinking, "Here I am in Vr̥ndāvana, thinking about another man's wife.

Shame on me." So, what did he do?

He started praying to Yamunā Devī to free him from his lusty desires and awaken his love for the Lord. Now, within moments, his whole life, his whole being was transformed, and he began to describe experiencing ecstatic symptoms of love of God, but not for Lord Rāma, but rather for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

An amazing transformation took place. And upon reading that, I, I, um, remembered in *Nectar of Devotion*, chapter 13, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes as follows, explaining how this can happen, how it did happen: Prabhupāda writes, "Rūpa Gosvāmī has stated that five kinds of devotional activities, namely residing in or visiting Mathurā or Vr̥ndāvana, worshiping the deity of the Lord, reciting *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, serving a devotee, and chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, are so potent that even a small attachment to any one of these five items can arouse devotional ecstasy even in a neophyte." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, for me, that explains what happened to Nandadāsa. By the mercy of whom?

By the mercy of Yamunā Devī. She's part of the, the, the, uh, Braja Maṇḍala. All glories to her, actually. She, as we know, she's one of the five personalities who grants entrance into Vr̥ndāvana, residence in Vr̥ndāvana. So, that explains it.

Actually, it might be nice to recite some prayers to her because she's so much part of this lecture today. In this particular pastime, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in his book *Stavamālā* very beautifully about Yamunā Devī. He writes, "May she, Yamunā, who was the daughter of Sūrya Deva, who saves one from having to enter the city of her brother Yamarāja, the sight of whom enables the most sinful persons to cross the ocean of sin, and the sweetness of whose water charms the hearts of everyone, always purify me.

May Śrī Yamunā, who is the daughter of Sūrya Deva, who decorates the great Kīva forest with a stream of pleasant waters, who is filled with lotus flowers and dancing birds, and who blinds the terrible sins of they who desire to bathe in her, always purify me.

May Śrī Yamunā, who is a daughter of Sūrya, a drop of whose water destroys the sinful reactions of people, creates a great, uh, flood of confidential pure devotional service to Lord Nanda Nanda, and who brings auspiciousness to they who desire to live on her shore, always purify me.

May Śrī Yamunā, who is the daughter of Sūrya Deva, who divides the seven oceans and seven continents, who witnessed many of Lord Kṛṣṇa's transcendental pastimes, and whose splendor rebukes a host of sapphires, always purify me. May Śrī Yamunā, who is the daughter of Sūrya Deva, who is decorated by the beautiful district of Mathurā, who expertly protects they who follow the path of loving devotional service, and who with the playful motions of the waves that are her arms offers respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa's feet, always purify me.

May Śrī Yamunā, who is the daughter of Sūrya Deva, whose charming shores are decorated with many loving cows, who is filled with many splendid and fragrant kadamba flowers, and who is delighted to have the company of Lord Kṛṣṇa's devotees, always purify me.

May Yamunā, who is the daughter of Sūrya Deva, who is filled with the warblings of thousands of joyful mālikā kushans, who is worshiped by the Vṛṣṇis, Devas, sides, and gandharvas, and the slightest scent of the fragrant breeze moving on her shores stops the cycle of repeated birth and death, always purify me.

May Yamunā, who is the daughter of Sūrya Deva, who is the famous splendid spiritual river flowing through the Bhuvar and Svar planets, and who burns away the greatest sins, and who is fragrant with scented ointments from Lord Kṛṣṇa's transcendental body, always purify me.

Oh, lotus-eyed one, oh, daughter of Sūrya Deva, oh, rescuer from all sins, please flood with pure devotional service that person who, reciting these eight prayers with a cheerful heart, glorifies you, whose waves are pure and splendid, and who is accompanied by all the demigods." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

It's so purifying. So, while this transformation in the heart of Nandadāsa was taking place, Vallabhācārya asked one of his disciples to go back, cross over the Yamunā River, and bring Nandadāsa to his āśrama. So, after some time, when Nandadāsa arrived, he fell at the feet of Vallabhācārya and he said, "Oh, merciful one, I have spent my life in trivial pursuits.

Please take me under your shelter and help me achieve the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now the plot thickens in a transcendental way. A month or so later, his elder brother Tulasīdāsa, um, hearing how Nandadāsa, because the word spread, had dedicated his life now to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, he penned a letter and, and sent it to him.

And the letter read as follows: "My dear brother, you left our Lord Rāma and have started worshiping Kṛṣṇa in his place. Have you gone mad?

How in the world could you do such a thing?" That was the letter.

So, you could say, with a touch of humor, Nandadāsa wrote back, "Brother, first I was devoted to Lord Rāma, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is all-powerful, came and stole my heart away. If Rāma was stronger, he would not have let me go.

Besides, since I have heard Kṛṣṇa's sweet Holy names, I've gone mad, and my eyes now swell with tears." So, after that exchange, Tulasīdāsa decided to visit Nandadāsa in Vr̥ndāvana. And after searching for him for some time, he finally found him, where?

At Govardhana Hill, where he was singing daily to the Gopāla deity found by Śrī Muraāri, because we know he's one of those famous eight poets. Now, approaching Nandadāsa, Tulasīdāsa said, "My dear brother, I've come to rescue you. Please come with me.

If you are interested in living in a village, then reside in a village. If you're interested to live in a holy place, then come back to Kashi. If you are interested to reside near a mountain, then reside in Tṛkuta.

And if you're interested in living in a forest, then reside in Daśārha. Our Lord Rāmacandra has purified so many places." A real Rāma bhakta. So, hearing this, Nandadāsa smiled, and it's described gazing out over the, the Vr̥ndāvana landscape, he spontaneously composed the following poem in Brijabhasha and sang it very sweetly: "Oh brother, if you wish to reside near a hill, then reside next to Govardhana Hill.

If you wish to reside in a village, then reside in the underground. If you want to reside in a city, then reside in Madhura, Mathurā, which is an ocean of unparalleled beauty and offers boundless happiness. If you find solace by a riverside, then reside on the banks of the Yamunā River that fulfills all the loving desires of the heart. Śrī Nandadāsa says, if you wish to dwell in a forest, then my dear brother, reside in Vr̥ndāvana." I just love that reply.

So, then Nandadāsa, you know, he, while he was there, he brought his brother before the Gopāla deity for Darśana, now known as Śrī Nathji. Although he knew that his brother Tulasīdāsa would only bow before his beloved Iṣṭa Deva, Lord Rāma.

So, understanding this, as they're all gathered, other pilgrims are there. Nandadāsa, um, stood before Gopāla and prayed. He prayed, "This great devotee prayed, 'My dear Lord, Tulasīdāsa lowers his head only to Lord Rāma. Therefore, please be merciful and appear before him as his chosen Iṣṭa Deva.'" So, while Tulasīdāsa and, you know, the pilgrims there were gazing at, at, at Gopāla, Gopāla showed his form as Lord Rāmacandra, just to Tulasīdāsa.

And seeing this, Tulasīdāsa's eyes opened widely, and he called out, "Jaya Rama, Jaya Rama," and bowed down. Did the devotee bow down before his beloved Lord?

As the pilgrims standing there were wondering, like, "What in the world is he doing, bowing down in front of Gopāla?" So, seeing how this mercy upon Tulasīdāsa was due to the prayers of Nandadāsa to Gopāla, it reminded me of a verse in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*.

He got the mercy of his brother by that time was a pure devotee. Happens. This verse is from, uh, Fifth Canto, 12th Chapter, Śloka 12. Listen: "My dear King R̥ṣabhadeva, unless one has the opportunity to smear his entire body with the dust of the lotus feet of a great devotee, one cannot realize the Absolute Truth.

One cannot realize the Absolute Truth simply by observing celibacy, Brahmacārya, strictly following the rules and regulations of household life, uh, leaving home as a Vānaprastha, accepting sannyāsa, or undergoing severe penances in winter by keeping oneself submerged in water or surrounding oneself in summer by fire and the scorching heat of the sun.

There are many other processes to understand the Absolute Truth, but the Absolute Truth is only revealed to one who has attained the mercy of a great devotee. The Absolute Truth is only revealed to one who has attained the mercy of a great devotee." And there's an instance there, and we also have that opportunity, Prabhupāda, because we have attained the mercy of a great devotee, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, there's hope for us. So, the next day, Tulasīdāsa, he went back to Banāras, and while, uh, Nandadāsa remained in Vr̥ndāvana, actually, for the rest of his life, writing poems and composing songs for the pleasure of, of Gopāla, upon Govardhana Hill.

Some of the many poems he, he, he wrote which are, uh, still read and, and sung in Vr̥ndāvana, which we may not know about, but I think in respect for him, they're, they're worth, they're worth mentioning, are as follows: *Rasa Pañcādhyāya*, *Sant Pañcādhyāya*, *Anartha Mañjarī*, *Māna Mañjarī*, *Rūpa Mañjarī*, *Rasa Mañjarī*, *Vīra Mañjarī*, *Bāg Gośāla Līlā*, *Śyāma Sāgī*, *Rukmiṇī Maṅgaḷa*, *Sudāmā Carita*, *Bhāṣa Daśama*, and a certain poem called *Pāvalī*.

We may never read them, but we, we offer our respects to him because those poems are full of nectarian, uh, ślokas and verses about Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhāṇī and Vr̥ndāvana. Maybe someday someone will translate them for us. So, eventually, sometime in the year 1583, while resting on the shores of the monastic Gangā lake on Govardhana Hill, Nandadāsa departed for Gokula and Vr̥ndāvana with the following words on his lips.

It was written down, many devotees were there to see him pass away. These were the words on his lips: "Brajaloka, look at the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa dancing on the banks of the Yamunā River. Mohana Mohana, May the, the smile of Kṛṣṇa, the drooping of his peacock crown, and the, the swaying of his Pīta Ambara yellow robes always remain within my heart.

Nandan, Niketan, Nandadāsa is present there watching this pastime very closely while singing from his heart." And then he left. All glories to that great devotee. So, I would like to finish today with just one of, uh, Nandadāsa's poems. A small poem, but elegance is truth spoken concisely.

It's, it's describing the beauty of Vr̥ndāvana. He wrote: "Vr̥ndāvana, who can tell its perfect beauty?

Its earthly counterpart, a place for Kṛṣṇa to make known his deeds to men. Where beasts and birds, hills, groves, and creepers, bushes, herbs, always lovely are, free from the bonds of time. The sun shimmers there, jewel-bright, each season a spring renewed, its splendor has no end.

Vr̥ndāvana is supreme amongst forests, its beauty never wanes. The sight seen in this forest's grace no other ground. As themes of verse confound the very gods of poetry. Alone on a jewel dasa, that stands resplendent. A lotus spreads its sixteen perfect petals, its graceful seed pod hangs above, out of which all joy is born.

There the young Lord of Braja, the mighty Prince of Love, is enthroned." Thank you, Nandadāsa. Thank you so much. Kṛṣṇa. So, yes, we have a few more poets, thankfully, so. And we'll continue, uh, next Friday. May Kṛṣṇa. Oh, glories to Śrīla.

The Revealer of the Dawn.