Hare Krishna everyone and a warm welcome back once again to our ever ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śiva, Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, all glories to. So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be number 118. 118 and herein we'll continue discussing the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet with great pleasure. Now you may remember last week we discussed how one time Kṛṣṇa had left the śrāḍya-rasāla, meaning the autumn rāsa dance, and the gopīs searched for him everywhere. We discussed how eventually at one point the gopīs noticed Kṛṣṇa's footprints in the dust of Vraja marked with the distinctive flag, the lotus, the thunderbolt, an elephant goad, and a barleycorn. But they also saw another set of lighter and smaller footprints just to the left of Kṛṣṇa's footprints that had markings similar to his. And based on the position of these two pairs of footprints, the gopīs guessed what had happened: that Kṛṣṇa had taken his favorite gopī with him, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Rādhārāṇī. Now it's interesting that Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments on exactly how different groups of gopīs saw Rādhārāṇī's footprints. Different groups of gopīs because different groups of gopīs have different rasas, different mellows of love with Śrī Rādhā and with Kṛṣṇa. There's different groups, different guṇas we call that. So Candravalī and other vipakṣa gopīs who are essentially for the purposes of igniting different loving sentiments within the hearts of the gopīs, Śrī Rādhā's competitors, that special group, they became disturbed. Other gopīs neutral to Rādhā, the tatastha gopīs, they didn't pay much attention to the fact that there were some other gopīs' footprints, and they just glorified Kṛṣṇa's footprints. But the suhṛt-pakṣa gopīs, the group friendly to Śrī Rādhā, such as Lalitā and Viśākhā, they recognized the footprints of Śrī Rādhā and they were internally enlivened, but since they were amongst many different kinds of gopīs, they pretended externally not to recognize those footprints. This is all Vraja-līlā without mentioning Rādhā's name. All these gopīs actually eventually declared her good fortune with one of the most famous verses in all Gaudiya literature. You know, it's on the tip of every rasika devotee. "Certainly this particular gopī has perfectly worshiped the all-powerful Personality of Godhead Govinda, since he was so pleased with her that he abandoned the rest of us and brought her to a secluded place." I think it deserves being recited again: "Certainly this particular gopī whose footprints they've seen has perfectly worshiped the all-powerful Personality of Godhead Govinda, since he was so pleased with her that he abandoned the rest of us and brought her to a secluded place."

Now the ācāryas say that due to these varying perceptions, various conversations went on as the girls, all these different groups of gopīs, followed the footprints. And in narrating these conversations of the gopīs in his Kṛṣṇa book, Śrīla Prabhupāda often repeats Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's name, leaving no doubt that the word "ārādhitā" meaning "one who perfectly worships" is an indirect reference to Śrī Rādhā. Now many of you know that there are critics who accuse Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas of artificially exalting Śrī Rādhā – that's a good way to put it, artificially exalting Śrī Rādhā. They claim her name is never mentioned in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, Rādhārāṇī. Now in the Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, chapter 8, verse 100, Śrīla Prabhupāda directly refutes this claim. He writes in his purport: "Sometimes the critics of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam find it difficult to find Rādhārāṇī's holy name in that book, but the secret is disclosed here in the word 'ārādhitā' from which the name Rādhā has come." O glory to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Now all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas share Śrīla Prabhupāda's conclusion. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, for example, says in the following statement before the "ānanda-ārādhita" verse in Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, chapter 4, verse 87: he writes, "Her worship, ārādhanā, consists of fulfilling the desires of Lord Kṛṣṇa; therefore the purāṇas call her Rādhikā." Now these pieces of evidence substantiate that Rādhā is Kṛṣṇa's dearmost consort. So much evidence we have. But although there were different reactions amongst the different groups of gopīs upon discovering Śrī Rādhā's footprints, the general consensus amongst the gopīs was that they had discovered something most wonderful. Most wonderful. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī sums this up in his Govinda-līlāmṛta, chapter 11, verse 52. It's so beautiful. There he writes: "One gopī said to another, the luster of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's feet are so beautiful that it makes the new sprouts named pallava, the lotus flower named padma, and the red lotus named kokanada appear dull and unattractive, just like a white chakravaka whose glory is dimmed by the darkness of night. Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet eclipse the beauty of everything beautiful. To what may a metaphor-hungry poet compare Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's beautiful feet?" Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now of course there are many pastimes glorifying the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, but today I would like to share what our previous ācāryas consider the topmost supreme pastime in this regard. Now it's a pastime I've shared before, but in his purport to Bhagavad-gītā, chapter 2, verse 25, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes: "Repetition of something is necessary in order that we understand the matter thoroughly without error." And this repetition I'm going to share with you today – this pastime, this repetition – is simply nectar. So late one morning, the famous devotee Jayadeva Gosvāmī was writing his magnum opus entitled Gīta-govinda, while his wife Padmāvatī was cooking lunch. Now Jayadeva was writing how in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes it appears that Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the love of the gopīs, particularly Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and was thus subordinate to them. He was thinking then to write a particular phrase in this regard, but he stopped short of completing it. He wrote something but he didn't complete it, saying to himself, "How can I write such a thing? Kṛṣṇa is in fact the supreme controller. How can he be controlled by the gopīs headed by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī?" So that's called writer's block. Those of you who are writers, you know what I'm saying. It's called writer's block. Transcendental writer's block. So he decided to take a break from his writing to think about it. So he told his wife Padmāvatī who was cooking that he was going to leave the house to take a walk and take bath in the Ganges and that he would be back soon. So he left.

Now while Jayadeva was away, one of the most amazing episodes in Vaiṣṇava history took place. One of the most amazing episodes in Vaiṣṇava history took place, for Kṛṣṇa disguised as Jayadeva Gosvāmī came to Jayadeva's home. He walked in. He went over to Jayadeva's desk, picked up his pen, and wrote something in the spot in the manuscript that Jayadeva had hesitated to write. Now what he wrote is idolized, memorized, and forever established, you could say, in the hearts of all Gauḍīya devotees of the Lord – who is today Kṛṣṇa or Rādhārāṇī or Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, but particularly Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kṛṣṇa wrote personally: "Śara gala kandanam mamasi rasi mandanam dehi pad Pallava" translated: "O beloved, your tender sprout-like feet are the antidote to Cupid's venom. Please place them on my head as my ornament in glory. Please place your lotus feet on my head as my ornament in glory. The scorching fire of Cupid's poison is unbearable. Please therefore, let the touch of your feet quell the torment of my love." Again, we have to recite that: "O my beloved, your tender sprout-like feet are the antidote to Cupid's venom. Please place them on my head as my ornament and glory. The scorching fire of Cupid's poison is unbearable. Please, therefore, let the touch of your feet quell the torment of my love." Now scholars have determined the most famous line there is "pallava" – "please place your feet on my head as my ornament and glory."

Now with that, Kṛṣṇa disguised as Jayadeva sat down and took the prasādam prepared by Padmāvatī. He had lunch and after finishing the prasādam, Kṛṣṇa told Padmāvatī he was going to go for another walk after prasādam. Now just after this episode, a few minutes later, the real Jayadeva Gosvāmī returned from his bath in the Ganges. And when he asked his wife Padmāvatī when prasādam would be ready, she was shocked. She said to Jayadeva, "You just came back earlier and then went over to your desk and had written something and then took prasādam and decided to go for another walk." So Jayadeva was astonished. Wait a minute. So he went over to his desk and there he saw, in wet ink, the words written by the Lord: "Please place your feet on my head as my ornament and glory." Seeing that, he exclaimed, "It's a miracle! It's a miracle! It's a miracle!" And tears of ecstasy flowed down from his eyes. He called out, "Padmāvatī, my dear wife, you were most fortunate. Kṛṣṇa himself has written the line 'pallava' and accepted prasādam from your own hand." So yes, that's the pastime. It's so wonderful, so sweet, and so relished amongst Vaiṣṇava devotees of the Lord.

So when Jayadeva Gosvāmī finally finished his illustrious Gīta-govinda – I was reading it – he concluded with the most beautiful prayer. I'll share with you: "Whatever is delightful in the varieties of music, whatever is graceful in fine strains of poetry, and whatever is exquisite in the sweet art of love, let the happy and wise persons learn that from the songs of Gīta-govinda."

Now the remarkable lesson from this pastime is that we see how Kṛṣṇa is subordinate to the love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and he shows that by asking her to place her two lotus feet – the subject of our recent lectures – her lotus feet on his head. And in Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi, verse 259, our beloved Śrīla Śrīdhara Sarasvatī also expresses a similar desire, and we'll conclude today with this prayer. It's so beautiful: "Become totally absorbed in Kṛṣṇa whose crown is decorated with the peacock plume and sing his name and glories constantly. Solely invoke his pleasure by engrossing yourself in serving his lotus feet and chanting the mahā-mantra continuously. My most intimate and heartfelt desire is to become a slave to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet. By her causeless mercy, may I attain spontaneous love for her service to Kṛṣṇa." And so may we one day, by the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda – that is our heartbeat. The doctor may feel a heartbeat, but really the heartbeat is to go back home, back to Goloka Vṛndāvana where we belong, serve the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So prabhus, I really enjoyed researching this. We're very busy at this particular moment up here in Ṛṣikeśa, India. We have our Ṛṣikeśa Kumbha Mela 2025. Literally – and I'm not exaggerating – thousands and thousands of westerners are coming to Ṛṣikeśa looking for something. We open the doors of the āśrama we're staying in every evening and we're getting between 600 and 900 guests every evening, kumbha melā, and at the end we serve prasādam, free ten-course feast every night. People are falling in love with Kṛṣṇa consciousness, this simple process introduced to us by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So although I know I'm really busy, I'm finding a few minutes to research and I'll continue because this is my seva to all of you. So we'll be back. I think we can maybe get two or three more classes about Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet. So stay tuned. See you next Friday. Divine lotus feet, Kṛṣṇa caraṇa, here on the banks of the Ganges, here in Ṛṣikeśa chanting the holy names with people from all over the world. Go back home, back to Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.