""Everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love. As we’ve mentioned numerous times, the series is meant to help us awaken our love for the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Of course, this is a very deep subject matter, but it’s one that Śrīla Prabhupāda has actually prepared us for. We should note that one of his very first books that he gave us at the beginning of the movement was *Nectar of Devotion*, which is a summary study of *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* by Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is *rasācārya*. This is a beautiful prayer to Rūpa Gosvāmī composed by my friend Hari-prasāda Dāsa; he did it in the last of January:

"By manifesting showers of *prema*, he, Rūpa, inundated the barren soil of the heart with *rasa*. I offer my humble obeisances to that rain cloud named Rūpa, who has been well-nourished by an ocean named Gaura."

Also, in giving us the *Kṛṣṇa* book—its full name is actually *Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead*, which is a summary of the Tenth Canto of *Bhāgavatam*—which Prabhupāda gave us at the beginning of the movement as well, he was again pointing us to achieving a deeper understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We often say Prabhupāda gave us everything, but he gave us everything in the very beginning. He writes in *Kṛṣṇa* book on page 46: "Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has given us a transcendental literary work entitled *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta*, which is full with Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. Exalted devotees can remain absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought by reading such books. Any book of Kṛṣṇa-līlā, even this book *Kṛṣṇa* or our *Teachings of Lord Caitanya*, is actually solace for devotees feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa."

Actually, if you were shipwrecked on an island in the Pacific Ocean and all you had to read was the *Kṛṣṇa* book, you could come to the highest stage of *prema*, feeling separation from Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. That’s a very powerful statement. But my godmother, who was a personal servant for many years, recounted one time how she went into Śrīla Prabhupāda's room and saw Prabhupāda reading *Kṛṣṇa* book. At that moment, Śrīla Prabhupāda looked up and he said, "If you just read this one book, you can become Kṛṣṇa conscious. You don’t have to read hundreds of books, just this one book." Then Prabhupāda said, "You don’t even have to read the whole book, just one chapter. If you read just one chapter of this book, you can become Kṛṣṇa conscious." So, she just nodded her head and said, "Yes." But Prabhupāda continued, still looking at her, and said, "Still, you don’t even have to read the whole chapter, just one page. You don’t even have to read the whole page, just one line." Then he said, "You don’t even have to read a whole line, just one word. Just one word of this book, if you read it, you can become Kṛṣṇa conscious because Kṛṣṇa is present in every word." Because Kṛṣṇa is present in every word. All glories.

So with that, we can understand how powerfully purifying is this process which Śrīla Prabhupāda has handed to us. One time he actually said, "Here is Kṛṣṇa, take Him." And I’d like to share a story in this connection how we’ve been given so much, everything, actually. My dear godsister, Yamunā Devī, once recounted—she described how one time she was traveling with Śrīla Prabhupāda as his cook in India along with her husband Gurudāsa and another couple, Śyāmasundara Prabhu and Mālati Devī. Śyāmasundara and Mālati had a daughter named Sarasvatī, who at that time was about four years old. And it’s quite famous, actually: Sarasvatī would go up to big Indian life members and ask them, "Do you know who Kṛṣṇa is? Do you know who Kṛṣṇa is?" And they were just like, looking at her, and she would say, "The Supreme Personality of Godhead!" and they would become very charmed. Śrīla Prabhupāda was actually very fond of her and he once said to her, "Sarasvatī, whatever realization you have, you can preach."

So one day, one very wealthy life member was so touched by this encounter with little Sarasvatī—"Do you know who Kṛṣṇa is? He’s the Supreme Personality of Godhead"—that he said, "I have a gift for you, Sarasvatī," and he handed her a pure silver deity of Kṛṣṇa. Sarasvatī kept that deity on a table in the apartment they were living in at that time, and she would offer Him flowers every day with lots of devotion. Then one day, Śrīla Prabhupāda visited Śyāmasundara and Mālati and, seeing that silver deity, he inquired about Him, like, "Where did He come from?" and Mālati explained that a life member had given the silver deity to Sarasvatī. So Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "But this is India. This deity is worth more than some people here make in a lifetime. Someone will steal it." Mālati asked, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, what should we do?" So Prabhupāda said, "When Sarasvatī is sleeping, take a mold of the deity and make another one from brass, then lock the silver deity away."

So it took a week or so for them to do it. And on the morning that the silver Kṛṣṇa was replaced with the brass Kṛṣṇa, and Sarasvatī saw the brass Kṛṣṇa, she said to her mother, "Where is my Kṛṣṇa? Where is my Kṛṣṇa?" and Mālati said, "Your Kṛṣṇa is here," but Sarasvatī started to cry and she said, "No, He’s not my Kṛṣṇa. Where is my Kṛṣṇa? I want my Kṛṣṇa!" and this went on for a few days. So much so that Mālati and Śyāmasundara were so disturbed that they were not able to serve Śrīla Prabhupāda properly. So they went to see Prabhupāda and they told him the whole story, and Śrīla Prabhupāda said to them, "Please call Sarasvatī here." So they went to get her, and when she came into Śrīla Prabhupāda's room, he asked her, "Sarasvatī, what is the problem?" and she replied, "I want my Kṛṣṇa! I want my Kṛṣṇa!" So Prabhupāda said, "That is very good, because the great devotees never say, 'I have Kṛṣṇa.' They always say, 'I want Kṛṣṇa.'" Then he said, "Do you want me to teach you a song about that, Sarasvatī?" She said, "Yes." So Śrīla Prabhupāda sat down with a harmonium and he started to sing the prayers to the six Gosvāmīs, the *Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam* by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya.

And after he sang the line, *he rādhe vraja-devike ca lalite*, which means the six Gosvāmīs were chanting very loudly everywhere in Vṛndāvana, shouting, "Queen of Vṛndāvana, Rādhārāṇī! O Lalitā! O son of Nanda Mahārāja, where are you all now? Are you just on the hill of Govardhana, or are you under the trees on the banks of the Yamunā? Where are you?" And then he stopped, and he said to Sarasvatī, "The six Gosvāmīs were great devotees who wandered on the banks of the Yamunā asking, 'Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Rādhā?' This is the higher stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Now, Yamunā said hearing that, how Sarasvatī became, you know, completely pacified. Yamunā later said, "When I saw Śrīla Prabhupāda explaining the highest subject to this young child to pacify her, the hairs on the back of my neck stood on end."

So, under Śrīla Prabhupāda's guidance and blessings, we may discuss these wonderful *līlās*, deep *līlās* of the Lord, with the hope that we may one day awaken our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that is there waiting in our hearts, waiting to be awoken. So today in our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, we’ll continue with the theme of flowers, and this will be part 12. Now, in the last two sessions we discussed *kadamba* flowers, but today I’d like to discuss the role roses play in Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes. I was reading that in our Western culture, although a variety of flowers are used to express different feelings and different emotions, roses are actually the most popular way to say, "I love you," "I’m sorry," "I thank you." You give some roses, "I love you," or "I’m really sorry," or "thank you." And depending on one's choice of color and arrangement, florists—I did some research—florists, they say red roses represent love and passion, white roses innocence and spirituality, yellow roses warmth, friendship and joy, pink roses gratitude, elegance and sweetness, orange roses pride, energy and intense desire, blue roses secret love, mystery and uniqueness, lavender roses represent love at first sight, wonder and enchantment, and black roses end of a relationship, change and courage.

And also, I was reading roses are possibly one of the oldest flowers known to man. There are rose fossils that date back 35 million years. And the oldest—this is interesting—the oldest living rose, meaning the rose plant that’s living, is 1,000 years old, and it lives at the base of a castle in Germany called the Cathedral of Hildesheim. It was planted in the early 800s—not 1800s, the early 800s—when that church was founded, and it still continues to bud and bloom each year. Can you imagine? 1,000 years producing pale pink flowers once a year, usually around May. Other interesting facts about roses are that all varieties of roses are edible, and the national flower for England is a rose, and Ecuador is one of the world's largest suppliers of roses with an astonishing 54 percent of the land filled with rose bushes. Of course, the rose is much more glorious in the spiritual world, in Goloka Vṛndāvana, where it is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. In Sanskrit, a rose flower is known—I was reading—by many different names: *japā*, *javā*, *javā-puṣpam*, *henapuṣpam*, *oḍrapuṣpa*, *kantaka*. And in Vṛndāvana here—where again I’m so fortunate to be in Vṛndāvana—there’s many types of roses, such as light pink roses, dark pink roses, red roses, I’ve seen roses with pink and white colors all mixed together, and roses that are soft and fragrant are usually red in color. However, as everyone knows, all roses have thorns on their stems.

Now, there was a poet named Vidyāpati, famous; he was from the Awadh region of India. He lived from 1342 to 1488. Vidyāpati, and actually Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī mentions him in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* in *Ādi-līlā*. He writes, *vidyāpati, jaideva, caṇḍidāsera gīta, āsvādana rāmānanda, svarūpa-gosāñi...* The translation is: Lord Caitanya used to read the books, relishing their songs with His confidential associates like Rāmānanda Rāya and Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī. Now, in one of his poems that I found, Vidyāpati uses the analogy of a thorny rose bush in describing Śrī Rādhā's love for Kṛṣṇa. It’s so sweet. He writes, "O beloved friend of mine," Śrī Rādhā says to her friend, "that the path of love is like a garden of roses, full of nectar, beauty and satisfaction. But once you enter into the garden of love, your clothes, respect, skin, attachment, and hair—ego—will be hurt by the sacrifices of love, which are like the thorns of roses." Vidyāpati says, "O friend of mine, therefore I warn you: come to the garden of divine love filled with roses at your own risk." Isn't that nice?

Now, roses in Vṛndāvana, they grow the whole year around, actually, but the most beautiful roses blossom in the month of Caitra. Month of Caitra, it’s coming soon, March-April. Now, another renowned poet—his name was Jñānadāsa, we’ve quoted him a few times—who lived around 200 years ago, he writes very beautifully: "Collecting tender, sweet little roses filled with color and fragrance, the Gopīs roam around Vraja. They filter the nectar and color from the roses and add drops of sesame seed oil to make *lālī*, a red balm. Then they take a small bud of a rose and apply that red balm onto Śrī Rādhā's lips." Jñānadāsa sings the glories of Śrī Rādhā who enchants the eyes of Kṛṣṇa. The lipstick put on like that—sings the glories of Śrī Rādhā who enchants the eyes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Now, the following pastime containing some glories of roses and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is from *Act 2* by Rūpa Gosvāmī; he actually goes into great detail, great poetic details, so if you have a copy of *Vidagdha-mādhava*, you can read the whole detailed pastime there. I’m just going to summarize it, as it is, but like a summary. So one day, while Rūpa Gosvāmī was writing *Vidagdha-mādhava*, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu suddenly appeared in his *kuṭīr*, his *bhajana-kuṭīr*, and the Lord inquired from Rūpa, "Rūpa, what kind of book are you writing?" So Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, he held up a palm leaf that was the page of the manuscript of the *Mādhava*, and when Lord Caitanya saw the fine handwriting of Rūpa Gosvāmī, His mind was very pleased, and being pleased, the Lord praised the handwriting there by saying, "The handwriting of Rūpa is just like rows of pearls." Famous, "The handwriting of Rūpa is just like rows of pearls."

So, in a part of the book we hear about a place in Vṛndāvana called *Praṣkandana-tīrtha*, which in Kṛṣṇa's time was famous for its gardens of wild roses; actually, it was known really as the foremost rose forest, more like a rose forest in Vṛndāvana. And Rūpa describes it as naturally a very aromatic place. You can imagine walking into a garden of fragrant roses—a very aromatic place—and even today, many gardeners have their flower gardens in this area of the *tīrtha* here in Vṛndāvana, where they grow these famous roses which are strung into garlands for all the beautiful deities here in Vṛndāvana. So in *Vidagdha-mādhava*, Rūpa Gosvāmī mentions that at the time of Kṛṣṇa's fight—or it describes it as a battle—with the Kāliya serpent, and Kṛṣṇa had not met yet, Rūpa says that at the time when Kṛṣṇa fought with the Kāliya serpent, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had not met yet. But he writes that their attachment to each other was soon to bring about their first meeting in the rose gardens of [that] secluded area. Now, a note here is that Rādhārāṇī had just married Abhimanyu, just to increase the intensity of, you know, the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It’s all on the transcendental platform. Abhimanyu is described as a dull cowherd boy, but he’s actually a shadow of Kṛṣṇa. Anyway, but unable to restrain her attachment to Kṛṣṇa, she finally expressed her feelings to Him in a letter. She wrote a letter to Kṛṣṇa just revealing her heart, how much she loves Him, which she gave to Lalitā and Viśākhā to give to Kṛṣṇa.

So those two *sakhīs*, they went and they found Kṛṣṇa with Madhumaṅgala, who were herding cows, but the cowherd boys and the pasture were some distance away. And Lalitā placed the letter in Madhumaṅgala's hand and she said, "Vārṣabhānī's princess has sent this to Kṛṣṇa! Vārṣabhānī's princess has sent this to Kṛṣṇa!" So turning to Kṛṣṇa, Madhumaṅgala, he joked, "Of what value is a letter? Better to have received some sweets!" Of what value was a letter? You know, he’s funny, Madhumaṅgala, attached to sweets. "Better they gave us some sweets!" But Kṛṣṇa was eager to know what Rādhārāṇī had written to Him; this is all in *Vidagdha-mādhava*. So He said, "Read it anyway, Madhu." So it’s described as Madhumaṅgala unrolled the letter; his eyes opened very wide in surprise as he read. Read this letter out loud to Kṛṣṇa. Rādhārāṇī wrote: "O dearly beautiful one, the artistic loveliness of your picture is now impressed within my mind. Since you are now living within my mind, wherever I wish to run, being agitated by impressions of you, I find that you, O my friend, are blocking my way."

So after Madhu re-read the letter—because Kṛṣṇa did read it again—Kṛṣṇa thought to himself, you know, a particular mood here, "Saintly housewives of Rādhā’s caliber never transgress strict moral codes." This letter must be a sign of great love. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa was actually happy to receive such a letter, but He pretended to be disinterested. He pretended to be disinterested in front of Lalitā and Viśākhā. So He said, "Madhu, why should I, who am adverse to even hearing about women, be polluted by the conduct of such a loose girl?" Strong words. "I will complain to the elders of this village about this." He was just, you know, trying to tease Lalitā and Viśākhā. So taking Kṛṣṇa's cue, Madhumaṅgala, he added very sternly, "O King of the brahmacārīs, listen! While you reprimand these brazen Gopīs, I will go to Mother Yaśodā and relate everything that has happened here, beginning with Śrī Rādhā's shameful, irreligious conduct. How unforgivable!"

Rūpa Gosvāmī’s—so Kṛṣṇa added, "Actually, Rādhā has never seen Me, nor have I seen her. This letter must be intended for some other cowherd boy who has captured her heart." So at this point, you know, Lalitā and Viśākhā, they couldn't believe their ears. What was Kṛṣṇa saying? So Viśākhā, so sweet, she said in a very appealing way, "Kṛṣṇa, by the same power with which you lifted Govardhana Hill, you have stolen the heart of a saintly Gopī! A Gopī who now appeals to you and to no one else." And Lalitā, she chipped in, "Kṛṣṇa, you are the happiness of Vraja." I love that—Kṛṣṇa, you are the happiness of Vraja. "How can you make this poor girl suffer so? Kṛṣṇa!" You know, in the same mood, you know, teasing everyone, He replied, "My brāhmaṇa friend Madhu does not tolerate any deviation from the path of piety, girls." So Lalitā was dumbfounded. After all the sweet smiles, you know, Kṛṣṇa had actually sent her way—*pūrva-rāga*, before they met, *pūrva-rāga* means there’s loving pastimes going on, but it’s mostly glances; as Kṛṣṇa leaves Nandagrāma to take care of the cows with Balarāma, He passes by the Gopīs and there’s these sidelong glances; Kṛṣṇa looks at Rādhā and Rādhā looks at Kṛṣṇa—so after all the sweet smiles Kṛṣṇa had sent her way, how could He be so indifferent? Lalitā was just thinking like this. So, visibly upset, Lalitā and Viśākhā just stormed off.

Now, here’s the interesting thing: suddenly Madhumaṅgala, he had a change of heart. They don’t usually hear like that, you know, he’s Kṛṣṇa’s little brāhmaṇa cowherd boy. And you know, so suddenly Madhumaṅgala had a change of heart, and turning to Kṛṣṇa, he said, "Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā obviously adores you. Why didn't you reciprocate with her love? Why did you say things"—how did he put it—"that will build a staircase leading to the top of a mountain of regret?" Such poetry! So, pausing for a moment, Kṛṣṇa replied—He had a change of heart, too—"My dear friend, you are right. It was cruel of me to mock her." And reflecting on His misbehavior, Kṛṣṇa concluded that He had gone too far and He thought, "Oh, upon hearing of my cruelty, moon-faced Rādhārāṇī, she might turn against me or she might even give up her life." He said, "What did we do now?" So Kṛṣṇa replied, "There’s only one thing to do: answer Rādhārāṇī's letter with a letter of my own." So Madhu kind of looked around and said, "What will you write a letter on?" So Kṛṣṇa replied, "With the help of rose petals, having turned her away, their scent may help bring her back to me." He said, "With the help of rose petals, I’ll write her a letter, and having turned her away, their scent may help bring her back to me."

So Madhumaṅgala, he clapped in approval and he said, "Then why don't we go to nearby [the forest]?" I described it earlier, forest of roses, and Madhu said that those roses will be very happy to serve your purpose. Again, remember, everything in Vraja is personal. Love reigns supreme in the spiritual world; there’s so much love because everything is personal. So he said that those roses in that forest will be very happy to serve your purpose. So, meanwhile, Lalitā and Viśākhā went to explain to Śrī Rādhā how Kṛṣṇa had dismissed her letter, and as she did so, hearing these things, tears flowed down Śrī Rādhā's cheeks. So Śrī Rādhā said to Viśākhā, "Of what use is it then? Better that I drown in the waters of the Kāliya Lake. Better I just drown in the waters of the Kāliya Lake. Even though Kṛṣṇa has rejected me, the hostile and insatiable hope to attain Him still burns within me. O mind"—she’s addressing her mind—"O mind, the deep water of the Yamunā, the sister of the King of Death, Yamarāja, is my only shelter now." Wow.

So off they went to the Kāliya Lake, you know, she’s thinking; Viśākhā is hoping she won't do it, but this is just a mood that they’ve set for that day, because they established all these pastimes in the morning, every morning in Vṛndāvana. So on the way to the Kāliya Lake, they passed by the rose garden, because it’s actually in that area, at which, you know, they’re coming to this beautiful flowering, rose forest. And Viśākhā tries to cheer Śrī Rādhā up by saying, "Śrī Rādhā, can you smell those beautiful roses? Let’s pick some to make rose water." So they stopped, and lo and behold, just at that moment, Madhumaṅgala and Kṛṣṇa arrived with their plan to—becoming specific here—Rūpa says to press rose petals into oil to use as a writing material for a love letter to Rādhā, to press rose petals into oil to use as a writing material substance, ink, for a love letter to Rādhā.

Now, as Madhumaṅgala and Kṛṣṇa approached the garden, they saw Rādhārāṇī along with Lalitā and Viśākhā. So what they did is they stopped and they hid behind a tree to listen to what these Gopīs were talking about, these three Gopīs. And watching very carefully, they saw Śrī Rādhā suddenly raise her arms, her hands into the air, saying, "O Kṛṣṇa, O killer of Pūtanā, is it right of you to have forced me into becoming so much attracted to you and then to neglect me?" So turning to Viśākhā, she said, "Perhaps I’ll just die of grief. If so, Viśākhā, please do one thing for me. To observe my funeral ceremony, place my body with its arms embracing a tamāla tree like creepers, so that I may remain forever in Vṛndāvana, undisturbed. This is my last request, my last request." But then Rādhārāṇī paused, and she thought, "But if I die, I will never see Kṛṣṇa again, whose face is like the moon," she was thinking, "and who enchants the three worlds." So at this point, her heart suddenly filled with a longing for Kṛṣṇa, and she said, "Friend, will you kindly show me His picture again?" So Viśākhā said, "But Śrī Rādhā, I have no tools to paint here. How can I draw you a picture?" So sitting down in the pose of a *yoginī*, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—she sat down in the pose of a, you know, the *āsana*, like a *yoginī*—she said, "Then I will make Him appear by my meditation. I will make Kṛṣṇa appear by my meditation."

Now, seeing Rādhā in this desperate situation, Kṛṣṇa could no longer restrain Himself, and He stepped out from behind the tree, His hiding place, which was pretty nearby. And seeing Him, Viśākhā was pleasantly surprised, and smiling, she said to Śrī Rādhā, "My dearest friend, I think you should open your eyes now and taste the fruit of your meditation. Open your eyes now and taste the fruit of your meditation." Śrī Rādhā opened her eyes, and she just gazed at Kṛṣṇa before she was mesmerized. And Rūpa writes, she whispered to herself, "Oh, my broken heart, good fortune has truly smiled upon you and made you whole again," addressing her heart, "made you whole again." So Kṛṣṇa was just about to take Śrī Rādhā's hand when a terrible voice pierced the air. Who could that be from? It was Jaṭilā, Rādhārāṇī's mother-in-law, who’s always trying to find Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together. Running up through the rose bushes, screaming, "What is Kṛṣṇa doing here? What is Kṛṣṇa doing here?"

Now, seeing this very quick changing of the plot, this turn of events, Viśākhā thought, "Oh, just as the *cakora* bird was about to drink the sweet rays of moonlight, a mass of dark clouds has covered the moon." So coming forward, Jaṭilā said to Kṛṣṇa, "You rascal! Why have you come here?" And Kṛṣṇa replied, "For the same reason as your daughter-in-law, to appreciate the beauty of these roses." And seeing this all unfold before her, "Oh my friend, after such a long time, I finally had the chance to enjoy pastimes with Kṛṣṇa, but alas, wicked fate has used this old lady as an instrument to stand in my way. How cruel, how very cruel, how cruel, how very cruel!" So then Jaṭilā just grasped her by the arm and said, "Come, daughter! Spend not a moment longer with this rascal Kṛṣṇa!" And the two quickly departed for Jāvaṭ, leaving Śrī Rādhā the only option to continue writing letters to Kṛṣṇa. See, the *ācāryas* say that I was reading, Rādhā is very fond of an expert at writing letters, especially love letters to Kṛṣṇa, of fondness, a fondness that has earned her the name *Pāṭhalekhikā*, earned her that name.

So Rūpa Gosvāmī recorded this first meeting of sorts of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa at Praṣkandana-tīrtha, a most beautiful garden of roses in his illustrious *Vidagdha-mādhava*. On his visit to Vṛndāvana, he actually spent time in the *tīrtha*. He spent time there, which I was reading, still overflowed with beautiful rose bushes 500 years ago. Sorry, Kṛṣṇa, another wonderful pastime. So today we’ll finish, as we do, with the beautiful verse from our hero Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī from his *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, *śataka* 11, text 66. He writes:

"O Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rādhā, decorated with splendid flowers and eclipsing the three worlds, is your beauty. The golden flowering vines are your delicate and splendid limbs, the beautiful lotus is your face, the jasmine flowers are your teeth, the bandhuka flowers are your lips, the white lotuses are your eyes, and the surrounding twigs are your hands and fingers."

Thank you, thank you, thank you once again. We’ll be back next Friday. I think we’ll get a couple more classes with flowers, let us see, otherwise we’ll choose another article or item that will help us awaken our love, gradually, for the Divine Couple by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

All glories.""