Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 79. Last week, we began discussing paraphernalia used in the worship of the Deity of the Lord, and in that lecture, we went into great detail about the bell. So, today we will discuss a most beautiful item used in service to the Lord, and that is the cāmara whisk.

The cāmara is translated by Śrīla Prabhupāda in his books as the yak-tail whisk, and in Vedic culture, it was used to fan a king or any personality having the stature of a king. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 6.7.6, the demigod Indra is described as being served using *cāmara-vyajana-ādīni*—meaning cāmara, or like a fan, and so on. In the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, 64 limbs of bhakti are described, and amongst them, limb 31 is called *pārśvato-vyajana*, or fanning the Lord.

*Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.140 says:
> *tatra*... (The term *pārśvato-vyajana* refers to cleaning various items of worship to be used for the Deity, and then to actually worship the Deity using these items like the cāmara, chatra, musical instruments, etc.)

Now, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī comments on this verse. He writes *pārśvato-rājña-iva-śobhā*: he writes *pārśvato* means offering worship by considering the Deity as a king. When you are worshiping, you are in this sense considering the Deity like a king, all in reverence. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 4.7.21, we hear how Lord Viṣṇu is worshiped using a cāmara. I will quote here again: "Fans of white hair appeared on both sides of the Lord like white swans, and the white canopy overhead looked like the moon." Similarly, in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 2.4.72, Lord Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha is also served using a cāmara whisk. It is quoted: "Servants stood about him, surrounding him and worshiping him with great respect, their appearance like his, their hands beautified by transcendental items for his service like slippers and yak-tail fans."

In my research, I was also reading that some forms of the Lord hold cāmara whisks, and further research reveals that the cāmara represents *dharma*. This is interesting. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 12.11.18 says *dharmaś cāmaram*—the cāmara whisk and the peacock fan represent *dharma* and fame, respectively. I found an interesting verse in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.155; it is a prayer wherein a devotee is eager to receive instructions on how to perform service using a cāmara: "O Lord of the universe, when will that day come when I, holding a cāmara in my hand, will see You along with Lakṣmī, and You will say to me, 'Wave the cāmara on both of us'?"

In his *Gandharva-samarpana*, verse 6, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī reveals his own desire to fan the Divine Couple with a cāmara whisk. He writes as follows—it is a long Sanskrit verse, so I cannot recite it—"Over in Vṛndāvana, on the banks of Yamunā, under the shade of a tree, while I fan the beautiful lotus faces of You and Kṛṣṇa that are kissed by droplets of perspiration that have arisen due to the fatigue of Your loving pastimes..." 

There is also a similar verse that appears as an additional verse in *Nectar of Instruction* that has not been published. By "not published," I mean the 11 verses of *Nectar of Instruction*, originally called *Upadeśāmṛta*, were actually spoken by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu to a group of devotees, including several of our six Gosvāmīs. On that occasion, Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote them down. Later, in a book called *Gaur-kṛṣṇodaya*, written by a certain Govinda Deva, a disciple in the lineage of Gadādhara Paṇḍita, it mentions another verse that Mahāprabhu spoke to that same group of devotees. I will quote that verse now, but I want to say that it is interesting that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī authorized this particular book and actually had it published in Bengali in his *Gaudiya Math*; it was available for all the devotees. So, here is the verse, which again mentions the fanning of the Divine Couple:

> "O Kṛṣṇa, O Lord having a dark, cloudlike complexion, O Lord having a face which is like a lotus blossoming due to the outpour of mercy in the form of the sidelong glances of Your beloved Rādhā, who has a lightning golden hue, when, by the mercy of Śrī Lalitā and others, will I fan that effulgent form of You along with Your beloved when You are replete with perspiration drops in the rāsa-līlā?"

A last note here: in the Asiatic Library in Bengal, there is a manuscript very old with 43 verses, and the stated author in that ancient scripture is Rūpa Gosvāmī, and there is an extensive commentary by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. So, members of our GBC Śāstra Committee are trying to get access to that old śāstra; that would be interesting—43 verses spoken by Mahāprabhu.

Let us see now. While researching this week, I found that the cāmara is called by different names in different languages in India, such as *chauri*, *chamari*, *chauri*, and *chamari*. So the cāmara, or the yak-tail whisk as Śrīla Prabhupāda often refers to it in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* and *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, is actually the tail of the yak, a species of oxen which roam the Himalayan mountain range. And when these yaks die a natural death, their beautiful flowing tails are taken to use as cāmara whisks. Therefore, in olden times, the entire Himalayan region was known as *Cāmara-deśa*. I thought that was interesting; previously, in ancient times, the Himalayas were called by people *Cāmara-deśa*. 

Now, the yak is considered one of the most pure and most pious of all animals mentioned in the Vedas because its stool, its dung, like the cow's, is used for fertilizer and fuel for sacred fires. And interestingly—this is something very interesting—it is completely odorless. The dung of the yak is completely odorless, thus making its lower body pure and useful for worship of Deities. That is where we get the whisk. And because of living in snow and harsh winter climates, its hair, the hair on its body, grows very fast to give warmth to its body; thus, its tail hair, I was reading, grows 20 times faster than an Arabian horse's tail. There is a detail for you!

In the *Sātvata-tantra* scriptures from the Atharva Veda, I found it is written: the cāmara is considered the best and purest amongst the hair of all living entities on earth. When it is kept in a treasure chest, it increases one's wealth; when it is hung on the door of a house, it prevents the negative effects of *asura-śakti* from entering into the house; when it is gifted to someone, it protects both the giver and the one who receives the gift; when it is waved at someone, it removes the glare of evil eyes. Now, we emphasized the phrase *asura-śakti* in that verse. So, I looked it up; it literally means the negative power of asuras, which includes the evil effects of demons, the evil effects of *dānavas*, it is like witches, the evil effects of *rākṣasīs*—technically that is a kind of ghost I was reading, in which their feet point in opposite directions when they walk, wow!—the evil effect of *piśāca*, or impious directions, and the evil effect of *adevajā*, which means entities not associated with pious demigods. As such, the cāmara is often referred to as *deva-vāhana*, the carrier of the devatās or demigods. 

I also read that in olden days, buying the hair—or let us say the tail of a yak—was considered a sin. To buy it, one could only actually possess it if it was received as a gift by the herder of the yak, the people that herded the yaks. 

Now, cāmara fans come in a variety of colors. Śāstra—this took some research—says that white cāmaras represent *sattva-guṇa* and are meant to be used only by Vaiṣṇavas. Crystal white cāmaras are to be used for fanning a king; cream-colored or slightly yellow cāmaras are to be used in the service of one's guru; brown-colored cāmaras are to be used for fanning sādhus or children; and the black-colored cāmara is to be used exclusively by the worshippers of Lord Śiva and Śakti worshippers. That is interesting. 

Now, śāstra goes on to say *suvarṇa-kāṣṭha-miśritam* regarding the handle of the cāmara. I will only quote a part of the verse: the handle of the cāmara fan can be made of gold, silver, wood, ivory, copper, and in some instances, alloys. In the *Padma-saṁhitā*, it is written that for a king of five villages, who is known as *rājā*, a wooden handle of a cāmara should be used. A king who rules over 10 villages should be worshiped by a cāmara with a copper handle. A king who rules over 10 other kings, he is called *adhirāja*, should be worshiped with a cāmara with a silver handle. And the king who rules over 10 *adhirājas*, he is known as a *samrāṭ*, should be worshiped with a cāmara with an ivory handle. And a king who rules over 10 *samrāṭs*, he is known as *cakravartī Mahārāja*; he should be worshiped with a handle made of pure gold. But there is one more; *Padma-saṁhitā* goes on to say that the guru of the *cakra* king, he is known as *sarveśvara*, he should be worshiped with a cāmara with a nine-gem-studded gold handle—not just a gold handle, but the guru, nine-gem-studded gold handle of the king. And I read elsewhere that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are meant to worship Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu with a white cāmara fitted with a silver handle. That is for us.

I also found an interesting fact in history: that in days of yore in Bhārat, in India, a cāmara fan or whisk was used whenever and wherever a king walked, sat down, traveled, or even sat down to eat; he was constantly being fanned. And during those times, on those occasions, two beautiful ladies always followed the king from behind and fanned him with the cāmara whisk. And these women were known as *deva-yākṣīs* or *viṣa-kanyās*. This is interesting: they were extremely beautiful unmarried teenage girls who from childhood were given small amounts of poison to ingest from poisonous trees, poisonous snakes, and poisonous herbs. And by ingesting these poisons very slowly over years, over a long period of time, they would become immune to their effects. They would become immune; poison bit, little bit, little bit—they would be full of poison, but they were immune to the poison. And when required, their respective kings would send them to rival kings or their enemies to kill them with their poisonous bites. Somehow, these girls would come close to the king, whatever, and then at an intimate moment, they would bite the king, and the king would die from the poison in their bodies. And it is interesting that it is said that the cāmara whisk—this is why I am getting to this—the cāmara whisk had the ability to counteract the poisonous effect of such a bite from a *viṣa-kanyā* girl. It is there in śāstra. The cāmara fan had the ability to counteract, in days of yore, the bite from one of these poisonous girls. Therefore, the tradition was that these *viṣa-kanyās*, they were the girls who followed the kings wherever they went, waving cāmara whisks, and you know, if another poisonous girl came and bit their king, they were the ones waving the cāmaras. Because of its fame in diluting the effects of poison as well as, you know, protecting royalty from evil eyes, what to speak of being used in fanning kings and queens and royal celebrations, whenever the hairs of a cāmara fell to the ground in the palace—you know, due to combing it or washing it or even just using the cāmara—servants cleaning the floors in the palace would take those strands of hair and present them to goldsmiths who would give them small amounts of gold in return. What a culture! Such an interesting peak at the days gone by.

Now, a poet from the Nimbārka-sampradāya has given us another interesting glimpse into history. His name was Candraśekhara. In one of his poems, he writes how cāmaras were used previously in the ratha-yātrā parades in Jagannātha Purī; he was a witness. I found this; it is interesting. This poet writes: 

> "The Lord of the universe, Jagannātha, is coming towards His chariot, leaving His palace temple behind. Sometimes crawling, sometimes laughing, sometimes dancing, sometimes crying in ecstasy, He comes out of His palace to be with His devotees. Infinite hands are raised in the sky, all holding cāmaras, fanning Lord Jagannātha together to the beats and jingling sounds of bells. These heavy waving cāmaras look like the dancing of lions in the forest. Devotees who are unable to see Him from afar, upon seeing these waving cāmaras, all fall down on the pavement to offer their respects to the Lord. Attached by four horses, the chariot is now running towards Vṛndāvana, carrying the Lord with Him."

Poet Candraśekhara says, "With open arms and tears of love in my eyes, I welcome my Jagannātha, Lord of the universe." Thank you, poet. 

Now, the poet Sadās writes how the queens of Dvārakā also waved cāmaras for the Lord's pleasure, but with an interesting little twist at the end. Listen to this: 

> "O King of Dvārakā, all glories to Your beautiful queens who are able to fan You with cāmara fans, unlike the gopīs of Vṛndāvana, who, mesmerized by Your undefeatable beauty, were stunned and never were able to wave a single cāmara at You, holding the trunks of trees. Now they lament and cry in Your separation. For them, only Your presence again in Vraja will satisfy them, as the cooling waves like the flying whisk."

Sadās says to the untrained eye, the queens of Dvārakā appear more fortunate than those most fortunate Vraja gopīs. That is deep.

Now, a certain poet named Govindadāsa, a Brajabāsī poet—whose poetry is actually, I was reading, still sung in rāsa-līlā theater performances in Vṛndāvana—he wrote a pastime called *Malla-yuddha*. So many advanced devotees, we will never know how many advanced devotees are living, if they came to Vraja to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, and many of them achieve perfection. So here is a pastime he wrote as a poem; it is called *Malla-yuddha*. Once, Kṛṣṇa said to Balarāma, "O Lord of cows, why are You always drinking nectar from a golden cup?" So Balarāma replied, "Kṛṣṇa, because I am King of Vraja, therefore I hold a golden cup as a victory sign in My left hand and bless everyone with My right hand up in the sky." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh, I see, My brother. Then we should announce You as the King of Vraja, and not that Abhimanyu, the so-called husband of Śrī Rādhā, because she is the Queen of Vraja, people assume he is the King of Vraja." 

So at that point, Madhu-mangala spoke up. He said, "Funny Brāhmaṇa boy, yes, I agree. We should organize a wrestling competition between You, Balarāma, and Abhimanyu. Whoever wins will become the King of Vraja, and the cowherd boys will always roam with him, waving cāmara whisks while uttering mantras from the Ṛg Veda." 

So within no time, this wrestling match was organized, and as Balarāma and Abhimanyu got ready, the whole of Vraja naturally came to watch the fun. And within moments, Balarāma and Abhimanyu were holding each other's shoulders, you like how wrestlers do, as the cowherd boys shouted, "Jayo! Jayo!" And the gopīs sprinkled drops of oil on both Balarāma and Abhimanyu to loosen their grip on each other, to enhance the mood of the wrestling match. Then suddenly, the poet says, Balarāma grabbed Abhimanyu around his waist and, throwing him onto the ground, placed His right foot on Abhimanyu's chest, saying, "This was as easy as playing with a child's ball." This was as easy as playing with a child's ball! And with that, all the Vrajabāsīs called out, "Jayo!" Then Mahārāja Nanda, he came forward and he placed the garland around the neck of Abhimanyu to acknowledge him—to acknowledge Abhimanyu—put a garland around his neck, and he placed a garland and a crown on the head of Lord Balarāma and proclaimed Him the winner. 

And at that point, all the cowherd boys came forward and started waving thousands upon thousands of cāmaras. The poet says it was like the full moon being waved by countless galaxies, *tārā-maṇḍala*, in the fields of Vrajabhūmi. The face of Lord Balarāma was effulgent like the glowing full moon, and the waving cāmaras looked like a multitude of stars dancing in ecstasy to the sounds and echoes of drums and bells. The gopīs started singing a song of blessings, the brāhmaṇas started chanting the hymns of the Vedas, the cows mooed very loudly, and the demigods showered flowers while sitting in their airplanes above. Poet Govindadāsa sits besides the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and simply prays for their blessings.

Kṛṣṇa, another scholar poet I discovered, his name was Mahéśvara Gosvāmī. He writes something very nice, including the cāmara. Little tidbit here: "May my body become the āsana of my guru, my senses the lamps of the temple of my guru, my desires the joy of my guru's service, and my dedication a cāmara waving behind my guru." That cāmara I desire to hold in my guru's service. It is like a galaxy of countless stars, the long beard of Brahmā, the flowing waves of the river Gaṅgā, and the white snow of the Himalayan Mountains, and a beautiful set of pearls—my cāmara. Wow. 

And in a similar way, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī refers to the cāmara in *Aṣṭādaśa-nāma-stotram*. He writes: "O Avanti, O Ujjayinī, please pick up that *spuṭam-mayā-purī*, the magical city of Indra; you can fan with the yak tail. O Country, you hold up the umbrella. O Kāśī, Benares, you keep the slippers ready. O Ayodhyā, you do not have to be afraid anymore. O Dvārakā, you may stop singing your eulogies because Lord Kṛṣṇa's Queen, Mādhava-devī, is pleased with all of you, who are ultimately her maidservants."

Harikṛṣṇa. A lot of nectar today. So finally, we will finish today with a small but significant, important mention of the cāmara yak-tail whisk as a mark on the transcendental body of Vṛndāvana's Queen, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. It is from *Jaiva-dharma*, in the section called *Madhura-rasa*, part three, by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. In this section, he is describing a number of auspicious signs on her transcendental body. This is from just one paragraph of many in that section: 

> "Upon the palm of her right hand, there are the same three prominent lines as on her left palm, plus a conch shell on each fingertip, a yak-tail cāmara fan below her index finger, and a gopura (a palace), a kettle drum, a lightning bolt, a pair of carts, a bow, a sword, and finally a water pot with a spout below her little finger."

Kṛṣṇa. Thank you so much. Yeah, we have got lots more paraphernalia to research and to describe and relish, and hoping to develop some spontaneous love for the Divine Couple. All glories to You. See you next Friday. Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""