Har Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Viṣṇupāda Kṛṣṇa Śrīmatī Bhaktivinoda Svāmī Prabhupāda.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our miniatures on stimulation for ecstatic love. And this will be part 134 in which we will continue our discussions on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's dress and attire today by hearing about her personal disguises, her personal disguises in her pastimes with Kṛṣṇa.

As I prepare these lectures, I am always remembering that it's only by the mercy of my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Therefore, when I came across the following prayer, I became very excited because it's the perfect glorification of Śrīla Prabhupāda and all our previous ācāryas for that matter.

It's called Śrī Śrī Bhāgavata Aṣṭakam. It means prayers praising pure devotees. What could be more wonderful?

By Śrī Rasikānanda. Rasikānanda was a great Vaiṣṇava ācārya. Many of you know in the era following Lord Caitanya's disappearance, along with his guru Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita, Rasikānanda inundated Orissa and surrounding districts in waves of Kṛṣṇa-prema that are still flowing today.

And here is aṣṭakam, meaning eight prayers glorifying great devotees. It begins: I always pray to and offer my obeisances to all the bhāgavatas, exalted pure devotees of the Lord, who are like honeybees drinking nectar from the sweet lotus feet of Śrī Govinda Deva.

By relishing the nectar of the most exalted love for Kṛṣṇa, they have renounced the material world and have become absorbed in unalloyed devotion to the Lord. Bliss and satisfaction saturate their pure minds. Prema illuminates their faces. They forever enjoy swimming in the ocean of nectar derived from hearing about Kṛṣṇa.

Even though dharma, artha, kāma, and mokṣa fall down at the lotus feet offering service, the bhāgavatas simply neglect them. They do not even glance at these allurements. Miseries are unknown to them. Tasting the nectar of love for Kṛṣṇa, they see the vast trouble-filled ocean of material existence as insignificant to cross as a water contained in the hoofprint of a calf.

I always pray to and offer my obeisances to all the bhāgavatas. They have independently and firmly bound the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa with a powerful rope of their topmost prema. Although continuously looking, Lord Brahmā and Śiva never attain the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Vṛndāvana.

But the bhāgavatas, the exalted pure devotees of Kṛṣṇa, are always in bliss from drinking the intoxicating nectar flowing from Govinda's lotus feet. I always pray to and offer my obeisances to these bhāgavatas. They give pleasure to Brahmā, all the Vaiṣṇavas, and everyone in the universe.

By Kṛṣṇa's desire, they take the form of ordinary humans and come to the earth in order to liberate the conditioned souls. Their appearance brings good fortune to the material world, and their lotus feet provide a boat for living entities to cross over the ocean of repeated birth and death.

I always pray to and offer my obeisances to all the bhāgavatas. Simply seeing such devotees gives a taste of nectar, stops the saṁsāra-cakra, the cycle of repeated birth and death, and cuts the hard knot of material attachment. Honoring the water from their lotus feet destroys the threefold miseries.

Talking with them increases one's love for Kṛṣṇa, the hero of Vraja. I always pray to and offer my obeisances to the bhāgavatas, overwhelmed with ecstatic love. Their bodies are always radiant and their hair stands on end. Streams of loving tears continuously wash their lotus faces.

Moment to moment, they enjoy spiritual happiness. Dancing blissfully and with voices choked with loving emotions, they loudly sing the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the gopīs. I always pray to and offer my obeisances to the bhāgavatas. Relishing Kṛṣṇa-prema is their only vow.

Their hearts are always softened by remembering Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, the reservoir of all bliss. Because Kṛṣṇa floods their hearts, gentle smiles adorn their beautiful faces. They please everyone by their divine qualities. They are grateful to all and are reservoirs of ever-flowing mercy.

I always pray to and offer my obeisances to the bhāgavatas. Even in dreams, they never forget Kṛṣṇa for a moment. With pure, unalloyed devotion, they are completely devoted to the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They are joyful abodes of wonderful qualities.

They live in this world as incarnations of pure love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I always pray to and offer my obeisances to the bhāgavatas. Then Rasikānanda gives its śruti-phala, the fruit or benefit of these prayers. He writes, "This bhāgavata aṣṭakam bestows all auspiciousness and awards one the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

It increases the excellence of bhakti and gives prema moment by moment. At every moment, one who faithfully reads these prayers will quickly attain the highest ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa. The bhāgavatas live in Kṛṣṇa's heart, and they completely control the Gopa-gana of Balarāma, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, by their pure love." I always pray and offer my obeisances to the bhāgavatas.

Thank you, Rasikānanda. My Kṛṣṇa!

What a meditation on Śrī Rādhā and all our previous ācāryas. Now, last week, we gave the Sanskrit definition of disguise as *cādmā*. C-H-A-D-M-A, *cādmā*. Now, further research explains that one who can assume any number of various disguises is known as *cādmādarī*. *Cādmādarī*.

And in the case of Śrī Rādhā, she is known as *cādmādarīṇī*. Beautiful *cādmādarīṇī*. However, a famous poet, Vidyāpati, whose poems Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu enjoyed hearing from Ray Rāmānanda and Svarūpa Dāmodara, writes in his poem called *Antar-gīta*, meaning "the inner grief of separation," that certain disguises are unavailable to Śrī Rādhā.

How's that?

Well, his poem begins with Śrī Rādhā describing to Lalitā Sakhī her pain in separation from Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā says, and this is wonderful: "Oh dear, why can't I disguise myself as the vaṁśī garland?

If I could become Kṛṣṇa's vaṁśī garland, I would always reside near his heart. Why can't I disguise myself as a cowherd boy?

If I could be a cowherd boy, I will be able to play and wrestle with him. Why can't I disguise myself as a fish in the Yamunā, which touches the lotus feet of Lord Hari when he jumps into the river?

Why can't I disguise myself as his sweet, lifeless flute, who, despite being non-living, as soon as it contacts his sweet nectarian lips, turns dead bodies alive again." Vidyāpati says, "Who knows Śrī Rādhā's inner pain of separation?

She who knows the art of disguise as the goddess of loving meetings." Wow. The goddess of loving meetings. Har Kṛṣṇa. However, the famous poet Viśākhadatta describes a very beautiful pastime in which Śrī Rādhā completely deceived her lover in the most clever disguise.

It's in his famous poem called "Love in Disguise." And therein he writes: "One time, Kṛṣṇa was sitting under a tall Kadamba tree when Lalitā Sakhī approached him with a beautiful flower stick." I thought that was amazing. She has a flower stick and cotton balls soaked with fragrant essential oils used by Śrī Rādhā as a gift for Kṛṣṇa.

Lalitā said, "Oh, Madhava, look what I got for you. The fortune of your life itself has approached you today. The fortune of your life has approached you today." Kṛṣṇa said, "What is that, my dear Lalitā?" Lalitā said, "More than you could expect.

The sweet nectar of pink roses, collected by queen bees and poured into a diamond pot, infused by the spring season and placed in the palms of goddesses, applied on soft cotton buds, and offered to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā.

Such rare rose perfume was smeared on the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā and is now in my hands on these cotton balls, which I'm giving you as the dearest fortune of your life." Placing those perfumed cotton buds around his ears, Kṛṣṇa smelled the aroma of Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet.

And what did he do?

He joined his palms in respect and said, "Oh, Lalitā, I must have performed great yajñas, for you have appeared as a blessing for my eyes today. You have appeared as a blessing for my eyes today." So Lalitā said, "Indeed, you should always praise the sakhīs of Śrī Rādhā, because we are the queens of all the forms of art." Then Kṛṣṇa said, "Really?" Lalitā said, "Do you have any doubts about it, Kṛṣṇa?" So Kṛṣṇa said, "I certainly do not agree with that statement." So Lalitā said, "Why is that, Kṛṣṇa?" And Kṛṣṇa replied, "Because whenever I disguise myself, you sakhīs can never recognize me." Then Lalitā said, "That's because of your clever and cunning ways.

That's because of your clever and cunning ways. But this time, our queen, Śrī Rādhā, will disguise herself, and if you can find her, Kṛṣṇa, then you win. However, if you will not recognize her disguise, then we sakhīs will be known as the goddesses of all forms of art, because disguising, also in Vraja, it's a form of art." As Kṛṣṇa nodded his head in agreement, Lalitā left for Śrī Rādhā's palace.

And when she got there, she saw Śrī Rādhā sitting on her bed surrounded by many of her maidservants, her dūṭīs, and sakhīs. And Viśākhā was showing Śrī Rādhā a painting book in which many scenes of different forests were painted.

And Viśākhā said to Śrī Rādhā, "Look at this one, Śrī Rādhā. It's you dancing in the rain at Lohavana. And look at this painting here. You're sitting in the garden of Campaka-vana while your gopīs are plucking jasmine flowers for your outfit.

And this painting is also beautiful because you are watering a mallikā vine with your own hands." Now, suddenly, Lalitā entered into the conversation and said, "Oh, Viśākhā, you are right. Śrī Rādhā looks so beautiful in these paintings. However, Kṛṣṇa thinks that he is the topmost expert in all different forms of art.

He agreed that if Śrī Rādhā disguises herself and he does not find her, then he will accept that we, the Gopa-gaṇa, the Gopa-gaṇa family of gopīs, are the actual goddesses of all art forms." So, nodding her head, she agreed to the proposal.

Meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa was searching for a lost cow when he reached a dense forest filled with henna groves. H-E-N-N-A, henna, like, you know, the painted on the hands with henna. There are groves of henna, filled with henna. And there he saw a group of young gopīs painting beautiful designs on each other's hands and feet while singing the following song.

They were singing, "Gopīs are always singing Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's glories." So here's the song that the gopīs were singing as they painted henna on each other's forms. Here's the song: "Dear Sakhīs, come forward. This henna is not ordinary. The color of this henna increases the love in your beloved's heart.

The redness of your hands and feet will catch glimpses of your beloved's eyes. Do not roam aimlessly in this forest of love. Filled with molten love, your heart is calling out for your beloved. Hurry up, as the cuckoo bird is singing songs of reuniting.

Let your hands and feet be painted with beautiful designs of henna." That's the song. Hearing their singing, Kṛṣṇa approached them. He was curious and asked one gopī, "Oh, gopī, is what you're singing true?" And that gopī nodded, "Yes, it is.

Our henna is magical. It does not only paint one's hands and feet, but also lovers' hearts." Wow. It does not only paint one's hands and feet, but also lovers' hearts. So Kṛṣṇa asked, "Oh, gopī, you speak so sweetly, just like a raindrop falling on the soft mud of Vraja from the heavenly planets.

What is your name, my dear gopī?" So that gopī replied, "Well, people call me Lalitā Harinī, the henna painter." Henna painter.

So Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh, Lalitā Harinī, paint me as well with your henna." So the gopī asked Kṛṣṇa, "What should I paint on you?

What design or what pattern do you want painted on you with my henna?" So Kṛṣṇa thought for a moment.

He said, "Okay, dear gopī, on my hands write 'Kishorī.' On my fingers write 'Bāminī.' On my neck write 'Śrī Rādhā.' On my wrist write 'Ānanda-bhariṇī.' On my chest write 'Svāminī.' On my earlobes write 'Nandinī.' On my shoulders write 'Vilāsinī.' On my eyelids write 'Piyārī.' On my lips write 'Shyamā.' On my nose write 'Sundarī.' On my heart write 'Rādhā, Śrī Rādhā.' Fill my body with the names of my beloved." So this gopī started writing all these names of Rādhā on Kṛṣṇa's body with henna paste.

And at the moment she touched Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa said, "Is it your touch which is so pleasant, or is it the names of my dearest which feel so pleasant on my body?" Let's repeat that. "Is it your touch which is so pleasant, or is it the names of my dearest which feel so pleasant on my body?" So the gopī replied, "It is the names of your beloved, and the art of my henna.

It is, it is the names of your beloved surely, and the art of my henna." So Kṛṣṇa then started chanting the names of Śrī Rādhā. And minutes later, when the henna had dried, Kṛṣṇa looked at his reflection in the water of a nearby lake and became mesmerized.

So overjoyed, he then went to Śrī Rādhā's palace to meet her and show her these beautiful henna designs. But when he came to Śrī Rādhā's room in her palace, the entrance was closed with curtains. He couldn't go in. So Kṛṣṇa called out, "Oh, dear Rādhī, please come see how I look today." But Śrī Rādhā replied from the other side of the curtains, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa, you look wonderful with those henna designs." And puzzled, Kṛṣṇa said, "But how do you know that I'm painted with henna designs?" So Rādhā replied, "Because it was me who painted them on you." And at that moment, Lalitā opened the curtains, and all the gopīs started laughing and giggling.

They said, "See Kṛṣṇa, you didn't recognize our queen disguised as Lalitā Harinī, the henna painter. So we have won." And as Kṛṣṇa admitted defeat by slowly bowing down to all the gopīs, Śrī Rādhā said, "Long live the disguising pastimes of Vraja!

Long live my sakhīs, who are the topmost goddesses of all forms of art." Rādhā and the gopīs have won. The poet Viśākhadatta writes, "Showers flowers on the divine couple who have countless pastimes of disguise to ignite love in the hearts of the divine couple's devotees." You and me, pra stimulation for ecstatic love.

Har Kṛṣṇa. Wow. So I would like to end the class today with a verse sung regularly in the Rādhā-Kānta temple in Purī, Orissa. It's sung during Maṅgala-ārati. Actually, as we mentioned last week, it describes the greatest disguise of all time: Kṛṣṇa as Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

And here's how it goes. It's sung at Maṅgala-ārati. "Hail to the son of Śacī, the Lord disguised in a golden form, playing in the water of the sacred lake Indradymna Sarovara. He is splashing water on Gaura, Gadāi, and Nitāi as he plays in ecstasy.

He is like a large shark in an ocean of nectar, and his associates are like fish in those waters, standing on the banks of that ocean of love and bliss. My guru is pouring nectar on me from amṛta-filled pots, showering me with līlā-mādhuryam, showering me with līlā-mādhuryam and making my birth successful.

Oh brother, sing the glories of Guru and Guranga. Hari Kṛṣṇa!" All thanks to Śrīla Prabhupāda, everything.

So thank you, Prabhupāda.

We're busy traveling still. I'm still in China, but I'll be leaving for Europe soon. In a month and a half, we have our Polish summer festival tour coming up, Mahā-mahotsava festivals, almost every night along the Baltic Sea coast in Poland, and then a tour through Europe.

And eventually, well, some months from now, I'm looking forward to getting back to Vraja. We're going to have our Kārtika-parikramā, and this Kārtika, we're going to be doing Māyāpur, the places of the holy places of Śrīla Prabhupāda in Kolkata, where he took birth and where he lived, etcetera, and then Jagannātha Purī.

So all of us, our future is very bright by his grace, by Prabhupāda's grace.

See you next Friday. In her disguises. Key Māyāpura Kṛṣṇa all over the world. He go JJ C D she and D.