Dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vrndāvana Dhāma. Śrīmad Bhaktivedanta Svāmī Prabhupāda ki jaya!

Namaste Sarasvatī Devai Gaura Vāṇī Prachāriṇai Nirviśeṣa Śūnyavādi Pāścātya Tyāgiṇi. I’d also like to say another prayer to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

In English, I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master, who gave me beautiful kanti-mālā. He is fortunate, for he has seen the beautiful form of a devotee, and he offered me his shelter. In one of his hands, he is holding my hand, and with this other hand, he is holding the lamp of knowledge, which helps me to cross over the dark ocean of the material world.

Sūradāsa says, “My Guru deserves the greatest respect, because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye. I bow down to him again and again and again.” Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya!

We are continuing with our mini-series on stimulating ecstatic love, and this will be part seven. We’ll begin with the beautiful poem by a poet named Citra Swami from his book called Nitya Kirtan. It was written in the year 1592.

It’s very sweet, glorifying both Kṛṣṇa and His cows. Actually, I’ve realized from giving these lectures over a period of time that Kṛṣṇa spends most of His day with His cows in the pasturing grounds of Śrī Vrndāvana Dhāma. There’s actually a saying here in Vrndāvana that if you see five cows sitting together, it means Kṛṣṇa is very near.

They say like that here. So, this poet, Citra Swami, he writes in the language... It’s very nice. Cows are in front of Him, Kṛṣṇa; cows are behind Him; cows are everywhere. Govinda, the protector of the cows, loves to be surrounded by them.

He runs with them and derives great pleasure from them. He even rubs the dust of the hooves on His body, oblivious to the mood of Vaikuṇṭha. He plays with cows as a cowherd boy. He fills the land of Braja with beloved cows and protects them by holding up Govardhana Hill.

The poet Citra Swami says, “Just see the Lord of all that be. He is dressed like a cowherd boy and is returning from the pasturing grounds to Braja with His cows.” Very sweet. So, in His duties as a gopāla, that’s how they call a cowherd boy here in Vrndāvana, it’s said that Kṛṣṇa uses His flute to call them.

He uses His stick to show them the way, and sometimes He also uses a stick to pet His cows, and He uses His silken rope to control them. But there’s one more very special thing that He uses in herding cows, which stimulates love for Him in the hearts of His devotees, including, I was reading, even Śrīmatī Rādhā Rāṇī and Her Gopis.

And what is that?

His blanket. You could say this is part two about His blanket. In our last lecture, we spoke about Kṛṣṇa’s blanket, so special. His blanket. Now, hearing the word “blanket,” we might think that Kṛṣṇa, you know, uses it just for covering Himself, like when He sleeps or to protect Himself from the cold.

But no, He actually carries a blanket as part of His, how do I say, His outfit every day while going to the forest with His cows. During my research, I found an old painting in Vrndāvana that depicts not only Kṛṣṇa but all the cowherd boys wearing blankets while herding cows.

And then I found out that even today, there’s a caste of herdsmen in Gujarat, India, that still carry big sticks and they wear blankets on their shoulders as a uniform, which distinguishes them from the shepherd caste who herd goats.

They don’t wear the blankets. And actually, there are traces of such a tradition as carrying blankets to be seen here and there in Vrndāvana as well. Like lots of times we’ll be out in different villages in Vrndāvana and I’ll see the cowherd boys there carrying blankets.

And that certainly, blankets are very much part of our overall Vedic tradition. Can do, chapter 3, verse 27, describes that when the Brāhmaṇa descendants of the Bṛṣṇi, Bhoja, and Āndaka dynasties, who are all incarnations of demigods, went to Prabhāsa, they were given charity in the form of blankets.

The exact verse is: “The Brāhmaṇas were not only given well-fed cows in charity, but also gold and gold coins, bedding, clothing, animal skin seats, that meant deer, blankets, horses, elephants, servants, and sufficient land for maintenance.” Now, the Tenth Canto, 10.71.16, also mentions blankets.

When Lord Kṛṣṇa departed Dvārakā to fight with Jarāsandha, He was accompanied by an army. Army?

He had servants, even had His Queens. So the verse says, “On all sides proceeded finely adorned women, attendants of the royal household, as well as courtezans. They rode on palanquins and camels, bulls and buffaloes, donkeys, mules, bullock carts, and elephants.

Their conveniences were fully loaded with grass, tents, blankets, blankets, clothes, and other items for the trip.” And Bhagavatam. So, it’s no surprise then that the Brajavāsīs had blankets in Kṛṣṇa’s Vrndāvana pastimes 5,000 years ago. But it’s important to note that such blankets in Kṛṣṇa’s Vrndāvana pastimes were particularly special.

How so?

Because, as we’ve mentioned several times, everything in Braja is personal, everything is conscious. That’s the nature of the spiritual world. In fact, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says in Gopāla Campū, Pūrva, chapter one, he says: “Vṛndāvana is beyond all considerations of dead matter.” A very eloquent way of saying that in the spiritual world, everything is conscious, everything is personal.

As a result, 5,000 years ago, during Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes on Earth, anything and everything in Vrndāvana achieved perfection, even something so simple as a blanket. For Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 11th Canto, 12th chapter, verse 8, says, beautiful Sanskrit: “The inhabitants of Vrndāvana, including the Gopis, cows, unmoving creatures such as the twin Arjuna trees, animals, living entities with stunted consciousness such as bushes and thickets, and snakes such as Kāliya, all achieved the perfection of life by unalloyed love for Me, and thus they very easily achieved Me.” This is from the lotus mouth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

So, something so simple as a blanket, a blanket in Vrndāvana, it’s not ordinary, it’s extraordinary. And thus, there are many pastimes where Kṛṣṇa’s blanket or blankets play a major role. We discussed a few in our last lecture, but for your pleasure, I shall share another beautiful pastime with you now.

We find this beautiful pastime containing the blanket in the works of a famous Vaiṣṇava poet named Līlā Śuka. Now, I did some research. Līlā Śuka, he was a contemporary poet of Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, who himself was an extraordinary poet.

Līlā Śuka was from the village of Uchhāna, near Varṣāṇā, Lalita’s village, and he was initiated in the line of Gadādhara Paṇḍita of the Pañca-tattva. His beautiful poetry, I found out, is still sung today in both the Rādhā Ramaṇa temple in Vrndāvana and Rādhā Govindajī’s temple in Jaipur.

They sing his poetry. He wrote a book called Gaura Līlā Sāgara. Gaura Līlā Sāgara. And his descriptions of the pastimes of Lord Caitanya were all written in the Braja language of Vrndāvana. Um, as an indirect result of this, well, an indirect result of this, unfortunately, was that his poetry was not widely read during his lifetime, because most of Caitanya’s followers were Bengali and were not conversant with the dialect.

But fortunately, some of his writings are there now in the Vrndāvana Research Institute. So we had a chance to go over them. So he relates, he relates that one time, some Gopis were fetching water from a well in Braja.

And of course, that’s very laborious work. If you see, we go out in Braja, we often see the young girls, you know, bringing these buckets of water up from the bottom of a well. It’s quite strenuous. So that’s what was happening.

They were fetching water from a well, and it was difficult. So they asked Madhu Maṅgala, who was resting nearby with Kṛṣṇa, in a very humble way. They said, “Hey Madhu Maṅgala, wake up. You are very strong. Our wrists and arms are weak.

Please help us to place these heavy water pots on our heads so that we can carry them to our homes.” Now, Madhu Maṅgala was astonished. He said to the girls, “What nonsense is this?

I am the son of a Brāhmaṇa. Did my mother give birth to me to place cheap water pots on the heads of village girls?” So, hearing his words, the young Gopis, they just started, you know, giggling and giggling and laughing.

So Madhu Maṅgala became offended, actually became angry. And he looked over to where Kṛṣṇa was sleeping. But it’s described that when he saw Kṛṣṇa’s moonlike face, all his anger dissipated. And pausing for a moment, he thought, “I’m not going to waste time arguing with these girls.

I’m going to go back to my afternoon nap with Kṛṣṇa. I’ll go back to my nap with Kṛṣṇa.” But he considered, “If I fall asleep now, and Kṛṣṇa wakes up later and goes to herd His cows, I’ll miss out on everything.

I’ll miss out on everything.” So, “I’ll do one thing. I’ll tie one end of my blanket to Kṛṣṇa’s feet, and the other end to my feet. That way, if He wakes up and tries to leave, He’ll fall all over me and wake me up too.” Interesting plan.

So, after tying the two of them together, Madhu Maṅgala laid down to to rest, to go to sleep. And then just a couple of hours later, Kṛṣṇa woke up. And as per Madhu Maṅgala’s plan, when He tried to stand up, He quickly fell down over Madhu Maṅgala, because, well, their feet were tied together with Madhu’s blanket.

So, at that moment, of course, Madhu Maṅgala woke up. And he immediately embraced Kṛṣṇa, who was lying next to him. So Kṛṣṇa, you know, taking in this situation, He looked him out of. He said, “Madhu, why did you bind our feet together with a blanket, causing me to fall down on the ground so hard?” So, Madhu replied, “My dear friend, why should you be surprised?

Every morning while wrestling, you are defeated by even the smallest of boys who make you fall on the ground while fighting. What to speak of the strongest fighter, me?” This is a funny cowherd boy. “Kṛṣṇa, the real issue I want to discuss with you is that today your Braja Gopis insulted me.” Kṛṣṇa said, “Oh, how is that?” Madhu related the whole incident that took place at the water well.

And hearing this, Kṛṣṇa made a concerned look and said, “Don’t worry, Madhu. We’ll take revenge on those girls.” The pastimes building up. So, the next morning, Kṛṣṇa and His funny cowherd friend Madhu Maṅgala made their way to a forest trail where the same group of Gopis were passing through to fill, after filling their pots with water.

And there, from a distance, a little distance away, they hid behind the bushes. Kṛṣṇa and Madhu threw small stones at the Gopis’ water pots, causing them to break apart and making all the Gopis soaking wet. That was the revenge.

So, visibly, visibly upset, all the girls immediately made their way to Varṣāṇā to complain to the Queen of Vrndāvana. And upon arriving, Lalita Śākhi came forward and gave a full report to Śrīmatī Rādhā and concluded by saying, “Kṛṣṇa’s mischievous behavior is out of control.

And on top of that, His fat friend Madhu Maṅgala is helping Him to do such things. O Queen of Vrndāvana, on behalf of all His Gopis, I’m requesting you to do something.” So, hearing from her, like, you know, her favorite Gopi, Lalita, Śrīmatī Rādhā took the incident very seriously and she said, “Lalita, as you are the one who experienced this mockery,” the poet uses this word, “this mockery, you should tell me what punishment I should give to Kṛṣṇa this time.” Indicating there’s many times, “What punishment should I give to Kṛṣṇa at this time?” And Lalita thought for a moment, and she replied, “Māna is the best punishment.” So, remember, māna in Sanskrit means anger.

So, in other words, she’s saying, “Once again, show your anger to Kṛṣṇa.” And Lalita concluded, “But this Kṛṣṇa, Rādhē, He’s very tricky. He always finds a way to pacify your anger. But don’t allow that to happen this time. You remember so many pastimes we told, how Kṛṣṇa goes in various ways, He pacifies, pacifies, pacifies His anger, but not this time.” Lalita said.

And Rādhā, she continued, “For His continuous grievous offenses to us Gopis, I also recommend, get this, you steal His cherished blanket, the one woven and embroidered with gold and silver metallic threads and embedded with pearls on the border.” That blanket.

She thought for a moment and said, “Yes, expressing my mind, my anger, and stealing His beloved blanket are certainly appropriate punishments.” So then, she brought it. Lalita and her friends made their way some distance away to where Kṛṣṇa was now taking rest under the shadow of a Kadamba tree, while all of His cowardly friends swam in the nearby Yamunā River.

So He’s actually sound asleep now. At that point, Śrīmatī Rādhā, with the help of her friends, very slowly snuck up. They were crawling, making no, not making any, you know, being very careful not to break any little sticks and make a noise or rustle the leaves.

They slowly snuck up to where Kṛṣṇa was sleeping. And with great care and attention, very deftly, they managed to take His blanket from under Him. Don’t ask me how they did it, but they did it. And they all ran back to Varṣāṇā.

So, not long after, Kṛṣṇa woke up. This is also much nectar. Kṛṣṇa woke up, and noticing that His blanket was gone, started searching for it frantically everywhere. And unable to find it, He returned to where He’d been sleeping. And seeing particular, very unique flowers that are always part of the flower bracelets of Śrīmatī Rādhā, lying on the ground, He came to the conclusion that it was She, Śrīmatī Rādhā, who had stolen His blanket.

The little flowers from her bangles, that was the evidence. So now, taking His friend Madhu Maṅgala with Him, Kṛṣṇa immediately made His way to Varṣāṇā to confront Śrīmatī Rādhā, because that blanket is very dear to Him. But when He arrived and approached the gates of the palace, a sakhī stopped Him, saying, “Oh, dark-looking cowherd boy, don’t you know our Queen is resting?

You cannot go inside.” But Madhu Maṅgala, he brushed the sakhī away, and he and Kṛṣṇa made their way into the palace. Now, while passing by one of the many rooms, they overheard Śrīmatī Rādhā and her girlfriends laughing and joking about how Śrīmatī Rādhā had silently stolen Kṛṣṇa’s beloved blanket.

So, entering the room, Kṛṣṇa said to Rādhā, “My dear Śrī Rādhē, I know you have stolen my blanket. Please give it back to me, as this blanket was given to me by my mother, Yaśodā, and she will be very upset if it’s lost.” At that point, one of the girls, one of the Gopis, she spoke up, saying, “Kṛṣṇa, why would our Queen steal your dark, dusty blanket?

I really like that one.” “Kṛṣṇa, why would our Queen Śrīmatī Rādhā steal your dark, dusty blanket?” So, Kṛṣṇa, kind of took it all in.

He paused for a moment, and it’s so nice. He said very softly, “To punish me?

To punish me?” So then, Śrīmatī Rādhā said, “Exactly, Kṛṣṇa.

And it appears you have realized now how you have mistreated my dear friends. But I will only return your blanket on one condition.” So, Kṛṣṇa, He said, “Whatever the condition is, I will accept. Just please give me back my blanket.” Śrīmatī Rādhā, she shot back, “No, first listen, and then agree to the condition.

Then only I’ll return your blanket.” So, Kṛṣṇa said, “All right, what’s the condition?

Whatever it is.” So, Rādhā, she said very slowly, “The condition is, you take four explicit vows, special vows, to take some vows here, Kṛṣṇa, four.” So, Kṛṣṇa said, “What are the four vows?” It’s so sweet. “Propose, listen to this,” Śrīmatī Rādhā said. “The first vow is that you will never trouble my dear Gopis again.” So, Kṛṣṇa said, “Yes, my beloved, I take that vow.” Then Śrīmatī Rādhā said, “The second vow is that you will never leave Braja.” So, Kṛṣṇa said, “I accept that vow, Śrīmatī Rādhā.

I’ll never leave Vrndāvana.” Then Śrīmatī Rādhā said, “The third vow is that you will always stay within my heart.” And Kṛṣṇa said, “Yes, dear one, I will always remain within your heart.” Then Śrīmatī Rādhā said, “And the fourth vow, Kṛṣṇa, the last vow is that you will never leave my devotees, even during the worst times of their lives.

You will never leave my devotees, even during the worst times of their lives.” So, Kṛṣṇa paused, and closing His eyes, you know, He replied with deep emotion, “Yes, dear Rādhā, I promise, I will never abandon those devotees who have taken shelter of You, even when they are experiencing their most difficult of times.

Yes, dear Rādhā, I promise, I will never abandon those devotees who have taken shelter of You, even when they are experiencing their most difficult of times.” So, at this point, Śrīmatī Rādhā broke out in a big smile and handed Kṛṣṇa back His cherished blanket.

And then they embraced each other. And at that point, all the Gopis, they performed Ārati to the Divine Couple, and finally showered them with flowers. So, probably, in this pastime, we see once again how deep is Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa, as we’ve discussed so much, so that she actually controls Him with her love.

And we also see how deep is Kṛṣṇa’s love for Rādhā, for love, of course, is reciprocal. Kṛṣṇa’s love for Rādhā is expressed in a beautiful verse from the Brahma Vaivarta Purāṇa, Kṛṣṇa Janma Khanda, 15.70. I found it, where Kṛṣṇa says, listen to this: “Speaking on hearing the syllable ‘Ra,’ I become anxious and bestow the most pristine bhakti upon the chanter.

And on hearing the syllable ‘Ḍha,’ I personally follow the chanter in order to hear the chanting of the name ‘Rādhā.’” Let me recite that again from Kṛṣṇa’s heart: “On hearing the syllable ‘Ra,’ I become anxious and bestow the most pristine bhakti upon the chanter.

And on hearing the syllable ‘Ḍha,’ I personally follow the chanter in order to hear the chanting of the name ‘Rādhā.’” Now, of course, these are all very deep subject matters. This is not like, you know, introductory Classical, or something from Bhagavad-gītā.

But nevertheless, these matters can be realized by the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, under the direction of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

In this regard, there is the following verse composed by a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava named Anādi in his commentary to Caitanya Candrodaya, verse 28 by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, that verse is so beautiful: “No one in this world has ever had contact with the taste of the ambrosia flowing from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.

Only the associates of Śrī Caitanya are familiar with this rasa (liquid mellows) through personal experience. Only by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu can we understand these deep subject matters.” Once again: “No one in this world has ever had contact with the taste of the ambrosia flowing from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.

Only the associates of Śrī Caitanya are familiar with this rasa (liquid mellows) through personal experience.” Now, in that verse, the word “pārṣada” means literally associates, means the personal associates of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But I checked with some Sanskrit scholars. It can also mean devotees.

So, it can read like this: “No one in this world has ever had contact with the taste of the ambrosia flowing from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. Only the devotees, the devotees of Śrī Caitanya, are familiar with this rasa (liquid mellows) through personal experience.” But the Sanskrit scholars, devoted scholars, pointed out to me that using the term “devotees” is an approximation.

For they say that the ācāryas say that not all devotees of Mahāprabhu are able to attain success in one lifetime. Not all devotees of Mahāprabhu are able to attain success in one lifetime. Nevertheless, we, as members of ISKCON, we have an extra added incentive.

What is that?

It’s the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

He is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda, in bringing Lord Caitanya’s movement to the West, he brought us it too, in such a way that it’s, you could say, easy for Westerners to practice.

If we had to practice according to the times of Lord Caitanya, it would be very difficult. But Prabhupāda adapted.

He’s the ācārya, he can do that. He made it very simple for us. And that simplicity is there in the institution of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

So, by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we can achieve that exalted state mentioned earlier, if we take proper advantage of that mercy.

Therefore, we can pray to Him daily. And I’ll conclude with the spirit, as I opened the talk today with the prayer of Prabhupāda.

We glorified Him in the middle, we will glorify Him at the end, for He is our savior from this ocean of material existence. The lotus feet of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world. Here’s this beautiful prayer: “śrī-guru-karuṇā-sindhu....” It’s one of my favorite prayers. “I bow down to the lotus feet of my spiritual master, who is a wish-fulfilling tree of divine love for Kṛṣṇa, the most munificent benefactor, who initiated me into the valuable jewels of both the Gāyatrī and Mahā mantras.

How can I sufficiently praise His glories?” So, thank you, Prabhupāda.

We got two classes out of the, the blanket, which, when hearing these glories, can gradually stimulate and awaken our love for the Divine Couple. So, we’ll leave you there from here in Śrī Vrndāvana Dhāma on a cold winter’s day, and look forward to speaking to you again next Friday.

We’ll pick another item or article which can help us awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa and speak about that as well. So, thank you. Śrī Śrī Śundara Vṛndāvana is Transcendental Book Distribution.

Glorious!