

Hare Krishna everyone and welcome back to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma. Namaḥ oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe. Glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 169, in which we will carry on our present theme of the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and our sub-theme about her eyes. But I want to say that actually, this lecture—number nine about her eyes—is the final lecture about her eyes. But don’t be discouraged. Next week, we are going to start discussing her glances—the glances from those eyes—and hopefully, we will have quite a lot of classes as well. There is so much nectar. I took a peek into the scriptures regarding her glance.

So, our ācāryas describe that—let’s just summarize—Rādhārāṇī is the personified form of mahābhāva. It means that she is the complete reservoir of the mellows of pious love. And her counterpart, her companion, her lover Kṛṣṇa, He is rasarāja; He is the king of the most excellent rasa, this mellow of pure spiritual loving exchanges. And thus, they are the transcendental couple, complete in exchanging transcendental mellows, or rasa. And even great ṛṣis and sages like Sanaka, Nārada, and exalted personalities like Lord Brahmā and Uddhava, they all praise the glories of Rādhārāṇī. Not only do they praise her, I was thinking, but they also express their eagerness to obtain her mercy—or even that of her close associates or sakhīs and maidservants. If they could achieve this, they would consider their lives to be supremely successful.

So, we are just beginning our first steps. Like I like to say, we know who we are and we know where we’re going. We’re following their footsteps, directly behind the footsteps of Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, regarding Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes—this last class, I’m a little sad, but anyway—Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in his introductory verse to Dāna-keli-kaumudī as follows:

“When Mādhava stood in front of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, blocking her way, she squinted, and teardrops overlaid her beautiful eyelashes. At the same time, her eyes, dazzling with a concealed smile, overflowed with loving desire. Those eyes with pink corners looked sideways and were most charming, slightly revealing the bouquet of her ecstasy.”

May Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes bestow the wealth of prema upon you all. Wow. May Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes bestow the wealth of prema, love of God, upon you all. Thank you, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. You gave these blessings 500 years ago, but they are still as potent as they were then, and 10,000 years from now. Everyone can take advantage of your causeless mercy. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, we once mentioned in this series that Rādhārāṇī’s eyes are of a bluish color. And there are many statements to that effect by Kṛṣṇa himself and by our ācāryas. I thought I’d bring it up because if you say something in learning circles, you have to be able to back it up by śāstra. So, I searched the śāstra about the blue eyes of Rādhārāṇī, and I found some samples. For example, in Govinda-līlāmṛta 11.49, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja quotes Vṛndā Devī. So, what higher authority do we need than Vṛndā Devī? There are a few verses there, but there is one line that stuck out for me. Vṛndā Devī says, “Rādhārāṇī’s eyes are like blue indīvara lotuses.” There are many lotuses; they are different colors. Here is the blue one: “Rādhārāṇī’s eyes are blue like the indīvara lotuses.”

And in Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta-mahākāvya, chapter five, entitled “Śrī Rādhikā goes to Nandigrāma to cook for Kṛṣṇa,” therein, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja writes more evidence: “Hearing old Jaṭilā’s words, Śrī Rādhikā fell silent and covered up the ocean of laughter that swelled within her heart while looking at her friends from the corners of her big blue eyes.” I’m going to recite that again: “Hearing old Jaṭilā’s words, Śrī Rādhikā fell silent and covered up the ocean of laughter that swelled within her while looking at her friends from the corners of her big blue eyes.”

Now, in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 1, verse 169, Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes: “The beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes forcibly devoured the beauty of newly grown blue lotus flowers, and the beauty of her face surpasses that of an entire forest of fully blossomed lotuses.” Indication there—they are blue as well. And in Muktā-carita, the famous pearl pastime, Raghunātha Gosvāmī writes in verses 8 and 9, here Kṛṣṇa is speaking:

“Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was decorating herself with her sakhīs with the best of pearls in the pavilion by the bank of Mālyahāri-kuṇḍa, which is, by the way, just next to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. I eagerly went there when I heard this from my parrot, who justly is named Vicakṣaṇa, meaning clever, to beg some pearls from them rather than those girls. As I was eager to decorate my cows, Hāsī and Hāriṇī, with them. But they were all very clever, those girls, and just looked at me with disdain from the corners of their lotus blue eyes, like sages with half-closed eyes.” Another indication—blue eyes. There are many more, but I just thought I’d put that in.

Now, the ācāryas explain a very confidential reason just exactly why Rādhārāṇī has bluish eyes. It is wonderful. They say because the young cowherd girls of Vraja always look so intensely at Kṛṣṇa, who is bluish-black like a monsoon cloud, their eyes are generally tinted blue. Because the young cowherd girls of Vraja always look so intensely at Kṛṣṇa, who is bluish-black like a monsoon cloud, their eyes are generally tinted blue.

Now, when speaking about Kṛṣṇa’s eyes for a moment, we should mention that there are references that his eyes also have a bluish tint to them—more like a bluish-black tint. Now, how can I verify that? Where is that described in scripture? Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura writes in the illustrious Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, verse 26: “When will Kṛṣṇa cast upon me his sidelong glances, which are as dark blue as blue lotuses growing in the Yamunā and quivering with waves of mercy? And when will my heart find joy in the playful notes of his flute, which are more cooling than the moon held on the head of Śiva, Cupid’s enemy? Please tell me.” He finishes, “Please tell me.” Wow.

Now, some more about Rādhā’s eyes. We’ll get back on track here. Her blue eyes. According to the science of the senses, it is known as indriya-vijñānam. Each sense is naturally attracted to a particular object. The ears are attracted to śabda, sound. The tongue is attracted to svāda, or taste. The nose is attracted to gandha, fragrance. The skin is attracted to sparśa, or touch. And the eyes—the eyes are attracted to rūpa, beauty or form. So, in this light, the great poet Sūradāsa writes:

Śrī Rādhā says to her friends, “Oh my dear friends, I wish that every pore of my body could become an eye so that I could see the ever-fresh beauty of Gopāla everywhere. Why has the Lord been so unfair to me, giving me only two eyes with which to see Him? Before me is an endless ocean of beauty in Madana-mohana, Kṛṣṇa. Yet my eyes are like two small cups. How can such an infinite ocean fit into these tiny cups of my eyes? When I behold His beautiful face, my heart feels both satisfied and unsatisfied at the same time. Satisfied to see His beauty and unsatisfied because I cannot behold it completely.” Sūradāsa concludes, “May the eyes of Pyārī, Śrī Rādhā, forever remain absorbed in the endless beauty of Gopāla.” What a wonderful poet.

Now, the poet Catur-bhujadāsa expresses the same type of longing for Śrī Rādhā in his famous poem called Govardhanavāsī Sānvarī Tumbina Rahyo Nahī Jāi. It is very famous in Vṛndāvana. In verses four and five, kind of in the same mood, he writes, appealing: “Oh my Lord, from the very first day I saw You, nothing else attracts me. I cannot sleep at night, and I have forgotten eating and drinking,” the poet writes. “Oh, sweet boy of Vraja, my ears long to hear Your voice, and my eyes burn with the desire to see You. My heart longs to meet You, for You are my very life and breath.” Same mood.

Let us follow in the footsteps of these great souls, the mahājanas. Now, there is a famous pastime in Vraja known as Chāyā-līlā. This means, literally, the pastime of the reflection. It is by, well, one of my favorite poets, Lalit Kishor. He writes: “One day Śrī Rādhā wandered alone to a lake called Rūpa-mañjarī-kuṇḍa. And as she sat on the bank playfully splashing the water with her hands, the surface of the lake gradually became very calm. And suddenly, she noticed the image of a beautiful young gopī in the water. Śrī Rādhā spoke to the image, ‘Oh, beautiful gopī, who are you? Your form is so enchanting. Why are you hiding under the water? Come out and play with me.’ But that gopī in the water, that image, remained silent. So, Śrī Rādhā lovingly continued speaking to her and asking many questions, thinking the girl must be very lonely and afraid. But when she tried to reach the water to pull that gopī out, the image disappeared. And when the water became calm again, the image returned.”

So, after some time, Rādhārāṇī’s friends, different gopīs, came to see her. She was crying. She was weeping. So, what did they do? Well, they naturally took her to Kṛṣṇa, who was nearby. Maybe then she’ll stop crying about whatever it was. So, when she got there, Rādhārāṇī said to Kṛṣṇa, “Kṛṣṇa, there’s a beautiful gopī hiding in the lake, but she will not speak to me.” So, Kṛṣṇa kind of smiled. He said, “Okay,” and He said, “All right, let’s all go there.” So, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs, everybody went to the side of that lake, and Rādhārāṇī pointed into the water, “There, Kṛṣṇa, do you see her? Do you see her?” So, Kṛṣṇa laughed gently, and He said, “Rādhā, oh innocent Rādhā, that is not another gopī. It is simply your beautiful divine reflection.”

But Rādhārāṇī insisted, “No, no. I have a friend there. I see her image.” So, then, this is so sweet. Kṛṣṇa asked her to look closely into the reflection’s eyes. He said, “Rādhā, what do you see there?” So, Rādhā replied, “Oh, I see Your threefold-bending form standing beneath the banyan tree at Vaṁśīvaṭa, playing Your flute beside the Yamunā.” And at that moment, she realized the truth, that the image was actually her own reflection, and that the reason Kṛṣṇa appeared within that reflection—that image—was because His form eternally resides within Rādhā’s vision. Eternally resides within her. She was looking into her own eyes. And she always has Kṛṣṇa in her vision. So then, the two of them embraced and, it is described, joyfully walked throughout the Vṛndāvana forest.

So the poet concludes, “May the threefold-bending form of Kṛṣṇa that shines within Rādhā’s eyes remain forever in my heart like a diamond set in gold.” So in this way, the poets of Vraja reveal Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes through their devotional poetry. There is actually a saying in Braj Bhasha that the language of the Vraja bhāṣā is Vraja bhāṣā: Jahā ravi nahī vahā kavi—where the sun’s light fails to reach, the poet’s insight shines. And from what we’ve covered today, we can understand that devotional poets can actually enter into the deepest chambers of our hearts and enlighten us and reveal the hidden flavors of divine love for the divine couple. And for us, this is especially true of our beloved Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda. We consider him the best of all poets for all time.

How do we know that? Well, in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, we read when Rāmānanda Rāya heard the Vidagdha-mādhava of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, he began to praise his talent as a poet. It is stated right there, Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā, chapter 1, verse 192: “After hearing this, Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya submitted at the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu the super-excellence of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s poetic expression and began to praise it as if he had thousands of mouths.” So then, Rāmānanda Rāya quoted an ancient verse used to glorify poets. It’s very beautiful, and I’ve quoted it many times: “What is the use of a bowman’s arrow or a poet’s poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?” Hare Kṛṣṇa. Rūpa Gosvāmī kī jaya. Thank you, Rāmānanda Rāya.

So I think it would be most appropriate to finish today with a verse glorifying Rūpa Gosvāmī. And this verse is by our illustrious Hari Parshad Prabhu from the GBC Śāstric community. He writes: “For purification of my physical body, I bathe regularly using water. However, for the complete purification of myself and my existence, I bathe in the nectar of the words of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī.” Very fitting. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Prabhu.

That ends our series on Rādhārāṇī’s eyes. But don’t despair. She has unlimited glories, and next week we move on to her glances. Okay? Thank you. Glory to the prophets. Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya. Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya. Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya. Vṛndāvana-īśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya—her eyes kī jaya. Māyāpura-dhāma kī jaya. Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya. Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-yuga kī jaya. Nitāi-Gaura-premānande. Hari Haribol. Jai Jai Śrī Śrī Rādhē Śyām. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you.
