

Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda. All glories to him. So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 19. Herein, we will continue discussing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, in particular the anklets that decorate her lotus feet. We do this on the advice of the following ācāryas. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Stavāmṛta-laharī, in the section entitled Utkalikā-vallarī, verse 27, he writes: “Oh all-powerful Lord Kṛṣṇa, when will your sweet and glorious flute music—which possesses the greatest opulence of the kingdom of all beautiful sounds and which is accompanied by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s anklet tinkling which eclipses the warbling of Brahmā’s swan—be joyfully worshiped by my two deaf ears?” This is real poetry.

Now, at this point, I would like to share one of my favorite anklet pastimes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Actually, I shared it maybe three or four years ago in another lecture, but it is so sweet and applicable at this time. And of course, we never tire of hearing nectarian topics of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that we know from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, First Canto, First Chapter, verse 19: “We never tire of hearing the transcendental pastimes of the Personality of Godhead, who is glorified by hymns and prayers. Those who enjoy association with Him relish hearing His pastimes at every moment and over and over again.”

The pastime that we will share today is recounted in Śrī Rādhā-caraṇa Dāsa Brahmacārī’s famous Vraja-maṇḍala-parikramā book—it was one of the first parikramā books to come out; all glories to that devotee. So, it begins: Once upon a time, on one fine spring day in Vṛndāvana, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had made a plan to meet at Śarabī-kuṇḍa. To avoid attracting attention, the plan was that Kṛṣṇa would come alone from the southern direction, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, with one maidservant, would come from the northern direction. They would meet at Śarabī-kuṇḍa, which of course is at Govardhana Hill.

According to the ācāryas, Kṛṣṇa arrived at the appointed time, but Rādhikā was not there. So He thought, “Never mind, ladies are sometimes late.” But as the time went on, it turned out that Rādhā was very late—like, really late. At first, Kṛṣṇa was a little impatient, but as time went by, He became concerned for Rādhā’s safety, for a rumor had reached Him that King Kaṁsa had heard of Rādhārāṇī’s breathtaking beauty and had been making plans to kidnap her and take her to Mathurā. So Kṛṣṇa thought, “I cannot wait any longer; I must look for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī,” and so He set out in the northern direction.

However, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was not late because of Kaṁsa or any other danger; rather, she had taken a detour through the forest of Varṣāṇā to collect some flowers for Kṛṣṇa. While doing so, she had lost one of her ankle bells. After searching for it everywhere in Varṣāṇā, she said to one of her gopī friends, “Dear one, I am sure that I lost it somewhere here amongst these trees, but where, I do not know.” Now, as we know, Rādhā is a princess and she has many ankle bells at her home in Varṣāṇā, so she wouldn’t ordinarily feel the loss of one. But she was particularly fond of this one ankle bell because Kṛṣṇa had given it to her at a very special moment. It’s described that it was a very delicate golden chain with studded jewels, and tiny golden bells were hanging from it. So she was determined to find her anklet, and at one point, she even called it out by name: “Ratna-nūpura, Ratna-nūpura, where are you?” But she heard no reply.

Now, in that connection, let us remember that everyone and everything in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma is fully conscious. So, just at that moment, Kṛṣṇa happened to be walking along the main road in that area. As He passed Varṣāṇā, He heard a lady’s voice coming from the forest: “Ratna-nūpura, Ratna-nūpura, where are you?” So He thought, “Ah, that’s Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s voice.” He turned and ran into the forest, where He found Rādhārāṇī and her girlfriend intensely focused on searching the woods, their eyes fixed on the ground trying to find that anklet. In fact, it is described that Rādhārāṇī was so absorbed in her search that she didn’t even notice Kṛṣṇa until she came upon His two blue lotus feet. Her eyes were fixed on the ground, and then Kṛṣṇa came, and she came across His two lotus feet.

At that point, she looked up and said happily, “Oh Śyāmasundara, I’m so happy You’ve come!” So Kṛṣṇa said, “My dear Rādhā, what are you looking for?” She answered, “I’ve lost one of my favorite ankle bells, and I’m determined to find it.” So Kṛṣṇa looked left, and then He looked right, and then He looked back at Rādhārāṇī. He said, “Dear one, it doesn’t seem to be here, so let’s go now to Śarabī-kuṇḍa as we planned, and later we’ll have another anklet made to replace the lost one.” But Rādhā replied, “Kṛṣṇa, absolutely not! I will not leave my dear anklet alone in these woods again.” Everything is conscious in Vṛndāvana; “I will not leave my dear anklet alone in these woods.”

So Kṛṣṇa tried again: “But Rādhā, let’s just look for it at another time.” But when Rādhārāṇī frowned—māna—Kṛṣṇa surrendered and said, “Oh, okay, okay, I’ll help you find it.” So He took Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s hand, and side by side they searched the entire forest floor. They looked under rocks, under bushes, around trees, even around the roots of trees, but with no success. They simply couldn’t find it. So eventually, Rādhā let go of Kṛṣṇa’s hand and, pointing, said, “Kṛṣṇa, you see there? There’s a flower garden over by the lake. You go look there, and I’ll continue looking here together with my maidservant; we’ll search one more time.”

So Kṛṣṇa was getting impatient. He wanted to bring this—how could you say—this lost ankle bell episode to a conclusion, but He just said, “Okay.” So He went to that flower garden, and while He was searching the flower garden by the lake, He came upon a beautiful desire vine hanging from a tree that had different colored flowers, and it was extremely aromatic. So He cut off a piece of the vine and made it into a flower anklet with the beautiful, fragrant flowers. Then He called out, “My dear Rādhārāṇī, look at this!” and He ran over to where she was and tied it on her ankle—this beautiful flower anklet.

Now, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī looked down, expecting to see her favorite anklet, but instead she saw a floral substitute. She was completely unimpressed, so she actually chastised Kṛṣṇa, as she sometimes does, saying, “Why don’t You look for my precious jewelry instead of playing with flowers, Kṛṣṇa? Why don’t You look for my precious jewelry instead of playing with flowers?” So Kṛṣṇa went back to the lake and thought, “She’s so absorbed in this anklet, and the entire day is going to be lost. I have to think of a better plan.” So He took His famous flute, vaṁśī, from His belt, and with it He dug in the ground. As He did so, He prayed—Kṛṣṇa is praying, it’s so cute—”My dear Mother Earth, please, please return my beloved’s lost ankle bells at once, please!”

And amazingly, as Kṛṣṇa said this, the hole that He had dug with His flute suddenly became filled with ankle bell bracelets. Some of them were identical with the one that Rādhārāṇī had lost, and there were so many varieties—literally thousands—and actually, some of these ankle bells were even more beautiful than the one she was looking for; more opulent. So Kṛṣṇa called out, “Rādhā, Rādhā, look, look! Come over here, see what I found!” So Rādhārāṇī and her gopī companion rushed over to where Kṛṣṇa was kneeling, and when they looked at the ground, the hole in the ground, their mouths dropped open. One ācārya describes the scene as follows: as a greedy king would revel in his treasure chest of royal jewels, Kṛṣṇa was running His fingers through heaps of ankle bells in the ground, each one more dazzling and ornate than the one before. And Rādhārāṇī, it’s described, she was speechless.

So Kṛṣṇa, not willing to take any risks, picked one out that perfectly matched Rādhārāṇī’s lost ankle bracelet as you have it. Then He said loudly, “Here it is, here it is!” So Rādhā, she took the ankle bracelet from Kṛṣṇa’s hand, and as she asked, “Where did all the other ones come from?” Kṛṣṇa smiled and said, “My dear Rādhā, by the constant touch of your lotus foot, your lost anklet became a cintāmaṇi gem that transformed the earth it touched into many millions of ankle bells.” Then He said in a joking way, “Dearest, if you don’t put it on at once, then the whole of Vṛndāvana will be paved with ankle bells. Hurry up, put it on!”

Rādhārāṇī smiled for the first time that day, because she was so anxious before. She gracefully put her lotus foot forward and said, “Śyāmasundara, then you had better secure it on my foot yourself so it doesn’t fall off again.” So Kṛṣṇa took the anklet from Rādhārāṇī’s hand and very carefully and very lovingly fastened it around her ankle, taking as much time as He possibly could.

Now, some Vaiṣṇavas say that many anklets with tiny golden bells can still be found on the banks of Śarabī-kuṇḍa there in the forest of Varṣāṇā, but they also say that such anklets can only be found by those who have unflinching and deep faith in the divine couple. So how to achieve that faith and love? Because one day we want to enter into these pastimes; that is our paramārtha—the supreme goal. We want to meditate on the supreme goal so that we can achieve it, purify our hearts, awaken our love, so we can enter these pastimes by the Lord’s mercy. So how to achieve that faith and love? The ācāryas say the formula is there—perfect questions, perfect answers. Here is the answer: All things lost are easily found in Vṛndāvana. Even souls who have lost their eternal identities as servants of Kṛṣṇa can find them by the grace of this forest and the holy names.

So that pastime, of course, happened 5,000 years ago, but we know that it is happening even today if we had the eyes to see. We’ve discussed that there are prakata (manifest) pastimes and aprakata (unmanifest) pastimes—not manifest to those who don’t have spiritual vision—but all these pastimes are taking place over and over again. If only we had the eyes to see! So how do we achieve those spiritual eyes? By the mercy of devotees only. In his Gauḍīya-mālā, Third Branch, Part Two, entitled Prārthanā, our beloved Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes: “There were some great munis and personified śrutis who executed their worship in the mood of the gopīs, catching a firm grip on the lotus feet of one of Rādhārāṇī’s girlfriends. Then, by the power of that nitya-sakhī’s affectionate favor, they ultimately attained a residential place in that sakhī’s own abode, where they eternally serve the divine couple, Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Hari.” Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s incessant longing is for the shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Anañga-mañjarī. That’s how he concludes.

So, of course, Anañga-mañjarī is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s little sister, the original form of Śrī Jāhnavā who appeared as Lord Nityānanda’s consort and pleasure potency. Now, of course, for us in ISKCON, the resident of Vṛndāvana—because Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is encouraging us to take shelter of a resident of Vṛndāvana to develop and serve and develop this mood to enter these pastimes—that personality whom we are following home is Śrīla Prabhupāda. Everything is clear; the path home is very clear. A straight, narrow path. We are following Śrīla Prabhupāda. Therefore, let us today offer the following prayer in conclusion of this lecture to our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. It’s very appropriate:

“Oh beloved spiritual master, you are always in the presence of the cowherd girl Śrī Rādhā, the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu. Please award me service at your lotus feet, which are the proprietors of devotional service. Please place me in the ocean of joy by bestowing upon me happiness in the mellows of service at the feet of Śrī Rādhā in the groves of Vraja-dhāma.” It’s all very clear, the path is clear. Let us follow Śrīla Prabhupāda’s lotus feet back to those beautiful groves of Vṛndāvana and perhaps join in one of those pastimes. Thank you. We will continue with more classes about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet next Friday. Hare Kṛṣṇa.
