Dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Viṣṇu. Namaste, all glories. So, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 90. As we've mentioned a number of times, this series is based on Śrīla Prabhupāda's chapter 26 of *Nectar of Devotion*, with the same name, "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," which has a long list of items that stimulate such love.

And we have covered many of those items in this series. But there's one item, one item much loved by all devotees, that we haven't yet discussed, and which we will speak about today. And that, that is Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī. Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī, I can see you're smiling. Śrīla Prabhupāda refers to her in that chapter as Krishna's favorite plant, Krishna's favorite plant.

And he writes therein, "Lord Krishna is very fond of Tulasī leaves and buds because Tulasī buds are usually offered up to the lotus feet of Krishna." A devotee once prayed to the Tulasī buds to give him some information about the lotus feet of the Lord.

The devotee expected that the Tulasī buds would know something about the glories of Lord Krishna's lotus feet.

He furthermore glorifies her in chapter 11 of *Nectar of Devotion* under the subtitle, "Living Trees, Such as Tulasī." Therein, he writes in the *Skanda Purāṇa*, there's a statement about Tulasī as follows: "Tulasī is auspicious in all respects. Simply by seeing, simply by touching, simply by remembering, simply by praying to, simply by bowing down before, simply by hearing about, or simply by sowing this tree, there is always auspiciousness.

Anyone who comes in touch with the Tulasī tree in the above-mentioned ways lives eternally in the Viṇḍāvana world." Now, in her memoirs, "My Dear Godsister," Govindadāsī, recounted that in 1968, before Tulasī Mahārāṇī made her appearance in the West, Śrīla Prabhupāda sometimes referred to her or talked about her.

She recalled him saying that in India, everyone considers Tulasī plants sacred, and no one will cut or uproot them. Even non-Hindus, he said, will not destroy Tulasī to build a house on a spot where she's growing. They'll actually look for a place not inhabited by Tulasī.

And later on, while serving as the temple president in ISKCON's Temple in Honolulu, Hawaii, Govinda dāsī acquired some Tulasī seeds from India. She got some Tulasī seeds from India and planted them in the temple garden in front of the temple.

And when Śrīla Prabhupāda came to Hawaii in 1971, he admired the Tulasī garden because the plants had grown far larger than anyone had expected.

Some were nearly 7 feet tall with stalks 2 inches in diameter. But this had caused a sort of problem, she said, because the Tulasī branches were beginning to cover the actual entrance into the temple. And when she pointed this out to Śrīla Prabhupāda and asked his permission to trim some of the branches, he became alarmed and he exclaimed, "You cannot cut Tulasī.

You cannot cut Tulasī. That is the greatest offense. You may never cut her, but you can tie back the branches obstructing the entrance." But even after tying back the branches, Tulasī kept growing, and the problem continued. And when she told Śrīla Prabhupāda that people had to bend down when passing through the Tulasī archway on the way into the temple, he was delighted.

He smiled, and his eyes sparkled as he said, "That's good. It's good. They have to bow down to Tulasī before entering Krishna's Temple." Then, when Śrīla Prabhupāda came for another visit to Hawaii a year or two later, he carefully entered the same Tulasī archway by going through sideways, because the branches were so thick, he entered and turned sideways and went in to avoid brushing against her leaves and branches.

And while walking along the walkway to the temple, which was lined with more Tulasī plants, he told his secretary, Śyāmasundara, "Don't step under the shadow. Don't step under the shadow." And amazingly, I actually found a verse supporting Śrīla Prabhupāda's statement.

It's from the *Garuda Purāṇa*, *Śauca khaṇḍa*, section 96: "Tulasī sarvadā śubhā." "Very beautiful. Wherever there is the shade of Tulasī Devī's plant form, which removes the pain of material existence, through there is always liberation from death. Such liberation is difficult to obtain simply by giving gifts." So in these ways, Śrīla Prabhupāda showed great respect for Tulasī, and that's true also in his books.

In his books, Śrīla Prabhupāda calls attention to the, could you say, the exalted position of Tulasī Devī.

For example, in a purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.16.21, he wrote, "Lakṣmī is sometimes envious of the Tulasī leaves, which are placed at the lotus feet of the Lord, for they remain fixed there and do not move, whereas Lakṣmī, he calls her Lakṣmī-jī, although stationed by the chest of the Lord, sometimes has to please other devotees who pray for her favor.

Lakṣmī sometimes has to go to satisfy her numerous devotees, but Tulasī leaves never forsake their position, and the Lord therefore appreciates the service of Tulasī more than the service of Lakṣmī." Now, it's interesting that Śrīla Prabhupāda was so grateful to Govinda dāsī for essentially inaugurating the worship of Tulasī in the West that he mentions her in one of his immortal purports in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Canto 4, Chapter 8, Text 55.

The verse reads, "One should worship the Lord by offering pure water, pure flower garlands, fruits, flowers, and vegetables which are available in the forest, or by collecting newly grown grasses, small buds of flowers, or even the skins of trees, and if possible, by offering Tulasī leaves, which are very dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Now, in the purport, in Prabhupāda's purport, he writes, "It is specifically mentioned herein that Tulasī leaves are very dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and devotees should take particular care to have Tulasī leaves in every temple and center of worship." The direct instruction: "Devotees should take particular care to have Tulasī leaves in every temple and center of worship." And he goes on, "In the Western countries, while engaged in propagating the Krishna consciousness Movement, we were brought to great unhappiness because we could not find Tulasī leaves.

We are very much obliged, therefore, to our disciple, Śrīmatī Govinda dāsī, because she has taken much care to grow Tulasī plants from seeds, and she has been successful by the grace of Krishna." Now, Tulasī plants are growing in almost every center of our movement.

Wow. It's important to note here that all our previous ācāryas also assigned great importance to Tulasī Devī, including Śrīla Prabhupāda's own spiritual master, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.

He wrote, "Śrīmatī Tulasī Mahārāṇī is our spiritual master. She's the queen of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

It is only by her mercy that one can become qualified to enter into Śrī Vṛndāvana.

We wear Tulasī Mahārāṇī around our neck. We chant until we have beads, knowing that she is very dear to Lord Krishna.

By our allegiance to her, we chant the names of Lord Hari." So, now let's go a little deeper into who this much glorified transcendental personality, Tulasī Devī, is, and just why she has endeared herself to so many exalted souls in this world.

So, to begin with, Tulasī Devī is actually an expansion of Vṛndā Devī in Goloka Vṛndāvana.

And as many of you know, Vṛndā Devī is a very exalted, very beautiful gopī. She has a golden complexion and wears a dress of blue color. She has a yellow parrot named Daṇḍaka, who has 300,000 parrot disciples who help him.

They fly all around Vṛndāvana carrying messages between Rādhā and Krishna.

And amongst the many thousands of different gopīs, Vṛndā Devī works under the guidance or the direction of Pralambārī, who's actually her guru. And Pralambārī's business or service is to oversee and supervise all the pastimes that happen in Vṛndāvana.

And Vṛndā Devī helps her in many intimate ways. We've discussed this some years ago, actually, in our classes. And the Vṛndāvana forest is actually named after Vṛndā Devī.

Vṛndā Devī once performed penances for 60,000 years and pleased by her austerities, Lord Viṣṇu granted the boon that "any penances performed here in this forest, as a result, will quickly fructify and bear excellent results." Pleased by her austerities, later, out of love, Vṛndā Devī gave her forest to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and thus Rādhārāṇī became queen of Vṛndāvana.

And as we've discussed many times, Vṛndā Devī is one of the five personalities that grant eternal residence in Vṛndāvana.

Those five personalities are Govardhana Hill, Yamunā River, Vṛndā Devī, Gopāla, Mahādeva, and Bṛndā Renu, the very dust of Vṛndāvana.

And because she's part of that illustrious five, Vācaspati wrote in his prayers to Vṛndā Devī, "By your mercy, people attain residence in Vṛndāvana, the desire to serve your Master's lotus feet, and the desire to assist in the rāsa dance.

O Vṛndā, I bow down to your lotus feet." So, Vṛndā Devī, by dint of her compassionate nature, appears in this world as the Tulasī plant, but by no means should anyone consider her to be an ordinary plant. In Text 3 of the *Tulasī Upaniṣad*, yes, there's an upaniṣad called the *Tulasī Upaniṣad*.

It is written: "Aupavaha, oh Śrīmatī Tulasī, you are ever young. Your form is unequaled and resembles 10 million piles of gold. You have both tree and non-tree forms. Please destroy my tree-like ignorance." What a prayer!

And in the *Harṣa-vardhana*, 9.174, it says, "Oh exalted Brāhmaṇa, one who simply utters the word Tulasī three times a day achieves the benefit of giving 1,000 cows in charity every day." I did a lot of research, and in the *Harṣa-vardhana*, 9.176, it says, "Just as everything is burnt to ashes by fire at the time of annihilation, all of one's sinful reactions are burnt to ashes simply by hearing the glories of Tulasī Devī, as well as by seeing her, planting her, watering her, and offering obeisances to her." As we heard earlier in the lecture.

Now, there are so many verses, actually. But now, just how Vṛndā Devī came as Tulasī to this material world is very interesting. Like many pastimes, there are different, slightly different versions or variations. The *Tulasī Stava* from the *Padma Purāṇa*, 16.133, mentions Tulasī Devī's origins in this world as coming from the churning of the milk ocean. "Pidi Devi, Pidi Hari, Bala, O Goddess, O controller of the demigods, please be kind to me.

O beloved of Lord Hari, please be merciful to me. O Śrīmatī Tulasī, who appeared during the churning of the milk ocean, I offer my obeisances unto you." And the *Tulasī Upaniṣad*, verse one, says the same: "Samaṭa Śrī Śāgarar kanyā." Almost identical. "Oh Goddess, your form is eternal, and you are able to bestow immortality to others.

Please lift me from the ocean of material existence, O daughter of the milk ocean." Another very popular, authorized version is in the *Brahma Vaivarta Purāṇa*, *Prakṛti Khaṇḍa*, sections 21 and 22, wherein it's described that Tulasī Devī descended into this world as the daughter of a king named Kuśa-dhvaja.

Kuśa-dhvaja, unfortunately, her father, Kuśa-dhvaja, eventually married her to an asura. This is the *līlā* named Jalandhara. Jalandhara. It's written that Jalandhara took advantage of her purity and her chastity to gain strength for his nefarious activities. Somehow or other, her purity and chastity from that, he was able to gain strength for his nefarious activities, and it's described that his strength was so great that even Lord Śiva could not defeat him in battle.

So, seeing this, the demigods were worried because he was a big, awful *asura*. So the demigods went to Lord Viṣṇu for help. And to try and rectify the situation, Lord Viṣṇu went to see Tulasī Devī, while assuming the form of her husband, Jalandhara.

And when Tulasī Devī greeted him, thinking him to be her husband, she acted very kindly, very lovingly towards him. And because she acted kindly to a man other than her husband, the purity of her chastity was momentarily broken. And thus Jalandhara lost his strength, just for a moment, because unknowingly she associated with the *demigod*.

So she lost the purity, so her husband lost his strength. So, taking advantage of this, the demigods came and immediately killed Jalandhara. And when Tulasī Devī understood what had happened, because Lord Viṣṇu then revealed his original form to her, she was angry that she had been deceived.

And she cursed Lord Viṣṇu that for his, it's described, stone-hearted behavior, stone-hearted behavior, he would become a stone. The *śāstra* says that honoring his pure devotee, Lord Viṣṇu accepted this curse and promised to appear as the Śālagrāma-śilā in the Gaṇḍakī River in Nepal.

And He also gave Tulasī the following two benedictions: "My dear Tulasī, you will grow forever as a tree in Gola on the coast of the Virajā River, on the Rādha-sthāna site, in the forest of Vṛndāvana, campaka, candana, and in the groves of mallikā, kunda, malikā, and malti.

In the second benediction, second verse, you will always live in sacred places and bestow the highest religious merit. All the holy spots will converge and reside at the root of your tree, and thus spiritual merits will occur to all.

Oh, fair one, all the demigods and I will wait there to gather your falling Tulasī leaves. You will always be the presiding deity of the Tulasī plant here on Earth, and at the same time, you will always support with Śrī Krishna in solitude in Goloka.

You will also be the presiding deity of the Gaṇḍakī River, and thereby shower Bhārata-varṣa with religious merit. You will further be the wife of the ocean of salt, which is my partial expansion. Oh, chaste goddess, you will always remain personally by my side and enjoy my company as Lakṣmī does." Now, of course, it's a rather unusual pastime.

You know, she's cursing Viṣṇu, but we should understand that such pastimes involving pure devotees, because she's mentioned as a pure devotee, obviously are for the benefit of conditioned souls in the material world to teach us various lessons. Pure devotees humbly accept such compromised positions for our benefit, just like Krishna's eternal friend Arjuna, who was seemingly placed into illusion so Krishna could speak the *Bhagavad-gītā* for the benefit of all humanity for all time.

In the beginning of our movement, because devotees were not much learned in *śāstra* and their faith was just beginning to bloom, Śrīla Prabhupāda hesitated to tell this particular, or to tell this particular pastime in its entirety.

How do we know?

Because again, in her memoirs, Govinda dāsī relates that Śrīla Prabhupāda had once told the devotees in Hawaii that Tulasī Devī was a great devotee of Lord Krishna, but her husband was a demon and killed by Krishna.

And then Śrīla Prabhupāda stopped short and became thoughtful.

They didn't say anymore. So Govinda dāsī said that her intuition was that he had given as much of that pastime as the devotees could understand at that particular time. So we've covered enough about Tulasī Devī today, and we shall continue next Friday.

I think we can have three classes about Śrīmatī Tulasī, there's so much to be shared. And thankfully so. Let us finish with two beautiful quotes by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura from his *Śrī Śaṅkha-cūḍa-caritra*, Text 89 and 190: "Oh Śrīmatī Tulasī, oh celestial Gaṅgā river of mercy, it is because I once placed my head at your lotus feet and drank some drops of water that washed your lotus feet that these desires have arisen in my heart.

Oh Śrīmatī Tulasī, how low I am, my heart pierced by hundreds of offenses. How exalted and difficult it is to attain my aspiration. Your causeless mercy is my only hope. It is by your mercy that I, who have so fallen, can have these desires in my thoughts." Hare Krishna.

Wow. So, I enjoyed researching this class and I enjoyed delivering this class. I hope that your appreciation for Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī has increased a thousandfold. We'll be back next Friday for more on Śrī Krishna, glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Haribol. Har Krishna.