

Devotees, welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-kṛṣṇa. So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 32. For this episode, I have chosen to speak about Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments.

To begin with, all of Kṛṣṇa’s jewelry and ornaments are completely spiritual; they are actually expansions of His personal energy, and thus they are worshipable. In his purport to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.2.21, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, “The ornaments, flowers, clothing, and all other decorations on the transcendental body of the Personality of Godhead are identical with the body of the Lord. None of them are made of material ingredients; otherwise, there would be no chance of decorating the body of the Lord.” Furthermore, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in his purport to Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 1.238—it’s really nice—”The Lord’s clothing, bedding, slippers, and everything required are all transformations of Śeṣa-Viṣṇu, the expansion of Śrī Balarāma. Thus the cloth and other paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are but other forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everything connected to the Lord is worshipable.”

He instructs us that just as Kṛṣṇa is worshipable, Kṛṣṇa’s place, Vṛndāvana, is also worshipable. And as Vṛndāvana is worshipable, similarly, the paraphernalia in Vṛndāvana—the trees, roads, rivers—everything is worshipable. Now, Jīva Gosvāmī says the same in his Bhāgavata-sandarbha. There, he actually quotes a verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.8.32: bhūṣaṇāyujaliṅgādyaiḥ. Those who are advanced in spiritual knowledge see unity in diversity. For such advanced persons, the Lord’s bodily decorations, His name, His fame, His attributes, forms, and the weapons in His hands are manifestations of the strength of His potency.

So, like everything else in the spiritual world, Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments are eternal. They are not fashioned or purchased at some point like, you know, we may buy jewelry for ourselves or our friends. No. Thus, the ācāryas say that when it is seen during Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes 5,000 years ago here on Earth that He dressed in a new ornament, that ornament is actually a part of the eternal spiritual world and it is merely making its appearance in the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in the material world. For example—I was trying to think of an example—when Kṛṣṇa appeared for the first time in front of Devakī and Vasudeva, He appeared in His four-handed eternal form with the crown. Then, as we know, He showed His two-handed baby form without His crown. So, Vasudeva then took Kṛṣṇa without His crown to Gokula. But the ācāryas have written that later, after killing Kaṃsa, Kṛṣṇa again accepted the same crown on His head; He accepted the same crown on His head. Thus, we can conclude Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments are all eternal, part of His eternal paraphernalia, and these ornaments appear and disappear according to the need of the līlā at a particular point in time in His pastimes. Isn’t that interesting?

So, as Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments are not different from Him, they can be meditated on. You can meditate on them as a stimulant, a stimuli for awakening our love for Him. The Bhāgavatam confirms that; the Third Canto, 28th chapter, text 28, says the yogi, the bhakti-yogi, should meditate upon Kṛṣṇa’s club, which is named Kaumodakī and is very dear to Him. This club smashes the demons who are always inimical and is smeared with their blood. One should also concentrate on the nice garland on the neck of the Lord, which is always surrounded by bumblebees with a nice buzzing sound, and one should meditate upon the pearl necklace on the Lord’s neck, which is considered to represent the pure living entities who are always engaged in His service.

So many wonderful, authorized quotes from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Jīva Gosvāmī. And so now, the Sanskrit term for ornament is bhūṣaṇa; it literally means anything which decorates. And of course, such ornaments add to the all-attractive beauty of the Lord; they just add to His beauty. However, it’s interesting that in the Third Canto, second chapter, 12th verse of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Uddhava tells Vidura, “My dear sir, Kṛṣṇa’s form was most wonderful when He appeared on this planet and exhibited His potency. The potency of His internal energy—His wonderfully attractive form—was present during His pastimes on this planet, and by His internal potency, He exhibited His opulences which are striking to everyone. His personal beauty was so great that there was no necessity for His wearing ornaments on His body. In fact, instead of the ornaments beautifying Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’s beauty enhanced the ornaments.” We’ve discussed this before. Therefore, Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 21.105 says: “Ornaments caress His body, but the transcendental body of Kṛṣṇa is so beautiful that it beautifies the ornaments He wears.” Therefore, Kṛṣṇa’s body is said to be the “ornament of ornaments.” I love that. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa’s body is said to be the “ornament of ornaments.” All beauty emanates from the Lord, and Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura has also written in his Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, verse 59, “His face is the best ornament; why does He need any other jewelry? Moreover, it has beautiful lips that radiate splendor all around. This massive radiance with its romantic appeal has so many artistic abilities that it is beyond the comprehension of the not-so-intelligent. This brilliance is extremely amazing.”

Actually, there are many passages in Vedic literature describing the glorious jewelry and ornaments of Kṛṣṇa. I was thinking that He is famously known for wearing the Kaustubha gem, which is one of the many exquisite and valuable jewels in His possession. In the Kālīya Lake, the Kālīya serpent’s wives—in the Yamunā—they actually gave this jewel to the Lord with their own hands. And many śāstric verses describe Kṛṣṇa dressed in a golden yellow cloth and draped in the finest imaginable necklaces. He wears coverings on His ears, karṇa-paṭṭu as they are called; He has swaying earrings; He wears bracelets, crowns—mukuṭas—sandals—pādukā. He wears braid clips—how do you say clips in His hair?—called nāgar. So many decorations like that. For example, for His protection, Mother Yaśodā placed on Kṛṣṇa’s arm an amulet studded with nine jewels. His two armlets He wears are sometimes called aṅgada or raṅgāṅgada. His two bracelets, part of His ornaments, are named śobhana. His Signet ring—He has a signet ring called ratnamuṅgī—and those yellow garments are named nigamas.

What else? Kṛṣṇa’s string of small bells is called śaṅkara, and His two anklets are called haṃsa-gañjana. And it’s described the tinkling sounds of these ornaments enchant the deer that are the minds of the deer-eyed gopīs. What else? Kṛṣṇa’s pearl necklace is named tārāvalī, and His jewel necklace is named prabhāvalī. The locket He wears on His chest is named hṛdaya-modana, and within that locket, I was reading, there is a picture of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. You know, people there, they wear these little lockets and they have His wife or the husband or a friend or something… He has a picture of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kṛṣṇa’s shark-shaped earrings are named ratiraṅga-daivata, and His crown is named ratnāpara. Its crest jewel—meaning the biggest jewel in the crown—is called camara-ḍimarī. Kṛṣṇa’s peacock feather is named nabhoratna-viḍambana. He also has another ornament, a guñjā necklace—rāghavālī—and His tilaka markings are named mohana. These are beautiful names; you could even give them to a devotee, or a spiritual master could give them at an initiation. And Kṛṣṇa’s garland of forest flowers and leaves is also considered part of His ornaments, which reaches down to His feet and contains flowers of five different colors; it is called vaijayantī.

So next week, in “Kṛṣṇa’s Ornaments Part Two,” we will discuss a number of these items in detail. But before concluding today, I’d like to mention that devotees can wear some of these items we’ve mentioned in the form of paraphernalia used by the deity of Kṛṣṇa—the deity of the Lord—for purification. In other words, you know, at some point, the pujārīs, they take the clothes off, and they can distribute them to the assembled devotees, or they can give the Lord’s garlands away. As Kṛṣṇa wears these ornaments for our purification, as a stimuli for developing love for the Lord, devotees can also wear these things. In this regard, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.216 quotes a verse from the Purāṇas: kṛṣṇa-nirmālya-dhāraṇam… Remnants like garlands, etc., taken from Kṛṣṇa’s deity—if they touch the body of an individual, they become free from all diseases and sins. Wow. And Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu also quotes Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.6.46, where Śrī Uddhava says, “Simply by decorating ourselves with the garlands, fragrant oils, clothes, and ornaments that You have already enjoyed, and by eating the remnants of Your meals, we, Your servants, Kṛṣṇa, will indeed conquer Your illusory energy.”

Wow, I’m going to repeat that one again: “Simply by decorating ourselves with the garlands, fragrant oils, clothes, and ornaments that You have already enjoyed, and by eating the remnants of Your meals, we, Your servants, Kṛṣṇa, will indeed conquer Your illusory energy.” Wow. We know that’s the case with taking prasādam, but I don’t know if all devotees know that by wearing the garlands we become purified, or if we get some apparel of the Lord, we can wear it now while serving the Lord. Uddhava himself many times received the Lord’s used garments, garlands, and ornaments. He would get these things Kṛṣṇa would give to him—garments, garlands, and ornaments—and he honored that prasādam. Remember, prasādam just doesn’t mean what we eat; it means mercy. He honored that prasādam, that mercy, and wore those clothes and garments with deep gratitude, which acted as a stimuli in his own love for Kṛṣṇa. Because these are perfected devotees, but the beauty of bhakti is that that love is going on forever; it just increases, and you know, it’s never a stagnant love. Kṛṣṇa’s love grows and grows infinitely. This is the beauty of the spiritual; you can just imagine—we don’t experience that here in this world, but there it just goes on and on, growing and growing. So, Uddhava’s love for Kṛṣṇa increased by wearing these different paraphernalia.

So, at one point, Kṛṣṇa sent Uddhava to Vṛndāvana, as we know, with messages for the Vraja-vāsīs to console them in their feelings of separation from Him. So, soon after Uddhava arrived in Vṛndāvana, the gopīs saw him in his chariot, and they initially mistook him for Kṛṣṇa because he looks very much like Kṛṣṇa—even his body color is identical with Kṛṣṇa—and particularly because he was wearing the Lord’s ornaments, His clothes and ornaments. So, actually, the Bhāgavatam describes this in 10.47, verses 1 and 2; it describes it better than I can: “The young women of Vraja became astonished upon seeing Lord Kṛṣṇa’s servant, who had long arms, whose eyes resembled a newly grown lotus, who wore a yellow garment and a lotus garland, and whose lotus-like face glowed with brightly polished earrings. ‘Who is this handsome man?’ the gopīs asked. ‘Where does he come from, and whom does he serve? He is wearing Kṛṣṇa’s clothes and ornaments.’” Saying this, the gopīs eagerly crowded around Uddhava, whose shelter was the lotus feet of Lord Uttamaśloka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. So, there’s the perfect description: when Uddhava arrived, this is what the gopīs said. They went on, they told Uddhava, “We understand that you are the confidential servant of Kṛṣṇa, and you have come here on His order.”

So, thus we can conclude that by honoring the clothes and ornaments of the Lord, Uddhava was able to gain their recognition and the association of the gopīs, and by their blessings, his attraction again for the Lord increased. So, as Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu states, there are unlimited benefits from wearing remnants of clothes and ornaments; we can conquer over the illusory energy, as the Bhāgavatam described. And those clothes, those ornaments, are listed as a stimuli for developing ecstatic love for the Lord. And where do we get them? We get them from the deities, our deities, which are not different than the Lord.

All right, Kṛṣṇa, so a little short today, but I am just heading up to the Baltic Sea coast; it’s the beginning of our 32nd summer tour on the coast up there, our Festival of India. All the devotees are waiting; our first programs start in a couple of days, so I have to get up and help get everything ready for this huge yajña, 32nd year we’re doing this. So, I made it a little bit short today, but we’ll finish with the quote from Teachings of Lord Caitanya, chapter 10, that’s entitled “The Beauty of Kṛṣṇa”—a wonderful ending:

“The pearls of the necklace which hang about the neck of Lord Kṛṣṇa are as white as ducks, and the peacock feather which decorates Kṛṣṇa’s head is colored like a rainbow. His yellow garment is like lightning in the sky, and Kṛṣṇa himself is like the newly arrived clouds. The gopīs are like footbells on His feet, and when the cloud pours rain on the grains in the field, it appears that Kṛṣṇa is nourishing the hearts of the gopīs by calling down His pastime rain of mercy—His pastime rain of mercy.” Teachings of Lord Caitanya kī jaya! And it continues, “Indeed, ducks fly in the sky during the rainy season, and rainbows can also be seen at that time. Kṛṣṇa freely moves amongst His friends as a cowherd boy in Vṛndāvana, and when He plays His flute, all living creatures, mobile and immobile, become overwhelmed with ecstasy; they quiver, and tears flow from their eyes. Of His various opulences, conjugal love is the summit. He is the master of all riches, all strength, fame, beauty, knowledge, and renunciation, and out of this, it is perfect beauty—His conjugal attraction. The form of Kṛṣṇa, the conjugal beauty, is eternally existent in Kṛṣṇa alone, whereas His other opulences are present in His Nārāyaṇa form.”

A nice meditation on Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments. So, thank you prabhus, please give us your blessings that we complete our programs with another Festival of India in Poland along the Baltic Sea coast. Yes, you know, every year we get six days a week for two months; we average between two and five thousand people a night, and we give them a real Kṛṣṇa-conscious experience. As Prabhupāda said, “We will take the world over by culture,” so we’re doing our best here in Eastern Europe. But I will continue somehow or other to give these classes every Friday. So, Hare Kṛṣṇa!
