""### Stimulation for Ecstatic Love Part 074 - A Close Friend of Jīva Gosvāmī

Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. So, before we begin today, I would like to recite a very beautiful verse I came across in my studies. It is from the *Bṛhad-gautamīya Tantra*, and I found that it has been quoted in several places by Jīva Gosvāmī, including in his *Kṛṣṇa-sarvasva* (106) and his *Gopāla-campū* (11). Kṛṣṇa is speaking:

"Verily, this delightful Vṛndāvana is My only home. My animals, both tame and wild, the birds and insects, the men and gods who abide here, all go to My home when they die. Those cowherd girls who live here in My abode are all eternally joined with Me, for they are dedicated to My service. This forest of mine, measuring five *yojanas*, is a form of My body. This Yamunā River is the suṣumṇā channel carrying nectar. The gods and other creatures dwell here in subtle forms. I am the soul of all the gods, and at no time do I leave this forest. I am manifest and unmanifest here in these woods in every age. It is beautiful and powerful, this abode, and cannot be perceived by the eyes of flesh."

Isn't that wonderful? I never heard that one before. So, we are continuing with our miniseries on Stimulation for Ecstatic Love, and this will be part 74. You have to excuse me today for a little bit of a cold, but we will continue. I would like to continue with our presentation of different Vaiṣṇava poets, and today we shall speak about Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. You may remember we did speak a little bit about him about two years ago, I believe, but since then, I found a treasure trove of information about this illustrious devotee. The contribution of the Six Gosvāmīs—who, as we know, are very close associates of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu—to the rejuvenation of Vṛndāvana is well known, but there are many other devotees, scholars, and saints who also played important roles in reconstructing the lost Braja and its culture. Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is one amongst those you could say "lesser-known" personalities, but as you will see, he too was a close confidant in working with the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana.

This Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was born sometime in the late 1500s. He is mentioned in the Vaiṣṇava *śāstra* called *Bhakta-māla* by the author Nābhādāsa, which was actually recommended by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura as an authorized source of Vaiṣṇava biographies. He approved of it—*Bhakta-māla*. I found out that it was actually recommended as one of the books to study in the Gauḍīya Maṭha for biographies of previous ācāryas. Now, there is another *Bhakta-māla* written in Bengali by one Lālābābū, but that book was rejected by Bhaktisiddhānta Ṭhākura as a *sahajiyā* book. So, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is in the *Bhakta-māla* edition of Nābhādāsa, and therein Nābhādāsa describes the wonderful qualities of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He writes:

"Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa possessed a cluster of praiseworthy qualities, liked by one and all. Gentle and generous, he took his orders from those who were realized beings. Having no ill feelings or worldly desires, he was a very abode of compassion. His devotion was unswerving, thus showing the path to other devotees. This made him well-known in Vṛndāvana as a bridge to the ultimate good. The nectar of Bhāgavata-kathā showered from his mouth and was relished by one and all."

Most significantly, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was a disciple of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, one of the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana. Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was especially famous, as we spoke some years ago, for his lectures on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī carried on that tradition after the departure of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Historically, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī came from a family of brāhmaṇas from South India, specifically they lived in Andhra Pradesh. While growing up there, he somehow or other became very attached to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. He is an Andra-deśī; he got really attached to *Bhāgavata-dharma* and all that it entails. Some scholars say that perhaps he became attached to Braja because in those days, Vaiṣṇava saints and sages were traveling around India to propagate the Holy Name and the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Anyway, somehow he achieved a great love for Śrī Dhāma Vṛndāvana and was writing beautiful poetry about Braja. In fact, by the time he was a young man, he was famous for his Kṛṣṇa-conscious poetry, much of which—or perhaps all of it—was, interestingly enough, written in the Braja-bhāṣā language, which is particular to Vṛndāvana. Braja-bhāṣā language in Andhra Pradesh! He is writing in Braja-bhāṣā language.

Now, how he eventually came to Vṛndāvana from South India is especially interesting. After the Govinda temple was completed in Vṛndāvana, Jīva Gosvāmī would go and take darśana of Rādhā-Govinda each morning. He was at that time the leading ācārya for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism because Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs had passed away. Now, after darśana, it is written that Jīva Gosvāmī would visit Rūpa’s *maṅgala-ārati* and then Madana-mohana’s *maṅgala-ārati*. He would go to three *maṅgala-ārati*s every day. And it’s interesting: these three *maṅgala-ārati*s were scheduled at different times to enable devotees to attend all three. And there is a tradition, many of you know, that says that by seeing all these three deities—Govinda, Gopīnātha, and Madana-mohana—in one day, all of one's sins are destroyed. So, this tradition of visiting three deities in a day actually came from Jīva Gosvāmī, and even today, devotees still observe this tradition by driving from Vṛndāvana to Karauli to see Madana-mohana—that’s where He is now—and on to Jaipur to see Govindajī and Gopīnātha. I’ve done that myself a couple of times.

Anyway, one day after taking darśana of Govindajī, Jīva Gosvāmī was walking down the stairs of the temple on the way to see Gopīnātha when he observed a saintly person sitting at the bottom of the stairs. This saintly person was singing a very beautiful Braja-bhāṣā song known as *Sakhi hauṅ ranga raṅgī, ranga raṅgī, sakhi hauṅ ranga raṅgī*—very famous—meaning: "Oh beloved sakhi, I have been transformed by the color of Śrī Kṛṣṇa." Actually, I will recite the whole song. It goes like this:

"Oh sakhi, I have been transformed by the colors of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. On seeing His beautiful form, I sold my soul to Him. I lost myself in His beauty. When I fall asleep, I lose myself in dreams of Him, and when I awake, I don’t see anything as separate from Him. It is as though my eyes have been trapped by His form, like a bumblebee trapped at night in a lotus flower. When I hear that He has gone to graze the cows, I don’t know which Kṛṣṇa people are talking about, for He is with me always. Who will listen to me? Who will believe me when I say it’s all nonsense? How can Gadādhara explain any of this? I am like a dumb person trying to explain the taste of guḍa—a sweet."

So, Jīva Gosvāmī heard the sādhu singing this song, this poem, and he was stunned, especially because it was in Braja-bhāṣā poetry and he hadn't heard it before. So, he asked the saint, "Sir, who wrote this? Did you write this beautiful poetry?" And the saint replied, "No, I was coming from South India to Vṛndāvana when along the way I met a personality known as Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He is a very nice devotee of Kṛṣṇa. It is he who composed these beautiful verses."

So, Jīva Gosvāmī said, "But if he lives in South India, how can he write such beautiful poetry without even coming to Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the place where one appreciates the color of Kṛṣṇa? Worship of the Lord in South India is in the mood of awe and reverence, *aiśvarya-bhāva*, where the glories of Śrī Rādhā are not sung. I am very interested to know this exalted devotee, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Do you know anyone who can deliver a letter to him and bring him here to Śrī Vṛndāvana?" So the saintly person said, "Yes, I have two brāhmaṇa friends who can render this service. They can deliver your letter to Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī in South India."

So the next day, Jīva Gosvāmī gave a letter to that saintly person. Now, it’s interesting: in the letter, Jīva Gosvāmī quoted the first verse from Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's book, and that verse read as follows:

"Without worshipping the pollen of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, without taking shelter of Vṛndāvana which bears her footprints, and without respectfully greeting the great souls whose hearts are filled with deep love for her, how will one be able to plunge into the nectar ocean of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa?"

Now, our Vaiṣṇava ācāryas have commented that Jīva Gosvāmī was writing to Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa as follows—they say, paraphrased: "I don’t know how you got this mood, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, when you were living outside of Braja and have no association with the servants of Rādhā. It is no doubt the result of some previous lifetime of service to great devotees. But in order to perfect it, you must follow in the mood of Śrī Rādhā and live in the association of her devotees here in Vṛndāvana. Otherwise, you will never attain its fulfillment." Kṛṣṇa! The scholars, they paraphrase like that what Jīva was saying.

So, that saintly person gave that letter—imagine getting a letter from Jīva Gosvāmī—to his two brāhmaṇa friends, who then made the long journey from Vṛndāvana to Andhra Pradesh. While searching far and wide for Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, one day they came across a sādhu taking a bath from a well, and they asked him, "Sir, we are looking for a person named Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Do you know of him or where he lives?" So the sādhu replied, "Yes, I know him, but please tell me first where you are from." So the two brāhmaṇas answered, "Oh, we are from Vṛndāvana!" And upon hearing the word "Vṛndāvana," that sādhu immediately fell down unconscious on the ground in ecstasy. This immediately attracted a crowd of local villagers, who then explained to the two brāhmaṇas that the sādhu who had fainted was, in fact, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī himself. They said, "He is Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and because he is a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, upon hearing the name Vṛndāvana, he fell unconscious in ecstasy, as he often does."

When Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī regained consciousness, the two brāhmaṇas said to him, "We have come to take you to Vṛndāvana on the order of Jīva Gosvāmī." Upon hearing this, it is described that Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī started laughing and laughing and just dancing in ecstasy, and without even finishing his bath, he immediately began running toward Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. In fact, I was reading, some say he ran all the way from Andhra Pradesh to Vṛndāvana!

When he finally arrived in Braja—I think about two months later—he first went to Govindajī’s temple, where Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was lecturing on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, as he did often. Upon hearing the nectarian words of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī again fainted in ecstasy. Seeing this, the devotees present at the lecture sent a message to Jīva Gosvāmī, who came to the temple to see who was this visiting sādhu who fainted in ecstasy hearing the *Bhāgavatam*. When Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī came back to external consciousness, Jīva Gosvāmī asked him who he was, and when Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī revealed his identity, Jīva Gosvāmī was very happy. He embraced him and asked, "My dear Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, tell me, how can you write such beautiful poetry about Vṛndāvana without having taken shelter of Śrī Rādhā and without the association of *rasika* devotees who live here in Vṛndāvana?" So Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī said, "Oh Jīva Gosvāmī, I am lower than a blade of grass. Please give me your shelter so I can truly understand and experience what I am writing about."

Jīva Gosvāmī replied, "Very well, but I am very busy with my *sevā*, so you please take shelter of Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He does not have any disciples yet, so when he deems you fit, you may take *dīkṣā* initiation from him." Then Jīva Gosvāmī said to Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who had just finished his discourse on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, he said to him, "This Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is a high-class brāhmaṇa and a devotee of Kṛṣṇa from South India. Please accept him as your disciple." So therein, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī started learning *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* from Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Actually, I was reading the other day also that when Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī would give his discourses on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, he would give them in three places every day: in the Govinda temple, in the Gopīnātha temple, and in the Madana-mohana temple. When he would give those discourses every day, Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs would sit and listen from him. You could say that Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s worshipable deity was *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, non-different than the Lord. After one year’s time, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī gave him *dīkṣā* initiation, and Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was actually the only disciple of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Sometime much later, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī gave the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* that was given to him by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu to Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Now you can understand what an important devotee he is within our line. And when Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī departed this world, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī continued giving the daily lectures on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* as his spiritual master did, in the Govinda, Gopīnātha, and Madana-mohana temples. I believe he also sometimes spoke in the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple in Vraja.

On top of this—it is just going deeper here, so much nectar, *Śrī Vṛndāvana-kī-jaya*—on top of this, his relationship with Jīva Gosvāmī continued deepening day by day. We know this about Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī for certain because he was one of the signatories on Jīva Gosvāmī’s last will and testament in the year 1608. Due to invalidity, Jīva Gosvāmī was unable to actually write his last will and testament on his deathbed, so it is known that he dictated it and asked his most close and confidential associates to sign it to make it authentic. So, on that will, which is still preserved in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute in Vṛndāvana—I saw it—we see the signature of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, which demonstrates the close and trusting relationship between Jīva Gosvāmī and Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

One time on the occasion of Vasantī-pañcamī, which is the beginning of spring, the first day of spring, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was sitting on the banks of the Yamunā chanting a very beautiful *Yamunā-aṣṭakam* that he composed, and suddenly tears came from his eyes, which mixed in with the mud of the Yamunā. Looking down, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī saw the top-knot of a deity of Kṛṣṇa protruding from that spot and immediately began digging. Several minutes later, he pulled out a small black stone deity of Kṛṣṇa. I mentioned he had a deity whom he later named Madana-mohana. When Jīva Gosvāmī was informed of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s find, he said, "It is Madana-mohana’s mercy upon him, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, that he can continue His worship, which was interrupted for a very long time." Interesting. And this deity is still being worshipped, actually, in Vṛndāvana. I had His darśana.

While Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was residing and lecturing in Vṛndāvana, the king of Bharatpur—Bharatpur is not far from Vṛndāvana—the king of Bharatpur would come regularly to Govindajī’s temple to hear his *kathā*. In time, this king started developing a spirit of renunciation and was even thinking of giving up his kingdom and just becoming a renounced sādhu in Vṛndāvana. When his wife, the queen, saw this gradual transformation in her husband, she became very worried, very, very, very anxious, to the point that she came up with a plan to stop her husband’s newfound spirit of renunciation.

One day, she called her pregnant maid—she had a maid who was pregnant—and offered her a huge sum of money to go to the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* lecture of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī that day and, in front of the audience, announce that Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was the father of the child in her womb. In the middle of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s discourse that day, she stood up, crying and crying, and called out, "Oh, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, you are becoming a famous devotee, but you have not told your disciples and the people in general that you made me pregnant eight months ago!" She said like that, in the public, amongst all the people who were at the lecture.

Needless to say, everyone was shocked. So Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, he was very calm, collected. He spoke up, saying, "My dear lady, of course this is not true. Perhaps you have done this only because you are in a desperate condition of life. As such, I pity you and I am concerned about you." Now, hearing these compassionate words of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, this maidservant of the queen, she relented, because the words of a pure devotee are very powerful; they have effect on our hearts as we know from hearing from *śāstra*. So she relented, and with tears in her eyes, related to that public assembly that her accusation was false and that the queen of Bharatpur had offered her money to do it.

Hearing all this, the king of Bharatpur, who was in attendance, rose up threatening to kill his wife, the queen, but Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī intervened. He said, "Do not do this. This is all because your wife is so attached to you. You should know that your duty is not to renounce her or your kingdom, but to protect her and rule your kingdom as a *rājarṣi*, a saintly person sitting on the throne. Better you stay in your palace at Bharatpur, and I will send my students daily to lecture to you and your good wife there." Hare Kṛṣṇa!

And then, demonstrating his deep humility, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, he said to the audience, "By giving these lectures on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, I have become famous, and my influence has increased. But this influence is like a witch that has cursed me. There is danger that my fame will become an obstacle to my *bhajana*. So this woman has done me a great service by proclaiming this malicious rumor, which will help to keep me humble and keep people away from me." Hare Kṛṣṇa! Such humility.

Let’s see. Oh yes, there’s another interesting pastime of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī that one night a thief came to Vṛndāvana for the purpose of stealing from the local people. Now, it’s mentioned that Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s door was never locked, and so when this thief came to his *bhajana-kuṭīra*, he easily entered. Although it was late at night—very late at night—Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was awake and chanting japa. When he saw that a thief had come into his house, he laid down and he pretended to sleep while keeping an eye open and observing the thief’s activity. But in reality, it’s written, he became absorbed in thinking of child Kṛṣṇa going into the gopīs’ houses and stealing butter. Rather than getting angry, he thought, "My Ṭhākura has come to my house to play His *līlā* of stealing." See how Kṛṣṇa-conscious he was! "My Ṭhākura," he’s just thinking in a deeply Kṛṣṇa-conscious way, "My Ṭhākura has come to my house to play His *līlā* of stealing."

In the meantime, the thief had collected a number of items from the *kuṭīra* and tied them with a sheet into a big bundle, but there was so much stuff that actually he was having difficulty getting the bundle onto his head to carry it away. So, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī got up and very quietly helped him to lift the bundle onto his head! And as he was doing so, the thief was astonished. He asked Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, "Who are you?" And Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī identified himself. When the thief learned whose house—*kuṭīra*—he was robbing, he fell to the ground, held onto the feet of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and begged for forgiveness. So Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī said, "Don’t worry. This is how you make your living. Take the bundle with you. I am not concerned for myself, for Kṛṣṇa will send me ten times this much tomorrow." So this thief was so impressed by Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa’s kindness that he actually gave up his profession of thievery and later on became Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s disciple. The power of these spirit-devotees!

When one of the thief’s friends heard about this particular incident, he chastised his friend, the original thief. He said, "How could you have been so stupid? You gave all those items back to that sādhu! By Hari, and to make matters worse, you became his disciple! I will show you what should have been done. I will show you what you should have done." So the next night, that friend went to Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s home, and after sneaking in, very quickly filled a sack with valuable items and he left. But when he got onto the street, he suddenly became very bewildered, and it’s described he didn’t know whether to go left or right. In fact, he just spent the whole night wandering around the village until he found himself back at the home of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

The following morning, when Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī came out of his home to take his morning bath in the Yamunā River, the thief fell at his feet, held onto his feet—held onto Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s feet like his friend had done—and he also begged for forgiveness. He said to Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, "I did not know your power. I am a thief and I came here to steal from you. It’s as if I have gone blind and cannot find my way back home. So please be merciful to me and give me the vision how to go back to our real home, Goloka Vṛndāvana, in the spiritual world." At that point, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī raised his hand and blessed him: "Let it be so." Kind are these sādhus! In this way, even those who came to him for some material benefit were blessed with spiritual insight. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

These are just some of the glories of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī; I just love to say his name now, the illustrious disciple of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. I think the following verse from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (11.14.24) nicely summarizes the life and teachings of this wonderful devotee. In this verse, Kṛṣṇa is speaking:

"A devotee whose speech is sometimes choked up, whose heart melts, who cries continually and sometimes laughs, who feels ashamed and cries out loudly, and then dances—a devotee thus fixed in loving service to Me purifies the entire universe."

I would like to finish today with a very famous poem by Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī entitled *Yugala-varṇana* or *Dhyāna-līlā*; it is known in two ways. You ask any scholar in Vṛndāvana, they know this poem describing Kṛṣṇa or *gopī*-particular pastimes in Vṛndāvana. Now, this poem by Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is very, very long, so today we will just recite a few selected verses from it, and perhaps we can include it in its entirety in the upcoming printed books in our Vṛndāvana lecture series, of which we have printed one already—two actually, *The Glories of Govardhana Hill* and *The Sacred Forest of Vṛndāvana*—and more books will come. So here is a few selected verses. It was hard which ones to choose because there are so many; like, it takes a half hour to read it, but I chose a few for your pleasure:

"I bow my head at the pastime place of Śrī Govinda. Taking shelter of His lotus feet, I attain some of the beauty of this forest of Śrī Vṛndāvana. Here, where the Citraṇī river flows with clear blue water, the Supreme Truth, knowable only through Vedānta, manifests in such a form. Here dwells the beauty of the lotus forest resplendent with red, yellow, white, and black colors, where swarms of intoxicated bees wander, engrossed in tasting the sweetness of honey. Here one hears the calls of innumerable types of birds such as cranes, swans, cuckoos, and *tṛta* birds; one’s intellect fails to count them all. The sacred and wondrous banks of the River Yamunā, adorned with various brilliant gems and pearls, puts to shame the light of the moon in the night sky. Here one finds the pollen of camphor, there heaps of saffron, somewhere else a spotless pure crystal rock like a stainless moon."

This is a beautiful description of the *Yugala-varṇana* depicting the sacred atmosphere and natural beauty of Śrī Vṛndāvana. It also hints at the presence of Śrī Govinda:

"Countless groups of young gopīs reside here. Rati, Rāma, Umā, and other celestial women are no match for them. Colorful garments adorn their bodies like a rainbow, along with *tilaka* and necklaces. Their beautiful appearances are enhanced by the application of *kunkuma*. There is also Govinda, the handsome young prince adorned with beautiful ornaments; His unparalleled beauty is praised by the damsels of Gandharva-loka. His dark-complexioned body is adorned with a yellow garment; a peacock feather crown decorates His forehead along with curly locks of hair. His eyes are like beautiful lotuses, and His playful and charming glances are like the arrows of Cupid. The sweetness of His lips surpasses the redness of the *bandhūka* flower. The excellence of His coral-like chin is unmatched; His teeth are like a string of pearls, pomegranate seeds, and jasmine buds. The beauty of His conch-like neck adorned with the necklace is indescribable; His arms are like the trunks of elephants, adorned with bracelets. He wears diamond-studded bracelets adorned with countless gems on His body. On His right breast is the Śrīvatsa mark; on His left breast is the line of fortune, Lakṣmī. In the middle of His chest, the brilliance of His necklace astonishes one’s mind. He who is known as Muralidhara holds a flute to His excellent lips. The nectar of its sound rains down, captivating the consciousness and intellect of all. On His left side resides the embodiment of all good fortune, Śrī Rādhā, the jewel amongst all women. In her heart, ever-new love and passion reside for her beloved. Her moon-like face and charming forehead are most beautiful. Her eyes, like silent arrows, are sharp as the bow of Cupid. The musk *tilaka* on her forehead and her earrings swaying to and fro are amazing to behold. Her curly locks of hair, like the roots of a vine, are beautifully adorned with great gems. For those whose minds are absorbed in the essence of this nectar of meditation and bliss, worldly sorrows will not affect them. This is Vṛndāvana, the place of the Lord’s pastimes, the abode of Govinda. There, Śrī Gadādhara prays for pure, unalloyed devotional service."

Oh, once again, isn't it? The poetry of these devotees warms the hearts of us aspiring devotees. We are eternally indebted to him. So, all glories to Śrīla Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī! All glories to Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī! All glories to Jīva Gosvāmī, all the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana! All glories to *guru-paramparā*, and all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! Thank you. *Prasāda-kī-jaya*! Hare Kṛṣṇa, see you next Friday."