""Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Oṃ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Nama oṃ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gauravāṇī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.* 

So today, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part two of part 23. In our last lecture, we discussed extensively the various kinds, shapes, and colors of Kṛṣṇa’s tilaka, and we will continue in that way. Kṛṣṇa’s tilaka is one of the many ornaments that add to His beauty and make Him look beautiful, but actually, Śrīla Prabhupāda explains that concept in reverse. In Chapter 22 of *Nectar of Devotion*, he writes that Kṛṣṇa actually makes the ornaments on His body, including His tilaka, look beautiful. He writes, "In the Third Canto, second chapter, 12th verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Uddhava tells Vidura, 'My dear sir, Kṛṣṇa’s form was most wonderful when He appeared on this planet and exhibited the potency of His internal energy. His wonderfully attractive form was present during His pastimes on this planet, and by His internal potency, He exhibited His opulences which are striking to everyone. His personal beauty was so great that there was no necessity for wearing ornaments on His body. In fact, instead of the ornaments beautifying Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’s beauty enhanced the ornaments.'" 

All right, but either way, Kṛṣṇa’s tilaka is one item that stimulates His devotee’s love for Him. Śrī Vallabhācārya, in his famous *Madhurāṣṭakam*, writes about the intoxicating influence of Kṛṣṇa’s tilaka among other things. Famously, he wrote *madhuram*... speaking about Kṛṣṇa: "His melodious singing is sweet, His yellow silk cloth is sweet, His eating is sweet, His sleeping is sweet, His beauty is sweet, His yellow tilaka is sweet. About the Emperor of sweetness, everything is sweet." 

It is for that reason that devotees take great pleasure in decorating Kṛṣṇa with tilaka. His intimate devotees in the spiritual world—last Friday we described in detail how Mother Yaśodā, the gopīs, the cowherd boys, they all delight in decorating Kṛṣṇa with tilaka—and other devotees do as well. I was reading last night that after the pastime of Kṛṣṇa’s lifting Govardhana Hill, when the Surabhi cow and Indra-deva came to see Kṛṣṇa, they offered their respects to Him, and then in her humble way, Surabhi came forward and, it is described, spoke with the eloquence of the goddess of learning. "O Lord," she said, "You are the tilaka mark of good fortune on the head of King Nanda’s capital. Even if hundreds of Indras tried to kill the cows and gopas, You would protect Gokula and fill its citizens with bliss." Then it is described that Indra and Brahmā together came forward and painted artistic tilaka on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead. So others also put tilaka on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead, and after that, overcome by bliss, the King of Heaven, Indra, placed a regal crown on Kṛṣṇa’s head and declared, "Kṛṣṇa, You are the King of Kings." Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

Now, at this point, I think it would be appropriate to discuss the tilaka of Kṛṣṇa’s eternal consort, Vṛndāvana-īśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, for Kṛṣṇa’s devotees also wear tilaka, and of course, She is the best of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees. Now, Rādhārāṇī’s tilaka is called *smara-yantra*. In *Gītāvalī*, in the prayer *Rādhāṣṭaka* by our beloved Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he writes about—he writes: "This beloved daughter of Vṛṣabhānu is the diamond-tira amongst the jewel-like adolescent girls. Her radiant complexion, like molten gold, elegantly complements her blue garments and dark curly hair. With her forehead marked with tilaka, her roving blue eyes outlined with collyrium, and her limbs elegantly adorned with jewelry, Her body appears to be sweetness personified." 

Similarly, in Govinda dāsa’s *Padāvalī*, we hear one time She, Rādhārāṇī, in separation from Kṛṣṇa, was dressed in a black sarī and decorated with pearl ornaments and a garment of flowers. Her complexion was golden with kuṅkuma, her lips were red like betel, and her eyes lined with black collyrium ointment. Tilaka of good fortune graced her forehead, jeweled earrings framed her cheeks, sweetness shone from her limbs, and yet sorrow filled her heart and tears rolled down her cheeks as She sat silently in separation from her Beloved. There again, we hear about her beautiful tilaka. Of course, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s tilaka does not look much like the vertical lines of Kṛṣṇa’s tilaka, which we discussed last Friday. Her tilaka is more of an artistic design on her forehead, and sometimes may not be so apparent because of her complexion like molten gold, meaning that because one kind of tilaka her servants adorn her with is gopī-candana tilaka, which is itself the color of gold, therefore her tilaka remains a little hidden by her golden complexion. 

Now, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 18, we get a glimpse of another kind of Rādhārāṇī’s tilaka. Therein, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes, "The nectar that flows from Rādhā’s form comes from her natural fragrance which resembles a blend of camphor, kuṅkuma, and roses, further enriched by the musk and aguru in her tilaka and añjana." So, it appears that this form of Rādhā’s tilaka is made from musk and aguru oil. We say "oud" many times these days; that’s what her tilaka is made of: musk and oud, or aguru oil. So interesting. 

And from śāstra, we also learn that, like Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī doesn't apply her own tilaka, but other devotees lovingly do so for Her. For example, in *Aṣṭakālīya-līlā Padāvalī*, it’s a book by a great devotee named Rāya Śekhara, we hear how Mother Yaśodā often dresses Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in beautiful clothes and ornaments, including auspicious tilaka. It says, "Mother Yaśodā motions for Rādhā to take her place on a seat in the center of the room and with great affection begins to dress and ornament Her. First, re-tying Rādhā’s soft curly hair into a graceful braid, she brushes Her then applies fresh vermilion in the part of Rādhā’s hair, tilaka on her forehead, and collyrium over her eyelids. Then she steps back to get a better look, marveling at her own artistry." So beautifully described, how Mother Yaśodā puts tilaka on Her. In our previous class, we discussed how sometimes Kṛṣṇa’s friends, His gopas, or even gopīs, they put Kṛṣṇa’s tilaka on Him, but it’s interesting that sometimes Kṛṣṇa himself puts tilaka on His favorite gopī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. 

In *Govinda-līlāmṛta* we hear, "Once Kṛṣṇa ornamented His beloved Rādhārāṇī. Afterwards, only for Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure did Rādhā examine her own reflection. It was incomparably beautiful, the eternal residence of loving sacrifice in which her forehead was a golden sacrificial altar—that yajña-śālā; her curly locks were like the magic syllables of the sacrifice; her multi-colored tilaka, a *smara-yantra*; her black eyeliner, the sacred ash; and the decorative flowers, uncontaminated offerings." Now therein, you may have noticed it’s mentioned her tilaka was like a *smara-yantra*, so I had to—I didn't know what a *smara-yantra* was, so I looked it up. What’s a *smara-yantra*? Yantras are in general symbolic geometrical patterns, and śāstra describes that when they represent the god of love, Kandarpa or Cupid, they are called *smara*. So She has that on her forehead. 

So, not only do Kṛṣṇa and Mother Yaśodā ornament Vṛndāvana-īśvarī with tilaka, but Rādhārāṇī’s maidservants obviously do as well, and there’s a very, very beautiful description of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s girlfriends ornamenting her with tilaka and other ornaments as well. I found it in *Garga-saṃhitā*, Chapter 20, entitled *Rāsa-krīḍā*, meaning the rasa dance pastime. So therein it is written—it’s so beautiful: "After enjoying water pastimes, handsome Lord Kṛṣṇa went with the gopīs to Govardhana Hill. On Govardhana Hill, in a cave where the ground was made of jewels, Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoyed a rasa dance with Śrī Rādhā, the queen of the rasa dance. Sitting on a flower throne, Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa shone like a monsoon cloud and lightning on the hill. There, their happy gopī friends decorated their Queen Rādhā with sandal, kuṅkuma, yavaka, aguru, and kajal. The gopīs worshiped Kīrtidā’s daughter Rādhā with offerings of honey, and Śrī Yamunājī gave *nūpura* anklets to Her. Śrī Gaṅgā gave splendid *mañjīra* anklets. Śrī Ramā gave a network of tinkling ornaments, and Matoma gave a beautiful necklace. Virajā, the gopī Virajā, gave a beautiful *candrakānta* necklace, splendid as millions of moons. Gopi Candra-nana gave many jeweled rings, and the gopī Yaśodā gave to Rādhā two bracelets rich with many jewels. Satya Candra-nana gopī gave many jewel *bhuja-kaṅkaṇa* armlets, and Māramati gave a pair of glittering *aṅgada* armlets. The gopī Bandī gave *ṭaṅka* earrings, Sukhadāyānī gopī gave *kuṇḍala* earrings, and the close friend Ānandī gave a *bālā-toraṇa* ornament—Śrī Rādhā’s *bālā-toraṇa* of the way to get back to the spiritual sky, to know what that is. Then, Padmā gopī gave beautiful forehead tilaka. Candrakalā gave a *bindu*, and Padmāvatī gave a nose-pearl that moved described to and fro. O King, her beautiful friend Candrakānta gave Rādhā a charming *bālā-puṣpa*, splendid as the rising sun. Dārī gave a crest jewel. Praharṣiṇī gopī gave a braja jewel, and the goddess Vṛndā, the queen of Vṛndāvana, Vṛndā Devī, gave Chandra and Surya ornaments glittering like 10 million lightning flashes. Accompanied by brilliantly decorated Rādhā on the king of mountains, Lord Kṛṣṇa shone with great glory." The place on Govardhana Hill where Śrī Rādhā was decorated like this is known as Śṛṅgāra-maṇḍala. Let’s go to Śṛṅgāra-maṇḍala next Kārtika. The Garga-saṃhitā tells the pastime again and again and again, and it finishes: "Then, accompanied by His beloved gopīs, Lord Kṛṣṇa went to the lake... such a beautiful description." 

There’s tilaka in there. Now, tilaka plays an important role in stimulating love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as well as in the combined forms of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa known as Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Tilaka also plays an important role in stimulating our love for Him. In *Caitanya-līlā* (8.14), we hear how when Lord Caitanya discovered Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa—it’s a wonderful pastime—He took mud, sacred mud from Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and applied it in 12 places as tilaka. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, the text says: "Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu then marked His body with tilaka made from the mud of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and with the help of Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya, He collected some of the mud and took it with Him." 

Furthermore, in *Caitanya-bhāgavata* by Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura, we learn that when Mahāprabhu was teaching as a young man—you could say actually a boy—He was known as Nimāi Paṇḍita, and He had a school, a tola. Whenever a student would come to school without tilaka, Nimāi Paṇḍita would refuse to see that student’s face. He would say, "Since you are not wearing tilaka, my dear student, you must not have done your morning pūjā, and if you did not perform pūjā, then most probably you didn't bathe, so you are coming before all of us in an unclean manner." It’s described that He would thus humiliate the student—because sometimes the teachers would chastise—so He would humiliate the student this way, and *Caitanya-bhāgavata* describes sending him back home, saying, "Take a bath, apply tilaka, and then return; otherwise, you cannot come here for studying. To see your forehead without tilaka is like seeing a cremation ground. Take your crematorium and get out of here!" Strong words, strong words. We hear how Mahāprabhu could be strong like the thunderbolt but soft as a rose, but such words are necessary because they stress the importance of tilaka for every devotee of Kṛṣṇa. 

I found a verse in the *Padma Purāṇa* where Kṛṣṇa says, "To please Me, devotees apply tilaka with a peaceful mind, every morning and evening, as well as during worship and sacrifice." But the Lord says, "Tilaka brings prosperity, protects against danger, and destroys fear. Therefore, one should always wear tilaka." And of course, we all know how much Śrīla Prabhupāda encouraged all of us to wear tilaka. I researched it and I found this letter that Prabhupāda wrote in 1970 to his godbrother, Mādhava Mahārāja. He wrote like this: "Everything is possible by the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, because He specifically appeared to reclaim the most fallen souls. And I find it practically daily that although these Western boys and girls are fallen in the material estimate, they have taken to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement very seriously, and the result is very quick. The newspaper reporters advertise these boys and girls as 'bright-faced,' and actually it is so. By nature, these American boys and girls are fair-complexioned or white; they are beautiful also, and when they take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness with symbols of mālā and tilaka, they appear to be coming directly from the Vaikuṇṭha planets. All by your grace, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and only by your grace." 

In *Nectar of Devotion*, Chapter 6, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, "Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states that his elder brother, Sanātana Gosvāmī, has compiled *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* for the guidance of the Vaiṣṇavas, and therein he has mentioned many rules and regulations to be followed by the Vaiṣṇavas. Some of them are very important and prominent, and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī will now mention these very important items for our benefit." Prabhupāda continues, "One of those many rules that Rūpa Gosvāmī mentions is that one should decorate the body with tilaka, which is the sign of the Vaiṣṇavas." And Prabhupāda comments on this instruction, "It is interesting, the idea is that as soon as a person sees these marks on the body of the Vaiṣṇava, that person will immediately remember Kṛṣṇa. Lord Caitanya said that a Vaiṣṇava is he who when seen reminds one of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, it is essential that a Vaiṣṇava mark his body with tilaka to remind others of Kṛṣṇa." 

Now, I was thinking, it is interesting that Prabhupāda writes, "It is essential that a Vaiṣṇava mark his body with tilaka so as to remind others," and he is referring here to non-devotees of Kṛṣṇa. Essentially, Śrīla Prabhupāda is saying that tilaka can even be the stimuli for awakening Kṛṣṇa consciousness even in the hearts of non-devotees. Beginning, of course: "There’s the Hare Kṛṣṇas, they have that mark on their forehead, they’re Hare Kṛṣṇas, and they say the name of Kṛṣṇa." So as Vaiṣṇavas, it’s only natural, isn’t it, that we hope one day millions of people around the world will wear tilaka? Wouldn’t that be wonderful? 

Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is famous for saying that he desired that one day high court judges everywhere would wear Vaiṣṇava tilaka. Furthermore, he said this would be a symbol of the successful influence of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the world. You go to court, and there’s a judge wearing Vaiṣṇava tilaka—oh, that’s good! All right. Well, so this encouraging of others to wear tilaka reminded me of a pastime in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. I am in Māyāpur now, it’s very nice, but I am kind of missing Vṛndāvana. There’s a village with the name Tilaka Gāḍī. In that village—or rather, how that village got its name was very interesting. Once upon a time, long ago, a very empowered Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Bābājī lived there. This Bābājī performed his *bhajana* in a cottage just outside the village, and after some years had passed, the local villagers treated him as their local saint and representative of Kṛṣṇa. As time went by, this Bābājī, this Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Bābājī, impressed upon those villagers the importance of chanting Kṛṣṇa’s holy names and decorating their bodies with Vaiṣṇava, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tilaka. And it is described that gradually some of the men and the women of that village began to mark their bodies with gopī-candana and regularly chant the mahā-mantra on tulasi beads. You know, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is contagious in the good sense! So eventually, the whole entire village followed suit, and because everyone in this village ended up wearing tilaka, that village became known as Tilaka Gāḍī. The sādhu’s name and a practice that actually endures to this present day. Yeah, so I think next Kārtika, we should go to Tilaka Gāḍī, make sure that we have good, bright gopī-candana tilaka on our faces, and then they’ll welcome us. 

As far as possible, we as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas should wear tilaka. Now, I say "as far as possible," which means, of course, that it may not always be possible because, well, many devotees go to their workplace or they go to school, and it may not be practical to wear tilaka. Even then, I know some devotees who I could say bravely—bravely—do wear tilaka to work, and I even know two young students of mine, they wear tilaka to school, and all their friends think it’s cool. But you have to be brave to do that, don't you? To go to work with tilaka. In this regard, one time Śrīla Prabhupāda told the story that there was a factory in India sometime back where the owner and, you know, most of the workers were Vaiṣṇavas, and these Vaiṣṇavas they had the freedom—therefore, working in that environment, they had the freedom—to wear their Vaiṣṇava tilaka to work. After some time, however, the ownership, the management of that factory changed, and the new proprietor was a Muslim. On taking over the business, the Muslim owner declared that he would no longer allow all the workers to come to work wearing Vaiṣṇava tilaka. Prabhupāda said that most of the, almost all the workers obeyed. One employee, however, thought he would take his chances and depend on Kṛṣṇa, so he went to work wearing very clear, bright yellow-white gopī-candana Vaiṣṇava tilaka. And that morning, after seeing all the workers assembled, the new Muslim proprietor said to the workers, "This one devotee who has worn Vaiṣṇava tilaka against my instruction, he is actually very brave, he is very courageous. Therefore, he is permitted to continue wearing tilaka to work, but all others are forbidden to wear it anymore." Hare Kṛṣṇa. So as I said, I know some brave devotees who wear tilaka to work, but if that is not practical—and times it’s not practical—we should at least wear tilaka whenever possible. 

In *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, he quotes Kṛṣṇa, who says, "Whoever wears the sacred tilaka mark, which goes upward like a flame, eats grains in someone's house, I, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, liberate his 20 previous generations from their sufferings in hellish planets." (*Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* 4.203). And another verse: "O King of the birds, Garuda, if gopī-candana is marked on anyone’s forehead, by the mercy of the Supreme Lord, no planets—Sun, Moon, Mars, etc.—Yakṣas and demigods, ghosts and devils, snakes and demons can harm such a person." (*Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* 4.238). 

Back there, of course, our purpose in decorating our bodies with tilaka while chanting 12 of Kṛṣṇa’s auspicious holy names is, of course, for purification and protection, as we mentioned in the first lecture, but ultimately, it is a stimulation for developing ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa and for Kṛṣṇa’s eternal consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. All right, Kṛṣṇa-dāsas, then today we’ll conclude our discussion on Kṛṣṇa and His devotees' tilaka as a stimuli for awakening ecstatic love by reciting—this is really nice—by reciting the glories of gopī-candana tilaka from *Garga-saṃhitā*, Sixth Chapter, 15th [canto], beginning from text 15. When I found out, I was like, "Whoa, that’s a perfect ending." *Garga-saṃhitā* describes the glories of gopī-candana tilaka. What better ending? Here it is. It’s a little long, but that’s good. 

"Simply by hearing about Gopi-bhūmi, which is so named because the gopīs resided there, one becomes free from the bondage of karma. In Gopi-bhūmi, gopī-candana was manifested from the gopīs' cosmetics. A person who marks his limbs with gopī-candana tilaka attains the result of bathing in Mother Ganges. A person who daily wears gopī-candana tilaka attains the pious result of daily bathing in all the sacred rivers in creation. The person who daily wears gopī-candana tilaka attains the result of performing a thousand aśvamedha-yajñas and a hundred rājasūya-yajñas. He attains the result of giving charity and following vows in all the holy places in creation. What’s more, he attains the goal of life; of this, there is no doubt." 

Please, Vaiṣṇavas, don't see this all as exaggeration. One of the offenses to the Holy Name is to think of the glories of the Holy Name or anything connected to Kṛṣṇa as exaggeration. This is the whole truth and nothing but the truth, transcendentally. It goes on, "Twice as sacred as the mud of the Ganges is the dust of Citrakūṭa. Ten times more sacred than that is the dust of Pañcavaṭī-tīrtha. A hundred times more sacred is the dust of gopī-candana." Please know that gopī-candana is equal to the dust of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Isn't it? We roll in the dust, we take some dust, we put it in our mouths, we take it home. It’s one of the five personalities who grant entrance into Vraja. *Garga-saṃhitā* is saying, "Please know that gopī-candana is equal to the dust of Vṛndāvana." 

"Even if in the past one has committed hundreds of sins, if such a person wears gopī-candana tilaka, then Yamarāja cannot take him away. How then can Yamarāja’s messengers touch him? When we die, we want to have tilaka on. A sinner who daily wears gopī-candana tilaka goes to Lord Kṛṣṇa’s supreme abode, Goloka, which is beyond the world of matter." In relationship to this, in Sindhu-deśa there was a king named... he was most cruel and sinful and he was addicted to visiting prostitutes. While he was on Earth, this cruel sinner murdered a hundred brāhmaṇas and 10 pregnant women. One day, he mounted a Sindhu horse—it’s described, a Sindhu horse—and went hunting. With a flood of arrows, he accidentally killed a brown cow in that hunt. One day, greedy to get this king’s kingdom, with a sharp sword, his angry minister, his chief minister, killed the king in the forest. 

Seeing him fallen to the ground and dead, the Yamadūtas came, bound him up, and joking as they went, took him to the city—it’s described, the city of Yamarāja. Seeing this sinner brought before him, powerful Yamarāja said to his scribe, Citragupta, "What is the proper punishment for this man?" Citragupta said, "O great King, he should be thrown into 8,400,000 hells for as long as the sun and the moon shine in the sky. On the earth, he did not perform a single pious deed. He killed 10 pregnant women and he killed a brown cow. He killed thousands of deer in the forest. He offended the demigods and the brāhmaṇas. He is a great sinner, my Lord." 

Then, by Yamarāja’s order, the Yamadūtas took that sinner and threw him into a terrible 8,000-mile-wide cauldron of bubbling, boiling oil in the hell of Kumbhīpāka. That’s one of the worst hells. However, the moment that sinner came to it, the boiling oil, which was described as hot as the great fire at the time of cosmic devastation, that boiling oil suddenly became cool—very cool! O King of Videha, as Prahlāda was unhurt in the same situation, that sinner was not hurt by the boiling oil. It became very cool! 

Then the Yamadūtas went and described with great wonder what had happened to the noble-hearted Yamarāja. So then, Yamarāja and Citragupta, they carefully reviewed—he went back and reviewed the sinner’s case and concluded that while he was on Earth, yes, not at any moment had he ever performed a single pious deed. So they were kind of bewildered. Then at that very moment, Śrīla Vyāsadeva arrived in that assembly. Bowing down before him and carefully worshiping him, saintly and noble-hearted Yamarāja asked Vyāsadeva the following question. He said, "When a certain sinner who had never performed even a single pious deed was thrown into the terrible boiling oil of Kumbhīpāka, my Lord, the oil suddenly became very cool. Because of this, my mind is now tortured with doubts." 

So Śrīla Vyāsadeva said, "O great King, the intelligent sages who have studied all the scriptures know that the ways of piety, sin, and spiritual progress are very subtle and difficult to understand. Yet, somehow or other, by destiny, this sinner did perform a pious deed that you haven’t noticed, and by that deed, he became purified. O noble-hearted one, please now hear the story of this." And as I was reading that, my hair stood on end, not because of... actually just like, "Wow!" That sinner died in a place where from someone’s hand some gopī-candana tilaka from Dvārakā had actually fallen on the ground. Dying in gopī-candana—note—the sinner died and he fell down on top of this gopī-candana. Dying in gopī-candana, the sinner became completely purified. 

"A person who wears gopī-candana tilaka ultimately attains a spiritual form like that of Lord Nārāyaṇa. By seeing him, one becomes free from the sin of killing a brāhmaṇa." Śrī Nārada said, "Hearing this, Yamarāja, who understands the glories of gopī-candana, took the sinner, placed him on an airplane that goes anywhere one wishes, and sent him straight to Vaikuṇṭha, which is above the worlds of matter, beyond the worlds of matter. O King, thus I have described to you the glories of gopī-candana. Anyone who simply hears this account—" Prabhupāda... "anyone who simply hears this account of gopī-candana’s glories becomes exalted." You are all now exalted! "He goes eventually to the supreme abode of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead." 

Wow, that’s all for today. A lot to digest there. I hope that you know, next time you’re in front of the mirror and you’re putting on your tilaka, you remember some of the glories of tilaka that we’ve described today, some of the instructions therein as well, and this will help you to very quickly make it back to the spiritual world. We should think of tilaka in that way. It’s one of the items that Kṛṣṇa wears, it’s divine, and He requests His devotees to wear it. Certainly, we know Prabhupāda had requested us to wear it whenever practical, whenever possible. So thank you, see you next Friday."