Hello, everyone. Welcome back once again to our lectures on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Nāma. All glories to the revealer of the dawn. So, recently we mentioned that the purpose of this lecture series is to awaken our love, specifically for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.18, "Jalām," one develops that love by practicing devotional service, whose main ways are meditation on and singing about the many pastimes of the Lord. That service becomes brilliant by chanting the Lord's most beloved holy names.

Now, Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur summarizes this entire process very nicely with the stanza in his poem called Śaraṇāgati. It's one of my favorites. He writes, "There rests upon my soul, from matter free, upon my lover's arms, eternal peace, and spirit's love are all my chanting charms." And our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda beautifully describes that exact moment we're back in our Lover's arms, Kṛṣṇa, upon returning back home to the eternal Vṛndāvana, in the spiritual sky.

It's one of the most beautiful passages in our entire list of śāstras. It's in Bṛhat-bhāgavatāmṛta, volume 3, chapter 6, beginning from verse 29. So beautiful, he's actually describing the devotee Gopa Kumāra's, how could I say, triumphant entrance into Goloka Vṛndāvana after a long journey home. It's in itself a long passage, but worth hearing, if only to remind us of the ultimate goal we're trying to achieve. Gopa Kumāra begins in this way, "I moved here and there anxiously, questioning each person I met, and as I made my way forward, I came to the pasturing grounds of the cowherds. Then, looking around in all directions, I spotted in the distance a town adorned with the essence of all sweetness."

Now, Śrīla Prabhupāda says in the purport to that particular verse, it's important, the other realms Gopa Kumāra had visited in the material and spiritual worlds were each great in their own way, but none of them, not even Vṛndāvana, was as attractive as this. Then Gopa Kumāra continues to describe his entering Goloka Vṛndāvana. On one side of that town, I heard wonderful songs sung by cowherd women, and the charming sound of the churning of butter and the jingling of bangles. Trying to subdue my agitated joy, I walked forward and came across a seated elderly gentleman, sobbing profusely, incessantly chanting "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa."

With some skillful effort, I made him speak, and I heard him say in a choked voice, "This town belonged to Nanda, the king of the cowherds, Kṛṣṇa's father." As soon as I heard those words, I fainted, overcome with delight. After a moment, that compassionate old man revived me, and I ran ahead and approached a gateway of the town and sat there at that gate. And there I saw, by the hundreds of thousands and tens of millions, all sorts of wonders, unseen, unheard of, unimaginable by anyone of this world.

I couldn't discern whether the people there were all enjoying the highest bliss or suffering in the grip of terrible misery. I heard the gopīs' songs, coupled with their crying, but were they songs of the greatest contentment or the greatest sorrow? I couldn't tell. A person seeing that place might think it was in the material world, but by carefully reflecting on whatever he had seen before, he would understand that it was now somewhere above all material planets, all higher planetary regions, and all the transcendental realms of the spiritual world.

Then an elderly lady came by. I bowed down to her and asked in a plaintive voice, "Where is Śrī Nandana playing today?" That elderly lady said, "This morning, that Giver of Life to us, Prabāsī, went to enter the dense forest to play with his cows and friends, and his respected elder brother. Later, at dusk, he will return. All the gopīs are waiting on this path, along the Yamunā, their eyes transfixed on the road. These trees stand with leaves erect, eagerly awaiting the chance to see him. Surely, he will come along this path."

Gopa Kumāra says, "As if anointed by a downpour of the purest nectar, I gazed with one-pointed attention down the path the old lady had pointed out. The sheer force of my ecstasy had frozen my thighs, but with some effort, I moved on. And I heard from afar a certain sound, mixed with the mooing of cows, it was the supremely attractive murmur of Kṛṣṇa's enchanting flute." That sound, sweet melodies of sportingly played notes, diverse with musical embellishments, was like nothing I had ever heard in the material world.

Its attractive force at once overwhelmed everyone in the cowherd village. By the power of that sound, sap flowed in a downpour from the long rows of trees. A flood of tears fell from the eyes of every embodied being in the village of the cowherds. A shower of milk rained from the breasts of all Kṛṣṇa's mothers, and even from the elderly women. And the rapid currents of the Yamunā suddenly stood still. I didn't know whether that flute gave out poison or the nectar of immortality, whether its sound was harsh like thunder or soft like water, hotter than blazing fire or cooler than the moon. I couldn't tell, but that sound drove all the gopīs mad. All of them were utterly bewildered.

Then I saw some women of Vraja come out of their homes, bearing in their hands the things needed to greet Kṛṣṇa with worship. Others, who passed by, held ornaments and offerings of food in their hands. Other ladies, ignoring everything around them, ran towards the mingled sounds of the mooing of the cows and the song of the flute. In the frenzy of love for Kṛṣṇa, the ladies stumbled down the path. Some ladies ran, their ornaments in disarray, some could hardly keep their belts and hair tied. Some stayed in their homes, stunned like trees, and others fell unconscious on the ground.

Some of the women, who had fainted, their faces wet with tears and saliva, were carried forward by their girlfriends. The ladies, so diverse in complexion and adorned with diverse ornaments and dress, put to shame the good fortune of the goddess of Fortune herself. Swiftly, the ladies ran to the bank of the Yamunā, absorbed in singing His name, games, and pastimes. I, too, went forward, as if pulled by someone, joining the throng of gopīs rushing forward. And all sides, I, too, began to run quickly.

Then, from a distance, I saw Him, His charming flute in hand, running quickly. He emerged from amongst His friends and animals and approached me, saying in a sweet voice, "Look, Śona, here is my dear friend, Śarūpa." The sun who shines on the lot of your family. Now, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in a purport to this verse, because Kṛṣṇa recognized Gopa Kumāra as His friend, Śarūpa, Kṛṣṇa left behind the cowherd boys and the cows and ran forward to greet him.

So sweet, so Gopa Kumāra goes on, Kṛṣṇa was dressed for the forest, His garments, earrings, and peacock feather crown all swayed to and fro, and so did His garland of Dūmbā flowers. His fragrance perfumed all directions, and His beautiful lotus face blossomed with a playful smile. His lotus eyes beamed with a merciful glance, and the variant assets of beauty decorated Him in a singular way. The fingers of His lotus hand busily pushed back the locks of His hair, which flew about, adorned with the dust raised by the cows.

His tender, divine lotus feet touched the surface of the earth, just to grant her the gift of supreme splendor. Playfully dancing, as they moved, they attracted everyone's heart with their great eagerness to walk quickly with large steps. The effulgence of His cloud-colored body, shining with the full sweetness of youth, lit up all corners of the sky. His beauty, which captured the hearts of the ever-dear devotees of Braja, was an ocean abounding with countless excellences.

He leaped forward and came close to me, compelled by the affection of His helpless devotee. I fainted in love upon seeing Him. He caught hold of me by the neck, and suddenly, He, too, fell to the ground. A moment later, I reawoke and carefully freed my neck from His grasp. I stood up and saw Him on the ground, unconscious, covered with dust. He was moistening the path with His tears. Hari Kṛṣṇa, isn't this beautiful? What we may expect, or what we can expect, when we purify our hearts and awaken our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? This is the ticket back home, back to Godhead.

So, again, that was a very long quote from Bṛhat-bhāgavatāmṛta, but absolutely necessary for us to hear and relish. For, with all due respect, no other spiritual tradition reveals, what to speak of explains, just how one enters the kingdom of God, we would say, Goloka Vṛndāvana. But we are all fortunate, for we know who we are, and we know where we're going. I've many times said that we know who we are, and we know where we're going, especially by those beautiful verses by Śrīla Bhakti Vinod Ṭhākur. There, no mystery, everything's clear, absolute truth.

So, today, we're continuing with our mini-series entitled "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 48. In this lecture, we will discuss Kṛṣṇa's Sudarśana Cakra. Now, I did some research. The scripture Amarakośa 1.129 says, "Cakraṁ sud," meaning the name of Bhagavān's cakra is Sudarśana, and the meaning of Sudarśana is "śu," meaning beautiful, and "darśana," or sight. The śāstras say that the cakra whose sight is beautiful to behold for the devotees is not beautiful to the demons.

The śāstras say like that. In a rare, unpublished Tantra named Viṣṇu-gāyatrī-saṁhitā, there's a text called "A Thousand Names of the Sudarśana Cakra." And within that śāstra, we find what is called the Dhyāna Mantra of Sudarśana. This is very rare. With the help of some of my scholarly friends, we found the Dhyāna Mantra of Sudarśana. It's as follows: "Holding a cakra, disc, bow, axe, sword, arrow, spear, binding noose, gold, lotus, glowing bud, shield, plow, mace, club, and jasmine in His 16 hands, He, Sudarśana, has extremely fierce teeth, spokes, His hairs are blazing, He has three eyes, His ornaments, garlands, etc., are all of the radiance of blazing fire. One should meditate on this personality, named Sudarśana, who is situated in a hexagonal maṇḍala and who takes on the role of a cakra that vanquishes the life airs of all enemies of Viṣṇu."

The mantra, actually, I have the mantra in Sanskrit, but it was very complicated, so what to speak of memorizing, I could hardly recite it. Now, in Southern India, the appearance day of Sudarśana in this universe is celebrated in the month of Āṣāḍha, on Śukla Pakṣa, Daśamī, the 10th day of the waxing of the moon. This year, we calculated it was on June 28th, 2023. Now, after hearing all this, one may question, how can the Sudarśana Cakra, such a fierce personality, such a fierce weapon of Lord Viṣṇu, actually be a stimulation for ecstatic love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? But it is a fact that it is a stimulation for ecstatic love, and that we shall see.

Just like we saw with the conch of Kṛṣṇa, Pañcajanya, in the last lecture, the Sudarśana Cakra actually plays a very intimate role in the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. To begin with, we can remember how last week we quoted Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū, chapter 15, by Kavikarṇapūra, which describes how Kṛṣṇa was worshiped. Remember, during Gauḍa-līlā, Kavikarṇapūra writes, "Gopa, with the limbs of his own body, provided an elegant throne made of smooth stones and jewels for Kṛṣṇa. The demigod Varuṇa personally held a fine white umbrella over Kṛṣṇa's head, which had a fringe of hanging pearls, that appeared like falling raindrops. Vṛndā, his arm trembling in ecstatic devotion, stood beside the Lord, fanning Him with a cāmara whisk. The full moon assumed the form of a mirror made of jewels, and remember, Pañcajanya, the large Kṣudra conch, sanctified the atmosphere with loud sounds."

And this is what I wanted to come to, the effulgent Sudarśana Cakra expanded as many lamps to illuminate all directions for the bathing ceremony. So, this fierce Sudarśana Cakra appears in very intimate, loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and the cowherd boys in Vraja. He's there. What's more, when Kṛṣṇa was holding up Govardhana to protect the inhabitants of Vraja from the torrent of rain sent by Lord Indra, Sudarśana Cakra appeared above Govardhana and, by spinning around, deflected much of the rain pouring down on the mountain.

And when it's described, when Kṛṣṇa saw that some of that flood water had begun to stream down and under the hill where the gopīs were, He again called upon Sudarśana Cakra to help in another way. It's written that, searing with the heat of 10 million suns, Sudarśana Cakra then hovered around the base of Govardhana and dried up the rain streaming down the hill, much like Agastya Muni had once dried up the ocean by drinking it.

Now, after Kṛṣṇa had put Govardhana back in place, Sudarśana Cakra, who's generally associated with Lord Viṣṇu in His pastimes, approached Kṛṣṇa, and He requested that He'd be able to reside somewhere in the Vraja area. The ācāryas say it's really nice, Kṛṣṇa felt greatly obliged to His eternal weapon, and He also wanted Sudarśana Cakra to witness the spontaneous loving devotion of the gopīs, much like He had wanted Uddhava, who's from Dvārakā, to also stay for some time or come to Vraja to witness the love of the gopīs.

So, Kṛṣṇa wanted Sudarśana Cakra to witness what the gopīs' bakti, the spontaneous loving devotion of the gopīs, was. Wow, so the Lord gave Him a place of residence, a place of bhajana, at Govardhana Hill. That place became known as Cakratīrtha, Cakratīrtha, the sacred tīrtha, or the place of the Sudarśana Cakra. That's His place. So, this cakra is well, it's directly under the very spot where Sudarśana Cakra spun above Govardhana Hill to protect the residence of Vraja from the downpour of rain.

Now, interestingly, it's also a residence, a prominent residence of Lord Śiva, who resides there in a group of five Śiva liṅgams, which were installed by the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, Braja. In this place, Lord Śiva is called Cakreśvara, and He's one of the five prominent Śiva liṅgams protecting Vraja. Śiva is there to protect another pastime, but Śiva protects Vraja. The other four are Aiśvarya in Vraja town, Kūṭeśvara in Rākhuṇḍa, Bālādeśvara in Mathurā, Nāndeśvara in Nanda, and Kāmeśvara and Kāman, each of those places is a very ancient, beautiful Śiva liṅgam.

Now, it's interesting to note here that our Śrīla Prabhupāda, who's Bṛhat-bhāgavatāmṛta, we were reciting, he's intimately linked with Cakratīrtha, because during his life, 500 years ago, he often lived there. He had different places he would do his bhajana, but this, you could say, was one of his favorite places, Cakratīrtha. He lived there, worshiping Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as well as the deity of Lord Śiva.

In fact, wherever Śrīla Prabhupāda took up residence in Vraja, I was reading, like Govardhana Hill, etc., he would never be far away from a deity of Lord Śiva. Actually, he would worship Śiva daily. The reason that Śrīla Prabhupāda always lived near Lord Śiva in Vraja is that Lord Śiva increases one's love for Lord Kṛṣṇa. Another reason he liked to live near Lord Śiva is that the two great souls are actually closely related. Śrīla Prabhupāda is said to be the combined form of Lavaṅga Mañjarī and Sanātana Kumāra. Sanātana Kumāra was born from Brahmā's mind and is thus the brother of Śiva, who was also born of Brahmā. So, they're brothers.

Sometimes, when absorbed in his internal identity as Lavaṅga Mañjarī, Śrīla Prabhupāda would meditate on how the gopīs used to come to Cakratīrtha, then known at that time as Paragaṭa, the boat landing, and from that place, he would daily circumambulate Govardhana Hill along a much longer outer parikramā path than we go. He'd start there from Cakratīrtha, and he'd go out a little bit beyond the route we take, further out, and it would take him a long time to go around Govardhana Hill, because it's much longer.

And it's said that he would perform 1,18 obeses, each time to Girirāja, every day. And once, at the advanced age of 65, Śrīla Prabhupāda was forming Govardhana parikramā, I think it was in the heat of the summer, he was passing by Kuśum Sarovara, when he sat down to briefly rest, and at that time, Kṛṣṇa famously appeared in the guise of a local cowherd boy and fanned Śrīla Prabhupāda with his upper cloth. And that mysterious boy said to Sanātana Bābā, "You're too old to be doing parikramā every day."

But Śrīla Prabhupāda, he was thinking, this boy's fanning has the same soothing effect on my body that His voice has on my heart. Is he someone special? And although Śrīla Prabhupāda was practically exhausted, he tried to conceal his condition from the boy, explaining how he had taken a vow to perform Govardhana parikramā every day. So, the cowherd boy just laughed, and then, embracing Sanātana, he picked him up and put him on his shoulder and started to walk, saying, "Don't worry, Bābā, then I will carry you. You've taken that vow, so I will carry you."

And in an attempt to stop the boy, Sanātana said, "Please put me down. My vow is to walk around Govardhana Hill, not be carried around it. Besides, how is it that you're so strong? Who are you?" So, Kṛṣṇa was very pleased with Śrīla Prabhupāda's determination, but He was also very concerned about his failing health, because he was elderly. And with these two factors in mind, the Lord provided a wonderful solution for His pure devotee.

Kṛṣṇa took Sanātana and led him closer to Govardhana Hill, there Kṛṣṇa placed His foot on a large stone, a large śilā, leaving an impression of His foot on that śilā. So, finally, Sanātana understood who that cowherd boy was, and falling on the ground, he bathed Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet with his tears and offered the Lord very beautiful prayers. Then Kṛṣṇa said, "Sanātana, take this stone, and worship it daily with tulasī leaves in water. That walk around it seven times, this will be equivalent to circling the entire hill."

And with that, Kṛṣṇa disappeared. So, Śrīla Prabhupāda then took that large śilā, this Girirāja śilā,