Hare Krishna everyone and welcome back again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śānta Davī.

Today I'd like to offer my obeisances to my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, with a beautiful poem in which a disciple in the Vedic religion is glorifying his spiritual master.

It's very beautiful. My mind longs for the blessed vision of my guru. It cries out like a thirsty chakora bird. My thirst is not quenched, and I can find no peace without the vision of that blessed person. Oh Lord and Master, your face is most beautiful, and the sound of your words imparts deep wisdom.

It has been so long since this rainbird has had even a glimpse of water. Blessed is that land where you dwell, my dear most friend and spiritual master. I give myself to you now and forever, oh deliverer of my soul.

When I could not be with you for just a moment, the dark age of Kali Yuga dawned for me. When will I meet you again, oh beloved Lord and Master?

I cannot endure the night, and sleep does not come to me without your audience. I will surrender everything to have your darśana once again. It was my extreme good fortune to meet you, oh most saintly of all persons. And I will find you again in the eternal home where I am meant to dwell.

There I will serve you forever, and I shall never be separated from you, even for an instant. I am forever your eternal servant, oh my beloved Lord and Master. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So, we're continuing with our series on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's ecstatic love, and this will be part 127. Herein, we'll continue discussing the dress and the attire of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. In this regard, there's a nice mantra chanted by pujārīs when dressing Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the temples of Braja in Vrindavan.

It's actually from the Ṛg Veda 3.8.4. And this mantra was used in ancient times to offer clothes to the demigods during yajñas. But after the establishment of deities in Vrindavan, the tradition of ṣoḍaśopacāra, meaning the worship of the deity with sixteen articles, came to branch out, wherein such Vedic mantras were also introduced in the service of the deities.

So, in essence, this mantra is a Vedic mantra and also part of our Vaiṣṇava āgama. *Vastrāṇi paridhāpaya*. Just the first line, because it's a long, long mantra. But the translation is: "I offer the finest clothes to hide your divine youth and beauty from the eyes of society.

Oh my divine Lord, please accept these clothes from me." Vaiṣṇava is offering this mantra to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. "I offer the finest clothes to hide your divine youth and beauty from the eyes of society. Oh my divine Lord, please accept these, please accept these clothes from me." Ṛg Veda, Ṛg Veda.

Now, regarding dressing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her attire and her ornaments, the dressing and the ornamentation of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is actually done by her most confidential associates like the Sakhīs, the older girls, and the Mañjarīs, the younger girls. Regarding her Sakhīs, the eight Sakhīs dressing her, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in *Lalitaṣṭaka*, verse two: "I offer my respects unto Śrī Lalitā Devī, whose beautiful face mocks the brilliance of the full moon, whose eyes are ever restless like those of a startled doe, who is famous for her extraordinary expertise in the art of dressing Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and who is a treasure house of unlimited feminine qualities." Lalitā.

And as regards the Mañjarīs, the younger girls dressing Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in *Śrī Caitanya Gaṇoddeśa Dīpikā*, verse 195, about one such gopī. He writes: "*pindrikā*." The maidservant who dresses and decorates Śrīmatī Rādhikā is called *pindrikā*. The maidservant who dresses and decorates Śrīmatī Rādhikā is called *pindrikā*.

And the one who decorates her is *citrikā*. The two maidservants who keep her informed about destined future events, or thus knowledgeable of the scripture delineating astrology, are *mantriṇī* and *tantrikī*. The last parts of their names are very similar, so beautiful.

But this dressing of Śrīmatī Rādhikā doesn't take place just once a day, as we might imagine. No, it takes place ten times a day. She changes her dress ten times a day for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa. The following times are those ten times: Upon rising before dawn, then again after dawn, she changes clothes.

Then when she cooks for Kṛṣṇa, then she changes her clothes after cooking for Kṛṣṇa. Then before going out to meet Kṛṣṇa in the late morning, another set of clothes. Then she changes for bathing again into her bathing clothes. Then again changes after bathing, another set.

Then when preparing to go out at night to meet Kṛṣṇa. Then to wear clothes for bathing at night, and finally, again after bathing at night. Such detail!

We're so blessed. All very confidential knowledge, but by Śrīla Prabhupāda's grace, we have access to this knowledge as a stimulation for ecstatic love.

Now, in the *Bhakti-ratnākara* by Narahari Cakravartī, we take the dust of his feet upon our heads. There's a nice dressing pastime where Kṛṣṇa dresses Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The Sakhīs, the Mañjarīs, of course, Śrīmatī Rādhikā also, but this is a pastime where Kṛṣṇa dresses Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

We described it in detail like four years ago, but it's worth repeating here with some more details. So, one time at Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were sitting under a famous banyan tree and they were so absorbed in their pastimes that they lost track of time.

We often say if you're doing something you like, time passes very quickly. And if you're doing something you don't like, time passes very slowly. So, in the midst of those pastimes, who happened to appear but Vṛndā Devī along with mother Pūrṇamāsī, who, as we know, is in charge of arranging all of Vṛndāvana's pastimes.

So Vṛndā Devī said to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, "Dear ones, you're going to be late for the Rāsa dance this late afternoon." And Rādhikā, hearing that, immediately became very angry with Kṛṣṇa. She said, "Kṛṣṇa, you lost track of time!

We're going to be late for the Rāsa dance, and all my gopī friends will miss out on your transcendental association." That's how she explained it. This is actually the compassionate nature of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Śrīla Prabhupāda describes in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* that Rādhārāṇī is such a great devotee, the greatest devotee, that she takes ten thousand times more pleasure in engaging others in Kṛṣṇa's service than doing the service herself.

So, by not being on time for the Rāsa dance, that means that her girlfriends are going to miss out on Kṛṣṇa's association. This is their concern. Then she said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, just look at me." Because it was later in the day, and her clothes had become wrinkled, and her hair a little disheveled.

So she said, "How am I going to show up for the Rāsa dance like this?" And Kṛṣṇa smiled, and he reassured her, "Devī, let me arrange things.

Let me put on your makeup. Let me decorate you with all these gold, diamond, rubies, and sapphire ornaments, and I promise you, it won't take more than a minute." But then Lalitā Sakhī spoke up, saying, "You know, Rādhā, he's just a boy.

He's a cowherd. We gopīs can do better than him." But Rādhārāṇī, in her heart of hearts, wanted Kṛṣṇa to decorate her. So she said, "All right, Kṛṣṇa, but do it nicely." So, taking charge, Kṛṣṇa asked a number of gopīs to go to different places and procure various jewels, ornaments, bracelets, bangles, etc.

So the gopīs ran off, but they quickly came back with all kinds of paraphernalia. Vṛndāvana provided these things—the desire trees.

You can go to a desire tree in Braja and ask for anything to be used in the service of Kṛṣṇa. So maybe they went to some desire trees, and Kṛṣṇa was very happy. So Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says every devotee has his worshipable deity who he loves to serve in so many ways, and Kṛṣṇa, although He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, also has His worshipable deity.

And who is that?

Vṛndāvan-eśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā. So, understandably, Kṛṣṇa took a long time to decorate Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He said he'd do it quickly, but with this unique opportunity, he was doing it very slowly, very carefully. And when he finished, just in your mind's eye, see, when he finished, he stepped back, and all the gopīs went, "Oh, so beautiful dressing you've done!

You're a boy, but you have done such beautiful dressing!" So then Viśākhā whispered something in the ear of Lalitā, and Lalitā, who's, you know, she's often very fiery, she stood up and said, "On this very day, under this banyan tree here at Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa, we declare that this cowherd boy Kṛṣṇa is the best of all pujārīs!" Usually, she's fiery, but here she's glorifying Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa made Rādhārāṇī so beautiful.

Then everyone looked at Rādhārāṇī, amazed at her transcendental beauty, her effulgence, her divine qualities, and appreciated how expertly Kṛṣṇa had decorated her with jewels and ornaments. So then Tuṅgavidyā, one of the Sakhīs, came forward and offered Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī a mirror.

So Rādhārāṇī looked in that mirror, saw her reflection, and smiled. And just by her smile, everyone's heart became pacified. Wow. Just seeing Rādhārāṇī smile, everyone became pacified. So then Rādhārāṇī said, "Oh, we're late. Let's go for the Rāsa dance." So everyone, of course, including Kṛṣṇa, went over to a place called Kuñja-vana, where other gopīs were waiting impatiently for the Rāsa dance to begin.

And when those gopīs who had been waiting for Śrīmatī Rādhikā looked at her, they said to each other, "Rādhārāṇī looks especially beautiful today. Who dressed her?" So Lalitā spoke up and said that Kṛṣṇa had dressed her.

So all those gopīs smiled and agreed that indeed Kṛṣṇa was the best pujārī of all. Hare Krishna!

What a wonderful pastime!

They're all wonderful. Now, moving on. Some of you may remember last week we mentioned Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī's commentary on *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*, 5.74, wherein he wrote: "Sometimes Śrīmatī Rādhikā takes on the role of *abhisārikā*. *Abhisārikā* is a *nāyakā*, or rather, a heroine who is eager to meet her beloved and decides to meet him by leaving home at midnight." There's a specific term, a specific term: "at midnight, and in the forest, a lonely forest." And we're together now.

The *abhisaarika* usually selects a moonless night for meeting Kṛṣṇa, a dark night, and wears dark clothes as camouflage. I mean, it's logical. She's, it's a secret meeting, she doesn't want anyone to see. So, dark nights, dark clothes, so no one can see.

Now, we discussed that, but I wanted to mention today that the *Gīta-Govinda*, 2.11, also describes Śrīmatī Rādhikā in this role of *abhisaarika*. There it is stated: "Quote: I remember Śrīmatī Rādhikā in the late evening. She dresses herself in clothes suitable for the dark and light fortnight because sometimes she meets when the moon is shining for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa.

She wears black clothes on the new moon day and white clothes on the full moon day, in accordance with Vṛndā's advice. She takes shelter in a secluded bower on the banks of the Yamunā in the company of her sakhī messenger." So, more insight into this particular nature of the gopīs.

And in verse, there's more nectar here, in verse 194 of *Padya-valī*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī provides Lalitā Devī's advice to Śrīmatī Rādhikā in the mood of an *abhisaarika* as she prepares to go and meet Kṛṣṇa on a dark night. He writes, this is Lalitā speaking: "Oh Śrīmatī Rādhikā, put your feet softly on the ground as you walk.

Cover your armlets and bangles with the end of your cloth. And most importantly, please maintain complete silence on the pathway. Else, if you open your mouth, then your moonbeam-like radiant teeth will end the darkness of the world." I want to recite that again: "Oh Śrīmatī Rādhikā, put your feet softly on the ground as you walk.

Cover your armlets and bangles with the end of your cloth. And most importantly, please maintain complete silence on the pathway. Else, if you open your mouth, your divine mouth, then your moonbeam-like radiant teeth will end the darkness of the world." Wow.

So, more detailed information about dress and attire is given by Bhakti Vinoda Ṭhākura in his *Gauḍīya-gāna-candrikā*, in the *Varṣāṣṭaka*, song 4, stanza 2, when he writes: "*Nīlaṁ gāndī dyukta kuṅkuma upari dṛḍha muktā-jala cchandaḥ*." So beautiful. "Upon her hips she wears red silken cloth on which tiny bells are swinging.

And upon her chest sways a lovely necklace of pearls. In this way, she looks so splendorous that she steals the heart of every beholder." Now, we can go a little deeper into the subject of Rādhikā's dress and attire by referring to Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*, wherein he describes sixteen decorations that she wears, specific decorations that she wears.

And as I was researching this, I was thinking, this information that's given by Rūpa Gosvāmī, sixteen particular decorations that she likes, can be very useful for our pujārīs in our movement who dress Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa daily. By Śrīla Prabhupāda's grace, there are Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa deities now being worshiped all over the world.

So, pujārīs, listen carefully. He lists sixteen decorations that you can decorate Rādhārāṇī with. So, first of all, he says, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is first nicely bathed. Then the tip of her nose is decorated with a glittering jewel. He goes on: She wears exquisite blue garments.

She wears a charming belt. Her braids are nicely tied. She wears beautiful earrings. Her transcendental body is anointed with fragrant sandalwood paste. Her hair is always decorated with flowers. She wears a flower garland. She holds a lotus flower in her hand.

She chews betel nuts. Her chin is decorated with little bunches of flowers drawn with many musk dots. Her eyes are attractively anointed with black mascara. Her limbs are decorated with colorful designs and pictures. Her feet are splendidly decorated with what?

We had a whole class on that!

Red lac. And she wears graceful *tilaka* markings. There you go. Pujārīs, I would like to conclude today with a description, a full description, of the transcendental form of Vṛndāvan-eśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā from the book *Prema-bhakti-candrikā* by Śrī Bhakti Vinoda Ṭhākura.

A translation of the original Sanskrit, as described by Śrī Bhakti Vinoda Ṭhākura, reads as follows. Now, a note here: Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's cavya-govindas' similar descriptions of Rādhārāṇī in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, actually based on this book, but this is a more detailed account.

So here we go. This is pure nectar. In the morning, Rādhikā's body is bathed in the nectar of compassion. In the afternoon, in the nectar of youth, and in the evening, in the nectar of luster itself. In this way, her bathing is performed, and her body becomes as brilliant as the cintāmaṇi jewel.

Her dress is composed of various kinds of silken garments, which may be compared to her natural shyness. Her beauty is more and more enhanced, being decorated with *kuṅkuma*, which is compared to beauty itself, and with blackish musk, which is compared to divine love.

Her body is decorated with different colors. The *kuṅkuma* is red, and the musk is black. Her ornaments embody the natural symptoms of ecstasy: trembling, tears, jubilation, stunning, perspiration, faltering of the voice, bodily redness, and dullness. In this way, the entire body of Rādhā has been decked with these nine different jewels.

Over and above this, the beauty of her body is enhanced by her transcendental qualities, which hang as a flower garland on her body. The ecstasy of love for Kṛṣṇa is known as *dhīra* and *adhīra*, sober and restless. Such ecstasy constitutes the covering of Śrīmatī Rādhikā's body and is adorned by *campaka*.

Her transcendental anger toward Kṛṣṇa is embodied as the arrangement of the hair on her head, and the *tilaka* of great fortune shines on her beautiful forehead. The earrings of Śrīmatī Rādhikā are the holy names of Kṛṣṇa, as well as the hearing of His name and fame.

Her lips are always reddish due to the betel nut of affection, ecstatic affection for Kṛṣṇa. The black ointment around her eyes is her tricky behavior, tricky behavior with Kṛṣṇa brought about by love. Her joking with Kṛṣṇa and gentle smiling is the *campaka* with which she is perfumed.

She sleeps in her room with the aroma of pride. And when she lies down in her bed, the transcendental variety of her loving ecstasies is like a jeweled locket in the midst of her necklace of separation. Her transcendental breasts are covered by her sari in the form of affection and anger towards Kṛṣṇa.

She has a stringed instrument known as *kācapi vīṇā*, which is the fame and fortune that actually dries up the faces and breasts of other gopīs. She always keeps her hands on the shoulder of a gopī friend, who is compared to her youthful beauty.

And although she is highly qualified with so many spiritual assets, she is nonetheless affected by the Cupid known as Kṛṣṇa. Thus, she is defeated. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī offers his obeisances to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, taking a straw in his mouth. Indeed, he prays, "Oh Gandharvikā, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, just as Lord Kṛṣṇa never rejects a surrendered soul, please never reject me." So thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Thank you for this opportunity to go through our scriptures, books, and the books of the Ācārya Gosvāmīs, to learn about all these transcendental qualities of the divine couple, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and Their associates, and all of Vṛndāvana.

So, we have more nectar on the dress and attire of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, which we'll share with you next week. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

All glories, all glories, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.