

Devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Nama oṁ viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.

So, we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 40. In this lecture, I would like to continue with our discussions on betel leaf in Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana-līlās. In our previous lecture on this subject, we discussed in detail—you may remember—how Lalitā-sakhī is in charge of the service of making and offering betel leaves to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. In fact, she has her own garden where she grows betel, and she herself stands next to the Divine Couple during the famous Rāsa dance with the golden box filled with betel leaves.

I also mentioned last Friday that pastimes involving betel leaves or betel nut in Vraja-līlā are almost too numerous to count. We did recount one pastime where the cowherd boys and Kṛṣṇa enjoyed betel at lunch in a pasturing ground of Vṛndāvana, and just this morning I read about a similar outing with Kṛṣṇa and his friends. This time, at their luncheon as it began in the pasturing grounds, the boys described how they raided each other’s lunch packs. They joked amongst themselves and finally they begged a morsel of food that Kṛṣṇa himself had tasted. One boy said, “Dear Gopāla, no doubt you have attained mystic powers as a result of Mother Yaśodā’s cooking; otherwise, what difference is there between you and us? So don’t be stingy; give us a bit of your lunch so that we can also kill demons, and in that way, we can save you some trouble.”

So all the cowherd boys, they applauded these words, and they each reached out with their hands for Kṛṣṇa’s remnants. After filling their bellies, the boys drank from a nearby pond and then rested in the shade while some boys fed Kṛṣṇa betel leaves and betel nuts, massaged His lotus feet, and cooled Him by waving a peacock fan. There was one pastime that Kṛṣṇa enjoys—betel leaf is confirmed by our Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his famous Gītāvalī, that poem. He writes: Jambulla rasala ane tambula masalla. He quotes: “Kṛṣṇa’s servants named Jambulla and Rasala provide betel nuts dressed with fancy spices; chewing the tāmbūla, Kṛṣṇa-candra then happily goes to sleep.” Now, when we use the word tāmbūla, remember that it is describing betel nuts and spices wrapped in betel leaves; that is tāmbūla.

Now, in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasāmṛta 3.6.140, it’s described that once, in Nanda Mahārāja’s palace, Rādhā and the gopīs were serving betel to Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī writes: “Skillful Rādhā had made tāmbūla and wrapped it into packets and offered them to Kṛṣṇa by placing them directly into His mouth, and Candrāvalī and Śrī Lalitā playfully massaged His lotus feet.” Then, in verse 141, he writes: “The gopīs divided the various services amongst themselves. Some took up yak-tail whisks, others held boxes in a row with much more tāmbūla, others had several vessels for catching the falling remnants of tāmbūla, and others carried large pots of fresh water.” Then, in verse 143, Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes how each gopī got the remnants of Kṛṣṇa’s betel, because it was falling, but actually, He gave it to them. He describes: “Kṛṣṇa, served by all those gopīs—their hearts melting in great affection for Him—responded by giving to each one, unseen by the others, the prized remnants of His chewed betel.”

Now, I bet in the second half of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Vidagdha-mādhava that sometimes Kṛṣṇa sends His flower garland—known as vijayantī, which literally means it means a fateful garland—as well as His half-chewed betel nuts to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī by way of gopī messengers. He writes that this makes Rādhā more than happy and causes her to dance in ecstasy. Now, conversely, Kṛṣṇa enjoys tasting the betel nuts enjoyed by His consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. This is described by Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his Vraja-vilāsa-stava, verse 61: “Kṛṣṇa stares at Śrī Rādhā for the aromatic betel nuts, enthusiastically dancing with playful happiness on the stage of your mouth; you must pay a toll of sending them to dance within my mouth.”

In a similar scenario, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in Vidāvalī, verse 2, that sometimes Kṛṣṇa enjoys the remnants of tāmbūla juice from Rādhā’s lips. He writes: “I offer my respectful obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose eyes are as beautiful as lotus petals, who delights in playing the flute, and who drinks the nectar dripping from Rādhā’s lips, and He wears a garland of forest flowers—who delights in playing the flute, who drinks the nectar dripping from Rādhā’s lips, and who wears a garland of forest flowers.” So that is the tāmbūla, the betel.

I also found a reference that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s maidservants, the gopīs, they often enjoy betel leaf themselves as a stimulation for ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa. However, I also read that when some of them requested Kātyāyanī—this famous pastime—to have Kṛṣṇa as their husband, Vṛndā-devī, who along with, we know, Pourṇamāsī arranges Vṛndāvana pastimes, she demanded that in order to achieve that, they had to follow a certain vow for one month. And what was that vow? Well, they had to include us in a betel nut; she said not to chew betel during this month, not massage their bodies with oil or apply oil to their hair. They had to rise while it was still dark, leave their homes four daṇḍas before sunrise to remember, walk to the Yamunā, bathe in the river, worship Kātyāyanī, chant their mantras, and then return home. But it’s interesting: one of the clauses was they couldn’t chew betel. Of course, the betel she was, you know, Kṛṣṇa’s remnants, but they had to abstain.

Now, as we mentioned last week, there are many devotees, rasika-bhaktas, who desire to be part of these ecstatic betel leaf and betel nut pastimes. Our very own Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he himself prays for obtaining the service of giving tāmbūla to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He wants to give the tāmbūla to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He states in his Śaraṇāgati, the fourth principle, song 4, verse 10, he writes: tāmbūla-sāj-i-karpūra-ān-i. “After dressing packets of betel nuts—it means preparing them—and fetching the camphor,” he’s speaking to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, “you will hand them to me, knowing me to be your very own.” And Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura prays for a similar service in Prārthanā, song 22, where he writes: śākhī-ājñāya kabe tāmbūla-sindūra-tilaka kabe parāba. “When, following the gopīs’ orders, will I offer betel nuts to the Divine Couple? When will I draw artistic tilaka markings in red sindūra on the Divine Couple’s foreheads?” So therein he says, “When will I offer betel nuts to the Divine Couple?” So we’re, you know, supposed to follow in the footsteps of our ācāryas. So hopefully one day this strong desire will also arise within our hearts, and we’ll have a little bit of information about it from this research.

Now it’s interesting—this is really interesting—the origin of betel leaf. Where do we find the origin of betel leaf? It’s there in Skanda-purāṇa, in the pastime. The Skanda-purāṇa describes the pastime of the churning of the milk ocean. It’s described therein that after distributing nectar—we’re all familiar with the pastime—after distributing nectar to all the demigods, the Mohinī incarnation of Lord Viṣṇu gave the pot of nectar, or the nectar pot, to Airāvata, the elephant carrier of Lord Indra; he ended up with the pot. Noticing that there were still—noticing that there were still a few drops left in that nectar pot, the king of snakes, Vāsuki, took the pot from Airāvata, and we took it to his abode in Nāgaloka, the abode of snakes. But after some time, Vāsuki noticed that a vine of beautiful green, aromatic leaves had started growing inside that nectar pot—that pot of nectar which the demons and the demigods had fought over. He noticed a vine of beautiful, green, aromatic leaves. So, curious, he tasted a leaf and found it to be extremely delicious. So, he informed, you could say, the chief of the demigods, Lord Brahmā, and Lord Brahmā then he went to Lord Viṣṇu and told the whole story, like about these, the nectar pot and how it’s in Nāgaloka and how it’s producing this vine of amazing leaves. So Lord Viṣṇu, He then called for His incarnation, Dhanvantari, the physician of all the demigods, you could say—I thought that was interesting—Lord Viṣṇu, He called for His own incarnation, Dhanvantari, and sent him to Nāgaloka to, you could say, check out this vine in the nectar pot. And after testing the vine and its leaves, concluded that the leaves of that vine were capable of treating many, many diseases. So Dhanvantari gave His blessings to that leaf, that it would be known as nāga-vallī, which means the leaf of snakes. He also gave a boon that poisonous snakes would never be able to tolerate that leaf. Apparently, in Nāgaloka, the snakes are not poisonous. Therefore, I was also reading in ancient India, when workers would go into a forest to procure sandalwood from sandalwood trees, because poisonous snakes would often wrap the… you know, wrap around the trunks of the sandalwood trees because of their intoxicating aroma, the workers would wear outfits or clothes made of betel leaves so the snakes wouldn’t harm them while they were cutting the branches of the sandalwood trees. I’d heard that many times, that snakes, they like to wrap around sandalwood trees; they have some intoxicating effect, the aroma. So these workers, you know, they had to get the sandalwood, so they dressed in betel leaves because that was the boon of Dhanvantari, that those snakes could not tolerate the betel leaf, and they go away. So as a result of the boon of Dhanvantari, betel leaves became the favorite leaf of the demigods. Skanda-purāṇa concludes: betel leaves became the favorite leaf of the demigods. So interesting.

Now also, according to the Mahābhārata, when Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers wanted to perform a Rājasūya-yajña—this is before the great battle of Kurukṣetra—Yudhiṣṭhira asked Arjuna to go to Nāgaloka and procure the auspicious betel leaf to be used in the yajña. However, when Arjuna arrived in Nāgaloka, the king of serpents, Vāsuki, said he would only give a vine of betel leaves if Arjuna married his sister, Ulūpī. So Arjuna agreed, and he married Ulūpī; he was a kṣatriya, they can have many wives. He married Ulūpī, after which Vāsuki gave him a vine of betel leaf as a wedding present, and Arjuna took that back and gave it to Yudhiṣṭhira for the yajña. This is the real history of the world.

Now in the Upaniṣads, it’s written that betel leaf is so auspicious because Indra and Śukrācārya are present in the top portions of the leaf. The goddess of learning and music, Sarasvatī, resides in the middle part of the betel leaf. Lakṣmī Devī, the goddess of fortune, resides in the lower part of the leaf. Lord Viṣṇu resides inside the leaf; Viṣṇu resides inside the leaf. Lord Śiva and Kāmadeva reside on the backside of the leaf. The wife of Lord Śiva resides on the left part of the leaf. Mother Earth, or as we say Bhūmi Devī, resides on the right part of the leaf, and the sun god, Sūrya-Nārāyaṇa, resides throughout the entire betel leaf. Very auspicious, the betel leaf.

Now another side note, a real side note here, is that I read that Marco Polo, Marco Polo, the famous Italian explorer and writer, wrote in his book in the year 1271—we’re going way back in time here—Marco Polo, he traveled throughout Asia, he traveled throughout India. He wrote in his book in 1271 about a city in India that he was visiting—this is actually 800 years ago—he wrote, and I’ll quote him here: “All the people of the city, as well as the rest of India, have a custom of perpetually keeping in their mouths a certain leaf called temble”—he wrote like that, “temble”—”or they describe it as pān or betel.” So we see in India today many people chewing pān; back then, it appears that, you know, everyone chewed pān according to Marco Polo.

Another interesting note is that in śāstra, it’s mentioned who is allowed to eat betel and who is not allowed to eat betel. In śāstra, those who should not eat betel are a brahmacārī (celibate), a widow, a yogī, a sannyāsī, a child below the age of 10, and a beggar. Those who may eat betel are married men, young men, beautiful women, a king and queen, and royal attendants—the idea being that betel in the material world, again as we discussed last week, it increases this material desire. But remember, we concluded our class last week by saying that devotees, Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs, should avoid betel leaf altogether, even if it’s mahā-prasādam of the deities. That strict injunction we heard from Prabhupāda, we heard from, and we heard from Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura; so we should understand what they talk about.

So we’re going to finish here. This is… tomorrow’s the last day of our summer tour here along the Baltic Seacoast. I have to rush off to the festival, and I have to pack—everyone’s packing because, you know, sadly, it’s over. We’ve been pushing on for a little over two months here. It’s been successful beyond my wildest imagination. We’re so grateful to Śrīla Prabhupāda and Lord Caitanya for the service, but time to move on. So we’ll finish here, but we actually have enough material for another lecture on betel leaf next Friday. As I mentioned last week, I didn’t know if I could even give a 10-minute lecture on betel leaf, but lo and behold, it’s an integral part of Vraja-līlā. So next Friday, we’ll continue. It’ll be a rather short class, like this one, because by then I’ll be traveling, so I have to fit it in.

But here’s a nice quote to finish for today. It’s again from—it’s from his famous Jaiva-dharma, chapter 33, wherein he gives us a very beautiful description of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, including betel leaf. So he writes: “An elaborate bath, the brilliant gem on her nose ring, a blue sari, the sash around her waist, braided curly locks, dangling earrings, sandalwood paste smeared upon her body, flower arrangements in her hair, a fine garland, a lotus—a lotus flower joyfully in her hand—chewing betel leaf and musk upon her chin, kajal-mascara around her eyes, colorful designs painted upon her cheeks, feet painted with the red alaktā tint, and her brow decorated with tilaka are the 16 śṛṅgāras shining with divine splendor upon the person of Śrī Rādhā.” Betel leaf is included. “The 16 śṛṅgāras shining with divine splendor upon the person of Śrī Rādhā.” All glories to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī! All glories to the betel leaf, such an important part of Vraja-līlā! So thank you, and Hari Kṛṣṇa. We’ll look forward to seeing you again on the road next Friday. All glories!
