Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 153, in which we will continue to discuss the various disguises that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa use in their pastimes.

In this episode, Kṛṣṇa very cleverly disguises himself as a masseuse. A masseuse is a woman who provides massages professionally. It's really an interesting pastime. And this disguise is described very nicely by the poet Lalita Kiśora in one of his extensive poems.

And he starts the description of the pastime with a beautiful prayer to Śrī Rādhā. He writes:

“Glorious are the lotus feet of Rādhikā, who controls the master of all, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The softness of her feet nourishes the hearts of the Vrajavāsīs. Her feet are the only treasure of the gopīs of Vraja. May those feet always stay on my head like the crest jewel in a crown.”

So one day Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī came back to Varṣāṇā exhausted from her transcendental pastimes with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He describes the corners of her eyes as red like rose flowers, and her limbs were fatigued.

And while Śrī Rādhā was sitting on her bed, Lavaṅga-latā Gopī—a new gopī we're introduced to here, Lavaṅga-latā Gopī, who is Śrī Rādhā's personal physician—entered the room holding a tray of medicinal herbs.

Śrī Rādhā said:

“O dear Lavaṅga-latā, my room is now fragrant with the herbs that your tray holds. May the aroma of those herbs relieve my fatigue.”

So Lavaṅga-latā said:

“O Priyā, indeed these herbs have been given to me by Mādhavī-sakhī, who always roams in the secluded groves of Vihāravana, where these rare herbs grow. These herbs are protected by yakṣiṇīs so they can be used in your service. I made oils infused with these herbs for you.”

So Lalitā asked:

“O dear gopī, what are the names of these special herbs?”

So Lavaṅga-latā replied:

“Pāśā, an herb which removes one's bodily pain. Vātā, an herb which soothes one's bodily pains. Mānā, an herb which makes one's limbs shiny. Latikā, an herb which clears one's skin. Vajragirinī, an herb which strengthens one's body. Jīvikā, an herb which kills diseases. Mośumā, an herb which makes one's skin very bright. Jāvadu, an herb which makes one's body very fragrant. And Nāga-patinam, an herb which destroys any poison in one's body.”

Wow. Special herbs.

And Lavaṅga continued:

“I mixed all these herbs in saffron oil to be used in the service of Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet.”

So at that point Lalitā-sakhī and all the other gopīs exclaimed:

“Jaya ho! Jaya ho! Jaya ho!”

Then Śrī Rādhā asked Lalitā to apply that oil on her feet and massage them with it.

So the sakhīs closed all the curtains, and Tuṅga-vidyā-sakhī started playing relaxing and soothing rāgas on a sitar just outside Śrī Rādhā's bedroom, as Lalitā began massaging Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet with this special oil.

And the soft touch of Lalitā's hands and the relieving effects of that special oil soon caused Śrī Rādhā to fall blissfully asleep.

Now during this whole time, Lalitā was glorifying and worshiping Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet, and Lalita Kiśora writes:

“As a result, the whole forest of Vṛndāvana was pleased in silence.”

Excellent choice of words.

“The whole forest of Vṛndāvana was pleased in silence.”

And as a result of Lalitā's massage, the signs of a temple, a seed, and a flag were revealed on Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet.

Then Lalitā gently removed Śrī Rādhā's ankle bells and rested her lotus feet on a silk cushion.

Now sometime later, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was wandering along the banks of the Yamunā River when he came upon Lavaṅga-latā, Rādhārāṇī's physician, and he addressed her:

“Dear gopī, you look so blissful. What good fortune have you achieved?”

So Lavaṅga-latā replied:

“I am coming from the shelter of Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet. I was fortunate to serve her feet with ointments and special herb oils.”

So Kṛṣṇa said:

“Oh, that's wonderful to hear. I hope someday I will be able to actually massage Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet.”

And as Kṛṣṇa continued wandering along Yamunā's shore, he prayed to Śrī Rādhā as follows:

“O Rādhe, your face is like the moon, giving joy to all the residents of Vṛndāvana. But when you are not present before us, we feel the deepest separation. O beautiful daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, by keeping your face hidden, you are causing anguish to so many creatures here in Vṛndāvana. The deer are suffering. Have you no compassion for them? The lotus flowers are saddened, along with the bees shut inside their buds. And so are the kuñjana and cakora birds. Please reveal the light of your moonlike face.”

Then, feeling intense separation, Kṛṣṇa's heart filled with a desire to meet Śrī Rādhā, and he suddenly thought of executing a new disguise pastime.

Changing his clothes into the disguise of a gopī masseuse—again, a lady who can give beautiful, nice massages—he journeyed to Varṣāṇā, to Śrī Rādhā's palace, and in that disguise entered her quarters.

Now Lalita Kiśora writes that with her eyes Lalitā asked this newly arrived gopī:

“My dear girl, who are you?”

She didn't speak. With her eyes she asked this newly arrived gopī:

“My dear girl, who are you? How were you able to enter this place without permission?”

So Kṛṣṇa, disguised as a gopī masseuse, replied with his eyes only:

“I came by the arrangement of Yogamāyā.”

Wow. Talking with their eyes.

“I came by the arrangement of Yogamāyā.”

Then Lalitā asked:

“Who are you then?”

So Kṛṣṇa replied in a pleasant feminine voice:

“I am a foot masseuse sent by Mother Paurṇamāsī. Please let me serve Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet.”

So Lalitā said:

“Even with Mother Paurṇamāsī's permission, I cannot let you serve Śrī Rādhā's feet. They are rare to obtain even for goddesses, what to speak of the gopīs of Vraja.”

So then Kṛṣṇa pleaded with Lalitā:

“O Lalitā, only by your mercy can one achieve Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet. Please bless me and let me serve those lotus feet of hers. Her feet are decorated with the redness of love and tenderness. They float on the waves of the ocean of the loving hearts of her devotees. One who serves those lotus feet becomes freed from the clutches of māyā. Days go by quickly when one meditates on Śrī Rādhā's feet. Days go by quickly when one meditates on Śrī Rādhā's feet. Śiva, Nārada, Śuka, and many other sages hanker to serve her lotus feet.”

So with a sidelong glance, Lalitā replied to the gopī masseuse:

“I am happy that you so deeply understand the glories of Śrī Rādhā's feet. So you may massage them, but please be careful and soft with them, like the whirl of a lotus bud, so that Śrī Rādhā will not wake up.”

So applying different oils on his hands, Kṛṣṇa, in disguise, softly touched Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet and began massaging them very skillfully.

Meanwhile, the sleeping Rādhā became overwhelmed with bliss and, assuming Lalitā-sakhī was still massaging her feet, slowly opened her eyes and said:

“O Lalitā, you have mastered the art of massage. Your touch is melting my heart with bliss, and all fatigue is slowly leaving my body with every touch of your soft hands. Where did you learn to do such a massage, Lalitā?”

But when there was no reply—because it wasn't Lalitā—Śrī Rādhā looked toward her feet and saw a beautiful dark-skinned gopī massaging them, tears flowing from her eyes.

Then suddenly Śrī Rādhā sat up and said:

“My dear mysterious gopī, your touch feels exactly like the touch of my most beloved. Who are you, dear one? And where has my Lalitā gone?”

So disguised Kṛṣṇa replied:

“Mother Paurṇamāsī sent me to serve your lotus feet in order to remove your fatigue, and I sent Lalitā to attend to other duties.”

So Śrī Rādhā said:

“O most charming girl, you speak so sweetly. Please come sit next to me and talk to me as my dearest new friend.”

So disguised Kṛṣṇa said:

“O my queen, I am your dāsī, your servant. Please do not say such things to me.”

But Rādhā said:

“I am impressed with your humility, dear gopī. But please fulfill my request and come sit very closely beside me.”

But just at that moment, as disguised Kṛṣṇa sat next to Śrī Rādhā, Lalitā-sakhī came running inside the room and exclaimed:

“Rādhe! Śrī Rādhe! By the grace of Yogamāyā, I have just realized that this gopī is not a masseuse but Kṛṣṇa himself, the master of all disguises!”

Ta-da!

And with that, all the gopīs present laughed and shouted:

“Jaya ho! Jaya ho! Jaya ho!”

while clapping their hands.

As their joyful laughter filled the palace, all the fatigue in Śrī Rādhā's body disappeared.

You know, gopīs are always looking for opportunities to bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together. So now they're very happy.

So Lalita Kiśora concludes:

“Lalita Kiśora glorifies the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā and her eternal servant Śyāma-sundara.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Short but sweet pastime.

So I would like to conclude today with a beautiful prayer written by another poet, Paramānanda dāsa.

So beautiful:

“Most blessed are Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet. They are beautifully formed, cooling, extremely soft and tender, and tinged with pink like the petals of a lotus. The nails of her toes are like incomparably lovely moons that display all sorts of beautiful colors. When she plays in Vṛndāvana's forest groves, her ankle bells make sweet sounds which attract Kṛṣṇa's curiosity. They bring the utmost joy to Kṛṣṇa, the supreme appreciator of loving moods, and help him to cross over the ocean of separation from Śrī Rādhā in which he drowns.

Poet Paramānanda dāsa says:

‘Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet are full of bliss and at every moment bring pure joy to my Lord, who has taken full shelter of those divine lotus feet.’”

The end.

Thank you.

See you next Friday.

And her lotus feet shine.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.
