

Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda. All glories to him. So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 136, in which we will continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s disguises in Vṛndāvana.

Now, disguises are very much part of the divine couple’s playful pastimes. Sometimes those disguises are meant to hide the divine couple from, for example, the elders of Braja, or to help them meet secretly in different scenarios. In Sanskrit terms, disguises are often referred to as āvaraṇa. Āvaraṇa means covering. Ācāryas describe that one such āvaraṇa is known as māyā, the illusory material energy; and because of this specific āvaraṇa covering, one cannot understand the existence of the Lord. For example, Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam—that fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature as the Supreme Lord of all that be; it’s hidden from them.

So, in order to unveil this specific āvaraṇa, one must seek out the shelter of a spiritual master, because the spiritual master is the one who uncovers this veil of illusion and clears our vision, thus allowing us one day to see the Lord. Therefore, we bow down to such spiritual masters. And the poet Premānanda, he wrote a very beautiful prayer during his lifetime to his guru, which I would like to share with you. He writes, “Oh guru, the gatekeeper of the Lord, by your permission, one enters into the realm of devotional service to the Lord. The Lord is covered with the veil of illusion, but you have uncovered that veil for us. Not only are you glorious, but your dear disciples are also glorious. Your disciples are therefore known as guru-siṁha, the lions of their guru. Your disciples roar fearlessly on the subject of māyā, or illusion, and pierce the subtle pride that sometimes hides within devotion. They represent you and walk gracefully in the forest of darkness while loudly chanting the names of the Lord.” Premānanda Dāsa glorifies the guru and his dear disciples. So sweet.

So, by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we can also unveil and properly understand the disguising pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They’re also hidden to some degree. I read something very interesting recently: that in Vṛndāvana, when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī disguises herself, the whole forest of Vṛndāvana tries to help her sustain her disguised character. Therefore, the forest of Vṛndāvana is very personal and is described as ekarasa, ekamana, aki-ādhāraṇa, which means that the forest of Vṛndāvana is always situated in the same mood as the divine couple themselves. Wow. All the forest vines, the fruits, the flowers, the birds, the insects, fountains, and even trees try to sustain and create this magical environment for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to disguise herself in the best way.

Another nature of the Vṛndāvana forest is prakaṭyam. Prakaṭyam means revealing, like the guru we mentioned earlier. Vṛndāvana forest personified reveals the secret pastimes of the divine couple and therefore is considered a mystical forest. But the ācāryas say that—sometimes this is interesting—the Vṛndāvana forest hides the mystery of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; it reveals and hides. And why is that? Because the third nature of the forest in Vṛndāvana is sarva-saṅmukham, meaning it changes its mood or its nature according to the desires or needs of the divine couple. Therefore, when there’s a need to hide something in the divine couple’s pastimes, the Vṛndāvana forest will hide that, and when there’s a need to reveal it, the Vṛndāvana forest will reveal. So, in that way, we can conclude that the forest of Vṛndāvana plays an essential role in the disguising pastimes of the divine couple. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, the poet, one of our favorite poets, Govinda Swami, in his poem Svāminīkā Māna—it means the pride of the mistress—he describes how Rādhārāṇī once successfully disguised herself as a dūtīkā, a messenger, within the boundaries of this mystical Vṛndāvana forest as a way to trick Kṛṣṇa. It’s a wonderful pastime. He writes: one day, the gopī Padma, who as many of you know is a very intimate friend of Candrāvalī, Rādhārāṇī’s rival or competitor, and Lalitā, who is a very intimate friend of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—of course, they were arguing, a transcendental argument about Kṛṣṇa’s love for Rādhā and Candrāvalī. So Padma began, “Kṛṣṇa loves Candrāvalī more than He loves Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.” But Lalitā, who can be very fiery, strongly objected, saying, “No, Kṛṣṇa loves Rādhā more than He loves your queen.”

Now, it’s interesting that instead of saying “Kṛṣṇa loves Rādhārāṇī more than Candrāvalī,” Lalitā said “Kṛṣṇa loves Rādhā more than He loves your queen.” She didn’t refer to Candrāvalī by name; she just used the term “queen,” and that was because Lalitā is very dear to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī dislikes hearing the very name of her rival, Candrāvalī. So therefore, even in their dialogues, Rādhārāṇī’s sakhīs never used Candrāvalī’s name, not even in Rādhā’s absence, as was the case here. So then Śibyā, who was another close friend of Candrāvalī, whispered something into Padma’s ear, and at that point, Padma smiled and said, “Ah, dear Lalitā, let us test this theory. Let’s arrange that for three days, Rādhārāṇī and Candrāvalī will not talk to or make any type of contact with Kṛṣṇa; then we will surely see who Kṛṣṇa misses the most. And if we see that He misses your Rādhā more, it will mean you win. And if He misses our queen more, it will mean we win—which will surely be the case. We’ll win for sure.”

So, looking out of the corner of her eyes, Lalitā angrily said, “Accepted. Accepted.” Then Lalitā, with all the sakhīs, went to where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was staying and told her about Padma’s challenge, to which Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī replied, “O Lalitā, you fully know my heart. I cannot live without making any contact with Kṛṣṇa for three long days. Even a moment of separation from Him feels like ages to me.” Jaya Śrī. So Lalitā replied, “O Rādhī, in this test of love, you must be patient to see if He loves you or our rival more.” So, understanding the need in this case to test Kṛṣṇa’s love, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī agreed, and she began a three-day fast.

And on the third day of her fast, Kṛṣṇa was wandering alone in the Vṛndāvana forest when He reached a secluded kuñja. And there, He began crying and lamenting while calling out Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s name, “O Rādhī, where have you gone? What mistakes or sins have I committed to your lotus feet that I am not seeing you these days? Please meet me just once.” So the poet Govinda Swami writes, “Hearing the inner call”—so beautiful—”hearing the inner call within her heart, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in her palace felt suddenly the urgent need to meet Kṛṣṇa, with all yoga arranging these pastimes. But because she had given a promise to Lalitā not to meet Kṛṣṇa for those three days, she decided to meet Kṛṣṇa indirectly, by disguising herself as a dūtīkā.”

Dūtīkā is a messenger gopī. Many gopīs have this service of delivering messages between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, etc. So she put on the clothes, the apparel of a dūtīkā, and took a long peacock feather for writing and hung an inkpot on her waist. Then, grabbing some large lotus petals to write on the messages, she went to that secluded place in the Vṛndāvana forest where Kṛṣṇa was crying. And when she arrived there, she saw Him in a most pitiful state. In fact, it’s described Kṛṣṇa had become so weak from crying, He couldn’t even stand up to greet this newly arrived gopī dūtīkā. So in that disguise, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said to Kṛṣṇa, “Oh cowherd boy, it looks like you’re suffering from love fever. Are you missing someone very dear to your heart? Do you want me to take a message to your lover?”

So, surprised, Kṛṣṇa said, “And who may I ask, are you, young girl?” So, disguised, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī replied, “I am a dūtī. I am a messenger. I heard your lamentation and came here to see what was wrong. Is there any way I can help you?” So Kṛṣṇa said, “I am so glad you came here. O dūtīkā, please take down a message for my beloved.” Now, to test Kṛṣṇa—because that’s the whole point of this pastime—to see whose name He would speak first, hers (Rādhā’s) or Candrāvalī’s, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī asked Him, “Well, tell me the name and address of your beloved, then I can take a message. Tell me your beloved’s name and her address.”

So it’s so sweet. Kṛṣṇa said softly, “Oh, her name is Rādhā.” Hearing that, a beautiful smile came across the dūtīkā’s face. Kṛṣṇa continued, “Her address is that she lives in highly-praised Goloka. Hidden by the grace of beauty, she dwells in a palace of glory along with all the colors of the rainbow personified. She roams around with her sakhīs, who each individually possess a dress of different colors of the rainbow. She glances down through her window of mercy and looks upon Me in that divine realm of Vṛndāvana.”

So at that point, the smile on the dūtīkā’s face became even broader. But despite His close contact with her, Kṛṣṇa didn’t recognize Rādhā disguised as a messenger. And of course, Rādhā couldn’t reveal herself because of the promise she’d made to Lalitā. Then the plot thickens. Suddenly, the breezes of the Vṛndāvana forest became filled with the aroma of jasmine and sandalwood. Buds of fresh flowers started blooming. Bees began singing songs of yugala-milana—it means the divine couple’s meeting pastimes—and lotus buds started blossoming. Peacocks spread their feathers wide open, and the nectar from all the flowers in the Vṛndāvana forest began dripping on the ground.

Specific signs. And looking around the forest, Kṛṣṇa reflected that before the dūtī messenger arrived, everything appeared dull and without mercy. But now, the whole scene and mood had changed, and it felt like the whole forest was dancing blissfully in love. In your mind’s eye, just try to picture the forest dancing blissfully in love. Śrī Vṛndāvana-kī-jaya! Then at that moment, Kṛṣṇa suddenly realized that those were the very signs shown to Him by the Vṛndāvana forest when He would regularly meet with Rādhārāṇī. All those signs… whenever Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would meet, the forest would dance in bliss and all these different signs would appear.

So, taking this cue—the poet says taking this cue from the Vṛndāvana forest—Kṛṣṇa glanced at the dūtīkā and immediately understood that she was none other than His beloved Rādhārāṇī. So He quickly embraced her, saying, “My dearest Rādhā, it’s you. You came hidden as a messenger. It seems you can hide from Me, but you cannot hide your disguise by the mercy of this lovely forest of Vṛndāvana. It reveals and it hides, hides and reveals.” Then Kṛṣṇa winked—I like this part—Kṛṣṇa winked at the forest of Vṛndāvana, and together He and Rādhā went for a stroll in the groves of Braja. Now, when Lalitā and Viśākhā told this to Padma, she became very embarrassed and ran back to Candrāvalī’s grove. So the poet Govinda Swami says the beautiful Rādhā, in the arms of Bāla-vihārī Kṛṣṇa, once roamed in the forest of Vṛndāvana disguised as a dūtīkā, a messenger of love. What a beautiful pastime.

So, in this way, we see that not only Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are involved in secret disguises, but that also the very forest of Vṛndāvana itself plays an equally important role in such pastimes. Jaya. So with that understanding, we can finish today with some excellent prayers to the forest of Vṛndāvana by one of my favorite poets now. His name is Harirām Vyāsa. He writes:

“Sweet, sweet is this forest of Vṛndāvana. Sweet, sweet are the nights in that forest. Beholding that forest, Mohan plays His flute. Rejoicing in that forest, He roams about it in bliss. Beholding the beauty of that forest, devotees find bliss and forget pain and grief. In that forest, the moon melts and the dust from the cows’ hooves creates clouds of nectarian rain. Looking at the beauty of that forest, the wife of Cupid forgets the beautiful form of her husband.”

Vyāsa-dāsa says, “Kiśorī looks at Kṛṣṇa with her right eye, and with her left eye, she beholds the beauty of the Vṛndāvana forest.” How are you, Kṛṣṇa? Thank you, please. We’re now in Poland on the Baltic Sea coast with our 35th annual festival tour. We’ve done a couple, we have 38 more festivals to go. We’re quite busy here in the modern-day pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, seriously, but we’ll find time to prepare another class about disguises because this is where we want to go—where the mercy of assisting Śrīla Prabhupāda in our previous life may bless us one day to enter into these eternal pastimes in Vṛndāvana. That’s our hope against hope. So thank you.

Śrīla Prabhupāda.
