Everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Sri Vrindavana master, who gave me a beautiful kanthi-mala, a fortunate tilaka, the beautiful form of a devotee, and who offered me his shelter. In one of his hands, he is holding my hand, and with his other hand, he is holding the lamp of knowledge which helps me to cross over the dark ocean of the material world. Suradasa says, "My Guru deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye." I bow down to him again and again. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya!

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 35. Previously, we discussed the different ornaments of Krishna in three parts. Today, we will be discussing the ornaments of Srimati Radharani. Of course, discussing such topics requires a lot of research. One scholar wrote: "Finding treasures of rasa in the nectar ocean of Krishna is as rare as finding a pearl in the ocean when the current is high." Imagine that! But by the mercy of our previous acharyas, we have such information at our fingertips. Therefore, Gopala Kavi, a famous Vrindavan scholar, writes about such acharyas as ours in his book, *Vrindavana-dhama-anuragavali*: "They churned thousands of scriptures with their own hands and gave us pots filled with sweet nectar and love."

One of the best examples of these pots of nectar is Srila Rupa Goswami's *Radha-Krishna-ganoddesa-dipika*, wherein he gives us a list of Srimati Radharani's precious ornaments. Generally, when we think of ornaments, we think of gold rings, silver necklaces, pearl necklaces, and so on. But you may remember we mentioned in a previous class that when such ornaments are not available, flowers can be used as a substitute, and they are not considered inferior in any way. Rupa Goswami writes again in *Bhakti-rasamrita-sindhu* (2.1.361): "When these same ornaments of jewels are made using flowers, they are known as *vanya-mandana*, or forest decorations." We quoted that last week, but he confirms the same in verses 139 and 140 of *Radha-Krishna-ganoddesa-dipika*. There he writes: "In their forms, varieties, and so forth, the ornaments made of flowers are no less than the ornaments made of jewels, gold, and other precious metals." So, it is twice confirmed!

The special service of decorating Sri Radha with flower ornaments—which we'll discuss first—is called *pushpa-sevana*. This particular seva is under the jurisdiction of Lalita Sakhi; she is in charge. In the *Lalita-ashtakam*, verse 2, it is said: "I offer my respects unto Sri Lalita Devi, whose beautiful face mocks the brilliance of the full moon, whose eyes are ever restless like those of a startled doe, who is famous for her extraordinary expertise in the art of dressing, and who is the treasure house of unlimited feminine qualities." So, Lalita has a very intimate service to Sri Radha.

Now, this dressing and ornamenting of Srimati Radharani under the supervision of Lalita Sakhi doesn't take place just once a day, as we might assume, but ten times a day! At the following times: first of all, when Sri Radha rises before dawn; then again after dawn; then she is ornamented again when she cooks for Krishna; then after cooking for Him; then before going out to meet Krishna late in the morning; and then, oh yeah, when she changes clothes for bathing; and again after bathing; then when she prepares to go out at night to meet Krishna; then when she changes clothes for bathing at night; and finally, after bathing at night. Ten times, ornaments are changed by her servants, the manjaris and sakhis!

So, the flower ornaments that Lalita instructs the gopis to use in decorating Sri Radha are as follows—this information is given to us by Sri Rupa Goswami. Those flower ornaments are: crowns called *kiritas*; hair bands called *balapasyas*; flower ear ornaments called *karnapuras*; flower forehead decorations called *lalatikas*; necklaces called *graiveyakas*; upper-arm bracelets; waist belts called *kanchis*; floral ankle bells; floral bangles called *katakas*; wristbands called *manibandhanis*; feet decorations called *hamsakas*; and bodices called *kanchulis*. And then Rupa Goswami says, "and many, many other such floral ornaments."

But it's interesting—all these ornaments are made out of flowers. After listing these specific flower ornaments, Rupa Goswami gives detailed information on what makes up each of these flower decorations. Now, this is all quite detailed, but of course, love is in the details!

As far as Radha's flower crowns are concerned, they are made by joining flowers of different colors together. Which flowers? Well, there's the *rangini* flower, which is blue; there's the *suvarna-yuthi* flower, which is golden; there's the *nava-mallika* flower, which is white; and the *su-mallika* flower, whose color resembles rubies. So, like that, her crowns are made from these types of flowers in their respective colors.

Next are Srimati Radharani's hair bands. They are made by stringing together a garland of various colorful flower buds. Not just flowers, but flower buds! Pujaris, take note!

Then, her flower ear ornaments. Rupa Goswami says that her flower ear ornaments are of five types. This is really detailed, but it is pure nectar! Her flower ear ornaments, like her earrings, are of five types. The first is called *tatankas*, which look like palm leaves and are of two kinds: they are either made of many-colored flowers or the petals of the golden *ketaki* flower. The second type of flower ear ornament is *kundalas*, which are flower ornaments resembling peacocks, sea creatures called *makaras*, lotuses, or half-moons. Then there are *pushpis*, which are earring ornaments made by stringing together four types of different colored flowers in sequence, forming a round shape, as he describes, and in the middle of these ear ornaments hangs a cluster of *gunja* berries. Then Rupa Goswami says *karnikas* are made by stringing yellow flowers around a lotus flower, with *bhringi* flowers and pomegranate flowers stitched in the middle. I think if you can just picture these in your mind's eye, it makes it easier to understand from the description. Then, *karnapuras* are round flower earrings that cover the whole ear. So, those are the five kinds of earring ornaments.

Another special kind of ornament that Sri Radha wears is called the *lalatika*. *Lalatikas* are made of two colors of flowers and are fastened on the top of her head along the parting of her hair in the middle. You can just imagine—on top of her head, but along the parting in the middle, made of two kinds of flowers.

Another flower ornament is Sri Radha's necklace, called a *graiveyaka*. Sri Rupa Goswami writes that it is an ornament made with only one kind of flower and beautified in the middle by vines and leaves.

Then there is Sri Radha's armlet, which she wears on her upper arm, above the elbow. Sri Rupa writes that this ornament is made by stringing three different colored flowers together, one by one, into the form of a round creeper. I think someone would have to show us how to do that—maybe one day they will, in the spiritual world!

Then there's a flower waist belt. You know, if there's no jeweled waist belt available, then the gopis make a flower waist belt called a *kanchi*. This is described by Rupa Goswami as an astonishing decoration made of five different kinds of colorful flowers and adorned with small, wavy garlands. Those are his words: "an astonishing decoration made of five different kinds of colorful flowers and adorned with small, wavy garlands." I'm trying to imagine that—small, little, wavy garlands!

And then, flower anklets are called *katakas*. These anklets are made by stringing together many kinds of flower buds and the stems of fruits or leaves, using a fine stalk as the thread. The stalk of the plant is used to weave these different types of flowers, small buds, fruits, and leaves.

Then, as was mentioned earlier, there are flower bracelets, *manibandhanis*. Now, *manibandhanis* are made with flowers of four different colors, with three flower strings hanging down from them. These *manibandhanis* are tied around Sri Radha's wrist. We continue with all these details because we are getting prepared to go back home, back to Godhead, and serve the Divine Couple in the kunjas.

Then, ornaments for her lotus feet. These *hamsakas* cover the entire top and side parts of Sri Radha's lotus feet, and they are beautifully constructed with small strings made of the buds of tiny flowers.

Sri Rupa Goswami continues, because he is our *rasa-acharya*. Then there's a flower blouse, which we mentioned earlier. A flower blouse is called a *kanchuli*. *Kanchuli* is the name of Radha's flower blouse, and Sri Rupa Goswami describes it as a highly enticing flower decoration, skillfully made of six different colored flowers. I like the language he uses: "a highly enticing flower decoration, skillfully made of six different colored flowers." And listen to this—it is scented with the fragrance of musk and is fastened around Sri Radha's neck with flower strings. You know, usually we string flowers using a thread, but this is fastened around Radha's neck with actual flower strings! I can't imagine... there are so many things we will discover as we advance in Krishna consciousness.

Then Rupa Goswami describes an umbrella, a *chatram*. Flower umbrellas are made by attaching strings of white flowers to thin wooden rods and decorating the wooden handle—because you hold an umbrella with a handle—with golden *yuthi* flowers.

Then, a flower bed, a *sayanam*. In other words, what Sri Radha lies on. For this, a wide mattress is made of strings of *nava-mallika* flowers as well as tender *chameli* flowers. That's what the mattress is made of! And Sri Radhika's pillow is made by joining *champaka* and *ashoka* flowers, along with a huge quantity of *mallika* and *chameli* flowers. Wow, all-glorious!

Then there's an awning, called an *ulloca*. An *ulloca* is prepared by making a lattice-like design, he describes, with strings of variegated, fresh *mallika* flowers, and attached to them are petals of the *ketaki* flowers. The walls of the awning are made of radiant strings of pearl-like *sindhuvara* flowers. What is a *sindhuvara* flower? I can't wait to see! The walls of the awning are made of radiant strings of pearl-like *sindhuvara* flowers, with garlands made of freshly blooming lotus flowers hanging down from the middle. I think you have to listen to this class a few times to really imbibe and, hopefully, one day memorize all these details of serving Srimati Radharani.

Then Rupa Goswami concludes this list of Radhika's flower ornaments with a hat... excuse me.

Where, you know, she can rest. He said many kinds of huts can be constructed—many kinds of huts can be constructed by using various flowers to decorate four pillars made of reeds, decorated on all sides with strings of various kinds of flowers. So there you go, Rupa Goswami has given us a detailed description of ornaments made with flowers worn by Sri Radha as described in his *Radha-Krishna-ganoddesa-dipika*. 

But of course, Sri Radha obviously wears traditional ornaments as well. One erudite scholar, the poet Ananta das, describes some of these jeweled ornaments very nicely in his book called *Seva-nishta*, which we found in the Vrindavan Research Institute. *Seva-nishta*... Now, Ananta das was a well-known Vrindavan poet in the late 17th century, and he was initiated in the line of the Goswamis, and he wrote in the Braja-bhasha language. If I had time, I'd love to learn the Braja-bhasha language. Sometimes the devotees say, "You know, you were preaching in France, you should have learned French. You're in Poland, you should learn Polish." No! If I'm going to learn any second language, it's going to be Braja-bhasha. That'll help me on the path home, back to Goloka! 

So this poet, Ananta das, he was very erudite, and he wrote in the Braja-bhasha language. Now, we're quoting him because, well, Srila Prabhupada writes in *Srimad-Bhagavatam* 1.1.1 that within the past 500 years, many erudite scholars and acharyas—like Jiva Goswami, Sanatana Goswami, Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura, Vallabhacharya, and many other distinguished scholars, even after the time of Lord Chaitanya—made elaborate commentaries on the *Bhagavatam*. This means some we know and some we don't know, and the serious student would do well to attempt to go through them to better relish the transcendental messages. So we're often quoting these various poets and scholars, as long as their *tattva* and their *rasa* are in line with our Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition. Because generally, although I'm always quoting Vrindavan poets, so like that... So, this Ananta das, in his *Seva-nishta*, he writes that in Vraja, it's very interesting, all the *sakhis* and *manjaris* engage in pleasing Srimati Radharani in different modes of service behind a curtain before she gives *darshana* in the morning.

And such services are classified as follows—I found this very interesting. What are the various services which the residents of Goloka Vrindavan, when they come here to Gokula Vrindavan, offer to Srimati Radharani? This is more interesting than the evening news, who won the football match, you know, or what are the capitals of the different countries of the world. This is how we should apply our intelligence! 

So, such services are classified as follows: 
1. The service of flowers, 
2. The service of ornaments, 
3. The service of perfumes, 
4. The service of outfits, 
5. The service of showing the mirror, 
6. The service of painting the face, 
7. The service of offering the items mentioned above, 
8. The service of offering betel, 
9. The service of rearranging such items, 
10. And the service of taking care of the items mentioned. 

And these ten services are done by ten different groups of servants of Radha. You know, there'll be someone in charge, but there'll be ten servants, and I can mention those respectively—the different groups that take care of these services:
- The service of flowers is done by the *malinis*, that particular group of *gopis*. 
- The service of ornaments is done by her *sakhis*. 
- The service of perfumes is done by the *manjaris*. 
- The service of outfits—the *kinkaris*, that group of *gopis* take care of the service of outfits. 
- The service of mirrors—there's a service of mirrors—is done by the *dasis*. 
- The service of painting faces is by the *sahacharis*. 
- The service of offering the above items, you know, overseeing all that, is done by the *nija-dasis*. 
- The service of offering betel nut is by the *ailis*. 
- The service of rearranging, putting those items back where they came from, is done by the *priya-sakhis*. 
- And the service of taking care of, of acquiring all these items mentioned, is done by the *anucharinis*. 

There you go! And it all begins in the morning after Srimati Radhika takes her bath and she's dressed. Then she sits on a golden throne. She bathes and she's dressed by her confidential servants, and then she sits on a golden throne, and eight huge mirrors framed in gold are situated in a circle around her. And there's a huge chandelier named *Sahasra-dipavali*—it means "the thousand lamps"—which is hanging over this golden throne to light it up. 

And next to the throne, there's a table called *Shringara-vedi*. *Shringara-vedi* meaning, well, the table of *shringara*—*shringara* means ornaments—the table of ornaments. So this table itself is filled with golden boxes studded with gems in the shapes of a fish, or a *makara*—which means a creature similar to crocodiles—peacocks, a turtle, or a mango. Interesting boxes! And these boxes are filled with perfumed oils, red lac, collyrium, *kunkum*, minerals of different colors, silver and golden glitter, bark from a tree called *mahima*, turmeric, and sandalwood powder. Now, why? Well, because all these maidservants of Sri Radha, they will utilize these things in her *seva*. So beautiful! And a pot with different silver and golden thin sticks to paint and decorate her is on the table, filled with flowers and jewels.

Now, there's... I was reading, a group of seven *gopis* nearby playing soothing music with ten instruments: 
- A drum, 
- *Jala-yantra* (ten different ceramic bowls filled with different levels of water), 
- A hundred-stringed instrument, 
- *Kachapi-vina* (which is a turtle-shaped *vina*), 
- *Manjira* (described as kartals), 
- *Vina* (a lute), 
- *Mridanga* (a smaller type of drum we're familiar with), 
- *Sagara* (an instrument that gives sounds like the waves of the ocean—wow, *sagara*, an instrument that sounds like the waves of the ocean!), 
- Then there are handbells, 
- And a *santoor* stringed instrument.

Now, as Sri Radhika sits on that golden throne, the *gopis* employ all these different ornaments in service to her. They begin decorating her. Firstly, they dry her hair with the smoke of cow dung and *aguru*—a beautiful type of perfume that we use in the worship of our deities, actually. Then they make her hair shiny with jasmine, almond, and amla oil. They tie Sri Radha's hair in a long braid which appears like a moving snake embedded with diamonds and pearls. They tie Sri Radha's hair in a long braid which appears like a moving snake embedded with diamonds and pearls. Then they put *bakula* and *champaka* flowers in her hair, and then it's described, sometimes they tie her hair up in a knot, and the poet says sometimes they "liberate her hair from the bounds of soft silken strings"—meaning they let her hair loose. I had to think for a minute when I first read it! "They liberate her hair from the bounds of soft silken strings"—they let her hair loose. 

Then, after putting red lac on Radha's hands and feet, they offer her countless necklaces, countless necklaces! And at that time, they tie a knot of all the strings of those necklaces falling behind her back in the shape of a black cuckoo. There's something for your mind's eye! All these countless necklaces, they tie a knot of the strings of those necklaces which, you know, fall behind her back in the shape of a black cuckoo. 

Then, to ward off any evil eyes—you know, people look at her, I don't know, anyway, to ward off any evil eyes—they call out, "Balahari! Balahari! Balahari!" which means, "May the energy of the evil eye on you come on us, come on us!" These are her surrendered servants. Then they circle her seven times with a golden pot filled with water, and afterwards they drink that water. It's a ritual, I was reading, for removing evil eyes. 

Then they show her hand mirrors from eight sides—you know, they're holding the mirrors in their hands—they show her hand mirrors from eight sides, which reflect countless images of her in the bigger mirrors which are around the room. And at this point, they place a beautiful blue lotus in her hand and fix cotton saturated with different perfumes behind her ears. Then they move her to a *mayurasana*. From the golden throne, the *gopis* move Radhika to a *mayurasana*. So, what's a *mayurasana*? It's a peacock throne, a peacock throne decorated with a colorful, jeweled canopy and curtains.

Next day, fans are rotated, with feathers and yak-tail whisks, and singing in loud voices, the gopīs open the curtains for darśana. Lalitā Devī comes forward and offers—or, as it says, waves—a golden plate with lamps on it. At this point, the residents of Vṛndāvana, particularly Varṣāṇā, stand for ārati, while Kṛṣṇa pays His obeisances unto the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā again and again and again. 

Our poet, Ananta-dāsa, says that one who hears the description of the śṛṅgāra of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī will attain the intense urge to serve the Divine Couple in Their eternal pastimes by the mercy of Guru and Vaiṣṇavas. By the mercy of all, we can attain this; by his grace only.

Wow. So now we've heard about Śrī Rādhā's flower ornaments as well as Her—how could I say—traditional ornaments. A very beautiful description of all these ornaments taken together, combined together, is given by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his book *Stavāvalī*, in the section called *Premāmbhoja-maranda*. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī actually quotes this book in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—this particular section, actually, is in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, 8.166. It’s esoteric, but it’s nice to meditate on how he speaks about these ornaments. 

Gosvāmī writes: "Śrī Rādhā's ornaments embody the natural symptoms of ecstasy: trembling, tears, jubilation, stunning, perspiration, faltering of the voice, bodily redness, madness, and dullness. In this way, Her entire body is bedecked with these nine different jewels. Over and above this, the beauty of Her body is enhanced by Her transcendental qualities, which hang as a flower garland on Her body."

Now, it's interesting to note here that not only do the gopīs dress Śrī Rādhā in beautiful ornaments, śṛṅgāra, but sometimes Kṛṣṇa does as well. This Kṛṣṇa does at the famous pastime place called Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa. Perhaps some of you have visited; it's actually off the parikramā path that goes around Vṛndāvana. Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī writes in *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, verse 82—he refers to this particular holy place—he writes: "In the grove named Śṛṅgāra-sthali, Kṛṣṇa decorated His beloved under a vaṭa tree, a banyan tree named Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa, which can be seen and glorified even today." And as I mentioned, you can go there. 

In *Bhakti-ratnākara*, Fifth Wave, Śrī Narahari Cakravartī also refers to this special place where Kṛṣṇa decorated Śrī Rādhā. He writes: "This is Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa, where Kṛṣṇa decorated Rādhikā in different ways." 

My dear illustrious godbrother, Śivarāma Mahārāja, relates this particular pastime of Kṛṣṇa decorating Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī very nicely in his *Nava-vraja-mahimā*. He summarizes the pastime very beautifully. He writes that one time at Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were sitting together under this banyan tree, Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa, and They were so absorbed in Their pastimes that They lost track of time. 

Suddenly Vṛndā-devī, who along with Mother Pūrṇamāsī, as you know, is in charge of arranging all Vṛndāvana pastimes—Vṛndā-devī arrived. Seeing the Couple together under this beautiful tree, she said to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, "Dear ones, You're going to be late for the rasa dance this afternoon!" 

Rādhārāṇī immediately became angry with Kṛṣṇa. She said, "Kṛṣṇa, You've lost track of time! We're going to be late for the rasa dance. It means all my gopī friends will miss out on Your transcendental association." 

I remember that this is the compassionate nature of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Prabhupāda describes in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* that Rādhārāṇī is such a great devotee that She takes ten thousand times more pleasure in engaging others in Kṛṣṇa's service than doing the service Herself. We see that in Her statement: "My gopī friends are going to miss out because we're late." Then She said, "Kṛṣṇa, just look at me!" Because it was late in the day, Her clothes had become wrinkled and Her hair was a little disheveled in this pastime. She said, "How am I going to show up at the rasa dance looking like this?" 

Kṛṣṇa smiled and He reassured Her, "Devī, let Me arrange these things. Let Me put on Your makeup. Let Me decorate You with all these gold, diamond, ruby, and sapphire ornaments that are placed here by Your sakhīs, and I promise You it won't take more than a minute." 

Then, you know Lalitā—she's fiery by nature, always trying to protect Śrī Rādhā from Kṛṣṇa when He gets out of hand—she said, "You know, Rādhā, He's just a boy, He's a cowherd. We gopīs can do better than Him." But Rādhārāṇī, in Her heart of hearts, wanted Kṛṣṇa to decorate Her, so She said, "All right, Kṛṣṇa, do it nicely." 

Taking charge, Kṛṣṇa asked a number of gopīs to go to different places and get more jewels, ornaments, bracelets, bangles, etc. All the gopīs ran off, and they quickly came back with all kinds of paraphernalia. They just had to go to the storehouses of Vṛndā-devī. We know that Vṛndā-devī has storehouses of whatever is required for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's sevā all over Vṛndāvana in the forest. They don't have to scout it out and ask where it is; they know it's all there for Kṛṣṇa's sevā. And they can also go to the desire trees, the kalpa-vṛkṣas: "I need a sapphire, I need a ruby, I need a pearl necklace for the sevā of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa," and those things just fall from the tree, because the tree is also a Vrajavāsī. 

When Kṛṣṇa saw all this paraphernalia, He was very happy. I was reading where Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes that this is so interesting: every devotee has his worshipable deity. We all have our worshipable deities whom we love to serve in so many ways. And Kṛṣṇa, although He is God, also has His worshipable deity. And who is that? Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrī Rādhā! So He was very happy. 

Understandably, it's described that Kṛṣṇa took a long time to decorate Śrī Rādhā. He took a long time. And when He finished, He stepped back, and all the gopīs went, "Oh, such beautiful dressing You've done! You're a cowherd boy, Kṛṣṇa, but You have done such beautiful dressing!" 

Then Viśākhā whispered something in the ear of Lalitā, and Lalitā stood up and said, "On this very day, under this banyan tree here at Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa, we declare this cowherd boy, Kṛṣṇa, to be the Emperor of Pujārīs—the Emperor of Pujārīs!" 

Then everyone looked at Rādhārāṇī—Her transcendental beauty, Her effulgence, and all Her divine qualities—and appreciated how expertly Kṛṣṇa had decorated Her with śṛṅgāra jewels and ornaments at Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa. You have to go there on your next visit!

Of course, one of the sakhīs came forward and offered Rādhārāṇī a mirror. Rādhārāṇī took that mirror, looked at Her reflection, and smiled. Just by Her smile, everyone's heart became pacified. Because this is bhakti. Bhakti means to give more than you take, and the gopīs were giving everything to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. When they see Kṛṣṇa—or, in this particular case, Rādhā—happy, that is their happiness. One day, that should become our happiness as well. She smiled, and everyone's heart became pacified. 

Then Rādhārāṇī said, "Oh, we're late! Let's go for the rasa dance." And everyone, including Kṛṣṇa, went over to a place called Nikuñjavana, where other gopīs were waiting impatiently for the rasa dance. 

When they all arrived, the gopīs who had been waiting for Śrī Rādhā looked at Rādhārāṇī and said to each other, "Rādhārāṇī looks especially beautiful today! Who dressed Her?" And when word got out that Kṛṣṇa had dressed Her, all those gopīs smiled and agreed that indeed Kṛṣṇa was the Emperor of Pujārīs. Hare Kṛṣṇa!

So, I would like to end—I don't want to end, but we're up here on the Baltic Sea coast again, you know, with the Festival of India, and I have to get out for harināma saṅkīrtana. We have a festival this evening as well—a festival every day, actually. 

I'd like to end today's lecture with a poem by Sūradāsa. You know Sūradāsa, we've quoted him many times, wherein he states that nothing can compare to the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He says Her beauty puts everything else to shame. Anything that's extraordinarily beautiful is put to shame, in a nice way, by Rādhārāṇī's beauty. He writes as follows:

"Mother Yaśodā says: 'O Rādhā, Your face is like the moon. Why do You not hide it, O beautiful daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu? By keeping it exposed, You are causing anguish to so many creatures. The deer suffers from it, even though there are no hunter's arrows to give it pain. Have You no compassion? The lotus is sad, along with the bee shut inside it, and so are the khañjana and cakora birds. Please cover up the light of Your countenance so that the moon may become happy again.' The poet Sūradāsa says: 'O lovely, moon-faced Rādhā, why put them all to shame?'"

Thank you, Prabhus. We will have another class on the divine ornaments of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī next Friday—I'm already preparing that. Thank you so much. All glories to the revealer of the Dhāma, the revealer of all these things to all of us, His faithful followers. 

Thank you.