Hari Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Nandanandana. Om Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Swāmin iti nāmine. O glorious!

So today we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 140, in which we will continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's disguises.

In our recent lectures we have discussed how Kṛṣṇa assumes a variety of disguises in His pastimes. We mentioned a gopī, a female doctor, a demigoddess, etc. But today I'd like to discuss a very unusual disguise that Kṛṣṇa assumed, and that is of Abhimanyu, who, as most of you know, is Rādhārāṇī's husband.

It's a famous pastime, and I've told it numerous times. But like all subject matters in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it's worthy of being told over and over and over and over for eternity.

So one day out at Yāvaṭa, where Rādhārāṇī lives with her husband Abhimanyu, and her mother-in-law Jaṭilā, and her sister-in-law Kuṭilā, all of whom keep a watchful eye on her to make sure she never meets with Kṛṣṇa, that day Rādhārāṇī actually had a scheduled meeting with Kṛṣṇa in a beautiful grove. Where was it? Not far from Nandagrāma.

So Rādhārāṇī made an excuse that she was going to pick flowers, and Jaṭilā initially agreed. But later on Jaṭilā began to worry, after Rādhārāṇī had left, that maybe she was meeting Kṛṣṇa. So she sent Kuṭilā to look around the fields and pastures of Vraja to see if anything was going on.

Now, in time, Kuṭilā was actually approaching the place where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were meeting. But as a precaution, Śrī Rādhā had posted several of her girlfriends as lookouts to see if Jaṭilā or Kuṭilā might come searching for them. And when they spotted Kuṭilā actually coming, they ran as fast as they could to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So at that moment, both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa cleverly went and hid themselves amongst the bushes and trees. The problem for Kṛṣṇa, when He's hiding, is that His transcendental body is extremely fragrant, and it can be smelled at a great distance. His body smells like aguru, a very expensive oil that comes from the aguru tree, mixed with musk, sandalwood, and camphor.

The śāstras say that when Kṛṣṇa leaves some place, for example, that distinctive aroma stays there for at least, well, we would say, 15 minutes. Fifteen minutes.

So when Kuṭilā came upon that scene where They had been, she smelled that fragrance and she immediately said out loud, "I know Śyāma has been here. I know Śyāma has been here."

So Śyāma, of course, is one of the popular names for Kṛṣṇa, meaning that the hue of His spiritual body is just like the color of a monsoon cloud. Nowadays devotees often call out, "Rādhe Śyāma, Rādhe Śyāma."

Rādhārāṇī's form is golden, more specifically like gold that has been melted down 10,000 times. It's described like that. Now, when gold is melted down, it becomes more golden, more lustrous, and more beautiful. And that is the color of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's body.

And because Kṛṣṇa's body is like a monsoon cloud, when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are together, it's like, quote, "lightning in a cloud in the monsoon season." Just in your mind, think lightning and a cloud in the monsoon season.

So Kuṭilā's in that area where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were. She's smelling this fragrance and saying, "You know, Śyāma's been here," when suddenly Rādhārāṇī comes out of the forest alone with a basket of flowers, as if she had been picking them.

But due to the scent of Kṛṣṇa's form, Kuṭilā said, "Śrī Rādhā, I know Śyāma has been here. And you're here, so something's going on, right? Śyāma has been here."

But in Sanskrit, words can have different meanings. So Śyāma can also mean nighttime.

So Rādhārāṇī very cleverly said to Kuṭilā, "No, the night is no longer here. As you know, the sun rose very early this morning, and there's lots of sunshine here. Night's no longer here."

So Kuṭilā got frustrated and she said, "No, I mean Hari. Hari is nearby. I can smell Him."

Hari means "He who takes away all inauspiciousness," a very common name for Kṛṣṇa. "Hari. So I mean Hari's nearby. I can smell Him."

But the word hari in Sanskrit can also mean lion.

So Rādhārāṇī said, "Oh Kuṭilā, you smell a lion. You've saved our lives. Thank you. Me and my gopīs will leave immediately."

So seeing that she wasn't making any progress, Kuṭilā just stomped off.

Then Kṛṣṇa did a most amazing thing. He disguised Himself to look like Rādhārāṇī's husband, Abhimanyu. And catching up with His sister, quote-unquote, Kuṭilā, He said, "Oh, my dear sister," in the voice of Abhimanyu, "what are you doing here?"

So Kuṭilā replied to Abhimanyu—actually Kṛṣṇa—"Oh Abhimanyu, you know, I almost caught Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together. I almost caught your wife and that Kṛṣṇa."

So Kṛṣṇa, disguised as Abhimanyu, answered, "Good work, Kuṭilā. And I have to tell you something very confidential, some secret."

And He said, "You know, I've heard that Kṛṣṇa has disguised Himself as me."

And as Kuṭilā shook her head, she said, "That rascal."

Then Kṛṣṇa, disguised as Abhimanyu, said, "Yes, and I'm going to call King Kaṁsa and get some soldiers and have this rascal, who's disguised himself as me, arrested. And as soon as I do that, I'll fetch Rādhārāṇī, take her into her quarters, lock the doors, and stay with her to protect her from Kṛṣṇa.

"And you should be aware, Kuṭilā, that I've heard that this Kṛṣṇa, disguised as me, looking just like me, is going to come to our palace at the normal time later on this afternoon, when I usually come home, and he's going to try to enter the palace disguised as me.

"So I want you to go back and tell everything to our mother Jaṭilā, what he's doing. Then the two of you go to the gośālā, take some very wet cow-dung and make big, huge wet cow-dung patties and pile them on the veranda on the roof.

"Then later this day, when that rascal Kṛṣṇa comes disguised as me, you'll ask him, 'Who are you?' And he'll tell a big lie. He'll say he's Abhimanyu. He'll say he's me. And at that moment, you take all those big wet cow-dung patties and throw them down on him."

Kuṭilā smiled. She loved this plan. So she ran all the way home, told everything to Jaṭilā, and together they went to the gośālā and got all these wet cow-dung patties, maybe 30 of them. And as instructed, they piled them on the roof on the veranda, waiting for Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu to come home and try to get in the palace.

So as that time approached, the real Abhimanyu came home. He's the real Abhimanyu. This is not Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu. The real Abhimanyu came home, but when he tried to get into the palace, the door was locked. That's unusual.

So then he saw his mother and sister up high on the veranda, screaming at him, "You rascal! You debauchee! We know who you are! You're Kṛṣṇa!"

This is the real Abhimanyu. He was shocked. He said, "What? Have you gone mad, my mother? My sister? I'm not Kṛṣṇa. I've just come home like always."

And Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā, following the plan, shot back, "No, you're Kṛṣṇa disguised as Abhimanyu."

So Abhimanyu yelled, "No! You can come and pinch me. I'm your son."

So then Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā yelled, "We knew you would say that!" Because that, remember, "We knew you would say that!"

And they started throwing the cow-dung patties on him, and they were splattering all over him in your mind's eye again. And as they threw more and more and more, they knocked him down. And finally, all 30 cow-dung patties were covering him.

So Abhimanyu muttered to himself, "They must have been possessed by a ghost. I'm going to go to Mathurā and get an exorcist who can take ghosts out of people's bodies."

Now, what's interesting is, in the old Nectar of Devotion you published many years ago, there was a picture, you could say a painting, in the book accompanied by an explanation by Śrīla Prabhupāda of this very pastime.

The painting is there of the pastime, and Prabhupāda comments there that Jaṭilā was hitting the real Abhimanyu with a stick and screaming at him, "You rascal! You are Kṛṣṇa!" while Abhimanyu is saying, "No, I'm your son!" while Kuṭilā is adding, "Hit him more! Hit him more, Mother!"

So that's the pastime.

So yes, these are very simple pastimes. One may think that the pastimes of the Supreme Lord must be very complicated, but actually, often the beauty of love is in its simplicity. The things that happen may not appear so significant, but it's the mood, it's the mellow, it's the rasa, it's the love in which they happen that makes them important to those who are hearing or seeing these pastimes.

It's the love. And all of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are imbued with deep love, deep rasa.

So I hope you've enjoyed this wonderful pastime.

I was thinking, Kṛṣṇa brought Goloka to the earth and manifested it as Gokula. Here He performed many, many līlās, many pastimes in Gokula, both for His pleasure and for the benefit of us conditioned souls in this world. And when He had enacted sufficient pastimes, He left this world for Goloka, confident that if we spend a good amount of time actually—as Prabhupāda said one time, "If you've got time, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." And he told us to chant a minimum of 16 rounds.

So if we can spend a good amount of time hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa, all these wonderful pastimes, one day we'll be qualified to join Him in that all-blissful abode of Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual sky.

I'd like to conclude with a verse that confirms this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. It's the Eleventh Canto, Chapter 1, verses 6 and 7. It's so beautiful, and I quote:

"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the reservoir of all beauty. All beautiful things emanate from Him, and His personal form is so attractive that it steals the eyes away from all other objects, which then seem devoid of beauty in comparison to Him.

When Lord Kṛṣṇa was on the earth, He attracted the eyes of all people. When Kṛṣṇa spoke, His words attracted the minds of all who remembered them. By seeing the footsteps of Lord Kṛṣṇa, people became attracted to Him, and thus they wanted to offer their bodily activities to the Lord and His followers.

In this way Kṛṣṇa very easily spread His glories, which are sung throughout the world by the most sublime and essential Vedic verses. Lord Kṛṣṇa considered that simply by hearing and chanting these glories, conditioned souls born in the future would cross beyond the darkness of ignorance. Being satisfied with this arrangement, He left for His desired destination, Goloka Vṛndāvana-dhāma."

Wow. Thank you, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Thank you, Prabhupāda.

So yes, I actually think we have a couple more classes on disguises. One or two about Kṛṣṇa or Rādhā, but also we have to cover the pastime of Kṛṣṇa disguising Himself as Lord Caitanya. That's really sweet, nectarean.

So thank you, Prabhus. See you next Friday.

And once again, glories to... Thank you. Hare Kṛṣṇa.
