Hi Krishna, everyone, and welcome back again to our series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Viśva-rūpa.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, based on Chapter 26 of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s *Nectar of Devotion*, and this will be part 94.

As we have mentioned before, we have discussed numerous items listed in that chapter that act as a stimulus for love of Krishna.

But interestingly enough, we have yet to discuss the very first item mentioned by Śrīla Prabhupāda there in that chapter.

He writes as follows: "Some things—some things," he begins, "which give impetus or stimulation to ecstatic love of Krishna are his transcendental qualities, his uncommon activities, his smiling features, the periodical occasions for remembering him, etc." So, the very first item of stimulation listed there is Krishna’s transcendental qualities, and that will be the subject matter for our next few classes.

And how many qualities, transcendental qualities, will we cover?

Well, well, we could go on forever. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 2.110 says, "The spiritual qualities of Krishna are unlimited.

Great personalities like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, and the four Kumāras cannot estimate the spiritual qualities of the Lord." So, we could just do 64 qualities. Again, *Cc.* 1.11.36 says, "The transcendental qualities of Lord Krishna are unlimited, but out of these, 64 are considered prominent.

The ears of the devotees are satisfied simply by hearing all these qualities one after another." But if we lectured on the 64 qualities of Krishna at the rate we're going in this series—we're in the 90s—it could take many, many months.

So, I decided we'll just focus on four of these 64 qualities. Four qualities that are most prominent and serve actually to distinguish Krishna from even His own expansions, like Lord Nārāyaṇa, for example.

As many of you know, it's said that Lord Nārāyaṇa has 60 of those qualities, but Krishna has four more.

They are described as wonderful, beautiful qualities that set Him aside as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Fountainhead of all other incarnations, Avatāras. And what are those four special qualities?

They are listed as: Number 1: Krishna is the performer of wonderful varieties of pastimes, especially His childhood pastimes.

Number 2: He's always surrounded by devotees endowed with a wonderful love of Godhead. Number 3: He can attract living entities from all over the universe by playing on his flute. And Number 4: He has a wonderful excellence of beauty that cannot be rivaled anywhere in the creation.

Now, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes these same outstanding qualities of Krishna in a very poetic way in the 13th chapter of his book, *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*.

He writes, "The same qualities, but very poetically." He writes, "Apart from these 60 transcendental qualities, Śrī Krishna has an additional four transcendental qualities which are not manifested even in the personality of Śrī Nārāyaṇa.

They are: Number 1: It is very beautiful. Krishna is like an ocean filled with the waves of *līlā*s that evoke wonder with everyone within the three worlds.

Number 2: In His activities of conjugal love, Krishna is always surrounded by dear devotees who possess unequal love for Him.

Number 3: Krishna attracts the minds of all the three worlds with the melodious vibration of His flute.

Number 4: The personal beauty and opulence of Krishna are beyond compare.

No one is equal to Him and no one is greater than Him. Thus the Personality of Godhead astonishes all living entities, both moving and non-moving, within the three worlds. He is so beautifully attractive that He is called Kṛṣṇa." So, although the pastimes, obviously, of Lord Nārāyaṇa are amazing, because well, He's Krishna’s expansion of Krishna, Krishna's pastimes are even more amazing.

I was thinking of an example, like Lord Nārāyaṇa—Krishna frees demons from sinful reactions by mercifully killing them.

But death at the hands of Nārāyaṇa merely sends the demons to heaven, or in some special cases, to Vaikuṇṭha. But when our Lord Krishna kills demons, He gives them the opportunity for eternal service in Goloka.

You take Pūtanā, for example. We know she smeared poison on her breast, intending to kill Krishna.

But because she had assumed the role of a nurse, or sometimes described as a mother, Krishna granted her the position of mother in Goloka Vṛndāvana after killing her.

Now, what is interesting is that although these four qualities mentioned are listed separately, they still have something in common, and that is they're all about loving relationships with Krishna.

Particularly, these four qualities, they're about loving relationships with Krishna.

And specifically, what type of loving relationships? *Vṛndāvana-bhakti*, the love of the residents of Vṛndāvana for Krishna, and Krishna’s love for the residents of Vṛndāvana.

Because love is reciprocal, this is the highest love. And according to *śāstra*, it's even higher than the love in Vaikuṇṭha, the official kingdom of God, where the residents there love Viṣṇu or Nārāyaṇa in the mood of *aishwarya*, meaning literally awe and veneration.

But Krishna says, "Mām chaiva avyabhichāreṇa bhaktir ye prayanti te mayi" (BG 7.28) – "Though possessed of wealth, they look upon Me with awe and veneration.

But Krishna says, *aishwarya-pradhāne prītiḥ kevalā na bhavet* – 'Devotion made feeble by such reverence does not attract Me.'" All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So today, let us discuss the first wonderful, distinguishing quality of Krishna again, namely, He is the performer of wonderful pastimes, especially His childhood pastimes, especially His childhood pastimes.

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.8.47, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, "Krishna’s childhood pastimes are so magnanimous and so great that simply chanting about them vanquishes the contamination of the material world." And that's what we're doing right now.

And Jīva Gosvāmī writes so beautifully in *Gopāla-campū* 1.1.68, as follows: "I adore the childhood years of the darling of Vṛndāvana’s women.

During this time, Krishna’s dark blue body was very effulgent, and the bells around his ankles and waist made a jingling sound, *cling, cling, cling*.

You write that he delighted everyone with enchanting crawling movements, the same crawling with which he later dragged a mortar with the sounds of *ka, ka, ka*, and effortlessly uprooted two Arjuna trees. As the trees made a loud cracking sound, he curiously looked behind himself and smiled." Thank you, Jīva Gosvāmī.

Now, the origin, the origin of Krishna's childhood pastimes is described by Sukadeva Gosvāmī in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Kanto, Chapter 8, as follows: That Vasudeva, he's described as the best of the Vasus, along with his wife Devakī, desiring to have the Supreme Lord as their child, this is history, approached Lord Brahmā and said, "Please permit us, please permit us to be born on the planet Earth so that after our appearance, the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Controller and Master of all planets, will also appear and spread devotional service, the ultimate goal of life.

Thus, those born in the material world may easily be delivered from the miserable condition of materialistic life by accepting devotional service." So Lord Brahmā said, "Yes, let it be so." And then *Bhāgavatam* describes, "Then the most fortunate Vasudeva, who was equal to Bhagavān, appeared in Bṛjapura, it's a beautiful way of describing Vṛndāvana, appeared in Bṛjapura, Vṛndāvana, as the famous Nanda Mahārāja, and his wife Devakī appeared as Yaśodā." So we're getting the historical references here.

Then *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.8.51 states, "When the Supreme Personality of Godhead became the son of Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā, they maintained continuous, unswerving devotional love in parental affection, and in their association, all the other inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, the gopas and the gopīs, developed the culture of Krishna-bhakti, developed the culture of Krishna-bhakti." So, of course, many devotees are familiar with what became from that, Krishna's childhood pastimes.

If only because, isn't it, we all celebrate them in ISKCON during the month of Kārttika each year?

Each evening, we gather in our homes, in local temples, and we sing the *Damodarāṣṭakam*, which glorifies Krishna's childhood pastimes.

Also, I remember I gave a series of lectures about Lord Dāmodara’s pastimes in these Vṛndāvana lectures in 2021.

So, I won't repeat those exact pastimes, those childhood pastimes, rather. Today, we'll actually go a little deeper and see these famous childhood pastimes through the eyes of several great saints, like Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Kavi Karnapūra, and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, who I've quoted many times from his commentaries on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*.

All their commentaries are valuable because they reveal many of the deeper meanings behind Krishna's pastimes.

This is important for someone ignorant of the Lord may pass Krishna's childhood pastimes off as—I don't even like to say it—but simply bedtime stories for children or mythology or something.

But no. The *Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa*, in the section called *Kṛṣṇa-janma-khaṇḍa*, Chapter 21, Verse 1, says again, "The childhood pastimes of Krishna are filled with deep meaning and are most dear to Him.

Krishna would wander around Gokula with His cowherd friends, enjoying various playful pastimes." So this is absolute reality.

This is absolute truth. Krishna's pastimes are absolute truth, not relative truth like in this world.

So again, from the historical point of view, Krishna's childhood pastimes began immediately after he got his name from Garga Muni. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says like that, his childhood pastimes began immediately after he got his name from Garga Muni. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* describes those pastimes, those particular pastimes, in Canto 10, Chapter 8, beginning verse 21.

This is verse 21: "After a short time passed, both brothers Rāma and Krishna—meaning Balarāma and Krishna—began to crawl on the ground of Bṛj with the strength of their hands and knees, and thus they enjoyed their childhood play." Simple enough.

But here, Hari refers to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Hari, in his commentary, explains how could you say the secret, the secret behind Krishna's crawling.

He writes: "Krishna was thinking, 'Dear Earth, although you have been immensely harassed day after day by these evil kings, you have not given up your quality of forgiveness.

Indeed, you are most forgiving, for even though you are everyone's mother, you tolerate your children stomping, stomping on your body through their feet, and you have also tolerated this—the misdeeds of all these evil kings. For this reason, O Earth, you are extremely glorious.' Krishna said, 'For this reason, O Earth, you are extremely glorious.'" Hari refers to him thinking like this.

So, Hari says that while expressing this thought in his mind, it was as if Krishna was consoling and encouraging the Earth by patting her on the back using his own palms on the pretext of crawling.

You know, he's going like this, he's pattering on the patting her on the back using his own palms on the pretext of crawling. What a beautiful insight. Now, in *Padyāvalī*, text 147, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī analyzes some of Krishna’s antics with his beloved mother, Yaśodā Mayī.

He writes, "One day, Krishna saw his father, Nanda Mahārāja, worshiping Indra.

Krishna asked, 'Bābā, who is Indra?' Nanda Mahārāja replied, 'You don't know, my son.

He is the king of Svarga heaven.' So that night, Krishna started dreaming that he had become the new king of heaven." Rūpa Gosvāmī describes, "Krishna is sleeping, considering himself as the king of Svarga.

Krishna was talking in his sleep as follows: 'Śiva, welcome.

Sit down here by my right. Brahmā, you sit at my left. Kartikeya, *asiṣe* to you. Indra, happiness to you. Kuvera, I did not see you. Is everything okay?'" Hearing this talking, Rūpa Gosvāmī goes on, "Yaśodā Mayī got anxious and said, 'Child, what nonsense are you saying?' Then she immediately made a loud noise. *Thoo*!

It's a *thoo*!

It's the noise of spitting for preventing any ill omens.' That's how he describes it. The noise of spitting for the for preventing any ill omens. He goes on, 'This noise startled Krishna and woke him up.' And Rūpa Gosvāmī finishes this verse saying, 'May this sound made by mother Yaśodā protect you all.

May this sound, this special sound, made by Mayī protect you all.' This is in his writings." Now, we move on. In *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*, it's chapter five, Kavi Karnapūra describes that one full moon night, Yaśodā Mayī was sitting outside chatting with some elderly gopīs while Krishna played nearby, ever so often glancing with loving eyes at the Moon.

Krishna was playing nearby, but he was glancing at the moon.

And wanting to make sure Krishna was okay, Yaśodā Mayī sent two of her servants to look after him.

And as the ladies sat down, they said to him, "Lālā, kim aham, kim caram?

Do you want milk?" And Krishna replied, "No." So the gopīs said, "Krishna, kim uta, kim uta?

Do you want fine yogurt?" Krishna replied, "No, no." Then the gopīs said, "Krishna, kim cha, kim cha?

Do you want thickened milk?" Krishna replied, "Not at all." Then the gopīs said, "Then what do you want?" Krishna smiled and said, "I want a big ball of butter.

I want a big ball of butter." So, one of the gopīs said, "Then I will go into the house right now and bring you a whole tray of your mother's most delicious butter." But Krishna stopped her and with another emphatic, "No, I don't want that." The gopīs got confused and they said, "What?

But whose butter do you want?" Krishna replied, "No one's." Then, pointing to that Moon, remember, he was looking, he said, "He said, 'I want that butter.'" Looking at the moon, "I want that butter." So all the gopīs started laughing and jokingly said, "Little boy, that's not churned butter." And they said, "That—that's a royal white swan gliding across the lake of the sky, gliding across the lake of the sky." But whatever it was, butter or not, Krishna, he wanted the moon.

He wanted that moon. So he said, "Then give me that royal swan so I can play with it, catch it before it quickly swims away." And then, working himself into a frenzy, he started kicking his feet on the ground and shouting, "Get it!

Get it now!" So, hearing Krishna's tantrum, some of the other gopīs, they tried to pacify him.

They said, "Lālā, please don't cry. Those other gopīs were playing with you. That's not actually a royal swan, but the moon in the sky. It's called *candra*." So, undaunted, Krishna replied, "Then give me that *candra* so I can play with it.

I want it right now!

Get it!" So, by this time, Krishna's antics had become too much for these gopīs to handle.

So they brought Krishna to Yaśodā Mayī and they explained everything that had happened.

So it's described, holding her crying son in her lap, Yaśodā Mayī spoke very sweetly into his ear, "Lālā, what you said first was correct. The Moon is actually freshly churned butter. She's trying to pacify him, but I cannot give it to you.

The Moon looks very tasty, but it actually has deadly poisonous spots on it, so no one can eat it." So this intrigued Krishna.

He calmed down and he said, "Mother, why are there poisonous spots on the Moon?" And Yaśodā Mayī replied, "Dear one, there is an ocean of milk in the universe." But before she finished the sentence, Krishna interrupted and said, "Mother, how many cows does it take to get enough milk for an ocean?" So Yaśodā Mayī laughed and said, "The milk ocean was not made by cows." So Krishna looked into his mother's eyes and said, "Mother, how can that be?

How can there be milk without cows?" So Yaśodā Mayī answered, "The one who gave cows the ability to transform grass into milk can also make milk without cows." So Krishna seemed satisfied, but he was still curious.

So he said, "Who is that?" Bowing her head in respect to the Lord, she replied, "Oh, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Although all-pervading, He is invisible to material eyes, and therefore, Lālā, you and I cannot see Him." So Krishna again looked at his mother, this time with a slight smile, and said, "Mother, is everything you're telling me true?" So rather than defend herself, Yaśodā Mayī cited scripture.

Listen, she said, "Long, long ago, the demigods and the demons churned this ocean of milk. Mount Mandara was a churning rod, and the king of serpents, Vāsuki, was a churning rope. The demons and the demigods pulled on the opposite ends of Vāsuki." So Krishna asked, "Did they churn like you and other ladies churn?" Yaśodā replied, "Yes, but their churning produced a deadly poison." So Krishna said, "Mother, how can churning milk produce poison?

I thought poison came from snakes." And Yaśodā replied, "Lālā, poison does come from snakes, but it came from milk first. Mahādeva drank that poison to save the universe. When some drops of that poison seeped through his fingers, the snakes drank it.

That's why they are now poisonous." So at this point, little Krishna shook his head in wonder.

And Yaśodā Mayī continued, "The Moon was also born from the churning of the milk ocean, so it too was touched by drops of poison, which we now see as those—those marks on the Moon. Can you see them?" So Krishna looked up at the Moon again.

He said, "Yes, Māyā, I see them." So Yaśodā Mayī concluded, "That is why we cannot eat butter from the Moon. It's poisonous. But we can eat Gokula's butter. We can eat Gokula's butter. Now, please take my freshly churned butter instead of the Moon." And Krishna nodded in agreement and yawned to show that he was sleepy, and his mother Yaśodā carried her son, carried her son into the palace.

Even before she could lay him down on—on his bed in the room, he had already fallen asleep in her arms, dreaming about an ocean of milk. So the next morning, Yaśodā Mayī woke Krishna up with a full tray of butter, yogurt, and other treats, saying, "Lālā, take what you like." But Krishna crossed his arms, looking at his mother, and he said, "Māyā, I will not eat anything.

Last night, I was hungry, but instead of feeding me, you put me to sleep with a story about poison on the Moon. I was hungry all night, so why should I eat your food now?" So Yaśodā Mayī put the tray down and replied with a smile, "If you were hungry all night, then who stole the butter from the storeroom last night?

Who stole the butter?" Somebody stole the butter from the storeroom.

So, understanding that his theft had been discovered, concealed, and that his false accusation had been exposed, Krishna looked away, unable to look at mother Yaśodā.

Then he suddenly threw his arms around her neck. The ācāryas say that Krishna embraced his mother as she lovingly held his butter-soft body of condensed bliss.

Krishna embraced his mother as she lovingly held his butter-soft body of condensed bliss, and she laughed as he whispered in her ear, "Māyā, I never steal butter, especially not yours." So, one devotee has written, "Oh, Gokul!

All Your pastimes are sweet, but Your mukha-cora pastimes are especially relishable due to the buttery fingerprints You leave on them after stealing Your mother's freshly churned butter. May that divine form of Yours that thrills at the sound of the churning rod and stays in mother Yaśodā’s kitchen to steal a handful of fresh butter protect us at all times." Krishna, Krishna, Lālā!

This is our life and soul, especially His childhood pastimes. Okay, thank you all for listening. Um, yes, actually, I think we'll continue with childhood pastimes. Of course, there are four qualities we want to discuss, but this first one, I think we'll get a few classes out of it.

So, we'll continue with these childhood pastimes next Friday. Thank you so much. All glories!

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

All glories to Krishna!