Hari Krishna, everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Śivāmbhu Kṛṣṇa.

Namaste, glories. So I'm presently in Śāntipur, Mayapur, having spent, uh, the month of Kārttika, the last month, uh, in Vrndāvana. It was very hard to leave Vrndāvana after doing CC A with so many loving devotees and seeing so many sacred, uh, locations.

But I know it will also be very hard to leave blissful Mayapur in two weeks for preaching in the freezing cold in Communist China, the land of the great red dragon. But go we must, as we know it will please Śrīla Prabhupāda, and we all live only to execute his desire.

The other day, I was reading about, uh, Lokanātha Gosvāmī, an associate of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, 500 years ago. When he was a young man, uh, both his parents, uh, passed away around the same time, and he immediately left for Nadia to return to the company of Nimāi Paṇḍita, whom he had known as a little child.

They were friends, and when he arrived in Nadia, he said to Mahāprabhu, Nimāi, I am free now to stay with you forever. We need never separate. But Nimāi Paṇḍita said, that will not happen. I have some service for you.

They were older now. Lokanātha asked, what kind of service?

Nimāi Paṇḍita said, take your good friend Bhāgavatācārya, go to Vrndāvana, and begin discovering the lost places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. Now, as soon as Nimāi Paṇḍita had said this, Lokanātha, who had been hoping to remain with his beloved friend forever, fell down on the ground unconscious.

And when he woke up, he said, Nimāi, please no. I've waited all my life to be with you, and now you're sending me away. So Nimāi Paṇḍita said, yes, Lokanātha, you have to go to Vrndāvana with Bhāgavatācārya. So Lokanātha again, he cried, no, please no.

So then a, a debate between the two ensued. And they were both good debaters. Ultimately, however, Nimāi Paṇḍita won with, uh, a winning argument. A winning argument. And what was the winning argument?

What did Nimāi Paṇḍita say to convince Lokanātha?

Nimāi Paṇḍita said, Lokanātha, a servant can be truly happy only when his master is happy. A servant can be truly happy only when his master is happy. And as soon as he heard that, Lokanātha said, then I will go.

So in two weeks, we will leave for China to help the many, many beautiful, surrendered devotees there execute the mission of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

But that doesn't make it any easier. Vṛndāvana Ṭhākura writes in the Nārada-pañcarātra, it's chapter 5, verse 61-62.

He's actually quoting Jīva Gosvāmī. "Icchāmayūr ṭhākur chala guśāmpur rūpe māya janāla." I want to stay in Mayapur forever. Caitanya says here, the miseries of material existence will be completely dispelled. But the next verse is very interesting. "Māyār adhina, ṭhākur ājñā, śarvera icchā hotay māra." The order of the Lord, however, is greater than the desire of his servant.

And my heart is palpitating at the thought of leaving Mayapur. Hari Krishna.

So we are continuing today with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part, part 55. In this lecture, um, we will continue our discussions on the famous Sāmakā Jūel. Actually, there are several versions of this pastime.

There's two in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, actually. We shared one earlier, but today I would like to share Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī's version from his book, his illustrious book, Lalita-Mādhava. Lalita-Mādhava is actually, uh, written in the the form of a drama. It's a drama.

And in Act Two, Scene Two, we hear, uh, Vṛndā Devī speaking to Paurṇamāsī. We spoke at length in one lecture a couple of years ago how Vṛndā Devī and Paurṇamāsī meet each morning at dawn to plan and or organize Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes for the day, for that particular day.

Each morning they meet. They choose the type of pastimes that will take place, where they will take place, uh, what time of the, uh, day the pastime will start and finish, who will participate, uh, what the mood will be.

Even small details, what type of flowers will be blooming, what animals, birds, butterflies will participate, what songs the birds will sing, what clouds will come, what color they will be, what the breezes will be like, like that. So one morning they met and started discussing, and Vṛndā Devī began by asking Paurṇamāsī why she looked so unhappy.

So Paurṇamāsī replied, "Udaya, the crest jewel of advisors, has just come from Mathurā City and told me the latest news that King Kaṁsa asked the demons Ariṣṭāsura and Keśī to go to Vrndāvana and see what was happening there." On that secret mission, which they partook of, the Keśī demon, um, happened to see Rādhā Rani and was mesmerized by her.

She was so beautiful and charming that he couldn't stop watching her. So when he and Ariṣṭāsura came back to Mathurā, Keśī reported to Kaṁsa, "Kaṁsa, you know, this boy Kṛṣṇa has a consort. He has a girlfriend." And then he began describing Rādhā Rani, and as he did so, Kaṁsa became spellbound.

And Lalita says, he shouted, "I must have her as my wife, as my queen." So then he said to Keśī and Ariṣṭāsura, "So, which one of you will go to Vrndāvana and kidnap this girl for me?" Come.

So, which one of you will go to Vrndāvana and kidnap this girl for me?

So both Keśī and Ariṣṭāsura, they were hesitant to reply, because they had both seen that there was something different about Rādhā Rani. She was very beautiful, but she also appeared to be very powerful, because they saw everyone was submissive to her, including Kṛṣṇa.

So neither of those demons, asuras, agreed to Kaṁsa's request. At this point, Kaṁsa became furious. If two of his best demons, best warriors, didn't agree to kidnap Rādhā Rani, what was he to do?

But then, suddenly, Saṅkha-cūḍa. Saṅkha-cūḍa, who had recently, uh, joined forces with Kaṁsa, spoke up. He was also in Mathurā. Saṅkha-cūḍa, he was very proud. And as he, he stepped forward, he said with confidence, "I will kidnap Rādhā. I will kidnap Rādhā." Now, before we continue, let me give a little history about this Saṅkha-cūḍa, which I found in Garga Samhitā.

Now, some devotees question the reliability of Garga Samhitā. I've heard that. But Garga Samhitā is, um, worthy of quotation, as we learn from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's, uh, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī's commentary on Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmrta 1, uh, verses 21 to 23. He writes, "The confidential science of pure devotional service is taught explicitly only in a few Vedic scriptures, little known to the public." Amongst these rare texts are the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad, the Nārada-pañcarātra, the Garga Samhitā, the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, the Hari Vaṁśa upapurāṇa, the Uttara of the Padma Purāṇa, and the Bhāgavata Mahāpurāṇa.

And Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu also refers to the Garga Samhitā in his Nārada-pañcarātra, where in he quotes it more than 20 times. I count it more than 20 times. For example, he writes in Chapter 3, Text 19, "māyā mayī śakti sandh vārṁ yaṁ kaṁ pāpaṁ nāsini." "Māyā-mayī is the Lord's yogamāyā potency.

It is filled with ever-increasing bliss." In the Garga Samhitā, it is described as the destroyer of all sins. So, Garga Samhitā shares the following story of Saṅkha-cūḍa. So, once upon a time, Saṅkha-cūḍa, who was at that time a servant of Kubera, the, the demigod of wealth, went to Mathurā and challenged Kaṁsa to a fight for whatever reason.

Now, we know that Kaṁsa, uh, was a very powerful person. But Garga Samhitā says that Saṅkha-cūḍa was puffed up with pride and undefeated in the skill of wielding a club. He had the special skill. He could wield a club.

Nevertheless, Kaṁsa agreed to the fight. So Garga Samhitā states that both of them had slain, uh, many heroes in the past. But when their fight, the two of them, uh, fought, neither Saṅkha-cūḍa nor Kaṁsa could, uh, could win. Could win, despite their best efforts.

So to resolve this dilemma, after some time, Garga Muni appeared and informed them that neither could actually kill the other, for they were both destined to die at the hands of Kṛṣṇa, and no one else. At Kṛṣṇa!

Now, hereupon hearing this, Kaṁsa and Saṅkha-cūḍa, uh, decided to join forces. So it was this Saṅkha-cūḍa who Kaṁsa sent to Vrndāvana to kidnap Śrī Rādhā. And so he left Mathurā, uh, with this evil intention and went to Vrndāvana. Now, the pastime evolves.

Lalita-Mādhava describes the pastime evolves. Shortly afterwards, after he left for Vrndāvana, the gopī named Kuṇḍalā came to see Paurṇamāsī with news of an interesting development. She said to Paurṇamāsī, "Paurṇamāsī, near Gaon Mālā's house, Gaon Mālā is a coward. Man, I just now saw the brilliantly shining Sun God.

I saw the Sun God. He was shining brilliantly." But Paurṇamāsī frowned and replied, "That couldn't be the Sun God. It can only be an asura sent by Kaṁsa. The news that Udaya brought to Vrndāvana has now come true." But Kuṇḍalā couldn't accept what Paurṇamāsī said.

She politely argued, "But mother Paurṇamāsī, the person I saw is so effulgent that the bright light emanating from him makes him difficult to see. Surely he can't be an asura." Then Paurṇamāsī said very slowly, "Kuṇḍalā, do not be fooled.

The bright light is not the natural effulgence of his body. It comes from a special jewel in his crown. It comes from a special jewel in his crown." Hearing this, uh, Kuṇḍalā inquired, "And where did he get this jewel?" So Paurṇamāsī replied, "He was the leader of the guards watching Kubera's treasury.

He liked that jewel, so he stole it. And that was the Sāmakā Jewel." And that's why he was so brilliant. Now, here the plot thickens even, even more. It was a, that day. It was a Sunday afternoon. And at this point in our pastime, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her friends were just finishing their worship of the Sun God, Sūrya Nārāyaṇa, at Sūrya Kunda in Vraj.

They had taken a short break, and Rādhārāṇī was, uh, sitting. It's described, uh, on a beautiful golden throne. When all of a sudden, this asura, Saṅkha-cūḍa, who Kuṇḍalā had seen near Gaon Mālā's home, and it was now hiding in the forest.

He sprang out from the bushes and grabbed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī by her hair and pulled her off that beautiful golden throne, and he dragged her away by her hair as all the gopīs started screaming, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, where are you?

Kṛṣṇa, help!" Then, then suddenly, very suddenly, Kṛṣṇa appeared and began chasing Saṅkha-cūḍa.

He was calling out, "Oh, rascal demon!

Offensive driyada!

I will soon catch you. But know that I will feel great pain, because I cannot spend eternity torturing you." That's really nice. But no, I will feel great pain because I cannot spend eternity torturing you. "The black knight of death he went on called, 'Kṛṣṇa now chases you soon to cover you with his limbs, but how will I torture you forever if you merely die?'" Raghunātha Gosvāmī writes so nicely.

So as Kṛṣṇa closed in on Saṅkha-cūḍa, the demon released Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and, um, moments later, he was captured by the Lord, who killed him with what?

His bare fists. And after this, Kṛṣṇa took the Sāmakā Jewel from the crown. Saṅkha-cūḍa. Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that with the demon dead and the famous jewel in Kṛṣṇa's hands, frightened, uh, Rādhārāṇī embraced the Lord, just as Baladeva, the coward boys, and the other gopīs arrived to congratulate Kṛṣṇa on his victory.

Then, it's described that after everyone had, uh, settled down, the gopīs all began, uh, staring, or you could say, gazing at this beautiful jewel, which was glowing like the sun in Kṛṣṇa's dark, raincloud hand. Kṛṣṇa had it in his hand, and each of them began wondering, "Will Kṛṣṇa give it to me?" The gopīs.

Kṛṣṇa's holding the jewel, and each of them began wondering, "Will Kṛṣṇa give it to me?" Now, when Kṛṣṇa understood the minds of the Braja gopīs, the milkmaids of Braja, he thought, "Surely I must give this Sāmakā Jñāna to my beloved Rādhā." But if I give it to her directly, the other gopīs will be jealous, and they may become upset with me.

They'll become upset with me, and then, without a doubt, quarrel will break out amongst them. So Kṛṣṇa looked at Baladeva and thought, "My brother knows everything. If I give the jewel to him, he can give it to Śrīmatī Rādhā.

He's everyone's superior, and so the gopīs will not find fault with him. They will not find fault with him." So, in the presence of all the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa offered the Sāmakā Jewel to Baladeva, who accepted it. And how's it described?

He tied it in a corner of his cloth. Now, Lord Baladeva knew that Kṛṣṇa wanted him to give the jewel to Rādhā, but he too, it's so cute, he was reluctant. Why?

For the same reason as Kṛṣṇa. He didn't want the gopīs to quarrel. He thought, "If I give the jewel to Śrīmatī Rādhā, my own group of gopīs will be upset that I didn't give it to one of them." He has his own group of gopīs.

So by the next morning, Baladeva had worked out a solution. Took a while. Complicated. Love is complicated. So by the next morning, Baladeva had worked out a solution. And that was when Madhumaṅgala came to, uh, Nandagram for breakfast, because the coward boys, they come to Nandagram each day to take breakfast with Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī writes, Baladeva happily placed the jewel in Madhumaṅgala's unsuspecting hand.

And Madhumaṅgala, being a prīya-narma-sakha, a special coward boy, a prīya-narma-sakha, they are confidential coward boys. They sometimes take messages between Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. You know, Kṛṣṇa sends a message to the gopīs, and the gopīs send the message back.

Sometimes they're carried by the prīya-narma-sakhas, confidential coward boys. So, uh, Madhumaṅgala, being a prīya-narma-sakha, had once understood the diplomacy behind the gift, which was that it was meant to be given to Śrīmatī Rādhā. So without hesitating, he said, loud enough for everyone to hear, "Of what use is this brilliant stone to me?

The only one worthy of it is she whose culinary talent draws the gods from their heavenly palaces, Śrī Rādhā." Draws the gods from their heavenly palaces, Śrī Rādhā. Now, at that very moment, Śrīmatī Rādhā, who was in the kitchen cooking breakfast for Kṛṣṇa, as she does every day, came out of the kitchen with a, how's it described, a steaming, uh, tray of rice.

So Madhu, Madhu, Madhumaṅgala at once took the tray from her hands and replaced it with the shining jewel, which itself was, it's described, vibrating the sacred syllable Om. The Sāmakā Jewel was vibrating the sacred syllable Om. So as Rādhā looked at the jewel, it's, this is really nice.

As Rādhā looked at the jewel, its effulgence grew in response to her touch. Its effulgence grew in response to her touch. And humbly bowing down before Madhumaṅgala, she handed the Sāmakā Jewel to a maidservant to keep for her for a moment, and continued serving breakfast to Kṛṣṇa, the coward boys.

The Caitanya says that no doubt it was a wise move on Baladeva's part, as none of the gopīs complained that Rādhā received the Sāmakā Jewel through a third party, not to mention a brāhmaṇa, meaning Madhumaṅgala. So in this way, uh, Kṛṣṇa achieved his purpose without upsetting anyone.

And the precious Sāmakā Jewel became the central gem in Śrīmatī Rādhā's necklace, a necklace her maidservants call the "Intimate Friend of Kṛṣṇa's Cūḍā Jewel." The intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa's Cūḍā Jewel. If someone asks you someday, "What is the Sāmakā Jewel?" You say, it's the intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa's Cūḍā Jewel.

Now, Raghunātha Gosvāmī has described very nicely the route, you could say, that the Sāmakā Jewel took with all, um, took, uh, as it changed hands between these different transcendental personalities. He described in verse 34 of his, of his Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, he prays to Śrīmatī Rādhā, "Oh beautiful-faced one, will I make the Sāmakā Jewel the central jewel in your necklace after the death of proud Saṅkha-cūḍa?

It was given by Baladeva to cheerful-hearted Madhumaṅgala, cheerful-hearted Madhu Maṅgala, and Madhu gave this jewel to you, and since then it has been the friend of the Cūḍā Jewel." Raghunātha Gosvāmī, the Caitanya Gosvāmīs go so far as to say that whenever Kṛṣṇa embraces Rādhārāṇī, the Sāmakā and Cūḍā gems also embrace.

Naturally, they have a close friendship, as do any devotees who share a common service to Kṛṣṇa. Wow. So we can finish today with a very short verse from, uh, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-Gaṇadeśa-Dīpikā. It's, uh, it's in Part Two, it's verse, uh, 201, describing this Sāmakā Jewel on Rādhā Rani's chest.

He writes, "Kṛṣṇa-prīti kar saṅga sanī." Short but sweet. "The pendant on her chest, Śrī Rādhā, contains a picture of Śrī Kṛṣṇa within it." Another name of Śrīmatī Rādhā Rani's Sāmakā Jewel is Saṅkha-cūḍa-śirāmaṇi. What a beautiful way to end this little series on the Sāmakā Jewel, Saṅkha-cūḍa-śirāmaṇi.

So thank you, prabhus. Um, I hope you enjoyed this little miniseries within a miniseries about this beautiful Sāmakā Jewel. And, um, yes, before we leave for China, we have, uh, another week, actually. Um, we'll look for another, um, item to, um, lecture on, stimulation for ecstatic love.

I really like this little series about the Sāmakā Jewel. So thank you all. See you next week. From Mayapur. Glories to the all healer of the Dawn. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Thank you.