

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back again to our lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Namo Viṣṇu-pādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale. So, devotees, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 96. Today we will continue speaking on the first of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities—namely, he is a performer of wonderful varieties of pastimes, especially his childhood pastimes.

Now, in Gopāla-campū, in the section—because there are different sections—first campū, pūrva-campū, our beloved Jīva Gosvāmī shares with us that Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes are mainly enjoyed by the elder gopīs in Vṛndāvana. I never thought of it like that. He writes in verse 142, and even explains more deeply, he writes: “Lord Kṛṣṇa’s birth and early childhood, which are mostly seen by the elders of Braja; Lord Kṛṣṇa’s boyhood victories over the demigods, which are mostly seen by his cowherd friends; Lord Kṛṣṇa’s great mercy to Kāliya and other demons, which are seen by the devoted people of Braja; and Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of love with his gopīs are all glorified in song.” He covers everyone.

Further on, he writes: “Fully aware of what those activities are, the worshipable people of Braja always perform activities that inflame their thirst for Kṛṣṇa.” I like that: “inflame their thirst for Kṛṣṇa.” As they come and go, busy about their business, their hearts yearn after Kṛṣṇa. I hope someday, Jīva Gosvāmī writes, I will love Kṛṣṇa as they do. Then he goes on to clarify that love by giving a warning not to try and understand it with logic and reasoning. He writes: “Although their love brings great happiness, their only motive is to please Lord Kṛṣṇa. As the Supreme Lord’s creation of the world is beyond human understanding, so the love felt by the people of Braja is also beyond human understanding.” He writes that love will not tolerate the logicians’ attempts to discuss or understand it.

Then he further clarifies the special love of the residents of Braja for Kṛṣṇa. He writes: “Is it Lord Kṛṣṇa who stands before us like spiritual love personified, or is it the people of Braja assembled together? Though they may try again and again, neither Brahmā, Śiva, Nārada, nor anyone else has the power to love as Kṛṣṇa and the people of Braja, because love is reciprocal.”

Then he goes on in Gopāla-campū to glorify the people of Braja. He writes: “The followers, friends, and associates of the gopa king Nanda and his wife Yaśodā, who is like his second half, are overcome with love for Kṛṣṇa because they are tightly tied to Kṛṣṇa with ropes of love. The splendor of Kṛṣṇa’s handsomeness has made Nanda and Yaśodā radiant like the sun and the moon, and their associates splendid like stars.”

Then he makes a very interesting statement: that there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa’s happy pastimes and his sad pastimes. He writes: “Anyone who thinks that some of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are happy pastimes and other pastimes are sad pastimes is bewildered.” He writes, “How can anyone say that about Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and mādhurya? Can anyone separate milk and water when they are stirred together?” Then he concludes: even a person with a peaceful heart will feel that heart tremble when he reads these two following verses. They are very short but very sweet, and here they are: “Kṛṣṇa cries out, ‘Mother, Mother, give it to me, please give it to me.’ The mother, Yaśodā, replies, ‘Oh my child, my calf, my boy who will live a long life, my boy more dear than life to me, for what do you ask?’”

And with that, Jīva Gosvāmī writes: “When will affectionate words like these make me remember Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and their mothers in Braja?” Short but sweet exchanges are full of divine love; in Braja, love reigns supreme in Vṛndāvana.

Finally, in Gopāla-campū, Jīva Gosvāmī quotes Nanda Mahārāja. Nanda Mahārāja is speaking to Mother Yaśodā: “Oh queen of my house, you must have performed many pious deeds in past lives that now your glorious son Kṛṣṇa talks to you, eats in your presence, asks you for things, smiles, laughs, and is so charming.” Then he says, when speaking of himself, “When thinking of these affectionate words whispered by Braja’s king Nanda, will my heart be bewildered with love?”

So, in Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes are known as ānanda-sāgaram, meaning an ocean of bliss. And this ocean of bliss inundated Vṛndāvana when Kṛṣṇa took birth and appeared in the home of Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā. So the great poet Sūradāsa describes this pastime—Kṛṣṇa’s initial appearance in the home of Nanda and Yaśodā—in his first-ever poem. The first poem he ever wrote, which he spoke or maybe sung in front of his spiritual master Vallabhācārya at Mathurā, the poem he recited is called Braja-bhāṣā-mahā-kāvya, and it’s very beautiful. He writes—a little long, but thankfully so—he writes:

“The hall of Braja was shaking in bliss. The planets started rotating in the most auspicious ways, and the brāhmaṇas started chanting Vedic hymns. Hearing such news of Kṛṣṇa’s birth, countless gopīs started running towards the doorsteps of Nanda Mahārāja. Those gopīs were heavily decorated like a parade of Lord Indra happening in Braja. Their breasts were bound by silk colīs or blouses, their hair parts were decorated with vibrant vermilion, they were all draped in new sarīs, and their eyes were contoured with collyrium. Their foreheads were decorated with bright bindīs, and their hands were occupied with big plates or dishes containing auspicious items. The gopīs left their houses and ran to Nandīśvara Hill like caged birds freed after ages of captivity. Their lotus faces were charming like lotus buds blossoming in the morning sun. They were running in every direction, which caused them to perspire heavily, their braids to loosen, and their flower decorations to fall on the ground of Braja as if flowers were raining down from their dark storm-cloud braids.”

When they reached Mother Yaśodā’s chamber where, all-attracted, baby Kṛṣṇa was sleeping in Mother Yaśodā’s lap, the gopīs fell at the lotus feet of Mother Yaśodā, appreciating their good fortune. Then they all started giving Mother Yaśodā overwhelming good wishes. Hearing the news, even the gopas, the cowherd boys, started decorating themselves. They put on gāja-mālās, grinding the minerals of Govardhana Hill; they marked each other’s body with auspicious signs and patterns. The cows sensed the excitement and ran maddened with ecstasy. Many vrajavāsīs came bringing pots with yogurt and butter; many played mṛdaṅgas and jhañjhas, and many sang the songs of joy. Mahārāja Nanda put tilaka on the brāhmaṇas and gave them cows whose horns were covered with golden covers. Mother Rohiṇī gave golden ornaments to all the brides of Braja. Mother Yaśodā, with a flood of tears flowing from her eyes, joined her palms to the demigods. The family members of Kṛṣṇa worshiped the Yamunā by pouring in endless milk streams that caused dark Yamunā to turn into a bright milky river. The warriors in Mahārāja Nanda’s army showcased their skills in the courtyard while the servants accompanied their weapon performance with playing big drums. Witnessing the unbeatable beauty of the child, everyone became overwhelmed and started embracing each other.

Now, at this point, it’s described—because remember, he’s reading this to his spiritual master Vallabhācārya—this was his first poem ever; it’s described at this point Sūradāsa’s voice choked up with ecstasy, and he was unable to complete the poem. So Vallabhācārya, who was his guru, completed it by singing the final stanza.

From that day on, the residents of Braja were never lacking pleasure, luxury, or satisfaction. Hearing this from Sūradāsa, one can develop the love of one who serves the lotus feet of Lord Hari. What a beautiful conclusion—guru and disciple joining together to glorify the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes.

Now, it’s so wonderful that the poet Paramānanda Dāsa describes what happened the next day. We have, by their mercy, an insight into all these wonderful spiritual activities. What happened the next day? He writes: “The next day, all the brāhmaṇas, including the sages Garga, Śāṇḍilya, Uddhava, and Agastya, came to give their blessings to mother and son. Together they said, ‘Oh Queen Yaśodā, your fortune brings the fruit of dharma. How is it that he who is the greatest opulence, who sleeps on the waters of the milk ocean, who is endless and infinite, stayed in your small belly? To whom demigods pray, to whom Brahmā awakened with hymns, upon whom sages meditate, that same Nārāyaṇa is now playing on your lap.’” Paramānanda says, “Hearing these words from the sages, Mahārāja Nanda danced blissfully in his heart, hearing the glories of his new child.” So much nectar.

Now, about all these amazing, sweet childhood pastimes, the poet Śrī Harirāma Ratna says—and we find this in Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Padyāvalī—”One who daily sings the glories of Yaśodā’s son, glories as cooling as sandalwood and camphor, is never troubled by Kali-yuga; rather, at every step, he finds a torrential flood of the sweetest nectar.” I’d like to recite that again: “One who daily sings the glories of Yaśodā’s son, glories as cooling as sandalwood and camphor, is never troubled by Kali-yuga; rather, at every step, he finds a torrential flood of the sweetest nectar.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Now, I’d like to summarize what I read this last week. I was reading that, remember, in their infancy, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were clothed, it’s described, only by the ten directions. It’s described that bells and anklets were their only ornaments. But as they grew older, their mothers wanted to dress them like princes. So Mother Yaśodā would tie a soft golden dhoti around Kṛṣṇa’s waist, she would hang costly necklaces on his chest, and place earrings in his ears. But as soon as she finished, Kṛṣṇa would undo all her hard work. He would forcefully remove his ornaments, sometimes crying—I was reading—when a ring or bangle would not come off. And finally, he would pull off his dhoti, keeping only a peacock feather like a crown on his head. That’s all. But Mother Yaśodā was just as persistent. She would say to Kṛṣṇa, “The son of a king cannot be seen parading around naked forever,” and so she would dress and ornament Kṛṣṇa again. But then, again, he’d take everything off. But gradually, Yaśodā’s perseverance won over and Kṛṣṇa had to submit to her will.

I was also reading that when the elder women, the older gopīs, flattered Kṛṣṇa—like praising his handsome looks—he would strut around like a peacock. Now, as it’s described, Kṛṣṇa was very possessive of his toys and belongings, and if anyone, desiring to tease him, took away even his most insignificant toy, he would fly into a tantrum until it was returned. But whenever he took one of Balarāma’s toys, he would just laugh and refuse to return it; and if that was taken away from him, he would pout for some time and then scheme how to steal it from Balarāma again.

Often, to distract his roving eyes from the world around him, the cowherd women would say, “Oh son of Nanda, let’s perform Āratī. To keep time in our singing, please accompany us by dancing. Now, Lālā, dance, dance.” And at this, Kṛṣṇa would clap his small hands and recite mantras like “taka taka,” moving his feet and body in time to the gopīs’ singing. These pastimes left everyone enchanted. I was reading that once the gopīs thought, “How does this little child know dance steps that are a mystery even to Lord Śiva?” And somebody answered, “He learned by watching us dance during our festivals.” Little did they know! Everyone admitted that this was the most logical explanation, but they also wondered—it’s interesting—whether it could be true. After all, they were thinking he danced with such expertise, so how could he just be imitating?

Just as his audience—you, gopīs, etc.—were thinking like this, Kṛṣṇa would stumble and fall. Then he would get up and run to the safety of his mother’s lap, hide himself under her veil and dress, and drink her breast milk contentedly. But seeing Kṛṣṇa at the center of attention made Balarāma a little jealous and frustrated, so he would also run to the shelter of his mother’s arms and drink her breast milk. And it’s described in this way, the two brothers would fall asleep.

So dear friends, dear devotees, let us finish today with, appropriately, a verse from Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Padyāvalī, short and sweet but we can repeat it forever: “With infant Kṛṣṇa charmingly decorated with a large peacock feather on his head, wriggling his lotus toes, his lotus mouth placed on his mother’s breast, enter the pathway of my eyes.” Hare Kṛṣṇa. Oh, glory to Braja, the revealer of the divine. So thank you. We have more childhood līlā next week; we are still on the first of those four qualities, but again, thankfully so. So I’ll see you next Friday. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Jai, glories to Kṛṣṇa.
