

Hari Kṛṣṇa everyone, and a warm welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. Nama oṁ viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we’re continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 98. We’re still speaking on the first of the four of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities that distinguish Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa, namely that He is the performer of wonderful pastimes, especially His childhood pastimes, Bālya-līlā. I was thinking that regular hearing of such pastimes is really essential for our progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and Śrīla Prabhupāda made this very clear. In the beginning of our movement, in Kṛṣṇa book, chapter 90, he wrote: “The transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, are so powerful that simply by hearing, reading, and memorizing this book, Kṛṣṇa, one is sure to be transferred to the spiritual world, which is ordinarily very difficult to achieve.” He continues: “The description of the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa are so attractive that automatically they give us an impetus to study repeatedly, and the more we study the pastimes of the Lord, the more we become attached to Him. This very attachment to Kṛṣṇa makes one eligible to be transferred to His abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana.” All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

And this refers actually to all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; they are all equally potent and purifying. Of course, someone may think that Kṛṣṇa’s teenage pastimes might be more potent or more powerful than His pastimes as an infant, but no. In the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, 3.7.124, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says very clearly: “Thus Kṛṣṇa displayed His supreme powers even in His childhood pastimes. In these pastimes, Kṛṣṇa demonstrates the greatness of the Supreme Being even more convincingly than in God’s typical activities like creation. In these childhood pastimes, Kṛṣṇa shows His power to enchant the entire world with His sweetness.” And we will be discussing these pastimes very soon, all of us in our different temples around the world, because Kārttika is coming, the month of Dāmodara. So, we should immerse ourselves in hearing and chanting, especially now, these childhood pastimes of Kṛṣṇa.

I was reading in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, volume 4, it’s the 15th Vilāsa, verse 537. Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, while discussing how we should observe Janmāṣṭamī, he writes: “Thereafter, Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving ceremony should be performed, and His childhood pastimes should be joyfully narrated on Janmāṣṭamī.” Then he writes: “The spiritual master should be invited and requested to speak about Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes. There should be singing, dancing, and the playing of musical instruments; in this way, through the entire night, one should proceed.” And Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary, 10.6.44, he writes as follows: “Any person who hears with faith and devotion about how Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, killed Pūtanā, and who thus invests his hearing in such childhood pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, certainly attains attachment for Govinda, the Supreme Original Person.”

Now, as we explained in our last lecture, Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes were mainly enjoyed by the elder gopīs of Vṛndāvana—elder doesn’t necessarily mean someone in their 80s or 90s, but mothers who are in their 20s and 30s. So, Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes were mainly enjoyed by the older gopīs of Vṛndāvana, beginning with, of course, Mother Yaśodā. Without a doubt, she alone exemplifies the mood of vātsalya-rasa, loving Kṛṣṇa as a small child. There is a famous verse, Bhāgavatam 10.9.20, very famous: “Neither Lord Brahmā, nor Lord Śiva, nor even the Goddess of Fortune, who is always the better half of the Supreme Lord, can obtain from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the deliverer from this material world, such mercy as is received by Mother Yaśodā.” But at the same time, all the older gopīs were in this mood of vātsalya-rasa, loving Kṛṣṇa in motherhood, and thus they all participated in Kṛṣṇa’s early childhood pastimes during which, acting as an ordinary child, Kṛṣṇa was often naughty. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes as such in Padyāvalī, verse 143—you got the essence here—he writes: “Awakened at daybreak by the sounds of yogurt churning, with silent steps, child Kṛṣṇa stealthily entered the gopīs’ homes, extinguished the lamps with His lotus breath, and stole a handful of butter. I pray child Kṛṣṇa may protect me.”

So, as a result of Kṛṣṇa’s naughty pastimes, transcendentally naughty pastimes of stealing butter—as we all know because we’ve heard these pastimes many times, and we should hear them many more times—these elder gopīs would regularly complain to Mother Yaśodā. Now, Garga-saṁhitā, Canto 1, Chapter 17, discusses this in detail. It says that one day, Upananda’s wife, Pārvatī—Upananda is actually the elder brother of Nanda Mahārāja—she came to make a complaint to Mother Yaśodā. She said, “Oh Devī, we are so close to one another that we see no difference between each other’s possessions. My stock of butter, ghee, milk, and yogurt is yours, and I take it that yours is mine. Nevertheless, your son, to learn right from wrong, must also learn how to discriminate between his house and that of others. In one way or another, this boy has become a thief, and when I try to correct him, he talks back to me and runs away. He comes to my house to steal butter, I try to talk to him, and he just runs away. As his mother, it is your duty to teach him to respect other people’s property. He is, after all, the son of Vraja’s King. If he steals, all the boys of his age will also follow his bad example. Even now, they accompany him wherever he goes and join in his mischief. Please, Māya, do something.” And she appealed to Mother Yaśodā.

So, in response, Yaśodā said, “I cannot—I just can’t understand. My warehouse is overflowing with butter; still, my son rarely eats butter or yogurt here in my house. Now I understand why he is eating in the homes of others. Oh honorable one, next time my Kṛṣṇa steals from your home, catch him! Catch him, bring him here to me with butter still on his chubby face, and I will teach him a lesson he won’t forget. In the meantime, please forgive his offenses and let there be no ill will between us and our families.”

So, Pārvatī Devī, it’s described, delighted to hear Mother Yaśodā’s words of reassurance, went home in a happy mood where she eagerly awaited for Kṛṣṇa to set foot in her house again so she could catch him. It’s all līlā. And it wasn’t long before Kṛṣṇa had finished his rounds in Gokula’s storehouses—you know, his rounds of going to all these different houses—and Upananda’s home was next in line to serve as the ācāryas say, how did they put it? “The arena for the cowherd boys’ daily sacrifices to the Supreme Lord.” In that sacrifice, they say Upananda’s butter would be the oblation, Kṛṣṇa the head priest, the cowherd boys’ mouths the sacrificial fire, and the village monkeys the beneficiaries of the gopas’ charity. So beautifully put.

So then, quietly, stealthily—actually the word used is stealthily—making their way from one grove of trees to another, Kṛṣṇa and His friends scaled the outer wall of Upananda’s house, quietly dropped into the inner courtyard, and ran to the storeroom where all the milk products were stored. But it’s described at that point the boys were surprised and disappointed when they saw that all the milk and the butter and the yogurt were suspended from the ceiling out of their reach. But when some of the gopas turned to leave—well, we can’t get it, so they turned to leave—Kṛṣṇa whispered, “Stay! Stay!” And he quickly constructed, could you say, a makeshift platform by piling together a crate, a footstool, and a grinding mortar—if my memory serves me right, a crate, a footstool, and a grinding mortar—a kind of wobbly platform. But anyway, when he climbed up on top of it with the help of his friends, the milk products were still too far away. But just as Kṛṣṇa was about to give up and climb down, Subala handed him a stick. So, Kṛṣṇa used the stick to poke the clay pot until it broke, spilling the freshly churned butter all over himself and onto the floor. And scooping up the nectar, this nectar, amṛta, the boys and their well, monkey friends—they’re accompanied by their monkey friends—greedily stuffed it into their mouths while, how’s it described? Softly giggling to themselves and complimenting Kṛṣṇa for His cleverness. “Oh Kṛṣṇa, you are so clever.”

But the plot thickens. Then suddenly, Pārvatī-māī arrived, and seeing her in the doorway also with a stick in hand, one boy shouted, “Quick, run, we’re all caught!” And all the boys started running around the storeroom, as described, in a panic, you know, here, there, everywhere. How do we get out? Some even ran right past Pārvatī and her menacing stick. But unfortunately, Kṛṣṇa couldn’t get past his aunt, because she’s Kṛṣṇa’s aunt. And by Yoga-māyā’s design, despite His superior agility, Pārvatī was able—or allowed—to catch Kṛṣṇa and hold on to his wrist while he was wriggling and trying to get away, calling for help. Abandoned by his friends, he was held captive by his determined aunt. And as a result, he shed—it’s described—false tears, like crocodile tears, that ācāryas say fill the trail he made by dragging his feet as Pārvatī pushed and pulled him back to Nanda Mahārāja’s palace. By the time the two of them arrived at Nanda-grāma, Kṛṣṇa was really scared. Remember, Mother Yaśodā said, “Bring him here, Pārvatī, you catch him if you can; catch him, bring him here.” So, by this time, Kṛṣṇa was really scared. He thought, “Mother will be angry and punish me with the stick.”

So the plot thickens even more. Śrīla, he used the edge of Pārvatī’s… sorry, to cover his head in shame. But as soon as clever Kṛṣṇa heard his mother’s voice, he manifested a portion of his mystic potency—that’s how it’s described, he manifested a portion of his mystic potency; he’s the master of all mystics—and transformed himself into Pārvatī’s son, whose name was Kaṇva. He just did a switch, you know, changed himself, quote-unquote, into Pārvatī’s son, Kaṇva, while keeping his head covered by her garment. So, approaching Mother Yaśodā, Pārvatī, who didn’t know what was going on, said, “Mother Yaśodā, this rascal son of yours again broke into my house, shattered a pot of butter, and ate the contents with his friends and all those monkeys!”

So, ashamed of her daughter-in-law’s son, Yaśodā Devī replied, “Dearest Pārvatī, remove your garment from his face. I have every intention to banish this mischievous boy from my house forever.” Strong words! But when Pārvatī removed the cloth from Kṛṣṇa’s face, she was shocked to see her own son, Kaṇva, standing by her side, like, “Whoa, what happened?” So, at this point, Yaśodā just laughed, wondering what this drama could be all about. She’s supposed to bring, you know, my son, but this is her son. So, Pārvatī, she had no explanation for a moment; it’s described she just stood there speechless as Mother Yaśodā said, “Devī, this is not my son but yours. Why have you unjustly accused my boy and played this trick on me?”

So, confused, Pārvatī pulled her quote-unquote son’s arms, and shaking him, she said, “My dear son, how did you change places with the son of Vraja’s Queen? And why? Tell me, or I will punish you!” But Kaṇva, quote-unquote, just looked silently at the ground, as if humiliated by his mother’s conduct. So, having no other recourse, Pārvatī left Nanda Mahārāja’s palace, bewildered, towing her son along with her. After she and her son Kaṇva had departed, it’s described Yaśodā, Rohiṇī, Nanda Mahārāja, and Balarāma, they all started laughing, saying, “This attempt to besmear the good name of Kṛṣṇa was foiled by His own purity.”

Meanwhile, on the way back to Upananda’s house, Kṛṣṇa—how could you say—he abandoned his disguise as Kaṇva, and he suddenly appeared like that to Pārvatī in His original transcendental form. So, seeing Kṛṣṇa before her, Pārvatī let go of his hand in amazement. Then it’s described that Kṛṣṇa—the word used is “wagged,” he wagged his forefinger at her—and he said, “Auntie, if you try to take me to my mother again instead of taking on the form of your son, I will take on the form of your good husband, and you will be discredited as the mad woman of Gokula. I’ll take on the form of your husband, and you will be discredited as the mad woman of Gokula.”

So, wide-eyed and speechless, Pārvatī wondered, “What kind of mystic power does this little boy have, and where has it come from?” And fearing that he could make good on his threat, from that point on, she stopped trying to catch him whenever he came to her house to steal butter. They just stood by, and gradually the word spread throughout Vṛndāvana: if Kṛṣṇa was ever caught stealing butter, be aware that he would use magic to escape punishment by embarrassing anyone who tried to bring him to justice. So, it was already known that he had killed, you know, powerful demons; thus, out of fear of being humiliated, all these elderly gopīs stopped trying to catch him in his butter-stealing pastimes. Thus, having instilled this fear into the hearts of the elderly gopīs, Kṛṣṇa and his cowherd friends, it is described, started to steal butter, milk, and yogurt with impunity. With impunity! So, in these and other ways, Kṛṣṇa spent his childhood in Gokula, it is described, in great happiness. Hari Kṛṣṇa!

So, let us conclude today with a final verse from our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī again, from his Padyāvalī; it’s verse 14, short but sweet. He writes: “Seeing a pot of butter in the distance, baby Keśava quickly crawled there, anxiously turning His face out of fear of His mother. I worship these childhood pastimes of the Lord.” As do we, following in your footsteps, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Hari Kṛṣṇa! So, that’s the end today, helping you prepare for the upcoming month of Kārttika. We’ll continue next week in our discussions of these four transcendental qualities of Kṛṣṇa that distinguish Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa. Thank you, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda! Hari Kṛṣṇa!
