""Hari Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved *śyāma-viśva-kṛṣṇa-pāda-namah*. We are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation of ecstatic love, and this will be Part 102. As most of you know, for the past two months, we have been discussing the four transcendental qualities that distinguish Lord Kṛṣṇa from His expansion, Lord Nārāyaṇa. 

To provide a short overview: so far, we have discovered, according to Rūpa Gosvāmī, *līlā-mādhurī*, which means that Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of astonishing pastimes, out of which *rāsa-līlā* is supremely captivating. Number two: *prema-mādhurī*—Kṛṣṇa is surrounded by devotees who possess incomparable *prema*, which develops up to the stage of *mahābhāva*. Number three: we discussed *veṇu-mādhurī*, the sweet and mellow sound of His flute, which attracts the minds of everyone within the three worlds. You may remember that last class we also discussed how Kṛṣṇa’s flute playing melts the hearts of everyone in the spiritual world. 

So today, we will cover the last and final quality: *rūpa-mādhurī*. *Rūpa-mādhurī* is what Rūpa Gosvāmī translates as Kṛṣṇa’s extraordinary beauty—how it astonishes all moving and non-moving entities. I was thinking this morning that we are very fortunate that we have pure devotees in our disciplic succession who know Kṛṣṇa and have seen Kṛṣṇa and can reveal and explain in detail this extraordinary beauty that Rūpa Gosvāmī is discussing. Such beauty of the Lord can actually only be described by pure devotees. Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, whom we have quoted a number of times, was a renowned disciple of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī; he wrote *Rādhā-prakṛti-gadādhara*. He translates: "How can anyone explain Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited beauty with the limited knowledge of their minds?" Quite simple and profound. 

In the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (10.14.7), Lord Brahmā alludes to the same. He says, "My dear Lord, the inconceivable qualities, beauties, and activities which You have revealed by Your presence on this planet cannot be calculated by any material measurement. If one even tries to imagine that Kṛṣṇa may be like this, that is also impossible." It goes on: the day may come when the material scientist, after many, many births or after many, many years, will be able to estimate the atomic constitution of the whole world, or he may be able to count the atomic fragments that permeate the sky, or he may even give an estimate of all the atoms within the universe; but still, he will never be able to count the transcendental qualities in Your reservoir of transcendental bliss. 

The same Lord Brahmā, after being blessed with that original *darśana* of the Lord Himself, shared that vision because he is the head of our *guru-paramparā*—he is the original guru in one sense. So, he shared that vision out of his kindness with us in his *Brahma-saṃhitā* (5.38): *premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena*. In that famous verse, he said, "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa Himself, with inconceivable attributes, whom the pure devotees see in their heart of hearts with the eye of devotion tinged with the salve of love." It is very poetic, but he is explaining to us how pure devotees see Kṛṣṇa in their hearts with devotion tinged with the salve of love. It is very beautiful. 

So, only pure devotees can see and reveal the beauty of Kṛṣṇa, and this has been made very clear in the 11th chapter, verse 8, of the *Bhagavad-gītā*, where Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna: *na tu māṃ śakyase draṣṭum anenaiva sva-cakṣuṣā | divyaṃ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ paśya me yogam aiśvaram ||*. Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna, "But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore, I give you divine eyes by which you can behold My mystic opulence." It is all based on *kṛpā* (mercy). I was reading in *The Harmonist* the other day that one time Śakti Śrī Siddhānta Sarasvatī said that one cannot perceive the actual blue color of Kṛṣṇa while he is in this material world, for that color of blue exists only in the spiritual world. There is an infinite amount of colors in the spiritual world, and in the spiritual world, it can be seen by the residents there because of their pure hearts, because of their *bhakti*, their devotion. 

So again, we are grateful for pure devotees who, down through the ages, wrote and sang about *rūpa-mādhurī*—Kṛṣṇa’s extraordinary beauty that can astonish all moving and non-moving entities. Now, one such devotee was Bhaṭṭa-dāra. Bhaṭṭa-dāra was a pure devotee from Orissa who wrote one time, just to give us a deeper understanding: "Oh maiden of Braja, look at that dark, handsome boy decorated with the dust of Vraja. His beauty is matchless. His beauty is the *vidyut*—the current in Sarasvatī’s vīṇā. His beauty is like the dancing of Naṭarāja Śiva. His beauty is like the sounds of the dancing anklets of Rambhā who fell from Svarga. His beauty is like the sun and the moon meeting in one place." Bhaṭṭa-dāra praises Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, from which all other beauty has appeared. So again, through the eyes of a pure devotee, we can appreciate in detail what is Kṛṣṇa’s beauty. 

In that author's work, we hear him comparing Kṛṣṇa’s beauty to various beautiful things in this world to give us an idea, but as you know, many scholars say that although we sometimes compare Kṛṣṇa’s beauty to such things, nothing can actually equal the original beauty of the Lord. We are just trying to make a comparison, but nothing compares to Kṛṣṇa’s beauty. Another interesting point here is that, what to speak of the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s form, even His shadow or His reflection is all-attractive. How do we know? In Chapter 22 of *Nectar of Devotion*, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes: In *Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta*, it is said, "One day Kṛṣṇa happened to see the shadow of His beautiful form reflected on the jeweled foreground. Upon seeing this bodily reflection, He expressed His feelings: 'How wonderful it is that I have seen such a beautiful form! Although it is My own form, still, like Rādhā and Rohiṇī, I am trying to embrace this form and enjoy celestial bliss.'" He sees His own form and is so attracted He wants to embrace it. And Śrīla Prabhupāda comments therein: he writes, "This statement shows how Kṛṣṇa and His shadow reflection are one and the same. There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa and His shadow reflection, nor between Kṛṣṇa and His picture—that is the transcendental position of Kṛṣṇa." So, even if devotees may not have a deity in their home, if they have a picture or a painting, according to Prabhupāda’s commentary in *Nectar of Devotion*, it is Kṛṣṇa. 

So, Kṛṣṇa’s *rūpa-mādhurī*, which we are discussing, is His extraordinary beauty that astonishes all moving and non-moving entities. Our ācāryas have revealed this to us because, well, we all hanker to see and enjoy beautiful things; but without knowing Kṛṣṇa, the epitome of beauty, we foolishly chase after the beauty that we see in this material world. In this world, we certainly see beauty in nature, objects, and people; however, we must remember material nature has its ugly side as well. This is a world of duality. Objects become less attractive with repeated viewing; it is true, and people lose their physical beauty with age. Śrīla Prabhupāda alludes to this in his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.11.25, and he writes, "The law of satiation acts materially, but there is no scope for it in the spiritual realm." Thank God, thank Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, we must look towards the spiritual world to satisfy this desire to see something beautiful. 

Thus, the *Ṛgveda* (2.2.0) says—one of my favorite verses—"Just as the sun rays in the skies are extended to the mundane vision, so in the same way, the wise and learned devotees always see the Supreme Abode of Lord Viṣṇu." Because those highly praiseworthy and spiritually awake brāhmaṇas are able to see the spiritual world, they are also able to reveal the Supreme Abode of Lord Viṣṇu. Again, we see it through the eyes of pure devotees. I was thinking that the passage of time can never deteriorate the beauty of that spiritual realm, primarily because time has no influence there. Therefore, no one is ever satiated while looking at Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world, or while looking at Kṛṣṇa in the material world, and even while looking at Kṛṣṇa in a picture, a photo, or the deity; He is absolute. 

*Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11.11.25 says, for example—I read this verse the other day—"The inhabitants of Dvārakā were regularly accustomed to look upon the reservoir of all beauty, the infallible Lord, yet they were never satiated." Therefore, Śrīla Prabhupāda concludes in his purport of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11.11.26: "And those who are artists overtaken by the beautiful creation should better see to the beautiful face of the Lord for complete satisfaction. The face of the Lord is the embodiment of all beauty. What they call beautiful nature is but His smile, and what they call the sweet songs of the birds are but specimens of the whispering voice of the Lord—the poet." So again, *rūpa-mādhurī*—His extraordinary beauty astonishes all moving and non-moving entities. 

Now, a little technicality here: the word *rūpa* refers to the Lord’s original form, His original form, and this is indicated in the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.44.14: *gopyas tapaḥ kim acaran yad amuṣya rūpaṃ lāvanya-sāram asamordhvam ananya-siddham*. Sanskrit is so beautiful! "What austerities must the gopīs have performed with their eyes! They always drink the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s form, which is the essence of loveliness, which is not to be equaled or surpassed, and which is *ananya-siddham*." This is the point I am making: "and which is *ananya-siddham*—not formed by taking help of any other form." An indirect way of saying that Kṛṣṇa’s form is the original form. That form is not formed by taking the help of any other form. The form that the gopīs meditate on—and that verse shows that Kṛṣṇa’s *rūpa*, His original form, and all other forms are derived from that one form. In this regard, I was reading *Padāvalī*, verse 82, which quotes—actually, it is also found in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 19.106—there it is stated: *rūpa-śreṣṭha*, Rūpa says, "The form of Śyāmasundara is the Supreme form." So we are just making the point from different angles: the form of Śyāmasundara is the Supreme form. And this is the form that Rūpa Gosvāmī is mentioning in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. 

And Prabhupāda’s *Nectar of Devotion* further notes, in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.29, verse 40, it says this original form of Kṛṣṇa creates what waves of ecstasy in various living entities like the gopīs who said, "Kṛṣṇa, Your beauty makes all three worlds auspicious. Indeed, even the cows, birds, trees, and deer manifest the ecstatic symptoms of bodily hair standing on end when they see Your beautiful form." As Śyāmasundara, the original form from which all the avatāras are coming, Kṛṣṇa’s avatāra possesses the full beauty of Godhead. 

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.44.14, the devout ladies of Mathurā also speak lovingly of Kṛṣṇa’s beauty as they saw Him entering into the city of Mathurā. At that time, I was reading, He was 10 years and 7 months old—I thought He was always older, but I read He was 10 years and 7 months entering into Mathurā—but very beautiful. They described His beauty in six ways. They said, you know, standing on the ramparts of the buildings or looking out the windows, "What austerities must the Vraja-gopīs have performed with their eyes! They always drink the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s form, which is the essence of loveliness and is not to be equaled or surpassed." That form is the only abode of beauty, fame, and opulence. It is self-perfect, ever-fresh, and extremely rare. I like that term: "it is self-perfect, it is self-perfect, ever-fresh, and extremely rare." How fortunate we are! 

So what exactly are the six ways they describe Kṛṣṇa’s beauty? I didn't quote the Sanskrit because it was quite long, but they said it is the essence of all loveliness, it is unequal or unsurpassed, again it is self-perfect, and it is ever-fresh, and *durlabha*—it is difficult to attain—we are hoping against hope—it is difficult to attain, and it is the only abode of beauty, fame, and opulence. *Jai Śrī Kṛṣṇa.* 

So, it is no wonder then that devotee poets meditate deeply and write extensively on Kṛṣṇa’s form in order to attain perfection of life. In again Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *Padāvalī*, verse 46, the poet Śrī Śarad-dhara Śarat-dhakka, he gives a beautiful meditation; I really liked it. He wrote: "I worship Lord Govinda, whose complexion is the color of a blooming blue lotus flower, whose face is like the moon, who is fond of wearing a peacock-feather crown, who bears the mark of Śrīvatsa on His chest, who wears a great Kaustubha gem, who is dressed in yellow garments, whose handsome form is worshiped with offerings of the lotus flowers that are the gopīs’ glances, who is accompanied by a host of Surabhi cows and gopas, who is fond of sweetly playing the flute, and whose transcendental body is decorated with glittering ornaments." Not just ornaments, but glittering ornaments; I like that "glittering." 

So we can conclude very easily: by the mercy of these ācāryas—again, we only see through their words, through their hearts—Kṛṣṇa’s form is the sweetest of all. And to fully appreciate it—now, to fully appreciate it, I am stressing to fully appreciate it—let’s see it through the eyes of Kṛṣṇa’s greatest devotee, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The great poet Ṭhākura Śrīla Vidyāpati quotes her. This is Rādhā speaking: "Dear sakhī, do you know what I saw? It was remarkable. When you hear it, you will feel, 'I must have seen a dream.' It is so unreal. I saw a pair of lotuses wearing a garland of moons. Upon them stood a young Tamāla tree with golden creepers entwining it. This combination was strolling along the banks of the Yamunā River. A moon arose on top of the tree with two newly sprouting leaves that were pink like the dawn. A couple of bimba fruits had manifested on that moon, and a parrot was perching motionless on them. It was topped with a pair of restless *kuñja* birds, covered with a cluster of *sarpenṭes*—which means *sarpenṭes* means like female snakes—and crowned with a peacock." That is how she sees Kṛṣṇa. At one time, we can appreciate the beauty through her eyes. 

Now, there is a wonderful pastime to illustrate just how Kṛṣṇa’s beauty is supreme. One time Cupid—we say in French, *Cupid*—one time Cupid, the celestial deity of love, who is also known as Kāmadeva, was roaming around the creation doing what he does. We all know: shooting arrows of lust into the hearts of all living beings. He has that, you could say, thankless task, and his arrows bound everyone; no one escapes, from the highest demigod down to the smallest creature. He was shooting them into a—for want of a better phrase—a web of lusty material desires. And having fulfilled his duty to inflict every being with material desires, he grew bored. Seeing this, several demigods told him that there was, in fact, a person presently on the earth planet who had never been influenced by lust, never, ever had experienced lust. Cupid was shocked. And when he asked the devas who this person was, they replied that his name was Kṛṣṇa. 

And at that moment, Kṛṣṇa was enjoying a dance with young girls in a place called Vṛndāvana. So at first, Cupid, he couldn't believe the demigods. He thought, "How is it possible that someone in the prime of youth can dance with beautiful young girls and still be untouched by lust?" We can understand. So, determined to prove that Kṛṣṇa was susceptible to his powers—Cupid, who is very powerful, he influences everyone—armed with his bow and arrows, and it is also described very nicely, accompanied by spring, a soft breeze, his cuckoo bird, and humming bees, he quickly made his way to Vṛndāvana—Vṛndāvana, the playground of God. And he entered specifically the forest of Nikuñja, where he saw Kṛṣṇa dancing with the milkmaids of Braja, as He does. 

Now, I was reading that at this time it was summer, it was summertime, and those of you who have been to Vṛndāvana, you know what summer means—it is blazing hot. But because Cupid had brought spring with him, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa immediately felt refreshed in his presence and invigorated. It is described by opulences of the prince of seasons; spring is called the prince of seasons. And responding to the spring atmosphere, the divine couple sang a song in Vasantī rāga. As it is really nice: as Cupid’s pet cuckoo sweetly sang the fifth note—the cuckoo, he accompanied Gāndhāra, he was there—so he sang the fifth note, and then Cupid sent his special bees which hummed around Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in another attempt to excite their passions. 

But how is it described? In tribute to the bees, the divine couple took turns looking into each other’s eyes, and in this way tasted the honey of each other’s sweet love. Nothing material, just the honey of each other’s sweet love; they are transcendental. And even though Kṛṣṇa held Rādhā’s hand in His, Cupid could see very clearly that their bodies radiated a pure and sublime goodness that was devoid of even the slightest trace of lust, passion, or ignorance. But Cupid is a powerful guy. Determined, still intent on proving this one person, Kṛṣṇa, was wrong, Cupid then called upon a gentle breeze from the Malayan Hills that was fragrant with the smell of sandalwood to excite Kṛṣṇa. But Rādhā purified it, purified it simply by Her presence, simply by Her presence. 

So in this way, by their pure love, their transcendental love, not tinged by any material *gunas*, divine love, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were neutralizing—you could say, neutralizing—all of Cupid’s attacks. Then Śrī Kṛṣṇa took up His flute and started playing it, and when the sound of His flute entered Cupid’s ear, it acted like a mystic mantra—a mystic mantra. Kṛṣṇa’s flute sound acted like a mystic mantra. If someone asks you, "What does Kṛṣṇa’s flute sound like?" you can say, "A mystic mantra to purify Cupid." Then it is described that as a last resort—he is getting purified—but as a last resort, Cupid shot an arrow at his sapphire target. With "sapphire target," sapphires are blue, so who is the target? Kṛṣṇa. So Cupid shot an arrow, his most powerful arrow, at Kṛṣṇa, but the arrow entered Lord Kṛṣṇa’s body without any visible effect. It just disappeared. It is described like a pebble falling into a raging river; that is how it is described. 

So Cupid then released one arrow after another, after another, after another, after another. But instead of returning to his quiver, as is usual when Cupid shoots arrows—he shoots into whoever he is shooting at and then the arrow comes back; it is kind of far out about Cupid—but instead of returning to his quiver like the arrows usually do, they all disappeared into Kṛṣṇa’s body, leaving Cupid without any weapons, and bewildered and humiliated. So Cupid thought, "Perhaps the demigods were right about this person." Hello, Cupid! "Perhaps the demigods were right about this person." 

And astonished by what was happening—who is this person?—Cupid stopped and he carefully examined, or maybe you could say meditated on, this person. He meditated on Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form, his eyes moving from Kṛṣṇa’s feet to His waist, to His chest, and then to His head, like we are trained like that also. Indeed, we are meant to start from the feet and move up to the beautiful face of the Lord. And as he continued to gaze upon the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa, he became more and more and more captivated by His beauty. It is described that Kṛṣṇa, in His *tribhaṅga-sundara* form—like my favorite form—His *tribhaṅga-sundara* form, He stood gracefully with His body bent in three places, playing His enchanting flute. His dark curly hair cascaded—it is a beautiful word, "cascaded"—like, you know, waterfalls cascading down, cascaded down to His shoulders. His eyes, extending almost to His ears, shone with a divine brilliance, and His form was adorned with a *Vaijayantī* garland, which is composed of five different kinds of flowers that never wilt. And the aroma of Kṛṣṇa’s body, a blend of *agaru* oil, musk, saffron, and camphor, attracted a whole bunch of transcendental bumblebees who buzzed around Him in search of nectar. 

And as Cupid continued to meditate on Kṛṣṇa, he found himself completely overwhelmed by Kṛṣṇa’s beauty. And as a result, basically his bow just fell from his hands as he realized Kṛṣṇa had captured his heart. And that is the theme of this lecture: Kṛṣṇa’s beauty captures the heart of all living entities if they are so fortunate to come in contact with Kṛṣṇa, which is the purpose of this International Society for Krishna Consciousness, who are preaching to introduce everyone to Kṛṣṇa. Some effect will always be there, so this is the supreme welfare, spiritual welfare for all of society. 

So Cupid, who had conquered the hearts of all beings, was now conquered by *rūpa-mādhurī*, He whose extraordinary beauty astonishes moving and non-moving entities, including Cupid. So what happened? Cupid, he ran towards Kṛṣṇa. He ran towards Kṛṣṇa, just like Prabhupāda said one time, "All of you Western boys and girls, you were very fallen, addicted to sinful activity, unregulated; but when you heard that chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa *Mahā-mantra*, you came running, *nāmin-tam Kṛṣṇa*. Why? Because there is no difference between the *Mahā-mantra* and Kṛṣṇa." We are so blessed. And Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says all the pastimes, the Vṛndāvana pastimes of Śyāmasundara *tribhaṅga* Kṛṣṇa, are in this *Mahā-mantra*. He says that; we are so blessed. 

So Cupid then ran towards Kṛṣṇa, and falling at His lotus feet, he pleaded, "Please, let me become Your servant." He could have asked for so many things, but he just asked to be the servant. That is the greatest thing: to be the servant of a glorious master. Then, noting Cupid’s repentant attitude, Kṛṣṇa took pity on him, as He is doing with us, and blessed him, as He is blessing us through our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. And what happened? Cupid fainted. He fainted, and the actual spot where he fainted in Vṛndāvana is called *Madana-terā*. *Madana-terā*; it is one place we can go on our Vṛndāvana *parikramas*. *Madana-terā*—meditate on this pastime. 

And from that day on, Kṛṣṇa became known as Madana-mohana: the attractor of Cupid. Very famous, right? The Temple of Madana-mohana here in Vṛndāvana, the attractor of Cupid. And Rādhārāṇī is Madana-mohana-mohinī—she sees the attractor of the attractor. So here in Vṛndāvana, they say, "*Jai Śrī Kṛṣṇa*," but more often they say, "*Jai Madana-mohana*." As such, in conclusion, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī says in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—actually, there’s only one Cupid in Vṛndāvana, and that is the transcendental Lord. He writes: *vana-mālī madana-mohana-kāma-yantra-upadeśa*. In the spiritual realm of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa is the spiritual, ever-fresh Cupid. He is worshiped by the chanting of the *Kāma-gāyatrī* mantra with the spiritual seed, *klīṃ*. Beautiful note to finish on: *klīṃ*, the bīja mantra. 

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you; this finishes our discussions on the four transcendental qualities that distinguish our beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa from His expansion, Lord Nārāyaṇa. I hope that you have benefited from the series; I have benefited unlimitedly. Your humble servant in presenting this nectarian knowledge given to us by our previous ācāryas, mostly important our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. We will move on next week to another stimulation of ecstatic love and gradually making our way home, back to Goloka. *Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya!* Thank you so much. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the *darśana* of Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa, see you next week. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.""