Hello everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Kṛṣṇa. Namaste. So, we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 72. In our last two classes, we discussed the pastimes and the poetry, you may remember, of Kumār Das, one of the eight famous poets in the line of Vallabhācārya, who composed numerous poems for the pleasure of the Goal Deity discovered by our Murāri Gouṅga Hill.

And today, I would like to discuss in detail about his youngest son, whose name was Caturbhuja Das, who also became a famous poet and kirtaniya, and is actually also counted as one of the Aṣṭa-kavi, or eight poets in the line of Vallabhācārya.

In my research, I was interested to learn why his father gave him the name Caturdhuja. It actually involves an amazing pastime wherein the Goal Deity interacts in a very intimate and very personal way with his father, Kumār Das. In this pastime, the Goal Deity literally talks, walks, and even plays with Kumār Das.

Devotees may be surprised to hear this, how Gopāl, you know, wrestled and played with Kumār Das, may even doubt it. But let us remember that at the same period in history, deities of the Lord were having similar amazing pastimes with our own Goswamis.

For example, in Narahari Cakravartī's Bhakti-ratnākara, chapter 5, it is written that 500 years ago, Śrīla Sanātana Goswami's deity, Madan Mohan, or sometimes known as Madana Gopāl, used to come and play like an ordinary boy with other ordinary boys in the forest of Mahāvan on the banks of the Yamunā River.

Years before Sanātana Goswami found him, he would play with and wrestle and play leapfrog, etc., with ordinary boys in Mahāvan. The deity, Bhakti-ratnākara, discusses this. The history is actually very interesting as regards Sanātana Goswami. One day, when Śrīla Sanātana Goswami was residing, you know, he would travel around different parts of Vṛndāvana and reside in different parts of the Vṛndāvana forest.

So, one time he was residing in Mahāvan, doing his writing and his bhajan, etc., and he happened to see these very same ordinary boys playing. And as he watched, he noted that one of the boys appeared to be really special.

There was something about that boy. He looked like all the other boys, but something special about him. So there was some attraction there. So, when the boys stopped playing, he followed that particular boy home to Mathurā because he was so unusual.

There was something divine. But when the boy went into the home, Sanātana Goswami looked in a window into the house, and all he saw was the famous Madana Mohan deity standing on the altar with the same demeanor of that ordinary boy whom he was curious about.

There was nobody else in the house. It's like, where's the boy?

All he saw was a deity on the altar. So at that point, Sanātana Goswami became overwhelmed with ecstasy, realizing that the deity of Madana Mohan was enjoying playing like an ordinary boy with these ordinary boys in Vṛndāvana.

Now, the Śāstra, Madana Mohana Carita, by the author Pandit Madana, as well as the Vṛndāvana Anuśrava, by the illustrious Gopāla Kavi, go on to explain that Sanātana Goswami would often return to that home while performing *mādhukarī* and sometimes when looking inside, he would see the deity come off the altar, play with the children, and then go back on the altar.

So we noticed that that's how they were treating the deity as one of the boys, that the worship of the deity on the altar was not much because, well, he's just part of the family. So on one occasion, while doing *mādhukarī*, which means to beg for foodstuffs, Sanātana Goswami came to that home and he humbly instructed the family in the proper etiquette of worshiping the deity of Madana Mohan.

So, it appears that Madana Mohan became attracted to Sanātana Goswami because some days later, Madana Mohan actually appeared in the dream of the head of the household, obviously a pure devotee, a Brahman gentleman. And in the dream, he requested that that brāhmaṇa give him Madana Mohan to Sanātana Goswami.

So the next time that Sanātana Goswami appeared at the door performing *mādhukarī*, the brāhmaṇa went to the altar, picked up the deity, and brought it to the door and requested that Sanātana Goswami accept Madana Mohan. So he agreed, he agreed, and Sanātana Goswami took him to his bhajan-kuṭīra, which at that time was on that small hill overlooking the Yamunā River.

It was called Dvādaśadulāla, where, as we know, Sanātana Goswami eventually had a temple built. That's another pastime. But in telling this pastime, I wanted to impress how we hear Madana Mohan playing with the ordinary boys and with the members of that family, you know, running, jumping, and wrestling, etc., although he's a deity.

There's also the pastime where Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda visited the home of their devotee Gorā Pāṇḍita 500 years ago in Ambāḍā, in Bengal. And when they were about to leave, Gorā Pāṇḍita, who was obviously very attached to Gorāi, he begged them to stay.

But Lord Caitanya, Lord Nityānanda told Gorā Pāṇḍita that it wasn't possible; they had other places to go, other pastimes. But to honor his request, and as you could say, a consolation, they had deity forms carved from nim wood in their likeness.

They ordered some devotees to carve deity forms out of nim wood in their likeness. And I was reading, these were actually the first deities of Gorāi ever made. And when the deities came, Lord Caitanya said, "Gorāi, my deity form is as good as I am.

We will forever remain therefore in your home to accept your service." But Gorāi replied, "If these deities are as good as you, Lord Caitanya, then why don't you just stay here with me and let them go out and preach?" So, considering this request, Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda, who are controlled by the love of their devotees, stepped onto the altar, raised their hands, and became the deities.

And to prove that they were identical, the original deities stepped off the altar and walked out the door of the house. They stepped off the altar and just walked out the door of the house. So Gorā Pāṇḍita became overwhelmed by this transformation, and he begged the deities to return to the altar.

So when the deities stepped back onto the altar, Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda stepped off, and they began to leave. The original Lord and Nityānanda, seeing this, Gorā Pāṇḍita ran after them and caught them, and then escorted them back onto the altar.

At that time, the other forms of Gorā-Nityānanda got off the altar and started to walk away. So this mysterious exchange repeated several times until it was no longer clear to Gorā Pāṇḍita who were the original forms of his dear Lords and who were the wooden deities.

Wonderful pastime. But finally, by deep realization, he understood who's who, and he asked the original Gorāi, who had come to visit him, to stay on the altar and never leave. And the deities left and continued the pastime of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

So, this is what happened. It demonstrates the truth actually that the Lord and His deity form are identical and capable of playful pastimes, as we're discussing, with their devotees. In fact, in the scriptures, there's the following verse: "Nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaḥ, caitanyaṁ rasamātmikāḥ, paramaṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-gānaṁ tad-ādikam." The Lord's holy name, His form, and His personality are all one and the same.

There is no difference between them, since all of them are absolute; they are all transcendentally blissful. Haribol!

Now, of course, there are other examples as well, with the deity interacting in a very personal way with His pure devotees. For example, there's the pastime of Śrī Gopāla, the witness deity, who we know from Caitanya Caritāmṛta spoke to the young brāhmaṇa boy who came to ask Him to bear witness and actually followed behind him all the way to Oriṣā.

All right, Kṛṣṇa from Frava to Oriṣā. So, I've shared these pastimes so that we can appreciate the following pastime where Gopāla, the deity discovered by Murāri, interacted with a number of devotees, including Kumār Das, the father of the poet Caturdhuja, who we will discuss about later.

So here's the pastime. So, one day, Gopāla actually came and appeared before Kumār Das and He said, "Kumār Das, today we will go together to the house of an old Gopi, because I have heard her butter is the tastiest in all of Vṛndāvana." So Kumār Das, who was like, "Wow, amazed," said, "Well, Lord, please do not include me in your stealing pastimes.

You are very smart and courageous, but what if that old Gopi comes and you run away and she catches me?

What will the people of Gowar say to me?" But Gopāla, He insisted.

Speaking, He's speaking to Kumār Das, just like Prabhupāda said at the installation in the early '70s of the small Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities in Los Angeles, California, in America.

In the lecture, he said, "If you see these deities as brass, they remain brass to you forever and ever. But if you worship them according to all the rules and regulations that I'm giving you, then one day these deities will speak to you." Even in modern times.

But Gopāla... So, Gopāla said to Kumār Das, He said, "Never mind what they may say. You must come with me." So Kumār Das smiled. He said, "As you wish." Gopāla then, after sneaking into some, it's described, old Gopi's house, Gopāla told Kumār Das to bend down so he could stand on his back and reach the butter that was hanging in the butter pots higher up.

So Kumār Das bent over, like, like you play horsey or something, and Gopāla stood on his back so he could reach, you know, the reach the butter. And He was eating the butter. But as He ate the butter while standing on Kumār Das's back, Gopāla's *dhoti* became a little loose and it was about to fall off.

So Gopāla very casually manifested two more arms, and with two extra hands, He held His *dhoti*. So feeling a heavier weight on his back, you know, two more arms, Kumār Das looked up and saw that Gopāla was eating butter with two hands, and with two other hands was holding up His *dhoti*.

So, in this way, he saw Kṛṣṇa's *catur-bhuja* form, a four-armed form like Lord Nārāyaṇa, who is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa. And he was so touched by this and just it was just etched into his heart that that experience. That as a result, when his first son was born, he named him Caturdhuja Das.

What a wonderful pastime. Where, where did you get your name?

That's a long story. Caturdhuja Das. Now, as we mentioned in a previous lecture, Kumār Das had other sons, but except for Caturdhuja and another son named Kṛṣṇadāsa, none of the others were actually devotees of the Lord. Anyway, so it's described that when Caturdhuja and Kṛṣṇadāsa were old enough, Kumār Das gave them charge of the family cows.

He had a small herd of cows. So it's reading, much of their youth was spent feeding them, you know, bathing them, herding them, and collecting their fresh milk and cow dung. This is all 500 years ago. So, one day, Caturdhuja had to leave the herd of cows.

He said to his brother, Kṛṣṇadāsa, "My dear brother, I have to leave now. Please take care of the cows today. I have to go with our father to see Gopāla. We have a purpose in going there." So Kṛṣṇadāsa, who is described in scripture as a very happy and fun-loving boy, started herding the cows around Gauṅga Hill so they could eat the soft grass there.

In previous lectures, we described how cowherd boys like to take cows to Gauṅga Hill during Kṛṣṇa's time, and even 500 years ago. That that grass is very special. It's very lush and green. When the cows eat it, they give very nice milk, and also it's very soft; it doesn't cut their tongues like grass sometimes does.

So, um, actually, I was reading about that grass when was it last year?

I read about that grass in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute in one book by one of our ācāryas.

And in one passage, an ācārya wrote a description of that grass as follows: "It melts the heart," he wrote. "The grass at the foothills of Gauṅga Hill is the same size as a human being. As such, it serves as a fence which protects the great mountain Girirāja from materialistic people.

When the wind flows from the east, eastern direction, that grass dances like the milkmaids of Vṛndāvana.

That grass decorates the boundary of Gauṅga Hill like the colorful lace of a round skirt. This blue, green, red, pink, and yellow grass has different sweet, pungent, and sometimes mixed flavors. It is moist in the morning as the dew settles on the tips of its crystal-like stringed threads.

All glories to the grass of Gauṅga with the highest taste of the spiritual world resides. All glories to the grass that grew on Gauṅga Hill. Everything in Vṛndāvana is absolute." So after some time, Kṛṣṇadāsa took the cows away from eating the grass to drink water at Gaṇḍuṇḍa, and when they finished drinking the water, he started gathering them to leave.

But when counting all the cows, he realized that two of them were missing. Now, this pastime, I summarized in a previous lecture, but it came across a more detailed explanation. Seek and you shall find. So, while searching for the stray cows, he discovered that they had entered a deep cave on Gauṅga Hill, not far from Govinda.

And as Kṛṣṇadāsa entered the cave to retrieve them, suddenly a wild tiger entered the cave and attacked the cows, the stray cows. So at that point, Kṛṣṇadāsa fearlessly started fighting with the tiger, which allowed those two cows to escape.

But of course, after a few minutes, he was overpowered by that tiger, and he was killed, essentially, you could say, sacrificing his life for the cows of Gopāla in that cave on Gauḍan Hill. So, later that day, in the afternoon or early evening, learning of his brother's death, the young Caturdhuja Das took his string *tambūrā* instrument, and in a mild and sweet voice, tears flowing down his cheeks, he composed a song for the pleasure of Gopāla, glorifying Gopāla because Gopāla was, is, the deity of both him and his beloved brother.

So, in honor of his brother, he composed a beautiful poem for Gopāla. It begins, "Govinda, the beautiful." O Govinda, protector of the cows, climbing up Girirāja Govinda, calling out the names of His beloved cows, saying, "Hey Ganga, hey hey Devarā," while He plays His flute to attract them.

When they hear this sound, they stand with grass in their mouths, their heads raised up, full of love for the Lord and the sound of His flute. They moo and run towards Him from all four directions. The poet Caturdhuja Das says, "Our Lord, the One Who lifted Govardhana Hill, cannot control His bliss as He uses His yellow garments to wipe the dust from His cow's faces." Composed that in honor of his brother, glorifying Gopāla.

What a sad day that must have been. So, in time, as he grew up, Caturdhuja became renowned as a poet and a singer. And so his father again, Kumār Das, asked him to join him when he would do, when he would sing *bhajan* for Gopāla in the temple.

So one day, Kumār Das, he was elderly. He was singing, "O friend, look at the sparkling flame of the ghee lamp in the mirrors around the temple. There we see Lord Hari as if painted in many pictures." Now, after singing that verse, his voice became very hoarse.

He didn't want to continue glorifying Gopāla in a hoarse voice, so he stopped. So his son Caturdhuja immediately took up, continuing, continuing his father's poem. He sang, "The flame of the lamp in the small mirrors is moving to and fro, just as Gopāla's unmatchable beauty is sometimes visible to our eyes and sometimes not, just like the curtains on the altar are opening and closing, revealing the beauty of Our Lord." So at that point, the pujārī came out from behind the curtain and said to Caturdhuja, after hearing your poetry, Gopāla Himself said, "Jayo, jayo!

May that poet live long!

May that poet live long!

He so much enjoyed his singing." So, after some time, Caturdhuja was actually assigned as one of the eight favored singers for Gopāla. They would take turns singing at different times of the day. And being the youngest poet of the group, he was known as Aṣṭa-kavi, Aṣṭa-kavi.

And one day, Vithala, the son of Vallabhācārya, who it's described was always mesmerized by Caturdhuja's singing, he came to him and he inquired, um, about this amazing service he would do every day for Gopāla. He inquired from him about the different melodies, or *rāgas*, he sang at different times of the day for Gopāla.

He said, "Could you, it's just amazing what you do. Could you describe in detail, you know, what *rāga* you're singing at any particular time of the day?

I'm just so curious." So Caturdhuja replied to Vithala, "It's a little technical, but it's important to hear Caturdhuja, because this is deity worship, and the love is in the details." So this is how Caturdhuja was expressing his love for the deity by singing different melodies at the right time of the day.

So he revealed his service. He said, "In śiśira winter time, the Maṅgala *rāgas* are Bhairavī *rāga*, Āśāvarī *rāga*, Kārakaṭī *rāga*, and Deva-gāndhāra *rāga*. At the time of Śṛṅgāra, the *rāgas* are Lalita *rāga*, Pañcama *rāga*, and Mala-kośa *rāga*. At the time of Rājat Bhoga, the *rāgas* are Āśāvarī *rāga*, Tōḍī *rāga*, and Dhanaśrī *rāga*.

At the time of Dhūpa Āratika, the *rāga* is Naṭa *rāga*. At the time of Sañjhyā Āratika, the *rāgas* are Rāga-raga, Pūrvī *rāga*, and Pāyā-raga. And at the time of Śayan Āratika, the *rāgas* are Kāmodī *rāga*, Bhairavī *rāga*, and Deva-gāndhāra *rāga*.

Then he went on to say, "And all these *rāgas* may change according to the weather, days, and festivals." Now, it's interesting to note, I discovered that these *rāgas* when they are sung are still standard in the worship of Gopāla, or Śrī Govinda, as He is being worshiped even today in Narasiṁha, India.

They've carried on for 500 years according to the standard that we just discussed. Haribol!

Now, in a previous lecture, we heard how once, because of the fear of Muslim invaders, the deity of Gopāla was moved temporarily to Mathurā, where our Rūpa Goswami and other great ācāryas came for His *darśana* and stayed at the house of Vallabhācārya's son, Balanābha, for an entire month.

And the day after the deity was moved, Gopāla Caturdhuja, who didn't know that He'd been moved, came as usual to the temple with his *tambūrā* instrument, and to his shock, found the entire temple empty. The deity had been moved during the nighttime.

It's described that there were no big drums in the four corners of the temple. There were no longer rugs on the floor or no oil lamps burning. Interestingly, it's described, the parrots had all left their cages, and the altar curtain was closed.

I was reading that the only sound in that empty temple was the echoing of Caturdhuja's footsteps. And in the midst of all this, he broke down crying incessantly in separation from Gopāla. And in that state of *viyoga-bhāva*, as we know it, in intense separation, he composed a song, a poem, and a song which is still very famous in Vṛndāvana and not unknown today, very famous.

And I thought it appropriate we could finish our discussion today with this poem. "More than enough," it begins. "Govinda Vāsa." "O Kṛṣṇa," he sang, "You who live by the Govinda Peak, I cannot live without You. O beloved young prince of Bṛja, please show me Your beautiful face with Your sweet smile, for my eyes are squirming like a fish without water.

And a single second passes slower than a millennium. A single second passes slower than a millennium." He places His flute in a scale of seven notes. He ties those lovely notes in with tones of loving moods, and His song is very sweet.

This Kṛṣṇa, who appreciates the fine mood of pure love, climbs up on the Girirāja Peak and calls out loudly to the cows with a very sweet voice, full of affection. He calls, "Come here, Ganga, come Dumārī!

O my Lord, since the day I first saw You, nothing else interests me. I cannot sleep at night, and I have forgotten all about eating and drinking. Dear Lord, my eyes burn for a chance to see You, and my ears long to hear Your voice.

My heart craves to meet You, for You are my very life and breath. My dear Kṛṣṇa, my mind wishes to keep You within my eyes. I wish to continuously and without any interruption behold Your gorgeous form as the Supreme Dancer.

Dear Lord, I have given up caring about how the world or my family will judge me. My love for You grows as a lotus bud in the warm sun. Millions of Cupids surrender to Your cheeky way of walking, and Your large lotus eyes have captured the heart of all the young ladies of Bṛja.

O enchanting Kṛṣṇa, protector of the cows and ocean of joy, You play in the forest bowers. I'm like a sweet fragrant multi-flower in Vṛndāvana, and You are the king looking for enjoyment.

Dear one, I will sing this song over and over and over again, like the calling of a Cātaka bird or a peacock. Please, You are the son of Nanda, like a fresh raincloud, please shower me with the rain of Your love.

Please let me enjoy blissful residence near to You on Govinda Hill forever and forevermore." The poet Caturdhuja Das bows down in surrender to beautiful Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the famous lifter of Govinda Hill. Wow. All glories to these poets who bring forth emotions even in our, in our stage of sādhana-bhakti.

They take us beyond the stage of sādhana-bhakti, one day, to spontaneous love for the Lord. We're very indebted to all of them. Praṇām. That's all, uh, for today. We have a couple more poets coming up in the next few weeks, so look forward to seeing you next Friday.

Kṛṣṇa. Balarāma. May Kṛṣṇa. All glories to Śrī. Haribol!