

Everyone, welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. So, we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 33. In this lecture, we will continue discussing Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments. Actually, it is by the mercy of guru, śāstra, and sādhu that we have such information about the Lord. Vaiṣṇava scholars say that there are three categories of ācāryas who describe Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in detail to the fallen souls of this world. The first type is called śruti-aṅgī, which means one who hears the pastimes from previous ācāryas and then describes them in detail. The second type is called dhyāna-aṅgī, which means the ācārya who, by the mercy of the Lord, sees Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in meditation in Vṛndāvana. It is said about such ācāryas: yāhā dekhe tāhā lekhe, which means “whatever they saw, they wrote.” I like that: whatever they saw, they wrote. The third and topmost class of these ācāryas are called līlā-aṅgī, which means those who participate in the pastimes of the Divine Couple and who can thus describe them in detail. It should be noted that there is no discrimination amongst any of these categories of ācāryas because, after all, they are all revealing detailed pastimes of the Lord, which helps to stimulate our love for Him.

So, continuing with our discussions on Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments, we’ll begin with His lotus feet, which is most appropriate. The first ornament on Kṛṣṇa’s feet is kunkuma, which many devotees know is a saffron, reddish powder made from the filaments of flowers. One result of this colorful powder on Kṛṣṇa’s feet is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.17.1, where it states: “Having washed the lotus feet of the Lord, which are covered with reddish powder, the water of the Ganges acquired a very beautiful pink color.” All right, Kṛṣṇa.

The second ornament decorating the lotus feet of the Lord is nūpura. Śrīla Prabhupāda translates nūpura as anklet or sometimes as leglet. Regarding nūpura, it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.8.49, lasat-kāñcana-nūpuram: “His lotus feet are decorated with golden ankle bells.” 10.44.29 says that both Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma wear ankle bells, vicitra-nūpurau, which means they make a sweet, jingling sound. Now, according to Vaiṣṇava poets, the nūpuras of Lord Kṛṣṇa are decorated with the padmarāga gem. When I read that, I didn’t know what a padmarāga gem was, so I researched and found out that the padmarāga gem is a reddish ruby.

Many more such ornaments are described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. In particular, in 2.1.360, he lists them as follows: a wonderful golden girdle belt, Kṛṣṇa wears an incomparable crown of peacock feathers, earrings studded with wonderful diamonds, a necklace of spotless white pearls, pristine armlets, golden bracelets, a beautiful moon-shaped necklace, a beautiful finger ring, and I like this part, “anklets filled with sweetness.” And he writes in the very next verse, 2.1.361: “Beautiful ornaments are made using flowers; then they are known as vanya-maṇḍana, forest decorations.” In other words, if you don’t have the ornaments, even in the forest, the cowherd boys or the gopīs can make the same ornaments out of flowers. He continues: “Colors made using natural minerals, and decorations made using such colors, are also known as vanya-maṇḍana.” Some transcendental details!

The next ornament is Kṛṣṇa’s golden girdle belt; it is known as kāñcī. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.28.16 says His loins and hips are encircled by a golden girdle belt. And in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.28.24, Kapila Muni says the yogi should contemplate Kṛṣṇa’s rounded hips, which are encircled by a girdle that rests on the exquisite yellow silk cloth that extends down to His ankles. 4.8.49 describes that His kāñcī, His golden girdle belt, is also decorated with bells—kāñcī-kalāpāṅga. The Lord is decorated with small golden bells around His waist. Again, this is very useful information for pujārīs who are in charge of making Kṛṣṇa’s clothes and ornaments. I also read that He is also depicted as wearing a similar golden girdle belt; just some extra details there.

Now we are moving up from the lotus feet to the waist and now to Kṛṣṇa’s head. There are actually many different ornaments that decorate this portion of Kṛṣṇa’s body—His beautiful head, His face, His hair, etc. Of course, one such ornament is a mukuṭa, meaning, as many devotees know, a crown, which actually comes in a variety of different shapes and forms. The crown Kṛṣṇa wears is in the shape of a banyan leaf, or sometimes it is described as a betel leaf, which bends slightly towards His left side—a crown shaped like that, it turns a little bit, it is slightly bending toward His left side. And I found a great poet and Gosvāmī of the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple; his name was Guṇa-mañjarī Gosvāmī. He wrote in his book, which they still use in the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple, his book is called Rāmaṇa-padma-mañjarī. He wrote that book in 1884, and he describes this particular mukuṭa—that this mukuṭa of Kṛṣṇa tilts towards the left, in the direction of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, because of His extreme love for Her. Wow.

Yes, information from the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple. One time, Śrīla Prabhupāda instructed some of his disciples that to understand deity worship, they should observe the worship of Rādhā Ramaṇa at the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple in Vṛndāvana. Now, why did Prabhupāda give that particular instruction? Well, one reason we can understand: Śrīla Prabhupāda was well aware of the standard at the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple while he was staying in Vṛndāvana for a number of years preparing to go to the West. Each morning, he would first take darśana of Rādhā-Dāmodara in the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, and then after performing mādhukarī—which means door-to-door begging for some foodstuffs—he would go for darśana at the Rādhā Ramaṇa Temple, and then he would chant japa at the samādhi of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī for many years, actually. So, this was part of his schedule, so he knew about the pūjā at the Ramaṇa Temple and he was impressed with it, so he said we should take some guidance from there.

There is another type of mukuṭa which doesn’t tilt, and it is known as kayūra. In Sanskrit, kayūra is a triangular golden mukuṭa on which a betel-shaped piece is placed in a particular formation—a very, very colorful piece is placed on the mukuṭa. Another type of mukuṭa is called a tripāra; it’s a triangular crown, and each corner of that triangular crown has an opening for attaching three peacock feathers. Another crown Kṛṣṇa wears is called a kulhe. It’s a round-shaped, small golden crown with natural gems and stones, with pearls hanging down a little bit on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead. So when I read that, I said, “I’d like to see that particular crown,” but the pearls, you know, just on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead. And then I read that this crown can be seen once a year on Balarāma Jayantī, on the day of Rakṣā-bandhana—so we also know as Lord Balarāma’s appearance date. So if you happen to be in Vṛndāvana on Lord Balarāma’s appearance day, Rakṣā-bandhana, please go to Ramaṇajī and see that beautiful mukuṭa. Then there is also a mayūra-mukuṭa; it’s a crown in the form of a dancing peacock.

Sometimes Kṛṣṇa wears a karṇa-ṭopī, which is not like a crown, but it’s more like a cap, actually—more like a cap than a crown—and it covers both His head and His ears at the same time. I was trying to imagine that, but then I remembered it’s something similar to the famous cap of Maṭhura-puṇḍa which we’ve described in previous lectures, which is made from Tulasī beads, like how He wore a coat of Tulasī beads, He had a beautiful cap of Tulasī beads, etc., which can be seen even today in the Rādhā-Gopīnātha Temple in a memorial that was built to honor Madhu Paṇḍita in Jaipur. Another cap is called a gvāla-ṭopī; it’s a very long, triangular cap, actually, where the top part falls towards Kṛṣṇa’s right side. And yet another type of cap that Kṛṣṇa wears is called a jūṛā. Similar to the gvāla-ṭopī, it’s also triangular, but it bends to the left side, the cap of Kṛṣṇa. And I read that this particular cap, if you’re interested, can be seen every Ekādaśī on the head of Govindajī and Gopīnātha in Jaipur, and also on Rādhā Ramaṇa in Vṛndāvana.

Now, another ornament—not a crown or a cap, but another ornament that Kṛṣṇa wears on His head—is called sarapañca. And this sarapañca is an ornament that is actually attached to Kṛṣṇa’s turban, because He also wears turbans. And this particular ornament is very, very beautiful. I read in great detail about it, but basically, it’s embedded with rubies, emeralds, sapphires, and sometimes pearls. You can see that on many of the Vṛndāvana deities. Actually, what we’re discussing is also worn in this discussion on other deities around Vṛndāvana as well. Now, another ornament that Kṛṣṇa uses is known as āvalī, and that translates as a pearl mālā, and it is actually like a hair braid which is used to tie up Kṛṣṇa’s hair on top of His head, and on top of that, there can be placed many types of feathers.

It’s instructed—yes, it’s instructed. Let’s talk a little bit about feathers. The feathers: one of the types of feathers that Kṛṣṇa wears, of course, is His famous peacock feather, which is known as joḍa. If He wears a single peacock feather, it is known as sikkī-pañchī. If there are three peacock feathers together on Kṛṣṇa’s head, it’s known as tri-joḍa. Then there are five peacock feathers together, and then it’s known as pañca-joḍa. If there are seven peacock feathers together, it’s known as sapta-joḍa. It’s nice how Kṛṣṇa wears forest feathers because He lives in the forest of Vṛndāvana. Another type of feather that Kṛṣṇa weareth—not only as a deity but when He is, you know, in His pastimes 5,000 years ago, we’re describing that as well—are the feathers of a white peacock, a golden peacock, and let me remember, a black peacock. He wears those feathers: white peacock, golden peacock, and black peacock. But I was reading that, unfortunately, the feathers of the golden peacock—well, there’s no more golden peacocks in Vṛndāvana, so He doesn’t wear those anymore, unfortunately. Further research revealed that Kṛṣṇa wears feathers from a sura-cāṭu bird—I couldn’t find out what a sura-cāṭu bird is, but He wears feathers in a sura-cāṭu—He wears feathers from parrots, and Kṛṣṇa also wears feathers from swans.

I’d like to share with you at this time a beautiful pastime, an “ornamental pastime,” let us say, that is described very beautifully by my dear godbrother Śivarāma Swami in his illustrious Nava-vraja-mahimā. He took this pastime from the Bhakti-ratnākara by Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī, and there it is described that one day in the Vṛndāvana forest, the cowherd boys had just finished lunch and they were lying down in the shade of a big banyan tree, when Subala-sakhā spoke up with a suggestion that they all decorate Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma like they had once seen Kṛṣṇa do to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, as Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa. Śṛṅgāra-vaṭa is where Kṛṣṇa ornamented Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, so the boys somehow they saw that. So Śivarāma Swami describes that all the boys agreed: “For just as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are the gopīs’ worshipable deities, so Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma are their worshipable deities,” as one ācārya puts it. So, following orders by older boys, the younger boys collected items in the forest for what is described now as a śṛṅgāra pastime, or a mental pastime.

So, first, the cowherd boys seated Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma on a marble platform beneath the banyan tree, and with twigs, flowers, leaves, and vines—as we know that Rūpa Gosvāmī mentioned that if you don’t have the real ornaments you can make them from these types of things—they expertly fashioned a throne with an elaborate canopy. Then some of the boys bathed Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma’s lotus feet; afterwards, others wiped their bodies with a damp cloth. And while—I remember Madhumangala chanted the Puruṣa-sūkta—he’s a Brāhmaṇa boy, right? Madhumangala chanted the Puruṣa-sūkta, and the other boys sang songs glorifying the two transcendental brothers. And as soon as Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma had been dried with, actually, described cotton towels, their servants, the boys, surrounded them with trays holding flower ornaments, garlands, colored minerals, and fresh silk cloth. Then, supervised by Subala and Śrīdāma, the older boys quickly dressed the two brothers and decorated their faces and limbs with what? With beautiful, beautiful, intricate images of fish, birds, and flowering vines. Vraja culture, Vṛndāvana affairs! It’s said that just as the gopīs are always prepared to fulfill any need or desire of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, so the cowherd boys always have every imaginable item on hand for serving Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. So sweet! And as expert as the gopīs are in conducting services like beautifying, entertaining, and praising the Divine Couple, these cowherd boys are just as expert in similar services to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. Of course, both girls and boys, they try to outdo each other, it’s a little competition there, but in Vraja, their transcendental competition never produces envy; it’s written only admiration for the other party’s service. And I remember hearing Prabhupāda once said, “That is the Vaikuṇṭha way.” So nice, a pastime or a mental pastime.

So I’d like to finish today with a very beautiful poem written by a new Vrajavāsī poet I discovered; his name was Caturabhuja-dāsa, and he was born in 1597 in the village of Umunavata. He writes so beautifully:

“O my dear friend, look at this Śrī Kṛṣṇa! The one who lifts Śrī Girirāja mountain and who is the connoisseur of fine devotional moods. Every moment of every day, His appearance is new and fresh. This ever-changing, new beauty is impossible for any poet to describe. His adornments and garments are always new and have variegated colors. Every limb is an ocean of loveliness which captivates millions of Cupids. The waves of beauty that arise in that ocean steal away the mind of the whole universe. The poet Caturabhuja-dāsa thus says: drink the nectar of the form of my Lord, base your entire life on that nectar, and remain always in His shelter.”

Our obeisances to that Vaiṣṇava poet. Hare Kṛṣṇa, prabhus! That’s the lecture for today—second lecture on Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments. I hope that it stimulates you somehow in your attraction for the Divine Couple. Anything in Vṛndāvana, wonderful Vraja! And we’ll be back again next Friday. I think we can have another lecture on Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments. Let’s see; again, we’re pretty busy here up on the Baltic Sea coast with a festival every day for the public, so I’ll try my best, and thank you very much.
