

Hari Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back again to our ever-ongoing lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīvṛndāvana. Nama oṁ viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So today we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 82. As you know, we have been discussing paraphernalia in service to the deity of the Lord, and last week we discussed dīpa lamps, or again, ghee lamps as we say in ISKCON. I would like to continue with this theme today, essentially part two on this subject. I would like to begin in an interesting way by quoting a poem by that famous poet Sadāśiva, a poem we have quoted numerous times, but especially today as he uses dīpas or lamps in a beautiful analogy. He writes:

“I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master who gave me beautiful tilaka, effulgent tulasi-mālā, the beautiful form of a devotee, and who offered me his shelter. In one of his hands, he is holding my hand, and with his other hand, he is holding the lamp of knowledge which helps me to cross over the dark ocean of this material world. Sadāśiva says my Guru deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye. I bow down to him again and again and again.”

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Now, as we mentioned in our lecture last week, dīpas or these lamps have been a part of Vraja culture even during the time of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s appearance there 5,000 years ago. I was reading that once, on the night of Dīpāvali, or Dīvālī as it is commonly called, the Vrajavāsīs decided to celebrate the event on the banks of Mānas-gaṅgā, next to Govardhana Hill. Mānas-gaṅgā was manifested from the mind of Lord Kṛṣṇa and is nondifferent than the sacred Gaṅgā river, which mercifully descends from the spiritual world down to the various levels of this material creation.

In preparation for the festivities, it is described that the men decorated their cows and pets—it is mentioned cows and pets. The gopīs, the milkmaids of Vṛndāvana, decorated themselves with their very best ornaments, and Kṛṣṇa made His cows jump and play—that is how it is described, jump and play. Meanwhile, Nanda Mahārāja had his men place many, many thousands of lamps, dīpas, on the shores around the entire lake. Then the Vrajavāsīs worshiped Gaṅgā-devī by floating tiny leaf cups holding ghee lamps on her waters. That night, the people of Vraja, the Vrajavāsīs, heard and sang the glories of Lord Rāmacandra, gave each other gifts, and enjoyed an opulent feast. And as the last lamps burned out and the Vrajavāsīs retired to the tents to rest, it is described, lulled to sleep by the peaceful lapping of Mother Gaṅgājī’s waves, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa slipped away to meet under the cover of darkness. Hari Kṛṣṇa, is that wonderful?

Now, it is said that in those days of yore, devotees used to hold a stick in one hand and a lamp in the other hand to walk through the forests of Vṛndāvana at night. I came across a poem written by a poet who lived in Vṛndāvana hundreds of years ago, wherein he described this in a very beautiful and devotional way. He wrote—I really like it:

“Oh brother, look at the bare feet of the monks wearing loincloths and walking on the dewy, muddy trails of Lord Girirāja. They hold monkey-crooked sticks in one hand and lamps in their other hands. They walk very early in the morning when even the sun is sleeping on his chariot. At that time, these saints are ready to offer their service to the high-raised Mount Girirāja. One after another, the sādhu-s are walking, holding lamps like they are offering their āratikas to Girirāja Bābā. I, Bāladāsa, offer my respects to the sādhu-s who please the Lord with their bhajans and their sādhanā.”

Now, when the Six Gosvāmīs and ācāryas of different Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas were living in Vṛndāvana, they used to celebrate a festival using lamps known as Ujjvala-manata. Ujjvala-manata. This festival is no longer observed, unfortunately, in modern-day Vraja, but it seems like it was really wonderful. The tradition was that the mahantas, the head Gosvāmīs of different Vṛndāvana temples, would light lamps in front of their respected deities and then place the lamps on carts which were covered with colorful cotton cloths. Then, sitting in the cart, holding the lamps in such a way as to protect them from the wind, the carts would circumambulate all around Vṛndāvana, followed by, you know, blissful kīrtana parties—devotees chanting in kīrtana. These processions would end on the banks eventually of the river Yamunā, where the lamps were then placed into the river in small, how could you say, hand-sized boats made of strong leaves. And as the many lamps floated down the river, the Gosvāmīs and their followers would all dance and sing the names of Rādhā-Dāmodara. We should start that again. ISKCON should start that festival again on the waters of the Yamunā.

And I have also seen that in a beautiful old place in Vṛndāvana known as Tattvan-Tashan, the culture of lighting lamps for light still exists. In the evenings, the sādhus there don’t use electricity at all, even now in modern times. In the evenings, they light numerous old lamps made of brass, copper, and clay with sesame seed oil, and this is the source of light in this beautiful āśrama in Vraja, a famous place.

Now, I found another beautiful poem by the poet Hitā-Paramānandadāsa, wherein he uses lamps as an analogy, and the poem is describing a conversation between two gopīs. It is very sweet. One new gopī, called Nilasākhi, asked Tārāsākhi, “Oh sākhi, how do Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa see each other in the darkest nights of Amāvasyā, when there is no moon or lamps lighting up the forest? How do they identify each other?” And Tārāsākhi replied, “My dear Nilasākhi, this forest land of Vraja is so mystical that even yogis cannot understand its divine nature. The eyes of our Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī are thus the lamps in which her tears of love are the oil. The stars of her eyes are the firelight, her lotus-shaped eyes are the dīpa, and her dark añjana is the darkness around that lamp. With this lamp, she beholds the unbeatable beauty of her beloved Śyāmasundara, who is darker than an evening cloud. But when her eyelashes flutter, when blinking, the light of her lamp goes off, which causes her to lose vision of her beloved. At that time, she becomes distressed and laments.” Hearing Rādhā’s lamentation of love, all her sakhīs come to the grove and open their eyes to reflect the divine form of Kṛṣṇa in their eyes. Hitā-Paramānandadāsa says, “I am blind because I am unable to see Kṛṣṇa with the lamp of my eyes.” All Kṛṣṇa!

Now the poet Lalita has revealed a pastime known as Dīpa-mālikā. Dīpa-mālikā, it means literally “the necklace of lamps.” It is very beautiful. It goes like this: Once, Mother Yaśodā said to Mahārāja Nanda, “Oh Swami, you are the greatest amongst all the men in Vraja, for you take care of all the Vrajavāsīs. But since Kṛṣṇa appeared in our house, you have lost all interest in everything, and you just play all day with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma as if you are a boy yourself. But Kṛṣṇa is seven years old now; he should be studying to become a responsible king like you, his father. The time has come for you to teach him how to herd cows and accept the ropes of responsibility.”

Mahārāja Nanda rolled his mustache with his fingers and said, “Yes, my Queen, you are right. I am lost—I am lost in his childhood play—when will that day be ours? I am lost in his childhood play, and I should now teach him the art of life. Oh Queen, please call your sons, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, here.”

When Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma came in front of Mahārāja Nanda, Balarāma said, “Oh great father, please accept me and my younger brother Kṛṣṇa’s praṇāmas.”

Mahārāja Nanda said, “All blessings, my dear children. I have one announcement to make.”

Kṛṣṇa said, “What is that, Father?”

Mahārāja Nanda said, “You should understand that the world we live in is in the clutches of Kaṁsa, who has not been favorable to the world since the time that you both took birth here in Vraja. I have been trying to save you both from his evil plans to kill you, but life is more about actions than precautions. Now you boys are growing up, and you should learn how to walk on hot marble, how to embrace water in cold weather, and how to protect your loved ones and yourselves. So now is the time that you both should join the cowherd group of boys and learn how to herd cows, protect yourselves, and return home safely each night with each and every cow.”

Nanda Mahārāja then asked Balarāma, “Badave, do you know the number of cows and bulls that we have in our gośālā?”

Balarāma replied, “Nine lakhs of cows and 18 lakhs of bulls, Father.”

Then Nanda Mahārāja called his servant, Yoana, to teach the brothers the art of herding cows. Yoana said, “Oh brothers, first you have to offer your respects to the cows, then fold your dhotīs and tie up your hair. Then the first work you have to do is to collect cow dung from the ground; this is the art of taking care of cows. Then slowly look at the cow’s eyes with affection, pet their foreheads, then their throats, and then their entire bodies. Then feed them with fresh green leaves and take a golden bucket to milk them. Warm your hands so that they feel it is the calf’s mouths, and only then milk their udders. After milking them one by one, you should make them attentive by blowing your bugle buffalo horns many times. After that, they all will become excited; then untie their ropes and open the gates of the gośālā. With that, herd the cows in seven different forests in Vraja every day and take a viśrāma—a rest—in the afternoon near the bank of the Yamunā or any kuṇḍa. After that, when long shadows start to appear behind your backs, it means it is evening time, so you blow your horns again. At that time, collect all the cows and run back to the gośālā. Doing this every day will make you the kings of Vraja.”

So Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma joined their palms in respect to Yoana and then got dressed in Naṭavara-vapu-veśa. This is really beautiful. Naṭavara-vapu-veśa—it means the most beautiful dresses of a hero—and they both dressed in silk dhotīs which were short and decorated with glittering lace. Their lotus feet were decorated with various ankle bells; their waists were tightened by colorful silk ropes similar to the ones that cows wear around their necks. Their long hair was tied in a jūdī—a big bun on top of the head—and covered with various colorful strips of cloth like turbans. And their hair was so silky that the turbans always drooped downwards to the left side, which gave them very beautiful forms—I like that part—and their ears were decorated with sandalwood paste, and wearing long, fragrant wildflower garlands, they appeared like the sons of the forest land. How beautiful is that? Sons of the forest land. And holding long sticks which were double their height, they blew their first horns for herding cows. And after that, Rohiṇī and Yaśodā came forward to worship their sons—it is described, the next generation of cowherds—applying tilaka. They sprinkled rose water all over them.

Now, after spending the entire day in the forest, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma returned with all their cows in the evening. At that time, Mother Yaśodā and Rohiṇī called all the gopīs together, both young and older gopīs, to do a procession. And all the gopīs of Vraja were dressed in colorful colīs—or top-pieces, shirts—and ghāgarās—ghāgarās mean skirts—holding lamps in each hand and placing a big lamp on their heads. They all started walking towards the Yamunā. It was a beautiful procession of lamps, and the residents of Vraja were all dancing and playing different musical instruments, described rolling in the dust and showering each other with flowers, and they were all singing the glories of Mother Nature and the Yamunā. Then all the gopīs placed their glowing lamps into the gently flowing Yamunā River as gratitude to Mother Nature, to the hills, the land, the cows, the rivers, and the sky. Nanda Mahārāja looked at the river Yamunā and said, “Oh Queen Yaśodā, my dear wife, look, it all appears like a necklace of lamps around the neck of Mother Yamunā.” And Yaśodā said, “I pray to the Yamunā for the safety and well-being of my son Kṛṣṇa.”

The poet Lalita says, “I offer my respects to Naṭavara Kṛṣṇa, who herds the cows of Mahārāja Nanda and returns home in the evening, bringing bliss and joy to all the residents of Vraja.” Hari Kṛṣṇa! Again, thank you to that poet.

So yeah, I would like to finish today by reciting a relevant poem for today from the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, 16th Vilāsa, Volume 1, by Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He entitled this poem “The Glories of Lighting Another’s Lamp During the Month of Kārttika.” When I first read that, that is an interesting title—the glories of lighting another’s lamp during the month of Kārttika. We think of lighting our own lamp, but he is taking an interesting angle here:

“By serving the Vaiṣṇavas and lighting the lamps they offer during the month of Kārttika, one attains the result of performing many rājasūya and aśvamedha-yajñas. Oh tiger of kings, a person who in Lord Kṛṣṇa’s temple lights the lamp that others will offer during the month of Kārttika becomes free from the tortures of Yamarāja. Oh king of brāhmaṇas, by lighting the lamp that others will offer during the month of Kārttika, one attains the result of having performed many great yajñas. Somehow or other, a mouse once lit a lamp that someone offered on a caturdaśī during the month of Kārttika. That mouse then attained a rare human birth and then went home, back to Godhead, to the Supreme spiritual world.”

Hari Kṛṣṇa, wow! Two lectures we did on the lamps offered to the deity of the Lord. Hari Kṛṣṇa, thank you, thank you, thank you so much. It is so nice doing this research, even in our busy travels; a nice service to all of you wonderful Vaiṣṇavas. So, I haven’t thought of what we will do next week, but we will find something and we will study and be ready for you next Friday. Śrī Kṛṣṇa!

Jaya Jaya Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara! All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dīpa-mālikā. Thank you, Hari Kṛṣṇa! Jaya!
