Hi Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

But first, "Bolo Śrī Śrī Gurū Gaurāṅgau ki jaya!

All glories to Śrī Śrī Gurū Gaurāṅgau!" I was thinking this morning that this hearing and chanting about Vṛndāvana and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and everything connected to them is the very best use of our lives.

And later in the morning, I came across a beautiful verse in this connection. It's from the *Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam* by Hari Kavi. It's verse 536, and I quote: "Giving up hundreds of other tasks, one should eat at a proper time.

Giving up thousands of other tasks, one should take bath at the proper time. Giving up hundreds of thousands of other tasks, one should give suitable charity. And giving up tens of millions of other tasks, one should perform devotional service to Śrī Hari." Wow!

So, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be, uh, part 95. And we've recently chosen, in the theme, as you know, um, of Kṛṣṇa's transcendental qualities from chapter 26 of *Nectar of Devotion*. And we mentioned in our last lecture that Rūpa Gosvāmī says in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* that Kṛṣṇa has 64 outstanding qualities, of which four are most prominent.

And I think it's good to recite them again: Number one: He is the performer of wonderful varieties of pastimes, especially his childhood pastimes. Number two: He is surrounded by devotees endowed with the wonderful love of Godhead. Number three: He can attract living entities from all over the universe by playing on his flute.

And number four: He has a, a wonderful excellence of beauty that cannot be rivaled anywhere in creation. Now, last week we spoke on the first one, Kṛṣṇa is the performer of wonderful varieties of pastimes, especially His *līlā* in His childhood pastimes.

But we did not exhaust that subject. How could you?

Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are unlimited. So we'll continue with it today. Now, the special beauty of Kṛṣṇa's childhood pastimes, or for that matter, any and all of His pastimes in Vṛndāvana, is that He is controlled by the love of His devotees.

That love is called *para-vaśya*. And if one checks the definition of "God," "God" in a Western dictionary is defined as what?

Supreme controller. But in God, Vaishnava philosophy, our philosophy as devotees in this Hare Kṛṣṇa Movement, we understand He mysteriously, lovingly, allows Himself to come under the control of the love of His pure devotees, particularly in Vṛndāvana.

And He's not shy about it at all. There's that famous verse in *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* 9.4.62. We hear Kṛṣṇa speaking: "Śrī Bhagavān uvāca" (Kṛṣṇa said). "I am completely under the control of My devotees. Indeed, I am not at all independent, because My devotees are completely devoid of material desires.

I sit only within the cores of their hearts. What to speak of My devotees, even those who are devotees of My devotees are very dear to Me." Now, the Vaishnava poet Govinda Swami, who actually lived in Vṛndāvana 500 years ago, describes very beautifully in his poem *Yugala-gīti* just how the Lord is controlled by His devotees.

He writes, and I, I really love this: "Lord Nṛsiṁha sat on the throne of Hiraṇyakaśipu and addressed all the demigods: 'Oh demigods, from this day forth, I will reside forever in the shadow of my devotees. Wherever my devotees will go, I will be their shadow.

Oh Prahlāda, for you, I won't return to my Vaikuṇṭha abode. I will eternally reside with you. I am controlled by my devotees. Wherever and however they want me, I will come in that form for their pleasure. I am the *kaṭaputali*.' It's a beautiful phrase.

I am the *kaṭaputali*, the puppet in the hands of my devotees, and the strings of these puppets are the strings of unconditional love, for which I am controlled." The poet Govinda Swami says, "Oh, brother, leave everything aside and worship the lotus feet of Lord Nṛhari, who protects his devotees at all times when they need Him." Wow.

So Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the love of His devotees. And there are those who worship Him in His majestic forms. But more blessed, more fortunate, are the *braja-vāsīs*, for whom He appears as a small child, a small baby. Former, former intimate pastimes.

Vṛndāvana-sakhas. Śrīla Canda Dāsa, another poet who lived in Vṛndāvana, I think around the same time, 500 years ago.

He puts this very nicely in his *Grantha Vṛndāvana-vilāsa*.

It's the first verse, actually. He writes: "Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose name the *braja-vāsīs* chant, Brahmā chants, Lord Śiva chants, Lord Ananta chants, Nārada, Śuka, and Vyāsa chant, is beyond their comprehension. Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose name His great devotees Dhruva and Prahlāda chant, Ceti's son Arjuna chant, and Durvāsā chant, is the protector of the destitute, the king of elephants Gajendra chants, the wife of Gopālan chants, the beloved lady of the king chants, giving love to her children. Śrīla Canda Dāsa says that is the same little Gopal, the upholder of Govardhana Hill, the dear son of Yaśodā, who has enchanted everyone's heart with this beautiful form and remains the necklace on the heart of Śrī Rādhā." And He remains the necklace on the heart of Śrī Rādhā.

It's like a great symphony, you know. The symphony comes to a climax. Who remains the necklace on the heart of Śrī Rādhā?

In Vṛndāvana, there is an ancient tradition of performing theater of Kṛṣṇa's *līlās* on stages.

It was actually started by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. And these theaters were called *Rasa Maṇḍala*. And you may have seen when when you go to Govinda Gosvāmī's temple, Rādhā-ramaṇa, before you enter, maybe 20 meters away, there's a platform we call a *maṇḍala* platform where these theaters have been taking place for 500 years.

It's still in fact. I saw several theaters there some years ago. And in these theaters, *Rasa Maṇḍala*, after reciting a *monā-charm* (meaning introductory prayers), the person who plays the role of Kṛṣṇa, just as an introduction, after the introduction, he sings a beautiful poem every time before the the theater starts in Braja Bhāṣā.

And I've heard there, I've been, I've seen these *līlās*, and I always, you know, we can, I can hardly understand Hindi, what about Braja Bhāṣā?

But I was always wondering, what is that actor who's playing the role of Kṛṣṇa singing?

But I finally found it. I found the Braja Bhāṣā, and I had it translated. So here's what Kṛṣṇa is singing before the *rasa-līlā* or whatever performance is going on. "So beautiful. I'm under the control of my dear devotees. Throughout the day and night, I keep them in my heart.

Not for a moment, in the blinking of an eye, do I ever forget them. I find no peace by staying at Vaikuṇṭha, nor in the meditation of yogis. I find pleasure in staying close to wherever my devotees are singing about me day and night.

I disguise myself according to the desire of my devotees. I break my own promises to honor the promises made by them. And thus I am known as biased. I wash their feet. I wash their cookery. I drive their chariot.

And I serve them. I do everything for the pleasure of my devotees. I don't ask them for any reward. And I serve them limitlessly. If they offer me a fruit, a flower, a leaf, or some water, I accept it with love.

I offer my very self to my dear devotees and forget about my own opulence. I do whatever my devotees desire. I continuously do whatever they want. Even if they sell me, I agree to be sold out of love. This is Braja-bhakti.

Kṛṣṇa's love for His devotees and devotees' love for Kṛṣṇa. This we find only in Vṛndāvana." Therefore, it's appropriate before these pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, whoever is playing Kṛṣṇa, before the play starts, he comes out every time and recites this beautiful poem.

It's amazing. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

And now, as we know, some of the sweetest childhood pastimes of Kṛṣṇa are His *Makhana-līlā*, His stealing butter. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in verse 34 of his beautiful *Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caramṛta* he writes as follows: "Oh Kṛṣṇa, who holds a flute and is the beloved son of Nanda Mahārāja, oh dark cloud-like one who roams in the forest, oh thief of butter and hearts alike!

Your *makhana-līlā* pastimes captivate the minds of devotees." And then in verse 82: "Oh Kṛṣṇa, who roams in the homes of the gopīs, stealthily taking butter and hiding in the shadows, Your divine mischief brings joy to the hearts of the *braja-vāsīs*.

Oh beloved of the gopīs, we are enchanted by Your every move." So many of these, uh, butter-stealing pastimes are described in the following scriptures, if you want more references: In *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam*, canto 10, chapter 8, of course, along with Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's commentaries on that chapter.

Also, we find them in *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu*, it's chapter five. In *Gopāla-campu*, in the section called *Pūrva-campu*, chapter seven. And in *Garga Saṁhitā*, canto 1, chapter 17. That took some research doing for you. And there's one very nice pastime where Mother Yaśodā she tricked Kṛṣṇa into admitting He, it was *daṇḍa-naṭa* (meaning butter theft).

So, catching Kṛṣṇa eating butter one day, she said, "Kṛṣṇa, you have stolen it, haven't you?" But initially, Kṛṣṇa professed His innocence, saying, "Māyā, it couldn't have been me.

For, remember, you sent me to Vṛndāvana to herd the cows today.

I left early in the morning and have just now returned with the setting sun. The cows and my friends are my witnesses. I have been away in Vṛndāvana all day.

Māyā, how can you accuse me like this?" Then he started crying crocodile tears and said, "I returned tired and hungry, and you call me a thief!

Māyā, how can you be so cruel?

Am I no longer your son?

If not, then I cannot live here any longer with you." So Mother Yaśodā's heart softened, and she said, "Lāla, perhaps I am mistaken. Maybe the neighbor saw someone else." But then she put her face in her palms and cried, "Remember, this is a little trickery here.

Oh, my son, surely I was wrong. I'm so sorry. You see, the neighbors complained. They swore upon their cows that you spent all day terrorizing their homes by breaking yogurt pots, eating the contents, and they said you were even sharing it with the monkeys." So now Kṛṣṇa, seeing His mother crying, Kṛṣṇa's heart softened, and placing one hand on her arm, this is *vatsalya-rasa*, He pleaded, "Māyā, don't cry.

I can confess. I confess, I stole the butter. I've never heard a pastime where Kṛṣṇa confesses. Please don't cry." So, hiding a smile as best she could, Yaśodā looked at her son through her fingers and cried even louder, "No, forgive me, oh innocent one.

I wrongly accused you. It's as you say, you were in Vṛndāvana, you couldn't have done it." Then Kṛṣṇa squeezed his mother's arm, crying, "You heard not to blame, mother.

I did do it. I did." "She replied, 'No, you didn't.'" "Kṛṣṇa insisted, 'Yes, I did.'" But barely able to contain her laughter with her trickery, Yaśodā said, "No, you didn't." "Yes, I did," Kṛṣṇa said. But now, now Kṛṣṇa started detecting something a little strange in his mother's voice.

You kind of see through it, her trickery. And repeatedly tugging at her hands, he finally uncovered her radiant, smiling face. It's described. And realized she had tricked him. Then Mother Yaśodā looked at Kṛṣṇa with wide open eyes and said once more with a smile, "No, you didn't." And then laughing through her arms around her son, covering, it's described, now smiling, tear-stained face with her kisses.

And Kṛṣṇa affectionately stroked his mother's hair. But still determined. And here's, you know, an important line here, not to be outdone. It's described, "Not to be outdone, even after having been exposed as a thief." He kissed Mother Yaśodā. His cheek came very close and whispered in her ear, saying, "Māyā, yes, I did.

Yes, I did." He wasn't outdone. All this is nectar, the nectar of the Gods. Now, there's another pastime described by Kavi Karpura in *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu*, and I found that it's also mentioned by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Pravāḷi*, text 42.

Kind of combined them here. It begins: Kṛṣṇa once reached into an open container full of butter, he was, you know, some gopī's house somewhere, and he was reaching into an open container full of butter. Then, just off to the side, he saw his own reflection in a shiny marble column nearby.

And thinking it to be another boy who had come upon the scene of his naughtiness, Kṛṣṇa blurted out, "Dear brother, if you don't tell my mother, I shall share some of this butter with you and we can enjoy it together.

But you must be quiet, otherwise she might catch us." Now, overhearing Kṛṣṇa's whispers from a nearby hiding place, Mother Yaśodā could barely keep from laughing out loud. Out loud. Then, as if she were ignorant of what was going on, she innocently came before her son. "My dear," she said, "who, how does it go, who, when caught red-handed, tried to rescue his propensity to steal?

That's wonderful. Who, when caught red-handed, tried to rescue his propensity to steal?" So, it's really nice.

Pointing to his own reflection in the pillar, Kṛṣṇa said, "Māyā, you're just in time. You see that greedy boy?

He came here to steal your butter, but I forbade him. But he ignored me, and when I got angry with him, he also got angry with me. He got angry with me." Then, shaking his head in a mischievous way, well, that sly smile on his lips, Kṛṣṇa went on, "But Māyā, you know, I'm not at all greedy for stealing butter.

It's him, it's not me. I'm not greedy." Try to get out of it now. We move on in *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu*, chapter 5. It's described that a little while later, Mother Yaśodā was doing some housework and having, how's this described, neither seen nor heard of her son for quite some time, she became suspicious, as mothers would.

So she called out, "Lāla, oh Lāla, Kṛṣṇa, where are you darling?

What are you doing?" But Kṛṣṇa had, in fact, broken into her store of milk products, and now he was afraid he would be caught.

So he ran to where Mother Yaśodā was and raising his hand with a very, uh, worried look on his face, he said, "Māyā, look, my hand was burning from the heat caused by the ruby bangles you placed on my wrists.

So I stuck my hand into a pot of butter to relieve the burning pain. But don't worry, Māyā, that pain's not so bad." So Yaśodā, she smiled and said, "Oh, dear, that sounds terrible, my son. Come sit on my lap at once and show me the burns on your hand." So as Kṛṣṇa sat on her lap, Mother Yaśodā looked at Kṛṣṇa's wrist, and kissing it, she said, "Oh, just see, your wrist is burned, my poor baby.

I will remove those ruby bangles so you will no longer feel any pain." Now, generally, when Mother Yaśodā caught Kṛṣṇa in the act of stealing, she would chastise Him. The *ācāryas* say, not for the loss of butter, but to fulfill her parental duty of training him to be honest and law-abiding.

But this time, this very special time, not wanting to make Kṛṣṇa feel bad that day, she said, "Oh, son, our entire stock of butter, ghee, and yogurt, it's all for you." At that point, Kṛṣṇa opened his eyes wide and he broke into a broad smile, then he said, "It's all mine?" "You replied?" "Yes, dear, all of it." So, Mother Yaśodā said, this is a rare instance where Kṛṣṇa escaped the anger of his mother for his constant stealing of his favorite milk product, butter.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

And we're reminded of this stealing, of course, in the *Dāmodarāṣṭakam*, a prayer by Satya-tapa Muni. Therein we hear: "To the Supreme Lord, whose form is the embodiment of eternal existence, knowledge and bliss, whose shark-shaped earrings are swinging to and fro, who is beautifully shining in the divine realm of Gokula, and who, due to the offense of breaking the pot of yogurt that his mother was churning into butter and then stealing the butter that was kept hanging from a swing, is quickly running from the wooden grinding mortar in fear of Mother Yaśodā, but who has been caught from behind by her, who ran after him with greater speed, to that Supreme Lord, Daśaratha, I offer my humble obeisances." But in the nice pastime we described today, she didn't chastise him so much.

So we got some rare glimpse today into *vatsalya-rasa*. Now, finally, as Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma grew up a little bit, it's described that their mischief increased so much that, uh, Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes in *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* 10.8.25 as follows: "When Mother Yaśodā and Rohiṇī were unable to protect their babies from calamities, because, you know, their babies are crawling all around, were unable to protect their babies." It's described from calamities like coming in contact with horned cows, fires, and animals with teeth, swords, water, birds, and thorns.

They were always in anxiety, and thus their household engagements were disturbed. Now, here's what's very nice. It increased their Bha... At that time, they were, he says, fully equipoised in the transcendental ecstasy known as the distress and maternal affection, for this was aroused within their minds.

Nice description of *vatsalya-rasa*. Now, our poet Hari Dāsa says that within this verse, there's a great secret. And I'd, um, like to finish today with the secret. Hari Dāsa says that when Kṛṣṇa was playing with horned cows, why was he playing with horned cows?

Because later he had to kill Ariṣṭāsura. He had to practice. Why was he playing with fire?

Well, because later he had to swallow the forest fire twice. Isn't this nice?

Why was he playing with animals with teeth?

Even his mother was so upset. Because later he had to kill the sharp-toothed Āsura. Why was he playing with swords?

So he explains, Nanda Mahārāja would sometimes forget to lock his cupboard, and Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma would therein, they would find swords and they would fight with those swords. Why?

He says, because Kṛṣṇa was practicing his future war with Jarāsandha, who he had to fight so many times like that. Why was Kṛṣṇa, a baby, you know, going down to the ponds and almost falling in?

He says, because later he had to chastise the Kāliya serpent. And why was he playing with, you know, wild birds?

Because later Hari Dāsa says he had to kill Bakāsura. And thorns. Thorns. Why was he walking through thorns and bushes?

Because later he would have to remove all the thorn-like kings from the surface of the Earth. So, practice makes perfect. And Kṛṣṇa started practicing all these activities right from childhood. And Hari Dāsa said, "That's the hidden reason behind these pastimes." These pastimes.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Isn't that nice?

We get some through our *ācāryas*, we get to look deep, deep into these wonderful pastimes. So thank you, Prabhu. Yes, we, we're supposed to cover, you know, four of these transcendental qualities of Kṛṣṇa. But we're kind of transcendently stuck on the first one.

Thank God. Um, you know, Kṛṣṇa's childhood pastimes. So we have more of those pastimes to, to share with you, uh, to the vision of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous *ācāryas*, as it should be.

So thank you so much, and we'll be back, um, next Friday for more nectar from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Jaya Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Thank you so much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.