Hari Krishna everyone and a warm welcome back once again to our ever ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Shri Vṛndāvana.

But first, Viṣṇu-Kṛṣṇa namaste Gaurāṇī. All glories to Śrīnātha. So, early this morning I was thinking that this entire series of lectures about Vṛndāvana that we've been doing for so many years now is simply to help us focus, or you could say, concentrate on Kṛṣṇa and his pure devotees.

Then, later in the morning, I heard the following in a Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam lecture by Śrīla Prabhupāda that he gave on January 17th, 1971.

He said as follows: "If you sit down and write some article on Kṛṣṇa, that means you have to concentrate on Kṛṣṇa's activities or Kṛṣṇa's devotees' activities. And that very process will purify your heart. That very process will purify your heart.

Therefore, we always recommend to our students that you write articles, uh, read our magazine, read our books. We have come here in this pandal, this kunda, not for any other purpose than to glorify the Supreme Lord, so that people may understand the importance of this movement, this International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.

Haribol." So, we're continuing with our miniatures on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 141, in which we will continue our discussions on Vṛndāvana Kṛṣṇa's disguises, the disguises.

So many classes we've done on disguises. Today, we will discuss, um, Kṛṣṇa assuming the disguise of a puruṣa, meaning a priest, uh, from two different śāstras. From Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta Mahākāvya, um, chapter 15, and Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī's Govinda-līlāmṛta, chapter 18.

They write of the same pastime, but they give slightly different versions. So, we, we mix them a little bit, but it's very beautiful. Now, why in the world would Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, assume the humble disguise as a priest, as a priest?

Well, let's see. So, in Vṛndāvana, Sunday, many of you know, is celebrated as the day of Sūrya Deva.

Sūrya Deva is the sun god. Many Brajabāsīs in the past and in the present take advantage, uh, of this day to go to Sūrya-kuṇḍa, where there's a beautiful deity of Sūrya, the sun god, to seek his blessings. I've been there many times.

For example, Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's father, goes there regularly to worship Sūrya Deva out of fear of Kaṁsa. Out of fear of Kaṁsa, who, as we know, resides in nearby Mathurā, and is always intent on killing Kṛṣṇa. His daughter, Vṛndāvanēśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, also regularly visits Sūrya-kuṇḍa, especially every Sunday afternoon, on the request of her mother-in-law, Jatilā.

Uh, I was reading of these two ācāryas' writings that Jatilā's reasoning is that by worshiping Sūrya Deva, Rādhārāṇī and her husband, Abhimanyu, their prosperity will increase. But she always sees it as an opportunity to get out of Yavata, to somehow secretly meet with Kṛṣṇa, who one time appeared there at Sūrya-kuṇḍa disguised as Sūrya's pujari, the priest, Buddhitama.

Now, our beloved Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has immortalized that pastime in his Gaura-līlā-tarangini, text 88. Very famously, he writes: "Seeing her father worship Sūrya Deva out of fear of the nearby Kaṁsa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, in the secluded place known as Santana Pada, also earnestly worshiped Sūrya to attain a certain youth whose complexion is as dark as a host of monsoon clouds, as her chosen husband.

I pray that Sūrya Deva may protect us all. Thank you, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī." Now, Narahari Sarkāra also glorifies this particular pastime in his Bhakti-ratnākara from verses, um, 585 to 587. He writes as follows: "This is Sūrya-kuṇḍa village. Here Śrī Rādhā went with great joy for Sūrya-pujā, and Kṛṣṇa enthusiastically became the priest.

Haribol." He goes on: "This Sūrya is the great giver of prema, prema means love towards Kṛṣṇa. Hearing his glories, who will not worship Sūrya here?

So, we must all go there. It's a very special place." Now, both Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja and Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura write that on the way to Sūrya-kuṇḍa, Rādhārāṇī actually first meets Kṛṣṇa at 12 noon at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. This is how it unfolds.

Before going there, she passes through Rādhā-kuṇḍa at 12:00 noon. And those ācāryas say that sometimes Kṛṣṇa arrives early at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and has to wait for Śrīmatī Rādhā, but at other times, they write, it is Rādhā, who has to wait until Kṛṣṇa arrives.

So, when he does arrive, they describe beautifully dressed and ornamented. Śrīmatī Rādhā greets him with great respect by placing a garland on his neck and sandalwood paste on his arms. All these things we can just envision in our mind's eyes.

Then, in the summer, when the heat is very oppressive, the divine couple afterwards, they enjoy swimming pastimes together. And afterwards, they swim in the cool, uh, waters of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. These ācāryas write that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's water sports may resemble the play of older children, but actually, they are expressions of selfless love, disclosed only to devotees with the deepest faith and grasp of the sublime.

Wow. Disclosed only to devotees who have the deepest faith and a grasp of the sublime Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, then after swimming, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa they come ashore, and their friends dress them in fresh clothing and flower decorations. Wow. Fresh clothing and flower decorations.

Then the divine couple sits down for a game of what?

Dice. We've discussed these dice pastimes in previous lectures. Um, in these dice pastimes, Rādhā rolls black dice, and I was reading, Kṛṣṇa rolls golden dice. But Rādhā is actually more skilled at throwing dice. So, although Kṛṣṇa wins some throws, Rādhārāṇī almost always wins the game.

And when she does, Kṛṣṇa places the dice in her hands and says, quote, "Today the goddess of fortune has smiled upon you. I thus submit myself to your lotus feet, my dear Śrīmatī Rādhā." Such wonderful pastimes. As a result of all this activity, by this time, um, it's described they're very hungry.

So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī feeds Kṛṣṇa first. Uh, she feeds him fruit collected from a nearby forest, picked by her maidservants. Uh, she feeds him savories brought from her home, and sweets that she has prepared earlier in the day. Such wonderful details.

And after Kṛṣṇa has eaten, Rādhā and her friends honor his remnants. And then the divine couple retire to a beautiful jeweled temple to rest. A jeweled temple to rest. So much detail, uh, to fix our mind and help us concentrate and get purified.

And meanwhile, Rādhārāṇī's sakīs also rest in their respective groves around Rādhā-kuṇḍa, while the younger girls, the mañjarīs, happily finish the remnants of the meal that Kṛṣṇa ate and the sakīs ate before busying themselves to prepare for Rādhā's visit to Sūrya-kuṇḍa at 3 p.m.

At 3 p.m. When it's next 3 p.m., you can think like this: This is what Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are doing. After this break, a parrot suddenly arrives with news that Abhimanyu and Jatilā are on their way to find out why it always takes Śrīmatī Rādhā and her friends so long to get to Sūrya-kuṇḍa to worship the sun god.

The news arrived that they hadn't arrived there yet, so they left to find out why it's taking so long. And the ācāryas say that this news is like a bucket of ice water tossed on Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs, who all leap to their feet at once.

Then Rādhā and her friends hurry off to Sūrya-kuṇḍa, while Kṛṣṇa goes to Kunja-bihārī to change clothes. To change clothes, yes, to appear like a celibate brahmacārī priest, Kṛṣṇa. So, carrying the items with which to worship the sun god, Rādhā and her gopīs are the first to arrive at Sūrya-kuṇḍa and this deity of, of Sūrya.

There he stands on a beautiful altar, which lies at the center of a flower-filled grove within a forest of, what?

Wish-fulfilling trees. This is all absolute truth, absolute reality. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her maidservants then, it's described, they sit down very close to the deity of Sūrya and place gifts and items of worship on a silk cloth before the altar and begin to sing traditional songs that glorify the sun god.

Then, a little while later, Madhu-maṅgala appears along with Kṛṣṇa, who is disguised as this, uh, young brāhmaṇa priest. And Kṛṣṇa, he's dressed in white cloth and his hair is tied in, in a, a top knot, looking like a lifelong brahmacārī.

Kṛṣṇa, lifelong brahmacārī. This is his disguise. Today, it's also described a scarf hangs around, um, his neck, and a, a large red spot of tilaka is seen on his forehead. Large red spot of tilaka on his forehead. His fingers are decorated with rings, and his, and his two hands are, um, kuśa grass and a sacred book.

You can just think like that. Kuśa grass and a sacred book. Doesn't mention the book, just says as a sacred book. So, these two śāstras say that he moves with an air of detachment. He is the puruṣa. He is the priest.

So now, it's not long before Madhu-maṅgala notices the sweets that are waiting to be offered to Sūrya Deva. So he says, "We should not keep the Lord of the Sky waiting for his worship or offering. Let us all do the needful.

We should not let the Lord of the skies, the sun god, wait for his worship and his offering. Let's do the needful." So, Śrīmatī Rādhā nods in agreement to Madhu-maṅgala's proposal and offers seats to Madhu-maṅgala and, and Kṛṣṇa disguised as, as the priest.

Then she places the tray of sweets in the priest's hands, and Kṛṣṇa's hands for offering, along with, um, gifts of garments and ornaments for Sūrya Deva. And at that very moment, Abhimanyu arrives with his mother, Jatilā, and the plot thickens.

Now, it's mentioned, uh, that on the way to Sūrya-kuṇḍa, Abhimanyu and Jatilā had been harshly speaking about Śrīmatī Rādhā, you know, complaining about her and criticizing her, maybe she's meeting with Kṛṣṇa from time to time. They were speaking harshly about Śrīmatī Rādhā.

But since they were now in the presence of Sūrya Deva and a brāhmaṇa priest, Jatilā and Abhimanyu controlled themselves and sat down in the corner of the courtyard. Now, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī acknowledged their arrival by bowing her head, as disguised Kṛṣṇa began reciting mantras, mantras to the sun god.

And as he does so, Rādhārāṇī becomes nervous that her in-laws, meaning Abhimanyu, Jatilā, might recognize Kṛṣṇa because of the way he's chanting the mantras or his voice. So, Rādhārāṇī just sits there shaking with fear, not knowing what to expect, what's going to happen now.

The other gopī girls also sense impending danger and whisper amongst themselves, "Abhimanyu will surely recognize Kṛṣṇa's voice. What should we do?" But the priest, the priest is calm, um, as he chants these, um, beautiful mantras and praise of the sun.

He's very calm because he's happy to be with Rādhārāṇī again. So, soon, it's described after their pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, they're getting away with it. But seeing Rādhārāṇī's nervousness, this priest disguised Kṛṣṇa comes up with a plan to calm her down, as well as to deal with Jatilā and Abhimanyu's constant suspicions and criticism of Rādhā.

So, suddenly, Kṛṣṇa makes his voice, this priest makes his voice to sound as if it's coming from the deity Sūrya Deva. He's speaking, but it sounds like Sūrya Deva speaking, and the voice says, "Who has been speaking ill of Rādhārāṇī?

You, Śrīmatī Rādhā, are as pure as my rays. The sun god speaking. You, Śrīmatī Rādhā, are as pure as my rays. Thus, I cannot tolerate those who falsely accuse you of any type of misconduct. Oh, chaste girl, everyone's hearing.

No matter how many sacrifices you perform for me, in return for the sins of those who criticize you, I will send death to your husband, and ruin Jatilā along with her relatives, her cows, and to all the people in her village if anyone criticizes you." So, then Śrīmatī Rādhā, understanding Kṛṣṇa's plan, because Kṛṣṇa is speaking as the deity, she played along by saying, "Oh, with folded hands, I pray to you, my worshipable deity, whom I have served all my life.

What will be my fate if my friends and relatives die?

My husband, Abhimanyu, is my life. She has to say it. My husband, Abhimanyu, is my life. If he dies, how can I live?

And my dear mother-in-law, Jatilā, always treats me with affection. If she is destroyed, how will your Rādhā survive such a calamity?

Oh, please be kind to them." Now, while Kṛṣṇa in, um, Sūrya Deva's voice and, and Śrīmatī Rādhā speak like this, Jatilā and Abhimanyu stand wide-eyed with their mouths agape. And finally, because they're hearing this whole thing, finally the deity of the sun says, "Oh, chaste one, Śrīmatī Rādhā, your intense devotion to me is very pleasing.

Therefore, rest assured that no calamity shall befall you. Your husband, family, and friends are all safe. Be at peace." And at these words of reassurance from the deity of Sūrya, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and disguise, disguise Kṛṣṇa, take their seats very close to each other, the priest and Rādhā, to complete the offering.

And as they chant mantras to worship the sun god and offer incense, lamps, flowers, and garlands, their heartbeats get stronger and stronger because they've managed to come together. And it's described as such, their love for each other shines brightly in their eyes.

They're able to fool, and as a result, their hearts are beating, and, and their love shines brightly in their eyes. Then, after the pūjā is completed, it takes some time. They don't mind. Śrīmatī Rādhā addresses Sūrya Deva, "Oh Lord, if you are still my protector and well-wisher after all I have asked, please throw me a flower.

Then I will be reassured. Everything you said is true." And as soon as she finishes speaking, the deity smiles and, what?

Shakes his body, causing all the offered flowers that have been offered to him to fall in a shower to the floor. And all the gopīs present jump to their feet and joyfully cry out, "Jai, Jai, Jai!" While Madhu-maṅgala is trying to gather all the offered sweets that have fallen on the ground in his cloth.

Then Kṛṣṇa, disguised as the priest, goes to each gopī. He places his hands on their heads and blesses them with the words, "May you all be happy with your husbands, with your husbands." Then, disguised Kṛṣṇa left. And it's described, the ācāryas, it's described that he's leaving, but he's looking back as if to look at the, you know, that beautiful deity of Sūrya Deva, but actually, his glance always falls on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, seeing the face of his beloved.

And soon after that, Abhimanyu, he leaves with Rādhārāṇī and Jatilā to go back to Yavata. Now, it's really interesting. On the way home, Abhimanyu and his mother, they end up praising Śrīmatī Rādhā profusely, although along the same road, not long ago, they had accused her of so many terrible things and called her bad names.

But now, everything's changed by this amazing pastime. And arriving in Yavata, Abhimanyu says to Jatilā, and I quote him: "My dear mother, never again listen to the advice of our foolish neighbors who will be the death of me. And never again fault your daughter-in-law, lest the Lord ruin you." And as the two of them talked about all they'd seen and heard that day at Sūrya-kuṇḍa, they agreed never again to speak ill about anyone, especially Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Haribol. Very famous pastime. I've told it a number of times, and but, uh, at Śrī Sūrya-kuṇḍa. So, if you have a chance, go to Śrī Sūrya-kuṇḍa and remember this wonderful pastime. So, we can finish today with two very beautiful prayers, calling, uh, from our hearts upon the mercy of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

There's so many, of course, but I chose the following. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in his Kṛṣṇa-caritā, uh, verse, um, 104: "Oh Kṛṣṇa, you and you alone are my worshipable deity, the giver of love, and the fulfiller of all desires. You alone are the object of my knowledge, my power, my wealth, my vital force, and my very life." And finally, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Prabhupāda prays in his Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta, verse, uh, six: "One of my favorites.

Oh, queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhā, when can I fan you with a yak-tail fan with a jeweled rod, while you and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are sitting under a tree, your lotus-like faces beautified by drops of perspiration from fatigue after your pastimes on the shore of your pond?" Śrīmatī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

One of my favorite disguise pastimes today at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and that's Sūrya-kuṇḍa. So, thank you, Prabhupāda.

Um, I just left Macedonia, where we had several wonderful festivals. Now, I'm in France. I'm going to, uh, New Māyāpur to celebrate the 50th anniversary of establishing that project, which was, um, desired by Śrīla Prabhupāda.

We're going to have three or four days of wonderful festivities. So, come here for that. So, I'm living in a little rural home just outside the community, very, very, very beautiful. So, thank you, and, um, see you next Friday.

Krishna, JJ, C.

Hey, sh the key. All right.