Hare Krishna everyone.

Welcome back once again to our lectures on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Om Viṣṇupād Paramahaṁsa Parivrājakācārya Aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda’s kīrtana.

Namaste. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So today we are continuing with our miniseries on Stimulus for Ecstatic Love, based on Chapter 26 of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Nectar of Devotion*. And this will be Part 51. In this lecture, we will discuss markings on the chest of the Lord.

Now, I got the idea to speak on this subject while reading Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s illustrious *Kṛṣṇa-caitanya-caritāmṛta*. In Text 66, he writes: “Oh, when will I see that young boy Kṛṣṇa, who is the storehouse of playful pastimes, whose chest and lotus eyes are broad, whose smiles and loving words are gentle, and whose bimba-fruit red lips and flute song are very sweet?” This mentions the chest of the Lord.

There, up until then, I only knew of one particular characteristic on the Lord's chest, and that was the famous Śrīvatsa mark, which is a small bunch of white hair, white curling hairs on the chest of the Lord. What’s more, I thought this mark was only on the chest of Lord Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa’s expansion.

For when I read *Kṛṣṇa Book*, Chapter 89, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes: “Lord Mahāviṣṇu has eight arms, all very long, reaching to His knees.

His neck is decorated with the Kauśtuba jewel, and His chest is marked with the symbol of Śrīvatsa.” But further research revealed that this distinctive mark is also on the chest of our Lord Kṛṣṇa and all of His incarnations as well. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains as follows: “Because Kṛṣṇa is the source of all incarnations, all the symptoms of all other incarnations are to be found on His transcendental body.” Another ācārya has written: “All symbols of Viṣṇu are also with Kṛṣṇa, otherwise Kṛṣṇa would be deficient as compared to Viṣṇu.

This cannot happen. This cannot happen.” So, whenever Kṛṣṇa appears in any form, His divine symbols accompany Him. An anonymous Brājarāja poet has written: “Oh, my Lord, when I walk, even my shadows don't follow me, but when You walk the earth, the planets and even the sky walk behind You.” So, it’s important to note that this symbol, Śrīvatsa, is not to be found on any other living entity, even Lord Śiva or Lord Brahmā.

In his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 6.9.30, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes: “In Vaikuṇṭha-loka, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has four hands and decorations like the Śrīvatsa mark on His chest and the gem known as Kauśtuba.

These are special indications of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord’s personal attendants and other devotees in Vaikuṇṭha have the same features, except for the Śrīvatsa mark and the Kauśtuba jewel.” Only Kṛṣṇa. So what does this distinctive mark on the chest of the Lord actually look like?

Well, Śrīla Kavi-karṇapūra, in his *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*, in the second Canto, the second Bouquet, he says: “On the right side of the chest of Kṛṣṇa is a fine arrangement of lotus thread-like soft hairs called Śrīvatsa.” So, there are some details. And Śrīdhara Svāmī gives more details in his *Bhāvārtha-dīpikā*, which is actually his commentary on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*.

And there, in 10.3.48, he writes: “Śrīvatsa is defined as a clockwise curl of hair on the right side of the chest of Bhagavān.” And in his *Satya-sandarbha* commentary to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī Ṭhākura says: “Śrīvatsa, Śrīvatsa, the Śrīvatsa is brilliant white in color.

The Śrīvatsa is brilliant white in color.” Of course, it’s understood that the Śrīvatsa is not ordinary hair. The ordinary hair of humans is actually considered to be an impure substance, but the divine hair of the Śrīvatsa is considered to be the personification of the effulgence of the Kauśtuba jewel, which also decorates the chest of the Lord.

Now, Śrīdhara Svāmī, the first commentator on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, confirms this in his commentary to *Bhāgavatam* 10.1.21.10. He says: “The illumination of the Kauśtuba is reflected in Kṛṣṇa’s soft Śrīvatsa hair.” There's the authority that the two, the mark of the Śrīvatsa and the Kauśtuba jewel, are together on the chest of the Lord.

This is also confirmed in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.28.14: “Kaustubhaṁ ca urasaṁ ca.” His chest has the mark of Śrīvatsa and the brilliant Kauśtuba jewel which hangs around His neck. Of course, this mark, this symbol, the Śrīvatsa, it’s quite small. You look on the chest of the Lord, it’s there, but it kind of looks a little bit, you have to look carefully to see it.

Actually, I was reading, there are three things that Kṛṣṇa never does while in Vṛndāvana: He never wears stitched clothes, He never cuts His hair, and He never uses His eternal weapons.

But at times, He reveals those weapons to show His opulence to His devotees. So, I was thinking, in the same way, sometimes the Śrīvatsa, although very small, can be seen by His devotees. And this Śrīvatsa is essentially, when you look at it, it looks like a symbol of eight triangles joined together like a yantra.

That's how the ācāryas describe it. The Śrīvatsa is essentially a symbol of eight triangles joined together like a yantra, in such a way that no one can understand where it starts and where it ends. So mystical. Now, the ācāryas explained that for the Vrajavāsīs, we're all trying to become Vrajavāsīs, the Śrīvatsa looks a little bit different.

For the Vrajavāsīs, they call the Śrīvatsa *prema-paṭṭa*, *prema-paṭṭa* means a complex knot of love, the threads of which bind the Lord and devotee together forever. Isn't that sweet? *Prema-paṭṭa*: a complex knot of love, the threads of which bind the Lord and the devotee together forever.

You see it a little bit different. Now, although the Śrīvatsa mark is eternally on the Lord’s chest, it makes its appearance in this world in a very interesting way. In other words, this mark is eternally present, but for the sake of *līlā*, pastimes, it makes its appearance when Kṛṣṇa comes to this world.

With the help of the GBC Śāstrī Committee, we discovered a commentary by Gāṅgādhara on the *Garga Saṁhitā*, written by Śrī Khaṇḍa Ācārya, that explains the source of the Śrīvatsa mark. He writes: “Śrīvatsaṁ bhr̥gu-prahāra-cinhaṁ viśeṣaṁ.” The Śrīvatsa is a special mark where there was an attack by the foot of Bhr̥gu Muni.

The Śrīvatsa is a special mark where there was an attack by the foot of Bhr̥gu Muni. Now, that pastime, of course, is very nicely summarized by Śrīla Prabhupāda in his *Kṛṣṇa Book*, Chapter 88-89.

Therein, Śrīla Prabhupāda summarizes: “Of course, he says, long ago there was an assembly of great sages on the bank of the river Sarasvatī who were performing a great sacrifice.

And in that assembly, the question was raised: ‘Who amongst the three predominating deities in this material world, namely Lord Brahmā, Lord Viṣṇu and Lord Śiva, is supreme?’ These three personalities are the controllers, we know, of the three modes of material nature, namely goodness, passion, and ignorance.

And after much discussion on this matter, the Great Sage Bhr̥gu, who is the son of Brahmā, was deputed to test all these three predominating deities and report back to the assembly as to who is the greatest. And the plan decided upon by the sages was for Bhr̥gu to test which one of the predominating deities possesses the quality of goodness in full.” Śrīla Prabhupāda writes like that, “the quality of goodness in full.” So, as the pastime goes on, Bhr̥gu Muni first of all went to his father's residence in Brahmaloka, wanting to test if Lord Brahmā had the quality of goodness in full.

He purposefully did not offer his respects to his father. Now, śāstra says, it's the duty of a son or a disciple to offer respects and recite suitable prayers when he approaches his father, his spiritual master. But Bhr̥gu Muni purposefully failed to offer respects, just to see what was Lord Brahmā’s reaction.

And Brahmā’s reaction was that he became very angry at his son’s impudence. He was actually ready to condemn Bhr̥gu by cursing him, but because Bhr̥gu was his son, Lord Brahmā controlled his anger. It is described, with his intelligence, he's very intelligent, he has forethought.

So, next, Bhr̥gu Muni went to Mount Kailāśa, where Lord Śiva resides. Now, Bhr̥gu Muni happens to be Lord Śiva’s brother, because both appeared from Lord Brahmā. As such, as soon as Bhr̥gu Muni approached, Lord Śiva rose to embrace him. “He’s coming forward.

So Lord Śiva, my brother is coming.” He rose to embrace him. But as Lord Śiva approached, Bhr̥gu Muni purposefully said, “My dear brother, you are very impure because you smear your body with ashes and you are not very clean.

Please don't touch me.” So, when Bhr̥gu Muni refused to embrace his brother, now Lord Śiva became furious with him. And it's described, immediately his eyes became red with anger, and with uncontrollable rage, he took up his trident and prepared to kill Bhr̥gu Muni.

At that time, that's the pastime unfolds because it's instructive. Lord Śiva’s wife, Pārvatī, was present, and she saved the situation by falling at the feet of her husband with sweet words. She talked him out of killing Bhr̥gu Muni. Well, that's how Śiva passed the test.

And after being saved from the anger of Lord Śiva, Bhr̥gu Muni went directly to the planet of Vaikuṇṭha, where Lord Viṣṇu was lying on a bed of flowers in the company of His wife, Lakṣmī, who was engaged in massaging His lotus feet.

And there, Bhr̥gu Muni purposefully committed three offenses to Lord Viṣṇu. The first offense was mental, the second was verbal, and the third offense, when Bhr̥gu Muni kicked the chest of the Lord in the presence of the Goddess of Fortune, was the most serious. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* says that Kṛṣṇa is all merciful, and He did not become angry at the activities of Bhr̥gu Muni, for Bhr̥gu Muni was a great Brāhmaṇa.

Although Bhr̥gu Muni, you know, to see who has this goodness in full, kicked the chest of the Lord, a corporal offense, kicked the chest of the Lord, but the Lord didn't become angry because Bhr̥gu Muni was a great Brāhmaṇa.

Lots of instructions here. Śāstra says, a Brāhmaṇa is to be excused, even if he commits an offense. And Lord Viṣṇu set the example. Yet, it is said that from that time, Lakṣmī, who was present, has not been very favorably disposed towards Brāhmaṇas.

And therefore, the Goddess of Fortune withholds her benedictions from them, and thus Brāhmaṇas are generally very poor. So, Bhr̥gu Muni kicking the chest of Lord Viṣṇu was certainly a great offense. But Lord Viṣṇu is so great, He did not care.

Instead of becoming angry or cursing Bhr̥gu Muni, Lord Viṣṇu immediately got up from His bed of flowers, along with Lakṣmī, and offered respectful obeisances to the Brāhmaṇa. He addressed Bhr̥gu Muni as follows: “My dear Brāhmaṇa, it is my great fortune that you have come here.

Please therefore sit down on this cushion for a few minutes. Oh, great sage, I know that your feet are very soft like a lotus flower, and that my chest is as hard as a thunderbolt. I am therefore afraid that you may have felt some pain by kicking my chest.

Let me touch your feet to relieve the pain that you have suffered.” So, Lord Viṣṇu then began to massage the feet of Bhr̥gu Muni. The Lord continued, saying: “My chest has now become sanctified because of the touch of your feet, and I am now assured that the Goddess of Fortune, Lakṣmī, will be very glad to live there perpetually.” Let's recite that again: “My chest has now become sanctified because of the touch of your feet, and I am now assured that the Goddess of Fortune, Lakṣmī, will be very glad to live there perpetually.” So, Bhr̥gu Muni was struck with wonder at the behavior of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

And because of his gratitude, his voice choked up, and he was unable to reply to the words of the Lord. Just tears glided from his eyes, and he couldn't say anything. He simply stood silently before the Lord. After testing Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, and Lord Viṣṇu, Bhr̥gu Muni returned to that illustrious assembly of sages, and he described his experience.

And after hearing him, the sages concluded that of all the predominating deities, Lord Viṣṇu is certainly the greatest. And the sages were astonished, because although Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva were immediately agitated, Lord Viṣṇu, in spite of being kicked by Bhr̥gu Muni, was not agitated in the least.

Now, the example is given that small lamps may be agitated by a slight breeze, but the greatest lamp, the greatest illuminating source, like the sun, is never moved, even by the greatest hurricane. So, within that pastime, we see the statement of Gāṅgādhara that we read earlier, that the Śrīvatsa is a special mark where there was an attack by the foot of Bhr̥gu Muni.

It rings true. The Śrīvatsa is a special mark where there was an attack by the foot of Bhr̥gu Muni. It rings true. And Caitanya Caritāmṛta further confirms this in *Ādi-līlā*, Chapter 15, Verse 74: “On Kṛṣṇa’s chest are the ornaments of the Śrīvatsa marks, indicating the residence of the Goddess of Fortune.

His chest, which is as broad as a plasterer, attracts thousands upon thousands of damsels of Vraja, conquering their minds by force. Thus they all become maidservants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” *Ādi-līlā* on Kṛṣṇa’s chest are the ornaments of the Śrīvatsa marks, indicating the residence of the Goddess of Fortune.

Now, before we finish, it should be noted that the Śrīvatsa and the Kauśtuba jewel of the Lord are not the only auspicious things on the Lord's chest that act as a stimulus for ecstatic love for devotees. For there’s another mysterious mark on the Lord’s chest, and what is that?

It’s a golden line. A golden line. And it also has a lot to do with Lakṣmī Devī, the Goddess of Fortune. The pastime is very interesting, and it’s worth telling. So, one time, Lakṣmī Devī, the eternal consort of Lord Nārāyaṇa, heard about Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Gokula, and she developed a very strong desire to participate in them, in particular, the Rāsa Dance.

Hearing of Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes with the gopīs, Lakṣmī went to Vṛndāvana and she began performing very severe austerities in the sub-forest of Bhāṇḍīrvan.

With a specific aim of becoming a gopī. The ācāryas say that she felt that Kṛṣṇa’s divine abode, Vṛndāvana, would empower her and fulfill her desires.

So, in beautiful Bhāṇḍīrvan, she cast off her jewelry, she began fasting from all food and drink. She took as her only sustenance the purifying air of Vṛndāvana, that was her foodstuff, the purifying air of Vṛndāvana, and she constantly chanted Kṛṣṇa’s sweet holy names: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

Unfortunately, there was one weakness in her attempt, and that was that although she was hoping to enter the Rāsa Dance as a gopī, she wasn’t prepared to renounce her position as the opulent Goddess of Fortune and reside in Vraja as a simple cowherd girl.

Our girls, they live very simply. Neither could she completely renounce her natural attachment to the Lord in the mood of awe and reverence. She serves the Lord as her husband in the mood of awe and reverence, unlike the gopīs who see Kṛṣṇa as their lover.

So, after some time, Kṛṣṇa recognized this, and He appeared before her. He said: “Oh, Lakṣmī Devī, oh, Goddess of Fortune, what are you doing here in this forest performing austerities?” She replied: “My dear Lord, by learning about Your deep loving pastimes, I have developed a desire to enter into the Rāsa Dance, just like the cowherd girls of Vṛndāvana.

Please bless me to be able to do so.” So, Kṛṣṇa said: “Oh, Goddess, you are the wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa and are the most virtuous, chaste woman in creation. Why have you abandoned the happiness of Vaikuṇṭha to mix with a cowherd boy like me?” So, Lakṣmī replied: “My dear Lord, I know that You and my husband are the same person, so my chastity is intact.

But I have heard of this unique sweetness of Your pastimes with the cowherd girls. Please allow me to experience the transcendental bliss that comes from being with You during the festival called Rāsa-līlā.” So, Kṛṣṇa smiled, and He replied: “I’m sorry, I cannot do that.” And Lakṣmī was shocked by His response.

She said: “What have I done to be rejected by my eternal consort?

How have I become so unfortunate?” So, Kṛṣṇa said: “Actually, you are faultless.

But your reverential mood in always serving Me as your husband, which you cannot give up, is incompatible here in Vṛndāvana.

In Vṛndāvana, My devotees are unaware of Me being the Supreme Lord.

My mother accepts Me as her son and ties Me to a grinding mortar. Subala, my cowherd friend, sees Me as an intimate friend, and in our games, he playfully climbs on my shoulders and says, ‘Hey, what kind of big man are you?

You want to fight?’ How can you enter the Rāsa Dance while maintaining the body and the identity of the Goddess of Fortune and showing Me the respect due to Lord Nārāyaṇa?” So, at that point, Lakṣmī Devī presented an argument to Kṛṣṇa: “But my Lord, the personified Vedas worshiped You to become gopīs, and You fulfilled their desire.” So, Kṛṣṇa replied: “Yes, but they forgot their identities as personified Vedas and My identity as the Supreme Lord.

Thus, they were allowed to enter the Rāsa Dance because they thought themselves to be milkmaids and Me their lover. If you want to enter the Rāsa Dance, Lakṣmī, you must be prepared to give up your present identity and pray to take birth in Vraja.” Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Of course, hearing this, we can understand what a challenge that was for Lakṣmī to give up all her opulences as the Goddess of Fortune and live like a milkmaid, meaning what?

Milking cows, sweeping the house, picking up cow dung, making cow patties, etc. And she basically had the wrong formula as well for developing bhakti. It's not that by austerities alone one achieves *premā*. Of course, some austerities are required, but they're not the primary cause of *premā*.

One gets *premā* by doing service, not by severe austerities. Devotional service brings forth *anurāga*, attachment, which leads one to love of God, whereas austerities alone only bring forth *vairāga*, detachment, but not necessarily attachment to Kṛṣṇa. So, Lakṣmī’s practice consisted only of austerities while maintaining in her heart a natural mood of awe and reverence for the Lord, which of course is very nice, but this *bhāva* alone does not work in attracting the attention of Kṛṣṇa.

We hear Lord Kṛṣṇa’s words in *Bhagavad-gītā* 9.11: “Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto mama vyayaṁ anuttamam.” “I [Lord Kṛṣṇa] am not revealed to everyone. Because I am Kṛṣṇa, I am not revealed to everyone. For example, knowing My opulences, the whole world looks upon Me with awe and veneration, but devotion made feeble by such reverence does not attract Me.

Knowing My opulences, the whole world looks upon Me with awe and veneration, but devotion made feeble by such reverence does not attract Me.” Go to Viśvanātha’s philosophy. So, finally, Lakṣmī Devī understood what Kṛṣṇa was saying. Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in his *Lalita-mādhava*, he’s actually quoting *Padma Purāṇa*, where Lakṣmī then said that if nothing else, she wanted to remain just like a golden line on the chest of the Lord.

She accepted because, of course, Kṛṣṇa, as Lord Nārāyaṇa’s husband, so she accepted the words of Kṛṣṇa and she expressed: “Just let me remain like a golden line on Your chest.” So, the Lord granted, Kṛṣṇa granted that request, and since then, Lakṣmī has been situated on the chest of the Lord as a beautiful golden line.

Another marking we are discussing today. Now, Śrīdhara Svāmī refers to this presence of Lakṣmī in his commentary on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11.4.39: “Śrīvatsaṁ ca lakṣmīṁ ca vṛṣabhānu-sutā-priyam.” He writes: “The residents of Śrīvatsa and Lakṣmī are respectfully the right and left sides of the chest of the Lord.” She is there in two ways. “The residents of Śrīvatsa and Lakṣmī are respectfully the right and left sides of the chest of the Lord.” Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, I think we analyzed that in full, what are the markings on the chest of the Lord. And we'll finish with a beautiful and relevant verse today from *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*. It goes like this: “The beautiful, soft, curly hairs on the right side of Kṛṣṇa’s chest resembled the tender stems of a lotus.

Seeing the mark of Śrīvatsa on His chest, Yaśodā thought it was breast milk that had previously spilled out of His mouth. She tried unsuccessfully to remove these milk stains with the edge of her cloth. Struck with wonder, Yaśodā thought, ‘This must be the sign of a great personality.’ Observing the sign of Lakṣmī, a small golden line on the left side of Kṛṣṇa’s chest, Yaśodā thought, ‘A small yellow bird had made a nest amidst the leaves of a Tāmal tree.

Could this be a streak of lightning resting on a rain cloud?

Or could it be golden streaks marking a black gold testing stone?’ Kṛṣṇa's delicate, leaflike hands and feet, glowing pink like the rising sun, look like clusters of lotus flowers floating in the Yamunā.” Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So much nectar, just a few marks there on the chest of our beloved Lord. No incarnations. Thank you so much for joining us. We're presently in Jaipur, the City of Victory, which was established by one of our great heroes, Sawai Jai Singh II, to give protection to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's beloved Īśvara Gopinātha.

We have a *parikramā* group of around 350 devotees. We're going to see Govinda, and Gopinātha, and Dadar, and Rādha-Vinod, our Vaiṣṇavas that came here several hundred years ago. So, it's been very wonderful. And, yeah, we'll be back next Friday with another lecture on Stimulus for Ecstatic Love.

Well, thank you all. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

All glories to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. All glories to the assembled devotees.