Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Vishnu padaya, Krishna prashtaya, bhutale, Śrīmati Bhaktivedanta Swāmī, Nāmni.

O spiritual master, a giver of divine wisdom, O friend of the fallen, You are the giver of Your own bliss, and You are the only ocean of mercy. Although dwelling in Vṛndāvana, You have descended for the welfare of fallen souls like me, and You are preaching the divine love of Rādhā for Kṛṣṇa.

Please be kind upon me. So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 20. In this lecture, I'd like to discuss the Lotus feet of the Lord, the Lotus feet of the Lord, and how they act as stimuli for awakening our love for Him.

I'd like to begin with a very beautiful verse glorifying Lord Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet from the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, 11.6.7. Here, the demigods are speaking: "Our dear Lord, advanced mystic yogīs striving for liberation from the severe bondage of material work meditate with great devotion upon Your Lotus feet within their hearts.

Dedicating our intelligence, senses, vital air, mind, and power of speech to Your Lordship, we demigods bow down to Your Lotus feet." Such a nice verse. So, in this verse, the devotees are praising Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā, and the very first thing they do is to glorify His Lotus feet.

Now, generally, if you want to flatter someone, you don't praise their feet. But Kṛṣṇa's feet are not ordinary. As I often say, they are extraordinary. Everything about Kṛṣṇa is extraordinary. Thus, throughout our scriptures, the glories of Kṛṣṇa's feet—their beauty, their fragrance, even their flavor—are glorified again and again by great devotees.

In the Third Canto of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, it's described that when the Four Kumāras met Lord Kṛṣṇa at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha, they had darśana of His Lotus feet, and that darśana had an overwhelming effect on them. Chapter 15, verse 43 of the Third Canto says, and we'll quote here: "When the breeze carrying the aroma of Tulasī leaves from the toes of the Lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead enters the nostrils of those sages, they experience a change both in body and in mind, even though they were attached to the impersonal Brahman." So, the Lord's Lotus feet are special.

I was thinking that they're so special that the Goddess of Fortune, Lakṣmī Devī, spends much of her time massaging Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet. In fact, those Lotus feet are so full of nectar that even Kṛṣṇa Himself is fascinated with His own Lotus feet.

We've all seen that famous painting of baby Kṛṣṇa floating on a banyan tree leaf, sucking His big toe. Now, the ācāryas, they comment on that. They explain that this is because Kṛṣṇa is wondering what it is about His feet that makes them so attractive to His devotees.

So, those soft Lotus feet are all-attractive, like everything about Kṛṣṇa. So soft that the Brajabāsīs, the people of Vṛndāvana, become very concerned, "What will happen to Kṛṣṇa when He walks barefoot through the Vṛndāvana forest and the small pebbles hurt His feet?" And the Gopis, Kṛṣṇa's greatest lovers, are so much in anxiety that they worry, "When they place Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet upon their chests, those chests may be too hard, because Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet are so soft." And why are Kṛṣṇa's feet so often referred to as Lotus feet?

Well, again, because they're soft like lotus flowers, they're beautiful like lotus flowers, and they're a pink color. Many lotuses are pink, so they're pink in color. Are Lotus feet like lotus flowers?

Even Kṛṣṇa's toenails are compared to the petals of a lotus flower. In this regard, a very famous verse is coming up here. In this regard, Queen Kuntī Devī says in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 1.8.22, "namas te paṅkajamalin te namaste." "My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus, and whose feet are engraved with lotuses." Queen Kuntī.

Now, I was thinking that a devotee might lament that those Divine Lotus feet are only available at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha because we heard the pastime, the summary of the pastime, of the Four Kumāras having darśana of the Lord's Lotus feet at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha.

But no, in discussing the glories of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, our ācāryas say that the first two Cantos of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam are compared to Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet. So you can attain them in that way. Of course, another way we have access to the Lord's Lotus feet is when we bow down to His deity form.

By bowing down, those Lotus feet come closer. By bowing down, we get darśana. We can see the deity's Lotus feet. Thus, bowing down to the Lord is actually so important. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa stresses in Bhagavad-gītā, Chapter 9, Text 14: "mat-karmanaḥ, mat-paramo, mad-bhaktaḥ, saṅga-varjitaḥ, nirvairaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu, ye mama bhaktāḥ sa te mayi." "Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion." This bowing down to the Lotus feet of the Lord has been going on since time immemorial.

I was reading the other night. Caitanya Caritāmṛta describes that when a number of Lord Brahmās from different universes entered Kṛṣṇa's room in Dvārakā, what was the first thing they did?

They all offered Him obeisances. They bowed down to His Lotus feet. And when all their millions of crowns touched the ground, it created, it is described, tumultuous, tumultuous crashing sounds. 2.3.21 confirms: "Quote: Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of all kinds of threes and is independently supreme by achievement of all kinds of fortune.

He is worshiped by the eternal maintainers of the creation, Lord Rāma, who offer Him the paraphernalia of worshiping by touching their millions of helmets to His feet. Who offer Him the paraphernalia of worship by touching their millions of helmets to His feet." That will give us a more Vṛndāvana mood here.

Now, besides the Four Kumāras, there's another example of how the Lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa act as stimuli for the devotee to remember the Lord in a mood of pure devotion. And that example is Akrūra. Akrūra, when he was making the journey from Mathurā to Vṛndāvana to bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma back to Mathurā for the wrestling match, I found in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.38.17.

Akrūra says, "What, if I have fallen at His feet?

The Almighty Lord will place His Lotus hand upon my head. For those who seek shelter in Him, because they are greatly disturbed by the powerful serpent of time, that hand removes all fear." So, therein refers to the Lotus, the Lotus hand of Kṛṣṇa.

I was reading the other day that the lotus flower found in Vṛndāvana's Māna Sarovara lake, it's called Saubhagya-dāyikā, Saubhagya-dāyikā, or the um, the white water lotus.

That lotus has a particularly fragrant scent. And śāstras say that Lord Kṛṣṇa's Lotus hand acquired the fragrance of that particular flower. How so?

By coming in contact with the beautiful faces of the Gopis. And He touched their faces. That's so beautiful. So, this happened actually during a Rāsa dance, which is described in the 33rd chapter of the 10th Canto of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam.

Now, knowing the potency of Kṛṣṇa's lotus-like hand, Akrūra was hankering for the Lord to put His hand on his head. This is how he was thinking. So Kṛṣṇa conscious, on the way to Vṛndāvana.

Now, as Akrūra got closer to Vṛndāvana, he meditated on what he would do upon arrival.

He was thinking as follows: "Because I studied that chapter for this class, I will at once alight from my chariot and bow down to the Lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. Their feet are meditated upon by great mystic yogīs striving for self-realization.

I will also offer obeisances to the Lord's cowherd boyfriends and to all the residents of Vṛndāvana.

Hare Kṛṣṇa." So, the Bhāgavatam says at that point that Akrūra was confident that Kṛṣṇa would know his heart.

You know, he's thinking like this, he's actually revealing his heart because Kṛṣṇa was in his heart, Kṛṣṇa knows his heart. So, Śrīmad Bhāgavatam describes um, Akrūra as thinking as follows: "The infallible Lord will not consider me an enemy, even though Kaṁsa has sent me here as his messenger.

After all, the omniscient Lord perfectly knows the hearts of everyone." So there you go. I was thinking that when I was reading that, that seemed to have this ability as well, to know the hearts of everyone. Many Prabhupāda disciples will tell you that when Prabhupāda looked at them, they sensed that he was looking straight into their hearts, and that he knew everything about them.

Now, um, Akrūra reached Vṛndāvana at sunset, and the first thing he saw were Kṛṣṇa's footprints.

Because Kṛṣṇa wanders everywhere throughout Vṛndāvana, and they were everywhere actually.

Because when the Gopis performed their daily sweeping in Vṛndāvana, whenever they come across Kṛṣṇa's footprints in the dust, they don't disturb them sweeping, you know, the groves.

When they see Kṛṣṇa's footprints, they're stimuli for them. They don't touch them. 10.16.18, we learn that even the animals in Vṛndāvana honor Kṛṣṇa's footprints out of love for Kṛṣṇa.

They preserve His Lotus footprints by carefully sidestepping them as they move about the land of Braja. They sidestep them, that's described in the Bhāgavatam. In fact, all the residents of Vṛndāvana respect and adore Kṛṣṇa's footprints. 10.21.10 says, "O friend, Vṛndāvana is spreading the glory of the earth, having obtained the treasure of the Lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī.

The peacocks dance madly when they hear Govinda's flute, and when other creatures see them from the hilltops, they all become stunned." So, Śrīla, uh, Sanātana Gosvāmī has written that because in Vṛndāvana Kṛṣṇa always goes barefoot, the land is covered by His footprints, which makes Vṛndāvana more glorious than Vaikuṇṭha, where Lord Viṣṇu simply wears slippers.

So, upon finally seeing Kṛṣṇa's footprints, Akrūra set an example for us all. He exclaimed, "Ah, this is the dust from my Master's feet!" And he rolled and he rolled and he rolled in that dust.

He has given His instructions on this matter. I saw the other day in *Kṛṣṇa Book*, Chapter 38, he writes. It's so important for us. This instruction: if you're planning a trip to Vṛndāvana soon, listen very carefully.

He writes, "As soon as one reaches the boundary of Vṛndāvana, he should immediately smear the dust of Vṛndāvana over his body, without thinking of his material position and prestige." As sung in a celebrated song: "When my mind will be purified after leaving the contamination of material sense enjoyment, I shall be able to visit Vṛndāvana.

O glorious!" So this pastime of Akrūra shows us the proper mood and actions to be taken when we come to our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

Or not only when we come, but when we're here, we can do Vṛndāvana parikramā, we can do Govardhana, we can take the opportunity to roll in the dust because Lord Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet have touched that dust.

So, for those who have the eyes to see, meaning spiritual eyes, they can see Kṛṣṇa's footprints everywhere in Vṛndāvana.

But with material vision, we can't see those Lotus feet everywhere. However, the Lord is so kind that even without spiritual vision, we can see some of those footprints, even today in Vṛndāvana.

Some of them, for example, halfway up Nandīśvara Hill, there's a flat rock upon which Kṛṣṇa sat 5,000 years ago. We were out there the other day. The ācāryas described that at that time, Kṛṣṇa was, they put it, Kṛṣṇa was enthralled by His own spiritual potency in the form of Braja's forests, lakes, rivers, hills, mountains, and many creatures.

They say the blackest Yamunā reminded Him of Śrī Rādhā's long braid, the blooming flowers of her enchanting smile, and the playful birds of her restless, magnetic eyes. Well, thinking in this way, actually, Kṛṣṇa could not contain His ecstasy. It's written, and as a result, His body became so hot that it melted the stone He was sitting on, leaving an imprint of His Lotus feet for all of us to see.

Stone imprints. Those we can see the imprint of Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet. Let's feed charaṇa upon this hill, pahāḍī, has made that place famous as Charna Pahāḍī. You can go there. Charna Pahāḍī, actually, it's a name shared with other hills in Braja upon which Kṛṣṇa has left His footprints.

Actually, there are five places in Vṛndāvana, all called Charna Pahāḍī, and they all have the Lord's footprints in stone.

They are as follows: because you can search them out when you come here: Nandagrāma, Chota Baithana, Govardhana, and Kamāvana. In Kamāvana, one set of footprints or Chandrasena Parvata, and one below Chandrasen Parvata—two sets of footprints. Now, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, our dear Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, emphasizes the importance and the benefit of worshiping Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet.

In two verses of his Pañca-ratna, one of our favorite books, he writes: "O Madhusūdana, a wise person nullifies any sins he may have done by serving Your Lotus feet within his heart. But one who rejects Your service gets sinful reactions, even though he may not have done any sinful deed.

Not by wearing saffron cloth, nor by restricting food and other sense activities, nor by living in the forest, nor by discussing philosophy, nor by observing a vow of silence, but only by even the slightest beginning of devotional service to the Lotus feet of Lord Govinda, who enjoys pastimes on Yamunā's wide banks, can one curtail lust, the influence of Cupid, Kāmadeva.

Wow!

By worshiping the Lotus feet of Lord Govinda, one can curtail lust." Now, one who is extremely fortunate may come across both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's footprints at Ratna Vedi. Ratna Vedi means the jeweled altar, which is actually a small bridge that divides Rādhākuṇḍa and Śyāma kuṇḍa.

I think most of you have been to Rādhākuṇḍa and Śyāma kuṇḍa, they know there's a division, there's like a little bridge going over that's called the saṅgam. It's the meeting place of Rādhākuṇḍa and Śyāma kuṇḍa. And on either side are the groves of Citra Gopi and Śānanda Gopa, just for your information.

Next time you walk across that bridge, on one side is the grove of Citra Gopi, and on the other side is the grove of Śānanda Gopa. Now, um, footprints of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa mark the place where Rādhā and Śyāma Sundara once stood, marveling at the beautiful, at the beauty of their lakes.

There they stood, marveling at the beautiful lakes, their lakes. Now, in *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta*, 14.21, we hear Kṛṣṇa say to Śrī Rādhā at that spot, as they were standing there. He said to her, "My beloved, in many ways, the beauty of your lake reminds me of your own magnificence.

The blooming lotus flowers are like the ever-blooming lotus of your face. The young fish darting here and there are like your restless eyes. The rolling, foam-topped waves like the sweetness rippling from your smile. And those swarms of honeybees like your swaying braid.

The sunlight reflected on the surface of your lake is like your golden complexion, O Rādhā. And these, in many other ways, this lake brings you to mind. Thus, the blessed sight brings pleasure to my heart." That blessed sight brings pleasure to Kṛṣṇa's heart.

So, where these footprints are today is where Kṛṣṇa held Rādhā's hand when He spoke those lovely words. Now, the ācāryas say that the divine couple's footprints seen together are so potent that just to hear about them gives one a drop of the same bliss the Gopis tasted as they tracked such footprints during the night of the Śaradiya Rāsa dance.

They were tracking those footprints. How so?

Well, on that occasion, when Kṛṣṇa disappeared from the Gopis' midst, they began searching for Him. And at first, you remember, they were asking the trees and the bushes and the different animals, you know, where is Kṛṣṇa, until in a corner of the forest, they noticed, imprinted in the dust, a lotus and a barley corn, and recognized these as some of the symbols of Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet.

They followed them. But later, when they saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's footprints intermixed with Kṛṣṇa's footprints, they could tell that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were together. And from the way their impressions were, their footprints, in in the in the dust, the Gopis could discern where Kṛṣṇa laid His arm on Rādhā's shoulder, where He picked her up, and where He gathered flowers to decorate her hair.

So sweet. So, following those footprints further led the Gopis into the um, you could say, the heart of the forest, where Kṛṣṇa had abandoned Śrī Rādhā, leaving her bewildered and crying in separation. That's a whole pastime we can tell another time.

And when the Gopis witnessed Śrī Rādhā's profound expressions of love and separation, they actually felt a little embarrassed by what they felt with their own insignificant affections. And the ācāryas say this further amplified their own attachments to Kṛṣṇa. Beautiful use of words.

Amplified their own attachments to Kṛṣṇa by witnessing the divine love that Rādhā had for Kṛṣṇa. Now, the ācāryas say that the sight of Kṛṣṇa's footprints stimulates ecstatic love, as does hearing narrations of His uncommon pastimes, seeing His sweetly smiling face, or, oh yeah, hearing His enchanting flute song.

Once, the Gopis explained to Uddhava that the sight of Kṛṣṇa's foot—the sight of Kṛṣṇa's footprints, decorated with divine symbols, guarantees purity, the ability to, the ability to always remain absorbed in thoughts of Him. In Bhāgavatam 10.47.50, we hear that after receiving letters from Kṛṣṇa in Mathurā, the Gopis said to Uddhava, "All these reminders constantly of Nanda Mahārāja's son!

Indeed, because we see Kṛṣṇa's footprints, which are marked with divine symbols, we can never forget Him." Now, those symbols, those marks on the soles of the divine couple's Lotus feet are very unique. It is said that devotees meditate on them in the same way that they meditate on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's garments, ornaments, or limbs.

The marks on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet are actually mercifully described by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his book *Śrī Rūpa Cintāmaṇi*. Therein, he writes that Kṛṣṇa's feet are decorated with 19 wonderful symbols. On His left foot is a fish, a half moon, a triangle, four water pots, a calf, a hoof print, Cupid's bow, two concentric circles, and a conch shell.

And on His right foot are 11 marks: an octagon, four Vāstu, svastikas, four rose apples, a thunderbolt, a banner, an elephant, a goat, a lotus, a vertical line, an umbrella, a disc, and a barley corn. All right. Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī has 19 symbols on her feet.

On her left foot is a half moon, a creeper, a bracelet, a flower, a flag, an elephant, gold, a lotus flower, a vertical line, an umbrella, a disc, and a barley corn. On her right foot is a fish, a spear, a chariot, a club, an earring, a sacrificial altar, a mountain, and a conch shell.

Now, the symbols on Śrī Rādhā's feet, like those of Kṛṣṇa, they form attractive patterns, actually. So, these marks allowed Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and their companions to distinguish the divine couple's footprints from others on the paths of Braja, helping the Gopis to find them, the divine couple, wherever they are.

Actually, once a small group of Gopis were on their way to the Yamunā when they saw the impressions of an elephant, a flag, and a thunderbolt in the sand, and they at once knew that Kṛṣṇa was nearby. Another time, I was reading, the Brajabāsīs could tell by the presence of terrible omens that Kṛṣṇa must be in danger somewhere.

So they followed His footprints to the Yamunā and found Him struggling in Kāliyā's coils. They were able to find out where He was by His footprints. Now, of course, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's footprints are no less potent than Kṛṣṇa's, because as Kṛṣṇa Himself admits, the pleasure she tastes while in His company is 10 million times greater than His own.

There's a beautiful verse like that. "Whatever pleasure I get from tasting my love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she tastes 10 million times more than me by her love. She tastes 10 million times more than me by her love." So it's confirmed.

Previously, I suggested a few of the many pastimes where Kṛṣṇa's Lotus feet play an important role in stimulating His devotees' love for Him and His divine consort. So today, I would like to conclude with Ṭhākura Prabhupāda's very beautiful words from a purport he gives in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 1.11.26, a very pertinent quote: "The Purity votes are always hankering after the Lotus feet of the Lord, which have a kind of honey that is transcendentally relished by the devotees.

They are like the bees who are always after the honey." Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, the great devotee ācārya of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, has sung a song about this Lotus honey, comparing himself to the bee. "O my Lord Kṛṣṇa, I beg to offer my prayers unto You.

My mind is like a bee and is after some honey. Therefore, kindly, therefore, give my bee-like mind a place at Your Lotus feet, which are the resources for all transcendental honey. I know that even big demigods like Brahmā did not see the rays of the nails of Your Lotus feet, even though they are engaged in deep meditation for years together.

Still, O infallible one, my ambition is such. For You are very merciful to Your surrendered devotees. O my Lord, I know also that I have no genuine devotion for the service of Your Lotus feet, but because Your Lordship is inconceivably powerful, You can do what is impossible to be done.

Your Lotus feet, they ride even the nectar of the heavenly kingdom, and therefore I am very much attracted by them. Also, fame, eternal, please, therefore let my mind be fixed at Your Lotus feet, so that eternally I may be able to relish the taste of Your transcendental service." Gosvāmī, actually, about Gaura Gosvāmī, it is written, "What gives us in this world the constant sweet experience of Śrī Rūpa Pada, the feet of the beautiful-looking Kṛṣṇa, certainly happens through Śrī Rūpa Pada, the wonderful poetry of Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Therefore, I take shelter of Śrī Rūpa Pada, the Lotus feet of Rūpa Gosvāmī." Composed by that prayer was composed by Hari Prasād Dāsa, March 10, 2023. Thank you so much. It's really been nectar speaking about um, the Lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and of course, we always have the shelter of the Lotus feet of.

Thank you. See you next Friday. Hare Kṛṣṇa.