Hi Krishna everyone.

And welcome back to our ever ongoing lecture series entitled The Glories of Sri Vrindavan Dham. But first, as always, namo om vishnu padaya krishnaya presthaya bhutale srimate bhaktivedanta swamin iti namine. Namaste saraswati deve gaura vani pracharine nirvisesha sunyavadi paschatya desha tarine.

All glories to Srila Prabhupada. So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love. And this will be part 175, in which we'll carry on with our presentation of the glories of Srimati Radharani, and of course, our discussions on her glances, as we've been doing.

Now, to set the stage, set the scene, the mood, I'd like to begin by reciting two very special verses about her glances that I came across in my studies on this subject. And the first is verse 46 of Sri Rupa Goswami's Padyavali.

He writes so beautifully: "I worship Sri Govinda, whose bodily luster resembles a fully blossomed blue lotus, and his face is like the moon, who loves wearing peacock feathers, whose chest bears the mark of Srivatsa and the Kaustubha gem, who wears yellow garments, whose handsome form the Gopis worship with thousands of side-long glances." The best part: "And his handsome form the Gopis worship with thousands of side-long glances." Now, the second verse is from again, Padyavali.

It's verse 295. During the Rasa Lila, when Radhika saw Krishna giving equal attention to other Gopis, she left in anger and went to the bank of the Yamuna.

Krishna followed her, stepping into her footprints, his hair standing on end.

When she then turned and cast a merciful glance upon him, pleased that he had left millions of Gopis for her, that one merciful glance was everything Krishna desired.

All glories to her glances. Now, moving on, how can I say, we're going to recite a preeminent and most famous verse about Sri Radha's glance. It's verse 10 of Sri Raghunath Das Goswami's illustrious Vilapa Kusumanjali. Very for us today, a very important verse.

Therein, Raghunath Das Goswami is praying to Sri Radha in the mood of being her maidservant. As a maidservant, a manjari, as follows: "Devi te charana padma dashikam viprayoga bharat davapada kare dayamanat adakaya balavim dvaya shana ni rikshanam ritai." Very famous verse and very, very relevant today. "O effulgent goddess, for this maidservant of Your lotus feet, separation from You is like burning in the flames of a blazing forest fire.

I thus beg You that You please restore her life with the cooling elixir of a moment's glance." I thus beg You, please restore her life with the cooling elixir of a moment's glance. Praying like that. And isn't it just fit her form in this fearful world?

So, in that verse, Raghunath Das Goswami is imploring Sri Radha to, how could you say, transfer her mercy?

How?

By her glance. There are many ways you can transfer things. He wants her mercy. How? "Please transfer it by Your glance." I was thinking this morning, actually, what can Sri Radha's side-long glances be compared to?

Because sometimes you have two things, and you compare them, you understand the superiority of one over the other. So, I was thinking, what can Sri Radha's side-long glances be compared to?

Well, nothing in this world, that's obvious. But then I came across in Lalita Madhava 8, a verse. It's verse 40 in Nava Vrindavan Viraha. And actually, it's the perfect answer because Krishna is comparing Radharani's glances to something.

You don't get better than this. So, Krishna compares her glances to "flowers of ever-new playfulness blossoming with the nectar showered by ocean spray from the waves of her dancing eyebrows." It's very poetic, but it touches the heart, even aspiring devotees.

How does he compare her glances to "flowers of ever-new playfulness blossoming with the nectar showered by ocean spray from the waves of her dancing eyebrows"?

Then, I was thinking, what is the effect of such glances?

And as I was reading the last few days, I found that the acharyas say that it is said, by the grace of her side-long glances, one may attain powers and opulences like that of the demigods. Or, one acharya says, "dominion over the kingdom of one's choices." That's interesting. "Dominion over the kingdom of one's choices." Hare Krishna.

Of course, they're just building up to help you eventually get a deeper understanding. But of course, that information, of course, such material favors like that are not favors at all, because, well, they lead to further entanglement. But it gives us a little idea how powerful glances are.

Now, another example can be found in a pastime that Sri Rupa Goswami refers to in Padyavali. It's verse 196. Very, very beautiful. It's a pastime compressed into a verse. And the pastime is as follows: One night, accompanied by a few friends, Srimati Radharani went to meet Krishna by the bank of the Yamuna.

And as they walked along these, you know, side roads to avoid being seen, one Gopi complained: "What kind of path is this?

It twists and turns like the winding coils of an angry snake. Why must we tolerate this?" But the brightly shining moon actually was more of a concern because it could expose, as they were walking along, their movements to people living in the villages nearby.

Now, determined that service to Krishna should not be obstructed, Radharani cast an angry glance, an angry glance from the reddish corner of her eyes, and forbade the moon to shine.

And immediately, the sky went dark. An angry glance from the reddish corner of her eyes, which forbade the moon to shine. "Stop." And immediately the sky became dark, and they could ride or they could walk on forward without any worries.

Rupa Goswami's Padyavali 196. So, those are the amazing effects of Radharani's glances. However nice that might be, they pale in comparison to her ability to control the Supreme Controller by her glance alone. We touched on this a couple of weeks ago.

And that is seen very clearly in verse 42 of Vilapa Kusumanjali. There, Srila Raghunath Das Goswami prays: "When with black eyeliner will this person worship Your eyes, which defeat the capricious wagtail birds, and which, with the slightest movement at their corners, can in an instant tightly bind the regal elephant known as Krishna?" Raghunath Das Goswami ki.

Now, Sri Rupa Goswami confirms the same in a similar way in Uddhava Sandesh, verse 44. He begins by explaining that once, while their parents were conversing, Radha and Krishna made, um, how does he describe it?

Cautious glances at each other. But then Lalita Sakhi humorously whispered into Radha's ear: "Devi, look. Krishna's flute fell to the ground, and now his bugle has also fallen.

Oh Radha, please do not embarrass Krishna while his father, King Nanda, is standing nearby.

Turn your restless sidelong glance away from him, otherwise, who knows what else he'll drop." In other words, she's glancing at him, he's dropping all these things in front of his superiors. She says, "Stop. Stop the glance." Indirectly, it shows how powerful it is.

Now, from Krishna's perspective, you could say Radha's glance is like what?

A formidable army against which he has no defense. He who kills demons as play, who defeats Shiva, and whose ultimate weapon is the chakra, he remains helpless against Radha Rani's arsenal. Arsenal usually means a lot of different types of weapons, which are her various glances.

I was reading one acharya said that just as Shri Radha's glance can devastate Krishna in so many ways, this is interesting.

Withdrawal of that same glance can even be more devastating. And I was trying to think of an analogy. It's very subtle, but just like in the old days, you know, when they were fighting with bows and arrows, they'd shoot an arrow.

An arrow is shaped like this. It's small at the front, and then it widens like this. So, it enters into someone's body very easily, but of course, you have to pull the arrow out. But pulling it out causes more damage.

You know, because this long part is cutting, cutting. It's an interesting analogy, but it helps us understand. Just as Radha's glance can devastate Krishna in so many ways, withdrawal of that same glance can even be more devastating.

So, the effect of Radha retracting her glance can be seen in the words of advice that Vishakha Sakhi once gave to her friend, Shri Radha. And I found this in Stavavali, 6.3. It helps visualize it. Vishakha said, "Radha, make your heart kind.

He who is the life of Gokula is sorely wounded. His heart pierced by the arrow of your sidelong glance. His flute, a glorious swan accustomed to singing the fifth note, has now become inert in the lotus flower of his left hand, silent out of great pain.

His forest flower garland, once very fragrant and attractive to swarms of black bees, has now wilted and fallen from his neck to the forest ground. Oh merciless girl, Krishna's transcendental form, that delight of Sanatan's heart, has now ceased pastimes and become emaciated, slowly withering away in a mountain cave.

Please revive him with the same glance with which you have so sorely hurt him, lest he never recover." In other words, use that glance in a different way. So, glances can be used to hurt and to relieve. That's the point.

And dear Prabhus, there are several verses that glorify her glance. Just, I thought I'd throw them in. They're short. Lalita Madhava, Act 4. This describes in even clearer terms the devastating effect of Shri Radha's loving glance upon Krishna.

And in this case, it's not a sidelong glance, but it's a straight-on glance. Straight-on. It's a glance we hear about from Krishna himself when he's reminiscing about his departure from Vrindavan to Mathura.

You know, Akrura came in the chariot, and Krishna and Balaram got on, and the Gopis were trying to stop it.

So, at this point, he's reminiscing. Krishna's speaking to Madhumangal.

He's actually holding his hand. And he says to Madhumangal, "Akrura held the horses' reins and was about to drive away. At that time, Radha approached, her heart trembling with unsteadiness, and crying loudly, she tried to climb onto the chariot, but her friends stopped her.

Then, she cast a tear-filled glance at me. Ah. She cast a tear-filled glance at me, her eyes pleading with mine. I paused for a moment, lost in those charming eyes that make demigods fall from heaven like rain. But I was so cruel that I rode away.

Alas, alas, why did I not take that beautiful girl with me?

Why did I not take that beautiful girl with me?

Why?

Why?

Why?" So, again, her glance has such a deep spiritual, transcendental emotion, prema bhakti effect on Krishna.

Now, all of this brings to mind for me a verse I quoted a few weeks ago. I'd like to quote it again. It's okay. We can quote many times. One time, Srila Prabhupada told one of my godbrothers that "If you memorize a verse and you quote it seven times in your classes, it's yours." So, we can repeat the verses.

But this verse kind of summarizes everything we're talking about today, the power of Radha Rani's glance. Again, Padyavali, from Rupa Goswami, it's verse 3.44. "Amongst the vraja-vasis, the Gopis are the best. And their best quality is their sweet words.

And amongst the Gopis, there is one who is better than all the others, and her best quality is what?

Her crooked sidelong glance." Vrindavaneshwari Shrimati Radha Rani ki. In a sort of conclusion, you could say that in a following verse, Rupa Goswami praises the wonder that is Radha Rani's sidelong glance. It's from Lalita Madhava, 4.28. Really another beautiful verse.

Therein he writes: "All glories to Radha's supremely victorious sidelong glance, which with its sweetness makes the beauty of the most splendid lotus flowers wilt, and with which its playfulness easily conquers Lord Krishna, who was himself garlanded by the goddess of victory, and who was victorious over all the three worlds." But he's conquered by her glance.

Hare Krishna.

So, I'd like to finish today with a most significant prayer. I mean, we've been quoting verses and shlokas and so forth, but actually, for Gaudiya Vaishnavas, all these verses and shlokas, even the Maha Mantra, it's all prayer from the heart to Radha and Krishna.

So, I'm saying that I'd like to finish today with the most significant prayer. Actually, it's different verses sung by Lord Shiva. This particular prayer, I've been waiting to share for this whole series. And the series is not finished. We have one more class, actually, on glances, but I thought I'd say it today.

It's the Radha Kripa Kataksha Stavraj. The prayer for the merciful sidelong glance of Shri Radha. It's actually described as an appeal to Shrimati Radha Rani from the Urdhvamnaya Tantra, spoken by Lord Shiva to Parvati. It's sung by every rasika devotee in Braj, and it's now a favorite of many ISKCON devotees as well, because it says everything.

You can find many devotees in the early morning or in the evening before the sun goes down at Radha Kunda. They're in the Kunda, and they're up to their waists, and they're chanting these prayers by Lord Shiva. I did mention in the very first class we gave in this mini-series that one explanation of why devotees want Radha Rani's glance is because they receive her favor, and with that favor, we can be introduced to her beloved Krishna.

That's certainly true. But there's another interpretation, or another reason why devotees, many devotees want Radha Rani's glance, because if you get her glance, you can pray to her to be her maidservant. Manjari bhava. So, it is very, very significant and a good way to finish today.

Lord Shiva, he's spoken by Lord Shiva to Parvati. He's praying for the sidelong glance of Radha Rani. I hope I can say it and express it in such a way as Lord Shiva intended it to be, and devotees are hoping it to be. "O goddess worshipped by the king of sages, O goddess who removes the sufferings of the three worlds, O goddess whose face is a blossoming lotus, O goddess who enjoys pastimes in the forest, O daughter of Vrishabhanu, O companion of Braja's prince, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess staying in a vine cottage by an ashoka tree, O goddess whose delicate feet are as splendid as red blossoms, O goddess whose hand grants fearlessness, O abode of transcendental opulences, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess who playfully shooting the arrows of Your glances from the curved bows of Your auspicious amorous eyebrows have completely subdued Nanda's son, Krishna, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess whose form is as splendid as champak flowers, gold and lightning, O goddess whose face eclipses millions of autumn moons, O goddess whose eyes are wonderful restless young chakora birds, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O young girl intoxicated with passion, O goddess decorated with cheerful jealous anger, O goddess who passionately love Your beloved Krishna, O goddess learned in playful arts, O goddess expert in enjoying amorous pastimes in the kingdom of the peerlessly opulent forest groves of Vrindavan, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess decorated with a pearl necklace of bold amorous hints, O goddess as fair as gold, O goddess whose breasts are great golden water pots, O ocean of happiness filled with the scented powders of gentle smiles, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess whose arms are loaded stocks dancing on the waves, O goddess whose dark eyes are dancing vines, O playful beautiful charming goddess, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess who wears a golden necklace on the three-lined conch shell of Your neck, O goddess splendid with three jasmine garlands and three jeweled necklaces, O goddess whose moving locks of dark hair are decorated with bunches of flowers, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess who wears a sash of flowers on Your curved hips, O goddess charming with a sash of tinkling jeweled bells, O goddess whose beautiful thighs punish the regal elephant's trunk, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess whose anklets tinkling is more beautiful than the sounds of many mantras and the cooing of many regal swans, O goddess whose graceful motions mock the moving golden vines, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O goddess worshipped by Brahma, O goddess to whom countless millions of Vaishnavas bow down, O goddess who gives blessings to Parvati, Sachi and Saraswati, O goddess whose toenails are anointed with limitless opulences and mystic perfections, when will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

O queen of Vedic sacrifices, O queen of pious activities, O queen of the material world, O queen of the demigods, O queen of Vedic scholarship, O queen of knowledge, O queen of the goddesses of fortune, O queen of patience, O queen of Vrindavan, the forest of happiness, O queen of Braja, O empress of Braja, O Shri Radhika, obeisances to You." After hearing this beautiful prayer by Lord Shiva, which just touches the heart, not the heart, within the heart, the soul, what more can be said?

I'll just finish there. Leave that ringing in your ears, in your minds, in your hearts, in your soul, the beautiful prayers of Lord Shiva for the merciful glance of Shrimati Radha Rani. When, oh when, will that day be ours?

Prabhus, we have one more class about glances. I just wish it could go on and on and on, but there are so many qualities about Radha Rani we have to cover through the years. And thankfully so. So, one more class next Friday.

Let us finish. All glories to Srila Prabhupada. Shri Shri Gaura Nitai ki, Shri Shri Krishna Balarama ki, Shri Shri Radha Shyama Sundara ki, Vrindavaneshwari Shrimati Radha Rani ki, her glances ki ki ki jai.

Mayapur dham Gaura Nitai ki, Shri Krishna Sankirtana ki.

Nitai Gaura Premanande Jai Jai Shri Shri Radhe.