Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our lectures on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale
Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.
Namaste Sarasvatī Deve
Gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 150, in which we will continue to discuss the various disguises of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Their pastimes.

In this episode, Kṛṣṇa very cleverly disguises Himself as a friend of His. This is the disguise today. He disguises Himself as a friend of His.

And how so?

Well, here we go.

We're presently in the month of Kārtika, also known as the month of Dāmodara, and we're all aware of Kṛṣṇa's naughty pastimes of stealing butter from the elder gopīs in Vṛndāvana.

And as a result of the stealing, the elder gopīs would regularly complain to Mother Yaśodā.

*Garga-saṁhitā*, Canto One, Chapter Seventeen, discusses this in some detail. It states that one day Upananda's wife, Prabhāvatī, came to make a complaint to Mother Yaśodā.

Upananda is the elder brother of Nanda Mahārāja.

She said:

"O Devī, we're so close to each other that we see no difference between each other's possessions. My stock of butter, ghee, milk, and yogurt is yours, and I take it that yours is mine. Nevertheless, your son must learn how to discriminate between his house and that of others.

To put it bluntly, your boy has become a thief, for He regularly comes into my house to steal milk products, to steal butter, and when I catch Him and try to correct Him, He talks back to me. Then He runs away.

As His mother, it's your duty to teach Him to respect other people's property. He is, after all, the son of Vraja's king. If He steals, then all the other boys His age will follow His bad example. Even now they accompany Him wherever He goes, and they join in His mischief.

Please do something."

So in response, Mother Yaśodā said:

"I just cannot understand. My warehouse is overflowing with butter. Still, my son rarely eats butter or yogurt here. Now I understand why He's eating it in the homes of others.

O honorable one, next time Kṛṣṇa steals from your home, catch Him. Bring Him to me with butter still all over His chubby face, and I will teach Him a lesson He won't forget.

In the meantime, please forgive His offenses, and let there be no ill will between our families."

So Prabhāvatī-devī, delighted to hear Mother Yaśodā's words of reassurance, went home in a happy mood, where she eagerly waited for Kṛṣṇa to again set foot in her house so she could catch Him.

And it wasn't long before Kṛṣṇa had finished His visits to Gokula's storehouses, and Upananda's home was next in line to serve as, the ācāryas say, the arena for the cowherd boy's daily sacrifices to the Supreme Lord.

That's how they put it.

It's a sacrifice.

Very poetic.

They say Prabhāvatī's butter would be the oblations, Kṛṣṇa the head priest, the cowherd boys' mouths the sacrificial fire, and the village monkeys the beneficiaries of the gopīs' charity.

The village monkeys, the beneficiaries of the gopīs' charity.

Transcendental poetry.

Then, quietly making their way out from a grove of trees, Kṛṣṇa and His friends scaled the outer wall of Upananda's house, quietly dropped into the inner courtyard, and ran into the storeroom.

But at that point the boys were surprised—disappointed, you could say—when they saw that all the milk, butter, and yogurt was suspended from the ceiling out of their reach.

But when some of the gopas turned to leave, Kṛṣṇa whispered:

"No, no. Stay, stay."

And He quickly constructed a makeshift platform by piling together a crate, a footstool, and a grinding mortar.

He put it all together and made a makeshift stage.

But when He climbed on top of it with the help of His friends, the milk products were still too far away.

Just as Kṛṣṇa was about to give up and climb down, Subala, the cowherd boy, handed Him a stick.

So Kṛṣṇa used the stick to poke the clay pot until it broke, spilling all the freshly churned butter all over Himself and onto the floor.

And scooping up the nectar, the boys and their monkey friends greedily stuffed it into their mouths while softly giggling to themselves and complimenting Kṛṣṇa on His cleverness.

"You're so clever."

But then suddenly Prabhāvatī arrived.

The plot thickens.

Seeing her in the doorway with a stick in hand, one boy shouted:

"Quick! Run! We're all caught!"

And all the gopas started running around the storeroom in a panic.

Some even ran right past Prabhāvatī and her menacing stick.

But unfortunately, Kṛṣṇa couldn't get past His aunt.

By Yogamāyā's design, despite His superior agility, Prabhāvatī was able to catch Kṛṣṇa and hold on to His wrist while He cried for help:

"Mā! Mā! Mother! Mother!"

Abandoned by His friends and held captive by His determined aunt, Kṛṣṇa shed false tears, the ācāryas say, and filled the trail He made by dragging His feet as Prabhāvatī pushed and pulled Him back to Nanda Mahārāja's palace.

She's dragging Him back.

And by the time the two arrived at Nandagrāma, Kṛṣṇa was really scared.

He thought:

"Mother will be angry and she'll hit Me with a stick."

So He used the edge of Prabhāvatī's sari to cover His head in shame.

But as soon as clever Kṛṣṇa heard His mother's voice, He manifested a portion of His mystic potency and transformed Himself into Prabhāvatī's son, whose name is Kandarpa, while still keeping His head covered with her garment.

He changed Himself to look like her son.

So, approaching Mother Yaśodā, Prabhāvatī said:

"Mother Yaśodā, this rascal son of yours again broke into my house, shattered a pot of butter, and ate the contents with His friends."

And ashamed of Nanda-nandana, Yaśodā-devī replied:

"Dearest Prabhāvatī, remove your garment from His face. I have every intention of banishing this mischievous boy from my house forever."

But when Prabhāvatī removed the cloth from Kṛṣṇa's face, she was shocked to see her own son Kandarpa standing by her side.

And at this point Yaśodā just laughed, wondering:

"What's this drama all about?"

Prabhāvatī had no explanation.

For a moment she was speechless as Yaśodā said:

"Devī, this is not my son, but yours. Why have you unjustly accused my boy and played this trick on me?"

So confused, Prabhāvatī pulled on her son's arms and, shaking him, said:

"My dear son, how did you change places with the son of Vraja's king? Tell me now, or I will punish you."

But "Kandarpa" just looked silently at the ground, as if humiliated by his mother's conduct.

And having no other recourse, Prabhāvatī left Nanda Mahārāja's palace bewildered.

And as she and her son Kandarpa—quote unquote—had departed, Mother Yaśodā, Nanda Mahārāja, and Balarāma all started laughing, saying:

"This attempt to spoil the good name of Kṛṣṇa was foiled by His own purity. This attempt to spoil the good name of Kṛṣṇa was foiled by His own purity."

It's not over.

Meanwhile, on the way back to Upananda's house, Kṛṣṇa abandoned His disguise as Kandarpa and appeared to Prabhāvatī in His original form.

Seeing Kṛṣṇa before her, Prabhāvatī let go of His hand in amazement.

Then it's described that Kṛṣṇa wagged His forefinger at her and said:

"Auntie, if you try to take Me to My mother again, instead of taking on the form of your son, I will take on the form of your good husband, and you will be discredited as the madwoman of Gokula."

The madwoman of Gokula.

So, wide-eyed and speechless, Prabhāvatī wondered:

"What kind of mystic power does this little boy have, and from where has it come?"

And fearing that He would make good on His threat, she stopped trying to catch Him whenever He came to her house to steal butter.

And gradually the word spread that if Kṛṣṇa was ever caught stealing butter, be aware that He would use magic to escape punishment by embarrassing anyone who tried to bring Him to justice.

Stated like that.

It was already known that He had killed powerful demons.

Thus, out of fear of being humiliated, all those elderly gopīs stopped trying to catch Him in His butter-stealing pastimes.

Kṛṣṇa, thus having instilled this fear into the hearts of the elderly gopīs, and His cowherd friends started to steal butter, milk, and yogurt with impunity.

So, in these and other ways, Kṛṣṇa spent His childhood in Gokula in great happiness.

Kṛṣṇa.

This is a good pastime for this month of Dāmodara.

Kṛṣṇa's disguise as the son of Prabhāvatī.

So let us conclude today with a final verse from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Padyāvalī*, Verse Fourteen.

Short but sweet.

And I quote:

"Seeing a pot of butter in the distance, baby Keśava quickly crawled there, anxiously turning His face out of fear of His mother. I worship these childhood pastimes of the Lord."

Rūpa says:

"I worship these childhood pastimes of the Lord."

And we do too, by his grace and by the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So thank you.

We'll be back again next Friday.

More disguises.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.
