

Hari Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. Nama oṁ viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we are continuing our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 60. Today, I would like to discuss the theme of dancing in the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Their associates in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Now, the Sanskrit term for dance is nṛtya, but nṛtya has many synonyms as well in Sanskrit; for example, tāṇḍava. Tāṇḍava, of course, is famous as the dance of Lord Śiva, but actually, tāṇḍava can refer to any dance. Then there is nartanam, then there is lāsya, nāṭanam, and nāṭyam. These are actually the prominent names of dance mentioned in the Amarakośa, the Sanskrit lexicon.

Now, our Lord Kṛṣṇa’s dancing began very early in His childhood. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.11.7 says: “Bhavānī, an elderly gopī, would say, ‘If you dance, my dear Kṛṣṇa, then I shall give you half a sweetmeat.’ By saying these words or by clapping their hands, all the gopīs encouraged Kṛṣṇa in different ways. At such times, although He was the supremely powerful Personality of Godhead, He would smile and dance according to their desire as if He were a wooden doll in their hands. Sometimes He would sing very loudly at their bidding. In this way, Kṛṣṇa came completely under the control of the gopīs.”

Now, the famous Śrīdhara Svāmī—Prabhupāda describes him as the first commentator on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam—he says that Kṛṣṇa did so, acting like that, in order to never give the impression that He is the Supreme Lord; that is Vraja. Now, while playing with the elderly gopīs in this way, Śrīdhara Svāmī says there would often be very sweet exchanges. Now, elsewhere, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.15.1 says: “Sometimes Kṛṣṇa would imitate the dancing of a peacock in order to make His friends laugh.” Lots of dancing pastimes! Now, Kṛṣṇa’s friends would also dance with the peacocks. I found that verse, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.12.8: “Sitting quietly with the cranes, the boys would sometimes dance with the peacocks.” Lots of dancing! And of course, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.16.26 notes that Kṛṣṇa is famous for dancing on the hoods of the Kāliya serpent. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.16.26, Śukadeva Gosvāmī refers to Kṛṣṇa as akhila-kalādhi-guru, meaning the original guru of all fine arts, of which dancing is one. And in his commentary to that verse, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, “Kṛṣṇa danced on Kāliya to show the young gopīs His dancing skills so that their pūrva-rāga, meaning budding love towards Him, would increase transcendentally.” Showing off to the gopīs!

Now, I was reading in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.8.10 that in the Vṛndāvana forest, the cowherd boys would often play instruments while Kṛṣṇa would dance. As Kṛṣṇa danced, some of the boys accompanied Him by singing and others playing flutes, hand cymbals, and buffalo horns, while still others praised His dancing. And sometimes the boys would dance and Kṛṣṇa would play the instruments; vice versa, transcendental vice versa. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.18.11: “While the other boys were dancing, oh King, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would sometimes accompany them with song and instrumental music, and sometimes the two Lords would praise the boys, saying, ‘Very good! Very good! Very good!’”

But of course, as our ācāryas explained, the highest level of Kṛṣṇa’s dancing skills were exhibited in what? The Rāsa dance. That’s described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.2, very famous: “There on the Yamunā’s banks, Lord Govinda then began the pastime of the Rāsa dance in the company of those jewels amongst women, the faithful gopīs, who joyfully linked their arms together.” The supreme dance! Now, this is really nice. I discovered a devotee named Anūpa Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭācārya describes actually the tinkling sound of Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells at that time when He’s dancing. It’s a wonderful verse. It’s in his composition called Amōda-mahākāvya. There he writes: “The gopīs heard the sound which delights the minds of the three worlds, which gave them great joy, and which gradually took over the tinkling of their ankle bells. This was the sound of Hari’s ankle bells: jum-juma, jum-juma, jum-juma, jum-juma.” What a wonderful detail! The sound of Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells in the Rāsa dance.

Now, earlier we mentioned how Lord Śiva is famous as Naṭarāja because of his tāṇḍava dance. However, it’s described that when Lord Śiva heard the flute of Lord Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, he left behind his meditation on Mount Kailāsa and started running towards Vṛndāvana to—what? To dance with the Lord! He heard His flute, so he ran from Kailāsa to Vṛndāvana to dance with the Lord. Now, the famous poet Harivaṁśa wrote a poem about Vṛndāvana called “Look, Everything is Dancing.” I just love that, when I came across that. He wrote a poem, “Look, everything is dancing,” and therein he writes: Dekho sakhī… Meaning, “Oh sakhī, look, everything is dancing in Vṛndāvana. The living beings and the non-living beings all dance blissfully and ecstatically, which stimulates their love for Kṛṣṇa.”

Now, another poet, his name was Nandadāsa; he lived 500 years ago. He wrote a poem in his famous book called Nandadāsa Kīrtanī, which I found out was later published hundreds of years later by the Ministry of Culture here in India. And therein, he begins by writing: “Kṛṣṇa, look, in the hands of Kṛṣṇa, Govardhana Hill is dancing while moving to the heavy winds on His little finger. Then the sweet sound of His flute comes out when He places His flute on His lower lip. The sound of the thundering sky is playing mṛdaṅga, and the lightning in the sky is giving applause to Govardhana’s dance by offering him a lamp like lightning. All the cowherd boys clap to give beats to Kṛṣṇa’s flute playing, and all the cows moo to add to the music for Govardhana’s dancing. All the gopīs show their appreciation for Govardhana, and the unstoppable rain of prema is actually pouring love everywhere.” The poet Nandadāsa says, “The pastimes of the Lord are always blissful, which takes away all of my worries.” How instructive!

Now, the medieval poet Gaṇeśa-śyāma, in a beautiful poem called Āgamana-pada, which I found out means “when coming home,” he describes how even Bhūmi, Mother Earth, danced during Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana pastimes here on Earth 5,000 years ago. This is really interesting. He begins by explaining that when Kṛṣṇa comes back to Nanda’s gośālā, everything and everyone there becomes joyful. How? Ātī gopāla gāna śyāma. He writes: “The residents of Vraja blow conch shells and light lamps in their houses. All the bright young maidens of Vraja decorate their eyes and feet with cosmetics, as 900,000 cows of Kṛṣṇa blissfully run towards the hill of Nandīśvara. Their heavy bodies and udders filled with thick milk create deep imprints in the dust of Vraja when they run. Hearing the ho-ho sounds of the cowherd boys, they shiver and shake the whole Earth in ecstasy. Thus, Mother Earth—Bhūmi—dances in ecstasy.” That’s the line: “Thus Mother Earth dances in ecstasy.” “The bells of the cows act as cymbals, and the mooing sounds act as mṛdaṅgas. Gopīs hold the pillars of their houses in fear of an earthquake.” The poet Gaṇeśa-śyāma claps, witnessing the dance of Mother Earth, who is unmovable on the head of the Śeṣa-nāga snake but who dances by Gopāla’s arrangements. Pure nectar! Fortunately, Lord Caitanya has brought this process—chanting, dancing, and feasting—to this world so we can go home and join the dancing in the spiritual world.

Now, I was reading that our poet Sadāśiva, he writes: Rāsa-nāṭa hī pīyārī. That not only Govardhana Hill and Mother Earth dance in Vṛndāvana, but all the trees and vines as well. He writes: “The night, filled with different emotions, made everyone dance in ecstasy. The soothing and fragrant breezes from the Yamunā’s banks made the trees of Vraja dance to and fro in bliss. The vines were dancing, the branches were dancing, the leaves were dancing, and the flowers were dancing too. Oh sakhī, look at Nandalāla; the whole forest was dancing to the sound of flowing kal-kal sounds of the Yamunā in the night.” Sadāśiva says, “The Lord in His dance made everyone dance in love and love and love.” That’s how he finishes the poem. Sadāśiva says, “The Lord in His dance made everyone dance in love and love and love,” ad infinitum.

So again, everyone and everything dances with Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. Śāstra says one afternoon, when Kṛṣṇa woke up after resting in the forest, all His cowherd friends were still asleep, so He decided to wake them up by playing His flute. Veṇu-vādanī, He who holds the flute. And when Kṛṣṇa started playing the flute, it enchanted the many peacocks wandering around Govardhana Hill, and they started dancing in great happiness. And when Kṛṣṇa saw the peacocks dancing so nicely, He encouraged them by His kind glances and sweet smiling. As a result, the peacocks were so full of gratitude that one of them went up to Kṛṣṇa, touched His feet, and requested Him to dance along with them. So Kṛṣṇa happily accepted this request, and along with His cowherd friends, started dancing very beautifully with all the peacocks. Now witnessing this—all of it is described—all the animals in the forest were completely mesmerized by Kṛṣṇa’s dancing. He’s the original Naṭarāja! The ācāryas say that, in fact, Kṛṣṇa’s dancing was so overwhelming that some of the peacocks fainted. This went on for some time, but eventually the peacocks danced until they were exhausted. But it’s said Kṛṣṇa, He went on dancing for many days and nights—one ācārya says for a night of Lord Brahmā. Now when Kṛṣṇa finally stopped dancing, the king of the peacocks was so grateful that Kṛṣṇa had given them so much of His precious time that he approached the Lord and offered Him what is most dear to peacocks, their most prized possession. And what is that? Several glorious peacock feathers. And Kṛṣṇa lovingly accepted this humble offering and placed a few of the feathers in His hair. And from that time on to the present day, Kṛṣṇa always wears peacock feathers on His head.

Now, as we mentioned earlier, Kṛṣṇa was inspired to dance at a young age—you remember we opened with this—by the elderly gopīs. However, it’s just mad, mad, mad—it gets sweeter and sweeter! However, He later on perfected the art of dancing. Of course, He’s eternally perfect, but akhila. He later on perfected the art of dancing from His dance instructor. Kṛṣṇa has a dance teacher! And who is the dance teacher of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is literally the cause of all causes? Well, it’s described in Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.77. It reveals—fortunately, that wonderful book reveals who is Kṛṣṇa’s dance teacher. Therein, Rādhā—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—is speaking to Vṛndā-devī. Listen to this: “Oh my beloved friend Vṛndā, where are you coming from?” Vṛndā: “I’m coming from the feet of Śrī Hari.” Rādhā: “Where is He?” Vṛndā: “In the forest on the bank of Vṛndā-kuṇḍa.” Rādhā: “What is He doing there?” Vṛndā: “He’s learning to dance.” Rādhā: “Who is His guru?” Vṛndā replies: “Your image, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, revealing itself in every tree and creeper in every direction, roaming like a skillful dancer, making Him dance behind.” Hari Kṛṣṇa! Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is Kṛṣṇa’s dance teacher!

And amazingly, we learn exactly what Rādhārāṇī’s dance steps sound like in chapter 23, verse 19, of the same Govinda-līlāmṛta. I’ve been practicing this, so: Dum-dum, kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa, svāmī-kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇa… Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he concludes: Mṛdu-śabdaiḥ… mṛdū-śabdaiḥ… nṛtyam. In this way, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī approached Śrī Kṛṣṇa and danced with Him. How blessed we are! Love is in the details, I always say. There we get to hear what it sounds like when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī dances with Kṛṣṇa.

So, to continue the ecstatic dancing of Vṛndāvana in Goloka Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa actually Himself appeared as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu 500 years ago to teach the people of this age how, by chanting and dancing and taking prasādam, one can achieve love of God and go back to that blissful spiritual world. Actually, Kṛṣṇa is waiting there to dance with us. How can I say that? Because in his purport to Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 7.99, our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda he makes this very clear. He writes—it’s so important—”Impersonalist Māyāvādīs always try to defy Vaiṣṇavas because Vaiṣṇavas accept the Supreme Personality as the supreme cause and want to serve Him, talk with Him, and see Him, just as the Lord is also eager to see His devotees and talk, eat, and—” Prabhupāda concludes, “and dance with them.” And dance with them! And surely, Prabhus, by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra and dancing in ecstasy here, we will qualify ourselves to do the same in the spiritual world. Sādhana-bhakti means devotional service in practice, and practice makes perfect. So, chant, dance, and feast on prasādam.

So how can we be 100% certain that the same activities are going on there in the spiritual world? Because the Brahma-saṁhitā, chapter 5, verse 56, tells us so. It refers to dancing in the spiritual world, and we will finish with that amazing verse today:

“I worship that transcendental seat known as Śvetadvīpa, where as loving consorts, the Lakshmīs and their unalloyed spiritual essence practice the amorous service of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa as their only lover. Every tree is a transcendental purpose tree, where the soil is the purpose gem, all water is nectar, every word is a song, every gait is a dance, the flute is the favorite attendant, effulgence is full of transcendental bliss, and the supreme spiritual entities are all enjoyable and tasty, where numberless milk cows always emit transcendental oceans of milk, where there is eternal existence of transcendental time who is ever present and without past or future and hence is not subject to the quality of passing away, even for the space of half a moment. That realm is known as Goloka, only to a very few self-realized souls in this world.” Hari Kṛṣṇa!

Brahma-saṁhitā! And one very special self-realized soul, Śrīla Prabhupāda, came to the West and taught us, shared with us this message, shared with us this vibhāva—back to the spiritual world, chanting, dancing, and feasting. And I’ve been so happy today to share the dancing of Vṛndāvana a little bit with Mahāprabhu as well. So there’s so much information about dancing because it’s such an important part of our process; we’ll next week have part two on dancing. Okay? So, thank you so much from Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

Śrī Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! Hari Kṛṣṇa!
