Hare Krishna everyone, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma. So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part five. Once again in this series we will be focusing on those things, those articles that awaken our dormant love for Kṛṣṇa, and today we will continue discussing Kṛṣṇa's stick. Kṛṣṇa's stick, which of course was the subject matter of our last class. So again, the name for stick in Sanskrit is yaṣṭi, and you may remember that another name for stick is laguḍa, and one who holds such a stick is known as laguḍī. And in our last lecture we gave a number of examples as well as a few pastimes where Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, and the cowherd boys all carry sticks. But it's interesting that gopīs, the cowherd girls in Vṛndāvana, they also carry sticks. The most obvious gopī of course is Mother Yaśodā, as we hear in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, Canto 10, Chapter 9, Verse 9, where it is stated: "When Lord Kṛṣṇa saw his mother stick in hand, he very quickly got down from the top of the mortar and began to flee as if very much afraid." When Lord Kṛṣṇa saw his mother stick in hand like that, so that's a very prominent example. And verse 2 of the famous Dāmodarāṣṭakam describes what Kṛṣṇa did when he saw the stick. We all know: "Upon seeing his mother's whipping stick, he cried and rubbed his eyes again and again with his two lotus hands." So sweet.

Now not only did Mother Yaśodā carry a stick, but sometimes younger gopīs would also carry bamboo sticks to playfully strike gopas, cowherd boys, in retaliation for teasing them or trying to steal their milk products. I was reading, as a result sometimes the cowherd boys carried shields to protect themselves from these young gopīs and their sticks. And actually such playful dealings are celebrated in Vṛndāvana, mostly in Varshāṇā in the month of Kārtika during the famous festival of Holi. I've seen this. At that time groups of ladies pour powdered colors over the men in the town and symbolically strike them with their sticks. And they have big sticks in these cases. This is called Laṭhmār Holī. Laṭh Mār Holī. Laṭh refers to those big sticks and mār in Sanskrit means to beat. So the festival of Laṭhmār Holī. But in general, sticks were the constant companions of Kṛṣṇa and his boyfriends, who use them very often in a variety of ways. For example, I was reading in Garga Saṃhitā, Canto 2, Chapter 20, verses 22 to 28. There it's described how Kṛṣṇa once manifested the Ganges with his vetra. Now vetra is another name for stick. Sometimes in this pastime they call it his dancing stick. So the Ganges that he manifested with this particular vetra, the stick, is called the Vetra Gaṅgā. And it's a really nice pastime, so I'll share it with you.

On the afternoon of Dhenukāsura, the demon's death, the cowherd boys returned from Tālavana where the pastime took place to their homes and described the heroic feats of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to their parents. And regarding the forest of Tālavana, they described them as demoniac donkeys. They told their parents Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma killed all the demoniac donkeys. Now it's described that a number of young gopīs overheard the boys relating Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in the Tālavana forest, and as a result they developed a strong desire to visit there, as we should by hearing such pastimes. Now knowing the hearts of the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa understood this. So one day after enjoying a rāsa dance with them, it was at Candraśālā, he took all the gopīs to Tālavana. The forest of Tālavana. And he showed them where he and Balarāma had tossed these demoniac donkeys into the trees. And it's described that in celebration, Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs started dancing again. In fact, they danced so much that they were all profusely perspiring. And so at the end of the dance, these gopīs approached Kṛṣṇa and said, "Our dear Kṛṣṇa, keeping up with your dancing has made us all very thirsty. But the Yamunā river is so far away. Your duty is to protect us. So please get us some drinking water from somewhere. Otherwise, Kṛṣṇa, how will we continue on?" They said like that to Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa smiled at the request and struck the ground with his vetra, with his stick. As a result, a spring of Ganges water bubbled up from the ground and formed a lake filled with blue lotuses. So the gopīs quenched their thirst in that lake and then on Kṛṣṇa's invitation they entered the water for jala-keli, which means water pastimes with him. Kelī means playful pastimes and jala means water. So jala-keli, water pastimes with him. And after enjoying pastimes in the water, Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs had a picnic beneath the star-filled sky that evening. And while the gopīs ate juicy tāla fruit, Kṛṣṇa told them pastimes of how he had rid the Vṛndāvana forest of many kinds of demons, just telling them like that.

Now that Vetra Gaṅgā in the Tālavana forest – I was reading – it's said to be so pure that merely by touching it one frees himself from the sin of killing a brāhmaṇa. And not only that, but bathing in the Vetra Gaṅgā qualifies one to enter Goloka Vṛndāvana. We shouldn't think statements like that are exaggeration. That's one of the ten offenses, to think the glories of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa are exaggeration. There's no exaggeration. This is the potency of the dhāma. By bathing in that Ganges, one qualifies oneself to enter Goloka Vṛndāvana. Let's go there. And I read that Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu visited Tālavana during his pilgrimage to Vṛndāvana and there he worshiped the deity of Lord Balarāma, the killer of Dhenukāsura, and he himself bathed in the Vetra Gaṅgā. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So there's another nice pastime also described in Garga Saṃhitā, but this time it's in Canto 3, Chapter 7, verses 15 to 23. And this pastime took place at Govardhana Hill near Govinda Kuṇḍa on the banks of the now not visible Nīpa Kuṇḍa. Not visible to those with material eyes, but those whose eyes had been purified by the process of bhakti, they can still see this kuṇḍa as Nīpa Kuṇḍa, just at the bottom of Govardhana Hill. So the ācāryas say that that particular area is called Dāna Droṇa Kṣetra, Droṇa Kṣetra, because Kṛṣṇa once served yogurt on a summer's day to the cowherd boys there in cup-shaped leaves made from nearby trees.

Now the pastime began on a particularly hot day while the cowherd boys were lying on the banks of that Nīpa Kuṇḍa as their cows grazed nearby. And they said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, it's so hot. Please relieve us by getting some cooling yogurt for us to drink." So Kṛṣṇa was reclining in the shade of a tree at this time, listening to the pleas of his friends, when all of a sudden he heard the sound of girls' voices and tinkling anklets. And peering over the top of a nearby bush, lo and behold, he saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her gopīs coming down the road towards him carrying what looked like pots of yogurt on their heads. So Kṛṣṇa didn't waste a moment and while calling out the names of his friends, he jumped out from behind the bush into the cowherd girls' path, brandishing his yaṣṭi – remember, his stick – and the cowherd boys quickly crowded behind Kṛṣṇa. And Subala called out, "Hey girls, what have you got in those pots?" But the gopīs simply kept walking along. So Kṛṣṇa took his stick and struck the ground with it and said, "Wait a minute, girls, you can't pass by without paying a tax toll." Here we have another dāna pastime. To which a chorus of girls replied, "Kṛṣṇa, your greedy mind is always obsessed with taxing those over whom you have no jurisdiction. Let's see how much tax you collect after you are locked up in Kaṃsa's prison." So Kṛṣṇa replied, "Who cares for Kaṃsa or his prison? You go ahead and complain to him. That would only give me an excuse to go to Mathurā and kill him sooner than I have planned." So hearing this powerful challenge from Kṛṣṇa, what did the cowherd boys do? They all stood up and blew their horns. They stood up real straight and blew their horns, shook their sticks, and it's described they filled the valleys of Govardhana Hill with cheers and shouts: "Down with the king! Kill Kaṃsa! Down with the king! Kill Kaṃsa! Down with the king! Kill Kaṃsa!" And in the midst of this commotion, Śrīdāmā, who of course is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's brother, informed Kṛṣṇa that the pots the girls were carrying contained yogurt that his sister had prepared the night before, adding that it was yogurt too good to be sold to strangers at the market.

So at this point Kṛṣṇa stepped forward and very deftly lifted a pot of yogurt off the nearest gopī's head, and all his friends followed suit. They did the same thing with surprisingly little resistance from the girls. Hmm, because in fact Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had made the yogurt especially for Kṛṣṇa and his friends and had enlisted the help of her girlfriends to carry it to the market, knowing well that by walking past Girirāja they would be ambushed. So as the boys try to place the pots on the ground and prepare to devour the contents, Lalitā Devī spoke up. She said, "Kṛṣṇa may be fearless amongst his friends in this secluded forest, but after we report this theft to the king, we will see how bold he is while being surrounded by powerful soldiers in the city of Mathurā." She's always defending Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And then with Rādhārāṇī in the lead, the gopīs left for their homes. Meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa and his friends collected large cup-shaped leaves from the nearby kadamba trees and soon everyone was relishing the yogurt that Śrī Rādhā had secretly prepared for them and which they had mischievously stolen. Such blissful pastimes, prasādam pastimes, are forever immortalized in the grantha-rāja Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, particularly in verse 10.13.11, where it is stated: Kṛṣṇa is He who eats only offerings of yajña, but to exhibit his childhood pastimes he now sat with his flute tucked between his waist, his tight cloth on his right side, and his bugle horn and cow-driving stick on his left, holding in his hand a very nice preparation of yogurt and rice with pieces of suitable fruit between his fingers. He sat like the whorl of a lotus flower, looking forward towards all his friends, personally joking with them and creating jubilant laughter among them as he ate. At that time the denizens of heaven were watching, struck with wonder at how the Personality of Godhead who eats only in yajña was now eating with his friends in the forest. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

A famous verse from Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, and we will finish today with part of Śrīla Prabhupāda's commentary on this verse, giving us a very beautiful insight into this pastime. Prabhupāda writes: "When Kṛṣṇa was eating with his cowherd boyfriends, a certain bumblebee came there to take part in the eating. Kṛṣṇa joked, 'Hey bumblebee, why have you come here to disturb my brāhmaṇa friend Madhumaṅgala? Do you want to kill a brāhmaṇa? This is not good.' At that, all the boys laughed and enjoyed speaking such joking words while eating. Thus the inhabitants of the higher planets were astonished at how the Supreme Personality of Godhead who eats only when yajña is offered was now eating like an ordinary child with his friends in the forest." Thank you for those and many more transcendental insights into Kṛṣṇa's wonderful pastimes in the topmost planet in the spiritual world. Please allow us to someday join you there in Vraja.

So thank you, prabhus. We'll finish here. Maybe we'll get another stick pastime, I'm not sure. I have to dive into the scriptures again. But if not, we'll pick another article which we can discuss which helps stimulate our dormant love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, and all the residents of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma. Thank you, thank you, thank you. Sunduke? It's December, Marathon ki jaya. Go back home, back to Godhead again.