""Welcome back, once again, to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. So, today I was reflecting again how in the spiritual dimension of Vṛndāvana, every person and every object—such as an animal, tree, musical instrument, ring, or necklace—is actually a transcendental personality, a unique, and how could you say, colorful individual. In the spiritual world, there are no bodies made of gross matter like flesh and bones, or even mind, intellect, or ego. Everyone has a *bhāva-deha*. A *bhāva-deha* means a spiritual body full of transcendental loving sentiments. Everyone and everything in Goloka Vṛndāvana is completely personal, full of love, Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa. And in this regard, everyone also has a personal and unique relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Not that some entities have a close relationship with Kṛṣṇa and others only get to be with Him from time to time or only get to see Him from a distance; no, everyone has a personal and unique relationship with Kṛṣṇa. This concept is called *prakāśa-vigraha*.

In *Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta* 3.6.11, we learn that every one of the millions and millions of cowherds, the children, young people, and elders, thinks, "I alone am most dear to Kṛṣṇa." "I alone am most dear to Kṛṣṇa." Because *prakāśa* also means one Kṛṣṇa per gopī in the rāsa dance and one Kṛṣṇa per cowherd boy during lunch. We’ve all heard in *Kṛṣṇa* book how during lunch, each cowherd boy feels that Kṛṣṇa is looking directly towards him. And as for the many living entities living in the Vṛndāvana forest, there are so many living entities, pure devotees, living in Vṛndāvana forest; they also enjoy a very personal and unique relationship with Kṛṣṇa. *Kṛṣṇa* book, Chapter 15, describes that once when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were walking through the forest, Kṛṣṇa said to Balarāma, "My dear brother, You are the Supreme Worshipable Godhead. Just see how the peacocks are dancing before You in great ecstasy. The deer, whose behavior is just like the gopīs, are welcoming You with the same affection. And the cuckoos who are residing in this forest are receiving You with great joy because they consider that Your appearance in their home is so auspicious."

"Even though they are trees and animals, these residents of Vṛndāvana are glorifying You. They are prepared to welcome You to their best capacity, as is the practice of great souls in receiving another great soul at home. As for the land, it is so pious and fortunate that the footprints of Your lotus feet are marking its body. It is quite natural for these Vṛndāvana inhabitants to thus receive a great personality like You. The herbs, creepers, and plants are also fortunate to touch Your lotus feet, and by Your touching the twigs with Your hands, these small plants are also made glorious. As for the hills and the rivers, they too are now glorious because You are glancing at them. Above all, the damsels of Vraja, the gopīs, are the most glorious because You embrace them with Your strong arms, being attracted by their beauty."

So now, therein we hear that the Vraja-gopīs are especially dear to the Lord. Sometimes it is that Kṛṣṇa makes it clear that one devotee or group of devotees are very special to Him. Again, *Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta* 3.6.216 says that yet when Kṛṣṇa shows special love for one of the gopīs, it then becomes apparent that she is the most dear to Him. But this special status of the gopīs doesn't create any envy in the spiritual world, for there is no envy in the spiritual world. Prabhupāda made it very clear, there’s no envy in the spiritual world. When the devotees there see another devotee getting special attention from Kṛṣṇa, they think, "How nice it is that Kṛṣṇa is pleased with that devotee's service." So today, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 38.

With part 37, we had concluded our lectures on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s transcendental ornaments. But today, I would like to discuss another subject related to her, and that is her braid—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braid. Ācāryas often refer to Śrī Rādhā’s braided hair as an exceptional part of Her beauty and, thus, for us, an impetus for awakening our love for Her. In the *Rādhā-aṣṭottara-śata-nāma*, verse 23, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī writes, *divyā-veṇī-vinirjitā-keśā*, meaning "Splendid braids have stopped the praises of peacock feathers." Splendid braids have stopped the praises of peacock feathers which are glorious in Vṛndāvana, but Her braids have stopped the praises of the peacock feathers. Now, technically, the word braid in Sanskrit is *veṇī*, as well as *kapardham*, *jaṭā*, *jaṭā-jūṭa*, *śikhā-dāma*, and *kothram*—different names for braids in śāstra. I was reading, it is said that the beauty of a woman resides not in her bodily limbs but in her long hair. It’s also mentioned that the long hair of a woman signifies good fortune. Therefore, in Vṛndāvana, all the Vraja-gopīs, along with the topmost gopī, Śrī Rādhā, have long hair for the good fortune of Kṛṣṇa. Now, the art of dressing braids can still be seen in South India where ladies braid their hair with flowers and jewels; those of us who have been to South India, we see that quite often. But the braids of the Vraja-gopīs are especially wonderful, for they are part of the gopīs' pure spiritual forms, and of course, this is especially true of the braid of Rādhārāṇī. In *Govinda-līlāmṛta* 11, verse 114, the braids of Śrī Rādhā are compared to the holy Triveni confluence of Gaṅgā, Yamunā, and Sarasvatī. It says:

"The Yamunā River of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s beautiful black hair is braided with the Sarasvatī River of a string of jewels and the Ganges River of pearls and flowers. In this way, the decorated braided hair of the curving-eyebrow Varāṅgī has become just like the pilgrimage place Triveni, where the Sarasvatī, Ganges, and Yamunā rivers converge, remaining all glorious."

Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī also refers to the beauty of Śrī Rādhā’s braids in his *Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, verse 148. Therein he says, "Śrī Rādhā’s body is full of loveliness (lāvaṇya) and decorated with pearl necklaces; her hair is long and her wonderful braid is decorated by beautifully strung flower garlands." Now, it’s interesting, during my research I came across the fact that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braids are often compared to serpents. In *Bhakti-ratnākara*, fifth wave, we hear *phāṇī-phēṇī-paṭhē-ḍhōlē*. Kībā o Śrī Rādhā defeating the snakes, Śrī Rādhā’s braids sway to and fro. How many waves of nectar flow from the graceful emotions of Her neck. And in *Catur-puṣpāñjali*—in the part called *Catur-puṣpāñjali*, which means literally a "handful of prayer flowers"—*Catur-puṣpāñjali* refers to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braid. In a similar way, he writes, "O Queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rādhā, I worship You. Your fair complexion is more resplendent than molten gold, the color of Your sari the hue of a blue lotus flower. Your beautiful braided hair is long, raven black, and studded with many brilliant gems like the shining black hood of a cobra."

Now, in this regard, there is an interesting pastime in relationship to this verse of Rūpa Gosvāmī, and I’ll relate that here. So, one day, 500 years ago, Sanātana Gosvāmī came to Rādhā-kuṇḍa to meet Śrīla Rūpa and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmīs, and upon his arrival, they both got up to greet him. And after respectfully seating him, they immersed themselves all in discussion of the nectarian pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This is what great souls do. At that time, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī was writing this *Catur-puṣpāñjali*, and when Sanātana Gosvāmī sat down to read it, he came upon this same verse that we quoted, comparing Śrī Rādhā’s braid to a cobra. So, at that time, he wondered, "Is it proper to compare Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braid to the hood of a poisonous snake?" That thought came to his mind. But later that day, he came down to the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and after offering prayers there, he began to take his bath when, suddenly, on the opposite side of the kuṇḍa, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, he noticed some cowherd girls playing under the shade of a large tree. And as he watched them from the distance, it appeared that a black snake hanging from the tree was about to wrap itself around the neck and shoulders of one of the cowherd girls. So, sensing danger, he called out to her, "Oh, hey! Look out, there’s a snake just behind you!" But the girls were absorbed in their play and they didn't take notice of him. So, he immediately took off running to save them from the impending danger. And seeing him approaching, the girls—the special girl and her friends—began to laugh.

Sanātana Gosvāmī realized that the girl was Śrī Rādhā herself and her friends were her gopī maidservants. And looking closer, he saw that there wasn't a black snake present; it was only the braid of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So, at that point, Śrī Rādhā and her girlfriends disappeared. So Sanātana Gosvāmī was completely stunned, but he understood—the understanding came to him—that Śrī Rūpa’s comparison of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braid to the head of a cobra in *Catur-puṣpāñjali* was, in fact, very appropriate. We often quote Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, don't we? For he’s our mentor in the science of rasa. It is said of him: *Rameśvara-pūrvaka-śrī-bhagavān*. "The Supreme Lord Śrīmān-hari, the husband of Lakṣmī, who extracted a small jar of nectar from the large ocean, is certainly great, but that personality who created an entire ocean of nectarian rasa, *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, in this world is certainly my most worshipable deity, Rūpa Gosvāmī." And that verse was composed by my good friend.

Now, I was reading, in ancient times women would wash their hair with a mixture of medicinal herbs as well as śīkākāī, āmlā, yogurt, milk, and almond oil. Then they would dry their hair with a silk cloth. They would dry their hair with a silk cloth, then smoke their hair with smoke from cow dung or—I was reading sometimes—aguru wood. Then they would oil their hair with different oils like almond oil, āmlā oil, jasmine oil, saffron oil, and even medicinal oils. Then they would tie their hair with cotton strings. But in Goloka Vṛndāvana, it’s the Aṣṭa-sakhīs who attend to Śrī Rādhā’s hair. In *Govinda-līlāmṛta*, their decorating braids is described in verses 2, chapter 2, verse 72 and chapter 2, verse 73. There it is described, "Lalitā decorated Rādhārāṇī’s hair with Bakula flowers, strings of pearls, and the splendid jewel that Kṛṣṇa had taken from Śaṅkhacūḍa. She fixed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braids, tied them with a ribbon, and decorated them with golden jeweled ornaments and red flower blossoms. Citrā then dressed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in a red garment sewn with gold and rubies, and above that, she placed the silk garment named *meghāmbara*, which is as splendid as a swarm of bumblebees. Over this garment hung two tight braids of curling hair tied with ribbons and decorated with gold and two red flowers." So many nectarian details just about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braids! How fortunate we are.

So, attending to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s hair involves washing her hair, drying it, smoking it, massaging it, combing it, weaving it into braids, and decorating the braids. Now, of course, this is a very intimate sevā, a very intimate service, and as such, many great devotees have expressed their desire to render the sevā to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. For example, our great hero, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, he prays to get the service of braiding her hairs. In *Prārthanā*, *svābhīṣṭa-dasa-vijnapti*, song 13, he writes:

"When will I gaze at the beautiful forms of the Divine Couple? When will I dress Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in blue garments and decorate her braided hair with garlands of jasmine flowers and strings of nine different kinds of jewels on a golden thread?"

And then Śrīla, another one of our heroes, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he appears—he appeals to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in verse 28: "I will offer you beautiful outfits according to your taste. I will disentangle and comb your hair with a golden comb. I will decorate your hair with different types of colorful and fragrant flowers, and at the end of your braid, I will tie a handful of hanging gems and pearls known as *cāmarikā*." Hare Kṛṣṇa! Now, this *cāmarikā*, I had to do more research, but this *cāmarikā* is a special type of ornament with strings from which hang pearls of different colors as well as gems and fragrant flowers. I also read that some *cāmarikās* are made to look like small, palm-sized gold fans—just imagine in your mind’s eye a small, palm-sized gold fan, which Rādhārāṇī uses to fan Kṛṣṇa in the groves of Vṛndāvana forest.

Now, in that verse we quoted, Viśvanātha Ṭhākura, it also—or he mentions a gold comb. Elsewhere, it’s written that when arranging Śrī Rādhā’s hair, other types of combs are used as well. In particular, Vitthala Vipula—in the Vṛndāvana Research Center, I came across this personality, Vitthala Vipula, a famous medieval Vrajavāsī poet. He describes some of these combs in one of his poems—combs that are used to comb Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s hair. He mentions therein, in one of his poems, a comb made of jewels, a comb made of ivory, a comb of gold and silver combined, a comb of feathers, and a comb of precious stones. And all these combs are used to comb Śrī Rādhā’s hair.

And just as great devotees hanker for the service of tending to Śrī Rādhā’s hair, so does the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. So everything has, you know, to say something in spiritual circles, one has to back it up with verses or the words of great devotees. So this is confirmed, that Kṛṣṇa likes to also dress Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s hair. It’s confirmed by the famous poet, a very special poet, Govinda dāsa Kavirāja, who wrote that song that devotees like to sing. He writes in one of his poems: "Often when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet, after dressing in new garments, Kṛṣṇa ties Rādhā’s hair, and He weaves her braids." The poet has spoken, "And He weaves her braids." And in *Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi*, verse 249, he prays as follows: "O Rādhā, when will I see Your braids, which Kṛṣṇa has personally decorated with flowers, jewels, strings of fragrant jasmines, and at their end a glistening cluster of rubies?" Wow, hmm. So, pūjārīs as well, take advantage of this lecture! If you can get a cluster of rubies, you can tie it to the end of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braid.

Now, for some līlā, there’s a nice pastime in this regard, wherein Kṛṣṇa combed, braided, and decorated Śrī Rādhā’s hair near at the base of Govardhana Hill. Local residents, they narrate the story in a very charming way. One day, in the month of Bhādra, when trees are especially rich with blossoms, Rādhārāṇī and her friends came to the forest of Puṣpavān—Puṣpavān, which is just next to Kuśuma-sarovara—why? To collect flowers for a festival called Sāñjhī. We elaborated on that festival a couple of years ago. Sāñjhī, of course, as always, the real purpose was they hoped to see Kṛṣṇa there. And actually, that day Kṛṣṇa was wandering alone in the forest, enjoying the natural beauty of Vṛndāvana, as He often does. And when He came upon these gopīs collecting flowers, He decided to, how could I put it, tease Śrī Rādhā. So He approached the gopīs pretending to be the gardener of a king named Kāmadeva. Pretending to be a gardener of the king named Kāmadeva. So Kṛṣṇa said, "Why are you girls picking the king’s flowers?" But the gopīs, they pretended not to notice Him. So Kṛṣṇa became a little upset, and He said, "You arrogant thieves, immediately identify yourselves, for you are destroying this forest." So that moment, Śrī Rādhā, she snapped back, "You, who ruin all of Vraja by hurting your thousands of cows through its forests, and who run around with your destructive friends, dare to accuse us?" So Kṛṣṇa tried to defend Himself. He said, "Because we graze our cows under the king’s sanction, I am faultless. You, however, are taking flowers without permission; therefore, you should be punished." This is a lover’s quarrel on a transcendental platform. Śrī Rādhā said, "You are faultless, Kṛṣṇa? Throughout your childhood you stole anything you could get your hands on, and now in youth you killed a bull." Then she issued the following decree—she’s the Queen of Vṛndāvana: "For falsely stating that this forest belongs to some imaginary king, for impersonating a constable of that king, and for the attempted imprisonment of innocent gopīs, this boy must be punished!" And all the cowherd girls applauded, and they called out, "Tie him up! Throw him in jail! Tie him up! Throw him in jail!"

The kind queen that she is pronounced a different sentence. She said, "This boy is hereby sentenced to the labor of dressing my ruffled hair." Wow, what a punishment! The labor of dressing my ruffled hair. So this punishment was very satisfying to the gopīs, and Kṛṣṇa also accepted it with a smile. It’s said, so Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and other gopīs entered a nearby pavilion with—it’s described—flower archways, swaying vines, and jewel lamps. And then Rādhikā, she sat down before a golden table on which there were combs, brushes, and a bejeweled mirror. Well, Kṛṣṇa quickly collected the best flowers He could find and fetched them on to decorate Śrī Rādhā’s hair, and He soon returned to the pavilion carrying a basket overflowing with flowers. And it’s so nicely described that parrots, cuckoos, and peacocks followed behind Him, filling the air with their voices. I like that part—parrots, cuckoos, and peacocks followed behind Him, filling the air with their voices. Then Kṛṣṇa said, "Lalitā, if there’s some water that I can use to purify these flowers?" So she replied, "Kṛṣṇa, we have lots of nectarian juices here, but no water." So then, Kṛṣṇa, smiling, He took His flute, His vaṃśī from His belt, and said, "Okay, don’t worry, I will summon water from every holy place in the creation." And then He hit the ground with His flute, and suddenly a sacred lake appeared—an entire lake appeared, filled with a glistening clear water shimmering in ecstasy at the prospect of serving Śrī Rādhā. And on each of those four shores, there were jewel-studded staircases and multi-colored lotuses. In the crystal clear waters of the lake, this lake was also full of jewel fish—jewel fish—and was surrounded by opulent gardens and blessed kadamba trees, which were home to singing birds and hanging flower vines. It is said that even if one were able to search all the heavenly planets, he could never find a lake that could match the beauty, opulence, and sweetness of that kuṇḍa. And, devotees, we all know that that amazing lake is Kuśuma-sarovara. We pass by it on our Govardhana-parikramā—beautiful lake with the beautiful palace behind it. That lake was created by Kṛṣṇa. So the ācāryas say that because that lake played, and plays, because pastimes are eternal, such an intimate role in Kṛṣṇa’s service to Rādhārāṇī, it’s the very heartbeat of Govardhana Hill. It’s the very heartbeat of Govardhana Hill.

I should also mention here that sometimes Kṛṣṇa wants to wear a long braid Himself. What? Yes, sometimes Kṛṣṇa wants to wear a long braid Himself. He has long hair, okay? And this is beautifully described in the Vaiṣṇava poet Sūradāsa’s poem called *Maiyā morī kab hū baṛhegī coṭī*. That’s the name of the poem. It’s about baby Kṛṣṇa crying and asking His mother as follows: Kṛṣṇa says, "Mother, when will my hair become longer? You tell me to eat butter and yogurt, but even after eating a lot of it, my hair is the same as before. But look at the hair of my brother Balarāma; it’s thick and dark like a huge snake. After drinking unboiled milk as a medicine, still my hair is not growing, Maiyā." Sūradāsa concludes, "I am ready to lose everything for the sweet words of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma." Well, therein we hear Kṛṣṇa wants long hair, a long braid as well. In Sūradāsa, he concludes, "I am ready to lose everything for the sweet words of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma." So are we.

So I would like to conclude today, conclude with a short verse from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s *Gītā-mālā*. It’s in Part Two, and it’s Section number four. It’s short, but it’s very sweet—elegance is truth spoken concisely. Herein Kṛṣṇa is compared to the jasmine decorating the braids of Śrī Rādhā and the gopīs. He writes, *tumi kṛṣṇa-hari-maṇi-yuvā-vṛnda-śiromaṇi, rādhikā-tumi-prāṇeśvarī, bhajana-tumi-rādhā-kṛṣṇā-karī*. "O Lord Kṛṣṇa, You are the sapphire in the crown of all youths. Rādhā is the queen of Your life. O Śrī Rādhā, You are the jasmine crown decorating the braids of Vraja’s girls, and You’re always eager to please Lord Kṛṣṇa." Hare Kṛṣṇa. Oh, glorious! Well, thank you so much, Prabhus. Um, well, as always, we’ll do our best to be back on next Friday with something else, a stimulation for developing ecstatic love for the Divine Couple. I hope this lecture today inspired you in that way, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s braid. I never thought I could speak for 40 minutes about her braid, but such is the treasure house of knowledge that we have in Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books and the books of our ācāryas. Hare...

Glorious! Haribol! Thank you.""