Hare Kṛṣṇa. Devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana, Viṣṇu Padāya Kṛṣṇa Preṣṭhāya Bhūte, Śrīmatī Bhaktivedanta Swāminīti, namaste. Sarasvatī Devāya, gorāvani, pācaraṇe vāri. So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part four. In this series on stimulation for ecstatic love, once again we're focusing on those things, those articles that awaken our dormant love for Kṛṣṇa. For example, Śrīla Prabhupāda mentions in the 26th chapter of Nectar of Devotion how the gopīs would meditate on Kṛṣṇa dressing himself just like a dancing actor, having a helmet with the peacock feather on it, wearing earrings on his ears, and yellow gold-colored garments covered with pearls and jewels, and all these various articles intensified the remembrance of the Lord and thus their love for him. In other words, these things acted as a stimulus for ecstatic love. And there are many, many such articles that help to stimulate the Vrajavāsīs' love for Kṛṣṇa and hopefully our love as well. And one of those is Kṛṣṇa's stick. Kṛṣṇa's stick, which we will discuss in detail today.

Now the general name for a stick in Sanskrit is yaṣṭi, Y-A-S-T-I, yaṣṭi. And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes Kṛṣṇa's stick in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.3.69. He writes: "Kṛṣṇa's yaṣṭi, made of dark wood, is three cubits in length and is decorated with gold on both ends." Now another name for stick is laguḍa, and one who holds such a stick is known as laguḍī. I knew a devotee who had that name, Laguḍīdāsa, in Australia, very nice devotee. In Govinda-līlāmṛta, verses 73 to 76, it describes how every morning Kṛṣṇa is decorated by the servant gopīs. It's written: "The servant gopīs of Nanda and Yaśodā, after his breakfast, on the left side of Kṛṣṇa's sash they tuck in his buffalo horn, and on the right side his muralī flute which is studded with wonderful jewels. They place his laguḍa, his stick, in his left hand, and his play lotus – which lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa playfully twirls around – is in his right hand." So it is described that Kṛṣṇa carries his stick in his left hand.

Now Rūpa Gosvāmī quotes a devotee named Śrī Yogeśvara in his Padyāvalī, verse 153, that sometimes Kṛṣṇa keeps his laguḍa, his stick, on his thigh and he rests his hand upon it. He writes: "O Deva, O Lord, you have your hands placed on top of the curved laguḍa that rests upon your thigh." Actually we quote Śrīla Prabhupāda so often. He gives us such transcendental details into Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma and all the residents of Vṛndāvana. We're so much indebted to him. Actually there's a beautiful prayer that I just discovered about Rūpa Gosvāmī. Sanātana? Quote: "Unto the personality who is Sarasvatī-rūpa – the personification of Sarasvatī Devī in the domain of knowledge, Vyāsa-rūpa – the personification of Vyāsadeva in the domain of teaching others, and Bharata-rūpa – the personification of Bharata Muni in the domain of dramaturgy (dramaturgy means in drama) – unto that Śrī Rūpa I pay my obeisances." Isn't that beautiful? This was composed recently and translated by my good friend Hariparṣad, a Sanskrit scholar.

Now it's interesting that in the famous Balabhadra-sahasranāma, the thousand names of Lord Balarāma which I found in Garga-saṃhitā, Canto 8, chapter 13, in verse 7 it's described that Lord Balarāma is also a laguḍī – yes, one who carries a stick. He also carries a stick. It's written there: laguḍī. So Balarāma also has this thing.

Now actually, because I did a lot of research, Kṛṣṇa has a variety of sticks, not just one. Like we discussed the other day his flute and mṛdaṅga, so there's different kinds of sticks as well. And one with a handle, a stick with a handle, is called laṭhī; and a crooked one is called bhā̃kī; and a straight and long one is called lākūṭī; and one embedded with gems and gold is called manohariṇī – beautiful name; and one that tilts from one side, that type of stick is called vakra, V-A-K-R-A, vakra; another one which is shaped like a snake is called bujagākinī; and one shaped like a capital T is called gaimukī. So now you know the different types of sticks Kṛṣṇa uses.

And also I was reading that the tradition of holding a stick is actually a symbol of status in India, in Vedic culture. And you may remember in our series on Historical Vṛndāvana, in one of the lectures we discussed how in old Vraja, a turban, a mustache, and a stick designated the status of a gentleman and his family. A gentleman would have turban, mustache, and stick. Now Kṛṣṇa, he's not elderly; he's ever youthful, so he doesn't have a mustache, but he does wear a turban and he holds a stick in his hand.

Now the first time that Kṛṣṇa ever held his stick was actually on the day of Gopāṣṭamī, when he took charge of herding cows. The ācāryas say that Kṛṣṇa herds cows with the help of four different things: his flute, his voice (because he uses his voice in different ways to call the cows), his blanket – it's called kāmarlī, K-A-M-A-R-L-ī, kāmarlī, that's the name of his blanket – and the fourth thing that he uses when herding cows is his stick. So four things. Now actually there are many other ways that Kṛṣṇa uses his stick or sticks. For example, I was reading that he uses a stick for resting his hands. He uses his stick as we know for breaking the pots of the gopīs which are filled with butter, curd, and Yamunā-jala. He uses sticks for stick fighting with his cowherd friends. And I read he used his sticks for jumping over muddy puddles during the rainy season. And lastly, he uses sticks for stretching his limbs and arms after waking up from a nap in the forest.

So many nectar details just about a stick. Nothing's ordinary. What Kṛṣṇa uses is extraordinary. I also read that one time Kṛṣṇa gave one of his favorite sticks to Śrī Rādhā, which, it's described, gave her the power to make herself invisible whenever her in-laws were searching for her. And she also embraces that favorite stick whenever she feels separation from Kṛṣṇa. She embraces the stick.

Now a little side note here: amongst Bengali devotees there is a very interesting saying that Kṛṣṇa, when he comes as Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, hides everything about himself in Kali-yuga. He hides his dark complexion, he hides his flute (Mahāprabhu doesn't have a flute), he hides his tri-bhaṅga form, he hides his peacock feathers. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu does not hide a stick, or his stick. When Kṛṣṇa comes as Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he doesn't hide his stick, which he holds as his sannyāsa daṇḍa. So when Kṛṣṇa comes, many things are hidden but not his stick – it's there. And Mahāprabhu's pastimes say it is done. Such a beautiful, very sweet insight.

Now not only Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma carry sticks, but their cowherd boyfriends do as well. That's described several times in our scriptures. I found Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.12.3 we hear that quote: "At that time hundreds and thousands of cowherd boys came out of their respective homes in Vrajabhūmi and joined Kṛṣṇa, keeping before them their hundreds and thousands of groups of cows. The boys were very beautiful and they were equipped with lunch bags, bugles, flutes, and sticks for controlling the calves." There's sticks everywhere. I was reading that those gopas would tap the cows on their backs with the sticks to indicate a particular direction that the cow should go in. Often there was such a connection between the boys and the cows that the boys would simply tap the ground with their sticks and the cows would know where to go. Talk about an intimate relationship.

The boys would also play with their sticks while they had their free time. They twirl them high in the air and then they would catch them when they came back down, and they would even have contests who could do this the best. Now when I read that, I remembered in Caitanya Caritāmṛta there is a pastime to commemorate this. Caitanya Mahāprabhu commemorated this particular pastime – stick twirling – along with Lord Nityānanda on one occasion in Jagannātha Purī. They had a competition. Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda had a competition who could twirl a stick and then throw it high in the air and then catch it very expertly when it came down. And guess who won? Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu won because he could catch the stick within his legs. Wow, that's how he won. You know, they two are twirling, but Mahāprabhu won because he catches the stick between his legs, which is something that it says Nityānanda couldn't do.

Now another way in which the boys use their sticks – as we actually mentioned – was in fighting. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.86 that one of the ways of experiencing sakhya-rasa (sakhya-rasa means friendship, like the boys' friendship) one of the ways of experiencing sakhya-rasa is the stick fighting between the cowherd boys. He writes so for stick fighting, the boys would actually break up into groups of two and they would fight. Of course it's all līlā, it's all playful fighting. But Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī explains at one point that as a result of these stick pastimes, the boys would often – that was going on – at the end they would just collapse on the forest floor exhausted in blissful ecstasy. When you get exhausted in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, not like material life – you're exhausted in blissful ecstasy. So that's what happened with the boys that fought; they just after some time collapse on the forest floor in blissful ecstasy. In fact, he says they were so absorbed in bliss that one time when it was time to get up and go home, Kṛṣṇa forgot his stick that he had placed on the ground next to himself. He forgot it. And later in the day, when Kṛṣṇa realized this, he was very upset. In fact, he and all the boys searched everywhere in the Vṛndāvana forest. They couldn't find that stick. They couldn't find Kṛṣṇa's stick. So the ācāryas say that since that day, no one has seen or found Kṛṣṇa's stick, although many devotees have tried. It's an interesting thing: if you go on parikramā of Vṛndāvana, you want to find that stick, many devotees have tried. But no one has seen or found that stick that Kṛṣṇa left on the ground after they had their stick fighting.

Now the ācāryas also say that because that stick enjoyed the bliss of Kṛṣṇa's touch, just to look for that stick is an act of devotional service. Wow. Because that stick enjoyed the bliss of Kṛṣṇa's touch, just to look for that stick is an act of devotional service. So you know, one day if you're in Vṛndāvana, you don't have anything to do, just walk around and look for the stick – that will be devotional service. Such is the nature of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma. And interestingly, it's accepted amongst all sādhus and devotees in Vṛndāvana that whoever eventually finds that stick gets to keep it. Whoever finds that stick gets to keep it. All right.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. So I'm still in America. I'm in Austin, Texas and we have a big program tonight, so I'm going to finish here. Been quite busy, but I can't neglect this duty to continue with our series every Friday somehow or other. So we'll finish today with a verse from one of my favorite poets, Raskhān. Remember Raskhān? We spoke about him extensively in one of our lectures on Historical Vṛndāvana. So he writes a nice verse which we can conclude today. Quote, it's so nice: "I will leave the pleasure of having nine types of enjoyment and the eight types of divine cities. Forgetting the pleasure of herding the cows of Nanda Mahārāja and his son Kṛṣṇa, I will renounce thousands of royal palaces just to live in the thorny bushes and kuñjas of Vraja. I will renounce the kingdom of the three worlds for the shawl and the stick of Kṛṣṇa. Poet Raskhān says, when, O when will that day be mine?" Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you, prabhus. We may be able to get one more class on sticks. I didn't actually finish my research because I've been busy here, but I'm going to do that. We may be able to have another class on sticks. It's a very important part of Kṛṣṇa's paraphernalia and so nectarian to discuss. So be back in one week, next Friday. Śrī glories to Vraja.