Hare Kṛṣṇa. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. But first, today we’re continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 19.

To begin with, Kṛṣṇa’s playground, Vṛndāvana, exists simply for the pleasure of the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. All the residents of Vṛndāvana, including even the sun, the moon, the River Yamunā, Govardhana Hill, all the trees, etc., are all serving Kṛṣṇa to the best of their abilities.

Now, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness there are actually two types of service mentioned by different authorities. One is called tat-sukha-sevā, and the other is... A devotee always serves Kṛṣṇa according to Kṛṣṇa’s desire, and a devotee serves Kṛṣṇa in the way that He wants to be served, and there is a big difference between these two types of service.

In Vraja, all the residents serve in the mood of tat-sukha-sevā, like serving the master according to His needs and desires, and not according to one’s personal desires. And Prabhupāda writes very nicely in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* in this regard, a very famous verse:

“When first-class devotional service develops, one must be devoid of all material desires, knowledge obtained by monistic philosophy, and fruitive action. The devotee must constantly serve Kṛṣṇa favorably, as Kṛṣṇa desires.”

Such devotees are known as *sevā-vyāsanī*. *Sevā-vyāsanī*. In Sanskrit, the word *vyasana* means, literally, addiction. And when we think of addiction, we generally think of it in terms of bad addictions. But *sevā-vyāsanī* is used in a good sense, meaning addiction for the selfless service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

In Vṛndāvana, the devotees are addicted—in a good sense, the best sense, the very best sense—to serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Now, there’s a famous bird in Vṛndāvana who’s addicted to holding a twig, or a small stick, in its feet. Even when flying, sitting in a tree, or flying, this particular bird always has a little twig clutched in its feet. Our ācāryas compare this to the Vrajavāsīs’ strong addiction to serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

This bird is the Hariyāl bird, or in English, we know him as the Yellow-footed Green Pigeon, a beautiful bird.

This bird is still seen everywhere around Vṛndāvana. It has a yellow-greenish color with blackish-gray-colored wings, and it always flies very high in the sky. It loves to sit on the higher branches of tall trees, like a banyan or kadamba tree. That’s where you’ll see them, on tops of trees.

And as I mentioned, a peculiar feature of this bird is that it’s always holding a twig—a twig from the tree—in its feet. In fact, it’s never seen without such a twig in its grip, and it holds that twig very tightly. They say that no one in the entire creation of Lord Brahmā can take that branch, can take that twig, from the grip of a Hariyāl bird.

Also, it’s interesting that while residing in tall trees, the Hariyāl bird never, ever comes down to the ground. It always stays in the trees, eating leaves, fruits, and tender sprouts. Sometimes you see birds; they hop from the tree down to the ground to get something to eat. Not this bird. It even drinks water up in the trees. It doesn’t come down to drink from ponds or reservoirs. Whenever raindrops fall or dew settles on the leaves of the tree, the Hariyāl bird drinks that water only.

Now, because it never comes down to the ground in search of food or water, it remains safe from animals who prey on birds on the ground or on the banks of water bodies. Therefore, generally, I was reading, the Hariyāl bird lives a long life. Some estimates say they live up to 24 years. And when it finally dies and falls to the ground, it’s very interesting—it’s always found still clutching that twig in its feet.

Therefore, our ācāryas often compare a sincere devotee who remains steadfast in doing sevā, in service, and who never gives up doing that service, even up to the point of death, to the Hariyāl bird, who always maintains a strong hold on the twig of a tree.

And the Italians say that just as the Hariyāl bird never comes down to the ground, but always remains, you could say, in an elevated position in the trees, so an advanced or elevated devotee always remains above material desires by tasting the higher pleasure of hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa.

So wonderful.

So in this regard, the poet Sūrdās expresses the gopīs’ love for Kṛṣṇa in that same mood of steadfastness. He writes, as the gopīs are speaking:

“Kṛṣṇa is for us like the twig of a tree for the Hariyāl birds. Our hearts, actions, and words are only meant to serve Kṛṣṇa and hold Kṛṣṇa firmly in our souls. In sleep, in consciousness, and in unconsciousness, we always chant the names of Kṛṣṇa. Hearing the message of yoga, as you have spoken to us, feels like a bitter gourd to us. You’re giving us this disease of yoga, which we have never performed or even heard about.”

So there we hear about the steadfastness of the gopīs’ love for Kṛṣṇa.

Now, another bird—I’ve got a couple of birds today, three birds actually—is the Surakāba bird, known in Western countries as the Golden Pheasant. The Golden Pheasant.

This Surakāba bird is very shy and often very difficult to see or spot in Vṛndāvana. The feather of a Surakāba bird is sometimes used as an analogy while referring to one who is very beautiful, someone with a golden complexion.

And the best example of that, of course, is because it has a beautiful golden complexion. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa wears the feather of the Surakāba bird, the Golden Pheasant, in His apparel, mainly on His clothes, to always remind Him of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So sweet.

So it appears Kṛṣṇa not only wears a peacock feather but a Golden Pheasant feather as well. Actually, I was reading that He often wears a combination of different feathers from different birds. But the combination of feathers on His crown, or in His hair, is only from birds who are friendly towards each other.

A pheasant’s feather is never found in His crown like a peacock feather is, because these two birds tend to fight with each other. But the feather of a swan can be combined with a peacock feather in His crown because these two birds are very friendly to each other—swans and peacocks.

This is, when I thought about it, the science of śṛṅgāra—śṛṅgāra, or dressing and ornamenting the Lord.

We can listen carefully because, well, one day, by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace, we’ll be back home in the spiritual world. We may be asked to decorate Kṛṣṇa, so we learn something here. Don’t mix the feathers. Put the feathers in the proper place on Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form.

Actually, in this regard, we’re all being taught this science by our spiritual masters. There’s that beautiful verse in the *Gurvaṣṭakam*:

“The spiritual master is always engaged in the temple worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He also engages his disciples in such worship. They dress the Deities in beautiful clothes and ornaments, cleanse Their temple, and perform other similar worship of the Lord. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.”

Śṛṅgāra with feathers.

So now, I also read that the Surakāba, the Golden Pheasant, actually has a boon from Kuvera, the demigod, that whoever sees this bird will never experience poverty in life. Therefore, in Vraja, in the olden days, ladies used to keep a feather of the Surakāba bird in their safes and in their gold jewelry boxes. Keep a feather there.

Another interesting point is that the male and female Surakāba birds live in pairs, like married couples, and never separate or even mate with other Surakāba birds. Rather, they always remain as one couple.

Now, devotee scholars compare the loyalty of these birds to each other to the loyalty of devotees who serve only Kṛṣṇa and never the demigods. They use the term *ananya-bhakti*, meaning devotees worship only Kṛṣṇa and remain loyal and dedicated to Him throughout life, just as a couple of Surakāba birds remain dedicated to each other for life.

Such a beautiful analogy.

Now, the importance of worshiping only Kṛṣṇa is stated in *Padma Purāṇa*. I was reading. I also found some verses, but I would like to quote one śloka from the *Gītā-māhātmya*, which Prabhupāda had quoted, verse 7, by Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya. In this regard, he wrote:

“There need be only one holy scripture—the divine Gītā sung by Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; only one worshipable Lord—Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; only one mantra—His holy names; and only one duty—devotional service unto that Supreme Worshipable Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Wow.

So in this way, the Surakāba bird of Vraja, you could say, demonstrates the philosophy of unalloyed devotion to Kṛṣṇa throughout one’s life.

Therefore, we once again can conclude that everything in Vraja—even the birds—is exalted. Everything’s exalted.

Now, one last bird is the Chiraiyā, or it’s known as the Indian Sparrow. The Indian Sparrow. But I like Chiraiyā, the Sanskrit names, the Sanskrit words for these birds and animals, etc.

Now, this bird is very small in size, and it has a black-and-brown color to it. And these birds live in large groups together in trees. It’s described that their chirping sounds fill the whole of Vraja with their wonderful singing.

Now, our ācāryas compare them to devotees who live in the association of one another in communities and, by their singing, fill such places with the divine names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, spreading auspiciousness everywhere.

Another nice analogy.

So, Prabhus, with this we will conclude our series on the birds of Vṛndāvana and how they help to stimulate our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I really enjoyed this particular series about the birds.

And we’ll end today with several verses from one of our very dear heroes. He writes:

“Meditate on wonderful Vṛndāvana, where there are millions of lakes, ponds, and wells, all filled with water as sweet as transcendental nectar; where there are many gardens filled with blossoming transcendental flowers and fruits and unlimited wonderful trees and vines; where there are numberless transcendental deer and other animals who move here and there; and where there are many beautiful transcendental groves.

Whose heart would not be enchanted by Vṛndāvana, where Śrī Śrī Rādhikā-Madana-mohana enjoy many pastimes; where there are many trees and flowering vines; where the ground is paved with jewels; and where the birds, the deer, and other animals are all maddened with transcendental bliss?

I meditate on Vṛndāvana, where the cuckoos sing the fifth note, the flute plays splendid melodies, peacocks sing and dance, vines and trees bloom splendidly, and charming forests are all wonderful with many birds and deer; and where there are many splendid lakes, streams, and hills.

O look at Vṛndāvana, so beautiful, with many blissful, splendid groves of campaka and victory trees, with many parrots and other birds intoxicated by singing Vedic hymns glorifying Kṛṣṇa; where many deer, who are so pleased in Kṛṣṇa, are there amongst these splendid transcendental lakes, ponds, and streams, all filled with water sweet as nectar, and with mountains of valuable jewels.”

The revealer of the name.

A little bit short today, but that’s all the birds I could find that were explained in our Vedic literatures by the Gosvāmīs, etc. So I hope you enjoyed this series. This series I really enjoyed myself, and we’ll find out another stimulus to speak about next Friday.

Jaya Śrī Śrī Rādhe!

Hare Hare.
