

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Viṣṇu-pādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale. Glorious to Prabhupāda. So, we’re continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 121. Herein we’ll continue discussing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, in particular, once again, I can say a third class on the anklets that decorate those lotus feet. As we discussed in the last class, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s ankle bells can be a source of joy, but they can also be a source of distress. And how that is so is described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, 1.6. In that verse, a gopī is describing Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes from the previous night. She says, “Last night, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was standing under a tree and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, around his courtyard, cooing like a cuckoo bird again and again. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī understood his signal, but whenever she went to open the door, her bangles and ankle bells—her bangles and ankle bells—made such sounds that even Kṛṣṇa could hear them. As a result, from inside the house, old Cāṭilā, who is always very protective of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, repeatedly called out, ‘Who is there? Who is there? Who is there?’ And hearing her loud call, Kṛṣṇa, with a distressed heart, spent the whole night outside under the tree.” It’s a famous pastime.

So, now, a similar concern is raised whenever Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī attempts to steal Kṛṣṇa’s flute, which she does quite often, actually. It’s written that the tinkling of her ankle bells makes such a noise that it’s hard for her to sneak up on Kṛṣṇa and rob him of his vamśī. In the Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā, verse 226, Vinda Devī says to Nārada Muni and Śakra:

“Sakhī, kit-translation: Sometimes Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy pastimes on a swing hanging from a tree branch and pushed by the gopīs. At such times, Rādhā often steals the flute from Lord Kṛṣṇa’s hand.” Let’s recite that again: “Sometimes Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy pastimes on a swing hanging from a tree branch and pushed by the gopīs. At such times, Rādhā often steals the flute from Lord Kṛṣṇa’s hand.”

So, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī confirms the same twice in his Ujjvala-dāmanī. First of all, in chapter 8, that’s entitled “Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s Friends,” there we hear Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī talking to her friend Citrā: “Oh, my friend with the beautiful face, good fortune has now appeared before us. I can tell that Kṛṣṇa has accidentally dropped the flute from his hand on the peak of Govardhana Hill. I shall go now and with an expert strategy take that flute and hide it on the hill.” And in chapter 16, he writes: “Silencing her ankle bells and placing them on her arms as golden armlets, and carefully observing Kṛṣṇa’s eyes for any sign of his becoming startled, smiling Rādhārāṇī stole the flute from Kṛṣṇa’s lap.” Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, a perfect example of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī silencing her ankle bells in order to steal Kṛṣṇa’s flute is found in the following pastime. Once upon a time, during an autumn Rāsa dance, Rādhārāṇī left the dance, and Kṛṣṇa, noticing this, left looking for her. This fact is confirmed actually in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, chapter 8, verse 112, and I’ll quote again here: “When Rādhārāṇī left the Rāsa dance out of anger and resentment, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa became very anxious because he could not see her.”

So, it’s described that he wandered through all the kuñjas, the gardens around Govardhana Hill, calling out Rādhārāṇī’s name until, finally, somewhere near Jātipur, on the other side of Govardhana Hill, he found Rādhārāṇī in a kuṇḍa with Lalitā and Viśākhā and some other special gopīs. But when Kṛṣṇa came up to Rādhārāṇī, she turned her face away and said to Lalitā, “Tell that rascal boy to go away. Tell that rascal boy to go away.” So Kṛṣṇa, he bowed his head, and with, we can imagine, with tears in his eyes, he left that place and he went to another kuñja nearby where he laid down and he went to sleep.

So, then Rādhā, smiling, told some of her friends to find out where Kṛṣṇa went and report back to her. Now, eventually, her friends found Kṛṣṇa laying down, sleeping in that other kuñja with his crown off and his flute under his hand. And when the girls came back and told this to Rādhārāṇī, suddenly all her gopī friends got the same idea at the same time. They thought in unison, “No one is guarding Kṛṣṇa. He’s asleep. He’s alone in the kuñja. This is the perfect opportunity to steal his vamśī, his flute.”

So, altogether, and very silently, they snuck into Kṛṣṇa’s kuñja and found him sleeping. But a note here: actually, Kṛṣṇa wasn’t sleeping. He was pretending to sleep. So, the gopīs started discussing how they were going to steal that flute. And Lalitā said, “This flute can only be stolen by someone who’s very clever, very quick, and very fast. That was the criteria.” Lalitā said, “This flute can only be stolen by someone who’s very clever, very quick, and very fast.” And immediately, all these gopīs simultaneously turned around and looked at Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She possesses all good qualities.

So, Rādhā smiled because this was actually an opportunity for her to associate with her beloved. So, what did she do? She tied her sari up like pants. Then, very carefully, tied a cloth around her bangles and her ankle bells so they wouldn’t make any noise. And she snuck up very quietly to where Kṛṣṇa was. She moved carefully and deliberately on the ground, crawling like that, one move at a time, making sure Kṛṣṇa didn’t wake up. Finally, when she got to where Kṛṣṇa was, she stealthily—it’s described—stealthily reached out, grabbed his flute, then she jumped up and ran just like the wind, while all the other girls giggled and laughed and giggled and laughed. Of course, they didn’t see, but as soon as the flute was gone, a big smile came across Kṛṣṇa’s face.

So, after some time, Kṛṣṇa came, got up, and came back to that first kuñja and called out to all the gopīs, “Hey girls, do any of you know where my flute is? Do any of you have my flute?” But they all looked at him like, “What do you mean, do we have your flute?” And Lalitā said, “Just see. First you offend Rādhārāṇī, and now you accuse some of her friends of thievery. You rascal boy.” So at this point, Kṛṣṇa came forward and started personally searching the gopīs for his flute. They were all saying, “Don’t touch me. Don’t touch me. Don’t touch me.” But Kṛṣṇa would just reply, “I’m just looking for my flute, girls.” So at this point, the gopīs started secretly handing the flute to one another, so Kṛṣṇa couldn’t find it. And eventually, it’s described, one of the gopīs handed the flute to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, but right in front of Kṛṣṇa. And Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī just stood there smiling with Kṛṣṇa’s flute in her hand.

So, what happens next? Well, well, because she’s the chief of all the gopīs, the queen of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa couldn’t just go up and start, you know, roughing her up and looking for his flute. So, to the joy of all the gopīs present, and to the joy of all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas forevermore, past, present, and future, Kṛṣṇa knelt down in front of Rādhārāṇī and taking her hand, begged her to give his flute back. He knelt down in front of her, took her hand, and begged her, “Please give my flute back.” So, in essence, this shows the power of pure, unadulterated love for Kṛṣṇa, that it is so powerful, it can control the all-powerful Lord. She has the topmost love, and Kṛṣṇa is controlled by that love. So he kneels down before her and begs for his flute, or we can say that Kṛṣṇa allows himself to be controlled by the love of his devotees. Another way to put it. So that is the intimate, sweet love of Braja, which is not found even in Vaikuṇṭha, the official kingdom of God.

Rūpa Gosvāmī writes very nicely about this Braja-līlā in his Lalita-mādhava, 10.38, where the gopīs are speaking: “Dear Kṛṣṇa, the fragrance of the mellows of your pastimes is spread throughout the forests of the glorious land of Vṛndāvana, which is surrounded by the sweetness of the district of Mathurā. In the congenial atmosphere of that wonderful land, you enjoy your pastimes with your flute dancing on your lips and surrounded by us, the gopīs, whose hearts are always enchanted by unpredictable ecstatic emotions. You enjoy your pastimes with your flute dancing on your lips and surrounded by us, the gopīs, whose hearts are always enchanted by unpredictable ecstatic emotions.”

I would like to conclude today with a description of the different types of ankle bells that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī wears. Again and again, I say, we are blessed to have so many details of Vṛndāvana, which act as even little tiny details as stimulation for ecstatic love. Of course, we may not have that ecstatic love, but we’re on our way by Prabhupāda’s grace. So, these different types of ankle bells, they’re described by a Vaiṣṇava poet named Haridāsa of the Nimbārka-sampradāya. I did some research. He was a court musician in the court of Raja Man Singh and credited with a large body of devotional compositions, especially in the Dhrupad style, the music we’re talking about here, Dhrupad style. And eyewitnesses, I read this in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, eyewitnesses wrote that when he sang his poetry in this particular Dhrupad style about God and Kṛṣṇa, plants would begin to flower even in winter. Clouds would start forming and burst into rain even in the summer. Fires would break out, and oil lamps would light up spontaneously.

So, here is his beautiful description of the various kinds of ankle bells that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī wears.

“The pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Nūpura-bhāṣiṇī and Nūpura-ghoṣa, are the two divine pairs of ankle bells that sound like peacocks.” “The pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Vidruma-āvalī, sound like thunder on a cloudy, rainy day.” “The pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Saṅkṣepa-śiṇī, sound like the chatter and chirping of flocks of sparrows at evening time.” “The pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Duruta-calinī, sound like the mooing of cows when they quickly run towards water to drink.” “And the pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Mañju-dhvani, sound like the hymns from the mouths of young Vedic brāhmaṇas in the guru of Bṛhaspati and the heavenly planets.” “And the pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Kiṅkiṇī, sound like the water of the Ganges breaking against its banks at high tide.” So beautiful. “The pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Gaja-vādinī, sound like the conversation of swans in the early morning.” “And the pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Ramaṇīya-kā, sound like the high notes of a vīṇā played by Gandharvas and Lokapālas.” Fortunately, she has many ankle bells.

So, this is just ongoing nectar. “The pair of ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, known as Priya-vādinī, sound like the ringing of a thousand bells, in which every bell produces a different melody that blends in sweetly like a beautiful symphony.” And I was reading, she wears these very special ankle bells during different Rāsa dances to please Kṛṣṇa. So, the poet Haridāsa, he goes on to mention that there are countless divine ankle bells in her treasure box, and these were just a few that were revealed to him. He says, “By the great rasika saints of Vṛndāvana, the great rasika saints of Vṛndāvana, and by the mercy of his spiritual master.” Everything comes by the mercy of the spiritual master. So, understanding that Śrīla Prabhupāda for all of us is the revealer of the dawn, we would not have access to this very deep transcendental knowledge had it not have been for his mercy, to walk the plank up to Jaladūta and sail halfway around the world to America. And I was reading in Prabhupāda Līlāmṛta the other day, he said where it was written that when he got off the boat for the first time in America, he said he told later, “I did not know whether to go left or right.” But the rest is history, and we’re somehow part of the history of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s legacy by his mercy.

So, in that same light, we pray for mercy from our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. “Oh beloved spiritual master, you are always in the presence of the cowherd girl Rādhā, the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu. Please award me service at your lotus feet, which are the proprietors of devotional service. Please place me in the ocean of joy by bestowing upon me happiness in the mellows of service at the feet of Śrīmatī Rādhā in the groves of Vṛndāvana.” Hare Kṛṣṇa. To Prabhupāda, Prabhupāda, we have another class, I think one more class, the fourth class, about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet and particularly the ankle bells. So, I’m back in Vṛndāvana now for a couple of weeks. I came for the celebration of the 50th anniversary of Prabhupāda opening the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir here and installing Gaurāṅga-Nitāi, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and Śyāmasundara. And it was a wonderful week with many devotees, many Prabhupāda disciples came. There were memories, and there were kīrtans, and there were movies, all about Prabhupāda. It was wonderful. So, I’ve been here. Summertime’s coming; it’s getting really hot. But in a couple of days, I’m going to Africa. Why would one ever want to leave Vṛndāvana? But we leave, like Prabhupāda did, following in his footsteps to spread the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa and the glories of Vṛndāvana all over the world. So, probably my next address will be from Africa. So, thank you. Early time. Kṛṣṇa. Transcendental distribution. Back home, back to Godhead. Jai, Jai. Time rolled.
