Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone and welcome back once again to our ever ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī Viṣṇu, all glories to. So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part 117, and herein we'll continue discussing the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I'd like to begin today by quoting a famous and very deep verse by Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī. It's found in his illustrious Vraja-vilāsa-stava, verse number 16. He's addressing Śrī Rādhā: "O goddess, I shall never pray to you for anything but the excellent service of your lotus feet. I offer my obeisances unto the idea of becoming your friend, but I truly relish the idea of becoming your maidservant." In the beginning he writes like that: "O goddess, I shall never pray to you for anything but the excellent service of your lotus feet." Hare Kṛṣṇa. Of course we know that Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī is one of the six Gosvāmīs in Vṛndāvana, but in the spiritual world he is one of the maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Now there are various opinions about his actual exact identity. Some say that he is Rasa-mañjarī, some say that he is Rati-mañjarī, others still say that he is Bhūnamatī. We are meant actually to follow in the footsteps of such great devotees as Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī. Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.9.21 says: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of mother Yaśodā, is accessible to devotees engaged in spontaneous loving service, but he is not as easily accessible to mental speculators, to those striving for self-realization by severe austerities and penances, or to those who consider the body the same as the self." So therein Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī says again: "The son of Nanda and Yaśodā is accessible to devotees engaged in spontaneous loving service." Therefore it's understood that the dust of the feet of Śrī Rādhā's servants is as relishable and important and sought after as the dust of Śrī Rādhā herself, this because of their pure love for her.

Such devotees – the ācāryas say that, for example, Uddhava was so impressed by the gopīs that on one visit to Vṛndāvana he stayed for eight months, and during that visit he repeatedly saw the pure love that those gopīs have for Kṛṣṇa. And his respect and admiration for them is seen in a famous prayer by him, very famous, relished by devotees, found in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.47.63. He prays: "I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the feet of the women of Nanda Mahārāja's cowherd village. When these gopīs loudly chant the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the vibrations purify the three worlds." Let's recite it again, so important: "I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the feet of the women of Nanda Mahārāja's cowherd village. When these gopīs loudly chant the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the vibrations purify the three worlds."

Now on his last visit to Vṛndāvana – because he came several times – he stated the same, you could say even more emphatically. He stated: "The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have given up the association of their husbands, sons, and other family members who are very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the path of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic knowledge. O, let me be fortunate enough to be one of the bushes, creepers, or herbs in Vṛndāvana because the gopīs trample them and bless them with the dust of their lotus feet." And so it is that even today Uddhava, as we know, he resides in Vṛndāvana as a lump of grass – a so-called lump of grass – relishing whenever the gopīs cross his path. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now I was thinking that not only do Vrajavāsīs like Uddhava, Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Sarasvatī aspire for the dust of Śrī Rādhā's gopī friends, but so do the devatās like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva. It's a known fact that Lord Brahmā performed austerities to be born as a hill in Vṛndāvana so that Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs would constantly place their lotus feet on him. He knew about this. As a result he appeared as the hill Varṣāṇā where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her parents King Vṛṣabhānu and Kīrtidā live. And Lord Śiva, he had the same exact desire. He also performed long and difficult penances until Kṛṣṇa appeared before him. And when Kṛṣṇa asked him what he desired, Lord Śiva requested a similar benediction to that which Lord Brahmā asked for. He said: "My dear Lord, let me appear as a mountain in Vṛndāvana. When you descend on the earth, I desire to have the dust of the gopīs' feet on my body." So Kṛṣṇa blessed Lord Śiva to appear in Vraja as the hill or the mountain on which Nanda Mahārāja would build his capital and on which the gopīs of course would constantly walk. That hill, that mountain, is called Nandīśvara, where the town of Nandagrāma was constructed. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now ācāryas have explained that those who desire to see the divine footprints of both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together can find them at a holy site called Ratnavedī. Ratnavedī translates as "the jeweled altar," which is on the small bridge that divides Rādhākuṇḍa and Śyāmakuṇḍa. For those who have been to Vṛndāvana, you know when you go to Rādhākuṇḍa there's a little bridge that goes over the two lakes, Rādhākuṇḍa and Śyāmakuṇḍa. We often walk across, and there's an altar in the middle. And those footprints mark the exact place where Rādhā and Śyāmasundara once stood marveling at the beauty of those two lakes. Right between them, they're looking at these lakes, and that moment – that very moment of history, real history – is captured in Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta, chapter 14, text 21, where Kṛṣṇa says to Rādhā: "Śrī Rādhā, my beloved, in many ways the beauty of your lake reminds me of your own magnificence. The blooming lotus flowers are like the ever-blooming lotus of your face. The young fish darting here and there are like your restless eyes. The rolling foam-topped waves are like the sweetness rippling from your smile. And those swarms of honey bees – you see the swarms of honey bees – are like your swaying braid. The sunlight reflected on the surface of your lake, Rādhākuṇḍa, it's like your golden complexion. O Rādhārāṇī, in these and many other ways this lake brings you to mind. Thus this blessed sight brings great pleasure to my heart." So the ācāryas say that the divine couple's footprints there – which you can see if you go to that bridge, you'll see an altar and there's footprints there – they say they're so potent that just by hearing about them gives one a drop of the same bliss the gopīs tasted when they listened carefully as they tracked such footprints during the night of the śrāḍya-rasa dance.

Actually we discussed that pastime in part last week, but I'd like to touch on it a little more today. On that occasion when Kṛṣṇa famously disappeared from the gopīs' midst during the rāsa dance, they began frantically searching for him. And at one point in a corner of the forest they noticed the imprint of a flag, a lotus, and a barleycorn in the earth, in the dust of Vraja, and recognizing those symbols to be from Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, they started following them. But as you remember from last week, later when they saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's footprints intermixed with his, they could understand that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were together. And from impressions in the soil the gopīs could discern where Kṛṣṇa had laid his arm on Rādhā's shoulder, where he picked her up, and where he gathered forest flowers to decorate her hair. So following those combined footprints a little further led the gopīs into the heart of the forest where, as you know in that pastime – in that particular rāsa dance – Kṛṣṇa had abandoned Śrī Rādhā, leaving her transcendentally bewildered and crying in Viyoga-līlā, in deep, very deep separation – the deepest because she has the deepest love for Kṛṣṇa. And when the gopīs witnessed Śrī Rādhā's profound expressions of love and separation, they spoke the following most famous verse, which is etched in the heart of every rasika devotee – hopefully in our hearts as well one day. They said: "Certainly this particular gopī, who they are seeing before them, has perfectly worshiped the all-powerful Personality of Godhead Govinda, since he was so pleased with her that he abandoned the rest of us and brought her to a secluded place."

So all this nectar about the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is meant to immerse our body, our mind, our intelligence, and our souls in the service of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Vraja. Śrīla Sarasvatī expresses this so beautifully in his writings, his book called Rāgānugā, chapter 9, text 32: "When will my heart, melting in prema, become merged in Śrī Vṛndāvana which is drenched in the ocean of mādhurya emanating from the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā?" So of course this is all very deep subject matter and most of us are sādhana-bhaktas, we're sādhakas, we're aspiring devotees. But even so, it's important to discuss these matters. There's a saying I often quote: we know who we are and we know where we're going. Perhaps some devotees may consider all this too esoteric, too much emphasis on the gopīs' loving feelings towards Kṛṣṇa and vice versa. But let us remember that Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, the king of all scriptures, begins by declaring itself rasa-śāstra for rasika devotees with the words "rasaṁ vai saḥ" – right there in the very beginning. Vraja-rasa cannot be bad, for it's the goal of devotional life. Of course it should be presented in accordance with Śrīla Prabhupāda's mood as he describes it in Kṛṣṇa book, in the Tenth Canto Bhāgavatam, and in a way that is understandable by the general Vaiṣṇava audience. And that I've tried to do with all of these classes, especially on Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet. In fact, we need to hear these very subject matters to advance from whatever stage we're at in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 5.45 and 46 says very clearly – this is very important: "When one hears or describes with great faith the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa, such as his rāsa dance with the gopīs, the disease of lusty desires in his heart and the agitation caused by the three modes of material nature are immediately nullified, and that devotee becomes sober and silent." By hearing this deeper esoteric matter. And if more evidence – well, there's lots of evidence – but if more evidence is needed, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura once said the following about hearing rāsa-līlā during a lecture he gave at Bhaktivinoda Aśana in 1932, and it was later printed in the Gauḍīya magazine in 1934 – that's where I found it. He spoke: "All these days we have not spoken about deep līlā, but this is our most confidential asset. This is our only sādhyā." Sādhyā means perfection. Once you make the mistake of thinking that anartha-nivṛtti – overcoming impediments like lust and greed – is the prayojana, means the goal of life, one thinking like this will never enter into ārādhya-prapti, which means actually acquiring what is actually needed and what we really desire. For this reason he spoke: "I will now begin speaking about aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā" – that means the eightfold daily pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So just how can we as aspiring devotees achieve such an elevated state? The answer is by the causeless mercy of Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda. Regarding Lord Nityānanda, in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 7.5.45 in the purport, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes: "In the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.2.4 it is said, one cannot attain the goal of life without the mercy of Balarāma." Śrīla Prabhupāda goes on: "Śrī Nityānanda therefore says, 'Kṛṣṇa preṣṭhāya bhūte' – when one receives the mercy of Balarāma, Nityānanda, one can attain the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa very easily." Recite that again: it is written, when one receives the mercy of Balarāma, Nityānanda, one can attain the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa very easily. Therefore we know that Gaurāṅga is even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa himself, although they are the same personality. And regarding Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he writes in Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Śikṣāṣṭaka, text 8, and we'll conclude with this verse today. It's so beautiful: "To the degree that we surrender to Lord Caitanya's service, to that degree we gain qualification for the service of Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet in Vṛndāvana." To the degree that we surrender to His mission, the saṅkīrtana movement of the present day, to that degree we gain qualification for the service of the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā in the spiritual world. All glories.

So thank you, prabhus. This was class two on the lotus feet of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I think we can get maybe two or three more classes. Let's hope we can, because this is a very deep subject matter but again necessary for us to hear. We have to keep the goal in mind; that will keep us enthusiastic. So śrī glories to Vraja. See you next Friday. Hare Kṛṣṇa.