

Hi Krishna, dear devotees, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing lecture series on our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. Viśvakṛṣṇa namaste. So once again, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 109. And today, we’ll continue to discuss the fourth quality of Krishna that distinguishes Him from Lord Narayana, namely rūpa-mādhurī, His extraordinary beauty, and it will be, uh, part three about His eyes, His lotus eyes. I would like to set the scene, the, the, the mood by quoting a beautiful verse by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, 3.34, where he’s describing Krishna.

“His face is radiant with gentle smiles, and His teeth are white as jasmine flower buds. His eyes, splendidly adorned by the outline of black cosmetics, beam with sidelong glances. His garment is so lustrous that it conquers the iridescence of the golden keśara flower, beautified with forest flower garlands and forest mineral pigments. He enchants the minds of even the great, self-controlled sages. His lips, graced by His flute as He returns from the pasture grounds, thus forcibly steal the minds of His cowherd friends by the sweet melodies of that flute.”

Thank you, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. So there, we hear, uh, a reference to His eyes again, which are, um, more often than not referred to as lotus eyes, comparing them to the beauty, of course, of a lotus flower. Queen Kuntīdevī’s prayers in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, specifically 1.18.22, is a perfect example in this regard. She said:

“namaḥ paṅkajamāline namaste jaya-śrī. My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus, and whose feet are engraved with lotuses.”

I’d like to recite that again: “My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, and whose glance is as cool as the lotus, and whose feet are engraved with lotuses.” So paṅkajānanetra literally means, uh, one whose glance is as cooling as a lotus flower. But it’s interesting that while researching for this lecture, I found a number of references comparing Krishna’s eyes to other wonderful entities, not just the lotus flower, that I would like to share with you today.

For example, in Jīva Gosvāmī’s Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, his commentaries on Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, we hear Krishna’s eyes compared to a cakravāka bird. Cakravāka birds that derive great pleasure by looking at the moon.

“Śrī-mukhaṁ ambho-ruha-bhāsa-bhāsaraṁ, śacī-nandana-candra-tala-paryagāṁ, śrī-candra-mandalaṁ ca cakravāka-netraṁ, śrī-cakravāka-candraṁ ca tad-aśra-yācakāṁ.”

He writes, “It’s really beautiful. The face of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is like a superior moon which nourishes the two cakravāka-defeating eyes of Krishna.” Not lotus eyes, but two cakravāka-defeating eyes of Krishna.

And I was reading sometimes Krishna’s eyes seem to turn into a tongue. This is explained in Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī’s Stava, in the section called Sakhī-saṁvāda, text number 74.

“kṛṣṇa-locana-tanu-jihvaya Rādhā-mukha-candra-madhu-pānaṁ.”

He writes, “The tongue of Lord Krishna’s glistening eyes drinks the nectar of the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s face.” Not lotus eyes, but the tongue of Lord Krishna’s glistening eyes drinks the nectar of the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s face.

Now, further, in Anīla-viśvāmbara-nikuñja-virudavali, which we’ve referred to on many occasions, there’s text 16, where Krishna’s eyes are compared to cups, to two cups.

“radhā-mugdha-smita-madhu-pānaṁ, kṛṣṇa-netra-pātraṁ.”

He writes, “The nectar of the smile of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is being drunk by the eyes of Krishna that have turned into cups.” Not lotus cups, but the nectar of the smile of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is being drunk by the eyes of Krishna that have turned into cups, two cups.

And if in Govinda-līlāmṛta, 15.20, Krishna’s eyes, it’s described, behave like security guards.

“kṛṣṇa-lokana-pāla-rakṣako, rādhā-mukha-candra-pramukha-senānī-rūpau.”

When the two brave security guards of Krishna’s eyes come in front of the two warrior leaders of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes, the two warrior leaders fled away. Thus, the remaining army, the remaining senses of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s body fell into disarray. Security guard.

Now, an interesting note here, something else I came across. There’s a beautiful description in Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Ujjvala-dāmanī, one of our favorites, text 155, where he describes how one time, seeing Krishna’s beautiful form, it had a magical effect on the Gopis.

“nayanāni nayana-vihīna-nāṁ yuvatīnāṁ, kṛṣṇaṁ vilokya sarvaṁ sarvendriyāṇi nayanī-karaṇam icchantīnāṁ.”

“Seeing Krishna, the beautiful-eyed ladies of Vraja desired all their senses to turn into eyes so that all of them could glance at Krishna.” Eyes, eyes, eyes. “Seeing Krishna, the beautiful-eyed ladies of Vraja desired all their senses to turn into eyes so that all of them could glance at Krishna.”

So, in these ways and more, we can appreciate how beautiful and powerful are Krishna’s eyes, His lotus eyes. But, uh, Śrīla Chaitanya Mahaprabhu describes that just as beautiful and potent is when Krishna glances at His devotees with these lotus eyes. That’s called a sidelong glance, and that sidelong glance is immortalized in the famous verse we find, well, in several places in scripture, including Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 5, verse 224. Many of you will know this verse.

“My dear friend, if you are indeed attached to your worldly friends, do not look at the smiling face of Lord Govinda, as He stands on the bank of the Yamunā at Keśava-ghāṭa, casting sidelong glances. He places His flute to His lips, which seem like newly blossomed twigs. His transcendental body, bending in three places, appears very bright in the moonlight.”

Wow. There, He, His glance, His glances, the eyes are amazing, but the glance of those eyes is very powerful. Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.46.21 describes that just thinking or remembering that glance, His sidelong glance of the Lord, brings an auspicious result. What to speak of receiving it? Just, you know, if you just think of it or remember it, it’s very auspicious.

“For the Gopis, say, ‘As we remember the wonderful deeds Krishna performed, His playful sidelong glances, His smiles, and His words, O Uddhava, we forget all our material engagements.’” From the lotus lips of the Gopis.

Now, Krishna’s glances are described in detail by a devotee called Dīnanātha. I had to do some research because whenever we speak in spiritual circles, we have to give reference to where we’re getting our knowledge from. So, Dīnanātha is a well-known ācārya from the Nimbārka Sampradāya. It’s interesting, originally he was a Māyāvādī, but after getting defeated in a debate with a scholar named Abhinava in Vṛndāvana, he surrendered, and he eventually became a powerful and, actually, much-loved devotee in Vṛndāvana himself.

Now, in one of his writings, he described Krishna’s glances as follows: “Glances of Keśava, the moon of Vṛndāvana, are triloka-mohana, which means that they can attract all the three worlds. These glances are sometimes sharp, cool, furious, soft, merciful, excited, restless, focused, or blissful.” These glances, we’re getting into details here, these glances of Krishna are sometimes sharp, cool, furious, soft, merciful, excited, restless, focused, uh, or blissful.

The mid-16th-century Vraja-bhāṣā poet, Mādhavadāsa, explained Rādhā’s glances as follows: “Krishna’s glances are infinite in number, infinite in number. Even the demigod of numbers, Lord Gaṇeśa, often gets confused counting the variety of Krishna’s glances. I offer my daṇḍavats to the Braja Gopis, who are victorious in catching each and every glance of Lord Madana within their hearts.”

Now, now, yet another, um, Vraja-bhāṣā poet, Kṛṣṇadāsa, he’s from the Haridāsa Sampradāya in Vṛndāvana. He also, I found, described Krishna’s glances very beautifully. He wrote:

“While lifting Govardhan Hill, Lord Krishna’s glance was felt by various devotees in many different ways. While lifting Govardhan Hill, Lord Krishna’s glance was felt by various devotees in many different ways because all the Braja-bases had assembled under Govardhan Hill for protection.”

He goes on. “While talking to the cowherd boys in a cheerful way, His glance pierced the hearts of the Gopis in madhura-bhāva. Now, he’s talking to the cowherd boys, but His glance pierced the hearts of the Gopis in madhura-bhāva. They’re looking at Him, watching Him. That same glance was playing in the lap of Mother Yaśodā. That same glance was playing in the lap of Mother Yaśodā. That same glance was petting the cows under the shelter of Mount Girirāja. That same glance was making Lord Indra shake in fear. That same glance was showering the hearts of yogis in bliss. And that same glance is pleasing the heart of the poor poet Kṛṣṇadāsa.”

Now, according to the poet, he was also a scholar, Līlā-śuka, Kṛṣṇa’s glances are nānā-bhimā, nānā-bhimā. It’s a Sanskrit term. It means literally, um, artistic glances, artistic glances. And he goes into detail describing various types of glances of the Lord. It’s amazing.

First, there’s gīta-nayana. Gīta-nayana, it means in, uh, which it describes as intoxicated eye glances, intoxicated, intoxicated eye glances. And he says these glances are seen during Krishna’s pastimes with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and other Gopis.

Then there’s vāmā-nayana. These are very slow and sleepy glances when Krishna rests on a, I looked it up, pālikā means a couch-like bed, after night of pastimes in the Vṛndāvana forest, He comes back, and vāmā-bhettra-nayana, those glances are slow and sleepy glances.

Then there’s cañcalā. Cañcalā means, um, restless glances, seen while sporting in the forest with His cowherd boyfriends. And then there’s a little P.S. there, or sometimes in a playful mood with the Gopis.

Then there’s dīrgha. Dīrgha means fast or clever glances, seen while Krishna is performing mischievous pastimes, like hiding, stealing butter, uh, disguising Himself, or playing.

Then there’s śaraṅga-nayana. Śaraṅga-nayana means, um, doited glances, which are restless or searching. They’re seen when Krishna is, um, searching for His lost cows in the forest, or for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī when feeling intense separation from Her. And then finally, he says, or when His kite is high in the sky, He’s flying in the sky, He’s glancing.

Then there’s vīra. Vīra it means, um, um, cunning warrior-like glances, which are seen when Krishna is wrestling with His cowherd boys in the early morning, not afternoon, but in the early morning. Vīra-vīra warrior-like glances, which are seen when He’s wrestling with His cowherd boys in the morning.

“So, prakāśa-bhākta-nayanā fired-up glances, seen when Krishna kills the demons sent by Kamsa to Vṛndāvana. You know, dhāra-dhāra means like fire. These glances appear like fire in His eyes.”

Then ākulā. Ākulā, this means glances seen when Krishna is hungry for food or crying for mother. These glances, He’s looking everywhere. “Where’s, where’s something to eat? Where’s my, my mother?”

And ānanda-vyakta-nayanā, blissful glances, seen when Krishna is satisfying the Braja-vāsīs with His gazes. He’s looking, and they’re happy, so He’s happy.

Then āścaryā. Āścaryā, um, surprised glances with wide open eyes. And he writes, these glances are seen when Krishna hears the glorious kathā of Lord Rāmacandra breaking Lord Śiva’s bow. That’s a detail of a detail. As surprise glances with with wide open eyes. And these glances are seen when Krishna hears perhaps His mother reading to Him at night when He’s trying to go to sleep, the glorious kathā of Lord Rāmacandra, specifically breaking Lord Śiva’s bow. Then wide open.

And our wonderful poet Līlā-kuñja concludes, “My heart feels victorious when I see kaṇṭita-kaṇṭita, meaning Krishna’s miserable and unhappy glances, which please Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī when she is in her mood of māna, or anger. She’s angry at Him. Krishna is like miserable and unhappy because she’s displeased. So, He’s, you can imagine His glances like that.”

Now, a lot of poetry today. The poet Govinda Svāmī, one of the Aṣṭa-cāpa, or the poets of Vallabhācārya, we’ve quoted them on several occasions, describes in one of his poems a very beautiful scene during Holi, the throwing of the, of the colors, colored dyes, which includes Krishna’s, uh, loving glances. Somehow, I came across it. I just love this.

“Listen. Behold the beautiful lad of Rādhā-ramaṇa, the uplifter of Govardhan Hill. His restless glances are shooting arrows of love and ecstasy to the innocent Gopis who come to the banks of the Yamunā to fill their water pots. Lost in His hypnotizing glances, the chastise Gopis of Vraja are unable to fill their pots. Thus, they stand stunned on the river bank, wet from the water of the Yamunā. Their feet are cold, and their hands shiver with perspiration on their foreheads and fast-beating hearts. They get lost in His glance. Oh, for that day we get lost in the glance of the Lord. What more is there to say? Such is the effect of the sidelong glances of Gopāla, who playfully pierces the hearts of the Braja-yuvatis.”

This is describing the Gopis, the Braja-yuvatis, the young maidens of Braja. Poor Govinda says, “I sacrifice my everything to that player of Holi, the lifter of Govardhan Hill.”

Now, this is interesting. We could analyze from different perspectives. Krishna’s glances, just as the effect of Krishna’s glances can be sweet, attractive, and charming, they can also be the opposite. That is described by Kavi Jagannātha. Kavi Jagannātha, he was, um, I read, he was a medieval poet in Braja who wrote hundreds of poems about Krishna and Vṛndāvana, and they’re still sung, read, or sung in many of the temples in Braja. Here’s one:

“Said to Maṅgala, ‘Oh brother, look at the furious glance of Krishna as He kills the Bhūmāsura demon. His eyebrows were furled towards His nose. The redness of His eyes are like fireballs shooting from a cannon. His eyes are filled with tears of anger. The corners of His eyes are invoking the Lord of Death, Mahākāla. His eyelashes behave like pointed daggers smeared in blood. His wide-open eyes are causing distress in the gardens of the demons, in the gardens of the demons.”

“Look at poor Vāṇāsura, who was just killed with fire-shooting glances from Krishna’s eyes.” Poet Jagannātha says, “May those fire-shooting glances of Krishna protect all devotees from enemies and from snakes. Haribol.”

Wow. So much nectar to meditate on. So, let us finish today with, with a verse and purport from Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, 4.24, verses, uh, 47 and 48. The chapter is entitled “Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Śiva.” It’s so beautiful, and again, we’ll hear about glances.

The verse is: “The Lord is super-excellently beautiful on account of His open and merciful smile and His sidelong glance upon His devotees. His black hair is curly, and His garments, waving in the wind, appear like flying saffron pollen from lotus flowers. His glittering earrings, shining helmet, bangles, garland, ankle bells, waist belt, and various other bodily ornaments, combined with His conch shell, disc, club, and lotus flower, increase the natural beauty of the śrīvatsa pearl upon His chest.” We often hear the śrīvatsa described as a curl, so that’s the verse.

And here’s Śrīla Prabhupāda’s purport: “The word prasanna-padāṅga, referring to Krishna’s smile and sidelong glances to His devotees, specifically applies to His dealings with the Gopis. Krishna is always in a joking mood, where He increases the feelings of conjugal rasa in the hearts of the Gopis. The conch shell, club, disc, and lotus flower can either be held in His hands or seen on the palms of His hands. According to palmistry, the signs of a conch shell, club, lotus flower, and disc mark the palms of great personalities, and especially indicate the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”

Very fitting to finish today with the quote from Śrīla Prabhupāda about Krishna’s glances. So thank you, prabhu-ji. Um, let’s see what we come up with next week, maybe a little something more about His eyes, or something more about sidelong glances. But whatever it is, it’ll be a stimulation for ecstatic love on the path back home to Goloka Vṛndāvana. Krishna, Śrī Gurudeva, ki jaya. Thank you.
