Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of Śrī Nandanandana.

oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale
śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So once again we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 110. Today we'll continue to discuss the fourth quality of Kṛṣṇa that distinguishes Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa, namely rūpa-mādhurī, His extraordinary beauty.

Previously we discussed Kṛṣṇa's face in detail. Today I would like to go deeper into that subject by discussing the finer aspects of Kṛṣṇa's facial features.

Interesting class.

To get us started, the Vrajavāsī poet Kaviśekhara Gosvāmī compares Kṛṣṇa's facial features to nine precious gemstones. Kaviśekhara Gosvāmī lived around 1675 in Navadvīpa, and he wrote many poems and pastimes in Bengali, Āryā, and Brajabuli languages.

He writes as follows:

"Kṛṣṇa's wide, beautiful face is like a dazzling diamond. His eyebrows are like blue sapphires. His eyes are like embedded pearls. His lashes are like gold hessonite. His nose is like a string of corals. His lips are like beautiful rubies. His chin is like a yellow sapphire. His cheeks are like cat's-eye gems, and His ears are rare emeralds."

Kaviśekhara, the poet, says:

"May these navaratna-like features, which are embedded in the pendant-like heart of Śrī Rādhā, protect devotees at all times, in all ages."

All ages.

Now the poet Govindadāsa, again one of the eight famous poets in the Vallabha-sampradāya line, mercifully goes one step further. He writes:

"O brother, look at the moonlike face of Kṛṣṇa. His broad forehead is the resting place of all good fortune. His nose is the pride of Cupid. His lips are all-auspicious. His cheeks are cups filled with sweet nectar. His ears are fans of divinity, fans of divinity. His eyes are like lakes of corallium. His eyelashes are petals of a rose. His brows are the bow of Lord Śiva. His chin is the estate of luxury and opulence."

Govindadāsa says:

"I sacrifice everything for the cooling face of the Lord."

The cooling face of the Lord.

So beautiful.

Now what's interesting is that Kṛṣṇa's face is often beautified by decorative paintings, which we call in modern-day ISKCON "gopī dots." I'm not sure who made up that term, "gopī dots," the face painting which we do often at festivals. But in Sanskrit they are actually known as makara-cihna, makara-cihna.

And makara-cihna literally means "Cupid's signs."

And the ācāryas say that by looking at Kṛṣṇa's face when decorated with makara-cihna, these beautiful facial decorations, a deep love for Him is invoked in one's heart.

Every day Mother Yaśodā, the cowherd boys, and the gopīs decorate Kṛṣṇa's cheeks and forehead with these painting designs.

I researched the matter and found out that these marks are painted on Kṛṣṇa's cheeks with different materials of natural colors. A few are listed in the scripture known as Makara-candrikā by a devotee called Rāmakṛṣṇa Cakravartī.

It's really interesting.

The color pink comes from kuṅkuma mixed with turmeric.

The color yellow comes from haritāla, which is a yellow mineral.

The white paint comes from candriyā, meaning white lime.

And saffron comes from candana, sandalwood paste mixed with saffron. We know that because in Deity worship we make candana and add some saffron, and it comes out a beautiful saffron color.

The blue paintings come from nīlama, which means indigo mineral.

The green colors come from patra, which means green leaves.

The blood-red colors come from dāḍima. Dāḍima means red pomegranate. They use red pomegranates to make that painting blood-red.

The brown colors come from khadira, which is the resin from a lac tree.

And black comes from kajjala, or collyrium.

Of course, nowadays devotees use these colors for gopī dots at festivals from artificial substances, but wouldn't it be nice to use these natural substances mentioned and revive the tradition? Of course, they're not so easy to find in the West.

Now a particular design is drawn as a series of dots coming down from Kṛṣṇa's forehead towards His cheeks, with a three-petaled lotus flowing downward. That design is called a kapola-maṇḍana pattern.

Take note.

A kapola-maṇḍana pattern means this particular design is drawn from a series of dots coming down from Kṛṣṇa's forehead towards His cheeks, with a three-petaled lotus flowing downward at the end of that design.

Pūjārīs can listen and make these designs on the Deities' faces because it's authorized.

A vine of leaves coming down from His forehead towards His cheeks, with a rose flower blossoming at the end, is known as a kapola-keli design.

Then a series of dots flowing down from Kṛṣṇa's forehead, with small flowers in between the dots and at the end with several fish opening their mouths downward, is known as a makara-maṇḍana design.

A curved line coming downwards from Kṛṣṇa's forehead towards His cheek, with two dancing peacocks facing each other at the end, is known as a mayūra-pakṣa design.

And a line with many mangoes, with small intervals in between, alongside an upside-down mango at the end, is known as pramoda-candrikā design.

This is interesting.

A series of dots coming from Kṛṣṇa's forehead to His chin is known as mahā-maṇḍana design.

And two suns under double-wheeled circles painted on Kṛṣṇa's cheeks are known as paśuma design.

And two fish, two cuckoo birds, and two peacocks painted on His forehead are known as rasa-maṇḍana design.

That's not all.

Small birds flying in a V-shape on top of His brows are known as vihanga-maṇḍana design.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So to paint the designs on Kṛṣṇa's face, Mother Yaśodā uses a golden needle called Jagat-mohinī, a leaf-shaped needle named Viśva-vandinī, a round flat needle called Bindinī, a sharp-edged golden needle called Anuśā, a soft cotton bud, plus sparkling powder known as abrā, and a small cow-tail fan to dry the designs.

This is nectarean, isn't it?

And Śaśi, our famous poet Śaśi, describes all these beautiful designs, the different paintings on Kṛṣṇa's cheeks, in one of his poems. I found it as follows. He writes, summarizing it all:

"The beauty of Śyāma's dark cloud-like face is painted with dots of stars made out of candana. His beautiful face resembles an ocean at night, with white curvy lines like waves coming onto the shores of His cheeks. His flowerlike face glows during the day, and bumblebee-like designs decorate it."

Śaśi says:

"The beautiful face of Gadādhara is like a temple which is painted with the love of Mother Yaśodā."

Like a temple which is painted with the love of Mother Yaśodā.

Wow.

And now we know what particular types of designs she does, the gopīs do, the cowherd boys do, and where they get the colors from, the pigments.

Now the following pastime is popular amongst the Vrajavāsīs, and I'll share it with you.

Once Kṛṣṇa came to Rādhārāṇī to ask her to play a game of śatranja. Śatranja is actually an ancient game akin to chess.

And He said to Rādhā:

"Dearest Rādhe, if I win, what will you give Me as a prize?"

And Rādhā replied:

"O Śyāma, You already have my everything. But if I lose this game, I will be Your servant life after life. But Śyāma, what will You give me if I win the game?"

So Kṛṣṇa said:

"Rādhe, I will be Your cera, the servant of Your words. Whatever You say, I will obey."

So Rādhā said:

"What if I say, 'Kṛṣṇa, bring me the moon'?"

And Kṛṣṇa cleverly replied:

"O Rādhe, just thinking about Your effulgence, the moon feels shame because it is less bright. If I go get the moon for You, he will die from shyness."

He will die from shyness.

So Rādhā smiled upon hearing Kṛṣṇa's answer, and after playing a few rounds of this game, guess what?

She won.

Rādhā won.

And she said:

"O Śyāma, as You can see, now You have lost the game. Therefore You have to become my cera, my servant, the servant of my words."

So Kṛṣṇa replied:

"O my Svāminī, my love, I will do whatever You say."

So Rādhā said:

"Then Kṛṣṇa, You come late in the evening to the grove of Rāta-mālatī."

There's a grove called Rāta-mālatī, where moonlight comes filtering through the leaves of the trees.

And Kṛṣṇa said:

"As You say, my Svāminī."

So in the evening Śrī Rādhā, after decorating herself, reached that grove. But after waiting many hours, Kṛṣṇa had still not arrived, as often happens.

So Rādhārāṇī, what did she do?

She spent time counting the stars and smelling flowers to distract herself while crying in separation. In this way she spent the whole night waiting for Śyāma.

Then finally, as the night started to draw to a close, Kṛṣṇa arrived at the grove.

But when Rādhārāṇī saw that the painted designs on Kṛṣṇa's face, which she had seen earlier that day, had vanished, she became suspicious.

And she said to Him:

"O love of my life, my life and soul, why did You come so late?"

So Kṛṣṇa folded His hands and humbly said:

"O Priyā, as I walked through the Vṛndāvana forest, a flower vine somehow bound My entire body, and it was very difficult to get disentangled. Thus I spent the whole night freeing Myself from it. I apologize for coming so late to our meeting."

But Rādhārāṇī manifested her māna, her loving anger.

She replied:

"O Śyāmasundara, it's obvious that Your face paintings have been cleared away not by a flower vine, but by the sweet kisses of another gopī by the name of Tārā."

So Kṛṣṇa immediately became embarrassed, and He apologized, saying:

"My beloved, the night is about to end. Let us walk together under the last rays of the moon, enjoying the sights and sounds of the Vṛndāvana forest."

And persuaded by her sakhīs, Rādhārāṇī gave up her māna, her anger, and the Divine Couple performed abhisāra.

It's a beautiful word.

Abhisāra means their roaming pastimes.

And just before the sun rose on the eastern horizon, in a grove named Makara-vāsa, Śrī Rādhā repainted beautiful fish-like designs on Kṛṣṇa's beautiful cheeks.

The poet Kavi Dāsa says:

"Bali hāri, bali hāri. I sacrifice everything, I sacrifice everything, to the beautiful Divine Couple who are situated in the grove of painting designs, situated in the grove of painting designs, Makara-vāsa."

Wow.

Let's go there on our next Kārttika parikramā.

So let us finish today with a verse from Śuka-śāstra, verse 105, by Kṛṣṇa-kavi, author of Govinda-līlāmṛta. He writes:

"The most prominent feature of Kṛṣṇa's face is His noble forehead. One of Vraja's parrots once said:

'I glorify Hari's forehead, framed by His curling locks of hair and the two vines of His eyebrows, splendid as the crescent moon, decorated with beautiful designs drawn in gopīs' pigments and bearing splendid kuṅkuma tilaka. It is Kāmadeva's trap to catch the deer of Śrī Rādhā's heart.'"

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So that's all for today.

We're spending a lot of time describing beautiful details of Kṛṣṇa's face as a stimulus for awakening our dormant love for the Lord. I'm sure it will work in due course of time.

And we'll be back next Friday with more nectar.

May transcendental book distribution go on. May transcendental festival distribution go on. All forms of saṅkīrtana.

Back home, back to Godhead.

Jaya Jaya Śrī Śrī Rādhe-Śyāma.

All glories to Hari.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.
