Hi Krishna, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. Śrī Kṛṣṇa śaṅta svāmī namaste.

All glories to you!

So, we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and today, I would like to cover the life and poetry of another very prominent Vrajavāsī poet named Parmanand Das. Parmanand Das is one of the famous eight prominent poets in the line of Vallabhācārya, called, as we explained in other lectures, the Aṣṭachāp.

He was born in a very prominent brāhmaṇa family in the city of Kanyakubja, in present-day Uttar Pradesh. I was reading Kanyakubja is famous for its fragrant oils and incense since time immemorial. Nowadays, it's known as the perfume capital of India, and in the Ramayana, Mahabharata, and the Puranas, it's referred to as Kanyakubja.

So, Kanyakubja is especially famous for rose gulab, which is the concentrated fragrance of roses, chaitī gulab, which is the fragrance of pink roses, which grow only in March-April. Mitti attar is a fragrance similar, is described to one that is experienced when the first drops of rain fall on parched earth.

Try to imagine that. It's famous for chameli or jasmine oils, and chandan sandalwood oils. Now, around the 16th century, the king of Kanyakubja at that time, he was a rājā, a saintly person sitting on the throne, and he called a meeting with all the principal brāhmaṇas of the land and asked them to arrange that all the people in his vast kingdom would have access to transcendental knowledge.

Now, the future parents of our Parmanand Das were living elsewhere at the time, but after hearing about this king's desire, they came and settled in Kanyakubja. Parmanand Das's father was a very learned and highly respected pundit, but unfortunately, he was poor, as brāhmaṇas sometimes are.

But when his son Parmanand was born, a very wealthy vaiśya businessman came and gave a large amount of gold coins to his father in celebration of the birth of his son, with the hope that he would also become a learned scholar and share his knowledge with the people in the kingdom of Kanyakubja.

I was thinking, just like in modern times, wealthy families give endowments to universities to further education and society. I was remembering one time, we invited the president of this country many years ago, Nelson Mandela, to a program that we were hosting, called the Festival for the Children of the Rainbow Nation.

And in his address to the audience, there were 100,000 children there, actually, Nelson Mandela referred to education. He said, if I can remember correctly, "Education is the most powerful weapon by which you can use to change the world." And I was remembering another quote by another scholar, Andy McIntyre.

He said, "If you think education is expensive, try ignorance." And I think it was Victor Hugo who once said, "He who opens a school door closes a prison." He who opens a school door closes a prison. Knowledge, of course, we would like to quote as devotees, the Bhagavad Gita, 9th chapter, verse number two. "This knowledge of the Gita is the king of education, the most secret of all secrets.

It is the purest knowledge, and because it is direct perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of religion. It is everlasting, and it is joyfully performed." As we know, anyway, Parmanand's father was very grateful and happy for that donation.

It's written that he thought, "The Lord has given me both money and my first son. He has been very generous to me today. My new son is a bringer of wonderful fortune, and his birth has brought me great joy.

Therefore, I will bestow upon him the name Parmanand." So, Parmanand means, or Paramananda means in Sanskrit, "servant of He who gives the greatest happiness." Krishna.

Now, as a result of this generous donation of the wealthy businessman, Paramananda's family soon prospered in many ways. Parmanand Das himself is described as something like a prodigy child in a transcendental way. It is said that he mastered the essential Vedic scriptures very early in his youth.

So, when he was 14, his father requested the brāhmaṇa community to perform the Upanayana ceremony, which, as we know, is to bestow upon the boy the sacred thread and he gets the Gāyatrī Mantra. So, I was reading the news spread, and because this boy was so learned at such a young age, brāhmaṇas from around the land came to attend the ceremony, as well as several kings and queens of nearby lands.

And I was also reading that the ceremony went on for several months. So, it's written that soon afterwards, Parmanand, inspired in particular by his study of the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, he started writing devotional poems and composing songs about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and their divine abode in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

And he very soon became famous for this, and crowds of people would come regularly to hear his poetry, to hear his bhajans. A few years later, when his father suggested he get married, Parmanand said, and I quote here, "Oh, respected father, I have no desire to get married.

Life is short and full of misery. My only desire is to spend time in glorification of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and eventually return to their abode. Please, just let me do my bhajans and not get entangled in the material energy of the Lord." So, his father, concerned, replied, "But my dear son, without the responsibility of marriage, how will you attain money and wealth and happiness in this world?" So, his son replied, "Father, the only real profit gained through the acquisition of wealth is the ability to feed vaiṣṇavas and brāhmaṇas.

I will never try to obtain money, but you will always have enough. So, give up the seductive delusion of wealth, artha, and concentrate on the holy names of the Lord, on chanting the holy names of the Lord." So, after some time, Paramananda Das, as a young man, he left home to focus on his spiritual practice in Prayāg.

Prayāg is known in ancient times as the city of Kashi. Kashi today, it's known as Banaras or Varanasi. So, there he settled in a small bhajana-kuti on the banks of the sacred Gaṅgā, and he focused on composing poetry at this time on the theme of the gopīs' feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa.

And soon, this poetry became famous in that region as well, and the residents of Prayāg, Varanasi, would often come to hear him read his poetry and sing his poetry. It had a big effect on their hearts. I think I've mentioned many times, like Prabhupāda said, that the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, it's beneficial to hear it from anyone at any time, but it's especially beneficial if you hear the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa from the lips of a pure devotee.

So, people became attracted. His poetry was touching their hearts. Now, at that time, some distance away, on the other side of the Gaṅgā, in a small village called Adila Gram, lived Vallabhācārya along with his family. As we've mentioned previously, Vallabhācārya is the founder of the Vallabha Sampradāya, also known today as the Puṣṭi Mārg.

And at that time, Vallabhācārya was writing his commentary on the 10th Canto of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, called in Sanskrit, Subodhinī. Actually, Śrīla Prabhupāda mentions this effort of Vallabhācārya in his purport to Chaitanya Charitāmṛta, Madhya 1.196.1.

There, he writes, "Vallabhācārya's book, known as Ṣoḍaśa Granthas, and his commentaries on Vedānta Sūtra, Nimbārka, and Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, Subodhinī, are very famous." And in that same verse, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja mentions that when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu visited Prayāg, Vallabhācārya came to see him.

The verse is: "Tatra chatur-mukhāṁ vāyuṁ pratīkṣamāṇaṁ caturbhujam, Gaṅgā-yamuna saṁyogam anuyātrī śrī-balābaṁ. Śrīmad-bhāgavatam." Śrī Chaitanya Mahaprabhu selected His residence beside the confluence of the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā at a place called Triveni. The two brothers Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Vallabha selected their residences near the Lord's.

So, this Vallabha is different than Vallabhācārya. It's the, you could say, the brother of Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī. Sometimes he was called Anupam, and sometimes he was called Śrī Vallabha. The next verse: "Vallabhaṁ rādhā-damodaraṁ cānyan, mahāṁ mahābādhaṁ mahābādhaṁ.

Mahā prabhubhir dṛṣṭam." At that time, Śrī Vallabha, meaning Vallabhācārya, was staying at a Āḍīlāgrāma, just across the river, and when he heard that Chaitanya Mahaprabhu had arrived, he went to his place to see him. "Teho dandavat kṛta prabhu kṛpā aliṅgita kṛṣṇa kathana.

Vallabhācārya, Vallabhācārya." It's sometimes described, offered Śrī Chaitanya Mahaprabhu his obeisances, and the Lord embraced him. After that, they discussed topics about Kṛṣṇa for some time. Now, in Prabhupāda's purport to Chaitanya Charitāmṛta, Madhya 12.63, he writes that "On another day, Lord Chaitanya went to visit Vallabhācārya in his home in Āḍīlāgrāma, on the other side of the river.

He paid a visit to him where he was living." Prabhupāda writes, "Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu visited the house of Vallabhācārya on the other side of Prayāg, in a place known as Āḍīlāgrāma." Now, what's interesting, I was doing a lot of research for this lecture, and I read that scholars of that period, they write that when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu visited Vallabhācārya, Vallabhācārya was handed a plate of bhoga by, I imagine, one of the pujaris there in their, in his home, to be offered to the household deity.

But upon receiving that plate to be given to the deity, Vallabhācārya got confused seeing two Supreme Lords together in his house, one in the deity form, the household deity, and the other in the form of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So, getting a little confused transcendentally, he offered the plate of bhoga to Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, who was supposed to go on the altar, but he handed it to Mahaprabhu.

Krishna.

So, now we're living in the village of Āḍīlāgrāma outside of Prayāg, on the other side of the river. Vallabhācārya had a servant named Kapura, who was an orphan. I was reading that while living in a jungle area in Madhya Pradesh, both this boy's father and mother were killed by a group of tigers.

And at that time, on that day, leaving the then 14-year-old boy frightened and just crying on the bank of a river for three days, it's described he didn't eat for three days. He was just crying. And at that time, Vallabhācārya was traveling and preaching around India.

And a few days after Kapura's parents had been killed, Vallabhācārya was crossing through that jungle area. And when he reached the riverside, he saw the young Kapura sitting and crying. So, out of compassion, he told his associates to take the boy with them back to Āḍīlāgrāma.

And the boy lived in the āśrama near Vallabhācārya's home. And as he grew up, Kapura was very grateful and began to serve Vallabhācārya, and eventually, he took initiation from him. So, one day, Kapura was filling water pots on the banks of the Gaṅgā next to Āḍīlāgrāma when he heard a devotee singing a very sweet bhajan with a voice just imbued with devotion he never heard before, coming from the other side of the river.

He was hearing the singing coming from the other side of the river in Prayāg, and he was so charmed, he wanted to immediately drop everything and go across the Gaṅgā to associate with this sadhu. But he had services he needed to attend to, so he couldn't go.

But later he inquired. That day, he inquired from the local people as to who that singer was. And smiling broadly, a group of people said, "Oh, that's the sadhu named Paramanand, a renowned poet and great devotee of the Lord, who settled in Prayāg.

He lives in a bhajana-kuti there." And they also mentioned that because that particular day was a Shivaratri, he would be singing bhajans all night long until the sunrise the next morning in his bhajana-kuti. So, eager to meet him, Kapura made a plan to cross the river by boat that evening, after his services were done.

But by the time he finished his sēvā and got to the riverbank, it was dark, and all the boats had stopped working. But he was determined. Just a moment's association with a saintly person can begin one on the path of perfection.

So, determined, he swam all the way across the Gaṅgā in the dark. Now, if you've ever been to Varanasi, to Prayāg, you know the river is very wide there. I've been there many times, and it's flowing very swiftly, but he took the risk.

When he got to the other side, he walked until he found the bhajana-kuti of Paramananda Das. How did he find it?

He followed his singing some distance away, he could hear, so he just followed the singing, followed his heart, they say, right?

To follow your heart. He followed his heart. He wanted association. He wanted to associate with this great, this great devotee. So, he reached his bhajana-kuti, and he was very humble. You know, it was dark. Maybe we can imagine one candle was burning or something.

So, he sat some distance away. He didn't want to disturb Paramananda. He just sat listening to him, and he was once again enchanted by his, his devotion. So, he stayed the whole night, stayed awake, absorbed in listening to him.

And upon returning back to Āḍīlāgrāma on the other side of the river, the next morning, he went to his spiritual master, Vallabhācārya, and he told him about this sadhu, Paramanand, who was living in Prayāg and his bhajana-kuti, just composing poetry and singing songs in glorification of the Lord.

And when his spiritual master, Vallabhācārya, heard about that, he said, "Oh, I'm very interested. If I could meet the sadhu Paramanand." So, Kapura, he asked, "But how will that happen?" So, Vallabhācārya said something a little mystical.

He smiled and he said, "Everything is done by the will of the Lord. Everything is done by the will of the Lord." So, Kapura just took that. Okay. So, it's interesting that the next night, Paramananda was sleeping in his bhajana-kuti in Prayāg when he had a dream.

And in the dream, he saw Kṛṣṇa sitting on the lap of Kapura, listening to his, Paramananda's, bhajans. Now, he didn't know who Kapura was, but he saw him in his dream, and Kṛṣṇa was sitting on his lap, and together they were listening to his Paramananda's bhajans.

So, in the dream, when Paramananda stopped singing, Kṛṣṇa ran up to him. He saw Kṛṣṇa running up to him, and Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear devotee Paramananda, why did you stop singing?

I was sitting on the lap of Kapura," he identified him, "I was sitting on the lap of Kapura and listening to your, your bhajan. Actually, we swam across the river together just to hear you sing." But then the dream broke.

And upon waking, Paramananda asked the locals if they knew anyone named Kapura, because it was such an amazing dream, he wanted to like meet him and share the dream with him. And he was informed that Kapura was, in fact, the servant of a great saint named Vallabhācārya, who lived across the Gaṅgā in a village called Āḍīlāgrāma.

So, inspired by his dream, Paramananda crossed the river in the boat, and upon reaching Āḍīlāgrāma, that village, he looked around and inquired, and he found Kapura doing errands in the village for his spiritual master, Vallabhācārya. And he shared his dream with him. "You were in my dream." And Kapura confirmed that he'd actually come to listen to Paramananda the night before, and he smiled when Paramananda told him that he envisioned Kṛṣṇa sitting on Kapura's lap, listening to him do his bhajans in his dream.

So, they spent time in deep discussions about the divine couple Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and at one point, Kapura mentioned that his spiritual master, Vallabhācārya, was nearby. And when Paramananda expressed a desire to meet Vallabhācārya, Kapura took him for darśana with Vallabhācārya.

And at that meeting, Vallabhācārya asked Paramananda to compose a song about Viraḥa, meaning when one feels separation from Kṛṣṇa, like the Vrajavāsīs. So, Paramananda, spontaneously, remembering he was a prodigy child, and now he's, you know, maybe in his twenties or thirties or something, made more advancement, he spontaneously sang the song in loving devotion.

And afterwards, Vallabhācārya was just stunned. He was just stunned. He sat there, he couldn't speak, actually, and expressed his deep appreciation. So, this was actually the first of many of their meetings. To make a long story short, and eventually, Vallabhācārya accepted Paramananda as his initiated disciple.

And a couple of years later, Vallabhācārya took Paramananda to Vraj, to Vṛndāvana.

Just imagine, he had grown up singing about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the Vrajavāsīs, Vṛndāvana, the abode, but he had never been there.

He fell in love with Vṛndāvana outside Vṛndāvana.

That gives us hope. Those of us who are serving Śrīla Prabhupāda and our movement in different parts of the world, it gives us hope.

We can also develop love for Vṛndāvana just by hearing, for example, the poetry of devotees like Paramananda.

So, he, Vallabhācārya, took him to Vṛndāvana.

It's described because he felt that was the best place for Paramananda to be inspired to continue his sēvā of writing poetry and singing for the Lord. And we know that too. Śrīla Prabhupāda has invited us to Vṛndāvana many times, or several times in his books, he mentions his followers should come to Vṛndāvana because you get special inspiration there, as many times as we can in our lifetimes.

So, in time, appreciating so much how Paramananda would sing for the Lord, Vallabhācārya made him officially one of the Aṣṭachāp, or one of the eight principal poets and singers who would daily sing for Gopala, the deity found by Mṛṇḍa Muni, who was being worshipped at that time on Govardhana Hill.

Each of those eight singers had a particular time during the day. So, that was the life of Paramananda. He continued to write poetry and sing daily for Gopala. In my research, there's no mention of any other historically extraordinary events in his life, but we understand as devotees that every minute of every day is an extraordinary time for every vaiṣṇava or vaiṣṇavī.

You could say, with each step we take on the path of devotional service, Kṛṣṇa bhakti, many spiritual wonders are revealed, are discovered, and there's more to come. That's very nicely described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Utkaṇṭita Vālinī text number six, one of my favorite verses of all time, where he writes, "O handsome, fragrant tamala desire tree blooming in Vṛndāvana forest, and embraced by the madhavī vine of the Goddess ruling this forest.

O tree, the shade of whose glory protects the world from a host of burning sufferings. What wonderful fruits did the people find at your feet?

What wonderful fruits do the people find at your feet?" So much is to be discovered on the path of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.

It just gets better and better. So, sadly, one day in the year 1583, when Paramananda was approximately 90 years old, while sitting under a tree on the banks of the Sikhara on Govardhana Hill and singing Gopala's glories, while looking upwards towards the moving flag in Gopala's temple upon the hill, he left his body and returned to the spiritual world.

So, of course, I think it would be most appropriate to conclude today with some of his poetry, so we can properly understand him. We've heard, you know, historically his life, but I think to hear his poetry is to know him.

Just like Śrīla Prabhupāda said one time, "If you want to know me, read my books.

Read his purports. You'll know who is Śrīla Prabhupāda." So, let's hear some of the poetry of Paramananda, so we just don't think of him as a historic personality, but we can feel very close to him, and we can also get his association through his poetry, and maybe it will also touch our hearts as well.

We can do so to try to experience just a drop of the love he had for Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's associates, and the transcendental land that is Śrī Vṛndāvana.

He writes: Lalitā says to Kṛṣṇa, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, our Queen Śrī Rādhā wears a gold-embedded cādar, whereas you only wear a black woolen sheet filled with dust from the cows. Rādhā adorns her head with a diamond-studded crown of victory, whereas you wear a turban of torn cloth.

Our Queen wears necklaces of countless gemstones which sparkle like different shades of the moon, whereas you wear a simple forest flower garland which has no shine. Our Queen dresses in skirts of opulence, whereas you dress in a cloth of poverty.

Krishna, she holds a stick of royal power, whereas you hold a simple bamboo flute.

Oh Kṛṣṇa, peacocks dance under nose rings, whereas you only have one feather on your head." So, he concludes, "The Queen of Vraj is Rādhā, whereas the son of Nanda is her servant for many lifetimes." This great poet also has written: "Look today, the buttermilk made from yogurt by the gopīs has become the rarest thing to achieve, even by the creator of this world, Lord Brahmā.

Just see the humble gopīs are distributing that buttermilk to everyone. It is the very Amṛta, the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lotus lips." Also, he wrote, "Lord of the 14 worlds, while ruling in Devaloka, eats 56 sumptuous food items, 36 types of special dishes, 108 types of different drinks, and many types of snacks every day.

Yet, that same Lord hankers for drinking a handful of buttermilk prepared by the Vraja gopīs of Vrindavan." The other day, I was thinking, I wonder what Kṛṣṇa's flute sounds like. Will I ever get to hear it?

I was wondering, like, what will it sound like. And then I found this poem by Paramananda Das, which gives a hint of what happens to those souls fortunate enough to hear that flute. "When, oh when, will that day be ours?" he writes. "Listen, oh sakhī, when Kṛṣṇa places the flute to His sweet, nectarian lotus lips, at that time, all people, demigods, and living beings stop breathing in excitement as He starts playing it, filling it with His transcendental breath.

All living beings and demigods become intoxicated. When He comes to the fifth note, all ecstatic symptoms start to appear. And those fortunate enough to hear it, and when He plays the seventh and highest note of His flute, He enlivens the very soul of everyone.

Oh sakhī, what more can I say?

With the last note of His flute song, all the kings place the royal crowns at the feet of that flute. Beautiful ladies surrender their beauty to it. Demigods offer their powers to it, and Sarasvatī becomes a maid servant to it.

I, Paramananda Das, also offer my everything to that flute, which can drown the entire world in ecstasy." We must all offer our prostrated obeisances to that Divine Personality and thank Him that 500 years later, His poem is stirring some emotions in our hearts.

We are very, very grateful and grateful to Śrīla Prabhupāda for introducing Vrindavan, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, their associates, and all these wonderful personalities who can inspire us.

Haribol!

So, we have a few more poets to go, and I'll be back next Friday. May J.J. Śrī Śrī Guru Gauranga. Haribol!

Haribol!