Hari Krishna, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Viṣṇupada Parivrājakācārya, Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja Prabhupāda.

All glories to Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 142, in which we will continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's disguises. In our recent lectures, we have discussed how Kṛṣṇa assumes a variety of disguises in his pastimes.

And today, I would like to begin by discussing how Kṛṣṇa assumed the disguise of a boatman, of a boatman. Now, of course, for many of you, this is a very, very well-known and often shared pastime, both in Vṛndāvana and also around the world.

But because of its transcendental nature, one never tires of hearing it, or any other pastime of Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda makes this very clear in *Kṛṣṇa* book.

He writes famously in chapter one, "For one who is wrapped in hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa, the subject matter never becomes hackneyed or old." That is the significance of transcendental subject matter in contrast to material subject matter. Material subject matter becomes stale, and one cannot hear a certain subject for a long time; he wants change.

But as far as transcendental subject matter is concerned, it is called nitya-nava-nava-yāmānam. Nitya-nava-nava-yāmānam means, Prabhupāda writes, that one can go on chanting and hearing about the Lord and never feel tired, but remain fresh and eager to hear more and more.

Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, by doing so, the *śravaṇam kīrtanam*, one becomes purified. And when visiting Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, one can experience the bliss of that divine abode. *Bhakti-ratnākara*, chapter five, quotes, Ragava Paṇḍita, a great devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who said, "All the places where Kṛṣṇa performed His pastimes can only be seen in ecstasy by people who are fortunate." All the places where Kṛṣṇa performed His pastimes can only be seen in ecstasy by people who are fortunate.

And Prabhupāda, we are fortunate.

We're in this disciplic succession, and our Founder-Ācārya is Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, this pastime of Kṛṣṇa assuming the disguise of a boatman can, you can say, technically fall under the category of his *jala-krīḍā* pastimes. *Jala* means his water pastimes. I was reading that many of Kṛṣṇa's water pastimes take place during Vṛndāvana's hot summers, and naturally so.

In this regard, in this mood, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, chapter 15, verses 1 to 18, it's really interesting that during the hot scorching days of April through July, many of you will know, one should place or submerge his beloved *iṣṭa-devatā*, his deity.

Obviously, we're speaking about a smaller deity in a vessel of cool water because Kṛṣṇa *jala-vihārī* – Kṛṣṇa is fond of playing in the cool waters of Vraja. Kṛṣṇa's fond of playing in the cool waters of Vraja. What's more, he writes, this ceremony should be a super celebration.

That's my translation. This ceremony should be a super celebration. Then he gives detailed instructions on how to perform this bathing ceremony, which he calls Kṛṣṇa's *jala-krīḍā* festival. *Jala-krīḍā* festival, he writes. And of course, this can be done by devotees all over the world, not necessarily in Vraja.

In your summertime, you can also do it. It's in *Bhakti-vilāsa*. He writes, one should place his beloved deity under dripping water coming from a small silver or clay pot above the deity. Regarding Śālagrāma and Govardhana Śilās, he writes, for this ceremony, *śalagrāmaś śilā*, *dina*, *gāndharva*, they can be fully submerged in a water pot or big bowl that doesn't have to drip down.

They can be inside the pot of fragrant cool water, scented by Tulasi mañjarīs, sandalwood paste, rose water, edible camphor, and flower petals from the rose, mogrā, juhi, and cempā flowers. If you can't get all those flowers, you can use local flowers with scent.

He also writes, "Don't observe these water pastimes on a summer day that is cloudy and gloomy." A little note there. Then he gives us the benefits of performing this summer festival for our deities to keep them cool. He writes the benefits.

He writes that by observing this kind of festival, *puṇyam aparam*, one will attain never-ending beauty and religious merit, and *kula-pāvana*, *kula-bhogā*, one's family becomes pure and never sees hell. And *yajña-satam-bhūmi* he writes, one attains the merit of millions of *havan* and *homa* fire sacrifices.

You bathe your deity in the summer, have some *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. I thought that you would be interested in summertime. So, now we will discuss the well-known *jala* pastime of Kṛṣṇa disguised as a boatman, as told to us by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his *Gopāla-campū*.

So, in Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her friends often have to cross over bodies of water like lakes and ponds and streams with their milk products to sell in various marketplaces.

Actually, one might wonder why would Rādhā have to sell butter in the first place?

Would selling a few pots of butter change her family's fortunes?

Well, there can only be one answer to this question, and that is, the gopīs crossing rivers, ponds, and streams to sell butter has only one purpose: to enjoy pastimes with their beloved Kṛṣṇa. Like, everything in front of everything, centered around Kṛṣṇa, is in the center, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So, one evening, Rādhikā and her friends arrived at Mānasā Gaṅgā Lake at Govardhana Hill. That evening, it's described, they were eager to offer their different milk preparations to Haridāsa. Haridāsa is the presiding deity at Mānasā Gaṅgā. There's a beautiful temple there on the other side of the lake.

But upon arriving at the shore of this sacred lake, they were disappointed to find that there were no boats waiting at the dock. Actually, there was one old and very rickety-looking boat at the far end of the landing, but there was no boatman inside.

And aside from a rumpled blanket lying on the deck of that boat, the boat appeared empty. So, disappointed at this turn of events, the gopīs were just about to return home when they heard a low moaning sound, not a loud moaning, but a low moaning sound coming from this old boat, as if someone were stirring from a deep slumber.

So, Śrīmatī Rādhikā ordered one of her mañjarīs, "Find out where that noise is coming from." So, the maid servant dutifully walked down the landing, carefully stepped onto this old, rickety boat, and cautiously approached this crumpled blanket because that's all there was.

And from beneath that blanket came what sounded like heavy breathing. So, this gopī, she hesitated for a moment and looked back towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who encouraged her friend with some movement of the hand. So, the young girl took courage and pulled back that old, dusty blanket.

And lo and behold, there lying on the boat's deck was a young boatman, who from the sounds of his snoring appeared to be in deep sleep. So, Śrīmatī Rādhikā's friend turned back to her and Śrīmatī Rādhikā and her friends who were watching with curiosity, and said in a described loud whisper – whispers are soft, but this was a loud whisper – she said, "It looks like a boatman, but he's asleep." So, hearing this, Śrīmatī Rādhikā herself walked down the pier until she stood, it's described, directly above the boat.

And clearing her voice, she called out, "Boatman!

Boatman!" But he didn't seem to hear. "Boatman!

Boatman!" she called again and again, but louder.

And this time, accompanied by a chorus of her girlfriends, they chimed in. She's singing, "Boatman," you know, they joined in a chorus, a real chorus, absolute chorus, nectar. So, finally, this boatman stirred and slowly turned over, and it appeared to them that he was a young man.

He was dressed in simple clothes, and his hair was tucked under a well-worn turban. But it appeared he must have been new to this profession because his hands and feet looked very soft. There were no calluses. You know, when you work with your hands rowing, his hands were all very soft.

There were no calluses. So, this boy, he spoke up. He said to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs, "It's been a long day, and I'm resting. Please get yourself another boat or come back tomorrow." And with that, he lay down again, pulling the blanket away from the gopī and over his head.

But then, at Śrīmatī Rādhikā's signal, this maidservant, her maidservant, quickly pulled the blanket away. And Lalitā Devī, standing nearby, as she does, in a very strong voice, she said, "Wake up, boatman!

The princess of Vraja!" Wow. "The princess of Vraja wants to cross the waters to worship Haridāsa.

Do not delay. Set your oar in place and take us to the far shore. And you will be handsomely rewarded. Not to mention the fact that you will have the privilege to serve the most chaste and pious girl of Vraja.

The most chaste and pious girl of Vraja." So, the boatman, he finally sat up, and after much discussion and arguing, they all reached an agreement, or rather, he reached an agreement with Lalitā, that his payment for transporting the gopīs would be the remnants, the remnants of Haridāsa's yogurt, butter, and curd food. *Prasādam*.

He'd get the remnants. We would all like that. And as the gopīs began to board the boat, the boatman insisted at this point that it would be safer to go in two trips. But Rādhā would hear nothing of it, for night was coming.

This is, you know, evening's approaching, and they were in a rush. So she said to him, "No, we will all go at once." So, at that point, the boatman reluctantly, apparently, pushed off from the shore, pulling on his long oars, all the while singing some song about "boating on the river with one's sweetheart." This is how it's written. "Boating on the river with one's sweetheart." Now, as time passed, they seemed to be making good time over the river.

Sometimes it's a lake or river; sometimes different terms are used. Actually, Mānasā is a big lake now. And they were making good time over this lake. But about a third of the way across the lake, the boatman stopped rowing, and he tilted his turban back on his head and he sat down, just gazing out at the water.

So, the cowherd girls, they all looked at each other in amazement. Like, what's going on?

We have to get to the other shore to worship Haridāsa. So, Rādhā then prompted one of them to inquire. So, this gopī said, "Oh, boatman, why have you stopped?" To which came the reply, "Dear lady, I'm tired and hungry.

You woke me after a hard day's work before I could have my dinner. You all filled this boat to twice its capacity, insisted that I race to the other side, but without eating, I cannot exert myself any further." This was his answer.

So, at first, the, you know, all the gopīs, they tried to encourage the boatman to, how could you say, rise to the occasion?

Then they threatened him with punishment. But when neither tactic worked, they gave him access to their pots of milk products, and he ate. But to their shock, he devoured the contents of not just one, two, or three pots, but all the pots on board.

After which he declared, "Oh, following such a feast, I must take a short nap." So, at that point, the gopīs spoke, described heatedly amongst themselves as the strong current of this water swept them out of the sight of Haridāsa's temple.

They could see as they're crossing, but now the current so strong, the boat going way, way off course, and they're getting really anxious. And meanwhile, their captain, their captain was stretched out on his seat, having a snooze. Like, what?

And as if to pacify their irritation, with good news, he announced, "If two of your maidens massaged my feet and another two my arms, I could resume my rowing that much sooner. If two of you maidens massaged my feet and another two my arms, I could resume my rowing much sooner." And all the gopīs became very angry and restless to hear this outrageous proposal.

But they're, you know, in their irritation, the boat is moving back and forth and tilting, from eventually tilting on one side, causing them all to shriek in fright. Shriek in fright. Finally, after the boat had settled itself, because they calmed down, Lalitā Sakhī threatened as follows: "Boatman, unless you start to row right now, we certainly will hold you by your hands and feet and toss you overboard.

Now get up!" The gopīs were going to tie him up and throw him into the lake.

So, reluctantly, the boatman resumed his service. And not a moment too soon, as they say, because dark clouds were beginning to gather overhead. It's already quite a situation, but now these big dark clouds are beginning to gather overhead. You see that in some of the paintings of this pastime.

And before long, a strong wind whipped up the lake, and water began to seep into the boat. Shaking his head, and with it, a small peacock feather in his turban, the boatman called out, over this raging wind, "Girls, I warned you that all of you together would be too heavy a load for this old boat.

Now look, my boat is taking on water. Unless you lighten our load by disposing of more weight, surely we will all sink. So you must all immediately throw your precious pots overboard." The pots were empty. They had to throw the pots overboard.

At that, the girls, they kind of grumbled, it's described, cursing their fate as they threw their valuable gold pots overboard. I read like that, they threw their valuable gold pots overboard. But even as the girls watched their, how could you say, family heirlooms disappear into the depths one by one of this water, the boatman called out to them, saying, "Whoa, the boat is still taking on water.

Now you must all discard your weighty jewelry." The gopīs have that beautiful gold jewelry. So, in a chorus, another chorus here, the girls answered, "Never!

In your mind's eye, you see all these gopīs. Never!

Never!" But as the hems, you could say, of their skirts started to soak up the rising water, they tossed all their necklaces and bracelets and gold anklets into the lake's swelling waves with, it's described, tears of resignation.

Tears of resignation. But adding to their despair, the gopīs could see that the water level in the boat was still rising despite everything they'd thrown into the lake. And at that, the boatman said famously, "The only way we can keep this boat from sinking is if you all bail the water out yourselves." Wow.

To which the gopīs angrily answered, "We would have done that with the pots, but boatman, you made us throw them overboard." So, smiling, the boatman suggested, "Well, use your blouses to soak up the water and then wring them out overboard.

Take your blouses, soak up the water in the boat, and then wring them out overboard." And this incensed the cowherd girls, who replied, "We would rather wring your neck and throw you overboard." And as the waves of this lake became more ferocious, the clouds above released a deluge from above, as the gopīs could see, sat helplessly in their tiny craft.

And by now, they were completely drenched. And Śrīmatī Rādhikā felt, it's described, extremely guilty for risking her girlfriend's lives, not to mention, she was distressed at the thought of never seeing Kṛṣṇa again. So, having no other recourse, she stood up, and raising her arms in the air, then threw them around the boatman, calling out, "Boatman!

Boatman!

Only you can save us. Please save us!

Please save us!" And at that instant, a flash of lightning struck her.

But the lightning flash didn't come from a cloud. It came from the body of the boatman, who, pleasantly surprised, you know, by this contact with Vṛndāvana Ishvara, Kṛṣṇa.

He put a free arm around Rādhā and taking advantage, pulled her closer, actually into a tight embrace. And Rādhikā, in order to defend herself, she reached behind the boatman, behind his back, to free herself. When suddenly, this is the moment to pause.

When suddenly, she felt a certain bamboo flute in the attire of the boatman. And as she held the flute up, suddenly the thunder and the lightning stopped, the winds died down, the clouds disappeared, and all the ferocious waters receded.

This calm Mānasā. And with that, all the gopīs' faces lit up with smiles. They all cried again in a chorus, "It's him!

It's him!

It's Kṛṣṇa!" And Kṛṣṇa, like an actor receiving a standing ovation, bowed his head towards the gopīs.

And then he pulled Rādhā even closer. And seeing Kṛṣṇa standing before them, all the gopīs who had been terribly frightened by the whole ordeal, and who were still drenched from head to toe in water, stood fully satisfied, gazing upon the divine couple.

For once again, they were united together. This is the gopīs and the sakīs. They're always trying, you know, to bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together because of various reasons, social customs. So whenever they can bring them together, they're happy. They united the divine couple upon the stage of Vraja.

It's how it's described, upon the stage of Vraja. Wow. So, it's not over. Then, beneath the full moon, because by now the evening had turned into night, and this boat pastime is taking a long time, Kṛṣṇa steered the boat towards the nearest island, where he and the gopīs changed into dry clothes while joking about the highlights of their adventure.

The highlights of their adventure. Then, once again, they boarded the boat, which had, like, Kṛṣṇa cast off its disguise, cast off its disguise, to reveal a golden jewel-studded craft equipped with all the paraphernalia necessary to serve the divine couple.

And as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa reclined on a comfortable couch, one gopī sang, another one played musical instruments. Still others steered their boat through the calm, lotus-filled waters of Mānasā Gaṅgā at Govardhana Hill. Then the divine divine boat embarked, described, on an island to island cruise. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes, they went from island to island, in which Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs reveled in their mutual love within the transcendental beauty of Mānasā Gaṅgā's opulence.

If only we could see. When, oh when, will that day be ours?

So, I'm going to conclude today with two relevant prayers by Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī from his *Vṛndāvana-vilāsa*.

Many of you may not have heard about it, but these are from this book. But they are ten anxious prayers for worshiping Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and verses eight and nine are relevant to today. So, Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, at this point in his writings, verses eight and nine, he's therein hankering to participate in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's *jala-krīḍā*, in their water pastimes.

And specifically, in his writings at Śrīākaṇḍa, *jala-krīḍā*, so he writes, "When will I serve Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in her favorite lake on a warm summer evening that made her yearn to enjoy water pastimes?

She and her playful friends jubilantly sprinkle the expert water sportsman, the expert water sportsman, Lord Govinda, with water from their *jalāntra*. *Jalāntra* is like those syringes, *jalāntra*." And the second prayer: "Rādhā and her sakīs and the best of loving heroes, Kṛṣṇa, all enter the Lilākoṇḍa, *Rādhākoṇḍa*, in great fun.

How wonderfully clever are their water pastimes!

The sakīs join our loving heroine, Śrīmatī Rādhā, and start to combat our hero, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Then Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa begin to sprinkle each other with water. Rādhā-mohana, Kṛṣṇa, looks at the cowherd girls. Rādhāṇī spends her time in the *prema*-filled waters.

In the *prema*-filled waters, Kṛṣṇa." Well, glories to all these Ācāryas who have given us access to these wonderful pastimes, and especially to Śrīla Prabhupāda, who makes them understandable for us to relish.

So, I have some more. Well, there are more disguised pastimes, and we'll continue probably for a few more weeks, but I thought this one was really nice, the boatman pastime across Mānasā Gaṅgā Lake. Hari Krishna. Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga, Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarāma ki Jay!

Hare Kṛṣṇa.