Devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We are continuing with our mini-series on the subject of stimulation for ecstatic love (*uddīpana*), and this will be Part Two. Once again, this series is inspired by Chapter 26 of Śrīla Prabhupāda's *Nectar of Devotion*, which has the same title: "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love." These lectures, as we explained in the first part, are a study of things which help to stimulate or awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa. In our last lecture, we discussed the glories of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, and we didn’t finish. So this will be Part Two, and we’ll continue to speak about Kṛṣṇa’s favorite instrument. The ācāryas have pointed out that Kṛṣṇa’s flute is a unique feature that distinguishes Him even from His personal expansion as Nārāyaṇa.

In the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā*, Chapter 23, verses 84 to 85, we hear as follows: "Above Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa has four specific transcendental qualities: (1) His wonderful pastimes; (2) an abundance of wonderful associates who are very dear to Him, like the gopīs; (3) His incredible beauty; and last but not least, (4) the wonderful vibration of His flute." I was reading that Kṛṣṇa has numerous kinds of flutes that He stores in a special chest at Nandagāon. The ācāryas say that the *veṇu* flute, which is made of a bamboo reed that comes from Vaṁśīvaṭa, has six holes and is the smallest of all His flutes. We touched on that flute in our last lecture, and it’s described that although it is an inanimate piece of wood, by the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s lips, it has been endowed with full awareness—so much so that it enjoys the privilege of being an intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa.

The holes by which a flute is played are called *chidram*. However, it is written that Kṛṣṇa’s flute appears to have no holes. Wait a minute—the holes by which the flute is played are called *chidram*, but it is written that Kṛṣṇa’s flute appears to have no holes! So how can this be? Well, all things are resolved in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One poet writes very nicely to resolve this apparent contradiction: "The deep essence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, condensed in the form of His pleasing smile, when poured into the flute as the nectar of His lips, fills it to the brim, giving the appearance that the *veṇu* has no holes." You know, when we read the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, we know that much has been written about the effect or the result of hearing this unique sound vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute.

For example, I was researching and I found in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 24.207, we hear this quote: "My dear friend, when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma pass through the forest leading Their cows with Their cowherd boyfriends, They both carry ropes with which, at the time of milking, They bind the rear legs of the cows. When They play on Their flutes, all moving living entities are stunned, and non-moving living entities experience ecstatic jubilation by Their sweet music." All these things are certainly very wonderful. 

Now, what is also wonderful is the pastime of the raining flutes. There is a pastime called by the ācāryas "the raining flutes." Well, we've heard of rainwater, sometimes it snows, or there’s hail—but raining flutes? Yes, indeed! One day, Kṛṣṇa was meeting with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Her rooms at Yāvaṭa, when suddenly, who should walk in but Jaṭilā, Her mother-in-law. Seeing her, Kṛṣṇa literally dove out of a window, but He left His flute behind! Now, fortunately, as we all know, Jaṭilā is half-blind, so she couldn't see exactly who it was that dove out of the window. But as she often does—she's always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, never forgetting Him—she assumed it was Kṛṣṇa and said to Śrī Rādhikā, "That was Kṛṣṇa, wasn't it?" But the Rājarāṇī denied it. Unfortunately, though, Jaṭilā then saw Kṛṣṇa’s flute lying on a table, and she immediately concluded that He must have been there. She blurted out, "That was Kṛṣṇa, I know it! There’s His flute! At last, I've caught You red-handed with that rascal!"

So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī didn't know what to say, but bold Lalitā—always there to protect Her dear Rādhā, she's Rādhā’s principal girlfriend—she stepped forward. In a matter-of-fact way, she declared, "That’s not Kṛṣṇa’s flute. Don’t be ridiculous!" Jaṭilā was astonished. She thought, "How could Lalitā deny that Kṛṣṇa had been here, when the flute is such clear evidence that He was?" So Jaṭilā asked in a scornful way, "Well, how did this flute get here then? How did this flute get here? You girls don’t play flutes; only Kṛṣṇa plays flutes. So how can you deny the obvious?" But Lalitā was not even slightly discouraged. She folded her arms and declared with complete conviction, "Jaṭilā, don’t you know? Today it is raining flutes! Don’t you know today it’s raining flutes?" Jaṭilā said, "Raining flutes? That’s completely crazy! How dare you say such rubbish!" Then, without hesitating for even a second, Lalitā said, "Just look out the window, then. Just look out the window!" So Jaṭilā went to the window, mumbling about rascal girls lying and talking nonsense. And when she got to the window and looked outside, sure enough, it was raining flutes! (Somebody should do a painting of that.) Sure enough, it was raining flutes, *voilà*!

Now, it's an interesting point that although the flute is Kṛṣṇa's favorite instrument and is so very dear to Him, from the following pastime, it appears that Śrī Rādhā has more control over that flute than Kṛṣṇa. That’s not surprising because She has full control over Him at all times by Her *bhāva*, by Her love, and Kṛṣṇa likes it that way. One time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī left the *rāsa* dance, and Kṛṣṇa, noticing this, also left that particular *rāsa* dance to look for Her. He wandered through all the *kuñjas* around Govardhana Hill, calling out Rādhārāṇī’s name, until finally, somewhere near Jaṭīpura, He found Her in a *kuñja* with Lalitā, Viśākhā, and some other special gopīs.

But when Kṛṣṇa came up to Rādhārāṇī, She turned Her face away and said to Lalitā, "Tell that rascal boy to go away." So Kṛṣṇa bowed His head down, and with tears in His eyes, He left that place. He went to another *kuñja* where, the ācāryas describe, He lay down and just went to sleep. He was so upset, He just went to sleep. Then Rādhā, smiling, told some of Her friends to find out where Kṛṣṇa went and report back to Her. Her scouts eventually found Kṛṣṇa lying down sleeping in this other *kuñja*, this other forested area, with His crown off and with His flute under His hand, sleeping.

So when the girls came back and told Rādhārāṇī, suddenly all of Her girlfriends, like Lalitā, Viśākhā, Rati Mañjarī, and Śrī Rādhā Herself—all of them got the same idea at the same time. They all thought, "This is all Pūrṇamāsī’s arrangement." She makes all these wonderful arrangements. Actually, very early each morning, she meets with Vṛndā-devī, her helper, and they come up with these amazingly beautiful, sweet, loving pastimes. So all these gopīs had the same thought at the same time. They thought, "No one is guarding Kṛṣṇa. He’s asleep, and He's alone in the *kuñja*. This is the perfect opportunity to steal His flute!" So all the gopīs got together and, very silently, they snuck into that particular *kuñja*, that grove where Kṛṣṇa was, and they saw He was still asleep. (A little note here: actually, Kṛṣṇa wasn't sleeping; He was pretending.) So the gopīs started discussing how they were going to steal that flute.

Lalitā said, "This flute, this particular flute, can only be stolen by someone who is very clever, very quick, and very fast." And immediately, all the girls simultaneously turned around and looked at Śrī Rādhā. Rādhā smiled, because here was an opportunity to associate with Her beloved. So She tied up Her *sārī* (to look like pants or something, which would make it easier to move and not make any noise) and She tied a cloth around Her bangles and Her ankle bells so they wouldn't make any noise. She started moving through the *kuñja*, moving through the grove, very quietly. You know, when you walk, some twigs can crack or you can move some leaves, but She is so expert She went through that *kuñja* without making even a little sound. She snuck up to where Kṛṣṇa was, and then it is described She moved very carefully and very deliberately, one step at a time, for those last few meters, just to make sure Kṛṣṇa didn't wake up. Finally, when She got to where Kṛṣṇa was, She very carefully reached out and grabbed His flute, then She jumped up and ran like the wind! As it is described, while all the other gopīs were watching, they just giggled and laughed.

Now, of course, Śrī Rādhikā and Her gopī friends didn't see it, but as soon as the flute was gone, a little smile came across Kṛṣṇa’s face. He was lying there, again pretending to be asleep, and as soon as the flute disappeared, a smile came across His face. After some time, Kṛṣṇa got up and came back to that first *kuñja* where the gopīs were. At first, they didn't notice Him; they just kind of ignored Him, which is a common thing in this pastime. He called out, "Hey, do any of you know where my flute is? Do any of you have my flute?" All the gopīs looked at Him like, "What do you mean, do we have your flute? Why would we have your flute?" And Lalitā said, "Just see, Kṛṣṇa! First you offend Rādhārāṇī, and now you accuse Her friends of thievery. You are such a rascal boy!" At this point, Kṛṣṇa came forward and started personally searching the gopīs for His flute, and they were saying, "Don't touch me, you rascal! Don't touch me!" Kṛṣṇa said, "I'm looking for my flute." So at this point, the gopīs started secretly handing the flute to one another so He couldn't find it. Maybe one gopī had it, and when He came to check her, she’d silently give it to a friend. Finally, one of the gopīs handed the flute to Śrī Rādhā right in front of Kṛṣṇa. So now Kṛṣṇa knew that Śrī Rādhā had the flute, and She just stood there smiling with Kṛṣṇa's flute in Her hand.

Now, because She is the chief of all the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa couldn't just go and start roughing Her up looking for the flute. So, to the joy of all the gopīs present, and to the joy of all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas—past, present, and future—Kṛṣṇa knelt down in front of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, took Her hand, and begged Her to give His flute back. In essence, this shows the power of pure, unadulterated love for Kṛṣṇa. It is so powerful that love can control the all-powerful Lord, or let us say Kṛṣṇa allows Himself to be controlled by the love of His devotees. Love reigns supreme, devotees, and that is where our hearts should be. This is the intimate, sweet love of Vraja, not to be found even in Vaikuṇṭha, the official kingdom of God.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda writes in *Lalita-mādhava* (10.38), where the gopīs are speaking. It's very sweet: "Dear Kṛṣṇa, the fragrance of the mellows of Your pastimes is spread throughout the forests of this glorious land of Vṛndāvana, which is surrounded by the sweetness of the district of Mathurā. In the congenial atmosphere of that wonderful land, You enjoy Your pastimes with Your flute dancing on Your lips and surrounded by us, the gopīs, whose hearts are always enchanted by unpredictable ecstatic emotions." All right, Kṛṣṇa, this is just nectar! Vṛndāvana—this is where we want to go. And by hearing—*śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam*—it brings Kṛṣṇa's presence, and by always being in association with the Lord through transcendental sound vibration, it is guaranteed that in due time our love for Kṛṣṇa will awaken. And when we leave this world, we will go where our heart takes us, and that will hopefully be Vṛndāvana.

So, dear devotees, I'd like to finish today with a verse from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā*, Chapter 21, Verse 144, as well as Śrīla Prabhupāda’s purport, because that's the way we understand everything in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Verse 144 says (and I quote): "The vibration of His flute is just like a bird that creates a nest within the ears of the gopīs and always remains prominent there, not allowing any other sound to enter their ears. Indeed, the gopīs cannot hear anything else, nor are they able to concentrate on anything else, not even to give a suitable reply. Such are the effects of the vibration of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s flute." 

And then Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, and this is very interesting: "The vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute is always prominent in the ears of the gopīs. Naturally," Prabhupāda writes, "they cannot hear anything else. Constant remembrance of the holy sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute keeps them enlightened and enlivened, and they do not allow any other sound to enter their ears. Since their attention is fixed on Kṛṣṇa’s flute, they cannot divert their minds to any other subject. In other words, a devotee who has heard the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute forgets to talk or hear of any other subject." Now, listen to the next thing Śrīla Prabhupāda says: "This vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute is represented by the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. A serious devotee of the Lord who chants and hears this transcendental sound vibration becomes so accustomed to it that he cannot divert his attention to any subject matter not related to Kṛṣṇa's blissful characteristics and paraphernalia." Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda! You know, we’re hearing in this class, in the previous class, and in future classes how the flute is so powerful—it attracts the devotees, it awakens their ecstatic love. And Prabhupāda said, "This vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute is represented by the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra."

The same effect will be there if we chant sincerely, follow Śrīla Prabhupāda’s instructions on how to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and if we distribute that chanting to the general public. This is the secret of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I’d like to thank all of you. I left Māyāpur—it was hard to leave Māyāpur—but I'm back in Vṛndāvana. I'm very happy to be here, at least for a few days. I'm going to America in a few days to do some programs here and there, but I can't stay away from Vṛndāvana too long, so I'll be back in three weeks. But we will continue with our lecture series on what stimulates us to love Kṛṣṇa—these different paraphernalia. Next Friday, I'll be somewhere on the East Coast of America, but we will discuss the mirrors—how the mirrors in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes stimulate us for eventual ecstatic love. Thank you. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! See you in a week. All glories.