Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone and a warm welcome back once again to our ever ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Bhakti, namaste. So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part 138 in which we'll continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's disguises. So many classes now on disguises. As I was going over some notes this morning in preparation for this lecture, I was thinking that these lectures we're giving about Vṛndāvana – almost 600 I think by now – are simply meant to gradually decrease our attachment to this world and increase our attachment to that transcendental abode of Vṛndāvana which we sometimes describe as the playground of God. Later I came across the following prayer by Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura that I feel perfectly describes that mood. He writes in his Prārthanā, song 29: "O Lord Hari, when will I reside in Vṛndāvana and behold the beauty of the divine couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? When will I give up the happiness of sleeping on a luxurious bed? And when will I smear my body with the dust of Vraja? When will I give up enjoying the six palatable foodstuffs? And when will I beg mādhukarī like a bee in Vraja just to maintain my body? When will I wander from forest to forest doing parikramā? And when tired, will I take rest on the banks of the Yamunā? I will cool myself down beneath the shade of vaṃśī and sit in the kuñja with other Vaiṣṇavas. Narottama Dāsa says, when will that day come that I will actually give up everything?" Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So today I would like to share yet another disguised pastime. This pastime, one of my favorite actually, is described by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his famous book called Śrī Prema-samputa. So one time Kṛṣṇa felt like testing Rādhārāṇī – not in the sense of trying to defeat her, but to see deeper within her heart how much love she has for him. So early one morning he did a very remarkable thing. This time he disguised himself as a demigoddess, a demigoddess from the heavenly planets. It's described with the crimson colored veil over his head, and he came into the courtyard at Yāvaṭa, where of course Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī lives. So when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī saw from the window in her room this very charming young woman, she said to her friend Lalitā, "O sakhī, Lalitā, look who is this beautiful young woman adorned with astonishing ornaments. Her radiance illuminates the whole courtyard. Our whole palace appears to be decorated with blue sapphires." So Lalitā, approaching the girl, asked, "Dear one, who are you and where have you come from? Is there any special reason you have come here?" But the young girl did not reply. So Lalitā asked the same questions again. But as before, the young girl wouldn't reply. Nevertheless, Lalitā Sakhī brought her into Rādhārāṇī's private chambers and there Rādhārāṇī herself asked, seeing her, "O beautiful one, who are you? It seems that you have appeared before us embodying the beauty of the entire world." But still this girl did not reply. So Rādhārāṇī continued, "Śyāme, please introduce yourself. There's no reason to be timid or reserved. Please understand that I consider you to be my intimate friend. Has your beloved perhaps abandoned you? Or did you find some fault in his character and therefore you left him? Actually, I think I know what happened. It must be that you are married and your family members are like mine. Perhaps they always surround you like Jaṭilā and Kutilā always surround and defame me, proclaiming my faults to everyone. Has this happened to you? Or is it that perhaps you have some disease and that's why you are so carefully covering your entire body?"

So when Kṛṣṇa disguised again as a heavenly demigoddess heard Rādhārāṇī speak in this way, a gentle smile appeared on his face and he said in a feminine voice: "O supremely beautiful Rādhā, I am actually from a higher planetary system. I came here because I have a certain doubt. Some time ago, a flute sound penetrated into our higher planetary system and it had a very powerful effect on everyone living there. So I decided to find out where this flute sound was coming from. Thus I followed the sound down here to the Earth planet and discovered it was coming from Vaṃśī Vaṭa in Vraja, from a handsome young boy playing it under a banyan tree. And closely observing for some time, I noticed that although he professes love for you, in fact he appears to love many young girls. My advice is that you leave him immediately." Important line: "My advice is that you leave him immediately." Now remember, Kṛṣṇa has taken this disguise and is speaking like this to test Rādhārāṇī's love for him. So what happened? Rādhārāṇī immediately jumped to Kṛṣṇa's defense and said, "No, I will never leave him. It is everyone's desire to serve him and love him. But our relationship is unique. My friends have noticed without envy that I am she who pleases him the most. So they happily engage in making arrangements for our pastimes together." So the demigoddess said, "But how can you be absolutely sure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's special love for you?" So Rādhārāṇī said, "The reason I am sure is that we are not two persons but rather we are one soul in two bodies." Now this we know as devotees to be true. Previously we have explained in detail how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa's pleasure potency, hlādinī-śakti. What's more, Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, chapter 4, verse 56 says: "Rādhā Kṛṣṇa ātmā diādi anonya vasa avadhāna kari" – quote: "Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are one and the same, but they have assumed two bodies; thus they enjoy each other." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Then Kṛṣṇa in the guise of a demigoddess smiled and with the perfect plan in mind he said, "Whether he is far away or close at hand, if your beloved, simply upon your remembering him, were to immediately appear here present before you, I would most happily witness it and become confident with the intimate knowledge of your oneness and love." So Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes that – and I'll quote him here – after hearing the demigoddess speak as she did, she closed her eyes and fell into a deep trance of meditation on the lord of her heart. She appeared like a powerful yoginī sitting in a trance of meditation, her senses totally restrained and observing complete silence like a yoginī. So taking this opportunity, Kṛṣṇa mystically and without anyone noticing abandoned his disguise dress as a demigoddess and suddenly embraced her, causing her to experience very deep ecstatic symptoms. Then opening her eyes, she saw her most beloved Kṛṣṇa had arrived. And at that moment Lalitā spoke up, saying – you know she's always protecting Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa – "What's going on here? What a surprise to see you all of a sudden. But know that only chaste ladies are eligible to enter these inner compartments. The wind god himself is incapable of suddenly and unexpectedly entering here. But we must praise your good fortune since the respectable lady of the house, Jaṭilā, is not home. Nor is that resentful husband Abhimanyu here either. The tides of fate are in your favor." I like that one: "The tides of fate are in your favor." So Kṛṣṇa said innocently, "But what fault is there on my part? I was simply playing in the courtyard of my father's gośālā when by chance I suddenly became overwhelmed with remembrance of Rādhikā. Immediately thereafter, it was as though some celestial being brought me here." And as Śrī Rādhā and all the gopīs smiled in appreciation, one girl said, "Oh, and what has happened to the beautiful demigoddess who was here amongst us?" Everyone was looking around. "Oh, what has happened to that beautiful demigoddess who was here amongst us?" The question was posed. But no one could answer that question. And Viśvanātha says, neither were they concerned, as they all enjoyed seeing the divine couple together once again against all odds. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now the final words of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his Śrī Prema-samputa are very touching. He writes: "In the year 6006 Śakābda, which is the Christian era 1703, during the month of Phālguna (February-March), this poem Śrī Prema-samputa became manifest to a certain soul while he was residing on the banks of Rādhākuṇḍa and Śyāmakuṇḍa, drinking and being nourished by the sweet nectar of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī's words." Hare Kṛṣṇa. We owe so much to him as well in so many different ways. Actually, we're forever indebted to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura for all the insights he has given us into Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa's loving pastimes of Vṛndāvana. I was reading he himself lived in various places throughout Vṛndāvana in his lifetime – Rādhākuṇḍa, Yāvaṭa, Grāma, etc. – as confirmed by various statements he made in his books. But like many preachers of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he often came up against opposition during his lifetime. I was studying his biography. On one occasion actually he had a public debate with scholars who would not accept Kṛṣṇa's loving relationships with the gopīs as the highest eternal expression of divine love. But by quoting from Vaiṣṇava scriptures, most notably Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, he defeated them. It's a long, interesting debate but we don't have time now. He defeated them. Unfortunately, upset at being defeated, some of his opponents actually took a vow to kill him. And one day, those evil-minded men armed with knives waited for Viśvanātha at a place in the forest that he regularly passed by while doing parikramā. But at the time they expected him to pass, instead of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura they saw a charming girl come by picking flowers. So the defeated scholars asked her, "Lalitā, did you see Viśvanātha come by this path?" She replied, "Oh yes, I saw him earlier but he seems to have disappeared." Now the girl's sublime radiance acted, it's described, to distract the men from their mission, and one of them asked, "Whose daughter are you anyway and where do you live?" So the girl replied, "Oh, I am Rādhā's maidservant. She is now at her in-laws' house in Yāvaṭa. She sent me here to pick some flowers for Kṛṣṇa." So as soon as she spoke those words, she disappeared, and in her place stood Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Wow. It is written that the influence of his personal presence in both his siddha and sādhaka forms transformed these scholars' hearts and they all fell at his feet and begged for his forgiveness. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Actually, there is the following saying in relationship to Viśvanātha Ṭhākura in relationship to three of his most famous books: Kiraṇa-bindu, Kaṇā, and Vaiṣṇava-panā. Quote: "These three books – Nīlamaṇi, Kiraṇa, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā – are accepted and used by the Vaiṣṇavas as their very wealth." As their very wealth. Wow. In this connection Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is glorified in the following verse, it's like poetry: "Because he has shown the viśva-vāsīs the residence of the material universe, the path of bhakti, he is called Viśvanātha, and because he is situated amongst the cakra circle of devotees, he is called Cakravartī." Wow. So prabhus, let us have faith that all we have shared today is true. It is absolute truth. And pray that one day we can, by Śrīla Prabhupāda's mercy, enter into such sublime pastimes. That must be our mood. Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura again writes in Prārthanā, song 17, and we'll finish: "I have heard from the mouths of pure devotees that by the mercy of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī one can attain the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. O my lord Śrīnivāsa Gosvāmī and the associates of Lord Gaurāṅga, all of you kindly fulfill my desires. Let the mercy of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī be upon me. For whoever has taken shelter of him is my master. When will Locana Dāsa Gosvāmī, my spiritual master, take me with him and place me at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa? When will it ever happen to me that the dear mañjarīs will chastise their servant Narottama?" Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So you know, we'll be back next Friday with more pastimes on disguises. Again, it's a central theme in Vraja-līlā, and it's so wonderful to be able to discover all these wonderful pastimes and share them with all of you by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda. Śrī Śrī Gaura Gītāya, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Gītāya, Śrī Vṛndāvana, Jaya, Śrīla Prabhupāda. Thank you. All right.