""Welcome back, once again, to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Dhāma. Excuse me, I still have my cold, so we are continuing with our mini-series on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 14. In our last lecture, we discussed the glories of the lotus flower in relating Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and I’d like to continue with the same theme today. Last Friday, we finished our lecture by sharing the poet Sūrdās’s *Kamal kī Chatrī*, wherein he wrote about an island of lotuses—you remember, an island of lotus flowers in the middle of the Yamunā River where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoyed very sweet loving pastimes. So, today, I’d like to begin by discussing not an island of lotuses, but an entire forest of lotuses—yes, a forest of lotuses in our beloved Dhāma.

It is the forest of Kumudavana. We touched on it briefly two years ago, but since then, we’ve discovered more nectar about this very unique forest of lotus flowers. It is actually mentioned in *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* (9.72), where it is said, "I offer my repeated obeisances to the delightful forest named Kumudavana that bestows a variety of joys, a variety of joys—obeisances to this forest decorated with various lilies and lotus flowers." Now, Kumudavana is also mentioned in *Śrī Mathurā-māhātmya*; it’s in chapter 11, verse 67, where it says, "Kṛṣṇa was tending cows and playing with His friends in Śrī Kumudavana in the afternoon," so it is mentioned there. Now, Śrīla Prabhupāda also mentions it in *Mathurā-māhātmya*, text 336, and therein he is quoting actually from the *Ādi-Varāha Purāṇa*. He writes, "The third forest is the transcendental Kumudavana. Oh Goddess, a person who goes there attains all success." So, again, he is quoting from the *Ādi-Varāha Purāṇa*. I also learned by researching that the Kumudavana forest is the smallest forest in all of Vṛndāvana. It must be pretty small; we’ve discussed many times that there are 12 main forests, and then there are sub-forests, and sub-sub-forests, and sub-sub *ad infinitum*, but the tiniest forest in all of Vṛndāvana is a forest of lotus flowers—actually, it has a circumference of only one kilometer.

Now, Kumudavana forest derives its name, obviously, from the lotus flowers there, but specifically, night-blooming lotuses grow there. It is unique for its night-blooming lotuses; they are called *kumuda* lotuses. The unique feature of the *kumuda* lotus is that it is closed in the daytime and it opens up at night when the moon appears. As the sun causes most flowers to open up in the daytime, moonlight causes the *kumuda* (the night-blooming lotus) to open at night. As a result, amongst many varieties of lotus flowers, the *kumuda* lotus is identified with the moon, so much so that it lends its name to moonlight, called *kaumudī* in Sanskrit. The moon is also sometimes referred to as *kumuda-bandhu*, which means "Kumuda’s friend"—the friend of the lotus. Generally, *kumudī* flowers in Kumudavana are described as white-colored. These night-blooming lotuses are white-colored, so much so that many poets say that a white swan hiding amongst the clusters of white *kumuda* flowers in a lake at Kumudavana can be perceived only by its song, because the white swans look so much like the *kumuda* flowers, you can’t tell the difference; it can only be perceived when it sings. Poets also describe the white *kumudas* as the "smile of autumn" as well as the "complexion of Lord Balarāma." So, these night-blooming lotuses are very special.

Now, again, these flowers only bloom at night, and so when dawn arrives with the rising of the sun, the *kumuda* flowers close up, and thus it is said no one can appreciate their beauty anymore. Now, I found a famous poet, his name is Bhaṭṭi, and in his poetry, he sympathizes with the disappearance of these special lotus flowers at dawn. In one of his poems, it’s very beautiful; he writes: "As day broke, a tree on the riverbank shed drops of clear water from the tips of its leaves. It resonated with bird songs and seemed to weep for the *kumuda* with tears formed from the night’s dew." I’ll recite that again: "As day broke, a tree on the riverbank shed drops of clear water from the tips of its leaves. It resonated with bird songs and seemed to weep for the *kumuda* with tears formed from the night’s dew," lamenting because you can’t see this beautiful flower well when it’s closed up in the daytime. 

Now, the Vraja-gopīs also referred to these *kumuda* flowers when they asked Uddhava, who was visiting them after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, whether Kṛṣṇa remembered their pastimes amongst the *kumudas*—amongst the lotus flowers. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (10.47.43), they said, "Does Kṛṣṇa recall those nights in the Vṛndāvana forests lovely with *kumuda* lotuses, jasmine, and the bright moon, as we glorified His charming pastimes? He enjoyed with us, His beloved girlfriends, in the circle of the rasa dance which resounded with the music of ankle bells." So, they referred to the *kumuda*. Though not visible now, *śāstra* says that the Yamunā River once flowed through Kumudavana in a winding course, nourishing the *kumuda* lotuses that flourished there.

So now, we’ll share a pastime described by a devotee, a Vaiṣṇava poet named Nandadās, who I could just say poetically penned a number of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes using the analogy of the lotus. Now, Nandadās was a medieval poet who used to live at the base of Govardhana Hill, and actually, he served as the *pūjārī* for the Gopāla deity that was discovered by Mādhavendra Purī, a special personality. And I was reading in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, he wrote hundreds of poems; in his book *Nandadās kī Pad*, we find the following pastime called *Nīta Viraja ko Pad*. It is still sung, because pastimes are sung in Vraja; it is still sung in Nathdwara in Udaipur, Rajasthan, where the deity of Gopāla is now being served—of course, nowadays He is known as Śrīnāthajī, but originally, when Mādhavendra Purī found Him, He was called Gopāla. It’s a pastime about the feelings of separation between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

Now, I must say it’s quite deep, but with Śrīla Prabhupāda’s direction, we can discuss it. Prabhupāda himself said the same in a Rādhāṣṭamī lecture he gave in London on September 18, 1969—I heard it the other night. Therein, he said, "These are, of course, very transcendental topics. It is a great science. Only one who is advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and well-conversant with the *śāstras* can understand such things. But still, we can discuss from the *śāstras*." When Kṛṣṇa wanted to understand Himself, Prabhupāda went on, He adopted the tendency—he uses the word "tendency"—of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu, *Rādhā-dyuti*. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa, but He has accepted the propensities of Rādhārāṇī. As Rādhārāṇī is always feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, similarly, in the position of Rādhārāṇī, Lord Caitanya was feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. That is the teaching of Lord Caitanya: feelings of separation, not meeting. The process of devotional service taught by Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His disciplic succession is how to feel separation from Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda continues, "And that is Rādhārāṇī’s position: always feeling that separation." So, yes, deep subject matters, but we see here even in the very beginning of the movement, Prabhupāda was preparing us, setting the foundation so that we can go on, and hopefully, by His mercy, one day understand these things. And we understand them by discussing them.

So, our poet Nandadās writes that when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were young, Mother Paurnamasi was always making special arrangements for their meeting. And when that was set up, she would send messengers with messages to inform Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa about the meetings. Something really interesting: I was reading that she actually had—it is described—an army of messengers. Paurnamasi has an army of messengers to send messages between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Very interesting. Messengers amongst them are parrots, pigeons, white eagles, female monkeys, *mañjarīs*, *dūtīkās*—*dūtīkā* is like female attendants, meaning the best friends of the Gopīs. They also take messages and other *catur-dūtīs*, meaning servants of the Gopīs. And then *dāsīs*, that’s described as servants of the servants of the Gopīs. Then there’s Vṛndā Devī who takes messages. And then it’s very nice: another group of messengers are the stars in the sky above Vraja; they act as messengers. The stars in the sky above Vraja somehow take messages. And last but not least, the lotuses of Vraja, they also act as messengers, and we’ll see how. 

So in this pastime, the poet Nandadās says one day Lalitā-sakhī said to Rādhā, "My dear Rādhā, by the arrangement of Paurnamasi, a meeting has been arranged for you with Kṛṣṇa in a beautiful forested area of Vraja down by the Yamunā River." But Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said, "Oh Lalitā, no, no, I am a pious girl; I cannot go to meet Him under these circumstances." Then Rādhā paused and said, "Yet, at the same time, I want very much to meet Him." So Lalitā said, "My dear Rādhā, your words appear contradictory. Will you go or not go? You have to make up your mind. Will you go or will you not go?" So then Rādhā replied, "My dear Lalitā-sakhī, you do not understand—this is so beautiful—you do not understand the language of love. It is so complicated. In love, saying 'no' is a 'yes,' night is daylight, losing a game is winning, and the thorns of Vraja are the lotuses of pleasure. This is a market of *rasa*; one who enters it gets stuck life after life. In love language, crying means laughing, insulting means showing respect, giving is receiving, and speaking is remaining silent. Oh Lalitā, love of Kṛṣṇa is the cooling sun, frozen ice, and the bright night of pain and separation. What can I say that could be analyzed by pure devotees of the Lord?" You know, for hours and days and weeks and months, it’s so nice. Then Lalitā smiled, and with tears in her eyes, she said, "Śrī Rādhā, I understand. So, let me take you to a *kuñja* on the banks of the Yamunā River where Kṛṣṇa is sitting and playing His flute, where a cool breeze removes the heat of separation and makes everyone dance in ecstasy." We sometimes say that in the spiritual world, if we step, it’s a dance; every word is a song, and it’s a festival every day. So, hearing these conversations, a word is like a song. 

So, Śrī Rādhā agreed, and she walked with Lalitā for some time, and eventually they came to a *ghāṭa* on the banks of the Yamunā River where they could see Kṛṣṇa playing His flute some distance away in a *kuñja* also on the banks of the Yamunā River. But instead of proceeding, Śrī Rādhā was just mesmerized by this beautiful *darśana* of Kṛṣṇa from a distance, so she couldn’t move any further. Then, looking up and seeing Śrī Rādhā gazing at Him from far away, Kṛṣṇa, He took the hand of Madhumaṅgala. And the poet says Kṛṣṇa said to Madhumaṅgala, "Please consider a way that I can send a message from My heart to the heart of Śrī Rādhā." So Madhumaṅgala, who we often know who’s described as a funny brāhmaṇa boy, but actually he’s very dear, very dear to Kṛṣṇa—he’s one of those special cowherd boys who actually takes messages between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa himself, so he has a very deep relationship with Kṛṣṇa. So Madhumaṅgala, he thought for a moment, then he stood up and he went down to the nearby Yamunā River where he picked a thousand-petaled lotus flower. When I read that, I was like, "Wow, in the Yamunā River, a thousand-petaled lotus flower!" It’s called *sahasra-dala-kamala*. And when he came back, somehow he presented this thousand-petaled lotus flower to Kṛṣṇa. 

So, Kṛṣṇa then proceeded to write messages on each one of the thousand petals of the lotus. The ink He used was from bees who drank the nectar of sweet lotuses, and He wrote with a quill—I don’t want to say "pen"—He wrote with a quill made of one of Kāmadeva’s arrows, upon which was stamped the moon as a seal. Then, Kṛṣṇa stood up, went to the Yamunā, and very carefully placed this letter on the flowing waves of the river, where this message... we heard how lotus flowers can be messengers, so here’s a thousand messages on a thousand-petaled flower. This message, this lotus flower, it floated down and reached the *ghāṭa* where Śrī Rādhā was sitting with Lalitā and several other Gopīs. One of those Gopīs who had come was Viśākhā-sakhī, and when Viśākhā-sakhī saw the thousand-petaled lotus, she went and retrieved it and brought it to Śrī Rādhā. Looking deep into this science of sending messages, and in a very excited mood, Śrī Rādhā then read every word of the entire thousand-petaled lotus a thousand times. She read every word of the entire thousand-petaled lotus a thousand times! And when she finished, she turned to her friends and she said—I mean, famously I’d like to say—"May the sound of these words filled with love and devotion resonate here in Śrī Vṛndāvana forever and forevermore." May the sound of these words filled with love and devotion resonate here in Śrī Vṛndāvana forever and forevermore. 

So, the poet Nandadās says, "One who sits on the bank of the Yamunā in the moonlight, full of devotion and love, can hear the Yamunā reverberate with the sound of the words of *Līlā-ambuja*, the lotus of divine pastimes." That lotus flower floated down and sent this message. So, he’s saying, "One who sits on the bank of the Yamunā in the moonlight, full of devotion and love, can hear the Yamunā reverberate with the sound of the words of what *Līlā-ambuja*, the lotus of divine pastimes, which spreads the message of love to one and all forever and forevermore." So, our gratitude to that poet whose words and realizations have hopefully brought us closer to the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Śrī Vṛndāvana. 

So, one more lotus pastime. I found this in my godbrother Śivarāma Svāmī’s *Nava Vraja Mahimā*, the book that he wrote, a pastime which he retold from the *Saṅgīta-mādhava*, chapter 8, by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the beautiful lotus pastime. One time, he describes: anticipating where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī would bathe in the Yamunā, Kṛṣṇa hid Himself within a cluster of blue lotus flowers in the river and waited until Rādhārāṇī and her friends arrived at a nearby bathing *ghāṭa*. So, soon enough—He’s arranging this pastime again—Rādhā and the Gopīs arrived and entered the water. It’s described joking and splashing and, oh yeah, of course, talking about Kṛṣṇa—that’s all they talk about: "When, when will that day be ours?" But when Śrī Rādhā swam straight into the deeper water of the Yamunā near a cluster of blue lotuses, she soon got the scare of her life. She was swimming very peacefully, her mind absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa, when—the *cāritra* says—suddenly a cluster of blue lotuses in front of her exploded with a roar and completely covered her with water, lotus leaves, and foam. So, she was startled, and she thought, "What is this? A demon? A crocodile? Or what?" So, she screamed for help. But as soon as things calmed down, she saw Kṛṣṇa floating in the water very nearby, smiling and laughing at the joke He just played on her. 

But it’s said that for Rādhā, this was no joking matter, according to Cakravartī Ṭhākura; this was no joking matter. And so, her fear turned into *māna*—again, the theme of *māna* so prevalent in Vraja-līlā—her fear turned into anger. So, she immediately turned her back on Kṛṣṇa, waded out of the water, and ran into the forest, followed by her equally upset friends. It’s said. So, now Kṛṣṇa was left alone, standing in shoulder-deep water in the Yamunā, and very disappointed that Śrī Rādhā had taken the joke so personally. So, Kṛṣṇa waded back to the shore, He sat down on the riverbank, and feeling completely dejected, He was wondering once again how He could pacify Śrī Rādhā’s *māna*, her anger. Now, we often hear Rādhā’s anger is never easy to appease; love is complicated. We heard earlier. Of course, we should be very careful not to think of her anger in a material way. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Ādi-līlā* 4.197, explains: "Quote: When the border of her sarī and the cloth veiling her face are caught by Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhārāṇī externally appears offended and angry, but within her heart she was very happy." Learning scholars call this attitude... 

Svāmī also writes in his *Dāna-keli-kaumudī*, verse number two, and it’s also quoted in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Ādi-līlā* 4, verse 131, about Rādhārāṇī’s love for Kṛṣṇa; it’s very, very special. So, I thought I’d quote this verse as well: "All glories to Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of the demon Mura. Although it is all-pervading, it tends to increase at every moment; although it is important, it is devoid of pride; and although it is pure, it is always beset with duplicity." That’s a very famous statement or verse about Rādhā’s love. You know, she has *mahā-bhāva*. We know that she has the purest, most intense love for Kṛṣṇa. Only three personalities have that: Śrī Rādhā, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and Mādhavendra Purī. We’ll only forever be servants of that divine love, and rightfully so. To be the servant of something great is itself something great; to be the servant of a glorious master is the highest position we can attain, and happily so. So, her love: "All glories to Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of the demon Mura. Although it is all-pervading, it tends to increase at every moment; although it is important, it is devoid of pride; and although it is pure, it is always beset with duplicity." So, sometimes that anger or that love manifests as anger, and Kṛṣṇa comes and He says He’s sorry and they make up. So, separation, then meeting—the separation, the meeting, separation, meeting—in this way, it’s the nectarean ocean of devotion; the *bhakti-rasāmṛta* meets us into churning with these loving sentiments. 

So, Kṛṣṇa was sitting, absorbed in thought now, how to pacify Śrī Rādhā, when suddenly Śrīmatī Vṛndā Devī just happened to walk by with a number of her helpers who were carrying a variety—it’s described—of clothes and ornaments on their way to a forest storehouse. We’ve discussed many times, Vṛndā Devī, she facilitates, she’s helping Paurnamasi, so they have to facilitate pastimes to have storehouses of different items around Vṛndāvana to facilitate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; they can go to the storehouse and get whatever is required for a particular pastime. So, on this particular day, Vṛndā Devī and her helpers, they were carrying a variety of clothes and ornaments on their way to a forest storehouse. 

The *ācāryas* say that Kṛṣṇa smiled and thought, "This, this, this must be the hand of fate!" So, approaching Vṛndā Devī, He described His predicament and said, "Oh Devī, please help Me regain Śrī Rādhā’s favor." So, Vṛndā Devī smiled, and quickly she came up with a solution. And what was that? Well, with the clothes her servants were carrying, she and her helpers dressed Kṛṣṇa up as a beautiful young girl—a tactic we know that Kṛṣṇa often employs to be able to approach Śrī Rādhā in her *māna*. So, satisfied with this disguise, Vṛndā Devī said, "Kṛṣṇa, You know what to do now," because He does it so often. "Kṛṣṇa, You know what to do now." Of course, these pastimes are repeated in a variety of ways, but one special nature of Vṛndāvana-līlā is that although the pastime may be enacted again and again, it always seems like the first time. And that’s a nice definition of "ever-fresh." Sometimes, the poets describe Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes as "ever-fresh," in what way? That although it’s done many times, each time the pastime is enacted—Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā, the Gopīs, or Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and the cowherd boys, or whatever—it’s always like the first time. All glories to Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma! 

So, she said, "Kṛṣṇa, You know what to do now." So, Kṛṣṇa followed the Gopīs' footprints, Rādhā and her friends, deep into the forest, right up to the entrance of a grove where Rādhārāṇī was surrounded by Gopīs. And what was she doing? She was complaining to her friends about Kṛṣṇa’s trick in the Yamunā. Suddenly, she looked up and saw this new Gopī standing very nearby. But the nature of the *līlā*... for the *māyā*-rāṇī, she couldn’t recognize that it was Kṛṣṇa. And though disguised, Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness and beauty enchanted Rādhārāṇī and completely bewildered her mind; she suddenly felt a surge of affection for this new dark-complexioned girl and at once invited her in. Rādhārāṇī said, "Oh moon-faced one, who are you? You are so sweet and beautiful, please become my very dear friend. Oh my gosh, please become my very dear friend." And as Kṛṣṇa enters the grove, Rādhārāṇī noticed His—or let’s say, her—this Gopī’s hesitation and said, "Oh friend, you seem to be trembling with fear. I wonder, is this because you know that Kṛṣṇa lays in wait for you somewhere? Is this why you’re hesitant? You have... you’re trembling with fear because out there Kṛṣṇa is looking for you?" So then, Rādhārāṇī reached out and took hold of this Gopī’s—Kṛṣṇa’s—wrist, and as soon as she did so, it’s said that she felt exhilarated, words stuck in her throat, and her limbs went stiff. And as soon as that happened, all of her friends who were, of course, attending to her, they understood who this new Gopī actually was, and they all smiled in approval. And seeing her girlfriends’ favorable reactions, Rādhārāṇī then smiled and had no choice but to give up her *māna*, her anger, and spend the rest of the afternoon in Kṛṣṇa’s blissful association. Hare Kṛṣṇa! Two wonderful pastimes today which we can begin to appreciate with Prabhupāda’s mercy.

So today, I’d like to conclude with a very beautiful verse from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 25.274. It’s short but sweet, and I quote: "Devotional service to Kṛṣṇa is exactly like a pleasing, jubilant forest—a forest of lotus flowers wherein there is ample honey. I request everyone to taste this honey. If all the mental speculators bring the bees with their minds into this forest of lotus flowers and jubilantly enjoy ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa day and night, their mental speculation would be completely transcendentally satisfied." All glories to *Kaumudī* Kṛṣṇa! Thank you, Prabhus. I’ll finish there, and I think we’ve exhausted our research on flowers, although there must be an infinite amount of knowledge on flowers and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; that’s as far as I can go. And we’ll take up a new subject for "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," a new item. I was thinking of doing the birds of Vṛndāvana, the birds of Vṛndāvana. 

So, we’ll do some research this week. Actually, in a few days, I’m going up to Rishikesh with 80 devotees—80 devotees—we’re going to be holding our Rishikesh Kīrtan Fest, like we did some years ago, just before Covid started. It was very, very successful. I’ve rented an āśrama, lots of rooms for the devotees, it has an auditorium, it’s a big kitchen, and there’s *sādhus* who live there; they’re very favorable to us. They actually encourage us to come back, and we’re going to go and harināma them every day, give out invitations, and we’re going to invite especially the Westerners, the people who are interested in yoga who come in great, great numbers, by thousands actually at this time of year, to inquire, "What is yoga?" And we’re going to be there teaching them what is *bhakti-yoga* as given by Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrīla Prabhupāda, which means chanting, dancing, and feasting with some Harikathā. Share some Kṛṣṇa consciousness with all of them in the hopes that after their visit to this *tīrtha*, this very important place, Rishikesh, they’ll have the good fortune to come to Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma and wander in this Dhāma of the Lord and learn about loving pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and come to our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, visit Śrīla Prabhupāda’s samādhi, and in the association of our ISKCON devotees, begin their path back home, back to the spiritual world. But still, I’ll be there for three weeks; I’ll somehow maintain these weekly lectures for all of you, and for me. All glories to the revealer of the Dhāma, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara! Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa."