

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Namaḥ oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. On the banks of the sacred mother Ganges, we have a couple more weeks of our festival program going, and it is going very nicely by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s grace.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 16. We will be continuing with the theme of birds in the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. In fact, we will discuss two kinds of Vṛndāvana birds this time: the famous Cātaka bird and the equally famous Cakora bird. They can be a great stimulus for awakening our love for Kṛṣṇa, so we should listen very attentively.

Śrīla Prabhupāda identifies two kinds of hearers of Kṛṣṇa-kathā: superior and inferior. In other words, those who hear for the purpose of awakening their love for the divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and those who hear simply for entertainment. The superior hearers are called pravara, and they are likened to Cātaka birds, swans, parrots, and fish. Whereas the inferior hearers are called avara, and they are likened to wolves, crows, bulls, and camels, who get no real, tangible benefit from hearing Kṛṣṇa-kathā, the glories of Kṛṣṇa.

Now, regarding the superior hearers likened to Cātaka birds, swans, parrots, and fish: it is said that a devotee who takes a vow to hear only Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is like the thirsty Cātaka bird who drinks only pure rainwater as it falls directly from a cloud. One who listens to a variety of scriptures but selects the essence of what he has heard—Kṛṣṇa-kathā—is like a swan that extracts milk when mixed with water. One who hears nicely and then repeats that knowledge well delights his guru as well as other listeners and is likened to a well-trained parrot, which pleases both its trainer and bystanders. And then finally, there is the silent listener who neither blinks nor speaks but admires with affection the excellence of what he hears; he is compared to a glossy fish swimming in the ocean of milk. I like that one—he is compared to a glossy fish swimming in the ocean of milk.

As we can imagine, there are many different kinds of birds in Vṛndāvana. Therefore, I was reading that Vṛndāvana is sometimes referred to as Bahuraṅgī-vana; it means literally the “forest of colors,” where various types of colorful birds reside. We mentioned in a recent class that the birds of Vṛndāvana are not ordinary birds, but rather divine personalities who live in Vraja and sing about the pastimes of the Lord for the pleasure of the Lord and all His devotees.

Kṛṣṇa is known as Bhāṣavit; Bhāṣavit means “the knower of all languages.” The language of humans, demigods, aquatic creatures, and even birds are all known by Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, it is said that when Kṛṣṇa places His flute to call the residents of Vṛndāvana, the language of His flute is understood differently by the various creatures of Braj. In other words, they understand Kṛṣṇa’s flute-playing in their own languages. The result of that is that cows think Kṛṣṇa is calling them when He plays His flute; gopīs think that Kṛṣṇa is calling their names; and deer, for example, think Kṛṣṇa is calling them only. But—and this is really interesting—when the birds of Vṛndāvana hear Kṛṣṇa’s flute song, the ācāryas say they think that Kṛṣṇa is competing with them in their ability to sing in higher notes.

The poet Govinda-dāsa refers to this competition in one of his poems. He writes: “Oh friend, just look! All the birds in Braj are singing a concert of competition of higher notes.” It is very poetic: a concert of competition of higher notes. Thus, the whole of Braj has become filled with intoxicating and pleasing musical sounds which reverberate thousands of times throughout the beautiful forest of Braj and fill the hearts of everyone with ecstasy. Countless birds on one side and Kṛṣṇa’s flute on the other side fill the hearts of the Vrajavāsīs with love. He says, “I see the Gandharvas, Apsarās, and the goddess of music bowing down to the lotus feet of those divine birds and the deer flute of Kṛṣṇa.” Thank you, Govinda-dāsa.

This is essentially how one can meditate on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, where everything is meant to stimulate love for the Lord and His eternal consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Now, we mentioned the Cātaka bird, who is famous for only drinking pure water that falls from rain clouds. Specifically, this Cātaka bird drinks water only when it rains during the moon’s transit in Svāti nakṣatra. On a morning walk on June 10th, 1975, in Honolulu, Hawaii, Prabhupāda said, “There is a bird called Cātaka that drinks only rainwater. Similarly, devotees simply depend on Kṛṣṇa; they don’t accept anything from this material world.” A nice comparison.

Now, there is a very beautiful pastime which is described by one of my favorite poets, Lalit Kishor, who is a famous Vaiṣṇava poet. It is known as Garva-garvita, which translates as “the pride of the proud,” and it concerns such a Cātaka. Once, Kṛṣṇa was sitting in a kuñja with Śrī Rādhē in the evening, and Śrī Rādhā said, “O Kṛṣṇa, please play your magical flute, which fills my ears with your beautiful words and music.” Kṛṣṇa smiled at Śrī Rādhikā and He started playing a very beautiful rāga—a rāga means a certain special melody according to that particular time of the day, which brings out the mood for loving pastimes.

But when Śrī Rādhā heard the fifth note of that rāga, she suddenly became very upset and angry, and she got up from her seat. Kṛṣṇa immediately stopped playing the rāga, and taking Śrī Rādhā’s hand, He asked, “Dearest Rādhē, what happened? Why are you upset?” Śrī Rādhā said, “Kṛṣṇa, my gopīs are correct; they always tell me I should not trust you, but I am very naive because I don’t understand your tricks.” Kṛṣṇa looked confused, so Rādhā continued: “Kṛṣṇa, you are a very clever boy, for you are playing your flute to please two gopīs—me and my competitor, Candrāvalī—for the rāga you are playing is called Candra-kōns; it means literally the rāga of Candra, the moon, or Candrāvalī, according to Śrī Rādhā.” She said, “I am going home to my palace. I’ll leave you with your rāga and your dearest Candrāvalī.” And with that, Śrī Rādhā walked out of the kuñja.

Now Kṛṣṇa, whose heart—it is described—had reached the peak of love for Śrī Rādhā by playing His flute in her service, had His heart broken, so He broke down sobbing. At that moment—Paurṇamāsī arranges all these pastimes—Vṛndā Devī, her assistant, came by and saw Kṛṣṇa crying. So concerned, she asked, “Kṛṣṇa, my dear Kṛṣṇa, my heart is breaking into pieces seeing you shed such precious tears.” She described them like that: precious tears. “These tears cause distress in the heart of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Lord Śiva. Please calm down for a moment and tell me the reason for your crying.”

Kṛṣṇa—it is described with His eyebrows bent in pain (imagine that, His eyebrows bent in pain) and with red eyes filled with tears—said in a sobbing voice, “Oh my dear Vṛndā Devī, please save me from a black serpent that came and bit me with its poisonous tongue. Soon I may not be able to meet Śrī Rādhā, the life-air of my existence.”

She said, “But Kṛṣṇa, I don’t see a black serpent here.”

Kṛṣṇa said, “Yes, it is here, but it is not an ordinary serpent. It is not visible to the naked eye, but the symptoms of its poisonous bite are visible. This serpent of separation—there is the clue—this serpent of separation comes without any physical form but causes symptoms such as crying, shivering, distress, which are proof of its poisonous bite of separation from one’s beloved. Oh Vṛndā Devī, please save me, please save me!”

Vṛndā Devī understood the whole scenario and said, “Oh Kṛṣṇa, do not worry; please be peaceful. I will now give you medicinal herbs by which this poisonous separation in your body will go away and never come back again.”

Vṛndā Devī called one of her Cātaka birds by clapping her hands five times. A beautiful Cātaka bird appeared in front of Vṛndā Devī. She quickly wrote a letter which she then placed in a golden casket, shot on a golden chain, and tied the chain around the neck of her Cātaka bird. The Cātaka messenger flew to the palace of Śrī Rādhā and sat on the throne of Śrī Rādhā. When Śrī Rādhā saw the bird, she opened up the casket and started reading the letter.

The letter read as follows—it is so nice: “Oh goddess of all goddesses in the universe, please accept my respects. This is of course Vṛndā Devī writing. You are the queen of Braja-dhāma, and our only shelter. Here is one soul who is surviving on his life-air, and you are his life-air. His love for you is like the love of this Cātaka bird in front of you, who always lives near ponds and lakes but never drinks water from them. Always dances in the rain but never, ever drinks a single drop of rainwater until the first drop falls to the earth during the Svāti nakṣatra. He chooses to die from thirst but never drinks any water from other sources. Similarly, your Kṛṣṇa—dear Kṛṣṇa—lives in the company of gopīs, dances in the rāsa dance with different gopīs, but never feels the same pleasure with other gopīs as he feels with you. Oh my dear queen, now he is dying of thirst from your separation. Please come back with this Cātaka bird and quench his thirst with your mercy, which is like the first drop of water during the Svāti nakṣatra falling into the mouth of a Cātaka bird.”

The poet Lalit Kishor says, “Oh my dear Ṭhākurāṇī, I beg you to help me meet your life-air, and so Kṛṣṇa, who loves you more than he loves any other gopī.” Thank you, Lalit Kishor. Again, we use many of your poems in our lectures; one day we hope to meet you.

So, in Prema-bhakti-candrikā, we hear: “Just as a fish out of water feels great distress and dies, similarly the devotee feels distressed without love of God. As a Cātaka bird drinks only rainwater, similarly unalloyed devotees relish only love of God.”

In verse 167, we hear: “Like the distressed crying of the Cātaka birds on a cloudless day of the rainy season, or the lamenting of a flock of Cakravāka birds when parted from their husbands at night, the saṅkīrtana of the Lord’s names arises when one is burdened by too much pain.”

Wow, and Rūpa Gosvāmī’s another drop of nectar: “Oh Cātaka, seeing the dark body of Kṛṣṇa, don’t run towards him by falsely thinking him to be a rain cloud. You will not find any water there; and instead, he will make you cry out in separation from your eyes.”

And finally today—because I have a lot of service to do here at the Rishikesh kīrtan nest; again, we are getting like four or five hundred people a night—finally, there is the Cakora bird. I have heard this word often because many times parents, they name their daughters Cakora. So we have the Cakora bird. The characteristic of the Cakora bird is that they love moonlight. The closer the Cakora bird can fly to the full moon, the more it relishes the night. And as soon as the moon is visible in the dark sky, the Cakora bird dances in happiness. Therefore, this bird is often used when describing the nature of the gopīs. They like to fly in the moonlight because as soon as the moon rises in the dark sky, all the Vraja-gopīs dance in happiness because soon they know they will meet Kṛṣṇa for a rāsa dance. That’s a wonderful comparison, so poetic.

So, we will finish today with some verses about the Cakora bird. We heard some verses about the Cātaka bird, and then we will hear finally this beautiful Cakora bird. First one, from Gopāla-campū: “Separated from Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā and her gopī friends look like those terrified of a forest fire; Cakora birds unable to gaze at the moon; new vines ripped from their trees; Śapharī fish out of water; or new lotus flowers uprooted from a lake.”

Next, Prema-bhakti-candrikā, song 7, stanza 3: “As a bumblebee yearns for lotus flowers, as the Cakora bird yearns for moonlight, as a chaste wife yearns for her husband, and a pauper yearns for money, a devotee yearns to attain love for the divine couple.” This is the way of love. This is the way of love.

And finally, a verse connected to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Yuga-avatāra Caitanya, verse 107 by Sārasvatī: “Gracefully dancing, spotless, free from all impurities and crookedness, showering the nectar of pure love of Kṛṣṇa which extinguishes the threefold sufferings of all living entities—His splendid effulgence tasted by the Cakora birds of the devotees’ hearts, and now risen from the milk ocean of Śacī’s womb, the moon of Lord Gaurāṅgacandra splendidly shines in this world.”

So, that is all for today. We will get one more class out of these amazing birds of Vṛndāvana next Friday. I was studying late into the night and came across a lot of information, so I figured we will get two classes here. But you must excuse me; back to the nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana here on the banks of the Ganges in Rishikesh. We have rented an ashram as I mentioned, and hundreds of people coming every night. We are the most popular thing happening in Rishikesh right now, and people love it! I just love when people come for the first time; I see them chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa for the first time, their eyes light up, they sit up, they smile. And within a very short time, we have some of the best kīrtaniyas, and it is gone; they are dancing in ecstasy! So satisfying to the heart, the mission of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

So, back to my duties here; I will be back in a week with all of you. Thank you so much for this opportunity. All the wonderful birds of Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana-īśvarī, the mercy He gave, back home, back to Godhead. Okay, Hare Kṛṣṇa.
