Hi Krishna, everyone!

Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Namaste!

I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who is an ocean of compassion. Just a fraction of his mercy is enough to liberate even the most fallen person. So, we're continuing with our miniseries today on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 92.

The other day, one devotee asked me how the figure 92, previous class, properly represents a miniseries. I replied, well, in the beginning, we thought we would only be able to discuss the actual items listed in chapter 26 of *Nectar of Devotion*, which act as stimuli for awakening ecstatic love for Krishna.

But the list kept getting bigger and bigger. And upon rereading Śrīla Prabhupāda's introduction to that chapter, I realized that the list he gave was really only a summary of such items, for he writes, "He begins, 'Some things which give impetus or stimulation to ecstatic love of Krishna are his transcendental qualities, his uncommon activities, his smiling features, his apparel, garlands, his flute, etc., etc.'" So, he just said *some* of the things.

In our research, we found other items to discuss. With the onset of COVID three or four years ago, we have given close to 400 lectures altogether. So, 90 lectures could possibly be considered a miniseries, and now 92. And of course, all the lectures are on the website, Vṛndāvana glories, Vṛndāvana glories.io.

The many benefits of worshiping Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī. Just this morning, I came across one such amazing benefit which is mentioned in *Haribhakti Vilāsa* 9.167. It's actually quoting Bhagavan Narada Muni, and the verse reads, "Now, listen as I describe the piety of a person who makes a fence out of wood, thorns, bushes, or any suitable material for enclosing Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī.

Oh King, for as many days as that fence remains, the person who built it will reside in Brahmaloka along with three generations of his family. A person who builds a protective wall around Tulasī Devī will attain the liberation of having the same bodily features as that of Lord Viṣṇu, along with three generations of his family." Actually, most importantly, the scriptures are full of pastimes that reveal the potency of Tulasī Devī in awakening loving devotion for the Lord within our hearts. *Bhakti*, for example, our main scripture, the *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam*, talks about the pastime of the four Kumāras, the sons of Lord Brahmā, who were, uh, very much attached to the impersonal aspects of Godhead.

But when they met the Lord at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha, they became pure devotees of Krishna simply by smelling the fragrance of Tulasī leaves that were on the lotus feet of the Lord.

The exact verse is *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam* 3.15.43. It says, "When the breeze carrying the aroma of Tulasī leaves from the toes of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead entered the nostrils of those sages, they experienced a change both in body and in mind, even though they were attached to the impersonal Brahman." Understanding.

Now, in the purport, Prabhupāda goes a little deeper.

He writes, "It appears from this verse that the four Kumāras were impersonalists or protagonists of the philosophy of monism, becoming one with the Lord. But because of the fragrance of His lotus feet, carried by the air and mixed with the aroma of Tulasī, their minds changed, and instead of becoming one with the Supreme Lord, they thought it wise to be devotees." Prabhupāda concludes, "Being a servitor of the lotus feet of the Lord is better than becoming one with the Lord." Hare Krishna!

Now, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very much disturbed to see the, the spread of irreligion in Navadvīpa, Bengal. So we know this pastime. He decided to call for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Krishna, asking Him to descend into this world.

And how did he do it?

He worshiped the Lord with Tulasī leaves and the water of the Gaṅgā, and pleased by his devotion, Krishna descended as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Also, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, the great devotee Haridāsa Ṭhākura delivered a prostitute who had come to him with the intention of seducing him, with instructions to chant the holy names and worship Tulasī. And she became so elevated by this service that even great Vaiṣṇavas would come to get her mercy.

Actually. So now, I would like to recite a prayer dedicated to Tulasī by, uh, the poet Govindadāsa Kavirāja. He was one of the famous poets in the line of Vallabhācārya. He wrote very beautifully: "I bow down to the goddess Tulasī, who resides in the vines and branches of Vṛndāvana.

She dances with the wind and sings with the flowing Yamunā. The red bangles on her white wrists attract Cupid. Her blouse is embroidered with fresh rose petals, and her sări is made with intertwined fresh leaves of revati. She walks with the gliding movement of a snake, which attracts the vanadevis, or forest goddesses of Vṛndāvana.

She empowers the devotees of Gaurāṅga. Govinda begs for her mercy with folded hands." Hare Krishna!

Thank you, Govinda Kavirāja. So, in our first lecture, we discussed in detail how Tulasī cursed Lord Viṣṇu. Remember, it's a pastime, to become a stone, and the subsequent benedictions the Lord gave her, which eventually resulted in the famous marriage of Tulasī and Śālagrāma-śilā, which we'll discuss a little later on in this lecture.

The benedictions were, in part, he said to her, "My dear one, you will be the presiding deity of the Tulasī plant here on Earth, and at the same time, you will always sport with Krishna in solitude in Gokula.

This is Viṣṇu speaking. Oh, chaste goddess, you will always remain personally by my side and enjoy my company as Lakṣmī does." Now, the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* 7.277, quoting Nārada Muni in the *Kṛta-yuga Mahāpāta* section of the *Padma Purāṇa*, Uttarā Khaṇḍa, also touches on the marriage of Tulasī and Krishna, Krishna in the form of Śālagrāma-śilā.

It says, "Krishna, setting an ideal example of chastity, Śrīmatī Vṛndā Devī had worshiped Lord Hari in her previous life and thereby attained this most glorious position, union with the Supreme Lord Śrī Krishna." Now, the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* also states, um, actually quoting the *Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa*, that it also mentions the, the marriage of Vṛndā Devī, or Tulasī, because they're the same person, personality, and Lord Hari.

Therein it says, "From Durvāsā Muni, Śrī Vṛndā Devī received a rare mantra consisting of Lord Krishna's names.

So, having renouncing everything, she left home and went to the forest to perform austerities for sixty thousand years. She performed those austerities in a secluded place. Then handsome, smiling Lord Krishna, who dearly loves his devotees, appeared before her and said, 'Please ask me for a boon.' She at once asked, 'Please be my husband,' and he replied, 'So be it.'" So, we have some references there about this auspicious marriage.

So, this, their marriage is, um, actually celebrated in Vṛndāvana on the eleventh night of the bright moon each year of the sixth month, Kartika.

It's actually on our ISKCON Vaisnava calendar every year as well. And officially, this marriage is called Tulasī-Śālagrāma Vivāha, and it happens on the Deva Uttāna Dvādaśī in Ārati, which is actually celebrated as the day when Lord Viṣṇu wakes up after his four-month-long yoga-nidrā sleep in the milky ocean.

I thought that was interesting. It is said that as He yawns upon waking up, all the demigods offer Him lotus flowers and prayers. Now, in Vṛndāvana, all the temples celebrate, including ISKCON Temple, this marriage ceremony of Tulasī-Śālagrāma in a big way.

Now, the poet named Hita Harivansh, one of the, uh, principal poets in the Vallabha Sampradāya, he describes in an even more detailed, elaborate, very beautiful manner, and with a slight variation, how Tulasī and Krishna met and they got married.

We just gave them *ur*—means a little something before the meal to get your appetite going. So, here's a very beautiful description of the marriage of Tulasī Devī and Krishna in the form of Śālagrāma.

It's actually my favorite version. So, he's writing about the personified form of Tulasī Devī as a Gopi, as well as Śālagrāma-śilā personified, meaning Krishna, because that's how the marriage took place.

And he begins, as we were hearing earlier, describing the austerities that Tulasī Devī performed. It was mentioned Vṛndā Devī earlier, but again, it's the same personality. And actually, it was Tulasī, it was Vṛndā in her form of Tulasī who performed these austerities, and we heard how she performed them for sixty thousand years.

So, he begins with that particular part of the pastime. He writes, "Oh, dear brother, listen to the story of the glorious wedding of Tulasī with Krishna.

When all the Gopis reached the Dasa Forest of Vṛndāvana, with the vines and flowers bound Tulasī's sacred body to protect her from the six harsh weather conditions, they saw her body had become as strong as Mount Meru.

She's doing these austerities. Her eyes looked like the twelve suns. Her body was glowing like the shadow of the moon in the ocean of night. The shadow of the moon in the ocean of night. Having spent ages in her *tapasya*, she was now as sacred as a teardrop of Mother Gaṅgā.

All the Gopis clapped and said, 'Dear Tulasī, you are glorious. Your *tapasya* has made Govinda love you without limit. He is searching for you now in all the forests of Vṛndāvana.

So please leave your meditation, for your waist has become as thin as the stem of a tamāla tree, and through your skin, your bones are now visible. Do not put yourself through any more suffering. Rather, please rise to marry Lord Govinda.

Look, look!

All the goddesses of fortune, intelligence, happiness, beauty, potency, bravery, fire, forests, mountains, wind, and auspiciousness are now singing your glories on the bank of the Yamunā River. Oh, Tulasī, you look stunned. Please move now and listen to the words that Govinda has sent for you.

He says, 'Oh, dear Tulasī, you are my very heartbeat. My heart is aching without your glance. Your devotion to me made me roll in the dust and call out to you. I want to accept you as my wife on this very day.

Please wake up, wake up.'" After listening to these words, a deity like Tulasī finally moved and offered her respects to all the assembled Rādhā Gopis. As soon as she tried to step out from the grove where she had been meditating, the vines in the grove said, "Oh Tulasī, you are our younger sister.

Please don't leave us." The flowers said, "O Viśva-pūjitā, Viśva-pūjitā, you are worshiped by the three worlds, and your presence has made us fragrant. Please do not leave us." The leaves said, "Oh Pāvanī, you are the purest, and you have made us ever fresh by your austerity.

Please don't leave us." The root said, "Oh Pītṛ, you are the finest of all. Your tears have watered us day and night, and we will die if you leave us." After hearing all of them, Tulasī got teary-eyed and replied to them, "Oh, my dear companions, I offer you my respects.

You are my companions in austerities. I will never leave you. Oh, vines, stay in my arms. Oh, leaves, stay in my hair. Oh, flowers, stay in my hands. Oh, roots, stay on my feet." After absorbing all the forest within herself, Tulasī then started walking towards the mirror palace, where all the Gopis then decorated her.

Her 108-pleated skirt was decorated with fine gold and precious jeweled embroidery. Her red and green shirt was shining like stars on her chest, and her forehead was decorated with a golden bindi and kuṅkuma. Her hands were decorated with henna designs and green bangles.

Her hair was loose and perfumed with the fumes of aguru ud. She walked with the sound of her ankle bells following her every step towards Krishna, holding a vanamālā, a forest garland, in her soft red hands.

Meanwhile, the Gopis were dancing and singing songs about the union of Krishna and Tulasī.

The cuckoos were singing melodies of love, while the swans were singing the glories of Krishna and Tulasī.

Finally united, wearing gold robes and diamond necklaces, the personified form of Śālagrāma-Krishna appeared, splendid like Cupid, holding a lotus flower in His hand and wearing a special turban called *śahsarā*, which hides the groom's eyes and doesn't allow the groom to see the bride for a moment.

Lord Brahmā then descended, and chanting sacred mantras along with seven Rṣis, they invoked Agni, and together they worshiped Lord Nārāyaṇa. Then they manifested 118 types of Śālagrāma-śilās and showered them with *puṇya-jala* and *ghee* from the *kamandalu* of Lord Brahmā.

All the demigods then started offering their gifts to Krishna, as they waved *cāmara* and showered Him with flowers.

Krishna Śālagrāma personified arrived on a palanquin and ascended the *vivāha-yāga* platform, the marriage platform.

Then, bringing in a curtain, the Gopis placed it between Tulasī and Krishna.

Then, chanting verses from the *śubha-maṅgala-snāna*, the *śubha-maṅgala-snāna*, all the demigods and Gopis started throwing yellow turmeric rice on the groom and the bride. Looking into each other's eyes, they expressed their joy and happiness, and the way their eyes were dancing showed the beauty of *rasa*.

Exchanging garlands, they circumambulated the sacred fire, and then they embraced each other. After showering flowers on them, all the demigods returned to their abodes. Then Śiva approached Tulasī and said, "Oh, Tulasī, you are very dear to Lord Govinda. Please always protect the Vṛndāvana forest and grant devotion to the devotees of our beloved Govinda." Hearing Śiva's words, thousands of peacocks started dancing as a performance on that wedding day.

Then all the Gopis started serving Tulasī, and then they distributed sweets to all the assembled brāhmaṇas. The poet Hita Paramananda Dāsa lights a lamp in the happiness of the Tulasī-Śālagrāma wedding. Hare Krishna!

Thanks to that poet, such a beautiful description of the wedding. Now, in Vṛndāvana temples, on the evening of the Tulasī-Śālagrāma Vivāha celebration, the marriage, in all the temples in Vṛndāvana, pujaris make a *maṇḍapa* like a small tent of four poles made out of sugar cane stalks.

And on all four sides of that small *maṇḍapa*, they place four wooden buckets with *pūjā*. *Pūjā* means these buckets include, um, radish, turnip, til seeds, til seeds, singhaṭā, which is water chestnut, fruit, spinach specifically, and a coin. It's described as an offering to the forest, to Vṛndāvana forest.

In the middle of these four sugar cane poles, they make an *āsana-yātra*, *āsana-dāna-yātra*. It's a specific type of design that invokes or brings forth the demigods, upon which a Tulasī plant is placed and decorated. Her pot is then decorated as a bride, and a Śālagrāma-śilā is placed on her right side.

Then a priest chants the sacred mantra, installs the auspicious clay pot, offers a *maṅgala-sūtra*, and then vermilion and other items, which all indicate auspiciousness. And after that, four *devā* or lamps are lit on the four corners of the *maṇḍapa*.

And then *bhoga* is offered. And after offering *bhoga*, all the *paṇḍitas*, the priests, circumambulate the *maṇḍapa* and distribute *prasādam* to all the assembled devotees. Then they all sit around and sing bhajans describing this beautiful wedding of Tulasī and Śālagrāma.

This is what happens in Vṛndāvana, and I believe we also do it in our ISKCON Temple, this famous marriage.

So, we'll finish today with, um, two short but very sweet, nectarian verses related to Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī. Śrīla Prabhupāda says in his *Sat-sandarbha*, in the *Bhakti-sandarbha* section, "To Tulasī Devī, *jāha prāṇa*, my life, *marava toṣaṇa*, is satisfying.

When I see Śrīmatī Tulasī, my heart is gladdened, and I know that Lord Madana-Mohana, the Lord of loving affairs, is also satisfied." Also, Lord Caitanya states in the *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, *Ādi-khaṇḍa* 8.156, "Prabhu Mahaprabhu, speaking," ah, "As a fish cannot survive out of water, I cannot survive without seeing Śrīmatī Tulasī.

As a fish cannot survive out of water, I cannot survive without seeing Śrīmatī Tulasī." All Krishna!

So, that's, that's all for today. Again, I hope that these lectures about, you know, Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī is increasing your devotion for her, as we can see it's so important. She's so merciful, so important to worship her to develop our love for Rādhā and Krishna and Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī.

And I believe we'll have another lecture about Tulasī Devī next Friday, so stay tuned. Thank you very much. Śrī Caitanya, Śrī Krishna.

All glories to Tulasī Devī. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.