Welcome back, once again, to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

Before we begin, namaste Sarasvatī devī gauravāṇī prathāne. For those of you who follow this lecture series, you know that we always end a lecture with the relevant verse to the theme of that day's lecture. Well, today I'd like to begin with several verses relevant to this series, the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

They are actually excerpts from Caitanya Candrodaya Nāṭaka, Act Number Three, which is a really beautiful drama by Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra. He was an intimate associate of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And in his drama, Krishna, accompanied by some of his cowherd boyfriends, is leaning against the trunk of a kadamba tree, playing on his flute, nearer to a little hut that the boys have constructed in the Vṛndāvana forest.

And Krishna begins by saying, "My dear friends, how delightfully beautiful Vṛndāvana is!

For the jasmine smiles, and the young aṅkura tree bears its first buds. The aśoka tree is joyful, and the trumpaka tree blossoms are very easy to pick. Look at those beautiful, flawless ball nut flower clusters, spring, fragrant with the scent of sandal.

Graces are little huts." And then, seeing Rādhā, Krishna says, "Friends, did Viśvakarma carve her so finely?

Did the artist Kāma paint her with love?

Did Tvaṣṭar, the Vedic artisan god, gather beauty in a bowl?

Where is she, the goddess of charm, born from the churning of an ocean of elegance?

Oh, she radiates such extraordinary beauty that though I see her daily, it's as if we've never met." Then Rādhā, seeing Krishna, says, "With his body, he darkens the entire world; with his face, he furnishes the world with the disc of a full moon; with his words, he fills our ears with liquid nectar; and with his glances, he grows lotuses in the sky.

What is this?

With his glances, he grows lotuses in the sky. What is this?" Then, looking more closely at Rādhā, Krishna says, "Oh, her face becomes even lovelier when covered by her shawl.

For a glance of her kajal-circled, fond eyes seems like a cage for a white wagtail, and this half-smile resembles a moon drop strained through cloth, subtle but very beautiful." So, these are some beautiful glimpses into Vṛndāvana, the land of love and bliss.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulating for ecstatic love, and this will be part 44. Part 44. And in this lecture, I'd like to continue our discussions on Bṛja-réṇu, the dust of Vṛndāvana.

As we've mentioned several times, the dust of Vṛndāvana is most worshipable.

In the morning Śrīmad Bhāgavatam class in Vṛndāvana on September 17, 1975, Śrīla Prabhupāda stressed this fact.

He said, and I quote him, "When you take a little dust of Vṛndāvana Dhāma, it means you are taking the dust of Krishna's lotus feet." From Vṛndāvana is so important. "When you take a little dust of Vṛndāvana Dhāma, it means you are taking the dust of Krishna's lotus feet." From is so important.

And as such, when devotees living in Vṛndāvana visit places like Śobhākunja, Govardhana Hill, Varṣāṇā, and Rādhākunḍa, they often eat a few grains, a few particles of this transcendental dust.

And I've seen that some even carry a small bottle of Vṛndāvana dust whenever they leave the Dhāma, and they often sprinkle it on their meals to maintain, I could just say, an intimate contact with Rādhā and Krishna and Vṛndāvana.

We're used to putting salt and pepper; they put a few grains, particles of dust, on their food. So they can remember Rādhā and Krishna.

All glories to the Bṛjā-vāsīs!

Now, biographers, they write that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī himself regularly ate a few particles of dust that he had collected from the birthplace of his spiritual master, Śrī Īśvara Purī. And as we mentioned last week, Vṛndāvana dust is doubly powerful, doubly powerful, because it's mixed with the dust of the feet of great devotees who wander the footpaths of Vṛndāvana in search of Krishna.

Therefore, Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, he sings: "I am the servant of the six Gosvāmīs, and the dust of the lotus feet provides me five kinds of foodstuffs." And realizing this fact, the special nature of Bṛja-réṇu, because it's mixed with the dust of the lotus feet of many devotees, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī prayed as follows, which is beautifully paraphrased.

It's a beautiful slogan from Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, but it's very beautifully paraphrased by Mahārāja in one of his lectures. I was hearing, he said, quoting: "In this life, it is impossible for me to get the dust of the lotus feet of the Gopis.

So let me take another birth as a blade of grass, as a medicinal herb, or some creeper in this forest of Vṛndāvana.

Then I will get a chance. When the Gopis feel the acute pains of separation from Krishna, they become mad.

At that time, they run through the forest of Vṛndāvana and never follow any path.

So when they are running, by chance, their feet may touch me, then I will get the opportunity to get some dust from their lotus feet, and then only my life will be successful. I will develop Krishna-prema.

Otherwise, it's not possible in this life." Whatever. And in a similar mood, I was reading Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, one of our favorites, earnestly prays in his illustrious Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta, 114: "May my eyes become filled with anxious desire on seeing the waves of Vṛndāvana's nectarian splendor.

May my intelligence dive deeply into the ambrosial ocean of Vṛndāvana's glories.

May my body, imbued with joy and spiritual desire, always roll in the dust of Vṛndāvana, and may I fall down in prostrated obeisances to all different Vṛndāvana creatures in every direction." So, in these lectures on Bṛja-réṇu, up to number three, I think we may have four and five.

We are sharing a number of pastimes related to the dust of Vṛndāvana.

But today, I wanted to share with you one of my favorites. It was written by a famous Bṛjā-bāsī poet named Lalita Mādhura. When I heard that name, I was like, wow, for Lalita Mādhura Dāsa. He was actually the brother of the poet Lalita Kiśora, whom we have quoted on a number of occasions.

He was a contemporary poet of Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura. He was from the village of Utargaon, near Varṣāṇā, and he was initiated in the line of Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita of the Pañca-tattva. And his beautiful poetry is actually still sung today in both the Rādhā-Ramaṇa Temple and Vṛndāvana and the Rādhā-Govinda Temple in Vrindavan.

And his brother, Lalita Mādhura, whom I will quote today, was also a highly respected and realized poet. In one of his poems, which I found, he describes Krishna's playful pastimes in the dust of Vṛndāvana, so appropriate today.

Actually, regarding playful pastimes or play in general, the ancient śāstra, Śabdārṇava, describes three categories of games which children play. Everything's there in the Vedas. Number one, games in water. Number two, games on the ground. And number three, games in the air.

And ācāryas say that Rādhā and Krishna's playful pastimes in Vṛndāvana also fall into these same categories.

It goes on to give a detailed list of activities in each of these three categories, which I'll share with you. Playful pastimes in water are listed as Jala-krīḍā, means, you know, hiding in the water. Jala-krīḍā, means playful pastimes with splashing water on each other.

Nāka-krīḍā, it's a competition of racing boats on water. And Mauna-krīḍā, lying down on the water surface, you know, children like to float on the water, swimming underwater. And Vivara-krīḍā, checking the depths of water by touching the bottom of a lake or a river.

You know, like children do, they want to dive down to the bottom, see what's there. So, these are playful pastimes which children do, and which, of course, this world's only reflection of the spiritual world. So, their children also play like that in Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Now, playful pastimes in the air are as follows: Vīmāna-krīḍā, means flying planes made of sticks and leaves in the air. Nowadays, children do, you know, paper airplanes. Paṅka-krīḍā, means flying kites in the sky. Ḍōla-krīḍā, swinging on a tree branch.

And Vīra-ḍōla-krīḍā, jumping down from a high place onto the ground. And pastimes on the ground are Picha-krīḍā. This śāstra describes like it's like hide-and-seek. Rasa-krīḍā, means dancing. Children, means hitting a ball with a wooden stick. And Daṇḍa-krīḍā, something similar to like hockey.

Ramaṇa-krīḍā, children hitting the ball and group. Kāya-krīḍā, it means acting without words, like silent films in the old days. And finally, Gupta-maṇi-krīḍā. Gupta-maṇi-krīḍā, means the mystical play of dust. So, today we will relay a playful pastime of Gupta-maṇi-krīḍā, the mystical play of dust, given to us by Lalita Mādhura.

So, he describes one day when Rādhā rāṇī was six years old, she left her palace to join her Gopi friends in the garden of her father, King Viśākhānu Maharaja. And arriving there, she found that Lalita and Viśākhā were playing the game of Gupta-vāsa.

Gupta-vāsa means, like, again, hide-and-seek. And greeting them, Śrīmatī Rādhā said, "My dear friends, call all the other Gopis from their homes and tell them I want to play a different game this morning." So, when all the village Gopis had gathered in that auspicious garden, Śrīmatī Rādhā said, "My dear virgin Gopis, today we will play a very beautiful game called Gupta-maṇi-krīḍā, the mystical play of dust.

In this game, one Gopi will hide her bracelet, or her gem ring, or pearl necklace, or some jewelry in the dust of Vṛndāvana, and all the rest of us will try to find those jewels.

Now, if we are unable to find those articles, then all of us will ceremoniously carry that Gopi who hid the items and place her on a golden throne. But if we, if we find that Gopi's jewelry, then she will become a lifelong servant of all of us, a lifelong servant of all of us." So, realizing that either conclusion was a chance to serve Bhakti, serve in the highest stage of devotion, all the Gopis started dancing and cheering each other on and loudly chanting: "Either was an opportunity to serve!" So, you know, that's the whole mood.

So, then it's described by the poet that everyone assembled at an area where he describes the Yamunā was flowing with a beautiful sound, when the air was blowing softly, and there were endless mounds of soft dust. So, having gathered in that auspicious place, the Gopis proceeded with a special ritual to choose which Gopi would be the one to hide her precious jewelry in the dust while the others closed their eyes.

So, the ceremony was that all the Gopis held fistfuls of dust in their closed hands, and on a signal, they were to open their fists and quickly throw the dust in the air. And the rule was that the first Gopi who threw her fistful of dust in the air would be the Gopi to hide her ornaments.

You had to be quick in this little ritual. One, two, three!

So, Lalita Mādhura, our poet, he comments very nicely on this scene. He said, "Oh friend, I have seen an amazing thing today. The Gopis of Braja, the milkmaids of Braja, who are like stars surrounding moon-faced Śrīmatī Rādhā, are playing Gupta-maṇi-krīḍā on the banks of the Yamunā, while holding the auspicious, soft, golden dust of Vṛndāvana in their fists.

Just so you know, the dust is flowing upwards from their hands, distributing the highest bliss on all of them. The sages Vyāsa, Nārada, Ambarīṣa, Udhava have arrived and are taking that dust on their heads. I say, oh friend, when will that day come when I too will respectfully place that dust on my forehead?" What a wonderful poet!

So, he goes on to describe that the Gopi named Maitreya, Maitreya, was the first to open her fist and throw Vṛndāvana dust high into the air.

Seeing her, Śrīmatī Rādhā paused for a moment and kind of looked at her curiously. And she said, "My dear Gopi with the dark complexion, please tell me more about yourself. You look so beautiful, but I've never seen you before here in Braja." So, Maitreya, you know, covered her face and she said, "Virtuous one, please accept me as your servant.

I am one of the maidservants of Devī Pūrṇamāsī, and I have come here today to play with you on her order only." Pleased with her reply, Śrīmatī Rādhā said, "Oh Maitreya, you new Gopi with the darkish complexion, you are welcome in our group of Rādhā Gopis.

Now, we will, and now please hide your jewelry as we all close our eyes." So, Maitreya went some distance and carefully placed some of her jewelry, you know, in the dust of Vṛndāvana, and then she called out, "My dear Gopi friends, now try to find the impossible place in the dust of Braja where I've hidden my jewels!" So, soon all the girls were like, you know, running around and searching through Vṛndāvana's dust in different places, you know, near the Yamunā River.

Our poet writes, "Some were digging the ground with their soft fingers, some were digging with the tips of their toes, some were digging with their bangles, kañcana, and some were digging with their rings. Oh brother, just see the milkmaids of Braja searching for treasures hidden, hidden in the dust of Braja by the Creator's secret line.

Oh brother, just see the milkmaids of Braja searching for treasures hidden in the dust of Braja by the Creator, Krishna!" So, when all the Gopis returned unsuccessful, they couldn't find Maitreya's jewels anywhere. Śrīmatī Rādhā noticed a pile of dust some distance away where they had not looked.

So, walking over, Vṛndāvana-īśvarī bent down and started to dig into that pile of dust.

And suddenly, to her surprise, she found very beautiful ankle bells, armbands, pearl necklaces, bracelets made of different gems, shining like the sun, so effulgent. And as her Gopi friends crowded around her, she kept digging, digging, and suddenly came across a beautiful golden pot studded with rare gems.

And as she very slowly took it out from the ground, suddenly nine goddesses appeared from the golden pot, joining their palms together in great respect. They said to her, "Oh Śrī Rādhā, we are nine embodiments of bliss and fortune that reside in the sacred, sacred dust of Braja.

While playing Gupta-maṇi-krīḍā, the mystical play of dust, you have found our treasure, this mystical treasure here in the dust of Vṛndāvana.

Therefore, please keep this golden pot and use it in Krishna's service." So, with this witnessing, all the Gopi friends, Śrīmatī Rādhā, they became mesmerized.

They took that pot and that jewelry, and they started decorating Śrīmatī Rādhā in a most beautiful way with all that precious jewelry that she had come across. Then they escorted her to meet her beloved Lord in a pre-arranged meeting further inside the Vṛndāvana forest, where they found Krishna herding his thousands of cows.

And at this point, the poet Lalita Mādhura, he writes a beautiful couplet: "Krishna met in Belavana with the dust of Vṛndāvana concealed their loving pastimes from the demigods.

Oh, my mind, just worship the dust which is glorified by Śruti and Purāṇas, which is worshiped by the nidhis and the siddhis, the nidhis and the siddhis, which is respected by goddesses, and which is the eternal residence of love and devotion for Śrī Krishna." Hare Krishna!

Mystic dust of Vṛndāvana.

Who knows what's in that dust?

So many wonderful, amazing things for us all. Good fortune is there in the dust of Vṛndāvana.

So, today we'll finish with a song, an appropriate song by Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura from his work Prema-bhakti-candrikā. The song is entitled "Vṛndāvana-dhāma-mahima." It goes like this: "When will I renounce material family life and drowning in transcendental bliss, go to Brajabhoomi?

Oh Lord, hurry!

When will this be?

When will I see the blissful land of Vṛndāvana?

When will I smear the dust in Vṛndāvana all over my body?

When will I walk about Vṛndāvana loudly singing the names of Rādhā and Krishna, and while crying, my voice will be choked with ecstatic love?

When in a solitary grove in Vṛndāvana, will I offer my full obeisances to the Divine Couple?

When will I call out, 'O Krishna, O master of Śrīmatī Rādhā rāṇī!' When standing on the shore of the Yamunā, will I drink some of its water in my cupped hands?

When will this be?

When will I go to the arena of the Rāsa dance and roll about in its dust, overwhelmed with ecstasy?

When will I visit Vamsivata and fall down on the ground, overwhelmed by transcendental bliss?

When will I see Govardhana Hill, my eyes filling with tears?

When will I reside at Rādhākunḍa?

When, as a result of constantly wandering Your Vṛndāvana with this poor body, will I fall down?" Poor-hearted Narottama Dāsa speaks in this way.

Again, pure nectar absorbing ourselves in Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

So many times, Rūpa Gosvāmī says, if you can, everyone should live in Vṛndāvana.

But if you can't live in Vṛndāvana, just always remember to Vṛndāvana from a distance.

Meditate on all its transcendental cultures, like this Bṛja-réṇu, which we've been discussing. And this way, we'll feel the mood of Vṛndāvana.

So, thank you very much. Um, yeah, I think we have a couple more classes on Bṛja-réṇu, and we'll be with you next Friday. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! Śrī Kṛṣṇa!

Hey!