Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale
śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine
namaste sārasvate deve
gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe

So before beginning today’s class, I would like to offer a beautiful prayer to Śrīla Prabhupāda. It’s actually a poem written by a Vrajavāsī whose name was Rāmdās. He writes:

“My dear spiritual master, O mercy of the Lord, please save me from the thorny clutches of māyā. One who serves your lotus feet attains every goal in life. Your seat is above those of kings; thus all royalty and saints seek shelter at your lotus feet.

Continuously repeating Kṛṣṇa’s names, your voice vanquishes all suffering. I was drowning in a deep ocean of illusion, but one day you reached out and brought me to the shores of reality.

Rāmdās says: I bow down to the lotus feet of my spiritual master, which are the source of all divinity in this material world.”

Oh, thank you.

So, we’re continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 139, in which we will continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s disguises. So many classes on disguises.

Now, the following pastime is adapted from *Saṅgīta Mādhava*, Chapter 8, by Śrīla Bhānu Svāmī.

One time, anticipating where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī would bathe in the Yamunā, Kṛṣṇa hid Himself within a cluster of blue lotus flowers. That’s His disguise today. He hid Himself within a cluster of blue lotus flowers in the river and waited until Rādhārāṇī and her friends arrived at a nearby bathing ghāṭa.

Soon Śrī Rādhā and the gopīs arrived and entered the water. It’s described that they were joking, splashing, and, of course, talking about Kṛṣṇa.

But when Śrī Rādhā strayed into somewhat deeper water near the cluster of blue lotuses, she soon got the scare of her life. She was swimming peacefully and, again, her mind absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa, when suddenly this cluster of blue lotuses in front of her exploded with a roar and showered her with water, lotus leaves, and foam.

Water, lotus leaves, and foam. In your mind’s eye, you can see it.

So, of course, Śrī Rādhā was startled, and she thought, “What is this? A demon? A crocodile or what? A demon? A crocodile or what?” And she screamed for help.

But as soon as things calmed down, she saw Kṛṣṇa floating in the water nearby, smiling and laughing at the joke He had just played on her.

But for Śrī Rādhā, this was no joking matter, and so her fear quickly turned into anger. She immediately turned her back on Kṛṣṇa, waded out of the water, and ran into the Vṛndāvana forest, followed by her equally upset friends.

So Kṛṣṇa was left alone, standing shoulder-deep in the Yamunā and very disappointed that Śrī Rādhā had taken the joke so personally. So He waded back to the shore and sat down on the riverbank, completely dejected, wondering how He could pacify Śrī Rādhā’s māna, her anger.

This theme is always coming up in Vṛndāvana.

Now, as we’ve often discussed, Śrī Rādhā’s anger is never easy to appease. Of course, we should be careful not to think of her anger in a mundane or material way. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 14, Text 197, explains:

“When the border of her sari and the cloth of her face are caught by Kṛṣṇa, she externally appears offended and angry, but within her heart she is very happy. Learned scholars call this attitude kuṭṭamita.”

Beautiful.

I was reading the other night that when Śrī Rādhā is experiencing māna, or anger, she often pouts in her room in either Varṣāṇā or Yāvaṭa. When Kṛṣṇa manages to approach either of those places and knock on her chamber door, Rādhārāṇī refuses to speak to Him. So He always tries to plead with her through the door.

Now Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, quoting a devotee named Śrī Godānācārya, reveals this and writes about it in *Padyāvalī*, Verse 243:

One time in Yāvaṭa, one of Rādhārāṇī’s girlfriends who was attending her stormed angrily out of the room when Kṛṣṇa was trying to speak through the door and said strongly:

“Śrī Rādhā is completely drenched in the brilliant red color of love, exactly like a guñjā seed. O expert word-juggler Kṛṣṇa, her love is not like Your love, which is exactly like the tiny red color on a parrot’s beak.”

A really beautiful *Padyāvalī* verse.

So that gopī is saying that Śrī Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa is complete and intense, like the vivid red that dominates a guñjā seed. In contrast, Kṛṣṇa’s love for Rādhā appears minimal, like the faint red tint on a parrot’s beak.

It’s all about love.

Now, back to the pastime where Kṛṣṇa surprised Śrī Rādhā in the Yamunā River.

Kṛṣṇa was sitting on the banks of the Yamunā, deeply absorbed in thoughts of how to pacify Śrī Rādhā, when suddenly Śrīmatī Vṛndā Devī, who, with Paurṇamāsī, arranges all these pastimes, happened to walk by with a number of her assistants who, it’s described, were carrying a variety of clothes and ornaments on their way to a forest storehouse.

We’ve talked about those forest storehouses where she keeps different paraphernalia to be used in the particular pastimes that take place in that part of the forest.

So she’s walking along with her associates.

Seeing them, Kṛṣṇa smiled and thought, “This must be the hand of fate.”

Of course, there is no fate or destiny in Vraja. It’s all pastimes, again arranged by Paurṇamāsī and Vṛndā. But here we go. He said, “This must be the hand of fate.”

Approaching Vṛndā Devī, He described His predicament. He said, “O Devī, please help Me regain Śrī Rādhā’s favor.”

So Vṛndā Devī smiled and very quickly came up with a solution.

And what was that?

Well, with the clothes her servants were carrying, she and her helpers dressed Kṛṣṇa up as a beautiful young girl, a tactic we know that Kṛṣṇa often employs.

Satisfied with this disguise, Vṛndā Devī said, “Kṛṣṇa, You know what to do now.”

So Kṛṣṇa followed the gopīs’ footprints deep into the Vṛndāvana forest, right up to the entrance of a grove where Rādhārāṇī was surrounded by gopīs and complaining to her friends about Kṛṣṇa’s trick in the Yamunā River.

Suddenly she looked up and saw this new gopī standing nearby. She couldn’t recognize that it was Kṛṣṇa. Although disguised, Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness and beauty enchanted Rādhārāṇī and completely bewildered her mind.

She suddenly felt a surge of affection for this new dark-complexioned girl and at once invited her in.

Rādhārāṇī said, “O moon-faced one, who are you? You are so sweet and beautiful. Please become my very dear friend.”

Wow. Please become my very dear friend. When will that day be ours?

As Kṛṣṇa entered the grove disguised, of course, Rādhārāṇī noticed his—or her—hesitation and said:

“O friend, you seem to be trembling with fear. I wonder, is this because you know that Kṛṣṇa lies in wait for you somewhere in the Vṛndāvana forest?”

Then Rādhā reached out and took hold of that gopī’s wrist.

As soon as she did so, śāstra says she felt exhilarated. Words stuck in her throat and her limbs went stiff.

As soon as that happened, all her friends attending her understood who this new gopī actually was, and they all smiled in approval.

Seeing her girlfriends’ favorable reactions, Rādhārāṇī also smiled and had no choice but to give up her māna, her anger, and spend the rest of the afternoon in Kṛṣṇa’s blissful association in the Vṛndāvana forest.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

This is, of course, just one of the many pastimes that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy in Vṛndāvana.

The ācāryas say, and I quote:

“No one can count how many pastimes Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy in Vraja. Every pastime is novel, even if it happens hundreds of times, and devotees derive ever-expanding bliss hearing about them again and again and again.”

As we’re doing.

The ācāryas also point out that whenever Kṛṣṇa tries to pacify Śrī Rādhā’s māna, or anger, ultimately He is almost always successful in appeasing her.

They give an especially sweet example.

One time, Nanda Mahārāja invited King Vṛṣabhānu and all the residents of Varṣāṇā to Nandagrāma to discuss some upcoming festivities.

That day, for some reason—a specific reason—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was especially angry with Kṛṣṇa, having seen Him with another gopī the day before.

Nevertheless, she decided to come along.

At that meeting, Kṛṣṇa was sitting on one side of the assembly, while Śrī Rādhā was on the other side of the assembly.

As discussions were going on, Kṛṣṇa kept trying to attract the attention of Rādhā. He kept trying to get her attention, but she would have nothing to do with Him because she had seen Him with that gopī the day before.

So at one point, the morning sun came shining through the window.

In your mind’s eye, you can see the bright sun coming through the window.

Taking advantage of this, Kṛṣṇa came up with a very sweet way to appease Rādhārāṇī’s anger, even in front of all the elders present.

This is nicely described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Padyāvalī*, Verse 242. He writes:

“In order to appease Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa placed the shadow of His head at her feet.”

Because if the sun is coming in, it can also create shadows.

“So, in order to appease Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa placed the shadow of His head at her feet. Then she put the shadow of both her palms on the shadow of the head of Kṛṣṇa together. In this way, both of them, seated in front of their seniors, pacified each other and relieved their sulkiness.”

Then the verse finishes:

“May this act of conciliation by Kṛṣṇa and loving forgiveness by Śrī Rādhā be victorious in all the worlds.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So much nectar.

This is our goal.

So I would like to conclude today with a quote from the writings of a devotee, Rāghava Śarmā. Actually, he was an ācārya in the Nimbārka-sampradāya, who says that whoever chants the following nine names of Kṛṣṇa every day while remembering the pastimes of the Lord will attain the bliss of devotion in this very lifetime.

So listen carefully.

He writes:

“Kṛṣṇa is known as Rasa-samudra, meaning He is the ocean of different rasas.

He is known as Rasa-sāram—He is the essence of all the rasas.

Rasa-ghanam—He is the most condensed form of rasa.

He is known as Rasa-jñāta—He is the connoisseur of all the rasas.

Rasa-lolupa—He is greedy for all the rasas.

Another name, Rasa-loka—He is where all the rasas stay.

Rasa-ākaram—He is the storehouse of all rasa.

Rasa-vivartana—He is the reason for changes in all the rasas.

And finally, Rasa-sambhava—from Him all the rasas manifest.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Of course, we know Kṛṣṇa has unlimited names, but I had never heard those names before. So we thank that author for all those nectarean names of Kṛṣṇa connected to rasa.

Thank you, Prabhus.

We’re still on the shores of the Baltic Sea here in northern Poland with our festival tour. Actually, we just have two festivals left.

We’re simultaneously relishing and lamenting the turbulence of rasa, or devotional service, because we’ve really enjoyed this summer. Thousands upon thousands—I’m not exaggerating—of people have come to our festivals and seen our stage show, tasted prasādam, and actually danced with us at kīrtana at the end.

Santuṣṭi—the heart is completely satisfied.

We still have a little time left, but I’ll be traveling again, and I’ll be sure to be with you again next Friday.

I think we have some more classes on disguises. It’s a central theme. It’s so nice to research it and to share it with everyone.

So thank you, thank you, thank you.

Of course, thank you to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa!

Thank you, Kṛṣṇa.
