Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste Sarasvatī Deve Gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 151, in which we will continue to discuss the various disguises Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa use in Their pastimes.

In this episode, Kṛṣṇa very cleverly disguises Himself as a flower seller, technically a florist.

I was reading in the list of disguises given in Gopāla-campū by Jīva Gosvāmī. He mentions, or lists, different disguises of Kṛṣṇa. The sixth in the list is where Kṛṣṇa disguises Himself as a florist selling flower garlands. He writes therein:

"When Kṛṣṇa came disguised as a flower seller, Śrī Rādhā said, 'This dark-skinned flower seller girl has laid out many garlands for sale, but how come her dark form fills me with such amorous desires?'"

Now, the poet Lalita Kiśora, whom we often quote in this series of rasa-līlā plays, gives more details about the disguise of Kṛṣṇa becoming a flower garland seller.

His poetic pastime embodies a famous verse from Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 19.5:

**kiṁ kāvyasya kaveḥ tasya
kiṁ kāṇḍena dhanuṣmataḥ
parasya hṛdaye lagnaṁ
na ghūrṇayati yat śiraḥ**

"What is the use of a bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin? What is the use of a bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?"

So, Lalita Kiśora writes as follows:

Once, in the month of Āśvina, the rain drenched the soil of Vraja so much that it turned into smooth mud. Just imagine. In fact, that year the rain was very heavy. Thus, the trees, groves, and forests of Vraja quenched their thirst by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. So poetic.

The birds were chirping, cuckoos were singing, and peacocks were filled with passion. The forest of Vṛndāvana looked mesmerizing, like a colorful painting of Urvaśī, the dancer from Gandharva-loka.

The land of Vraja was filled with colorfully blooming flowers and newly sprouted leaves. Bumblebees were flying around fragrant flowers, thus making the air of Vraja intoxicated with their fragrance. The air of Vraja was intoxicated with their fragrance.

The lush green forests of Vraja were decorated with flowers of mālatī, kadamba, mallikā, piyā-bāsā, kāminī, mādhavī, kundalī, campaka, cāvarī, jūhī, motiyā, and kusuma.

While looking at those flowers, a desire rose in the heart of the master of all intelligence, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who decided to create a rūpāntaraṇa, a suitable change in His physical form.

So, reaching a nearby garden of exotic flowers called Ānanda-vilāsa-kuñja—that's what the garden is called, Ānanda-vilāsa-kuñja, meaning "the garden of blissful pastimes"—which was actually under the care of Mother Yaśodā, Kṛṣṇa made various garlands with His own hands.

Some of the garlands, it is said, or as written by Lalita Kiśora, had seven colors. Some were made only of red and white flowers, while others had very intricate designs.

Then, changing into the clothes of a flower-selling girl, Kṛṣṇa placed a basket filled with those flower garlands on His head and started on His way to Gāhvara-vana. It's where the sakhīs come down from the high hills of Varṣāṇā to play ball games with Śrī Rādhā.

Reaching there, Śrī Rādhā and Her sakhīs started playing the game of catching balls. And the balls for these games were made of grass and flowers. So sweet.

Their giggling, laughing, joking, the sounds of them clapping their hands, and the tinkling of their ankle bells from their fast steps filled the forest of Gāhvara-vana with joy and overflowing happiness.

Though the whole forest was filled with the fragrance of forest flowers, suddenly a new, unexpected aroma coming from the northern direction stole the gopīs' hearts, including the heart of the crown jewel of all gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

As a result, they stopped playing ball, and curiosity rose in their hearts.

At that very moment, a loud voice came from deep in the grove:

"My dear beautiful moon-faced girls, please purchase my lotuses and garlands!"

Suddenly Kṛṣṇa appeared from the bushes disguised as a dark-complexioned florist.

Wearing a red veil and a green sari, disguised Kṛṣṇa looked like a walking bouquet, one often seen in the hands of King Indra.

Thousands of bumblebees, maddened by the aromas, sat on top of this newly arrived gopī's flower baskets. Showering pārijāta and mallikā flowers on the path, the florist made her way toward Śrī Rādhikā.

Curious, all the gopīs ran toward her and asked:

"O beautiful gopī, your aroma is most wonderful. What perfumes have you applied on your dark limbs?"

Kṛṣṇa, disguised, replied in a very sweet voice:

"O young gopīs, this is not any perfume but the scent of a very rare and fragrant flower garland in my basket."

Indulekhā said:

"I am the gardener here, but I have never smelled such flowers before in the whole land of Vraja. From where have you come and brought these flowers? They smell like flowers from the garden of Indra."

The florist girl replied:

"Oho, you are very right. These flowers are from the southern part of Devaloka, where the goddesses themselves come and choose flowers for their ornaments."

Then Lalitā said:

"O dark-complexioned gopī, you have come here just in time. After playing with the ball for a long time, our queen feels fatigued, and all her flower decorations have become disheveled. Can you please provide us with some of the best flower garlands in your basket?"

And the florist girl replied:

"It will be my greatest fortune. But first, allow me to see your queen."

Hiding amidst the gopīs, as if hidden by them like curtains, Śrī Rādhā came forward in front of her friends and looked directly at the face of this dark-complexioned florist girl.

Then Śrī Rādhā whispered in the ear of Anaṅga-mañjarī Sakhī:

"O my dear friend, this gopī is stealing my heart. My heart is floating in the waves of desire. Her full-moon-like face is causing streams of loving affection to arise in the ocean of my heart. O sakhī, please make her my dear friend. Please make her my dear friend."

Anaṅga-mañjarī approached the florist girl, saying:

"Dear young gopī, our queen likes you. She wants you to decorate her with these beautiful garlands."

Then the florist girl replied:

"How fortunate I am."

Then disguised Kṛṣṇa started decorating Rādhikā with beautiful flowers and flower garlands.

Sitting around Śrī Rādhā while the florist girl decorated her, some gopīs were holding a mirror, others were fanning them with peacock feathers, and still others were simply admiring the rays of beauty reflecting in the mirror.

This is the poetry.

The sound of humming bees filled the grove with music similar to that of a sitar.

While looking into the eyes of Śrī Rādhā, the florist girl's love for Her became obvious. When Śrī Rādhā looked into the florist girl's eyes, Her heart started fluttering.

And then suddenly She announced:

"Arey chaliyā Nanda-nandana! O my dear friends, this girl is not a florist. This person is not even a girl, but the son of Nanda Mahārāja Himself!"

Hearing this, Kṛṣṇa started laughing and embraced Rādhā.

And the poet concludes:

"Lalita Kiśora showers fragrant flowers on the Divine Couple, who are always surrounded by beautiful gopīs in this land of Vraja."

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

That's all for today. It's very short. I think this class is about ten or fifteen minutes, but I couldn't resist. It's just a simple plot, but because it's Vraja, it's full of nectar.

So, thank you. See you next Friday.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Hare Kṛṣṇa.
