

Hari Kṛṣṇa, everyone! Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. Nama oṁ viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So, this morning I was thinking that we actually may never finish this series because, well, the glories of Vṛndāvana are unlimited, and that is made very clear by Śrīla Prabodhananda Sarasvatī in his epic Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta. He writes therein: “He who offers respectful obeisances to Vṛndāvana is worshiped by the three worlds; he who has no respect for Vṛndāvana is reviled by the three worlds; he who takes Vṛndāvana very seriously is taken seriously by all the demigods; and he who takes Vṛndāvana lightly becomes as insignificant as a blade of grass.” He further says: “Anyone who smells a flower from Vṛndāvana, feels breezes from Vṛndāvana, sees a person from Vṛndāvana, or somehow or other bows down in the direction of Vṛndāvana, or once utters the auspicious name ‘Vṛndāvana’—even if he dies in some place far from Vṛndāvana—will at once attain that transcendental abode.”

And the other day I was reading Garga-saṁhitā, and it echoes the same: By uttering the name of Vṛndāvana, one attains the merit of chanting Kṛṣṇa’s holy names. By hearing the name of Vṛndāvana, one acquires the merit of hearing Kṛṣṇa’s līlā. By touching Vṛndāvana, one obtains the merit of saintly association. By smelling the fragrance of Vṛndāvana, one is blessed by the merit of smelling the sweet fragrance of tulasī leaves offered to Lord Govindadeva.

Hari Kṛṣṇa! So, today we’re continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 43. In this lecture, I’d like to continue discussing the sacred dust of Vṛndāvana, or as we all know it, braja-reṇu. Last week, we mentioned how the dust of Vṛndāvana is sacred because of the touch of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet as He traverses the Vṛndāvana forest and the pasturing grounds of Vṛndāvana. However, it’s not only Kṛṣṇa’s feet that make the dust of Vṛndāvana special, but it’s all of His associates as well, as our great ācāryas have all walked on that sacred ground. The dust of the feet of such devotees must also be considered extremely sacred. This is confirmed in Bhāgavatam, Second Canto, third chapter, verse 23, where it is said: “The person who has not at any time received the dust of the feet of the Lord’s pure devotee upon his head is certainly a dead body, and the person who has never experienced the aroma of the tulasī leaves from the lotus feet of the Lord is also a dead body, although breathing.”

Let us also remember that Kṛṣṇa’s greatest devotees, the milkmaids of Vṛndāvana—the gopīs—are always walking barefoot through the Vṛndāvana countryside. Uddhava thus concludes his famous prayers to the gopīs by actually worshiping the dust of their feet (10.47.63). He says: “I constantly glorify the dust of the feet of the women of Nanda’s cowherd pastures. Their chanting of the activities of Lord Kṛṣṇa purifies the entire universe.” All glories to the dust of their feet! And of all the gopīs, it is the chief, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Therefore, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī begins his illustrious Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi by actually glorifying the dust of Rādhā’s feet. He writes: “I bow down to the glorious daughter of Vṛṣabhānu, the supremely astonishing opulence of whose lotus-feet dust is incomprehensible to the gods like Brahmā and Śiva, and whose compassion-soaked glances rained down the nectar of the essence of all human goals.” Then he continues: “I constantly meditate on the dust of Śrī Rādhā’s feet, which has limitless power, being the magic potion that immediately brings that Puruṣa—who is imperceptible to even such great souls as Brahmā, Śiva, Śukadeva, Nārada, and Bhīṣma—under her control. I meditate on the dust of Rādhā’s feet, which is the cow of plenty, bestowing rasa on all those who worship it as a festival of love, just as it was with the noble gopīs who, by taking it on their heads, attained their desired goal, the peacock-crowned Lord endowed with all virtues, Kṛṣṇa.” Then, in verse 33 of Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi, he concludes—and this is really nice—”Happily abandoning my family and unlimited riches, as well as all kinds of other spiritual practices in which I have long lost any faith, I simply meditate on the dust of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, which rains down on me torrents of amazing natural joy.” Such wonderful verses!

Now, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas generally say that three different activities performed in three different holy dhāmas very quickly give Kṛṣṇa-prema—so this is of special interest to us. In Navadvīpa, harināma-saṅkīrtana awards love of God. They say in Jagannātha Purī, by relishing Jagannātha-svāmī’s remnants, one can easily achieve perfection. And in Vraja—in Vṛndāvana—prema comes to one who glorifies, honors, contacts, and rolls in the sacred dust, braja-reṇu, or sometimes they say braja-raja. Isn’t that nice? Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī says in verse 1 of Vraja-vilāsa-stava: “Without worshiping the pollen of Śrī Vṛndā’s lotus feet, without taking shelter of Vṛndāvana which bears her footprints, and without respectfully greeting the great souls whose hearts are filled with deep love for her, how will one be able to plunge into the nectarean ocean of love for Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa?”

Vṛndāvana is, as we’ve discussed before, where Uddhava, Kṛṣṇa’s friend and minister, once visited Vṛndāvana, and he later prayed for a future birth as a blade of grass in Vṛndāvana just to get sprinkled with dust from the gopīs’ lotus feet as they passed by. Now, this is really interesting: in Vṛndāvana, they actually say that the dust of Vṛndāvana is not only closely connected to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, but it is also fully devoted to her. I really like that. The dust of Vraja is not only closely connected to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, but that dust is also fully devoted to her. One popular Hindi bhajan says: “In Vṛndāvana, each and every pebble and particle of dust is chanting ‘Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Rādhā’.”

Therefore, our beloved Rūpa Gosvāmī advises us in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu—which means one should always live in Vṛndāvana—and Rūpa Gosvāmī clarifies that if you can’t live physically there, you can live in Vṛndāvana by always remembering Vṛndāvana, glorifying Vṛndāvana, hearing discussions of Vraja, or just chanting, because it’s glorification of the divine couple. There’s a very nice verse I found in the Brajabhāṣā language that glorifies this sacred dust of Vṛndāvana. It goes as follows: The goddess Mukti (Liberation) asked Gopāla Kṛṣṇa, “Oh Gopāla, I am liberating everyone, but who will liberate me?” So Gopāla said: “If one particle of dust of Vraja will touch your forehead, you, Mukti, will also get liberation.”

Now, it’s also said that in olden times, or even nowadays, Vrajavāsīs would eat a few particles of Vṛndāvana dust from time to time. And as we know—as we’ve discussed in previous lectures—even Kṛṣṇa, once as a small child, ate the dust of Vraja. Sometimes they say the dirt of Vraja. Last Kārttika, I watched a theater performance about Kṛṣṇa eating braja-reṇu, performed by some Vrajavāsīs as I was going around Vṛndāvana on the parikramā-mārga during Kārttika. They were just doing this as a sevā for the pilgrims; they were having this little theater on the side of the parikramā-mārga. It was so sweet, and I had a devotee who could translate for me the Brajabhāṣā language. I found the dialogue really interesting: when Mother Yaśodā asked Kṛṣṇa, “Lālā, your brother Balarāma said that you have eaten some dust, some dirt! Why would you do that? I always arrange for you to eat nice butter and curd. Why do you eat the dust of Vraja?” So Kṛṣṇa replied to Mother Yaśodā: “Jahora…—” I hope I’ve got the Brajabhāṣā proper there—”This nectarean taste, this nectarean taste of the dust of Vraja is not found in sweet butter and milk, Maiya; neither in the 56 kinds of various food items! It’s found in the dust of Vraja.” So Kṛṣṇa is glorifying it; He said that taste is sweeter than anything that we partake of in this world, and foodstuffs.

Fortunately, as many of you know, nowadays there’s less and less dust in Vṛndāvana proper because of modernization. So many buildings are coming up, so many roads are going up, etc. In previous years—I remember in previous years, when I first came to Vṛndāvana, the whole parikramā-mārga around Vṛndāvana was only dust. Nowadays it’s concrete, and we’re navigating trucks and cars, and, you know, where’s the dust? It’s gone. But of course, Vṛndāvana is very expansive, so we can take advantage of Vṛndāvana dust in other parts, but it’s a little painful that the parikramā-mārga is asphalt instead of dust these days. Now we can appreciate the value and the importance of Vṛndāvana dust even more in how our great ācāryas perceive it, by hearing from them. It’s said that a saintly person sees through his ears, not through his eyes, and we can see by hearing from great ācāryas. We could also take advantage by their example.

So, there’s a wonderful pastime in this regard to braja-reṇu. Once, one of our great ācāryas, Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī—he was the renounced spiritual master of Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī—he was hungry when he was living in Vṛndāvana. The tradition was, and of course it still is, that when such sādhus are hungry, they do madhukarī. Madhukarī means literally that the sādhu goes to four homes of the householders and he begs for some prasādam, and whatever he gets from those four homes, he is satisfied that Kṛṣṇa has given that, and that’s what he’ll eat that day. So the first person that Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī approached that day was a humble, lowly street sweeper who was actually taking a break for a moment and eating a roṭī, like a chapati, or they say flatbread sometimes. So Bābājī said to the sweeper: “Sir, I’m very hungry. Could you please give me one of your roṭīs?” The sweeper replied: “Bābā, why do you ridicule me? You know, I’m a low-caste sweeper; how can I share with you one of my roṭīs?” But Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī insisted, so the sweeper had no choice but to comply, and he gave a roṭī to Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī, who ate it. Now, news spread, and hearing about this, the, how would you say, the leading men of Vṛndāvana came to Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī and they said: “Bābā, you’re the crest jewel of Vṛndāvana. It pains us to hear anyone criticizing you, but now everyone’s talking against you. They’re saying, ‘Bābā has gone mad! If he defies age-old traditions, what will happen to society? He’s taking food from a street sweeper!’” But Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī he replied: “Sirs, you are all learned people; don’t you know the importance of the dust of Vṛndāvana? It is so surcharged with Kṛṣṇa-prema that even Lord Brahmā desires to become a particle of braja-reṇu. This dust of Vṛndāvana—therefore, isn’t a Vṛndāvana sweeper who is constantly serving that dust by sweeping it, by breathing it, by rolling in it, and by bathing in it, more pure than anyone else?”

Now, it’s said that at that moment, how’s it put? Silence filled the air, indicating everyone’s acceptance of Bābājī Mahārāja’s reply. All glories to braja-reṇu! Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī is an amazing ācārya. I was reading that he would live six months in Vṛndāvana and six months in Navadvīpa-dhāma. And while living in Navadvīpa-dhāma, it’s described he would always show very deep respect to all its residents, even to the animals. Actually, one time, some little puppies came and ate some of the prasādam from his plate. He was, you know, we can imagine him sitting on the ground with a leaf plate having taken some prasādam, and three or four little puppies came and they crawled on the plate; they started eating from his plate. But he didn’t protest. But his servant, whose name was Bihārī, he became disgusted to see these little dogs, I could just say, devouring his Guru’s prasādam. So he immediately came and he drove them away. But immediately, it’s described, Bābājī Mahārāja said: “Bihārī, these puppies are residents of the holy dhāma! They are not ordinary living entities. I will not eat until they come back to share the mahā-prasādam from my plate!” So Bihārī had to go find the little puppies and bring them back. Such is the vision of such great ācāryas like Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī.

Hari Kṛṣṇa! So today, we’ve heard so much glorification of the dust of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Hopefully, it will act as a stimulus for ecstatic love on our paths back home, back to Kṛṣṇa’s abode, to Goloka Vṛndāvana. And surely, as we mentioned in last Friday’s lecture, the next time we go to Vṛndāvana, let us follow again Śrīla Prabhupāda’s instruction to roll in Vṛndāvana’s dust upon arrival. Let us re-establish this tradition; it used to be followed by all of us in the early years. Because remembering Kṛṣṇa book, chapter 37, Prabhupāda writes: “One who intends to visit Vṛndāvana should follow the ideal footsteps of Akrūra and always think of the pastimes and activities of the Lord. As soon as one reaches the boundary of Vṛndāvana, he should immediately smear the dust of Vṛndāvana all over his body, without thinking of his material position and prestige.”

Now, actually having the dust of Vṛndāvana here on our planet Earth is really a special blessing that’s not necessarily there in other parts of the universe, and that’s confirmed by the great poet Hari-śauri, a great Vaiṣṇava poet, in a verse with which I will finish today. We can appreciate how, you know, we have access to braja-reṇu here on the Earth planet. It may not be everywhere in the universe, but it is definitely here, so we should take advantage of it. Here’s the verse: “It’s actually the demigods who are speaking: ‘Kṛṣṇa, You bless the residents of Earth with the dust of Vraja. We who are in the heavenly planets feel cheated because we’ve never received it. Dear Lord, there are devotees in the lower planetary systems also, like Bali Mahārāja, who also feel cheated that they have not received this dust of Vraja. Please, somehow or other, be merciful upon us all!’” So the demigods are afraid; even in the lower planets, they’re lamenting, “We don’t have access to this dust,” and we do! So, let us take advantage.

So, we’ll finish there. As I mentioned last week, I think we’ll have some more classes on braja-reṇu. I think I can do two or maybe three or more, let’s see. So, thank you very much for listening. We’ll be with you next Friday. All glories to the revealer of the dawn, Śrīla Prabhupāda! Vṛndāvana is! Thank you very much!
