Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone and welcome back once again to our lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma, Viṣṇu Padāya Kṛṣṇa Preṣṭhāya Bhūte, namaste. All glories to. So I'd like to share a verse to begin with today to set the mood as a meditation on the glories of Vṛndāvana. It's from Śrī Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, chapter 21, text 45. It's spoken by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu: "Vṛndāvana Dhāma is very soft due to the mercy of the Supreme Lord and is especially opulent because of the mood of pure devotion that pervades every speck of dust in Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana is glorious because the transcendental glories of the son of Mahārāja Nanda are exhibited fully there. Under the circumstances, not the least anxiety ever arises in the heart of a true Vrajavāsī." Under the circumstances, not the least anxiety ever arises in the heart of a true Vrajavāsī. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So we are continuing today with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part 125. Śrīla Prabhupāda makes it very clear in the Teachings of Queen Kuntī, chapter 18, how Rādhārāṇī's attire, her dress, can be a stimulus for ecstatic love. This is the subject matter as we move on about the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He writes, it's very beautiful: "The entire Bhāgavatam is glorification of Kṛṣṇa, and this is glorification by Śukadeva Gosvāmī. He says that one can be perfectly purified if one either glorifies Kṛṣṇa, meditates upon him, or simply sits before the deity of Kṛṣṇa and sees him thinking, 'How nicely dressed is Kṛṣṇa, how nicely dressed is Rādhārāṇī.'" So that's our subject today, the attire of the dress of Śrī Rādhārāṇī. Moved up from her lotus feet. But as Śrī Kṛṣṇa's pleasure potency, hlādinī-śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī has the ability to attract or control Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the ācāryas note that her dressing is even more attractive than Kṛṣṇa's. Her dressing is more attractive than Kṛṣṇa's. One of our famous poets, a Brajabhāṣī poet, Paramānanda Dāsa, describes very nicely in one of his poems. I actually quoted this poem a few years ago in our series of lectures. He writes: "Lalitā says to Kṛṣṇa, 'O Kṛṣṇa, our queen Rādhārāṇī wears a gold-embedded chhatrī, whereas you wear only a black woolen kāmalī filled with dust from the cows. Our Rādhā adorns her head with a diamond-studded crown of victory, whereas you tie a turban of torn cloth. Our queen wears necklaces of countless gemstones which sparkle like different shades of the moon, whereas you wear a forest flower garland which has no scent. Our queen wears dresses and skirts of opulence, whereas you dress in a cloth of poverty. She holds a stick of royal power, whereas you just hold a bamboo flute. O Kṛṣṇa, peacocks dance on Rādhārāṇī's nose rings, whereas you have only one feather on your head.' He concludes: 'The queen of Vraja is Rādhā, whereas the son of Nanda is her servant for many lifetimes. The queen of Vraja is Rādhā, whereas the son of Nanda is her servant for many lifetimes.'"

So it's for these reasons that Śrīla Prabhupāda once instructed our pūjārīs in ISKCON to always dress Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī more beautifully than Kṛṣṇa. When recounting her memories of Śrīla Prabhupāda, my godsister Tuṅgavidyā Devī Dāsī said that in Bombay in 1972, when Śrīla Prabhupāda walked into the temple one day to see the deities, he smiled broadly. Prostrating himself before Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, he looked up at them repeatedly and smiled. Then he arose and he said to her, "Thank you very much. Make many thousands of outfits like this and always make Rādhārāṇī more beautiful than Kṛṣṇa. Make many thousands of outfits for this divine couple, but always make Rādhārāṇī more beautiful than Kṛṣṇa." And Prabhupāda concluded: "Then Kṛṣṇa will never leave."

So to begin with, both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's dress and outfits are generally quite simple, living the village life in Vṛndāvana, as opposed to when Kṛṣṇa and his queens are in Dvārakā – there is much more opulence. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī writes in Yugalāṣṭaka, verse 7: "Nīlāmbara-dhārā" – Rādhārāṇī wears a simple bluish cloth. However, it's interesting that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya 215 that she can also wear multicolored clothes as well. He writes specifically: "Rādhikā devī pītāmbarādhārā" – Rādhikā is dressed with multicolored clothes. Now an example of this more opulent and multicolored clothes even in Vraja is seen at Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's coronation ceremony in Vṛndāvana, where she is dressed by her maidservants in the forest. We discussed that ceremony actually in a series of lectures in detail during the COVID period, and at that time I remember we discussed how Jīva Gosvāmī in his Mādhava-mahotsava – famous book – he wrote that after the abhiṣeka, the bathing ceremony of Śrī Rādhā, at that historic moment her maidservants dressed her in an opulent dress befitting a queen – Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Queen of Vṛndāvana. And Jīva Gosvāmī writes that so as not to disappoint them, Rādhārāṇī invested her full potency in that dress that she had been offered. As such, its embroidered swans immediately came to life and cooed in concert with the tinkling of her ankle bells. Then she accepted a delicate sash for her waist scented with perfumes like oud and musk. And as a result, like her complexion, the sash gave off a soft reddish glow that revealed her heart's feelings and radiated love for Kṛṣṇa. Then the gopīs profusely decorated Rādhārāṇī with flower ornaments, and with that she appeared like a floral goddess of Vṛndāvana, making the nearby trees shudder in bliss. And the next part of that ceremony entailed Rādhārāṇī being clothed in a second royal dress. And at that moment the gopī Sañjanā stepped forward and began braiding and decorating Rādhā's hair as part of the dressing, part of the attire. And when she had finished, Rādhā's long braid resembled a black vine decorated with tiny flowers, a variety of gems, and Kṛṣṇa's beloved mind. Then she placed a peacock feather at the end of the braid and asked her assistant, whose name was Chāyā, to add scented oils, tiny garlands of delicate flowers, sindūra, and sindūra in the rest of Rādhārāṇī's hair. Just extra details there. And Chāyā, this gopī, finished by placing a number of dazzling jewels in Rādhārāṇī's hair, making her hair appear like a star-filled sky. Then another gopī began painting patterns on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's face: budding creepers on her forehead, flowering creepers on her cheeks, and a bumblebee-like spot of kuṅkuma on her chin. Another gopī drew a line of kajal around Rādhā's eyes, hung a pearl on the tip of her nose, and put sparkling jewels on her ears. And yet another gopī was about to paint Rādhā's lips when she noticed how rosy Rādhā's smile already was, and thinking that lipstick would only hide the natural beauty of Rādhārāṇī's lips, she put down her brush. And then the same girl fastened a silk band, engraved with Kṛṣṇa's name, around Rādhārāṇī's neck and valuable rings on all ten of her fingers. Our ācāryas say: to what can Śrī Rādhā's fully ornamented beauty be compared? A golden vine fully blossomed, mountains glistening in the sunshine. Hariḥ. Her indescribable glory can only be compared to itself. So in this way we can appreciate that Rādhārāṇī does sometimes dress in ornate ways in Vraja, all for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa of course.

Now the following is a list of different styles of outfits which sometimes adorn Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's transcendental form, and this is all very relishable. Sometimes she wears a gulāb-jāmā – a dress made from rose petals. Nāraja – an outfit of pearls and shells. Ākāśā – a dress of sky blue color. Āmarāśī-pari – green leaf colored blouses with mango colored skirts. Bāṅgānī gāṭā – an eggplant colored dress. Pīyo gāṭā – a turquoise colored dress. Puṣpa-vallarī veśa – an outfit embroidered with vines of flowers. That is a hand-painted dress. Kamala-cakravartī veśa – another hand-painted outfit but with lotuses painted all over the dress. Some of our pūjārīs may want to memorize this when you go to Vṛndāvana to get the people who make dresses there for your deities. Popaṭī raṅgī gāṭā – a dress which has the color of a parrot with red and pink ruby embroidery. Pataṅgī gāṭā – a bright pink dress. Sātanī gāṭā – a seven colored dress. Seven colors. Indradhanuṣī gāṭā – this is a dress that looks like a rainbow, rainbow outfit. Mayūra veśa – an outfit made with peacock feathers. I've seen that in a few ISKCON temples. Śyāma gāṭā – a dress which has the color of a dark monsoon cloud. Candī gāṭā – a silver dress. And kṣīra-candana gāṭā – a dress dyed with saffron and sandalwood paste, and Ārāñī gāṭā – an outfit embedded with silver mirrors. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now the poet Paramānanda Dāsa says in one of his poems: "Śrīṅgāra patto – look my dear friend, the full opulence of Vṛndāvana has arrived. From head to toe, all beauty of the past, present and future has manifested in the personality of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. From the divine womb of mother Kīrtidā, Rādhārāṇī who is the treasure of all types of beauty has appeared in the beautiful land of Vraja." Now while researching about these different dresses, I discovered that some of them were narrow while other dresses or skirts are very wide. And it reminded me of an instruction that Śrīla Prabhupāda gave when he visited our Paris temple in 1974. And during that visit, the pūjārīs had been dressing Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in simple clothes that we purchased in India, and as such the skirts were falling flat around Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa's transcendental form, just like that, flat. So when Prabhupāda saw this, he told the pūjārīs that the skirts had to be much, much wider. He said, you should put some sticks underneath the deity skirts to open them up and make them wider. You should put some sticks underneath the deity skirts to open them up and make them wider. I found that very interesting. And then he said another thing which surprised us all. He said, smiling – and I've mentioned this before – "French girls are the most beautiful in the world. So Kṛṣṇa has come to France to find his French gopī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. French girls are the most beautiful in the world. So Kṛṣṇa has come to France to find his French gopī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī."

Now in Vṛndāvana pastimes, Sudhī Sakhī is saj-samārinī sakhī. It means the attendant of Rādhārāṇī who takes care of her wardrobe, of attire, of dress and everything. And everything in Rādhārāṇī's wardrobe is recorded in the royal court accounts of Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu. Her ornaments, numbering sixty-four, are kept in a special box called sajja-sāṃhāra. And the person in charge of that particular box is Viśākhā Sakhī. And one of the specific duties of these gopīs is to count all the jewelry before decorating Rādhārāṇī with them, and then count all those ornaments again when taking them off so nothing is lost. And Rādhārāṇī's sakhīs also arrange for the making of all of Rādhārāṇī's dresses and outfits. It is said that these outfits are so beautiful to behold that four-faced Brahmā and five-faced Śiva become stunned and call her clothes inconceivable and beyond the comprehension of their minds. And the Vṛndāvana poet Śrī Kayanāraya writes: "Her clothes are so royal that the wives of the king of the demigods, Lord Indra, become jealous and give up any hope of attaining such garments. In fact, Rādhārāṇī's clothes are so magical and mystical that even Kṛṣṇa once chose to wear them in a playful pastime." And we can conclude the day with this pastime. We have many more classes about her attire, about her dress. So let us conclude today with a verse in this connection from Śrīla Prabhupāda's Nectar of Devotion, chapter 42. It's entitled "Fraternal Loving Affairs." It's short but sweet. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes: "Kṛṣṇa once dressed himself up exactly like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī just to create some fun amongst his friends. Just to create some fun amongst his friends, he put on golden earrings and because he was blackish, he smeared the pulp of kuṅkuma all over his body in order to become as fair as she. By seeing this dress, Kṛṣṇa's friend Subala became very astonished." Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you for that. That's all for today.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, jaya, śrī glories. Thank you very much for that.