Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone and welcome back again to our ongoing lectures on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma. Namaste all. So today we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love. This is part 163 and we will carry on with our present theme, the glories of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and this will be the third lecture on her transcendental eyes. Before we begin, I would like to share a beautiful prayer composed by the poet Navala Mādhurī Dāsa. He's a celebrated Brajabhāṣī poet and actually a renowned ācārya in the Śrī Haridāsa Sampradāya in Vraja. And this prayer glorifies the spiritual master, and through it Navala Mādhurī longs to become an object of his guru's vision, hoping thereby to cross over the vast ocean of material existence and this terrible age of Kali, and we can all relate. He writes: "Blessed are the days when the guru casts his merciful glance upon the disciple. That glance purifies the heart and the senses, washing away the dust of ignorance and desire. The sidelong glance of the guru is the greatest treasure in a disciple's life. Bereft of that merciful vision, one simply sinks into the vast ocean of the material energy. O my good fortune, please grant me the compassionate glance of my very dear spiritual master. Please."

Now regarding Rādhārāṇī's eyes, in the Muralī Maṇḍala Parikramā of Śrī Narahari Cakravartī, a beautiful pastime connected to Rādhārāṇī's eyes is described. That Narahari writes, it's very beautiful: "O Śrīnivāsa, behold the village of Añjanaka where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa performed their pastimes. Once Rādhā was dressing herself in a secluded place. She adorned herself with ornaments, tied her hair, and as she was beginning to apply añjana (collyrium) to her eyes, suddenly the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute entered her ears. Immediately Rādhārāṇī left everything and came here with her sakhīs to meet Kṛṣṇa. Seeing her, Kṛṣṇa became overwhelmed and he made Rādhā sit upon a flower-bed āsana arranged by Vṛndādevī. Gazing upon her beauty, Kṛṣṇa noticed that her eyes were not yet fully decorated with añjana. And when he asked the reason, the sakhīs explained how upon hearing the sound of his flute, she left everything and came running to him. Delighted by the opportunity, Kṛṣṇa himself brought añjana (collyrium) and applied it to Rādhā's eyes in great happiness. For this reason, this place is now known as Añjanaka." Wonderful. Now we know why that place got the name Añjanaka.

There's also a wonderful passage in Govinda-līlāmṛta, chapter 46, verses 47 and 48, that illustrate how everything Śrī Rādhā sees reminds her of Kṛṣṇa. This is the depth of her premikā. Everything she sees somehow reminds her of Kṛṣṇa. This is the perfection of always remembering Kṛṣṇa, never forgetting him. It is as follows from Govinda-līlāmṛta: "Seeing the forest with its bluish splendor like Kṛṣṇa's complexion, tilaka flowers resembling Kṛṣṇa's tilaka, great arjuna trees reminding her of Kṛṣṇa's friend Arjuna, blooming kadamba trees and scattered peacock feathers like the ones Kṛṣṇa wears, punnāga, mirobalan, and campaka flowers used in Kṛṣṇa's garlands, gold and coral trees like the ornaments that decorate him, dark tāla trees, guñjā beads, and the cool shade of kadamba groves where he likes to sit, the sweet sounds passing through bamboo just like his flute, vermilion, madana trees, and birds playing freely. Rādhikā mistakes all of this for Kṛṣṇa's body. She mistakes all of this. This reminds her of Kṛṣṇa's body, the fulfiller of all her desires. Whatever her eyes rest upon, she sees features of Kṛṣṇa's form. Cupid's arrows thus pierce her heart causing pain and yet she feels happiness. O, how astonishing is all this, how she sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere."

Now many poets and ācāryas describe the beauty of Rādhārāṇī's eyes using images from nature, comparing those eyes for example to the crescent moon, a first raindrop, a conch, or arrows tipped with sharp edges. But the most commonly used comparison of her eyes is to the lotus flower, with terms like kamala-nayanī, kumuda-nayanī, lalanā, and puṣpa-nayanā. They compare her eyes like that to lotus flowers. But why specifically, with so many other comparisons, the lotus? Well, I found that the poet Paramānanda, whom we often quote, answers this question in one of his poems. He writes, it's so beautiful: because of their softness, their depth and gravity, their fragrance, their natural pink hue, their cooling nature, their many delicate layers, their purity, and because the lotus is Kṛṣṇa's favorite flower, the eyes of Rādhārāṇī are compared to a lotus flower. And actually the poet even praises the lotus itself as supremely fortunate for being compared to her eyes. Wow.

Now the following pastime describes the tears flowing from the eyes of Rādhārāṇī and her gopīs as Akrūra's chariot departs Vṛndāvana for Mathurā with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. At that time Balarāma urged Kṛṣṇa to console the gopīs as they were leaving Vraja. So as they were departing, Kṛṣṇa repeatedly promised the gopīs, "My dear gopīs, I will return the day after tomorrow." Just as they're starting out: "My dear gopīs, on this road, I will return the day after tomorrow." So that stretch of road is now called Paraso. Paraso means "I will return the day after tomorrow." That stretch is called Paraso. Wow. And it is said that the cries of the gopīs there still echo amongst the trees and stir the waters of nearby Paraso Kuṇḍa.

So the gopas, the cowherd boys, eventually stopped following the chariot. But the gopīs could not. They kept following. And as they followed the chariot, their tears and desperate chanting seemed to slow the horses, as if pulling the chariot back. So at last Kṛṣṇa folded his palms and commanded the gopīs to return home, again promising he would come back quickly. And as the gopīs watched Kṛṣṇa fading into a cloud of dust, the mascara washed from their eyes forming dark streams, said to have become the Yamunā river herself. Wow, the mascara from their eyes. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, one of my favorite pastimes connected with Rādhārāṇī's eyes occurred at Pūlvara Kuṇḍa. One day Rādhā was picking flowers to make a garland for Kṛṣṇa when suddenly Kṛṣṇa appeared there with his friends, and it's described his arrival filled her heart with joy, but his subsequent swift departure struck her like a venomous serpent and she fainted. He left as quickly as he arrived, and that was too much for her, and she fainted, and nothing her gopīs tried could revive her. So they rushed to Paurṇamāsī, who said, "The cause of Rādhā's fainting is itself the cure." It's quite deep: "The cause of Rādhā's fainting is itself the cure," meaning Kṛṣṇa. So she said, "Bring him. His touch and his voice will awaken her." So the gopīs searched everywhere and eventually found Kṛṣṇa by the Yamunā river, and they brought him to where Rādhārāṇī lay fainting, unconscious. But upon seeing Rādhārāṇī unconscious, Kṛṣṇa just started crying. Then reaching out, he gently touched her eyes. He reached out and Kṛṣṇa touched her eyes and whispered into her ear, "I am here. Open your eyes. I am here. Open your eyes." And it's described the sound of his voice and his touch acted like powerful medicine. And Rādhārāṇī slowly opened her eyes and arose as if from a deep sleep. And fearing she might faint again if he left, Kṛṣṇa stayed there for quite some time. It's a nice pastime.

Now, here is something wonderful. Of course, it's all wonderful. But the other day, I read that when Rādhārāṇī would pass by other Vrajavāsīs' homes, they envisioned her as the sum total of all auspicious things one could hope to see at the commencement of a journey, an undertaking, or a sacrifice. They saw the ornaments on her ears as flowering creepers in bloom, her braid as the tail of a peacock, her face a fully opened lotus, her eyes – because we're talking about eyes – her eyes as darting hummingbirds, and her smile as a pure white swan. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now I would like to share with you four poems glorifying Rādhārāṇī's eyes composed by four exalted Vaiṣṇava poets: Sūrdāsa, Hari Rāya, Kavi Ānandadāsa, and Govindadāsa. So first, the famous Sūrdāsa writes: Rādhā explains to Lalitā, "My eyes have become servants of that dark-complexioned Kṛṣṇa. That is the only way for them to be happy. But when these eyes are required for other tasks, they can do nothing else but look at Kṛṣṇa. I have humbly asked and even implored the Lord himself to help when needed. I sometimes need to look at something else, but I can't control my eyes. Day and night they spend gazing at Kṛṣṇa's face and they do not listen to a word I say. They are struck by the beauty of his three-fold bending form and have broken all relationships with me. Sūrdāsa says my own eyes have totally neglected me and are also transfixed on that dark and beautiful lad, Śrī Kṛṣṇa." Thank you Sūrdāsa.

Hari Rāya, the poet Hari Rāya, tells Kṛṣṇa: "O my beloved, let me always keep your form in my eyes. The entire universe falls flat in prostration to the beauty of just one of the pores on your body. Let me strongly embrace you, O dark and beautiful one, and taste the nectar of your lips." Hari Rāya says, "I will never reveal to anyone my sweet encounters with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the most beloved and the topmost knower of the most exalted mood of devotion."

Then Kavi Ānandadāsa writes: Kṛṣṇa says to Rādhārāṇī, "Your eyes do not need collyrium to be black, your skin does not need oils to be supplied, and your lips do not need betel to be red. Your teeth are bright without polishing, and you are beautiful even without ornamentation. You do not need perfume to be fragrant, and you know all the arts of love without studying the scriptures." Kavi Ānandadāsa says, "You are the very life breath of my lord, the upholder of Govardhana hill."

Then Govindadāsa writes: Rādhā told her sakhīs, "The creator has no clue. He should have given me eyes in each and every pore of my body so that I could drink the nectar of my beloved's beautiful face without any delay. But he did not do so. Alas, he knew nothing of my longing. If he had given me ears all over my body, I could listen to my beloved's soft, sweet voice constantly. If I had thousands of arms, I could embrace my lord strongly enough to extinguish the fire that burns within my heart." So says the poet Govindadāsa. Hare Kṛṣṇa. It's a lot of nectar.

So I will conclude today with a very beautiful pastime described by the 19th century Bengali poet, the famous person Aṣṭāvakra. He entitled it "Hari bola nakolo barana." So once when Lalitā asked why Rādhārāṇī favored dark blue garments, which she does, Rādhā replied, "When I cannot see or embrace Kṛṣṇa when separated from him, wrapping myself in dark blue cloth reminds me of his embrace. Thus my heart, mind, and body become painted with Śyāma's color." So Lalitā said, "O Rādhe, you are so glorious. I have never witnessed such exalted love anywhere in the three worlds." And Rādhā replied, "My dear friend, without you, my love for Kṛṣṇa is like a dried tulasī plant. You are the one who always waters the desired tree of my hopes and makes my life successful by engaging me in serving Kṛṣṇa in a variety of ways." And when Lalitā Sakhī asked if Śrī Rādhā ever felt completely separated from Kṛṣṇa, it's so nice. Rādhārāṇī replied, "How can I ever feel complete separation from him when my sārī is dark – Śyāma? The clouds above are dark – Śyāma. I see a cuckoo sitting on a dark tāmāla tree – Śyāma. And my eyes are painted with dark collyrium – Śyāma. How can I not see Kṛṣṇa? He is everywhere for me." The reveal of the dhāī. Wow.

So, thank you, prabhus. In our research, we found even more information just about eyes and her glances. So we'll be back next Friday for more nectar. Thank you so much. Vṛndāvana eyes, Kṛṣṇa, Jaya, glories to Śrīla. Thank you. See you next Friday. Bye.