Hi Krishna everyone and welcome back to our ongoing series on the lectures of our most beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Namaste!

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

So, we're continuing with our miniseries on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 78. With our last lecture on, uh, Kavi Karṇapūra, we concluded our discussions on, of poets. And today, we'll begin a new subject, which will be paraphernalia used in the worship of the Deity of the Lord.

Another short little series. Of course, we have discussed paraphernalia in previous lectures, but in this series, we'll focus especially on Deity paraphernalia. And as our first installment, we'll discuss Bells. Bells, actually, chapter 26 of *Nectar of Devotion*, entitled again "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," mentions bells as a stimulation for such love.

There it is written, "A certain Gopi once stated to her friend, 'My dear friend, when I heard the sound of the leg bells of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I immediately started to go out of the house to see Him. But most regrettably, when my superiors were present just before me at that time, and I could not go out.'" I also came across a very beautiful prayer by a Vaiṣṇava poet named Rasika Raya.

Where he, um, could you say, poetically refers to bells awakening love for Guru and Gaṅgā. It's very sweet, and it's very deep. He writes, "I was sleeping in the darkness of ignorance, my bed made out of illusion, and my pillow, my material attachments.

I was seeing the false dreams of lusty and greedy desires. When suddenly, the sweet sound of a bell came to my ears, and my consciousness was diverted to the hands of my beloved Guru, who woke me up by the sweet-sounding ankle bells of Lord Gaurāṅga.

In doing so, He revealed to me the realm of divine love for Gaura Prabhu, my Lord's walking is like the rumbling sounds of bells. His laughing, like the heartbeats of bells. His moving, like the jokes of bells. His words, like the praises of bells.

His every action sounds like the countless jingling of bells, which wake sleeping souls up to dance in the ecstasy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's love." Poet Rasika Raya says, "Serve the Lord such a one who rings the bells of our hearts." Haribol!

Krishna, of course, most of us from Christian backgrounds are familiar with bells and spiritual practices, most notably church bells.

There's an old poem I remember from my youth: "When the old church bell that we love so well, swings aloft in the belfry tall, with a joyous peal, oh, how glad we feel, as we hasten to its call." It's interesting that the, uh, ringing of bells actually played an important part at the beginning of the Hari Krishna movement.

In chapter 19 of our beloved *Śrīla Prabhupāda Lilāmṛta*, entitled "Planting the Seed," we hear, "Śrīla Prabhupāda picked up two brass bells in his left hand and began ringing them, then lighting two sticks of incense from the candle near the picture of Lord Jagannātha and his associates, he began waving the incense slowly in small circles before Lord Jagannātha while still ringing the bells.

He looked deeply at the picture and continued cutting spirals of fragrant smoke all the while ringing the bells." "None of the boys knew what he was doing, although he did it every evening, but it was a ceremony. It meant something." The boys began to call the ceremony "Bells." The boys began to call the ceremony "Bells." After Bells, Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, it would usually be time for the evening saṅkīrtana.

But bells have always been an important part of our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. I came across a poem by a pujārī who served Govinda hundreds of years ago. His name was, um, Kṛṣṇadāsa Brahmacārī. He wrote: "Hear the bell, brother, hear the bell, the music of the sacred sanctum, the reverberation of mantras, the echo of sacred hymns, the vibration of prayers, all ringing together in the bell in the sacred sanctum of Govindajī." Kṛṣṇadāsa says, "I will leave all the music of Indraloka behind to ring the bell in the kuñja of Madana-mohana." Now, *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam's* de worship handbook, entitled *Ārcana Paddhati*, describes the bell used in pūjā as follows: "The sound of a bell embodies all music.

If a devotee lacks instruments and saṅkīrtana, he should simply ring a bell, for that sound in itself is dear to the Lord. Thus, one should worship the Pūjā Bell before worshiping the Lord as an item of His paraphernalia that is very dear to Him." Many functions of worship require that one ring a bell with a handle.

I was reading that in ancient times, brāhmaṇas in South India used to ring very large bells while doing pūjā. That is why they're, uh, often described in, or depicted, you could say, in old drawings and paintings as very large and powerful men, because they used big bells.

Actually, according to the Pañcarātra tradition of worship, such brāhmaṇas and priests, uh, use bells made of either, uh, bell metal, um, silver, copper, or brass. But bells made of gold, iron, and other alloys were, uh, not used. And the interesting thing is that it was written how much the bells used in pūjā for different Deities should weigh.

In other words, for this Deity, you know, you use a bell that's this heavy. For that Deity, use a bell which is another way, like, like that. And I researched, and I was astonished to learn that all these bells used, especially in South India, here, were extremely heavy.

For example, for worshiping Śaraṇa Chakra and Lord Nṛsiṃha, the bell had to weigh eight kilos of pure bell metal. Eight kilos!

For Varāha Deva, the pujārī used a bell of seven kilos of pure bell metal. For Vīra, six kilos of pure bell metal. For Lord Rāma, the pujārī rang a bell of five kilos of pure bell metal. For Paraśurāma, for the Deity of the Deities, the pujārī used four kilos, a bell made of four kilos of pure bell metal.

And for Halāyudha, Lord Balarāma, three kilos of pure bell metal. For Hayagrīva, uh, the bell was two kilos of pure bell metal. For Trivikrama, less than two kilos of pure bell metal. And for Kṛṣṇa, one kilo of pure bell metal.

And for Śālagrāma Śilā, the pujārī would ring a bell less than one kilo of pure bell metal. Very detailed Deity worship. So, just imagine these, uh, paricārikas, these brāhmaṇas, ringing these huge bells by hand while doing, uh, pūjā. But it's a fact.

Now, the procedure of using bells in pūjā is written in many different, uh, śāstras. One description is found in a śāstra known as *Padma Dīpa*. *Padma Dīpikā*, and there, I found a prāṇāma mantra, uh, is given that is chanted just before ringing the bell. "Om Anandavallī namaha." Translated, it means, "I offer my respects to you, O Divine Bell.

You are the best amongst musical instruments. Your divine sounds are liked by all the demigods. Oh, sacred sound, without your presence, no Lord or ritual is pleased." Then, while ringing the bell in the right hand, the pujārī would chant, "Om Gaṁ." "I am ringing a bell to invoke the demigods, to remove the existence of demons, and for the happiness of all living creatures.

Following Vedic principles, I invoke the sacred sounds of the bell." I never knew we could get so much information about bells in Vedic culture, but seeking, he shall find. It's all there in the scripture. Then the pujārī would offer a flower to the bell, saying, "Om Gaṁ, I offer my respects to the best of all instruments, the bell, the best of all instruments." Of course, ISKCON, we use a slightly different standard and different mantras, but it's interesting to hear the history of bells in ancient times.

One very interesting thing, though, is that this *Padma Dīpa*, this scripture describes the places where demigods reside on the bell's structure as follows: The lower part of the bell is the āsana of Lord Brahmā. The hanging metal part inside which rings is the āsana of Sarasvatī.

The handle of the bell is the place of Gaṇeśa, and the top of the bell can be for any vāhana, carrier of the Deity that one is worshiping. Now, regarding that, the top part of the bell. Bells with the top of a bull are only meant to be used by followers of Lord Śiva.

Bells with a conch on top of the bell are only meant to be used by Śrī Vaiṣṇavas and Ramanujas. Bells with Garuḍa on top are meant to be used by followers of Lord Rāma. Bells with a chakra on top are meant to be used only by devotees of Lord Jagannātha, because, you know, in the Jagannātha temple, there's a huge chakra on top.

And bells with no shape on top, or a top shaped like a peacock, a flower, or a gopī, a cowherd girl, are to be used only by Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas or other Vṛndāvana-vāsis.

I thought that was interesting. Other shapes who mentioned like the conch, the chakra, the Garuḍa, the tops of those of the bells are not to be used, uh, uh, in Vṛndāvana, because they are symbols of Lord Viṣṇu, who was worshiped in the mood of, uh, parāvāra, or on veneration, in Vaikuṇṭha.

That mood does not exist in Vṛndāvana.

In Vṛndāvana, as we know, the gopīs worship Kṛṣṇa in the intimacy of love.

Therefore, bells for worship in Vṛndāvana don't have any symbols of Viṣṇu.

So interesting. Now, śāstra goes on to mention the different sounds of bells used in worship of the Lord. Actually, it mentions seven different types of sounds, like as follows: Mañju means a sound not too loud and not too soft.

Ujjvalikā, this means a bell that makes a loud but sweet sound. Bipana keyini, a noisy sound and very loud. Madhu vinī, very, uh, soft, sweet sound. Viśva vāṇī, it means a mixed yet beautiful type of sound. And Goma rāṇī, the sound of mooing cows.

You can imagine you're ringing a bell, it sounds like mooing cows. And Haṁsa nādinī, a sound like a group of Haṁsa birds. Wow!

An interesting tradition is that in Bengal, two different types of bells are used in worship. One is big, and one is small. Small bells are used for offering bhoga, and big bells are used when offering āratī. The Goṭhās, but in Vṛndāvana, it's said only one big bell is used for all the, uh, āratīs.

Now, in Vṛndāvana, in the land of love and bliss, bells are not only articles used in worship, paraphernalia used in worship, but they are used as decorations and even jewelry on the transcendental forms of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī often wears, I was reading, bell-like earrings.

And Kṛṣṇa wears a thread of bells tied around His waist, called kiṅkiṇī. Kiṅkiṇī in Sanskrit. He also wears a bell as a pendant in a necklace around His neck. And I was reading, He also wears bells in a turban, called guṅgu, guṅgu, guṅgu.

And of course, we know He wears ankle bells. The poet Śaśiśeśkhara, who we have often quoted, most expertly alludes to bells when describing the beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. It's so beautiful. He writes, "O sakhi, the transcendental body of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the sacred temple of Śyāmasundara.

Her heart is the āsana of the Lord. Her eyes are the doorsteps of that temple. Her eyelashes are the curtain of that temple. Her forehead is the canopy of the temple. Her lotus mouth is the jhaṅkāra sound of the temple.

Her ears are the walls of the temple. Her nose is the ringing bells in the temple." Poet Śaśiśeśkhara says, "Worship the beautiful queen Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who dedicated her everything in the service of Govinda." Thank you, Śaśiśeśkhara. Now, not only in Kṛṣṇa-līlā, but also in Gaura-līlā, the use of bells is very significant.

In the śāstra *Gaura-Gaṅgā*, attributed to the scholar Keśava Kaśmīra Paṇḍita, who, of course, was delivered by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu and continued his poetry, it's written. I really like this part. "In Gaura-līlā, in the house of Mahāprabhu, Viṣṇupriyā shows Him a lamp.

Mother Śacī blows the conch, and Īśāna, um, his house servant, rings the bell in the courtyard. Of the house of Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, Nanda Babu does the āratī to show Him Mahāprabhu the lamp. Atala blows the conch, and Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita rings the bell.

In the forest of Bengal, while coming back to his residence in the evening, Haridāsa shows the lamp to him. Narahari twirls the whisk. Vasudeva blows the conch, and Kaḍara Babu rings the bell. In Gambhīra, Svarūpa Dāmodara shows the lamp to him.

Raya Rāmānanda blows the conch, and Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya rings the bell, while the small boy Gopāla Guru dances while saying, 'Jaya Jaya Jaya!' In Vṛndāvana, the eyes of cows show them the lamp.

The dear Samir soft breeze blows the conch. The trees and flowers move like a flying whisk, and the flowing water of the Yamunā rings the bell. The flowing water of the Yamunā rings the bell." Haribol!

Okay, go on forever, right?

So, we will finish today with a beautiful pastime from, uh, the pen of the Vaiṣṇava poet and author Lokanātha Gosvāmī, whose life and works we discussed recently in another lecture. It's called, appropriately, "The Lost Bell." Once upon a time, all the gopīs of Vṛndāvana came to the doorstep of Rāṇī's palace and said, "Oh, most merciful princess of Vṛndāvana, please hear our request." So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was sitting in her chambers, heard the gopīs and invited them in for darśana.

Now, the group of gopīs was headed by Lalitā Sakhi. And as they entered, she came forward and said, "Oh, Rādhā, we are very distressed by the activities of this Kṛṣṇa. Not only is He breaking our water pots, stealing our butter, hiding our clothes on the trees, and fooling all of us with His so-called love.

This time, He has done something very bad to us. He made a group of His illiterate, coward boys open all the belts of bells around our cows' necks and freed them from our gopas. Now, all our cows are lost in the forest.

We can't find them because we can't hear their bells." So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī smiled and said, "Dear gopīs, I'm very sorry to hear this, but the reality is that you love the hero of all playful pastimes. You love the hero of all playful pastimes.

It's not His fault, but ours, that we have become so attached to Him. But I have a remedy for it. Let us steal His kiṅkiṇī, His belt made of 100 bells, with which He attracts the senses of all the cows, like bells hanging on the cows' necks attract Him to them." Lalitā said, "Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, did you hear the saying from our Guru, Janārdana? 'If not this, then that,' which would mean in this case, 'If not the bells, then the flute will work for sure.'" So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī smiled and said, "When that time comes, I will show Him my face, and by looking at my face, He will be unable to blow air into His flute from His lips.

Thus, He will be unable to collect His cows, and He will surrender to me, and I will give Him all kinds of punishments." So, how does this unfold? "Not this, not that." "If not this, then that." So, meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa, desiring to bathe in the Yamunā, left all His cows near the bank of the river.

He removed all His ornaments and drove into the water to swim with His friends. And at that point, Lalitā appeared on the scene. She came to the bank and stole His kiṅkiṇī bell belt and hid it in the forest.

It's described with the help of Yoga-māyā. And after finishing His water pastimes, Kṛṣṇa came out of the water and He quickly dressed Himself. Actually, with the help of all His coward friends, one boy dried His body with cotton towels, another styled His hair to dry, some friends tied His dhoti, others tied His turban, some boys decorated His forehead with fresh sandalwood paste, some put on His earrings, some put flower garlands around His feet, and some fanned Him with lotus leaves and sprinkled Him with Yamunā jal.

And after showing Him His reflection in the waters of the Yamunā, they all told Him, "Kṛṣṇa, now it's time to call the cows by ringing Your kiṅkiṇī bell belt." But as soon as Kṛṣṇa searched for the belt around His waist, He discovered it wasn't there.

And panicking, He told all His coward friends, "Start searching for it everywhere." So, the boys started looking in the immediate area, and then it's described in every forest grove in Vṛndāvana, but they simply couldn't find it.

So, then Madhu Maṅgala told Kṛṣṇa, "Play Your flute. Okay, if you don't have the kiṅkiṇī bell belt, just play Your flute. We can go home. Just play Your flute," he said, "before it gets dark," because it was getting late, um, for them to go back to the Gopa.

However, when Kṛṣṇa put His flute to His lips and started putting His fingers on the holes of the flute, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her gopī friends suddenly appeared nearby. And He got distracted, described by the infinite and endless and matchless beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

The infinite, endless, and matchless beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and He was unable to play His flute. So, putting aside His flute, Kṛṣṇa said to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, "Dear Rādhā, I offer my respects to your divine beauty. It always encourages me to perform my duties.

But today, the nature of your beauty is distracting me from the art of playing my flute. In the state of mind, I am remembering all my past activities and find myself guilty of cheating your sakhīs by arranging to steal the belts of the bells of their cows." So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī smiled and said, "My dear Śyāmasundara, then give up your ways of playing with my innocent gopīs." Kṛṣṇa replied, "Oh, Rādhā, along with you, they all live within my heart.

They were not giving me their butter, so I decided to take revenge and let all their cows go free. And you couldn't find them because my boys stole their neck bells. Now, in your presence, I admit I was wrong." Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said, "You've accepted your mistake, so now you may go." So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh, Rādhā, I will, but please return my kiṅkiṇī belt." So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said, "For that, Kṛṣṇa, you have to collect all the cows and bring them back to the respective gopas of the sakhīs." With that instruction, Kṛṣṇa called all his cowherd friends and ordered them to follow Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's instruction.

And at that point, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī tied the kiṅkiṇī belt back around Kṛṣṇa's waist. Then Lalitā Sakhi performed āratī to the divine couple, while all the sakhīs together rang beautiful sounding bells in their hands. "Let Rasika Raya," at the end, he prays to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, "Oh, queen of Vṛndāvana, please bless me with Kṛṣṇa-prema, for you alone are able to bestow it." Haribol!

Wasn't that nectar?

Supreme nectar!

Haribol!

So, yes, the first of this little, little miniseries. And, um, bells, who can imagine so much nectar from bells?

But everything is to be glorified. And so, we'll finish here and, um, see you next Friday for more glories. Jaya Jaya Śrī Śrī Gurudeva!

Haribol!

Haribol!

Haribol!