Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved favorite of Sri Radha and Krishna, Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja. “namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.” Namaste Sarasvatī Devī Gauravāṇī Pracārine Nirviśeṣa Śūnyavādi Paścātya Deśa Tārine.

I'd also like to recite another prayer to Śrīla Prabhupāda: "O beloved spiritual master, you are always in the presence of the Cowherd Girl Śrī Rādhā, the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu.

Please award me service at your lotus feet, which are the proprietors of devotional service. Please place me in the ocean of joy by bestowing upon me happiness in the mellows of service at the feet of Śrī Rādhā in the groves of Śrī Vṛndāvana." Hare Kṛṣṇa!

So today, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimuli for ecstatic love, and this will be part 18. Number 18. As we mentioned one time, such discussions are a perfect way to begin the day. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura liked to quote the following verse from the Nārada Bhakti Sūtras: “cloudy day is not inauspicious, but the day devoid of discussing Kṛṣṇa-kathā is inauspicious.” So, in this series, we've covered different types of stimuli which can help to develop our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as well as awaken a firm desire in our hearts to be part of the Divine Pastimes.

So far, we've spoken on such items as flowers, blankets, Kṛṣṇa’s flute, peacock feathers, and birds. Each and every object in Vṛndāvana, whether moving or stationary, living or non-living, is connected to the pastimes of the Lord, and therefore helps us to remember the Divine Couple.

And when a devotee comes to the point of constantly remembering the Lord in loving devotion, then he's finally come to the stage, what we would describe as samādhi. That’s our definition of samādhi: to always remember the Lord in loving devotion.

So today, I would like to continue our previous discussions on the birds of Vṛndāvana by introducing you to the cakravā and cakravī birds.

The cakravā and cakravī birds. The cakravā is a male. I saw a photograph with a black line on its neck, similar to, I guess you could say, a black ribbon. And the cakravī is his female counterpart, but she doesn't have that black line on her neck.

That’s how you distinguish the two. They're kind of golden in color, actually. Now, they're known in Vṛndāvana as dampati-pakṣī, meaning married birds, both in Śāstra and amongst, I guess you could say, present-day bird watchers.

Cakravā and cakravī are famous for their intense love for each other. Because of this attachment to each other, they actually can’t live without each other. Therefore, they're almost always seen together. And whatever food one bird gets, he shares it with the other through his or her beak.

And they're often seen on the banks of Vṛndāvana’s lakes and small ponds and other bodies of water.

And they’re known as jala-jīvanas, meaning literally whose lives are water. Jala-jīvanas, whose lives are water. Therefore, sometimes people mistake them for ducks, but they're not ducks, actually. They're better known as lovebirds. Lovebirds!

And are most famous for love and separation. For when the day ends and the sun begins to set, they become very anxious at the prospect of not being able to see each other in the darkness of night. In fact, I was reading, they start crying as if they're going to be separated forever.

Okay, just imagine, they're so intensely involved, they love each other so much. So they start crying like they're going to be separated forever. Some accounts say that the male cakravā, he spends the night in the forest, whereas the female cakravī, she flies away a little bit and she spends the night waiting on the banks of a nearby lake.

Then when the sun rises the next day, these lovebirds fly to meet each other as if they're meeting for the first time. Which is very much the mood in Vṛndāvana.

As we've often described, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are always as if the first time. So these birds exemplify that. Now, the Ācāryas say that in the evening, when Rādhā and her girlfriends hear the cakravā and cakravī birds cry, and get this prospect of separation, they too become anxious at the prospect of separation from Kṛṣṇa.

They also become anxious, “Oh, maybe we're going to be, what's going to happen when we're separated from Kṛṣṇa?” Wow.

So, when this happens, Śrī Rādhā actually runs to meet Kṛṣṇa at Vaṁśīvaṭa, where He's playing His flute. And the poet, oh, poet, because we caught him so many times, Sūradāsa, describes this very beautifully in one of his poems. He writes: “Śrī Rādhā, on listening to the cries of the cakravā and cakravī, becomes overwhelmed, and her heart begins to instruct her mind as follows: Her heart begins to instruct her mind as follows: ‘Bird of my mind, please take me to the lake known as Caraṇa-sarovara, the Lake of the nectar of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, where there is no illusion of separating at night and where there is no pain of separation.

Take me to that sarovara where Lord Śiva and the sage Sanaka are the swans, where other sādhus are the fish, where lotuses bloom, and where there's no fear of night, even for the duration of the blinking of an eye.

With the bees chant the divine hymns of the nigama literature, where she says liberation is easily available, and where everyone drinks the nectar of good deeds. Oh mind, leaving that sarovara behind, why are you sinking here, sinking in the ocean of unfulfilled desires of love for Kṛṣṇa?

Go now to that sarovara where the goddesses of Fortune play in the waters.’ Who was like a cakravī bird could not live without the Caraṇa-sarovara of Lord Kṛṣṇa.” That’s so nice. Now, in a similar mood, another of our favorite poets, Lalita Kishor, he writes in his, um, poem, it’s called, let me remember, Vihanga-līlā.

Vihanga-līlā, quote: “It is said that the crying of the cakravī and cakravā birds is the sound that indicates the time of meeting one's beloved. So do not cry, Rādhā, run immediately towards the groves of Vṛndāvana where Manmohan Kṛṣṇa is waiting for you.” These poets give us great access into the deeper understandings of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Now, just as the sound of the crying of the cakravā and cakravā birds fills the heart of Śrī Rādhā with, you know, vipralambha-bhāva, with feelings of separation, another bird, another famous bird, the cuckoo bird of Vṛndāvana, fills the heart of Śrī Rādhā with feelings of happiness with the sound of its sweet singing of the loving affairs of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa when they meet, saṁbhoga, when they meet.

So, the cuckoo birds of Vṛndāvana, they're they're dark in color, which it's said serves to remind all the Gopis of Kṛṣṇa.

And the cuckoo birds, who sing in high pitches, these cuckoo birds are actually considered to be the king and queen of singing in the Vṛndāvana forest.

They sing in high pitches, high notes. And no bird, I was reading, can sing more beautifully in Vṛndāvana than the cuckoo bird.

I read that when the cuckoo birds sing, all the other forest birds, and there are just so many different types who also sing very nicely, they become quiet and listen to this sweet, as it’s described, intoxicating sounds of the cuckoo birds, which reverberate through the trees.

Now, because of being black with red beak and red eyes, the the cuckoo bird is often compared to Kṛṣṇa, with this dark complexion, His uh, His red lips, and His reddish eyes. And because He uh very beautifully can play His flute in high pitches, remember the cuckoo bird, they sing in high pitches, high notes.

Now, here’s an interesting note. Sometimes, the famous Papiha bird, there’s a bird called Papiha. This bird sometimes sings along with the cuckoo bird, filling in between the cuckoo's notes, because the notes are separate, of course. So this Papiha bird, he or she fills in between the cuckoo's notes with a sound like, “Whooo,” of course, I can't do it properly.

I could not not a one of those, um, one of those Papiha birds. But the sound is something similar to “pee hoo, pee hoo.” Which is a low pitch sound. Cuckoo singing high-pitched. And this uh, particular bird sings in a low-pitched sound, which in Bṛjabhāṣā means “beloved.” Beloved, beloved.

And the Ācāryas say that the combination of the Papiha and the cuckoo's lower than high-pitched sounds reflects two stages of love. Reflects two stages of love, which are number one, love in silence, and number two, bold and daring love for Kṛṣṇa.

Now, those Gopis, the Ācāryas described, those Gopis who are bound by household duties and cannot go out independently to dance with Kṛṣṇa, are the reflection of the lower pitch sound of the Papiha bird, or love in silence, because they can't leave home.

So, love in silence. And Gopis like Śrī Rādhā, Lalitā, and Viśākhā are a reflection of the higher pitched notes of the cuckoo bird, in which their love is considered bold and daring in the service of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. Now, an interesting fact is that the cuckoo birds, they know how to sing in various rāgas.

Remember, they're not ordinary birds. They're self-realized sages, or their pure devotees of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So the cuckoo birds, they can sing in, in rāgas like the Rāmakali rāga, like the Mālkauṁsa rāga, like the Bahāra rāga. And there's one more, uh, the, the Bhīmapālakā rāga, which are all sung in higher pitched notes, and which bring a, a sense of joy and excitement to the hearts of the Bṛja Gopis in hopes of meeting and seeing Kṛṣṇa very soon.

So, the birds have a nice service. Now, there's one Śāstra we used to quote a couple of years ago. It's called the Subhāṣita-ratna-bhāṇḍāgāra, long name. There, and it said that a Vaiṣṇava is supposed to be like a cuckoo, meaning, he or she should be a connoisseur of art and music.

But that Śāstra points out that if and when a Vaiṣṇava finds himself in an assembly that doesn't appreciate, you know, culture, arts, or fine music, that Vaiṣṇava should keep silent. The Sanskrit is: “O Cuckoo, it’s so nice that when the rainy season arrived, you started observing perfect silence, because when frogs become the prominent noise makers in Vṛndāvana, that silence is golden.” So, the import, the Ācāryas give the import, is that when arasikas, arasikas means non-connoisseurs of art, are given in prominent, or given prominent places in society, you know, they're always speaking, they're important persons, they're always speaking, drowning everyone out with whatever they're saying, the saintly Vaiṣṇava should observe silence.

It also goes on to say that even though Vaiṣṇavas are like cuckoos, they should not always shy away from showing their qualities of speaking or singing nicely, otherwise people will never know what true art, music, and literature is. And there's a nice Sanskrit verse in that book as well: “O Cuckoo, don't always maintain a complete silence.

Occasionally, you should sing your fifth note, the sweetest one. If you don't do that, then how will people ever know you are in this mango tree full of ka… and crows?” The import is, some advertisement is necessary for preaching.

The Ācāryas say that our modern age is such that those who speak a lot can sell dust, whereas those who speak little cannot manage to sell even diamonds. We hear of the famous fifth note in music. This fifth note is often compared to the cuckoo's cry.

In the Vedas, there are actually seven musical notes. They are known as svaras. They are as follows: (The speaker then lists the seven svaras in Sanskrit with their corresponding names.) And each of these notes has a name. For example, Sa is known as Sañjja.

Ri has the name Ṛṣabha. Ga has the name Gāndhāra. Ma, Madhya, Pa, the fifth note, Pañcama. Dha, Daivata. And Ni, Niṣāda. And in, uh, I guess you could say, Western music, we have the equivalent, equivalent version of these notes as follows.

We know Do, Re, Mi, So, La, Ti, Do. They correspond. So the equivalent of Do in Vedic Sanskrit is Sa. Re is Ri. Mi is Ga. So is Ma. Pa, the fifth note. La is Da. And Ti is Ni.

It's a little technical, but it's interesting for, uh, students of… Now, in Vedic music, each note is actually associated with the sound of a particular bird or animal.

Sa is like the peacock's cry. Ri is the cow calling her calf. Ga is like the goat's bleat. Ma is the heron's cry. Pa is the cuckoo's cry. Then, let me remember, Dha is the horse's neigh. And Ni is the elephant's trumpeting.

So, Śāstra says that the cuckoo's cry, Pa, is exactly like that of lovers expressing their intense love for each other. The fifth note, Pa, generates this, this effect, this loving effect. Thus, the Ācāryas say, it is the fifth note that produces the topmost emotion in the heart of Kṛṣṇa's greatest lover, Rādhā, since it reminds her of her loving pastimes with Kṛṣṇa.

Now, I was thinking of a corresponding verse to that, and of course, it's there in CC Madhya Līlā, Text 176, where in that famous verse, refers to the fifth note. To the to the fifth note, we hear her say: “My dear friend, now I have met my very old and dear friend Kṛṣṇa on this field of Kurukṣetra.

I am the same Rādhā Rāṇī, and now we are meeting together. It is very pleasant, but still I would like to go to the bank of the Yamunā beneath the trees of the forest. There I wish to hear the vibration of His sweet flute playing, the fifth note, within that forest of Vṛndāvana playing the fifth note within that forest of Vṛndāvana.” Hari Kṛṣṇa!

Now, there's a very nice pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, including cuckoo birds, which took place at Yavata, where Rādhā Rani lived after getting married to Abhimanyu. You may remember, she lived there in that palace with her in-laws, Jutilā, who was her husband's mother, and Kotilā, who was Abhimanyu's sister.

And Rādhā Rani considered her home in Yavata to be actually like a prison, because her in-laws were always suspicious that she may try to meet Kṛṣṇa. And it's a fact, Rādhā Rani was always trying to get out of Yavata, out of the palace, to meet Kṛṣṇa.

And Kṛṣṇa was always trying to get into the palace in Yavata to meet Rādhā Rani. So, one day, Kṛṣṇa, who we mentioned earlier resembles a black cuckoo, went to a part of the Vṛndāvana forest, to a part of the Vṛndāvana forest to enlist the help of the cuckoo birds there to help free Rādhā Rani from her prison in Yavata.

So, there He called all the the cuckoos by playing musical notes that sounded like the cuckoo singing. The Ācāryas say that soon all the cuckoo birds in Vṛndāvana joined Him in a chorus that echoed throughout Bṛja.

I also read that Kṛṣṇa danced while playing His flute, which really excited the birds. So, then, very soon, the sound of the birds singing combined with Kṛṣṇa's flute playing, where He could also sing like or make the sounds of the cuckoos, brought all the residents of Vṛndāvana to their rooftops to see what was going on, a big cacophony of sound.

This included Jatilā, of course, who came out of her, her home, the palace, to see what was happening. Now, on that day, Viśākhā was visiting Rādhā Rani. So Jatilā said to her, “Viśākhā, I have never heard cuckoos sing so beautifully before.” So Viśākhā said, “Yes, for some reason, the birds must be rejoicing.” So Jatilā nodded, saying, “Yes, it is all exceptionally beautiful, isn't it?” So, at this point, Viśākhā, who is described as very clever, suspected that Kṛṣṇa might somehow be behind this, um, cuckoo's festival.

So she said to Jatilā, “Mother, could myself and Rādhā Rani go to see what has excited these birds?

We'll bring you back a report.” So Jatilā replied, “Yes, dear, go ahead and enjoy seeing the cuckoos singing from close up.” Then she said, “But you come right back with Rādhā Rani. That's Jatilā.” So, when Viśākhā told Rādhā Rani the plan, Śrī Rādhā got dressed very quickly in her finest garments and ornaments and hurried off with Viśākhā, as well as other of her girlfriends, to the forest.

Now, Śāstra says that Rādhā Rani said nothing to these other girls about the prospect of meeting Kṛṣṇa. However, the loud beating of her heart let her friends know that Kṛṣṇa was on her mind. They didn't know, but they they understood, because the loud beating of her heart let her friends know that Kṛṣṇa was on her mind.

So, as soon as everyone arrived at this the designated place in the forest, they were overwhelmed with the sound of cuckoo singing. In fact, the singing was so intense that it completely drowned out all other sounds. Top of that, the forest was so thick and so dense that at first the Gopis became confused where the sound was coming from.

But at last, they noticed a tree that was covered entirely with blissful singing cuckoos, and beneath the tree, lo and behold, stood Kṛṣṇa, directing this choir of birds in their singing with His hands. Seeing that the Gopis had arrived, Kṛṣṇa, you know, He lowered His hands, and the cuckoos, realizing that their purpose had been fulfilled, stopped singing.

Then they just all looked around, you know, curious, what's going to happen next. Meanwhile, back in Yavata, this abrupt ending to the cuckoos' singing startled Jatilā. She thought, "What a shame!

These girls must have frightened the birds and made them stop singing." But of course, we know the cuckoos had not been frightened, but rather, they were in bliss as they crowded up together in the branches of the trees, feeling, it's described, privileged to watch a fresh new pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together that they had facilitated with their singing.

In other words, every being in Vṛndāvana has some important service to render in the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So those cuckoos, they were totally satisfied. So, we'll finish today with some words of one of my heroes, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, in his Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta, chapter 2.

He writes: “The growth of attractive trees and creepers laden with flowers and fruits of variegated colors; the attractive, intoxicating, blissful calls of many peacocks, cuckoos, and parrots; the many attractive lakes, rivers, mountains, and attractive bowers; and the attractive land made of gold and jewels have attracted me to Vṛndāvana.

May my mind reflect upon Vṛndāvana, its clean earth made of the most colorful cintāmaṇi, its creepers and trees full of fruits and flowers, glowing with knowledge and bliss, its flocks of birds chanting the Sama Veda, and its rivers and lakes of spiritual rasa.

Who would not serve the highest Govindavana where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, flattering each other in many ways, pluck flowers from trees and creepers with great joy while bathing in its lakes and playing with the birds and playing with the birds?” All right, Kṛṣṇa!

Wow!

So, we'll finish there. Um, actually, we're still in Rishikesh on the banks of Mother Ganges. We've been here almost three weeks. We just have, I think, three, three days left. So, we have mixed emotions, you know, it's it's ecstasy, and then we're lamenting, we may have to leave this saver very soon.

It's been so wonderful. Three weeks, three weeks. Every night, four or five hundred Westerners are coming. They're all here, as I've mentioned before, to learn about yoga, but they buy our advertising, by word of mouth, they come to our festival.

We can't even put one more person in the hall, it's just totally packed. And we've just relished, relished introducing them to the chanting and making friendship with them. We've taken a lot of contacts. And of course, there's a delicious feast cooked every night.

We're going to miss that service. But, um, Kṛṣṇa consciousness always gets better. Just after we end here, I'm taking 20 devotees to, uh, Kathmandu, Nepal, to be with the devotees there and do Hare Nāma Mahāyāga.

Invitation, bring people back to the temple, and do the same thing all over again forever. But we'll be back, uh, in, in one week with, um, I think we could do one more class on the birds in Vṛndāvana, stimuli for hearing about their service.

It gives us the stimuli for developing love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So, thank you. See you soon. Hey!

Glorious Prabhupāda!