Hari Krishna everyone and a warm welcome back once again to our ongoing lecture series entitled the glories of Śrī Vrindāvana dhāma.

Om Viṣṇupād paramahaṁsa parivrājakācārya aṣṭottara-śata śrī śrīmad A.C. Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda mahārāj.

So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 180, in which we continue with our present theme of the glories of Vrindāvanaśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, specifically this class, her tears. But before we begin, I would like to quote a very beautiful verse about Śrī Vrindāvana dhāma.

It's from Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya Leela, Chapter 21, verse 45. Like, you could say, to set the scene, the verse states: "Vṛndāvana dhāma is very soft due to the mercy of the Supreme Lord and is especially opulent because of the mood of conjugal love that pervades every speck of dust.

In Śrī Vrindāvana, Vṛndāvana is glorious because the transcendental pastimes of the son of Mahārāja Nanda are exhibited fully there.

Under the circumstances, not the least anxiety ever arises in the heart of a true vrajābasī." That's my favorite, uh, line. "Under the circumstances, not the least anxiety ever arises in the heart of a true vrajābasī." All glories to the residents of Vṛndāvana.

Now, continuing with our discussions on Rādhārāṇī's tears, I think this is the fourth class about her tears. In Utkaṇṭha-ullāsa, verses 13, 21, 22, and 23, we hear how much Krishna feels obliged to her when she expresses her love for Him through tears, by crying tears.

Here it is. Pausing for a moment, Śrī Krishna remembered an incident that took place long ago. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was picking flowers in the Vṛndāvana forest, became overwhelmed with ecstasy by accidentally hearing the sound of His flute.

Seeing Rādhikā's reaction, a gopī immediately ran to Krishna, who was tending the cows as they drank water by the bank of the Yamunā.

That gopī said, "Krishna, when Rādhārāṇī heard the sound of Your flute, she was inundated by a monsoon of perspiration, and tears flowed from her eyes like a river, and her bodily hairs stood up like blossoming flowers.

Stunned and pale, she so resembled Sarasvatī, and she so resembled Sarasvatī that simple people thought Rādhikā to be that deity, that form of the goddess, and began to worship her to become scholars." So Krishna said to that gopī, "My dear sakhī, I become so conquered by the love of My devotees that I give Myself completely to anyone who can offer that rare and priceless love.

O sakhī, know this for certain: I have eternally given My very heart in exchange for pure love." Hari Krishna.

But not only is Krishna overwhelmed by Śrīmatī when He sees her crying tears of love for Him, but so are her girlfriends, her maidservants, as well.

When they see her crying, they become overwhelmed and they start crying. This is explained by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta, commentary on text 5, verse 7: "Tears reign supreme in Braja.

He writes, 'May Śrī Rādhā, whose beautiful youthful form shines with waves of splendor like molten gold, whose every movement is filled with graceful and sweet loving pastimes, whose trembling voice, flowing tears, shivering limbs, and other ecstatic symptoms of love for the dark-complexioned Śrī Krishna, fill her sakhīs with wonder and make the hairs on their bodies stand erect when they come with her to her favorite grove.

Be my queen; may she be my queen.' " So they also, her girlfriends also, experience ecstatic symptoms by seeing her, seeing Krishna, seeing the divine couple together.

Tears, tears, tears. Now, he expresses the, um, the same in the commentary on text 17, verse 24, while at the same time asking for a special benediction. Devotees are always asking for, for, for mercy. So just listen to his prayer for mercy.

He writes, "May Vṛndāvana's queen, shedding tears of great mercy, be kind to me.

May the desire vine of her mercy bear fruit, and may I always live in her favorite garden. It's my favorite part: 'And may I always live in her favorite garden.' That is his desire." Now, one last nectarine verse before we move on to a pastime.

This is a unique verse where both Śrīmatī and her maidservants cry at the same time. We, Krishna cries, Radha cries, the girlfriends cry, her girlfriends cry.

It's just interesting in this research I came across this. Sometimes Rādhārāṇī and her maidservants cry at the same time. This is all about tears, this class. So in verse, it's from Govinda-līlāmṛta, verse 110. "Śrī Rādhikā and her dear girlfriends became overwhelmed with ecstatic love when they saw Mādhava, Śrī Krishna, appearing like the beautiful spring season.

At that moment, their transcendental emotions blossomed like mālavī flowers in full bloom. The goosebumps arising on their bodies appeared like newly blossomed flowers. The tears flowing from all their eyes resembled drops of sweet honey dripping from those blossoms. Their gentle smiles were like beautiful flowers opening in the springtime, and their soft, faltering voices, choked with love, hummed like swarms of honeybees moving amongst the blossoms.

As the fragrant Malayan breeze softly moved through forest boughs, their bodies trembled in ecstasy along with the wind itself, crying together." Now, a note here, a short note. The Ācāryas explain that just as the essence of a flower is its honey, similarly, the essence of divine love reveals itself through ecstatic symptoms like crying.

Just as the essence of a flower is its honey, similarly, the essence of divine love reveals itself through ecstatic symptoms like tears. Now, in Dana-keli-kaumudi, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī very beautifully describes this mood by writing: "Śrī Rādhā's eyes are like a bouquet of kila-kiñcita flowers." Śrī Rādhā's eyes are like a bouquet of kila-kiñcita flowers.

Now, the term kila-kiñcita refers to, they say, a rare and wonderful mixture of ecstatic emotions arising simultaneously in pure love for Krishna.

Har Krishna.

So those are the verses and some of the little bit of the līlās, you could say, concerning tears of Rādhārāṇī and Vrindāvana. And now for a beautiful pastime. This pastime, it's so nectarine. It describes the making of the famous lake Mānasa-sarovara in Braja.

Now, this lake should not be confused with the lake of the same name in the Himalayan mountains. The two are completely different. The Himalayan Mānasa-sarovara was born from the mind of Lord Brahmā, and, um, I actually had the good fortune to take a bath in that lake.

I was going, with several years ago, with a group of devotees. We went to Tibet, and there's Mount Kailash, and Mount Kailash is Lord Shiva and Pārvatī, etc., etc. So it's, um, a difficult parikramā, but well worth it, getting the mercy of one of the best devotees of Lord Krishna, Lord Shiva.

But at the bottom of Mount Kailash is this beautiful Mānasa-sarovara lake. We took some, well, we bathed actually, in the lake. So that particular lake was born from the mind of Lord Brahmā. Mana means mind, to Mānasa-sarovara. But the Mānasa-sarovara in Śrī Vrindāvana appeared from something far more intimate.

How so?

It was created from the tears of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Yes. Tears of loving anger, tears of divine jealousy, tears of transcendental love. So one night during the Rāsa dance, Krishna was dancing with all the gopīs on a sandy bank of the Yamunā River.

It's described the moon was full, the breeze was fragrant, and the sound of ankle bells and singing filled the entire forest of Braja. And Śrīmatī was there, as she should be, at the center of everything. But suddenly, she noticed something.

Krishna was treating her just like all the other gopīs, equally.

He was smiling at all of them, speaking sweetly to all of them. The gopīs and Rādhā, dancing with them, and externally, he appeared to be giving everyone equal attention. Now, ordinarily, one might think, "Well, that's fair." But the love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is not ordinary love.

Her love is the highest. It's the most complete. Of course, all the vrajābasīs have divine love for Krishna, and Krishna has divine love for all the vrajābasīs, but she stands out.

She has the *mahābhāva*. So when she saw Krishna behaving equally towards everyone, now this is interesting, her heart became filled with *māna*, jealousy, loving anger.

And without saying anything, she quietly left that Rāsa dance alone. And crossing the Yamunā River by herself, she wandered through the forests of Braja, and eventually she came to a secluded grove. And it's described in that grove, there were Pīlu trees surrounded by Kadamba and Tamāla trees.

Uh, it's interesting, standing together in pairs. Now, no one was there. Only the sounds of crickets, humming bees, and distant birds calling through the night. It was as if all of nature felt sympathy for her sorrow. All of nature felt sympathy for her sorrow.

Now, at that point, Śrīmatī, this is history, transcendental history, Braja history. She sat down on a flat stone as tears flowed from her eyes like torrents of rain. And in doing so, they created a small lake. And that lake became known as Mānasa-sarovara, the lake of loving anger.

Now, Ācāryas point out that the astonishing thing is that Radha was not crying for herself. This, we have to understand. She was crying for Krishna.

She thought, and this is the essence of this pastime, "What other gopī can I do?

Who else can satisfy Him completely?

Thus, if He treats me like everyone else, equally, actually what's happening is He's cheating Himself of the highest happiness." This is the mystery of Radha's love. She gives the greatest love for Krishna.

So when she sees Him with other gopīs, He's not experiencing the same pleasure that she can give Him with her *mahābhāva*. So she thinks like this. It's not really jealousy. She's not jealous of the other gopīs. She's thinking of Krishna. "Krishna is more happy with me.

He should spend more time with me because I give Him the greatest pleasure, and that's what we want." So she never thinks of her own happiness independent of Krishna.

Her only concern is His pleasure. In fact, the very reason that Radha exists is to give joy to Krishna.

So then, another thought came to her mind. "If Krishna no longer needs me, why should I continue to live?" But you see her selflessness.

In her next thought, she thought, "No, if I die, and later Krishna realizes this mistake, then He will be extremely unhappy.

So I won't die." And then she started crying again. And the Ācāryas say that through her tears, she said, "What a cheater Krishna is.

He steals butter, He steals yogurt, He steals clothes, He steals hearts, He steals the very lives of people. And now, in the end, He has cheated Himself. How so?

Because He's giving so much attention to these other gopīs, and He's happy. But His greatest happiness comes in His association with me because of my pure love. Very interesting, very, very deep. Krishna's cheated Himself of my love." Now, meanwhile, back at the Rāsa dance, Krishna suddenly realized His feeling of great happiness was gone.

Who's the great happiness? Śrīmatī.

And thus, the whole atmosphere of the Rāsa dance had changed because Śrīmatī was gone. Fine enough, Krishna is with the other gopīs.

The gopīs are with Krishna.

That love is *ānanda-br̥ddhi-bhāva*, it's always expanding. But the centerpiece, Śrīmatī, was gone. And immediately Krishna became restless.

So, alarmed and anxious, He left the Rāsa dance and began searching along the banks of the Yamunā. When suddenly, He saw her divine footprints, distinctive footprints. So He followed them across the Yamunā, through Belvan, until finally, He reached that secluded grove of Pīlu trees.

And there, He saw her sitting upon the stone, crying, crying, crying, and surrounded by this lake formed from her tears. But even before seeing her, it's described, Krishna had begun crying.

And when He saw Rādhā sitting there alone, He felt completely heartbroken. There's actually a beautiful painting there at Mānasa-sarovara. There's a little temple. You, next time you go to Vrindāvana, you should go there to Mānasa-sarovara, and you'll see this little temple there.

And there's a beautiful painting inside. It's actually worshipped by the vrajābasīs who live there. And that painting depicts what happened next. So listen carefully. Krishna then approached Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī very humbly and placed His *veṇu*, His flute, at her lotus feet and bowed His head down to her lotus feet.

Now, Rādhārāṇī, though still extremely, appearing extremely angry, actually, internally, she was feeling great satisfaction. Why?

Because Krishna was finally with her again, receiving the highest happiness with her love, the happiness that only she could give Him in that regard.

So this scene is depicted in that painting. To go to that little temple and see. So the Ācāryas conclude that Rādhā's anger is not ordinary anger. It is love in the highest form. Even her reproach of Krishna is meant only for His pleasure.

This is the essence of this pastime. Even her reproach of Krishna is meant for His pleasure.

And as always, their separation ends in union, and their sorrow ends in happiness. I read when Ācāryas said that their separation ends in union and their sorrow ends in happiness. Oh glorious to Śrī Vrindāvana dhāma. Therefore, Mānasa-sarovara is a very special place.

It's not simply a lake. It is manifest from Śrīmatī's love, a place where she revealed the deepest emotions of her heart to Krishna.

And again, because the lake was born from her *māna*, her loving anger, it is known as Mānasa-sarovara. Now, I've heard in Braja, I've heard on a number of occasions, the sādhu refer to Mānasa-sarovara as Hr̥d-yasa-sarovara. Hr̥d-yasa-sarovara. When I first heard that, "What's that?" So they say, "You are calling it Mānasa-sarovara.

We call it Hr̥d-yasa-sarovara." So I asked, "What does that mean?" And the reply was wonderful.

They say, "What does it mean?

It means the lake of the heart." Why?

They explained, "Because once Krishna gently told Śrīmatī, 'Oh, beautiful one, this lake born from your tears is exactly like My heart.' This lake born from your tears is exactly like My heart.

But Radha replied, 'Oh, Śrī Krishna, perhaps it resembles your heart, but actually, this lake is My heart.'" So Mānasa-sarovara, you can say, means the heart of both Rādhā and Krishna.

And even today, it's said that devotees who sit quietly there, go there on your next parikramā to Vrindāvana, sit quietly there, because the sādhu say that while one sits quietly there, chanting the holy names beneath the silence of Braja, that's how they describe it, chanting the holy names beneath the silence of Braja, sometimes one can feel something extraordinary.

One can hear the parrots calling. One can hear, they describe, the cranes crying in the distance out of love for Radha and Krishna.

They experience, one who goes there experiences soft breezes moving across the water. Everything there feels alive. They say with remembrance of the divine couple, as if the heartbeat of Radha and Krishna still echoes through that sacred place.

They say like that, as if the heartbeat of Radha and Krishna still echoes through that sacred place.

Hr̥d-yasa-sarovara. Krishna.

So, let us finish today with another verse from Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, Chapter 2, verse 3, text 24, which implores us as sādhanas, as aspiring devotees, to come to the stage where we ourselves shed tears of love in pure Krishna consciousness.

Our hearts have to become purified to the point where one day, some tears will fall from our eyes by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's grace. So, what is the verse?

Our finishing, concluding verse: "Certainly, that heart is still unmoved which, in spite of one's chanting the holy names of the Lord with concentration, does not change even when one displays such signs of transformation as tears in the eyes and ecstatic standing of the hairs on end." Thank you.

We'll be back again with more transcendental nectar. I think we have a couple more classes about Vrindāvanī Śrīmatī's transcendental tears, and the tears of Krishna, the tears of the gopīs, cowherd boys, all the residents of Vrindāvana.

Tears reign supreme in Vrindāvana. Thank you. Vrindāvanī ki Jaya!

Prema-dhāma Vrindāvana!

Jaya!

And once again, glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dhāma.

All right. B.