

Hari Krishna, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Naom Viṣṇu-pādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale. Glorious to all. So today we continue our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 161, in which we begin a whole new topic—a whole new topic. We’ve done the disguises, and now we’re moving on to the glories of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Hare Kṛṣṇa. And we’ll start with descriptions of her transcendental form, beginning with her lotus eyes. But to begin this new topic, I would like to quote Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī in his Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta-śataka, Verse 34, introducing us to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

He writes: “Glorious are those persons who desire to climb out of the well of material existence and attain liberation. Even more glorious are those who have dedicated themselves to the service of the Lord. More elevated again are those who have become attached to Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. Those who love the husband of the queen Rukmiṇī are even superior to such devotees. While still more praiseworthy are those who are dear to the son of Yaśodā. More glorious again are those who have made friends with Subala’s comrade. Superior to those in the mood of friendship are those who worship the Lord as the lover of the gopīs. However, standing at the head of all devotees in the creation are those who have been carried away by the flood of pure, unadulterated love emanating from the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and worship her above all.”

What a wonderful introduction to this topic. So, to begin with, I found many verses and references to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes. I mean, there are many. Let me quote a few verses here before we begin with a wonderful pastime today of how she first appeared in this world 5,000 years ago with her eyes closed—yes, with her eyes closed.

So, in Govinda-līlāmṛta, verses 48 and 49, it is written: Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes are blue—a very specific blue like Indīvara lotuses, indīvara lotuses. They are not merely compared to lotuses; they are blue indīvara lotuses themselves. Then, in Govinda-līlāmṛta verse 95: “To nourish Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s honeybee-like eyes, the creator fashioned a lake of nectarean beauty known as Śrī-Rādhā’s face. In this lake, two sweet blue lotus flowers—her eyes—spring forth, and her moonlight cheeks surround them, causing them to blossom.”

Then, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in his Rādhikāṣṭakam: “She shoots her beautiful glance just like the flower arrows from the bow of Cupid. Her beautiful nose defeats the beauty of sesame flowers, and from it a nose ring swings very beautifully. I worship the lotus feet of that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu.”

And finally, from Govinda-līlāmṛta verse 100: “The creator gathered the essence of all sweetness and virtue in the universe to form Rādhikā’s eyes. The remnants that fell to the earth became black bees, deer, cakora birds, white lotuses, blue lotuses, and fish.” And thinking with that verse, we conclude that all beauty in this world is only the leftover residue of her eyes—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes.

So, we’ll move on. Now, there is a very beautiful līlā in both Govinda-līlāmṛta and Padma Purāṇa as to how Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa first met. So, one day 5,000 years ago, just before Kṛṣṇa was to descend into this world for his pastimes of delivering the pious, annihilating demons, and reestablishing dharma, he approached his beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and said, “Oh beloved, please come with me to the earth planet.” But Rādhārāṇī expressed her reluctance to come to the earth because she would have to see so many people, when the only one she wishes to look upon is Kṛṣṇa. So, she only agreed to Kṛṣṇa’s request on the condition that the first person she would see would be him. And as we’ll see, after her appearance on the earth and for a little time afterwards, she won’t open her eyes. They’ll remain shut, and we’ll find out why.

So, soon afterwards, Kṛṣṇa appeared on the earth. And one day, the great ṛṣi Nārada Muni came to Gokula here on the earth—to Gokula—to have darśana of baby Kṛṣṇa. And while he was there gazing at baby Kṛṣṇa, in his heart it’s described he felt some message that the Lord’s hlādinī-śakti, his pleasure potency, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, had taken birth nearby as well. So, what did he do? He went village to village around Braja-maṇḍala, the greater area of Vṛndāvana, inquiring about her appearance. And finally, he came to the village of Rāval, which is where she appeared, where he was greeted by her father, King Vṛṣabhānu. And the king said, “Nārada Muni, it’s wonderful that you have appeared in my home. Is there any particular reason that you’ve come here?”

Nārada Muni said, “Yes, I have a question. Has a girl recently taken birth within your home?” And a big smile came over Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu’s face and he replied, “Yes, by the grace of the Lord, I have been blessed with a daughter who is divinely effulgent—divinely effulgent. But then King Vṛṣabhānu became a little despondent. And looking down, he said, “But unfortunately, this child has not yet opened her eyes. She has not yet opened her eyes.”

So Nārada Muni said, “Oh, she has not opened her eyes?” And King Vṛṣabhānu said, “Yes. Therefore, we do not know whether she is blind or if she is a celestial being who is unwilling to look upon the imperfections of this world. Prompted by the desire for her prosperity, I seek a boon from you, sage, most glorious one. Please cast a glance at this girl and make her well.”

So Nārada Muni said, “Okay, can I see her?” So, King Vṛṣabhānu sent for his servants, and they brought little baby Rādhā before Nārada Muni, who, because of his deep spiritual insight, was able to perceive that this was not an ordinary baby but actually Lord Kṛṣṇa’s eternal consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And only out of great difficulty, it’s described, upon seeing her he was able to restrain his ecstatic emotions; he had to control himself.

So then Nārada said to King Vṛṣabhānu, “My dear king, providence has surely blessed you. Quickly go and bring back the items with which we can perform a purificatory ceremony. I will perform such a ceremony to ensure that in time this child blesses the world with the glance of her dove-like eyes.” So King Vṛṣabhānu, he was in ecstasy. So, while he was getting all the pūjā paraphernalia, Nārada Muni knelt down before Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in her form as a baby and revealed his heart with a beautiful prayer that we find in Padma Purāṇa, Pātāla-khaṇḍa, chapter 70. I just discovered this.

Nārada said to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, “Moving freely everywhere, I have wandered all over the world, but nowhere have I seen a beautiful girl like this. I move in the world of Brahmā, in the world of Rudra, and in the world of Indra. But I have not seen anyone even with the tiniest fraction of this girl’s beauty. I have seen the great illusion of this world as well as the glorious daughter of the Lord of mountains, Pārvatī, whose form fascinates all movable and immovable objects. But even she, who has an extremely delicate body, does not have the beauty of this little girl. Excellent ladies like Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, and Kānti-vidyā do not even have a shade of her beauty. I have seen Mohinī, the form assumed by Lord Viṣṇu by which Śiva was fascinated. But even that form is not similar to the beauty of this little girl. Therefore, neither I nor others have the power to know this dear consort of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Her form will cause great delight to Kṛṣṇa.”

Wow, what a prayer. And as he said this prayer, little Rādhā playfully wiggled her hands like babies do. But knowing that her devotee Nārada was actually eager to behold her original form, baby Rādhārāṇī appeared before him as a fresh youth—as a young girl around eight or nine years of age. And on either side of Rādhārāṇī was Lalitā and Viśākhā. So at this point, you can just imagine Nārada Muni; he became speechless gazing upon this divine form of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. But then suddenly around the corner came King Vṛṣabhānu. He appeared with the pūjā paraphernalia that Nārada had requested. So immediately, Rādhārāṇī became a baby again. And hiding his ecstasies, Nārada Muni performed the rituals for the child and then departed, all there in our śāstras.

Now, because of that special darśana with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Nārada Muni was left with a very deep and very intense desire for more of her association, and even more so for her service—to serve her. So he went to a place in Vṛndāvana and performed very severe austerities for a very long time under the direction of Vṛndā Devī and was eventually able to enter into Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in the form of a gopī; her name was Nāradī Gopī. It’s a whole pastime, we told it one time. So some say he simultaneously continues his travels through the universe, and others say that he left that service as Nāradī Gopī to do his preaching around the universe. Two different opinions.

Now, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī did not open her eyes immediately after that purificatory ceremony that Nārada Muni had performed. However, King Vṛṣabhānu had great faith that whatever the sage said would come true. So the next day, Paurṇamāsī-yogamāyā arrived to have darśana of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and when Paurṇamāsī first saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, very beautiful words came from Paurṇamāsī’s lotus mouth. She said to King Vṛṣabhānu and Queen Kīrtidā, “This girl is not ordinary. Great personalities like Brahmā, Śiva, Nārada worship her, knowing that she can fulfill all their desires—material and most importantly, spiritual. So please take good care of her,” said Paurṇamāsī.

Now, the king and queen were very joyful hearing this blessing from Paurṇamāsī, but at the same time, they were concerned, and they expressed their concern to Paurṇamāsī. They said to her, “Look, her eyes. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes are closed. We don’t know what’s going on. Why are her eyes closed? Why doesn’t she open her eyes? Is she blind?” Of course, we know that Paurṇamāsī, with her assistants like Vṛndā Devī, they just arranged all these different pastimes to increase the ecstasy. So Paurṇamāsī just smiled and said, “Don’t worry, it’s just Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s pastime.”

So the next day, this pastime unfolded even more when Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā came with baby Kṛṣṇa to visit their friends, King Vṛṣabhānu and Queen Kīrtidā-sundarī. They’re actually good friends. And when they arrived, infant Rādhārāṇī was sleeping in her bedroom. So Nanda, they were met at the door by Vṛṣabhānu and Kīrtidā-sundarī, and they were invited into a reception room. And while these two couples were talking, Kṛṣṇa, who was quietly laying on his mother’s lap, very slowly climbed off and crawled towards the bedroom where little Rādhā was sleeping. And when he came into the room, he crawled—crawled over to her crib, and recognizing her as his eternal divine consort, reached out and very gently touched baby Rādhā’s eyes.

Now, Govinda-līlāmṛta describes that moment very nicely: that as soon as Rādhārāṇī felt the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s hands on her eyes, she became aware that the person for whom her eyes were created was sitting beside her. Then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī opened her cloud-blue eyes and smiled. Meanwhile, all the parents, seeing that Kṛṣṇa wasn’t present, began looking for him. And when they came into the room where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were playing together like little children, they saw that Rādhārāṇī’s eyes were wide open, and everyone became very happy and blissful and ecstatic. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So that’s the first pastime I’m going to tell in this topic of this series about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes. I think we have a couple more classes about her eyes, but I thought that was really an appropriate one. It’s the beginning. She appeared on this planet and she appeared to be blind, but she didn’t want to see anything but Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa came, touched her eyes, and she opened them, and they played together. So you can meditate on that this week.

I would like to conclude today with a prayer by Vidyāpati, who we know was one of the favorite poets of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In this prayer, he very beautifully compares Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyes to a lotus flower. Listen to this. He writes: “O sakhī, look at the fortunate lotus-like eyes of Rāy—Rādhā, meaning Rādhā. In the petals of her lotus-like eyes reside the dark bumblebee of Kṛṣṇa. When the sun of their meeting shines in the sky of her heart, the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa is revealed in the hearts of her sakhīs. In the lake of love, those two lotus-like eyes are floating. In her heart, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa live in one united form. The whiteness of her eyes is her form, and the darkness of her eyes is the bumblebee of Kṛṣṇa.” Vidyāpati praises the king who knows all about the loving affairs of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Well, thank you to that ancient poet whose poetry Caitanya Mahāprabhu loved, and of course, thank you to Śrīla Prabhupāda for introducing us to this wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness with these nectarean topics about Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys and the cowherd girls and the trees of Vṛndāvana and the lakes of Vṛndāvana, everything—we are so much indebted. So again, we have some more classes about her eyes and we will continue next Friday.
