Everyone, a very warm welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dāma, Kṛṣṇa, Bhūtale, Śrīmatī Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, nominee Namaste, who is the revealer of the Dham. Today, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love based on Peter Paul Pod's Nectar of Devotion, again chapter 26, and this will be part eight. We have been discussing different articles or paraphernalia of Kṛṣṇa. Upon seeing, hearing about, or even simply touching them, they help to awaken love for the Lord within the heart of a devotee. We gave the example in one of our first lectures in the series of a mother who, upon being separated from her small daughter, immediately remembers her upon seeing her daughter's little shoe somewhere. A transcendental example is kindly given by Rūpa Goswāmī in Bhakti Rasa Mṛta Sindhu, wherein he writes, "In the kaisora age, beginning from the 11th year and continuing up to the end of the 15th year, Kṛṣṇa's arms, legs, and thighs become marked with three divisional lines. At that time, Kṛṣṇa's chest challenged a hill of marakata jewels; his arms challenged pillars of indranīla jewels; the three lines of his waist challenged the waves of the river Yamunā, and his thighs challenged beautiful bananas." When the gopīs said, "With all these exquisite features of his body, Kṛṣṇa is extraordinarily beautiful, and therefore I am always thinking of him to protect me because he is the killer of all demons." 

So here I would like to mention again, as I have many times, how indebted we are to both Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī and Śrīla Prabhupāda for giving us Bhakti Rasa Śāstra and Nectar of Devotion, respectively.

Śrī Bhānudāsa writes in his work Kadambari in the Maṅgala Carana to that book, verse 7: "It's really nice fine literature is not appreciated by a wicked mortal, much like nectar does not go down Rahu's throat; whereas such literature is treasured in the heart of a good soul, much like Hari's chest bears the splendid, stupid jewel." Now, Bhānudāsa, actually his full name was Parabhatta, was a seventh-century Sanskrit prose writer and poet, and his works are well-read and famous even today. In fact, many scholars describe him as Bhānuchistaṁ jagat sarvaṁ, a nice title that means "Bhānu has described everything in this world, and nothing is left untold."

In previous classes, we discussed how blankets are very much involved in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes and thus helped to stimulate our love for Kṛṣṇa. There's a saying that the Lord accepts ordinary things and makes them extraordinary. An example is given: he accepts the feather of a peacock, which is commonly found on the ground here in Vṛndāvana, and he takes it and places it on his forehead, or he holds a flute of bamboo, which grows in the forest. Similarly, the ācāryas say that he accepts even the simplest of people who approach him for service and transforms them into transcendental devotees who themselves become capable of fulfilling others' spiritual desires, just like a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree. So, the articles we mentioned, like the peacock feather and the bamboo flute, are simple objects, but they are divine, being related to the Lord, and the same is true with the Lord's blanket.

This we have been discussing for two lectures now, but my dear prabhus, we are not finished today. We will discuss more about Kṛṣṇa's precious blanket in the hopes that, again, such a discussion will help awaken love for Kṛṣṇa, and that love is already there; it’s hidden within our hearts. That's described by Rūpa Goswāmī in Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, chapter 22, verse 107, a very famous verse: "Nitya-siddha Kṛṣṇa-prema sādhyakabhunai, śravaṇādi śuddha chitte karaye udaya." 

Quote: "Pure love for Kṛṣṇa is eternally established in the hearts of living entities. It is not something to be gained from another source. When the heart is purified by hearing and chanting, this love naturally awakens." So, that's what we're doing here; we're hearing and chanting. Now, the poets have revealed their sentiments about Kṛṣṇa's blanket in one of his poems that he dedicates to Śrī Rādhā. He writes, "Oh friend, look! Śrī Rādhā is the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and her lover is a simple cowherd boy. Śrī Rādhā sits on the throne, and her beloved sits on the stem of a tree. Śrī Rādhā wears a golden shawl, and Kṛṣṇa wears a dark blanket." 

Surdasa says, "Oh friend, there is no good quality in your Kṛṣṇa; it's only because of the loving glances of our queen Rādhā that everyone treats him with respect." Hare Kṛṣṇa. So therein we hear how Kṛṣṇa wore or eternally wears a dark blanket. It's interesting to note that here in Vṛndāvana, I often see deities, like yesterday I was at the Rādhā-Rāmaṇa Temple, a couple of weeks ago at the Bṛndābana Temple, and both times those deities were wearing dark-colored blankets because it's winter here now. When I looked more into the matter, I discovered that such blankets that they offer to the Lord are made fragrant before offering with perfumed oils and replaced near coal heaters to warm them before being offered to the Lord and placed on his body. 

Such a blanket is called balāpoṣa (बाला-पोष). Furthermore, the blanket is described in śāstra as being light like a feather, warm like a mother's lap, fragrant like flowers, and soft like the tender touch of a newborn baby. The blanket the deities wear is light like a feather, warm like a mother's lap, fragrant like flowers, and soft like the tender touch of a newborn baby.

A side note is that the sādhus here in Vṛndāvana wear blankets called loi (लॉई). It's also a dark-colored blanket; it's heavy wool. Centuries ago, these types of blankets were worn by the Vraja-vāsīs; everyone would wear them in those days, and they were sold in a particular marketplace. So much so that that marketplace became known as Loi Bāzār. Most ISKCON devotees are well aware of Loi Bāzār these days, which specializes in many devotional items. Every ISKCON devotee comes from the West and goes to Loi Bāzār to buy dodies, chāṇḍā, and saris, etc. 

In my research for this lecture, I discovered that an old tradition in Vṛndāvana was that if a king or a highly esteemed person would visit a temple in Vṛndāvana for darśana, the pājārī would offer him the mahā-garland of the deities, mahā-prasāda from the deities, and on special occasions, also a blanket or the blanket that the Lord was wearing around his shoulder or around his neck. Now, in present-day culture, the culture of giving a mahā-garland and mahā-prasāda is still there, but giving a blanket to esteemed persons has now changed to offering a small scarf. They have some scarves nearby, and they touch it to the feet of the deity and give it to the esteemed person. Just something like this, about that big, not very big, so times have changed.

Now, I'd like to share another of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes that involved his precious dark blanket. This pastime is related by the great devotee Śrīla Narahari Chakravarti Ṭhākura in his famous book Bhakti Ratnākara. It's in the fifth wave in a section entitled Mathura Mandala Parikramā. Actually, for my lectures, I get a lot of līlās from that book, from that section, so you could say this pastime is one version of the famous pastime of Kṛṣṇa becoming a boatman and taking Śrī Rādhā and her gopi friends on a boat ride on the Manasī Gaṅgā Lake, which we know is at Govardhana Hill. It's one version; just like in the Don Kaley, the pastimes where Kṛṣṇa taxes the gopis here and there at different times and different places, there are slightly different versions. 

So this is a very nice version of this particular pastime. Now, Manasī Gaṅgā, the history of that sacred lake, is very interesting. Once, upon hearing the glories of Mother Gaṅgā, Nanda Mahārāja, Yaśodā, and so many other gopas and gopīs, they took Kṛṣṇa on a journey to the Himalayan Mountains to take a bath because they heard how auspicious it was to take a bath in the Gaṅgā. On the way, they rested for a little while, and at that point, Kṛṣṇa questioned the need for all of them to travel so far, telling them—this is one of my favorite statements: we have favorite verses—this is a famous statement: "All holy places reside in Vṛndāvana." 

This is one of the beautiful features of Vṛndāvana; whatever holy places we see in India and throughout the universe, and throughout the cosmos, you can find the original place here in Vṛndāvana. So at this particular point, you know, Kṛṣṇa stopped everybody and said, "Well, first of all, he thought of Gaṅgā Devī, and at once just by thinking of Gaṅgā Devī, her strong current brought her to that spot where he was standing. At the head of this current was Gaṅgā Devī herself. As we know, she rises on an alligator, so she was mounted on an alligator, and this darśana of Gaṅgā astonished Nanda and Yaśodā and all the gopīs and gopas. So at that point, Kṛṣṇa said, 'My dear friends, all holy places exist in Vṛndāvana. You want to take a bath in the Gaṅgā? So Gaṅgā Devī has personally appeared before you here today in Vṛndāvana. Please bathe in her waters without delay.'" 

So it appears they weren't very far; they were just on the frontier of Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa didn't want to leave Vṛndāvana, so Gaṅgā came. So in this way, Manasī Gaṅgā appeared in Vṛndāvana, and we see her when we go on Govardhana Lake. Halfway, that's where the Harideva Temple is; actually, so she's called Manasī Gaṅgā because she appeared from the mind or the thoughts of Kṛṣṇa, meaning "mind." So here in Vṛndāvana, some address her as a river, while others address her as a lake.

Now, the currents of Manasī Gaṅgā, I was reading, flow so swiftly through Govardhana Hill that her powerful waves move even the boulders that line her shores. So a boatman must be very expert in piloting his boat across the lake, especially in the rainy season when thunderstorms often appear. It's not an easy thing when the wind comes up and the waves are there for boatmen to cross Manasī Gaṅgā; it's a real challenge. Her waves were so powerful they moved boulders covered on Hill. 

So one day, Rādhārāṇī and her gopīs were carrying pots full of different milk preparations to offer to one of their favorite deities, Harideva. We told that pastime, but it happened to be on the opposite side of Manasī Gaṅgā. So they were thinking they would take a boat, but when they arrived at the banks of the lake, they were disappointed to find there were no boats at the dock. Actually, there was one old, very rickety boat at the far end of the dock, but there was no boatman in sight—just the boat was there. All they actually saw was a large, crumpled-up blanket in one corner of the deck. 

So disappointed, the gopīs were just about to return home when they heard this low, moaning sound coming from the old boat, like it's described as if someone was stirring from a deep slumber. So Śrī Rādhā ordered one of her maidservants; she said to her, "Dear one, find out where that noise is coming from." So that Brajagopī, very dutifully, walked down the landing, stepped onto that old rickety boat, and very cautiously approached the blanket. Then from beneath the blanket came what sounded like heavy breathing. So the gopī hesitated for a moment and she looked back towards Śrī Rādhā, who encouraged her with the movement of her hand. 

So that young gopī took courage and pulled back that old dusty blanket, and there, lo and behold, lying on the boat's deck was a young boatman who, from the sound of his snoring, appeared to be in a deep sleep. So the gopī turned back to her friends and Śrī Rādhā and she said in a loud whisper, "It looks like a boatman, but he's asleep." So hearing this, Śrī Rādhā walked down the pier and she stood directly over the boat. Then she cleared her voice and she called out loudly, "Boatman! Boatman!" But he didn't seem to hear. So she called that again, but this time louder, and it's described very beautifully, accompanied by a chorus of her amused girlfriends. 

Finally, the boatman stirred a little bit and turned over, and then he sat up, rubbing his eyes. They could see that he was a young man. He was dressed in simple clothes; he had a dhoti and a sash, and he was actually wearing a cloak with his hair tucked under a well-worn turban. But she noticed immediately that he must have been new to his profession because his hands and feet looked very soft, and they had no calluses. "What kind of boatman is that who is rowing all day and has no calluses?" So she noticed this. 

The boatman sat up and he called out, "It's been a long day, and I'm resting. Please get yourself another boat if you're looking for a boat; it's not going to be this boat, or you come back tomorrow." With that, he laid back down and he pulled his blanket back over him. So at that point, Śrī Rādhā signaled her maidservant to pull the blanket away. Now, Lalitā Devī, who is always there to serve Śrī Rādhā, as her favorite gopi, gets angry sometimes when Kṛṣṇa mistreats Rādhā. Lalitā, who was nearby, said, "Hey, wake up, boatman! The queen of Vṛndāvana wants to cross the river to worship Harideva. Do not delay; take your oars and ferry us to the far shore. You will be handsomely rewarded, not to mention the fact that you will have the privilege to serve the most chaste and pious girl of Vṛndāvana," of course meaning Śrī Rādhā. 

So the boatman finally sat up again, and after much discussion, it’s described that he reached an agreement with Lalitā that his payment for transporting the gopīs would be the remnants of Harideva's prasādam. They served the milk products as payment; he would get yogurt and butter and curd, and everything they had in their pots. But as the gopīs began to board the boat, the boatman started insisting that it would be safer if they went in two trips. In other words, he took one group of gopīs over, came back, and took another group of gopīs over because he felt the boat was a little small for everybody. But Śrī Rādhā would hear nothing of it because she didn't want to be separated from her gopīs, and they didn't want to be separated from her. 

So the boatman pushed off from the shore, and they noticed that while he was pushing off from the shore, he was smiling and singing a song about boating on a lake with one sweetheart. They were looking at him; he was singing a song about boating on a lake with one sweetheart. So everything went well, you know, for some time; they were making good time across the lake. But about a third of the way, the boatman stopped rowing. He tilted his turban back on his head and he sat down, looking out at the river. 

So all the gopīs were surprised; they were all looking at one another like, "What's happening?" So Śrī Rādhā asked one of the gopīs to ask the boatman the following, "Oh boatman, why have you stopped?" To which came the reply from the boatman, "Dear Vraja-gopī, I'm tired and hungry. You all woke me up after a hard day's work, but before I could have my supper, you told me to leave. Plus, you have filled this boat to twice its capacity, and you insisted that I race to the other side. Neither could I have my supper, nor did you follow my advice, though you know we shouldn't all pile in this boat now without eating. I cannot exert myself any further." 

So at first, the gopīs tried to convince the boatman to continue rowing; then they actually threatened him. But apparently, neither tactic worked, so they gave up. It’s described that they gave him access to their pots. That's how it's described, the author. But he shocked them when he devoured everything in the pots, and then he declared, "Ah, following such a feast, I must take a short nap." Then, stretching himself out on the floor of the boat, he again covered himself with his blanket and said, "If two of you girls massage my feet and another two of my arms, I shall resume my rowing much sooner." 

So then, Lalitā threatened the boatman, "Unless you start to row right now, we will hold you by your hands and feet and toss you overboard into the lake. Now get up!" With that, the boatman, you know, reluctantly resumed the service—not so reluctantly; we understand that he appeared to be reluctant, resuming his service. And not a moment too soon, I was reading, for storm clouds began, how would you say, gathering overhead, and before long it said a strong wind appeared, like gale-force hurricane winds, along with thunder and lightning, causing the lake water to rise. Soon, water began to seep into the boat. 

So shaking his head, the boatman called out over that strong wind, "See, girls, I warned you! I warned all of you that together would be too heavy a load for this boat. See what's happening now? Look, because it's so heavy and the waves were so strong, my boat is taking on water! So unless you lighten the load here by disposing of some precious weight overboard, surely we will sink." 

So cursing their fate, the gopīs had no other choice than to throw their pots overboard. Now, let me tell you that these pots were pure gold, so they were precious and they were heavy. So they had to throw their golden pots overboard. But even as these breathless gopīs watched their precious pots disappear into the depths of the river, the boatman called out again saying, "Ladies, the boat is still taking on water! Now you have to discard your heavy jewelry!" Because the gopīs were wearing bangles and earrings and nose rings and all sorts of necklaces, you know, fine jewelry, heavy. 

But the girls answered in a chorus again saying, "Never!" But I was reading as their skirt hems started to soak up the rising water. They reluctantly tossed their necklaces and bracelets and nose rings, everything into the lake's swelling waves, it's described. But the water in the boat kept rising. So the boatman said, "Ladies, the only way we can keep this boat from sinking is if you bail out the water yourselves!" To which the gopīs answered very angrily, "We could have done that with the pots you made us throw overboard! We could have done it, but you made us throw the pots overboard! So now what?" 

And then, as the strong winds continued whipping the, how would I say, the lake into a fury, the gopīs just sat there, drenched in water up to their waist. Up to their waist! Critical scene here, all poor emāsīs, Yogamāyā's arrangement! So at this point, it’s described that Śrī Rādhā began feeling extremely guilty at risking her girlfriends' lives. But the author says, not to mention being distressed at the thought of never seeing Kṛṣṇa again. 

We should also think like that—not to mention being distressed at the thought of never seeing Kṛṣṇa again. So having no other recourse, Śrī Rādhā stood up and she raised her arms and she called out to the boatman, "Boatman, please save us!" And she just threw her arms around him like a desperate plea, "Save us!" She threw her arms around him. Now, it’s described at that instant, a flash of lightning struck her. When I read that, I couldn't, like, what? As soon as she embraced the boatman, a flash of lightning struck her. But, prabhus, the lightning flash didn't come from the clouds above; rather, it came from the body of the boatman, who pleasantly surprised, pulled Śrī Rādhā even closer to him. 

Now, the effect of the boatman's touch at once revealed his real identity to Śrī Rādhā. She knew who this was, but the gopīs, who had never seen Śrī Rādhā even so much as look at another man other than Kṛṣṇa, they were shocked! They were shocked and they cried out over this howling wind altogether, another chorus, "Lord Śiva, save us! Just as we were about to sink to our watery graves in this lake, Śrī Rādhā tosses us into an ocean of embarrassment!" 

So rather than, you know, saying something to explain everything to defend herself, Śrī Rādhā reached behind the boatman and from his cloak pulled out what? A bamboo flute, much like a magician can pull a rabbit out of a hat. And as Śrī Rādhā held up this famous flute, the thunder and lightning stopped, the winds died down, the clouds dispersed, the waters receded, and the gopīs' faces lit up with smiles. "Oh!" they cried, "It's him! That's Kṛṣṇa! Oh!" they cried. "Then Kṛṣṇa," is described as pleased with himself, as an actor receiving a standing ovation, bowed his head towards the gopīs and pulled Śrī Rādhā even closer as she struggled to get free from his embrace. 

Now, the author says, the gopīs were terribly frightened by this ordeal, and they were still drenched from head to toe. But seeing Kṛṣṇa standing before them made all the torment worthwhile. That's the word he used: all the torment worthwhile. Now, our author, Śrīla Narahari Chakravarti Ṭhākura, he says, and I'll quote him here: "They were, after all, loving puppets in the hands of the Supreme Puppet Master, who pulls strings of love at will, uniting him and his eternal companions upon the stage of his Vṛndāvana līlā." I recite it again: "They were, after all, loving puppets in the hands of the Supreme Puppet Master, who pulls strings of love at will, uniting him and his eternal companions upon the stage of his Vṛndāvana līlā."

Then it’s described that beneath a silvery moon, Kṛṣṇa steered the boat towards the nearest island where he and the gopīs changed into dry clothes while joking about the highlights of their adventure. And then once again, they boarded the boat, which had, like Kṛṣṇa, listen to this, cast off its disguise to reveal a golden jewel-studded luxury craft, the boat had cast off its disguise to reveal a golden jewel-studded luxury craft equipped with all necessary things to serve the Divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

Then, as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa reclined on a comfortable couch, some gopīs sang, others played musical instruments, and a few others steered the boat through the calm, lotus-filled waters of Manasī Gaṅgā. Hare Kṛṣṇa! Pure nectar!

Let us never forget that this is the goal of all our practices in Kṛṣṇa. So, prabhus, this concludes our lectures on Lord Kṛṣṇa's blanket as a means to awaken our love for him and his divine consort. Next week, we'll be speaking on sandalwood. So many articles in Vṛndāvana can bring forth that loving mood so well. Going to research, I found a few things about sandalwood, and we'll discuss the use of sandalwood in the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as another stimulus for awakening ecstatic love. Now, in preparation for that, I mean like the mood that will accompany those that mini-series, we'll conclude today with the verse from Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, 11th if I lost texts 25 to 31. This will prepare us. 

Quote: "One should meditate on Kṛṣṇa as he sits on a lotus throne in a very relaxed manner. The throne is placed in the shade of a desired tree that is situated on a beautiful riverbank and surrounded by lakes filled with lotuses and water lilies. The riverbank is situated at the foot of a golden mountain that is decorated with various minerals, chirping birds, and wish-fulfilling trees. Lord Kṛṣṇa is decorated with a pearl necklace and a flower garland. The throne is covered with gold and bedecked with jewels and covered by a colorful canopy. After fixing one's mind on the Lord in this manner, a devotee should worship him with offerings of jati flowers. Then one should offer food to the Lord and his cowherd boyfriends on silver plates. In this way, self-controlled devotees should meditate on Lord Kṛṣṇa as he is comfortably seated along with all his cowherd friends." Beautiful meditation to prepare us for next Friday. Thank you, thank you, thank you so much. A goodbye from Śrī Vṛndāvana Dāma, and we look forward to seeing you in a week's time. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrī Gaurāṅga!