Hare Krishna, everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, Kṛṣṇa.

Today, I'm addressing you from Rishikesh on the banks of the celestial Gaṅgā River. We're here for our Rishikesh Kirtan Fest, and it's going very nicely. So, we are continuing with our mini-series on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be Part 69.

In our last few classes, we have been discussing various devotional poets. So today, I would like to speak about a devotee of the Lord who's famous for having composed 125,000 devotional poems or songs about Lord Kṛṣṇa and Śrīla Prabhupāda.

That famous work is entitled *Sūra Sāgar*, meaning literally "Ocean of Melody." Unfortunately, only 6,000 of those poems still exist, and this devotee's name is Sūradās. Now, Sūradās was a disciple of Śrī Vallabhācārya of the Pushti Sampradaya, and he wrote his poems in the Braj Bhāṣā language.

And they were mostly, scholars say, lyrical, and as such, they were easily sung by devotees of the Lord in the past and in the present as well. Now, I first came into contact with Sūradās some years ago as I was researching for famous devotee poets and musicians on Folio, better known as our Bhakti Venta Prabhupāda.

And there I discovered a prayer by Sūradās entitled *Charu Kamal*, or simply "Lotus Feet." It begins: *Charu kamal Vandan Hari Ray, I offer prayers unto the lotus feet of the worshipable Lord Hari. Then jankī kripa pangu giri langhai, and kshama kachu by His mercy, a lame person crosses mountains, and a blind person sees everything.

Baha shrava bahira sab bolai, a deaf person hears, and a dumb person speaks. Punē kripa nirdhan jan dhani binu chhatra suthar chalai.* Again, by His mercy, even a poor person may walk with a servant holding an umbrella over his head. *Sūraswami mai Lord of Sur is full of compassion, therefore I offer my obeisances unto His lotus feet again and again.* So, in that poem, Sūradās says, "And by the Lord's mercy, a blind person can see everything." And as I inquired further, I discovered that this poet-saint Sūradās was literally speaking from experience, for Sūradās was actually born blind.

He was born blind. He was born in a village near present-day Agra in the year, um, 17, excuse me, 1479, way back in 1479, actually in a poor radical family. And it is said that as a child, he had this mystical ability to find lost items.

As a very young child, for example, once his father was given two gold coins for performing a sacrifice or a ritual, which some rats carried away at night. And when his father was searching for them, Sūradās, despite being blind, led his father to exactly where they were.

He was also, it is described as a young, young child, able to predict the future with pinpoint accuracy. He could predict the future. But obviously, more important than all of that was this inclination to hear about Kṛṣṇa. As a small boy, it is said that while other children were playing, he simply wanted to listen to his mother recite Kṛṣṇa's *līlā* pastimes.

And the real depth of his relationship with Kṛṣṇa was revealed one day when he was five years old. When he fell into a deep well. When he was five, he somehow fell into a deep well where he remained inside for six days.

But the whole time, he remained calm, just thinking and praying to Kṛṣṇa. Then miraculously, on the seventh day, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa appeared and rescued him personally from the well. This was well known, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was standing quietly by Kṛṣṇa's side when Sūradās, not knowing who she was, grabbed her ankles.

And when she revealed that she was Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and requested he let go of her ankles, Sūradās said that because he was blind, he couldn't be sure of her identity. So then Kṛṣṇa smiled and immediately restored, or gave him his eyesight, and he was able to have *darśana* of both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

He could see finally. And being pleased with him, Kṛṣṇa asked Sūradās to request a boon. So Sūradās folded his hands and gazing at the beautiful form of the Lord, he said something amazing. He said, "My dear Lord, I prefer to remain blind.

I prefer to remain blind, as I do not wish to see any other form than Yours and Your dear most consort, Rādhikā." So he was blind for the rest of his life. Kṛṣṇa granted his request. Unfortunately, it is written as a result, when he was young, he was ridiculed and even shamed for his blindness, especially by his peers.

Now, the *ācāryas* say that as a result, he quickly became detached from material life, and in a spirit of renunciation, he actually left home at the age of six to become an aesthetic. At the age of six. Now, it may be surprising to some people that a boy could and would leave home at such a, what you say, tender age.

But it wasn't an isolated case. There are numerous similar examples in Vedic history. For example, we hear in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam how Prahlāda Mahārāja left home at five years of age. And Dhruva Mahārāja also left his mother and father and went to the forest at, I think, the same age, five, looking for God, for Kṛṣṇa.

And in more recent history, Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya also, when he was five, one day asked his mother, "Can I take *sannyāsa*?" So she was shocked and she replied, "Yes, my son, but only when you're on the verge of death," meaning, in her mind, you know, when you're an old man, my son.

So the intelligent boy immediately ran to the Kāverī River, which was nearby, and which was full of crocodiles, and he jumped in. And he swam to where the crocodiles were floating. And when they saw Śaṅkara, they started swimming towards him with their mouths wide open.

And at that point, Śaṅkara called out, "Mother!

Oh, Mother!

She was nearby. I'm now on the verge of death. Can I take *sannyāsa* now?" So his startled mother had no other choice but to call out with tears in her eyes, "Yes, my dear son, you may." And with that, Śaṅkara, who was actually a good swimmer, outswam the ferocious crocodiles back to the shore of the river.

When he got out, he picked up some torn saffron cloth on the bank and put it on. Then picking up a nearby stick to use as a *daṇḍa*, he walked barefoot out of the village as a renunciate. And what could I say?

The rest is history, Śaṅkara. So, our hero today, Sūradās, he expressed a similar desire to renounce the world in pursuit of God, and he left home at six years old. And where did the poor boy go?

Well, he went straight to the banks of the Yamunā. It's described there, he became enriched with the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, they put that so nicely, the scholars.

He became enriched with the mercy of Śrī Vallabhācārya and *Bṛhad Gautama Tantra* 1.16 speaks of the Yamunā River so nicely. "All glories to Śrī Yamunā, the daughter of the Sun God and sister of Yamarāja!

She is the beloved of Kṛṣṇa, the killer of *māyā*, and has exceeded the greatness of Gaṅgā Devī in her friendship with Him, having made intimate friendship with Mathurā Devī. She always embraces her. And disguised as ordinary water, her waves flow with the honey of the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa." Her waves flow with the honey of the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

There he went in Braj on the banks of the Yamunā. So there in Vṛndāvana, he gradually became an accomplished poet and musician and composer of devotional songs.

And he also became very expert in playing a number of musical instruments. In time, he met his spiritual master, Vallabhācārya, and he took initiation from him. Now, when Sūradās first met Vallabhācārya, at their very first meeting, he started crying and he said to his guru, "Oh, my master, I am blind in both material and spiritual vision.

My whole life I have been suffering in the clutches of the Lord's material energy, not finding peace anywhere in this world. I have come to you to take Your shelter." And Vallabhācārya, he replied, "Oh Sūra, being Sūra, meaning in Sanskrit, brave, why are you weeping?

Open your heart. Do you not see the grand reception in the courtyard of Mahārāja Nanda on the occasion of his beloved son Kṛṣṇa's appearance?" So as soon as Sūradās heard these words from his guru, it's described something changed in his heart, and all his misery was gone.

He took the words of his guru to heart, and at that very moment, he sang the following poem, which is actually his very first poem dedicated to Kṛṣṇa. It began: "Maharaj, Braj, the word has spread. Oh, Braj, dear brother, the son of the King, Mahārāja Nanda, has appeared.

The maidens of Braj have started decorating themselves, before arriving at the palace of the King to sing auspicious songs. They are dressed in vibrantly colorful clothes and are wearing their blouses close to their hearts. They have put red dots in the middle of their foreheads, and their fortune is situated in their eyes as *giliyam*.

They are all running to Nanda Bhavan like red, yellow, and green birds who have been freed from their cages. The cowherd men have started dancing, singing, and running in all directions, their hearts filled with the topmost joy of their life.

Brahmins have started singing Vedic hymns, and musicians are playing drums and *kartāls*. Oh, Sūradās says, from that very day, all the residents of Braj started living a life of celebration and happiness." Such a poem. So, when Vallabhācārya heard that beautiful poem from the mouth of Sūradās, he told him to take a sacred dip in the Yamunā and come to him so that he could give him initiation.

He said, "Oh, Sūra," which was his name from childhood, "from today on, you shall be known as Sūradās." Sūra literally means brave, and in olden times, Sūra referred to a soldier who fights on the battlefield without fear. But Vallabhācārya explained at that moment that he was giving that name to Sūradās as one who was qualified and brave enough to walk in the complicated field of musical notes and melodies, which is a brave act in service to Lord Gopāl.

So, soon after his initiation, Sūradās was selected as the chief singer at the famous Gopal Temple on Govardhan Hill, of course, we know that deity of Gopāl was found by Mahaprabhu, Madhavendra Purī, and now he's worshiped in Mathurā. So, he was selected as the chief singer at that temple on Govardhan Hill.

And once the head pujārī of that temple, curious as to how Sūradās was always describing the beauty of the Gopāl deity so nicely in his poetry, although he was blind, wanted to test Sūradās. So, that day, he dressed the beautiful deity again, Śrī Gopāl, in only a single strand of pearls.

And when the curtain opened, the pujārī said, "So, Sūra, do tell us how Gopāl looks today." So Sūradās started singing. He began: "Lāho nanga, nanga, oh Sākhī!

Look today, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is standing naked. His only adornment is a string of pearls, and waves of beauty arise from His unclothed form. Every limb is glowing in incomparable sweetness. Seeing it, even the sun and millions of Cupids are put to shame.

Sūradās says He has a captivating smile and drops of milk on His face, and He is laughing along with the Gopis." So, after this incident, everyone was convinced of Sūradās's unique ability to see, to see his beloved Lord, despite the fact that he was blind, mystically.

Soon his fame in writing increased, and his composing of poems and songs spread rapidly. And at that time in history, the legendary musician Tānsen, who was actually the chief musician in the court of the great Emperor Akbar in Delhi, once sang one of Sūradās's songs for Akbar, and when he did, it brought tears to the emperor's eyes.

But when Tānsen said the song wasn't his composition, but he said a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa living in Vṛndāvana, Akbar asked Tānsen to go to Vṛndāvana and bring that person, Sūradās, back to his palace in Delhi to sing for him.

So, when Tānsen arrived in Vṛndāvana accompanied by a soldier and a palanquin to bring Sūradās back to the king's court, and he approached Sūradās and asked him to accompany him for this particular purpose, Sūradās just refused to go.

So the soldier said, "Your refusal can lead to the emperor's anger, which will have an effect on the service of Lord Gopāl. So don't make the emperor angry." As a compromise, Sūradās then asked his very dear friend and godbrother, Kumbhandas, Kumbhandas to go to Akbar's court in his place.

So, when Kumbhandas, who is actually described as another gem amongst Braj Bhāṣā poets, came before Akbar, the emperor, he sang: "Santānan kahāṁ vāto?

What did the devotees have to do in the capital of the emperor?

Nothing!

Coming to this place has broken my footwear and disturbed my chanting of the Holy Names of Lord Hari. Here I am forced to look upon a false emperor and offer him my respects." Wow. He's a sadhu, he speaks the truth.

Then Kumbhandas, he concluded: "Kumbhandas says, without Girirāj, all these things are useless. What a devotee!

Without Girirāj, all these things here in Delhi, they're useless." So, after hearing that, Akbar was astonished. Instead of becoming angry, Emperor Akbar allowed Kumbhandas to return to Vṛndāvana with an earnest request that Sūradās reconsider and come to Delhi to sing for him.

So, actually, Sūradās eventually agreed, somehow or other. And when he arrived in Delhi, Akbar asked him to quickly compose a poem about his exploits, meaning the emperor's exploits. But Sūradās refused. And when Akbar asked him why he was refusing, Sūradās broke out in a spontaneous song.

This was the song: "No more room remains in my heart. It is the son of Nanda who lives there, always, all the time. How is it then possible to let someone else, even come in?

In the waking hours, in the dreams at night, His face never leaves my heart, not even for a moment. People tell tales, oh Uddhava, they try to tempt me, but what can I do?

My heart, so full of love, is like a clay picture into which an ocean cannot be poured. Sūradās sings only of dark and lotus-faced Kṛṣṇa, of His soft and sweet smile. It is for the vision of Him that my eyes thirst eternally." And when he finished singing, Akbar stood there speechless, and tears were flowing down his cheeks.

And only Tānsen was able to speak. And he said famously: "Some are hurt by a warrior's arrow, some are tortured by pain, but those whose hearts are touched by Sūradās's lyrics are pierced through again and again." Let's recite that again: "Some are hurt by a warrior's arrow, some are tortured by pain, but those whose hearts are touched by Sūradās's lyrics are pierced through again and again." So, actually, many of Sūradās's songs were in the Braj Bhāṣā language of Vṛndāvana, which very much endeared him to the residents of Vṛndāvana.

It is said with his poetic genius and musical skills, he knew how to turn the hearts of the Braj Vāsis because he only sang of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's devotees. He wasn't like many sadhus at that time who spoke and sang of the formless Supreme.

Sūradās made it very clear. In my research, I found one of his songs to that effect. Listen to this: He writes, "My mind runs in circles, bewildered, finding nothing to grasp, no support in the formless, who they say is faceless, with no attributes, no lines, no characteristics.

They consider it in every way inaccessible. So Sūradās has decided to sing of the beautiful Lord incarnate, Śrī Hari, and all His attractive pastimes." Made it very clear, not the formalist, but the Lord Himself. Now, Sūradās himself was well aware of the very deep pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and His devotees in Vṛndāvana.

He openly sang of the Gopis' pangs of separation from Kṛṣṇa, for example, the *vipralambha* love and separation. Listen to this following composition of his. It's, it's the Gopis singing after Kṛṣṇa has left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā.

This was the Gopis singing, very deep. "No one has ever become happy loving the moth, loved the fire, but the fire consumed her. No one has ever become happy loving the bee, loved the lotus, but the flower became its prison.

No one has ever become happy loving the deer, drawn by the sweet sound of the hunter, had to bear an arrow in her heart. No one has ever become happy loving. We who loved the honeyed one, Kṛṣṇa, were struck dumb when He left us.

Without our Lord, we suffer. Our tears are always flowing. For no one has ever become happy loving." The Gopis. That's so beautiful. So, he understood the deeper mellows. And in Vṛndāvana, Sūradās spent much of his time near Govardhan Hill, on the banks of the sacred Candrasarovara Lake.

Candrasarovara Lake. Actually, this lake, Candrasarovara, it is to the followers of Vallabhācārya what Rādhākuṇḍa is to the followers of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We've been there many times. And eventually, Candrasarovara is where this great devotee artist left the world in the year 1581.

His *samādhi* is there. And his final words uttered on his deathbed are so inspiring. As he lay there, the son of Vallabhācārya, his name was Vitthala, asked Sūradās, "Sūradās, what are you thinking about now?" And as a way of replying, Sūradās composed what would be his last poem, or his last song.

He sang: "Kṛṣṇa's beautiful eyes are like *cakora* birds, full of *rasa*, very restless, and slightly *rūṇa* due to intoxication. Seeing this, my life cannot remain in the cage of this body any longer." And finishing his song, Sūradās at once gave up his body.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

And from that day on, it is said that devotees go there to pray for his, Sūradās's, inner vision by which to see Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Kṛṣṇa's eternal pastimes. Wow. And we should take advantage when we're in Vṛndāvana to go there to that holy place, that holy lake, and take shelter at his *samādhi* and reflect on his songs and his pastimes while he was in this world.

We should bathe in that Candrasarovara where he departed. So, we can finish today, I thought, with some of Sūradās's poems. A little lengthy, but this is really how we can understand who he was. We can hear his words, like Prabhupāda had said one time, "If you want to know me, read my books.

Read my books." So we can understand this wonderful saintly poet by hearing some of his poetry. There are so many. I mentioned, you know, 100,000 more poems. But here are a few of them. This first poem is in the mood of Kṛṣṇa speaking to His mother from afar.

He's left Dvārakā and he's on his way to Mathurā. So, a very spiritually emotional time. So, to capture that mood, Sūradās writes: "Mother Yaśodā, rest assured, we will both be home in five or seven days. Both Balarāma and I.

In the meantime, now and then, check on my flute, check on my staff, and the horn I blow. Don't let Rādhikā pull away any of my favorite playthings. Ever since the day you and I parted, no one's called me 'Little Kanhāi'.

No one rises early to make me breakfast or gives me fresh milk at night. No news ever comes from your direction to tell me how you are suffering. And now, Vāsudeva and Devakī say that really, I was born to them.

What can be said about Father Nanda?

How cruel-hearted he had been to bring me here to Mathurā, says Sūra, and never seek me out again." Wow. "How cruel has he been to bring me here to Mathurā, says Sūra, and never seek me out again." Here's another one: "Lord Hari is solely the patron of the poor.

Our Lord is the one who fends for the wretched, brings fulfillment to those whose love is pure. What storehouse of wealth did Sudāmā possess?

Why was Hari drawn to a hunchback's charm?

What sort of lordliness did the chief of a clan claim?

Still, He volunteered as Arjuna's charioteer. What were Vidura's name, birth, and clan?

No matter to Hari; He was moved by love. Sūradās's Lord is this kind of Lord. He burns away the trials of the true. He burns away the trials of the true." Here's another one: "Purifier of the fallen, pitier of the pious, guardian of those who have no guard.

Such are the phrases they always say to praise You, scriptures, universes, and gods. Yet no one has fallen further than I have. No one is more guardless, more impious. Why do You not give me deliverance?

Is anyone more crippled than I?

You granted happiness to the Brahmin and the harlot, freed the elephant from his curse, and took away the terror of Arjuna's seed, the target of a thousandfold heat. Nothing has ever been said or enacted in word, or in deed, or in thought, that You didn't see.

Sūradās says, You know it all inside and out." Here's another one: "Fix your thoughts, *ānanda-nandana*!

Oh, my mind, refrain from drinking the liquor of the senses, and bow down before His cooling lotus feet. His legs, beautifully flexed at the knee, appear like lovely staffs of gold. And the shining yellow garment clinched around His waist seems like the saffron-colored core of a lotus.

His bells make a sound like the happy clatter of little goslings newly born. And from His navel to His chest, a row of tiny hairs marches forth like a regiment of bees. A jewel is at His neck, and a necklace of pearls.

Sandal on His limbs, wild flowers garland His breast. So it seems as if the *gaṇeśā* in passion borders the moon, and vines unfold a dark *tālī*. His hands and arms are lotuses, petals and stems. His mouth shapes sweet-sounding words.

And so radiant is His face, it's a peerless moon on a fragrant, brilliant night. His lips, His teeth, His cheeks, His nose, His surprisingly beautiful eyes, and earrings dangle. And the hollow behind His cheeks, as if Kāma, the entrancing one, were dancing there.

His hair is all curls beneath His peacock feather crown, and His forehead marks and eyebrows make a line, as if Kāma, seeing clouds and a rainbow in the sky, were poised to release a pair of arrows. Sūradās says, 'Let your eyes fill and fill with the beauty of the blessed cowherd.

Gaze at the splendor of that Lord of life so intensely that your eyes can't bear to close.' Sūradās, you're far away, but please accept our most humble obeisances. And please, please draw us near to You so we can learn more about the Lord of your life.

Hare Kṛṣṇa." That's all in Sūradās.

I wish we could speak about him for millions of classes, but how Kṛṣṇa. So, thank you from Rishikesh at our Rishikesh Kirtan Fest. It's going wonderfully. We're getting 400, 450, sometimes 500 Westerners, all spiritual seekers, every evening. They're chanting and dancing in ecstasy with us, and they're relishing some *kīrtan*, some workshops, and of course, every evening, a free, delicious vegetarian feast.

Many of them say, "I came here to Rishikesh, I didn't know what I was looking for, but now I found it in the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, all by Śrīla Prabhupāda's grace." Thank you for joining.

See you next Friday. May Kṛṣṇa. The banks of the Gaṅgā, Jai Śrī. Very.