Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale
Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.
Namaste Sarasvatī Deve
Gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 143, in which we will continue our discussion on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's disguises.

Hearing such pastimes will certainly increase our desire to serve the Lord.

There's a Sanskrit book entitled *Subhāṣita*. *Subhāṣitas* are described as short and memorable verses. *Su* in Sanskrit means "good," and *bhāṣita* means "spoken," which together literally means "well-spoken" or "elegant sayings."

So, in the *Subhāṣita* it says:

*Śataṁ vihāya bhoktavyaṁ* — giving up hundreds of other tasks, one should eat at the proper time.

*Sahasraṁ snānam ācaret* — when it is the proper time to take a bath, one should give up thousands of other tasks and bathe at the proper time.

*Lakṣaṁ vihāya dātavyaṁ* — when there is a suitable time for giving charity, one should give up hundreds of thousands of other tasks and give suitable charity.

But *koṭiṁ tyaktvā hariṁ bhajet* — when it comes to worshiping Śrī Hari, Kṛṣṇa, one should give up ten million other tasks and worship Śrī Hari.

Such wisdom.

So now, in the Vallabha-sampradāya and throughout Vṛndāvana, there's a well-known pastime that I'd like to share with you today.

One morning, while Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's girlfriends were dressing Her, Lalitā-sakhī spoke up and said:

"Dearest Rādhārāṇī, today we will ornament You with shark-shaped earrings because Śyāmasundara is like a shark and Your earholes are like the ocean. As a shark cannot live without the ocean, so Kṛṣṇa is unable to live without You. And whenever Kṛṣṇa sees these shark-shaped earrings, He will remember that His life is nothing without You. He will remember that His life is nothing without You."

She continued:

"And dearest Rādhā, I am putting kajjala in Your eyes because this is the darkness of love, and love matures best in darkness."

Such poetry.

So, in this way, Śrī Rādhā started Her day with great hopes of encountering Kṛṣṇa, decorated in this wonderful way.

And by Paurṇamāsī's grace, Her maidservants were able to arrange a secret meeting with Kṛṣṇa later that day.

However, as sometimes happens—or often happens, as we've been hearing through the months—Kṛṣṇa arrived late for the rendezvous, and as a result Rādhārāṇī became very angry.

Again, what is anger in Sanskrit?

*Māna.*

She came into māna.

Of course, Kṛṣṇa tried as hard as He could, as He often does, to pacify Her, but He was unsuccessful.

So, as He sometimes does, He went to Lalitā-sakhī and asked her to intervene.

Fortunately, Lalitā was able to partially calm Śrī Rādhā down.

But afterwards Lalitā found Kṛṣṇa and chastised Him, telling Him never to make Śrī Rādhā angry again.

"Never again, Kṛṣṇa."

So a few days later—this is an interesting twist in the pastime—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were sitting happily together in a forest grove, a kuñja, when Kṛṣṇa said:

"My dear Rādhārāṇī, what do You think if we switch roles? What do You think if we switch roles and I become angry with You, just this one time?"

So Rādhārāṇī smiled and said:

"Yes, that kind of māna might be fun."

So Kṛṣṇa joked and said:

"Watch out. It will not be easy to pacify Me."

But Śrī Rādhā said:

"Don't be so sure of that, Kṛṣṇa. You know the strength of My love and how easily I can control You."

So right then and there Kṛṣṇa went into māna, anger, on the banks of the Yamunā.

Now, as much as Śrī Rādhā tried to pacify Him, She wasn't successful.

It's the pastime.

So then Rādhārāṇī asked Lalitā to help, but even she wasn't able to appease Kṛṣṇa's māna.

Then Śrī Rādhā turned to Viśākhā for help, but even she was not successful in pacifying the pouting Kṛṣṇa.

So then sixteen thousand gopīs were called forth, and even they failed.

So at that point Śrī Rādhā began crying, and as She did so, Her tears flowed into the Yamunā River.

Soon the river began overflowing its banks because of Her tears.

When that happened, Yamunā-devī herself—the Yamunā River personified—appeared and said:

"Dear Śrī Rādhā, Your tears are causing me great pain. Please give me an order that I can pacify Kṛṣṇa on Your behalf."

So after Śrī Rādhā blessed Yamunā-devī, Yamunā-devī went into a nearby kuñja, a nearby grove, and soon reappeared looking exactly like Kṛṣṇa in His form as Gopāla lifting Govardhana Hill.

That beautiful form of Gopāla discovered by Mādhavendra Purī at Govardhana.

She was holding a lotus flower in her left hand, and her right hand was in the pose of lifting Girirāja.

The famous Deity.

She had also expertly manifested all the beautiful features of Kṛṣṇa and was wearing the same outfit as Kṛṣṇa, along with a necklace and a beautiful crown.

So then what did she do?

Well, she passed by Kṛṣṇa, who was pouting on the banks of the river.

And when Kṛṣṇa saw her looking identical to Him in every way, He became attracted to His own form.

It's not the first time He became attracted to His own form.

Kṛṣṇa said:

"Excuse me. Tell Me who you are. I would very much like to embrace you."

So Yamunā-devī, looking like Kṛṣṇa, said:

"Dear Kṛṣṇa, if You would like to attain me, You must first give up Your māna, Your anger toward Śrī Rādhā, and take shelter of Her lotus feet."

So, of course, Kṛṣṇa immediately agreed, and giving up His māna, He bowed down to the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was standing just nearby.

So Yamunā-devī accomplished what Lalitā, Viśākhā, and even Śrī Rādhā had been unable to do.

So because Yamunā was so successful in pacifying Kṛṣṇa, Rādhārāṇī very kindly gave her a most beautiful blessing.

Listen to this.

She said:

"My dear Yamunā, as you are dear to Me, so the lotus flowers that constantly decorate your waters are also dear to Me. So from this day forth I shall always hold one of your lotus flowers in My left hand and bless you with My right hand."

Just envision it in your mind's eye.

"So from this day forth I shall always hold one of your lotus flowers in My left hand and bless you with My right hand."

And it is for this reason, dear devotees, that we see Rādhā, along with Kṛṣṇa, in both our London and Paris temples in the pose of holding a lotus flower in Her left hand, with Her right hand raised in blessing—blessing Yamunā-devī.

So please go online, dear devotees, and download a photo of Rādhārāṇī in this pose in either London or Paris.

These Deities, these two sets of Deities, famously installed by Śrīla Prabhupāda, are known as Rādhā-Londonīśvara and Rādhā-Parīśvara, respectively.

Both of them very dear to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

There you see Rādhārāṇī in that pose.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So I would like to conclude today by reciting a few exquisite verses from the final portion of Chapter Two of *Govinda-līlāmṛta* by Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, which opens a window, you could say, into the eternal morning pastimes of Vṛndāvana, where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is lovingly dressed and adorned by Her intimate maidservants.

With great care and devotion, they ornament Her with countless artistic touches, including a lotus flower in Her hand.

It's all tied together.

Enhancing, let us say, Her beauty in ways that captivate the heart of Kṛṣṇa Himself.

And I quote:

"Lalitā then placed on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's finger a signet ring decorated with various jewels and carrying the inscription 'Rādhā.' This ring decimates the happiness of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's rivals.

Viśākhā then fastened two sets of wonderful golden jeweled anklets above Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet. The tinkling of these anklets resembles the pleasant cooing of cātaka birds. Simply by hearing these tinkling sounds, the swan of Lord Kṛṣṇa's mind becomes enchanted and loses all composure.

Viśākhā then placed on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's ankles two sets of glistening jeweled bells. These bells seem to be the music teachers of the gently cooing swans in the Yamunā River.

Sudevī then placed various glistening jeweled rings on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's toes. These rings were fashioned with such wonderful artistic craftsmanship that they astonished even the creator, Lord Brahmā.

Then, at the moment of sunrise, Nāradā, the daughter of a florist, gave a toy lotus flower to her friend Viśākhā. Viśākhā's lotus face lit up with a smile, and she then placed that toy lotus flower in the lotus hand of lotus-eyed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī."

Please allow me to say it again:

"Then, at the moment of sunrise, Nāradā, the daughter of a florist, gave a toy lotus flower to her friend Viśākhā. Viśākhā's lotus face lit up with a smile, and she then placed that toy lotus flower in the lotus hand of lotus-eyed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī."

Very clearly described there.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you.

We'll be back again next week. Actually, we have more pastimes with disguises. There are so many that we could probably make this section into a book.

Sorry.

Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya!

All glories to Vraja!

All glories to that lotus flower in the hand of Śrī Rādhārāṇī!
