Hi Krishna, dear devotees, welcome back again to our ongoing lectures on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Namaste, śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau namaha. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 84. In this lecture, we will discuss the glories of various altars, thrones, and royal seats used by the Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

It will be an interesting lecture, as we'll see that the Lord has a variety of places where He poses in all His majestic beauty. Of course, the most prominent is His altar where He's worshipped in His temples in India, and now, by Prabhupāda's grace, all around the world.

Traditionally, I was reading that an altar is located in the inner sanctum of a temple, where only Brahman priests actually have access. This inner sanctum has a technical name in Sanskrit; it's called *garbha-gṛha*. And in the Viśvakarmā Vāstu Śāstra, chapter 73, verse one, the *garbha-gṛha* is described as follows: "In any temple, the *garbha-gṛha* is the place where the main deities of the temple—meaning, in this verse, Hari, Kṛṣṇa, Śiva, or Brahmā—along with their consorts and *āsana* seats, are placed." Then, this Viśvakarmā Vāstu Śāstra goes on in great detail about how that sanctum, or as we would say in ISKCON, the altar room, should be constructed.

Such doors constructed directly in the line of sight of the *garbha-gṛha* can be five in number, or three in number. Just some details there. It's interesting. Next, Viśvakarmā Vāstu describes that within this *garbha-gṛha*, there should be space for the *pujārī* to perform *parikramā*, or to circle around the deities. "That was interesting." *Antaḥ pakkṣino 'tāvāh tam, garbha-gṛha* should be equipped with an inner *parikramā* path, or it can also be devoid of the same.

Interesting. Then, Viśvakarmā Vāstu describes that the *garbha-gṛha* should be decorated with various items such as *toraṇa*, meaning hanging door decorations, etc. Then more details. I'm sharing them with you because they may be useful for those of you who are building a temple.

The Viśvakarmā Vāstu specifies that the *garbha-gṛha* is actually of two types: *divya* and *brahma*. The *garbha-gṛha* consists of two divisions: one, *divya*, and two, *brahma*. The *divya* division is the space where the deity is installed, and the *brahma* division is the space before the deity where the offerings, etc., are placed.

The śāstra also specifies that in order to illuminate or give light to the *garbha-gṛha*, one can keep a *devama*, a pillar of lamps, a *dīpa-daṇḍa*, a linear series of lamps, and a *dīpa-toraṇa*, wall hangings of lamps, etc. Plus, it says there should be arrangements to draw curtains in front of the *garbha-gṛha*, as we do in ISKCON.

Besides this, there should be ample facilities for celebrating other festivals, or many festivals, actually. And I was reading that there's no fixed height for the *garbha-gṛha*. In fact, some deities, according to the śāstra, can even be placed at ground level.

And I was thinking of an example of that: the Nṛsiṁha deity at Nṛsiṁhapura in Nabadwip. If you see that Nṛsiṁha deity, Ugra Nṛsiṁha, from Satya Yuga, actually, He's on ground level. But obviously, other deities can be placed above ground level in order to aid visibility.

Now, our beloved Śrīla Saṅga Svāmī also gives, how could I say, ample knowledge in his *Haribhakti-vilāsa*, the 18th Vilāsa, on how to prepare an altar for the Lord. It's quite long. It begins in text 434. He writes, "I shall now describe to you the characteristics of the deity stand," or you could say, altar.

There's actually 50 verses, but we'll only mention a few. He goes on: "The altar's height should be half the height of the deity, and its width should be equal to the width of the deity. Thus, there should be an equal amount of space on the four sides of the base of the deity's stand.

The middle portion of the base, which covers an area of four times, is suitable for placing a nice stand for the deity. There should be an opening at the base where water drains out, and this opening should be half of the width." Really specific here. "The deity of Lord Hari or Kṛṣṇa should have an especially beautiful effulgence, and the stand of the altar should be equally attractive, equally attractive or foremost of all." He writes here now about the various kinds of stands according to the different deities. "It has been ascertained that there are 10 kinds of altars." Wow. *Śanila, vāpī, yakṣī, vṛtta, maṇḍala, pūrṇa-candra, bhadra, padma, ardha-candra,* and *triśūla*.

A *śanila* stand or altar is square, without a belt. A *vāpī* stand or altar has two belts. A *yakṣī* stand has three belts. A *vṛtta* stand is square, but a deity should not be installed on it. Couldn't find out what the belts were, but a *maṇḍala* stand is round and has three belts.

A *pūrṇa-candra* stand or altar should be red, and it should have two belts, probably some formation going around to give strength to the altar. A *padma* stand is just like a lotus flower, having 16 petals, and it is a little smaller at the base.

And *ardha-candra* looks just like a bow, and a *triśūla* looks like a trident. If these stands or altars appear to be not so well-made on the northern side, they are still considered auspicious and suitable. Wow. Then he goes on: "A *śanila* stand awards one wealth.

A *vāpī* stand bestows immense wealth. A *yakṣī* stand awards one the wealth of cows. A *vṛtta* stand bestows opulence. A *maṇḍala* altar gives one good reputation. A *pūrṇa-candra* stand awards benedictions. A *bhadra* stand gives one long duration of life, and a *padma* stand bestows good fortune.

And an *ardha-candra* blesses one with good children. And finally, a *triśūla* enables one to defeat his enemies." Of course, this is coming from Śrīla Saṅga Svāmī, but all of these things can be employed in pure devotional service to the Lord.

That's our understanding. He goes on: "A marble deity should have a marble stand. A clay deity should have a clay stand. A wooden deity should have a wooden stand or altar, and a deity made of various substances should have a stand made of several things.

Those who desire their own welfare should never prepare a stand improperly. Those who desire their own welfare should never prepare a stand improperly, but according to these injunctions, one should accept the deity stand, the altar, as being non-different from the deity's consorts." Thus, the characteristics of the deity stand have been described in brief.

Of course, I made it very brief. There's actually 50 verses. Of course, it may not always be possible for us here outside of India to adhere to these instructions in constructing altars for our temple deities. But most importantly, the main thing in providing an altar, even the most simple one, is the love and devotion in which it's built and offered and used in service to the Lord.

Now, Śrīla Prabhupāda demonstrated this in Gorakhpur, India, in February 1971.

I was reading, actually listening to a lecture tape the other day, on hearing that Prabhupāda wanted to preach in Gorakhpur, Hanuman Prasad Poddar, he was head of Gita Press, a well-known publishing company, still a well-known publishing company, he offered one of his properties, actually a two-story house known as Krishna Niketan, to Prabhupāda and his disciples to stay in during their visit to that city.

And when Prabhupāda received the offer to use Krishna Niketan, he acted very quickly.

He said it was not proper that the deities of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that he had brought from Kolkata had been placed away in a trunk after a recent Kumbha Mela. The deities were worshipped at the Kumbha Mela, big deities, and he said they'd already been worshipped, so he said their worship should not be stopped.

Once the deity is worshipped, it should go on continuously. In fact, he said, "At that time, his disciples, Kosala and Nandu Kumar, the deities have to be formally installed tomorrow." So soon, devotees were running around preparing for the next day's festival.

And Prabhupāda himself directed the devotees in cleaning this the temple room in this borrowed house from ceiling to floor, and in building an altar.

That's why I'm telling this story, this pastime, in building an altar. So he asked his disciple, Hati Mai, to donate her fanciest sari, which he hung like a curtain before the table that was to be the deity's altar. A table to be the deity's altar.

The altar needed a backdrop, he said. And while Kosala stood on the table, he handed her pieces of colored fabric to arrange some decoration behind the wall, and the backdrop completed. Prabhupāda took a rug, which a devotee had brought from Allahabad, and placed it over the table altar.

In other words, that new rug became on top of the table altar. Then Prabhupāda surveyed this new temple room and said, "Oh, it is very nice.

Oh, it is very nice." So that night, devotees stayed up all night sewing clothes for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and the next morning, the deities were placed on their glorious altar. I would say glorious altar because it was manifested from the heart of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the best altar in the universe.

And the devotees resumed their worship, offering *prasādam* and *ārati* six times a day. So again, an altar can be simple, very simple, made and offered in the mood of loving devotion. The court singer of Akbar, Tansen's guru, Swami Haridās, writes as follows: "Kusum Vana, oh residents of Vrindavan, behold the beauty of the two brothers, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who are sitting in the palace made of flowers.

They are sitting on a royal throne, an altar made of flowers, with canopies made of various colorful flower buds. Kṛṣṇa is decorating Śrīmatī with different flower ornaments. Śrīmatī Śyāmā smiles and hides her face with her veil, which mesmerizes Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Haridās says, 'I sacrifice the countless armies of Cupid's kingdom for the sweet glance of the Divine Couple.'" What more simple altar could you get than flowers?

But so much *bhakti*, so much devotion, in Vrindavan, the abode of love and bliss. And the poet Parānanda also describes the, how could I say, the Vrajavāsī's mood of worshipping Kṛṣṇa on an altar. He writes: "*Anathā rāha, mahālā, o, ek gopī said to Kṛṣṇa, 'Dear one, do not go anywhere else.

Please stay in my dwelling palace. Be seated on your beautiful throne, and I will arrange your clothes and jewelry. I will decorate your throne and your resting place. I will dance to please you, serve you, and satisfy you with my best efforts.'*" Prananda Das says, "What more is there to say?

I will be your maid servant birth after birth." Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Now, there's a beautiful verse I found in the Vaiṣṇava-āgama śāstras, also called the Pañcarātra Saṁhitās, which describe 12 specific thrones or seats, *āsanas*, that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa sit on in their Vrindavan pastimes. Here's the verse: "*Vṛndāvane yāny anani nikāma syāma-śyāmayoḥ, dhīrādhira-dhairya-sthānaṁ śrī-govinda-parigrahaḥ*." It's a long one.

Translation: "The 12 kinds of *āsanas* or seats of the Lord in Vrindavan are: *bhū*, an altar-like seat; *mayūra*, a seat resembling a peacock; *pāraṇa*, a bed-like seat; *śayana*, a resting or sleeping seat; *śṛṅgāra*, a seat for enjoying beautiful ornamental decorations; *kuñja*, a seat with a bower or leafy enclosure; *snāna*, a seat for bathing and play; *siṁhāsana*, a lion's throne; *mṛdu*, a cushioned or soft seat; *suśayana*, a very comfortable seat; *bhogya*, a seat for enjoying, obviously, food and offerings; and finally, *bhagavat-āsana*, the divine seat specially made for the deity." Haribol!

So, one poet named Madhava Dasa writes a prayer to these seats as follows: "I offer my respects to the *āsanas* of the Divine Couple, which give comfort and pleasure to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, which is the expansion of Anantaśesa. These seats are highly praised by the demigods such as Indra and Bṛhaspati, worshipped by Lord Śiva and Pārvatī, and are the eternal shelter of the devotees of the Lord.

I, Madhava Dasa, take shelter of these 12 *āsanas*." Haribol!

So, so many varieties of altars and thrones and seats, from big to small. I was reading that even something so small as a leaf can even act as a sitting place for the Lord. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written in his song, "*Vena Padara Vindum*": "I meditate on that baby Kṛṣṇa who was sleeping on a leaf of a banyan tree with His lotus foot placed in His lotus-like mouth, with His lotus-like hand.

He's sleeping on a banyan to relieve..." Wait, I think that's a slight misquotation. It should be about baby Kṛṣṇa sleeping, His lotus foot up to His lotus-like mouth, with His lotus-like hand holding it. In a similar way, one of my favorite poets, Rasik Kṛṣṇa, he writes: "Oh brother Jiva of Kali Yuga, behold the beautiful Lord Ganga.

He sits on a half-cut banyan tree on the seashore of Puri. Haridasa, with joined palms, is listening to the glories of Lord Jagannātha from Him. The high waves of the salty ocean are touching His lotus feet, moving to and fro.

The sweet-smelling air is moving His long curly locks. The sun is offering a lamp to Him in the sky, and the clouds are witnessing the exchange of love and devotion between Haridasa and Govinda." Rasik Kiśora says, "When will that day come when I will place my head over that banyan tree *āsana*, which became as soft as the lap of mother Śacī for Gaurāṅga Hari?" Wow.

We owe so much to these poets. But again, if possible, we can and should combine Śrīla Prabhupāda's guidelines, as we've been reading, and devotion in preparing altars for our Lordships in our great International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.

In our temples, and being Founder-Ācārya of our movement, Śrīla Prabhupāda gave such guidelines in a letter he wrote to a group of devotees in May 1968.

He wrote: "The *siṁhāsana*, or altar, may vary in shape and size, depending on the number and types of deities and the size of the deity room. Since the *siṁhāsana* is the Lord's *āsana*, or place of activity, it should be attractive and kept absolutely clean.

If the *siṁhāsana* has a roof, you should regularly clean the top. If there is no roof, then there should at least be an umbrella or some type of cloth canopy above the deities. There should be some arrangement for retiring the deities from public view—a curtain.

If the temple room is too small to accommodate a separate deity room with doors, you may hang a curtain to serve this purpose. If the temple room is too small even for that, the curtain may be integrated into the design of the *siṁhāsana*." So many instructions.

The altar should be so made with a curtain that it may be closed when Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī are taking rest. So, I would like to share today with you a just description of Govinda-sthala, otherwise known as Vṛndāvana.

It's the place where Kṛṣṇa, as you know, played His flute one night, calling His devotees for loving pastimes. Now, therein, there is a beautiful description of where the Lord stood, and it's actually written by Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Kavirāja in his immortal *Govinda-līlāmṛta*.

There are many verses, but here's a combination of some of the verses from chapter 21. We'll hear about the altar, many things, but also the altar. He writes: "Govinda-sthala was packed with desire trees that could fulfill every wish, *pāraṇa* trees that destroyed all enemies, *mandāra* trees that destroyed poverty, and *śatana* trees that bestowed all bliss.

They were cooling, yellow sandal *hari-chanda* trees to please the heart and body, and many varieties of bountiful creepers. All the trees and creepers in Govinda-sthala could fulfill every conceivable desire of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. The other trees and vines could not.

Restless rohita fish moved in the water, and motionless salota trees stood on the land. The rohita fish swam in the water, and the rohita trees stood on the land. The whole of Vṛndāvana was beautified by blooming golden trees with sapphire platforms, sapphire trees with golden platforms, cat-sized trees with crystal platforms, lapis lazuli trees with diamond platforms, diamond trees with ruby platforms, and moonstone trees with emerald platforms.

Every tree had a different platform, and the branches of every tree were embraced by blossoming creepers. The *kuñjas* had thick flowering creepers for walls and roofs made from the dense foliage of the trees. They looked just like jeweled temples.

Govinda-sthala was filled with the pleasant singing and flitting about of many attractive birds, such as pigeons, doves, turtle doves, cuckoos, parrots, partridges, roosters, cranes, *mananas*, quail, shrikes, shrikes, excuse me, skylarks, peacocks, blue jays, *chāras*, and *tātas*. In the center of Govinda-sthala was a Golden Palace studded with jewels and surrounded by many groves of desire trees.

At the foot of a desire tree in the middle of the golden circle was a great jewel temple, a *yāpī mandir*, surrounded by a raised altar, surrounded by a raised altar with jeweled steps leading up on all sides. Four desire trees, *pāraṇa, mandāra, harichanda*, and *śatana*, graced the four corners.

The golden *siṁhāsana* inside the yoga mandir was shaped like a lion resting on rear legs, its paws were raised above the ground. The lion made of sunstone had ruby eyes, and its ears and tail were turned upwards. The lion throne appeared to be flying due to its bright effulgence.

A golden umbrella shaded the *siṁhāsana*, which sat on an eight-petal lotus formation, having colorful jeweled filaments. The lotus petals were covered with fine fabrics and stuffed with cotton to make comfortable seats." How Kṛṣṇa goes on and on and on, but just some nectar there to hear about, you know, the altar, the *āsana*, the throne, in that most auspicious place.

So, I would like to finish today. I have to finish. I'm actually in London, just came from America. I'm in London for a couple of days on my way to Poland for our annual Summer Festival tour, Festival of India.

So I have to finish, start packing to get there. There are 350 devotees who are waiting. Big Mahāyajña. This will be the 34th annual festival tour. We've preached to millions. But I'd like to finish today with a beautiful poem, a beautiful poem by the Vrindavan Vrajavāsī poet, Vaiśākh Dāsa, in which he glorifies his guru.

Now, we've been speaking on a deep subject matter today, the paraphernalia of the Lord in Vrindavan, all related to places where the Divine Couple, Śrīmatī Śrī Radhā and Kṛṣṇa, stand. But such things can only be realized by the mercy of one's pure spiritual preceptor.

So, I feel this is an appropriate prayer to finish our lecture, wherein we glorify the sitting place of our beloved spiritual masters. Vaiśākh Dasa writes: "With deep guru-bhakti, serve the divine *āsana* of your Guru, which is passed from one Ācārya to another.

It is the eternal place of the guru-paramparā. Accept the shelter of this divine seat, which is accepted by the Ācāryas, and on which the Guru sits, from which he delivers the lost and the fallen and meditates on Kṛṣṇa. I, Vaiśākh Dasa, massage this *āsana* with fragrant oil, which is just like massaging the lotus feet of my Guru." Haribol!

The end. So, thank you for joining us. We'll be busy this summer, of course, but I feel this is one of my most important services to everyone. We'll continue our research in the scriptures and come up with another class, another lecture, next Friday.

Thank you so much. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! Śrī Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅgau!

Jai!

Haribol!