Hari Krishna everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing lectures on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Īśvara Purīpāda, Kṛṣṇa.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 156, in which we will continue to discuss the various disguises Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa use in their pastimes. In this episode, Kṛṣṇa cleverly disguises himself as a fabric dyer, like a cloth dyer.

It's interesting that up until now, we have discussed 22 of Kṛṣṇa's disguises, most of which he assumes, of course, to approach Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, to appease her *māna*, or her anger, and ultimately to mitigate their separation from each other. Now, Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, refers to such pastimes in verse 90 of his *Gopāla Campu*, 29th *Puraṇa*.

He writes as follows: "In this manner, on other nights too, Śrī Rādhā saw Kṛṣṇa disguised in a variety of ways. At that time, she experienced relief from her separation." As we noted, then he writes in verse 100: "These descriptions are merely a small sample.

There were many more such instances of Kṛṣṇa taking disguises." Wow. Now, curious to know of the other disguises that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī refers to, I researched and made a list of disguises mentioned in various of our Gauḍīya śāstras and temple traditions in Vṛndāvana, as well as poems and oral traditions, and even theater plays here in Vṛndāvana, where I am right now.

And I thought I would present the list to you. So, here it is. It's quite long. Kṛṣṇa takes a lot of disguises. It's one of his main pastimes, actually. So, Kṛṣṇa assumes the following disguises: the disguise of a snake charmer, a yogī, a beggar, a yoginī, a gardener, as Balarāma, as Abhimanyu, as a sitar player, as a *vanara* (meaning gypsy), as Lord Śiva, as Chandi Durgā, as the goddess Kāli, as Lord Rāma, as a mystical goddess, as a female teacher, as a hypnotist, as a maddened gopī, as a henna painter, as a monkey, as a peacock.

Um, he assumes the disguise of Durvāsā Muni, as Cupid's messenger. Here's an interesting one: as Kamsa's soldier, as a king, as a brāhmaṇa, as an old lady, as a drummer, as a magician. Here's another interesting one: as a crocodile, a turtle, Rādhā's cousin, and as Vaṭuka, a dwarf Kṛṣṇa.

But as I mentioned earlier, today we will discuss Kṛṣṇa's assuming the disguise of a fabric dyer, a dyer of cloth. Now, in his list of disguises, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī mentions this particular disguise in verse 102 of the 29th *Puraṇa* of *Gopāla Campu*.

He writes as follows: "On another night, disguised Kṛṣṇa said, 'My name is Śamba. I'm a world-renowned fabric dyer. Any lady who wears clothes colored by me finds her heart to be colored with the same affection.' Finds her heart to be colored with the same affection." Now, there are actually three different versions I found of Kṛṣṇa's disguise as a fabric dyer, which all take place along the banks of Mānasī Gaṅgā in Govardhana, and the dialogues in the pastimes described by the ācāryas, as we see, sometimes slightly differ, but the plot is the same.

And these slightly different ways of presenting the same pastime can be done for three reasons, as explained by ācāryas: Number one, differences in poetic writings, a *dainya* mood of a certain *sādhaka*, and showing different angles of the same pastime, just like the way a ray of light is seen as a rainbow of colors when going through a prism.

You may have experienced that. Now, the most popular or widely accepted version of this fabric dyer pastime is described by Śrī Narottam Dāsa Ṭhākura. Śrī Narottam Dāsa Ṭhākura, a well-known and highly respected Vrajavāsī poet. He writes as follows: "One day, all the gopīs were serving the divine couple in a forest of guñjā berries.

I never heard of a forest of guñjā berries, but a forest of guñjā berries, which appeared as red, white, and black dots on bushes all around the forest. That's where you find the guñjā berries, actually. And there, the gopīs had arranged a very beautiful couch of flowers for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to rest on and enjoy themselves.

And when they had both sat down on that couch, facing each other, they started talking in a very sweet way. Kṛṣṇa began by praising the incomparable beauty of Śrī Rādhā, saying, 'O Rādhī, your limbs are softer than freshly turned butter.

The radiance of your complexion overcomes my own bodily glow. My fingers are blessed to hold your limbs with utmost care, like the sea holds pearls in its waters. Without your association, there is no peace for me.'" All glories to Kṛṣṇa's words.

So, after hearing such praise, Śrī Rādhā started praising Kṛṣṇa in return, saying, "O Kṛṣṇa, your beautifully elongated eyes are the arrows of Cupid. The light layer of kājal on your eyes dyes the sky dark at night. Looking at your shark-shaped earrings, I see them suffering, as my heart suffers in separation from you.

O glorious Rādhā's words." So, at that point, Śrī Rādhā stopped her praising, and while looking closely at the necklace Kṛṣṇa was wearing, she saw a gopī hiding close to Kṛṣṇa's heart. Actually, it was his necklace containing the Kaustubha gem, which, actually, I've read many times, shines like a mirror, and actually Śrī Rādhā was seeing her own image reflecting in it.

However, she took it to be a rival gopī hiding there. So she continued, "O Kṛṣṇa, I could never have expected this from you. While sitting right next to me, you are hiding another gopī in your heart. You are talking to one gopī, me, while meditating on another.

Oh Kṛṣṇa, you never change. You never change." So surprised at her words, Kṛṣṇa was without words. He couldn't even speak. And he tried to, I could just say, clear his name, but Rādhā's anger made him speechless, the poet says.

So, Śrī Rādhā stood up from the flower couch in anger and left the forest of guñjā berries. By then, Kṛṣṇa felt that it was pointless to try and pacify her. So, he proceeded to Nanda Bhavan, or we often say Nanda Gṛha.

Now, on his way, he passed through Bilva, one of the forests, where he was there reminded of being in that place with Śrī Rādhā, and immersed in those memories, he sat down under a tree, crying, while loudly calling out Śrī Rādhā's name.

Now, Tungi-vidyā Sakhī, who happened to be nearby, heard the sound of Śrī Rādhā's names, and she came, and she said to Kṛṣṇa, "O prāṇa-priya, so beautiful, O prāṇa-priya, the beloved of my life, why are you lamenting so?" Kṛṣṇa replied, "O Tungi-vidyā, your dear mistress rejected me without any reason.

She thought I was hiding some other gopī in my heart, who was in fact none other than her own reflection. It was her reflection in the Kaustubha gem on my chest, and when I tried to clear her doubt, she just left the forest.

And as she departed, I saw red flakes of fierce anger in her eyes. Wow. I saw red flakes of fierce anger in her eyes. Her lips were shaking in anger, and the color of her body gradually faded. Vidyā, generally, her māna is difficult to win over, but this time it looks like impossible to win over.

I've lost all hope, and the only way for me to continue living this life is now to become a renunciate who spends every moment of his life chanting Śrī Rādhā's names." Wow. We'd like to be like that. So, smiling, the poet says, gentle and sweet Tungi-vidyā placed her hand on Kṛṣṇa's shoulder and said, "O prāṇa-ballabha, do not lament.

You have come to my forest to please me. Join me at my palace. That's why you've come, to please me by coming to my palace. I see it like that. And there, we will find a way to once again unite you and Śrī Rādhā.

This is the service of the sakhīs and the gopīs to always somehow unite them in Vraja." Now, meanwhile, in her palace, Śrī Rādhā's anger turned into *pīḍā*, meaning painful anger, it's described, which hurts one's heart in an angry way, which hurts one's heart in an angry way.

And in such a state, Śrī Rādhā ordered all her gopīs to never again wear dark saris in front of her, for such saris reminded her of Kṛṣṇa. She said that the following evening, they should all come and bleach all of her dark saris white.

And when this news reached Tungi-vidyā, of course, there's a plan here. Smiling, she came to Śrī Rādhā's palace and she said, "O queen of Vṛndāvana, all glories to you.

Now I know a very skillful fabric dyer for this very purpose. His name is Rangraś. Interesting. His name is Rangraś. He wants to help you bleach all your dark saris. Please bless him by giving him this opportunity to serve you." So, the plot thickens.

So, Śrī Rādhā innocently replied, "Then call him immediately, Tungi. Do not delay. I do not want to wear any dark clothes which remind me of Kṛṣṇa's betrayal." So, Tungi-vidyā Sakhī went back to where Kṛṣṇa was now chanting Śrī Rādhā's names, and there she took the time to disguise him as a fabric dyer with a long black mustache, a large triangular cap, and a colorful dolman coat.

Then, with different dyes of different colors, along with a big clay pot filled with water, as well as a stick in his hand, Kṛṣṇa made his way to Śrī Rādhā's palace, disguised as a fabric dyer. And upon arriving there, he announced to Śrī Rādhā and all of her gopīs, "O Vrajāṅganā, so beautiful, O Vrajāṅganā, women of Vraja, come and let me help you dye your hearts, robes, and minds in the colors of your beloved." Now, hearing this particular call, Śrī Rādhā said, "Whoa, get rid of this fabric dyer.

As I have already stated, I do not wish my saris to be the same dark color as my beloved." But Tungi-vidyā defended disguised Kṛṣṇa, saying, "Dearest Rādhā, I have heard that this fabric dyer, Rangraś, is very qualified in his work.

In fact, it is said he is the best fabric dyer in the whole of Braja Maṇḍala." So, trusting her sakhī, Tungi-vidyā just gave all her dark saris to Rangraś, saying, "O Rangraś, better you use your talents to completely bleach these dark colors out of my saris." So, Rangraś said, "But these saris are all beautiful dark colors.

Why do you want me to bleach them?" So, Śrī Rādhā replied, "You need not know the reason for this.

Just do your work quickly. You need not know the reason for this. Just do your work quickly." But as soon as disguised Kṛṣṇa placed one of Śrī Rādhā's dark saris in his clay pot along with boiling water, of course, and mixed in special herbal bleaching dyes, herbal bleaching dyes, the dark color of Śrī Rādhā's saris didn't fade a single bit.

Didn't work. And when he tried again, they all remained the same dark color. So, seeing this, Śrī Rādhā became greatly disturbed, and she said, "Let me try to bleach these saris by putting the *cūrṇa*, which means herbal bleaching powder, into the boiling water." So, she poured even more of this powder into the boiling water.

However, our poet explains that clever Kṛṣṇa, disguised as the fabric dyer, didn't actually use bleaching powder. Rather, he used *tirauna*, which is a strong powder which makes colors even more vibrant, even more prominent, and even more permanent. So, they all stayed black or whatever dark colors they were.

So, when Śrī Rādhā saw her attempt had also not bleached her saris, she turned, and she said to Rangraś, "O Rangraś, either you are bad at this work, or your bleaching mixtures have failed. If it is impossible to bleach my clothes, then put other dye mixtures in the pot and dye them all bright colors.

And dye them all bright colors. So at least I can get rid of the darkness of my life, that Kṛṣṇa." Wow. So then, very carefully and in an artistic way, Rangraś poured different dyes in the water to create beautiful colored patterns on the saris, to change them from dark colors to beautiful colored patterns on the saris.

Now, after some time, when he took the saris out, these colored patterns on them, the poet describes what they all spelled: the names of Kṛṣṇa. The colored patterns spelled the names of Kṛṣṇa. How wonderful. And such saris are actually called Kṛṣṇa-nāma-vibhuṣita, meaning robes with Kṛṣṇa's names on them.

In your mind's eye, you can see, the dark saris are all different colors, but the colors, the patterns, spelled Kṛṣṇa's names. Now, while looking at Kṛṣṇa's names on her saris, Śrī Rādhā became spellbound with the magic of these names, and isn't it true, the magic of these names.

And her tongue started chanting them, but still, in the mood of *māna*, anger, she tried to stop chanting. And so, Tungi-vidyā, ever in the mood of wanting to unite the divine couple, rushed forward and said, "Rādhā, you are greatly upset with Kṛṣṇa, but you cannot be upset with his names, which are even dearer to you than his personal form." Please listen to that. "Dear Rādhā, you are greatly upset with Kṛṣṇa, but you cannot be upset with his names, which are even dearer to you than his personal form." Wow.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

And so it was. As Śrī Rādhā continued chanting Kṛṣṇa's names, her heart melted, and her *māna* slowly left the throne in her heart, and humble love took over the crown of her kingdom. The *māna* slowly left the throne of her heart, and humble love took over the crown of her kingdom.

Oh, Kṛṣṇa-conscious poetry. And so, crying, while crying, she said, "O Madana-mohana, O Lord full of colors, where are you now?" She didn't know Kṛṣṇa had come in disguise. "Oh Madana-mohana, O Lord full of colors, where are you now?" And as if on cue, Rangraś, who was standing nearby, Rangraś, Kṛṣṇa in disguise, started playing a flute.

And stunned Rādhā said to Tungi-vidyā, "Oh, is Rangraś also a flute player?" So, smiling, Tungi-vidyā replied, "My dear queen, he is everything you want him to be, for he himself is, in fact, the very Lord of your life." So, realizing now, realizing now that her lover was standing next to her, Rādhā ran towards Kṛṣṇa, the one who dyes everyone with the colors of his love, the poet says.

And they embraced each other tightly, the poet writes. Then they sat in the grove of the bright-colored saris, a grove now of bright-colored saris of Śrī Rādhā, as Tungi-vidyā pleased them both by playing her *vīṇā* for them. She's an expert *vīṇā* player.

And the poet concludes: Narottam Dāsa begs for blessings to sing the glories of the divine couple for the rest of his life. Hari Krishna. Śāntiśi, by hearing this *kathā*, śāntiśi, the heart is completely satisfied.

Why hear anything else?

I keep saying. So, in concluding here, I would like to offer my respects to Śrī Guru, my beloved spiritual master, the revealer of the damp, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and Gaurāṅga.

With a beautiful prayer by Guru Nanak, a famous spiritual teacher in the Sikh religion, who was actually, I was reading, a contemporary of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He wrote very beautifully: "I give my heartfelt respect and devotion to anyone who sincerely chants your [meaning Kṛṣṇa's] holy names.

To those who turn to your name for shelter, I offer myself again and again. If this body could become a dyeing vat, O Beloved, and your holy name the color placed within it. And if the Guru himself were the one dyeing this cloth, then the color that would appear would be unlike anything ever seen before: pure, bright, and divine.

Those whose lives are colored in this way, O Beloved, always feel your presence with them. Dear Lord, please bless me with even a little of the dust of the feet of such humble souls." Nanak says this is the only prayer of my heart.

Hari Krishna.

See you next Friday. More disguises. The upcoming Christmas marathon. Shine, shine, shine, shine. All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thank you very much.