Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

But first:

oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya
kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya
haraye paramātmane
praṇata-kleśa-nāśāya
govindāya namo namaḥ

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 71. It will also be Part 2 of the poetry and pastimes of Kumbhandās, that great Vṛndāvana poet who, as we spoke last week, lived during the time of Lord Caitanya and was a disciple of Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya.

As we mentioned last week, there were—and are still—some differences in opinion between the Vallabhas and the Gauḍīyas, but Śrīla Prabhupāda requested us to be respectful and appreciative of Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya and his followers.

Now, there are two very wonderful pastimes I’d like to share with you today, showing how in the early days there was little or no animosity between members of the Vallabha line and those of the Gauḍīya line. It includes Kumbhandās as well.

The pastimes actually begin with Mādhavendra Purī discovering Gopāla on Govardhana Hill.

One day, while visiting Govardhana Hill, Mādhavendra Purī took a nap, and he had a dream. It’s described in great detail in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 4.

In that dream, Gopāla appeared to Mādhavendra Purī and said:

“For many days I have been observing you, and I have been wondering, ‘When will Mādhavendra Purī come to serve Me?’ Now that you have come, please unearth the Gopāla Deity, who is none other than My very self.”

And in that dream, Gopāla revealed where He had been buried many years earlier during an attack by foreign invaders.

So when Mādhavendra Purī woke up, he immediately found that spot and unearthed the Deity, built an exquisite temple for Him, and arranged for His daily worship.

Now, here’s where the pastime gets exciting.

During His visit to Vṛndāvana in the year 1515, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu had a very strong desire to visit Gopāla because He had heard He had been discovered. However, there was a problem.

Understanding that Govardhana Hill is not different from Kṛṣṇa Himself, Mahāprabhu set the example for all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas by not climbing up Govardhana Hill to take darśana of Gopāla.

So Gopāla Himself arranged a līlā so that Mahāprabhu could have His darśana.

*Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 18.25 says:

“Coming down from Govardhana Hill, Lord Gopāla arranged an interview with Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who was unwilling to climb the hill, thinking Himself to be a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa.”

Now, how that actually transpired is further described in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*.

During His trip to Vṛndāvana, Lord Caitanya visited the famous Harideva Temple near Govardhana Hill at Mānasa-gaṅgā. That night He stayed awake the whole night chanting in the temple.

Then, in the morning, He revealed His heart to His companion Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya—that He was suffering because He was unable to see Mādhavendra Purī’s Gopāla Deity atop Govardhana Hill.

He lamented as follows:

“Since I shall not at any time climb Govardhana Hill, how will I be able to see Gopāla Rāya?”

However, the Deity Gopāla knew what was on Lord Caitanya’s mind, and so He played a trick.

He actually inspired a villager to spread a rumor that a group of Muslim soldiers nearby were preparing to plunder Govardhana Village.

This villager told the other villagers:

“You must immediately flee this village along with the Deity of Gopāla because the Muslim soldiers will come tomorrow and cause harm to the Lord.”

Now, the head priest taking care of Gopāla atop Govardhana Hill at that time was a devotee named Rāmdās.

So, in order to move Gopāla, Rāmdās quickly called three trusted Vaiṣṇavas to help carry Gopāla away. They were Kumbhandās, a devotee called Sādhu Paṇḍita, and a farmer.

When Kumbhandās, Sādhu Paṇḍita, and the farmer arrived, they placed Gopāla on the back of a buffalo and took Him down the hill to the village of Gāṅṭholī on the opposite side of Govardhana Hill.

It’s described that they put Him on a buffalo because the invaders would not be suspicious of something very valuable being transported on the back of a buffalo, so they would not harm them.

In Gāṅṭholī, Gopāla was kept in the house of a brāhmaṇa, and His worship from that point on was conducted secretly.

I actually read a few months ago in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute that in those days Deities would sometimes talk personally with their pure-hearted priests.

So one day, Rāmdās, the pūjārī, asked Gopāla why He wanted to come to such a secluded place as Gāṅṭholī.

“I mean, You were on top of Govardhana Hill, but now You’re in a very secluded place in this village.”

So Gopāla replied:

“While being worshiped on top of Govardhana Hill, I was far away from Śrī Rādhā for so many years. So I am waiting here to see Śrī Rādhā, who has appeared in the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu.”

Wow.

And that was soon to happen.

After waking up at the Harideva Temple, where He had been chanting all night and lamenting that He could not see Gopāla, Mahāprabhu began to circumambulate Govardhana Hill while dancing and singing in ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa.

As soon as Lord Caitanya reached Gāṅṭholī, He heard that Gopāla had been moved from His temple on top of the hill. He asked where, and He heard it was Gāṅṭholī.

So He quickly proceeded to the village of Gāṅṭholī, where He finally got the opportunity—His heart’s desire—to see Gopāla.

And, well, we can understand that love is reciprocal. Gopāla got to see Him.

While in front of this famous Gopāla Deity, Mahāprabhu sang the following verse:

“May the left arm of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus flower, always protect you. With His left arm He raised Govardhana Hill as if it were a toy.”

Mahāprabhu recited that in front of Gopāla.

Mahāprabhu actually remained in Gāṅṭholī for three days until it was revealed that it had only been a rumor. It wasn’t true that Muslim soldiers were preparing to attack that day, because it was a ruse arranged by Gopāla Himself.

So with that news, Gopāla was taken back to the top of Govardhana Hill.

Mahāprabhu wanted to see Him, and He wanted to see Mahāprabhu. So that was all arranged by some transcendental trickery.

As He was being moved, this pure devotee Rāmdās asked Lord Caitanya how His followers would be able to take Gopāla’s darśana in the future because he had heard that Mahāprabhu didn’t walk on Govardhana Hill, understanding Govardhana to be nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa, and neither would His followers.

So what was Lord Caitanya’s reply?

He said:

“My dear Rāmdās, My followers’ love will drag Gopāla down from the hill to the ground.”

“My followers’ love will drag Gopāla down the hill to the ground.”

And that came true in more ways than one.

Because we read in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 18, beginning with Verse 47, how that happened.

There it is described that when Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī was getting elderly, he too was in anxiety that he might never have Gopāla’s darśana before leaving this world, just like Lord Caitanya.

Understanding His pure devotee’s heart, Rūpa Gosvāmī’s heart, Gopāla again devised another very clever plan.

Again, a rumor was started that some Muslim soldiers were coming to harm Gopāla, but this time the rumor was true, and Gopāla knew it.

So Gopāla’s pūjārīs quickly took Him down the hill to the house of Viṭṭhaleśvara, the son of Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya, in Mathurā.

Hearing this news, Rūpa Gosvāmī and a number of his associates went there from Vṛndāvana and actually stayed an entire month in that house, in Viṭṭhaleśvara’s home, just basking in Gopāla’s presence.

Actually, a couple of months ago I learned that that house still exists. The Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya line is maintaining that house.

Although Gopāla is now in Nāthdwāra, that house is considered a very sacred place because He resided there for a long time. We also consider it a very sacred place because Rūpa Gosvāmī and his associates spent a month there in Gopāla’s presence.

Again, it just shows the cooperation in the early years between the Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya line and the Gauḍīya line.

This is actually mentioned in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 18.47. In the purport there, Prabhupāda says:

“When the two brothers Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī went to Vṛndāvana, they decided to live there following Śrī Mahāprabhu’s example. They did not climb Govardhana Hill because they considered it nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

However, on some pretext, the Gopāla Deity granted Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu an audience beneath the hill, and Gopāla similarly favored Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī. During His ripe old age, when Rūpa could not go to Govardhana Hill because of invalidity, Gopāla went to Mathurā and remained at the house of Viṭṭhaleśvara, the son of Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya, for one month, and it was then that Rūpa Gosvāmī could see Gopāla’s beauty to his heart’s content.”

As confirmed in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*.

Now, I mentioned a number of associates who accompanied Rūpa Gosvāmī to stay in that house for one month.

Again, *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 18.53 says:

“Āsiyā mukhya-gaṇa lañā, sei Gopāla dekhi’ bahu raṅga.”

“It was with great jubilation that Rūpa Gosvāmī visited Lord Gopāla accompanied by all these devotees.”

Now, what’s amazing is that they’re actually listed in *Bhakti-ratnākara*, Sixth Wave. And what a list it is.

*Bhakti-ratnākara* says:

“The following Vaiṣṇavas were present in Viṭṭhaleśvara’s home with Rūpa Gosvāmī: the merciful Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, a reservoir of good qualities, Śrīmad Śaṅkara Bhaṭṭācārya, Sādhu Paṇḍita, whose characteristics were all wonderful, Prayāga Kṛṣṇadāsa, Kṛṣṇadāsa Brahmacārī, Yādava Ācārya, the merciful Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Pāka Gosvāmī, Govinda, Īśāna, Śrī Govinda, the magnanimous Vanamālī Kṛṣṇadāsa, Śrī Uddhava Dāsa, who occasionally visited Bengal, Dvija Haridāsa, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, Śrī Gopāla Dāsa, whose body is completely spiritual, Śrī Gopāla Miśra, and many others.”

Wow.

And *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 18.54 concludes:

“After staying at Mathurā for one month, the Gopāla Deity returned to His own place, and Rūpa returned to Vṛndāvana.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So later, Gopāla was moved to Nāthdwāra in Rajasthan for His safety, and He is presently being worshiped there by the followers of Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya.

As we mentioned previously, in time He became known as Śrī Nāthajī, and He is being very nicely taken care of there. It is a very wonderful darśana. I’ve been there several times. If you can ever make the trip, please do.

So, as we heard, our Kumbhandās assisted the Gauḍīya devotees in taking Gopāla off the hill so that He could meet Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Now, Kumbhandās could be famous enough for participating in that pastime, but his fame is actually greater for all the beautiful poems and songs that he wrote about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

I was reading that as a poet he wrote only about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Then finally, in the year 1640, after having lived more than one hundred years, Kumbhandās was leaving his body in a village called Pārsolī. We mentioned it in the previous lecture.

As he was taking his last breath, Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya’s son, again Viṭṭhaleśvara, came to his side and asked him:

“What is on your mind?”

At that very moment, Kumbhandās composed a famous poem entitled *Rasāśraya*.

And here is the most significant part of that poem. It’s very touching to the heart.

He’s leaving his body. With his last breaths, this is what he spoke:

“O my dear brother, look! Śrī Rādhā has been submerged in the rasa of love and emotions for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Like a golden vine climbs a dark tamāla tree, that same kind of love is waiting for me.”

And he left his body.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

This is all the information actually available. I went through many, many books, biographies, accounts, and so forth and so on. This is all I could find on Kumbhandās.

But it’s enough.

Such a wonderful devotee, and we all offer respectful obeisances unto him.

So that concludes today’s lecture.

All glories.

See you next Friday.

Kṛṣṇa!

Hare Kṛṣṇa.
