

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone, and welcome back again to our lectures on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, we’re continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 87. In this lecture, we will discuss the vīṇā, the instrument, the vīṇā.

In last week’s lecture, we discussed four types of musical instruments. If you remember, the first was—well, we mentioned them—there were āvatya instruments, made out of animal skin that can be beaten upon, like bāṅgā, different types of drums, etc.; tatā, stringed instruments like, well, vīṇā and sitār, etc.; ghana, meaning percussion instruments mainly made out of metal, like cymbals, etc.; and suṣira, suṣira means wind instruments like the flute, etc. So, the vīṇā belongs to the tatā (string) category, and Bharata Muni gives the names of various types of vīṇās in his Nāṭya-śāstra, Chapter 29, verse 118—a little technical, but necessary. The seven-stringed vīṇā is known as citrā, whereas the nine-stringed vīṇā is known as vipañcī. The citrā is played using fingers, whereas the vipañcī is played using a koṇa. I looked up a koṇa; a koṇa is like a wooden or metal bar that you slide along the strings, like that—you see sometimes in modern days they use that with the guitar, something like that. Anyway.

Now, without a doubt, one of the most famous personalities having a vīṇā is our Nārada Muni. In the Bhāgavata (2.4, verses 161–162), the BBT commentators note—and I quote—”Gopīkumāra is amazed that he meets Nārada almost everywhere and sees him always the same, with the same vīṇā in hand.” Nārada, and the purport says, “Nārada, the sage, constantly travels throughout the creation, preaching and performing saṅkīrtana of the names and glories of God while playing his vīṇā, a stringed instrument similar to a sitār.”

And as many of you know, we’re introduced to Nārada Muni earlier in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, actually, First Canto, Chapter 5, to begin with, where he’s preaching to Śrīla Vyāsadeva. At that time, he reveals to Śrī Vyāsadeva that in his previous life he was the son of a maidservant. (1.5.25) He says, “Oh, addressing Śrīla Vyāsadeva, in my past life, in the last millennium, I was born as the son of a certain maidservant engaged in the service of brāhmaṇas who were following the principles of Vaiṣṇavism. When they were living together during the four months of the rainy season, I was engaged in their personal service.”

But interestingly enough, the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa describes how before that life—before that life—Nārada Muni was a Gandharva in the Gandharva-loka. And the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa describes as follows: He was the adorable husband of 50 Gandharva ladies in the full bloom of their youth and feminine attractiveness. Having won the hearts of these ladies, he was ceaselessly infatuated with sense gratification. It’s further stated that he was the progenitor of the Gandharvas. His singing voice was melodious and his youth unfailing—interesting, his youth was unfailing. He was expert in song and the play of the vīṇā, and was wise, sweet-spoken, and tranquil in disposition. His name in that life was Upabarhaṇa—Upabarhaṇa meaning literally “the adorable one.” But it’s described even as a Gandharva prince. In the midst of such a pleasurable life, he never completely gave up saṅkīrtana, meaning chanting of the names and glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That’s indicated in Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa 1.13.7.

Having nicely ruled the kingdom for some time in the company of his wives, once upon a time, singing the glories of Lord Hari, Upabarhaṇa suddenly came to the abode of Brahmā. He was singing the glories of the Lord—that’s quoting to show you that even there he was doing saṅkīrtana. At that time, in that particular birth, unfortunately, the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa relates that near the end of his life as a Gandharva, Upabarhaṇa became bewildered during—it’s described as a saṅkīrtana festival, meaning where they’re chanting the glories of the Lord—it was organized by Lord Brahmā. It is described that therein he saw the exquisitely beautiful celestial girl, apsarā, named Rambhā. It’s described that while this seductive lady was dancing, Upabarhaṇa’s attention was focused on her bodily beauty, causing him to completely lose his composure, and he stopped playing his Gandharva music. In other words, he stopped singing the glories of the Lord, and he actually fainted. She was so beautiful, he fainted looking at her. And then when he revived, when he woke up, he just left the festival in shame. As he left, all the Devas, the demigods present, they just laughed at him. Lord Brahmā—remember, it was organized by Lord Brahmā—Lord Brahmā was particularly incensed, and he cursed Upabarhaṇa to die and take a low human birth as the son of a maidservant.

But in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (Canto 1, Chapter 5, and also Chapter 6), where he’s preaching to Śrī Vyāsadeva, he describes that in that life he revived his Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Many of us have given lectures on that particular part of the Bhāgavatam, and after leaving that body, he achieved his spiritual body. Remember that his mother was bit by a snake and so he left home, and he went to the forest, and he searched for Kṛṣṇa, etc. So after he left that body, he achieved a spiritual body. We hear Nārada saying in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.6.26): “And so, O Brāhmaṇa Vyāsadeva, in due course of time, I, who was fully absorbed at that time in thinking of Kṛṣṇa and who therefore had no attachments, being completely free from all material taints, met with death as lightning and illumination occur simultaneously.” It’s a beautiful part of the Bhāgavatam how he meets the Bhaktivedāntas, the traveling sages. Then in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.6.28), it’s stated: “Having been awarded a transcendental body befitting an associate of the Personality of Godhead, I quit the body made of five material elements, and thus all acquired fruit or results of work, karma, stopped.”

So in that birth, as a young boy leaving home and going to the forest, he achieved that. And finally, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.6.30), he continues: “After four billion, 320 million solar years, when Brahmā awoke to create again, by the will of the Lord, all the ṛṣis like Marīci, Aṅgirā, Atri, and so on were created from the transcendental body of the Lord, and I also appeared along with them.”

So it was at that point that Nārada Muni learned how to play the vīṇā. It was at that point—after that coming out again, taking birth after whatever so long—he learned to play the vīṇā at that point from his music guru, whose name was Ulūka. And following instructions and guidelines given by Ulūka, Nārada Muni practiced music for a thousand divine years—it’s more than our thousand years, it’s by the calculation of the demigods. Now, how do we know? Because this is all described in the Liṅga Purāṇa, particularly in this section called Uttara-bhāga, 3, verses 67 to 77. Therein it is said that Nārada Muni became richly endowed with the knowledge of musical notes and expert in playing the vīṇā and other instruments. In all, the sage learned thousands of different tunes, as well as 36,000 notes and their intricate nuances. Therein is described how eager to employ his newly gifted musical skills, he then performed kīrtana in Svetadvīpa to please the Lord.

In the Liṅga Purāṇa, Uttara-bhāga (3.76–79), it’s written that after hearing Nārada play his vīṇā, the Lord said, “From Ulūka you have gained familiarity in the musical arts, but you have not yet attained Tumburu’s level.” Tumburu, I looked up as a heavenly Gandharva—not a lady, but a gentleman—he’s a heavenly Gandharva, he’s very expert in musical arts. The Lord continues, “A time will come, however, when you will excel him. In the 28th cycle of the four yugas of Vaivasvata Manu, I shall appear in the Yadu dynasty as Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī and Vasudeva. At that time, I will fully empower you in the art of music.” It’s so nice to read about this history in detail.

So sometime later, the Lord’s prediction came to pass, namely on Raivataka Mountain, described near Dvārakā, where Lord Kṛṣṇa instructed his wife Queen Jāmbavatī as follows: “Oh gentle lady, kindly teach Nārada the art of playing the vīṇā in accordance with śāstric injunctions.” (Liṅga Purāṇa, Uttara-bhāga, 3.96). And after a year of dedicated practice with Jāmbavatī, then the Lord ordered Nārada to approach Queen Satyabhāmā for instruction in the art of singing. Yet even after this second year of training, it wasn’t finished. Kṛṣṇa then directed Nārada to Queen Rukmiṇī, whose—how could you say—initial analysis tested Nārada’s patience. In the Liṅga Purāṇa, Uttara-bhāga (3.102), Rukmiṇī says, “Even though you have been chanting for a long time, you still do not understand the notes perfectly.” So Nārada didn’t give up; with great determination, he studied under Queen Rukmiṇī for three years, it’s described. Then Kṛṣṇa himself personally instructed Nārada in the art of devotional music, and after some time he was finally able to surpass Tumburu. And it’s said at that point he danced in ecstasy. The Liṅga Purāṇa, Uttara-bhāga (3.67–77) says, “Then Kṛṣṇa said”—and this is important—”Oh great sage, you now know everything. What you have been seeking, you have attained. Therefore, along with the sage Tumburu, sing in praise of me, sing in praise of me.”

And it was at that point that Nārada Muni began traveling everywhere, as we know him in creation, chanting the glories of the Lord with his vīṇā. Of course, we know he’s an eternally liberated soul, but these pastimes are there to teach us. We also need to study and grasp our—whatever talents we have, whatever knowledge we have—to employ it properly in the service of Guru and Gaurāṅga. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.6.31–32), Nārada then says: “Since then, by the grace of the almighty Viṣṇu, I travel everywhere without restriction, both in the transcendental world and in the three divisions of the material world. This is because I am fixed in unbroken devotional service to the Lord, and thus I travel constantly, singing the transcendental message of the glories of the Lord, vibrating this instrument called a vīṇā, which is charged with transcendental sound, and which was given to me by Lord Kṛṣṇa.”

Now, which I found really interesting is that in the purport to this verse, Śrīla Prabhupāda elaborates, and in his elaboration, he’s quoting the Liṅga Purāṇa himself. He, himself—so everything I’m saying is authorized. When you say something in Vedic circles, you have to back it up with śāstric references. So I’ve been quoting Liṅga Purāṇa because Śrīla Prabhupāda quotes Liṅga Purāṇa as follows: In the purport, Prabhupāda writes: “The musical stringed instrument called the vīṇā, which was handed to Nārada by Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is described in the Liṅga Purāṇa, and this is confirmed by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī.” Now, Prabhupāda quotes Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his purport: “Jīva Gosvāmī has written: ‘The transcendental instrument—this transcendental instrument, the vīṇā—is identical with Lord Kṛṣṇa and Nārada because all of them are of the same transcendental category. Sound vibrated by the instrument cannot be material, and therefore the glories and pastimes which are broadcast by the instrument of Nārada are also transcendental, without a tinge of material impurity.’” Thank you, Jīva Gosvāmī. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Wasn’t that interesting? Liṅga Purāṇa, my quotes, the history of Nārada Muni. So we’ll conclude today with a song by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura about Nārada Muni playing his vīṇā. The song is entitled Nārada Muni Bājāy Vīṇā; it’s actually from Ṭhākura’s Gītāvalī, as follows:

“When the great soul Nārada Muni plays his vīṇā, the holy name Rādika-Raman descends and immediately appears amidst the kīrtana of the Lord’s devotees. Like a monsoon cloud, the holy name showers nectar in their ears. All the devotees, due to great ecstasy, repeatedly dance to their heart’s content. All the people of the universe become maddened upon hearing this intoxicating shower of nectar. Some people cry, some dance, and others become fully intoxicated within their minds. Lord Śiva, embracing Nārada Muni, repeatedly makes loud screams of ecstatic joy. And Lord Brahmā, dancing very ecstatically, says, ‘All of you, kindly chant Hari, Hari, in great happiness.’ The thousand-faced Ananta-Śeṣa chants Hari, Hari. By the influence of the transcendental vibration of the holy name, the whole universe becomes ecstatically maddened, and everyone tastes the mellows of the holy name. Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda, the humble servant of the Lord, says: ‘The holy name of Kṛṣṇa has fulfilled all my desires by vibrating on everyone’s tongue.’ Bhaktivinoda therefore prays at the feet of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī that the chanting of Harināma may continue like this always.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Nārada Muni and his vīṇā. So actually, devotees, we have much more information about the vīṇā, which we will share next week. Actually, we may have two more classes, but I thought this was a nice way to introduce the vīṇā because one of our heroes, our hero Nārada Muni, it’s his favorite instrument, and we see the effect of him playing this instrument. So next week, we’ll have part two of the vīṇā. Therein, we’ll hear about the absolute master of the vīṇā—who is the absolute master of the vīṇā? Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—and when she plays her vīṇā, she mesmerizes Kṛṣṇa and all of Braja, Braja-bhūmi, with her playing. So I look forward to sharing that, and I’m sure you look forward to hearing it. Thank you so much. All glories. Jai Śrīla Prabhupāda. Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.
