""Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Thank you for being with us. We are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 39. For this lecture, I have chosen a very interesting subject: betel leaf in Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana pastimes. The reason I chose this subject is that I often come across the mention of betel leaf or betel nut in researching for my lectures. For example, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.12.1 describes one of the days that Kṛṣṇa ate lunch with His cowherd friends in the Vṛndāvana forest. The verse says, "O King, one day Kṛṣṇa decided to take His breakfast as a picnic in the forest. Having risen early in the morning, He blew His bugle made of horn and woke all the cowherd boys and cows with its beautiful sound. Then, Kṛṣṇa and the boys, keeping their respective groups of calves before them, proceeded from Vrajabhūmi to the forest."

Then, in *Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta* 3.7, verses 60 and 61, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī reveals some of the food that Kṛṣṇa ate. He writes that the most expert enjoyer of all kinds of amusing sports drank a savory tamarind nectar, many other beverages, buttermilk, and Yamunā water carried in *tumbī* gourds and other sorts of vessels, and He made the boys drink too. In this way, He delighted all the cowherd boys. Then, in verse 62—this is really interesting—Gosvāmī writes, "Then Kṛṣṇa did *ācamana* and then chewed fragrant, camphorated betel nut that each boy had brought from his home, and also fresh forest betel nut soaked and wrapped in many leaves of nāga creepers. He enjoyed the betel nut and also gave it out." So, therein we hear how Kṛṣṇa and His friends relished this betel nut.

And in *Padyāvalī* verse 188, Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda reveals how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī also enjoys this betel nut. He writes, "O Kṛṣṇa, O killer of the Murā demon, Your absence has so stunned beautiful-faced Rādhārāṇī that as she talks at night with her friends, she cannot remember whether she took any betel nuts, whether the betel nuts are in her hand, or whether the betel nuts are in her mouth." Oh, and just this morning I was reading how Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura hankers for the savor of the service of offering a betel in the form of *tāmbūla* to the Divine Couple together. In his book *Prārthanā*, he writes in the poem *rādhē kṛṣṇa prāṇa mora gati...*: "After stringing together garlands of mālatī flowers, I will place them around Their necks, and I will offer *tāmbūla* scented with camphor to the lotus mouths."

Now, *tāmbūla* is made with betel leaves and contains betel nuts and other pleasantries. In other words, they make a kind of a cup, you could say, out of betel leaves, and inside they put betel nut and other pleasantries. We will discuss that a little bit later; I will describe *tāmbūla* more in detail. Now, the service of offering betel leaf to the Divine Couple is actually the principal service of Lalitā Devī, one of the Aṣṭa-sakhīs. Lalitā-sakhī, one of the eight principal maidservants of Rādhārāṇī, performs numerous services to please Their Lordships, but offering betel leaf is one of her favorites. During the rāsa dance with Kṛṣṇa, she stands on the right side of Kṛṣṇa holding a golden box of betel leaves and spices to offer to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa during the dance. In our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, our temple in Vṛndāvana, we see there on the altar Lalitā in that pose with a silver box meant to contain the same items.

Lalitā-sakhī actually has her own garden where she grows betel leaf. This is revealed by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, verses 134 and 136. He writes, "Madan-mohinī Śrī Lalitā is the supervisor of the maidservants who perform *tāmbūla-sevā*. She is the supervisor of the kinnara-kiśorīs engaged in the Madan-mohinī garden. She is the supervisor of the maidservants who protect flower vines, betel leaves, as well as betel nut trees. She is the supervisor of the Vana-devīs, the flower goddesses, and even those maidens who are esteemed in venerable groups." I really like that last line, so poetic: "and even those maidens who are esteemed in venerable groups."

So, Lalitā engages all these different types of maidservants in the service of producing and offering betel leaf, and she herself is expert in *tāmbūla-vidyā*, or rather the skill of making betel. *Tāmbūla* refers to the betel leaf, and *vidyā* refers to the science or knowledge of how to make them into beautiful forms to offer Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Now, while making betel for the Divine Couple, Lalitā-sakhī utters a special mantra while binding these betels. In my research, I found that she actually got this mantra from the goddess of the forest known as Vana-devī, and this mantra works to increase the love of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So, when she is binding these betels, she chants this mantra, and this mantra—which, you know, is imbued into the betel leaves—increases the love of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa when They partake of it.

In this regard, it is said that Lalitā-sakhī has two unique qualities: number one, the strong or sometimes harsh words coming from her lotus mouth, and number two, her skillfully made betels. By strong words or harsh words, she separates the Divine Couple and brings forth Śrī Rādhā's pride, like *mānavatī*, and afterwards, by offering Kṛṣṇa her handmade betels, she reunites Them with love and devotion. So, I can explain this a little more in detail. We have discussed on several occasions that, you know, Lalitā has a very fiery nature. We discussed that two years ago, I think—a whole class on her—in that when she sees Kṛṣṇa teasing Śrī Rādhā, she speaks strongly, causing Him to go away, or she goes away with Rādhā. Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in this *Lalitā-aṣṭakam*, verse 5, "I offer respects unto the abode of all good qualities, the supremely charming Śrī Lalitā Devī, who, upon hearing Śrī Kṛṣṇa speak even a few sly words to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, immediately becomes furious and shames Kṛṣṇa with her biting, sarcastic remarks: 'Oh Kṛṣṇa, You are so truthful and simple-hearted and such a chaste lover!'" So then Kṛṣṇa goes away. But later, by offering both of them—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—her specially, how could you say, specially charmed betel, she reignites Their love for each other and They reunite. These are the two services she does: separates them and brings them back together.

Vaishnava scholars call this *viparīta-rati*, which means essentially love acting like a magnet in the sense that it can attract or repel. As we have all seen, a magnet can repel a piece of metal or, when you turn it around, attract a piece of metal. So, Lalitā-sakhī is an expert in separating the Divine Couple by her fiery words and then reuniting them with her love-charmed betel leaf. So interesting. Our Ācāryas dive deep into these *vraj-bhakti* truths. Śrīla Prabhupāda actually refers to this special skill of Lalitā-sakhī to revive Śrī Rādhā when she is feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. In *Nectar of Devotion*, chapter 30, there he writes, "One of the principal Gopīs, Lalitā, informed Kṛṣṇa: 'My dear Kṛṣṇa, when You disappeared from the arena of the rāsa dance, our most dear friend Rādhārāṇī immediately fell on the ground and lost consciousness. But after this, when I offered her some of Your chewed betel nut remnants, she immediately returned to consciousness with jubilant symptoms in her body.'" Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Now, earlier we mentioned this silver box that Lalitā-sakhī holds next to Kṛṣṇa on the altar at our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir in Vṛndāvana, or for that matter, any altar in the world where she and Viśākhā-sakhī stand on either side of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I was reading that she has many different types of these boxes; some are silver, some are golden, and some are embedded with gemstones, all of which store the betels to offer Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Now, the betel leaves themselves can be of many different shapes and sizes, and how they are combined together to be placed in the hand of Rādhārāṇī for offering to Kṛṣṇa—one is a cone shape. And I was remembering that in older deities of Rādhārāṇī that I have seen in Bengal and Odisha, we see in her left hand that she is holding flowers or giving blessings, but in her right hand, she is offering betel to Kṛṣṇa. Many older deities you see like that, cone-shaped in her hand. Sometimes pujārīs place in Rādhārāṇī's hand two cones—the betels joined together—so she can offer Kṛṣṇa, and they are known as *yugala-tāmbūla*.

When two cones are offered, pujārīs take note; in Sanskrit, it means a set of two betels, *yugala-tāmbūla*. And very often, these betels are wrapped in gold foil, which make them look like a golden betel, and they are known as *kanaka-patra* or the Golden Leaf, *kanaka-patra*. Another way to offer betel. So now, when betel leaves are offered to Kṛṣṇa by Śrī Rādhā or by a pujārī, it is called *tāmbūla*. Again, we are mentioning *tāmbūla*, but actually traditionally *tāmbūla* consists of betel nuts and 64 spices and flavors. But for the most part, these, the particular items that are placed inside are kept secret. It is a secret only a few special souls know. Why? Because it is described, it is a luxury reserved for the Lord. It is one of the luxuries reserved for the Lord, so it is a little confidential. In connection to this subject of luxury, I was reading in Vṛndāvana lore, it is said there are seven different luxuries. I found this really interesting. What are the seven luxuries?

1. The luxury of having a guru.
2. The luxury of having learned friends.
3. The luxury of traveling in all the four directions.
4. The luxury of experiencing six different tastes of food.
5. The luxury of wearing silken garments.
6. The luxury of witnessing a dream come true.
7. The luxury of having betel leaf.

It is said that these seven types of luxuries are rare even for the demigods to possess, but they are all available for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's servants in Vṛndāvana, because those servants use them fully for the pleasure of the Lord. So all luxuries are given to them, not for themselves, but for the pleasure of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Now fortunately, although it is a secret, "seek and ye shall find," I managed to find a list of half the 64 items—couldn't find the others. Where did I find them? In a poem by a medieval poet named Vyāsadāsa in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute. He writes that true *tāmbūla* contains the following items to be offered to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, either in the cone form or the *yugala-tāmbūla*, the double cone. They include—we will go down the list here; I found 32:

*   *Kevḍā*, which means drops of screw pine flower.
*   Lime.
*   *Lavaṅga*, clove.
*   *Elācī*, cardamom.
*   Betel nut.
*   *Gulāb*, meaning rose petals.
*   Fennel seeds.
*   *Śrī-phala*, meaning coconut powder.
*   *Muḷatthī*, licorice or sweet wood.
*   *Keśara*, saffron.
*   *Laungī*, dried raw mango.
*   *Miśrī*, jaggery.
*   *Harichūrī*, green pungent leaves.
*   *Motīcūrī*, this is a nice one, crushed white pearls.
*   *Sarvana-patrikā*, that is fenugreek.
*   *Candana-cūrṇa*, powdered sandalwood.
*   *Dālacīnī*, cinnamon.
*   *Kālī-mirchi*, black pepper.
*   Thin gold foils.
*   *Sugandhi*, described as desired incense oil.
*   *Yamunā-chāl*, the bark of the Java plum tree.

So if you are taking down the list here to offer *tāmbūla* so that Rādhārāṇī can give it to Kṛṣṇa, I don't know if you are going to find the bark of a Java plum tree. Then there is *kadambarī*, a type of dried fruit. Butter. It is another type of herb. Actually, it means white sugar. *Tulasī-bīja*, seeds of the Tulasī plant. *Haridrā*—this is a really interesting one, *haridrā*, a yellow edible rock. No comment. A yellow edible rock. Then there is *Sudarsana-patra*, the dried leaf of the Sudarśana tree. *Giri*, almonds. *Rāī-kailī*, a type of herb. *Madhu*, drops of honey. And 32, *Sneha*, referring to love—the most important ingredient, probably. So that is *tāmbūla*. For the other 32, I think we just have to wait till we get back to Goloka Vṛndāvana; the secret will be revealed, and we can help Lalitā-sakhī make *tāmbūla*.

In *Stava-valī* by Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, in the section called [unnamed], verse 10, Gosvāmī describes his desire to offer such *tāmbūla*, to offer such betel to the lotus mouth of the Divine Couple. He writes so beautifully: "O friend, she whose name bears the nectar syllables, Raṅgadevī, on my request teaches me the art of dancing. Then, in the rāsa dance, I shall place in the mouths of the gracefully dancing Divine Couple betel nuts to make Them even more expert in dancing." And Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he also mentions a similar desire in his book *Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma*. We have quoted that many times, *Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma*, in two verses, in verse 9 and in verse 35. Here in verse 9, he is addressing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī: "I will string garlands and so forth; I will clean necklaces and belts and other ornaments and make various brushes with which to paint *makara* signs and other pictures on Your transcendental body. I will prepare an ointment of a mixture of *candana*, camphor, *kuṅkuma*, *aguru*, and so forth, and along with the sakhīs, I will blissfully prepare betels with great skill by placing lime, cloves, and betel nuts in betel leaves." Then in verse 35, he writes, "In the morning, You, along with Kuṇḍalatā and Your dear sakhīs, will proceed to Nanda-bhavan to cook breakfast for Your beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa at the request of Mother Yaśodā. At that time, I will follow behind, carrying a container of *tāmbūla* as well as a jeweled fan and other items."

Regarding these devotees who appear in the *nitya-līlā*, eternal pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as Gopīs in the spiritual world, Gosvāmī writes, "By offering her, Śrī Rādhā, betel nuts, by massaging her feet, by bringing her water, by arranging for her meetings with Lord Kṛṣṇa, and by performing many other services, many Gopī-maidservants affectionately please Rādhā, the great queen of Vṛndāvana forest. When the Divine Couple enjoyed Their pastimes, these maidservants are not at all shy to serve even when the Aṣṭa-sakhīs are [present]. I took shelter of these maidservants who have Rūpa Mañjarī as their leader." Such devotees as Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī, and Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura are qualified to speak in these ways on these deep pastimes because in their eternally liberated forms as Gopīs in the spiritual world, they participate in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. Take for example 13-year-old Kastūrī Mañjarī, whose complexion is described as the color of gold and who dresses in clothes the color of white crystal; she blissfully resides in a part of Raṅgadevī's grove called Kastūrī-kuñja.

In His pastimes 500 years ago, she appears as Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, the Lord's poetic biographer, you could say, who writes of Kṛṣṇa's eightfold daily pastimes. He resided on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and composed a number of books in which he describes the service of offering betel to the Divine Couple. In one of his writings, he wrote a quote: "In the morning, Lalitā sent a garland and betel leaves with Tulasī and kastūrī, saying, 'Give this to Śrī Hari.' In the evening, Rādhā sent Tulasī and kastūrī with a basket full of food for Yaśodā." So, how can Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī write about these things? Because not only does he envision them, but he is part of those pastimes as a Gopī in the spiritual world. So, there we hear of the importance of betel leaf in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.

Now, apparently, different forms of the Lord, such as every devotee's favorite, Govardhana Hill, also relish betel leaf. It is described in *śāstra*—we have discussed this many times—that when Kṛṣṇa appeared as a gigantic deity on top of Govardhana Hill to receive the offerings of the Vrajavāsīs to Girirāja during Govardhana Pūjā, He kept asking for more and more foodstuffs. There is that famous quote, *ānaya, ānaya*—"Give me more, give me more." But at one point, the Vrajavāsīs had no foodstuffs left to cook and offer, so out of fear of offending this gigantic deity, they looked to Balarāma for help. So Lord Balarāma, you know, famously offered a Tulasī leaf to the giant deity, who was finally satisfied. It is described that when this deity had finished eating everything, Kṛṣṇa—this deity of Govardhana—rinsed His mouth with water from a nearby lake, then spit it out behind Him, causing a lush field to magically appear. Finally, He picked His teeth with bamboo canes and sweetened His mouth and aided His digestion by chewing a few cartloads of betel nuts. It is described He sweetens His mouth and aided His digestion by chewing a few cartloads of betel nuts. It is described His beautiful face was glowing with great satisfaction. So Govardhana likes betel nuts.

Now, there is a nice poem I came across by the Vrajavāsī poet Paramānanda Dāsa, in which he alludes to the fact that betel leaves not only serve to enhance Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's loving moods, but like we just heard, they also aid in Their digestion. He writes—it is interesting—"O Kṛṣṇa, the remover of all sorrow, I have prepared this fragrant, digestive leaf of betel with all the tastes that You prefer. Please grant me the grace to never leave Your side. Without You, Lord, what will I do? May our love never be interrupted. May our love never be interrupted." I was thinking when I read that that one time Śrīla Prabhupāda said that we are aspiring devotees, so we say we may not be able to know exactly how to pray to the Lord, but we can learn and memorize the prayers of great devotees and offer those prayers to the Lord; they will certainly be accepted. So I was thinking that is one prayer we can offer to the Lord: "Without You, Lord, what will I do? May our love never be interrupted." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So in my research, I came across many instances where betel leaf and betel nuts play an essential or important part in līlās about Kṛṣṇa, actually too many to count or remember even. But one example is that Vṛndā Devī assigns forest goddesses and maidservants to maintain Rādhā-kuṇḍa and to provide, amongst other things, you know, the fruits and flowers needed for the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It is described that for this service, many groves, flower gardens, and sub-forests are always well-stocked with countless items such as sweetly smelling incense for the day pastimes and softly burning lamps for the evening or night pastimes. It is all mentioned. Also mentioned that around there are actually tables and countertops with glasses of pure water and honey wine—I was reading honey wine as well—as well as large containers of betel leaves and spices. We cannot see them when we do Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā, but in your mind's eye, just see large containers of betel leaves and spices on tables and countertops around Rādhā-kuṇḍa, because they are such an integral part of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.

Now, just how those betel leaves are used is described by our Gosvāmīs. That for example, during the famous swing pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is being swung by her closest associates, the tempo of the swinging sometimes gets really strong and they are pushing really hard, Śrīmatī on the swing, so she calls out for help at some point from her eight girlfriends. And as they climb onto the swing, it instantly unfolds into a whorl of like a lotus flower, a whorl of eight seats for all the Aṣṭa-sakhīs to sit on, her closest associates. And while swinging, these Gopī girls, they render many services. Campakalata and Citrā, they serve nectar drinks; Raṅgadevī and Sudevī, they apply fragrant ointments; and finally, Lalitā and Viśākhā serve Rādhārāṇī betel. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So we will finish here today. We actually have enough material for another lecture on betel leaves and betel nut next Friday, but we will finish here today. Let's finish with some quotes to begin with from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Antya-līlā* 16.131. Actually, Lord Caitanya is speaking again all about betel leaves. He says:

$$...$$

"The demigods themselves cannot obtain even a small portion of the remnants of Kṛṣṇa-prasādam. Just imagine the pride of those remnants! Only a person who has acted piously for many, many births and has thus become a devotee can obtain remnants of such food." Well, we are so fortunate. Then in *Antya-līlā* 16.133, Mahāprabhu refers now to betel leaf prasādam. He says:

$$...$$

"This is very important. The betel chewed by Kṛṣṇa is priceless, and the remnants of such a chewed betel are said to be the essence of all nectar. When the Gopīs accept these remnants, their mouths become His spittoons." Hare Kṛṣṇa. Now, why I am sharing these verses is it is very important to note that this final statement of Mahāprabhu is meant only for the residents of the spiritual world to enjoy—the betel enjoyed by the Lord. For the betel leaf there in the spiritual world or in the pastimes about in Kṛṣṇa is of a different quality than the betel leaf or betel nut here. As we mentioned earlier, the betel leaf or nut here acts to increase the loving sentiments of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa; it is a transcendental item. So again, when They take that betel, They become intoxicated with *rasa* or with love. Whereas the betel nut here—the betel nut here—it is actually an intoxicant to be avoided by all devotees of the Lord. In order to teach us this lesson, [Mahāprabhu] performed the following pastime described in *Ādi-līlā* 15, verse 16: [Mahāprabhu] ate betel nuts offered to the deity, but they acted as an intoxicant, and He fell down on the ground unconscious. Now in his commentary to this verse, [Śrīla Prabhupāda] writes: "Betel nuts are an intoxicant, and therefore the regulative principles prohibit eating them. Mahāprabhu's pastime of fainting after eating betel nuts is a solid instruction to all of us that one should not touch betel nuts, even those offered to Viṣṇu. He writes, 'Just as one should not touch grains on the Ekādaśī day...'" Of course, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu's fainting had a particular purpose; as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He can do whatever He likes and eat whatever He wants, but we should not imitate His pastimes.

So I am sharing this because, well, you know, we have heard so much about the nectar of betel nuts and betel leaf, but it's not meant for us; they are meant for Kṛṣṇa, for our deities also in Vṛndāvana. Dāsa Gosvāmī [or] Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, he comments as follows: "If, seeing the Lord's acceptance of intoxicants like betel nuts during His abhiṣeka, befitting the King of kings, one tries to imitate Him, then one's inauspiciousness is assured. The proper etiquette approved by the Mahājanas is to touch the remnants of betel nuts simply to one's head. If one accepts betel nuts on the pretext of accepting prasāda, then his propensity for material enjoyment will certainly increase rather than becoming purified. Sahajiyās, the purification of us, cleverly avoid agitating their bodies with this idea, these items, betel nuts and betel leaves." So in this world, we should be happy practicing offering betel nuts and betel leaves to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who accept them as a transcendental commodity, you could say, with the hope that one day we may be so fortunate to be trained in offering them to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Concludes in that way with this verse, the final verse today: "When her limbs clothed in silken garments splendid like a new lotus whirl and the hairs of her body enlivened, having again and again happily tasted the betel nuts chewed by the Lord of her life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, well, my dear friend, teach me the arts of singing and playing musical instruments." Hare Kṛṣṇa. So that is all for today. Actually, when I had this idea to do a lecture on betel nuts, you know, I thought, "Well, maybe I won't be able to do it because there is not enough information," although I had come across, you know, references. You know, I thought, "Maybe let's see if it works." But here we go, we have one full lecture by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our glorious previous Ācāryas, and we even have more information and nectar about this subject matter. So I will see you next Friday for part two on betel leaves and betel nuts and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's glory. Thank you so much. [Hare Kṛṣṇa].

*Jaya* Śrīla Prabhupāda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana! All glorious to the devotees!""