Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back again to our lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 105.

In this lecture we will continue to discuss the fourth quality of Kṛṣṇa that again distinguishes him from Lord Nārāyaṇa, called rūpa-mādhurī, his extraordinary beauty. We will continue speaking today about his face.

Now, you remember last week we discussed the beauty and significance of Kṛṣṇa's nose, which we described as the most prominent feature of his face. So today we'll discuss another important aspect of the Lord's charming facial features, and that is his lips, his lips.

As Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas striving to awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa, we should actually hanker to see this particular feature of the Lord's face—his lips—just as the great saint Śrīla Maṅgala Ṭhākura did.

In Chapter Eight of Nectar of Devotion, Śrīla Prabhupāda quotes Maṅgala Ṭhākura:

“I am eagerly waiting to see that boy of Vṛndāvana whose bodily beauty is captivating the whole universe, whose eyes are always bounded by black eyebrows and expanded like lotus petals, who is always eagerly glancing over his devotees and therefore slightly moving here and there. His eyes are always moist, his lips are colored like copper, and through those lips there comes a sound vibration which drives one madder than a mad elephant. I want to see him so much in Vṛndāvana.”

So, in the same mood, in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 15.63, Lord Caitanya recited the following verse, which was originally spoken by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to her dear friend Viśākhā, where she refers to the beauty of Kṛṣṇa's lips:

“My dear friends, the luster of Kṛṣṇa's body is more brilliant than that of a newly formed cloud, and his yellow dress is more attractive than newly arrived lightning. A peacock feather decorates his head, and on his neck hangs a lovely necklace of brilliant pearls. As he holds his charming flute to his lips, his face looks as beautiful as the full autumn moon. By such beauty, Madana-mohana, the enchanter of Cupid, is increasing the desire of my eyes to see him.”

From the lotus mouth of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Now, that verse is also found in Govinda-līlāmṛta, Chapter 4, Verse 84.

And what will be the result?

I was thinking of meditating on Kṛṣṇa's lips, so I found a verse. Verse 24 of Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā, Chapter 15, answers the question:

“The sweetness of the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips, when mixed with the camphor of his slight smile, steals the minds of women. It takes all their other desires away, and when they don't get this nectar, their minds are agitated. Indeed, this nectar is the first and foremost treasure of the women of Vraja.”

So it takes all other desires away. Of course, we know their only desire is Kṛṣṇa, but just to stress the point, this is what happens. So powerful—meditating on Kṛṣṇa's lips.

Now, Chapter 21 of Nectar of Devotion describes that when Kṛṣṇa turns six years old, his copper-colored lips—described as copper-colored lips, mentioned earlier by Maṅgala Ṭhākura—take on a reddish luster, a luster the ācāryas say is found in six other places on his body, including his eyes, palate, nails, palms, and soles.

And I was reading that some poets compare this reddish color to bimba fruit, others to the bandhūka flower, and still others compare it to the color of a rose apple.

Getting some details here about Kṛṣṇa's lips.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.32, other ācāryas write that Kṛṣṇa's lips are moderately full, meaning neither too thick nor too thin. A gorgeous soft red glow defines his lips at their edge, a glow further embellished by the rays of his teeth as he speaks.

I like that part—the rays of his teeth as he speaks.

They say that Kṛṣṇa's lips are famous for their taste and their fragrance, both of which are likened to enchanting nectar, indescribable sweetness, and honey drawn from the beehives of the gardens in Vṛndāvana. Honey drawn from the beehives of the gardens in Vṛndāvana.

However, only Mother Yaśodā, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, a few fortunate gopīs, and Kṛṣṇa's wives in Dvārakā taste Kṛṣṇa's lips directly. Taste Kṛṣṇa's lips directly.

Of course, his wives in Dvārakā are free to enjoy such a blessing, but not so the unwed girls of Vṛndāvana, the gopīs.

One scholar has written:

“The lawful access Kṛṣṇa's wives have to his lips is a source of divine envy for Vṛndāvana's milkmaids.”

And I found Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.90.28 confirms this in a beautiful verse:

“O friends, just think of his wives, whose hands he has accepted. How they must have undergone vows, sacred baths, fire sacrifices, and perfect worship of the Lord of the universe to constantly relish the nectar from his lips by kissing. The damsels of Vraja would often faint just by expecting such favors.”

That's the most important line:

“The damsels of Vraja would often faint just by expecting such favors.”

However, the gopīs are not only divinely jealous—divinely jealous—of the wives of Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā, but very much so of Kṛṣṇa's flute as well, which he constantly puts to his lips, how could you say, to charm the residents of Vṛndāvana.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.21.9, one gopī very famously says to another, because this is a very famous verse:

“My dear gopīs, what auspicious activities must the flute have performed to enjoy the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips independently and leave only a taste for us gopīs, for whom the nectar is actually meant?”

It's a famous verse.

Now, it's said that the Pāñcajanya conch is also a close associate of Kṛṣṇa's lips, but it doesn't share the same degree of intimacy that the flute enjoys with Kṛṣṇa, so it's not counted in the same category as the flute.

The Pāñcajanya conch enjoys a more formal role of declaring Kṛṣṇa's arrival or perhaps challenging an enemy, roles that our ācāryas consider inferior to the flute's intimate service of conveying messages to the Vrajavāsīs, especially the gopīs.

And in doing so, the flute has more access to Kṛṣṇa's lips than the gopīs do, and the gopīs painfully acknowledge this.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.31.14, addressing Kṛṣṇa directly, they say there in the Bhramara-gīta:

“O hero, kindly distribute to us the nectar of your lips, which enhances romantic pleasure, vanquishes grief, is thoroughly relished by your flute, and makes people forget any other attachment.”

So these sentiments actually echo the words of Kṛṣṇa's dear Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, as we hear in another verse.

Lots of verses today.

In Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā, Chapter 16, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī addresses Kṛṣṇa:

“My dear lover, let me tell you of a few essential qualities of your transcendental lips. My dear lover, let me tell you of a few essential qualities of your transcendental lips.”

She goes on:

“They agitate the mind and body of everyone. They increase desires for enjoyment. They destroy the burden of material happiness and lamentation, and they make one forget all material tastes. The whole world falls under the control of your nectarean lips. They vanquish shame, religion, and patience, especially in women. Indeed, they inspire madness in the minds of all women in creation.”

Śrī Rādhā continues:

“Your lips increase the greed of the tongue and thus attract it. All things considered, to us and to the rest of the world, the activities of your transcendental lips appear paradoxical.”

Paradoxical.

From Rādhā's standpoint.

So in those and other verses we quoted today, we hear the gopīs' desire to taste the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips.

But one very important thing to consider is that, as aspiring devotees, we shouldn't try to imitate such great devotees, eternal associates of the Lord, who hanker for such intimate association with Kṛṣṇa.

As humble followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, we do not desire direct contact with Kṛṣṇa's lips. Rather, we want to serve those who have such contact. In this way, we'll eventually taste everything that they taste.

I found a little quote the other day somewhere, but it rhymes with that. It said:

“Although a bee collects honey from the flowers of a creeper, the leaves of the creeper also hear the bee humming and feel its touch.”

And so it is for the servants of the servants of the servants of Kṛṣṇa.

In Utkalikā-vallarī 13.11, one devotee prays—this was very nice:

“I offer my respectful obeisances unto you. I beg you, whenever you touch the charming bimba fruit of Kṛṣṇa's lips, please whisper in his ear and tell him how I burn with a desire to attain him.”

So in that mood again—servant of the servant of the servant—we can conclude today with Texts 287, 288, and 289 of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's Padyāvalī, in which Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is glorifying the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips, asking only for the constant protection of the Lord.

This is how we have to feel, hanker.

He writes, and we conclude:

“On a wonderful night in delightful Vṛndāvana forest, filled with the fragrance of jasmine flowers, illuminated by beautiful moonlight, and made charming by the singing of the cuckoos and other birds, Kṛṣṇa's sweet flute music, which stole away the gopīs' hearts and bodies, was splendidly manifest.

Filled with the sweet nectar of Kṛṣṇa's lips, the playful sound of the flute delighted the doe-eyed gopīs and the sages.

May Kṛṣṇa, who thirsted after the honey of the gopīs' lips and whose playful, talkative flute music made the gopīs tremble, protect you from all dangers. Protect you from all dangers.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, again and again and again.

So that's it for today, Prabhus.

We actually have more nectar on Kṛṣṇa's lips, but you'll have to wait until next Friday.

Thank you so much.

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa ki jaya!

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Thank you.
