Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 61.

In this lecture I would like to continue with the theme of dance in Vṛndāvana that we discussed last week.

In that lecture we briefly mentioned Kṛṣṇa's dancing on the hoods of the Kāliya serpent, you may remember, and I would like to begin today by going a little deeper into that pastime for the purpose of seeing how Kṛṣṇa's dancing on Kāliya's hoods was more for attracting the attention of the young gopīs of Vṛndāvana than simply chastising a demon.

You may remember that last week we quoted Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.16.2, wherein he wrote:

“Kṛṣṇa was dancing on Kāliya to show the young gopīs his dancing skills so that their pūrva-rāga, meaning their budding love for Him, would increase.”

So, in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Vṛndāvana Campū, and Gopāla Campū, we find more details of this particular pastime and what was Kṛṣṇa's real, true intention.

Therein it is described that, jumping on top of Kāliya's main hood, Kṛṣṇa kicked it repeatedly, weakening the serpent's other hoods at the same time. It's described that, like an expert snake charmer, the Lord quickly got Kāliya under His control.

Then Kṛṣṇa glanced at the Vrajavāsīs who were watching all of this from the banks of the Yamunā, as if to say:

“Now watch this. Now watch this.”

And as Kṛṣṇa continued dancing on Kāliya's hoods, the soles of His feet became reddened by the glow of Kāliya's jewels.

As the battle continued, Kāliya would raise one head behind Kṛṣṇa, who would gracefully slap that hood with His palm and then jump on top of it to continue His dance, uttering sounds like:

“Tai tai ti tha!”

in imitation of percussion instruments.

It's written that Kṛṣṇa was pleased to perform on such a novel stage—the heads of the serpent—to such a captive audience as the Vrajavāsīs on the banks of the Yamunā.

And as we mentioned, Kṛṣṇa was especially keen to attract and impress the young gopīs who had given Him their hearts.

During His performance, Kṛṣṇa's eyes often met the gopīs' eyes, promising them that sometime in the future:

“We will dance together as I am dancing now.”

With eye contact He promised them:

“Sometime in the future we will dance together as I am dancing now.”

And with that, the girls would shyly lower their eyes, hopeful that Kṛṣṇa would indeed fulfill this pledge.

It's mentioned that Kṛṣṇa's dancing on the heads of Kāliya did not go unnoticed, for in the heavenly planets the demigods, musicians, and singers soon arrived to accompany Kṛṣṇa with their instruments, as well as to sing songs, shower flowers, and offer prayers.

But śāstra relates that despite getting pounded in this way, Kāliya was too stubborn to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. So the Lord, to rectify him, trampled his heads in a furious dance, one after another, ultimately causing Kāliya to vomit blood.

In appreciation for His efforts to subdue Kāliya, the demigods praised the Lord with mantras and showered Him with millions and millions of flowers.

And to reciprocate with their devotion, Kṛṣṇa kicked Kāliya's hoods even more with His artistic dancing.

In fact, it's described that Kṛṣṇa danced with such determination that the celestial musicians couldn't keep pace with His rhythms and instead danced to their own music as they sang the Lord's praises.

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī writes that when Kṛṣṇa enacts the same pastime in Goloka, He extends His hands to the gopīs from atop Kāliya's hoods, and unseen by those on the Yamunā's shore, He and the gopīs relish rāsa dancing on Kāliya's heads.

Wow.

The rāsa dance takes place on Kāliya's heads, according to Sanātana Gosvāmī.

He goes on to say that, always willing to please Kṛṣṇa in any way that they can, the gopīs join Kṛṣṇa in spite of the fact that they are terrified of serpents and dance on Kāliya's hoods simply because Kṛṣṇa wants them to.

They're so surrendered.

All glories to Kṛṣṇa, who is *Akhila-kalā-guru*, meaning the original guru of all fine arts, and most importantly *Gopījana-vallabha*, the lover of the gopīs.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So in this way and others, Kṛṣṇa would delight the residents of Vṛndāvana with His extremely blissful dancing pastimes.

The famous devotee poet Vṛndāvana dāsa captures this mood very nicely in his poem, which he entitled—really nicely—“Dance More! Dance More!”

That's the title of the poem.

It can be found in Gokulānanda Sena's *Prārthanā-khaṇḍa*, page 963.

And he writes:

“Nāc re Rāma, nāc re Kānāi!

My dear Rāma and Kānāi, dance more! Dance more! I'll give you condensed milk, butter, and cream.

Āmār kāla-maṇi, māyār hāra!

Oh, I didn't see you dance. Dance again! Then I will give you a garland of jewels.

Tāla bāje Nandarānī, bole Rāma Kānāi.

The queen of Mahārāja Nanda, Yaśodā, gives the beat and directs their dance.

Tat tā tat tā!

Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, the jewels of the Ahiṛ dynasty, clap their hands and dance in time.

Rāma mora, Kānāi mora, maṇi-māyā jori.

Vṛndāvana dāsa sings:

‘O my dear Rāma and Kānāi, Kṛṣṇa, you look so beautiful with your effulgent bodies and jeweled crowns on your heads.’”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

We thank that poet.

Now, last week we mentioned that Lord Caitanya, the Yuga-avatāra, and of course the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, very mercifully brought such chanting and dancing from Goloka Vṛndāvana to this world 500 years ago for the purpose of delivering all fallen souls back home, back to Godhead.

In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 3.19, we hear Lord Caitanya Himself say:

“Yuga-dharma pravartāimu nāma-saṅkīrtana.

I shall personally inaugurate the religion of the age, nāma-saṅkīrtana, congregational chanting of the holy name.

I shall make the world dance in ecstasy.

I shall make the world dance in ecstasy, realizing the four mellows of loving devotional service.”

And Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja mirrors the same thing in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* Ādi-līlā 3.72. He says:

“When loud nāma-saṅkīrtana is performed all over the world by those who follow in Lord Caitanya's footsteps, all living entities, moving and non-moving, dance in devotional love.”

So much a part of our process—dancing.

Now, to show the potency of such chanting and dancing, Lord Caitanya experienced and exhibited that same ecstasy Himself.

For we all know that after receiving the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra from His initiating spiritual master, Īśvara Purī, Lord Caitanya said to him:

“My dear lord, what kind of mantra have you given Me? I think I have become mad, because by chanting it I immediately feel an ecstasy that makes Me dance, laugh, and cry.”

And Īśvara Purī replied:

“Kṛṣṇa-nāma mahā-mantra svabhāva ei haya.

Yes, it is the nature of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra that anyone who chants it immediately develops loving ecstasy for Kṛṣṇa.”

So chanting and dancing.

Lord Caitanya Himself chanted and danced as a perfect example of how we can become Kṛṣṇa conscious. And so did His associates. They set the same example by chanting and dancing for us.

For example, in the *Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭaka* by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, he confirms this in the very first verse, the famous verse:

“I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Six Gosvāmīs, who are always engaged in chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa and dancing. They are just like an ocean of love of God, and they are popular both with the gentle and the ruffians because they are not envious of anyone. Whatever they do is pleasing to everyone, and they are fully blessed by Lord Caitanya. Thus they are engaged in missionary activities meant to deliver all the conditioned souls in the material universe.”

So therein we hear how they were dancing.

Now, moving on.

Vakreśvara Paṇḍita was another one of Caitanya Mahāprabhu's companions who taught, how could I say, the art of devotional dancing as a very means of attaining Kṛṣṇa.

In fact, Lord Caitanya once said that Kṛṣṇa personally danced in Vakreśvara Paṇḍita's heart.

And *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* reveals that sometimes Vakreśvara would dance continuously for three days and nights without stopping, pleasing Lord Caitanya to no end.

Actually, once as Lord Caitanya sang, Vakreśvara Paṇḍita blurted out in ecstasy:

“O Candra-mukha! O Mahāprabhu! Please give me ten thousand Gandharvas. Let them sing as I dance. Then I will be greatly happy.”

And in response to that, Mahāprabhu replied:

“I have only one wing like you, but if I had another, certainly I would fly in the sky.”

Such an intimate relationship.

Dance, dance, dance.

It's interesting that our Śrīla Prabhupāda once wrote a similar thing in the same mood. Upon arriving in America on the Jaladuta, he wrote:

“O Lord, I am just like a puppet in Your hands. So if You have brought me here to dance, then make me dance. Make me dance, O Lord. Make me dance as You like.”

Now, coming to a close, it is said in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā 2.34–35, that Lord Caitanya always appeared in four places:

In the household temple of His mother Śacī, in places where Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu danced, in the house of Rāghava Paṇḍita, and in the house of Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura.

So wherever there was dancing, Mahāprabhu was dancing.

It's just an interesting note.

So in conclusion, I would like to finish today with a verse from Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura, *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, Ādi-khaṇḍa 28.84.

This verse, I discovered, is also found in the Padma Purāṇa, as well as in the *Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya* 20.68.

A very beautiful verse and a wonderful way to conclude today:

“My dear King, when Kṛṣṇa's devotees dance in kīrtana, they destroy the inauspiciousness of the earth by the touch of their feet, the directions by their glance, and the higher planetary systems by their upraised arms.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Dance, dance, dance.

So thank you for allowing me to address you today from Chennai in South India. We're on a traveling saṅkīrtana party here for five weeks, visiting all the temples, the wonderful devotees, having ecstatic kīrtanas, and following the advice—dancing in ecstasy.

So we'll see you next Friday.

May the dancing of Gaura and His associates, and our dancing along with them, bring Kṛṣṇa's mercy into our lives.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.
