Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale. Namaste Sarasvate Deve.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 93.

In this lecture we will conclude our discussions on Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī.

Like all our lectures in this mini-series, our purpose in speaking about Tulasī Devī is to deepen our understanding of her and appreciate how important she is in helping us awaken our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as well as the divine abode of Vṛndāvana.

There's a very beautiful verse in this connection in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* 9.105, as follows:

“O goddess Śrī Tulasī, although I am most insignificant, I am trying to plunge into the nectarean ocean of your glories out of intense eagerness. Please forgive my offenses.”

I recite it again:

“O goddess Śrī Tulasī, although I am most insignificant, I am trying to plunge into the nectarean ocean of your glories out of intense eagerness. Please forgive my offenses.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, as I was researching the glories of Tulasī Devī in various śāstras, it became apparent to me that she is much appreciated by all the residents of Vṛndāvana, where of course she thrives. Even her compatriots, the other flowers in Vṛndāvana, honor her.

We see that in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.15.19:

“Although flowering plants like the mandāra, kunda, kurabaka, utpala, campaka, arṇa, punnāga, nāga-keśara, bakula, lily and pārijāta are full of transcendental fragrance, they are still conscious of the austerities performed by Tulasī, for Tulasī is given special preference by the Lord, who garlands Himself with Tulasī leaves.”

We must also consider that even the most exalted devotees of Vṛndāvana extol the glories of the Tulasī plant.

And who are those devotees?

The gopīs—the milkmaids of Vraja, the cowherd girls of Vṛndāvana.

In the *Caitanya-mañjuṣā*, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says famously:

“Ramaṇyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā.”

“There is no better worship than what was conceived by the gopīs.”

“There is no better worship than what was conceived by the gopīs.”

Important verse.

So the gopīs are the topmost devotees, and amongst the gopīs, Śrī Rādhārāṇī is the topmost.

And where do we learn of the Vrajavāsīs’ appreciation for Śrī Tulasī?

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.30.37. It's a very famous verse. It's when the gopīs are searching for Kṛṣṇa, who had left the rāsa dance, and in their madness of separation they're inquiring from different residents of the dhāma if any of them have seen Kṛṣṇa. They even inquire from the trees.

And when they come upon a flowering Tulasī plant, they say:

“Kaccit tulasi kalyāṇi govinda-caraṇa-priye...”

“O most kind Tulasī, to whom the feet of Govinda are so dear, have you seen that infallible one walk by, wearing you and encircled by swarms of bees?”

Now, “wearing you” refers to Govinda wearing a Tulasī garland.

Now Śrīla Prabhupāda goes deep in his purport to this famous verse. He writes:

“The ācāryas explain here that the word *caraṇa* is a term of respect, as in the expression *bhavataḥ caraṇaḥ*.”

And then he continues:

“The bees humming around the garland worn by Śrī Govinda were attracted by the fragrance of the Tulasī-mañjarīs offered to Him. The gopīs felt that the trees had not replied because they were male, but that Tulasī, being female, would sympathize with their plight.”

That Tulasī, being female, would sympathize with their plight.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now Jīva Gosvāmī, in his commentary on this verse—because actually, as we know, there are many commentaries on the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*; Prabhupāda would actually travel with a book that had the commentaries of various ācāryas on the Bhāgavatam. I saw that book one time.

And Jīva Gosvāmī, in his commentary on this verse, explains that the gopīs understood Tulasī was someone who was constantly in the presence of Kṛṣṇa due to her connection with His feet, meaning her leaves are placed on the Lord's lotus feet.

Thus, in their state of separation, they felt that Tulasī, being very dear to Kṛṣṇa, would surely know where He is.

And Jīva Gosvāmī adds that the reference to the bees indicates the divine fragrance that surrounds Kṛṣṇa, a fragrance that attracts even the bees, thus further enhancing the sacredness of Tulasī's connection with Kṛṣṇa.

Wow.

What would we do without the commentaries of these ācāryas?

Now, the great Vṛndāvana poet and commentator Śrī Hari Sūri, whom we often quote, also touches on this pastime in his writings.

He writes that the gopīs were thinking as follows:

“We consider this Tulasī to be *atula-guṇā*, incomparable in character, as well as a repository of simplicity. This is because even though she sees us gopīs as her rivals, she keeps her head bowed down in distress upon seeing our distress.”

“This is because even though she sees us gopīs as her rivals, she keeps her head bowed down in distress upon seeing our distress.”

So I was thinking, why does Tulasī see the gopīs as her rivals?

Well, because Tulasī is married to Hari, to Kṛṣṇa, and the gopīs also want to be married to Hari, to Kṛṣṇa.

So the gopīs continue:

“O Tulasī, O Dhātrī, O Earth, both of you are co-wives of Hari. Yet the affection that you have for each other is incomparable, because you, O Earth, are always sheltered at the feet of Tulasī, and you, O Tulasī, are always acting as the Earth's umbrella.

We too wish to love that same Hari. Can you please tell us where He has gone?

We too wish to love that same Hari. Can you please tell us where He has gone?”

Very nectarean parts of these beautiful commentaries.

So taking into consideration these passages from śāstra, as well as the realizations of exalted ācāryas, we should always consciously worship Tulasī Devī with great awe and reverence.

The ācāryas encourage us to do so in Verses 308 and 309 of *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*.

A devotee named Gopāla is speaking to Amita. He says:

“Do you worship Lord Hari every day with offerings of Tulasī leaves?”

He asks him:

“Do you worship Lord Hari every day with offerings of Tulasī leaves? Do you decorate your body with tilaka every day?”

Then he says:

“Do you wear beads made from āmalakī fruit on your neck? Do you place on your head the Tulasī garland that was offered to the Lord?”

So like that, we're being encouraged by the ācāryas to focus on the worship of Śrī Tulasī.

And Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, in his immortal book *Jaiva-dharma*, Chapter 20, Part 8, says—and I quote:

“Tulasī may be served in nine ways: seeing Tulasī, touching Tulasī, meditating upon Tulasī, glorifying Tulasī, bowing down before Tulasī, hearing the glorification of Tulasī, as we're doing now, planting Tulasī, tasting Tulasī, and worshiping Tulasī daily.”

Practical advice on how to worship Śrī Tulasī.

He goes on:

“All these services to Tulasī Devī are ultimately meant for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord. Thus the glories of Tulasī Devī are endless.”

Pertinent advice from the pioneer of the saṅkīrtana movement in Western countries, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

Now, if one is not so fortunate to do all or any of these—well, let us say if one is not fortunate to have the opportunity to worship Tulasī Devī in these various ways—*Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 2.3.23 actually condemns such persons in the following way.

If you don't worship Tulasī, it's quite heavy, but it's there. It's there. It's right there in the Bhāgavatam.

“The person who has not at any time received the dust of the feet of the Lord's pure devotee upon his head is certainly a dead body. And the person who has never experienced the aroma of the Tulasī leaves from the lotus feet of the Lord is also a dead body, although breathing.”

Told you. It's quite strong, but it's there.

So I would like to conclude our four lectures on Tulasī Devī today with Nārada Muni's instructions to the hunter Mṛgāri, whom he reformed and made into a pure Vaiṣṇava.

And Śrīla Prabhupāda's advice to all of us in his purports to this pastime are especially valuable for those who are sincerely desiring to go back home, back to Godhead.

So we begin with *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 24.260:

“Tulasī-rāya āge eka mañca kariyā...”

Nārada Muni said to the reformed hunter:

“Leave your home and go to the river. There you should construct a small cottage, and in front of the cottage you should grow a Tulasī plant on a raised platform.”

First instruction.

Devotees always want instructions from their spiritual masters, so this hunter is very fortunate. Nārada Muni is giving him these instructions.

*Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 24.261:

“Tulasī parikrama kara, tulasī sevana...”

“After planting the Tulasī tree before your house, you should daily circumambulate that Tulasī plant, serve her by giving her water and other things, and constantly chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra.”

Now we come to Śrīla Prabhupāda's purport, and I found it one of the most extraordinary purports in the *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. Actually, listen to this. He's advising us. This is the beginning of spiritual life.

“After leaving householder life, one may go to a holy place such as the bank of the Ganges or Yamunā and erect a small cottage. A small cottage can be constructed without any expenditure. Four logs serving as pillars can be secured by any man from the forest. The roof can be covered with leaves, and one can cleanse the inside. Thus one can live very peacefully.

In any condition, any man can live in a small cottage, plant a Tulasī tree, water it in the morning, offer it prayers, and continuously chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Thus one can make vigorous spiritual advancement. This is not at all difficult. One simply has to follow the instructions of the spiritual master strictly. Then everything will be successful in due course of time.”

Then everything will be successful in due course of time.

“As far as eating is concerned, there's no problem. If Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, supplies everyone with edibles, why should He not supply His devotee?

Sometimes a devotee will not even bother to construct a cottage. He will simply go to live in a mountain cave. One may live in a cave, in a cottage beside a river, in a palace, or in a big city like New York or London. In any case, a devotee can follow the instructions of his spiritual master and engage in devotional service by watering the Tulasī plant and chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.

Taking the advice of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, our spiritual master Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Mahārāja said one can go to any part of the world and instruct people to become devotees of the Lord by following the regulative principles, worshiping the Tulasī plant, and continuously chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra.”

Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

And thank you, Śrīmatī Tulasī Devī.

And all the comments we've received during these four lectures from great ācāryas.

Once again, I hope that these four classes on Tulasī Devī have inspired you in your appreciation for her, and then your affection for her, and one day your budding love for this great devotee of the Lord.

So thank you, Prabhus.

We'll move on to another item in stimulating our love for the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and the transcendental abode of Śrī Vṛndāvana next Friday.

May Kṛṣṇa bless you.

Jaya!
