Hi Krishna, everyone.

Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Namaste. So, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part sixty-five. As you may remember, last week we discussed the role of poetry in helping us to reawaken our love for the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and to serve Them eternally in Their transcendental abode of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

That, that is the very goal of our lives, is made clear in the following poetic śloka by Haridāsa Ṭhākura, it's entitled, "A Prayer for Eternal Residence." "Those individuals who are fully engaged in carrying out various karmas prescribed by the Vedas, etc., those who are extremely desirous of understanding the impersonal Brahman, those whose minds show eagerness in attaining the happiness of Vaikuṇṭha, as well as those who delight in Dvārakā, etc.

May all these individuals attain their respective cherished goals. What difference does it make to me, oh Rūpa?

In close proximity to You, may the banks of Śrī Yamunā become my beautiful, eternal place of residence." Harish. So today, I would like to continue exploring the theme of transcendental Divine poetry. So important is it that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself describes Himself as such poetry in His Bhagavad-gītā, 10.31: "Aśvatttha sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ devaṛṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ, gandharvāṇāṁ citrarathaḥ siddhānāṁ kapilaḥ puraḥ.

Aśvatttha sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ devaṛṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ, gandharvāṇāṁ citrarathaḥ siddhānāṁ kapilaḥ puraḥ. [Bg 10.31] I am the Aśvattha tree among all trees, and among the sages, I am Nārada. Among the Gandharvas, I am Citraratha, and among the perfected beings, I am the sage Kapila." In his commentary on the Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīla Prabhupāda mentions this verse and clarifies Kṛṣṇa's statement.

He says, "of months I am Mārgaśīrsha [November-December], and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring." It's important to note, as we did in last week's lecture, that when we speak of poetry, we are not referring to mundane poetry again, poetry which describes the affairs of this world.

But rather poetry that glorifies the name, fame, pastimes, and paraphernalia of the Lord. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in Padyāvalī 5.107: "Gṛhīta-hari-nāma-bhakti-rathena [or similarly translated] hearing the poetry of a person who has no transcendental knowledge and who writes about the relationships between man and woman simply causes unhappiness, whereas hearing the words of a devotee fully absorbed in ecstatic love causes great happiness." Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī had explained that, for example, when Caitanya Mahāprabhu was residing in Jagannātha Purī, many poets used to come to see Him and offer their different kinds of poetry.

But the regulation was that, um, Caitanya Mahāprabhu's secretary, Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, he had to first examine all of these writings. And if he found there were no mistakes in describing the loving affairs of Kṛṣṇa, then only would he allow the poets to approach Caitanya Mahāprabhu and recite their poetry.

So again, poetry in the ultimate sense is meant to instill or awaken feelings of love for Kṛṣṇa. And therefore, it can only really be written by devotees of the Lord. Now, last week we mentioned how Śrīla Prabhupāda was himself an accomplished poet.

Actually, I was reading that when he was in the Godruma Math, he was actually recognized as such. In a letter to Rameśvara Prabhu, on December 3rd, 1975, Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote: "My dear Rameśvara Prabhu, please accept my blessings.

I am in receipt of your very encouraging letter dated November 27th, 1975. Your reported book sales is very encouraging. You are all becoming very, very, very dear to my Guru Mahārāja. I started this movement by book selling. I was never a beggar for money, but I was writing books and selling.

My Guru Mahārāja very much liked my writing and he used to show others in my absence. He said, 'Just see how nicely he has written.' He encouraged me and my godbrothers, they also liked my writing. After I wrote that poem for Vyāsa Pūjā of my Guru Mahārāja, they used to call me a poet.

They used to call me a poet." And Śrīla Prabhupāda wanted us, his disciples and his followers, to be poets as well.

In a letter to Munda on July 28th, 1969, Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote: "I am so glad to learn that Mr.

Ted Burke, the American poet, is now living with you as a brāhmaṇa. Let him become now a Vaiṣṇava poet. There are so many Vaiṣṇava poets in India now. As Kṛṣṇa consciousness is spreading, I think there must be some Western Vaiṣṇava poets, and Mr.

Ted Burke may be the first one." Harish. So, we should try our hand, all of us, in writing poetry. And in doing so, we can take inspiration from a number of great poets in our line. And there's no secret, you know, who some of them are.

To begin with, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta makes it very clear who some of them are in the following verse from Caitanya-caritāmṛta, 1.10.115: "Vidyāpati, Caṇḍīdāsa, Śrī Govinda, Ādi Kavi, Karana, Prora, Ananda. Svarūpa Dāmodara used to read the poems of Vidyāpati and Caṇḍīdāsa and Śrī Govinda's gīta, he used to make Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu very happy by singing these songs.

He used to make Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu very happy by singing these songs." And in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, 2.7.7, Kavicandra Gosvāmī says something very similar: "Caṇḍīdāsa, Vidyāpati, Rayer S'ri Gita, Kavi, Śrī Govinda. Śrī Rūpa Sanātana, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Gases Par-ananda. He also passed his time reading the books and singing the songs of Caṇḍīdāsa and Vidyāpati and listening to quotations from the Jagannātha Vallabha Nāṭaka, Kṛṣṇa Carita, and Śrī Govinda." "Thus, in the association of Svarūpa Dāmodara and Raya Rāmānanda, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu passed His days and nights chanting and hearing with great pleasure." So, some great poets are mentioned there too.

And we can be inspired by them. Of course, as many devotees know, the poetry of Caṇḍīdāsa and Vidyāpati and Śrī Govinda Gosvāmī, it's more often than not very intimate, very confidential, and is therefore meant really for only very, very advanced devotees.

In a conversation with Dr. Śaligram Shukla on July 5th, 1976, in Washington D.C., Śrīla Prabhupāda said: "Vidyāpati's writing is meant for realized souls, not ordinary.

Ordinary, they will take as love affairs between girls and boys. Therefore, it is not for them. Those who are already advanced, liberated, then these love affairs have brought and Kṛṣṇa, they will be discussed in detail. Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to discuss Jagāi Mādhāi's books, Vidyāpati's books, very confidentially amongst a few devotees, not publicly." However, I was thinking that not all of Vidyāpati's songs are of a confidential nature.

He also wrote some, you know, basic truths in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. How do we know?

Prabhupāda said so.

Prabhupāda writes in the purport to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 4.25.12.

He writes as follows: "Śrīla Vidyāpati, a great Vaiṣṇava poet, has sung, 'Taṭala śakha-vṛkṣa-bhīru, bindu śama, śūnya-dharā-ramaṇī.' Material sense gratification with society, friendship, and love is compared to a drop of water falling on the desert. A desert requires oceans of water to satisfy, and if only a drop of water is supplied, what is the use?

Similarly, the living entity is part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who, as stated in Vedānta-sūtra, is ānanda-mayo 'bhyāsāt, full of enjoyment. Being part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entity is also seeking complete enjoyment.

However, complete enjoyment cannot be achieved separately from the Supreme Personality of Godhead." So, that's something about Vidyāpati, that he also wrote some, you know, truths for some basic truths. So, we can take inspiration from some of the songs of Vidyāpati.

I saw a few talking about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but in a very nice way, simple way. Or we can take inspiration simply from his life, his exemplary life. I was reading that Vidyāpati was born in or around 1350 in Bihar, India.

And his most enduring literary contribution is recognized actually as a body of over 500 poems sung as songs, composed between 1380 and 1406 about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Surprisingly, Vidyāpati himself was not a Kṛṣṇa devotee. Actually, he was a devotee of Kṛṣṇa's greatest devotee, Lord Shiva.

Just as the Gaṅgā is the greatest of all rivers, Lord Indra the Supreme amongst deities, and Lord Śambhu, Shiva, the greatest of Vaiṣṇavas, so Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the greatest of all Purāṇas. So Shiva being such, Vidyāpati once had a dream of Lord Shiva.

He describes the dream in detail in his book called "Unmantra Ratna" (or similarly named). He writes there: "Nandi, the giant bull, eyes were red, intoxicated with energy, he was breathing fire from his nostrils. A huge golden bell was hanging around his neck, his horns were digging the earth and covering the whole world in dust.

Oh, what a dream!

His horns were moving restlessly like that of a mad bull. He was controlled by the crown jewel of all Audalas, Lord Shiva, who was gracefully holding the reigning rope of the bull in his one hand and a bugle horn in his other hand.

A countless army of Bhūtas, ghosts, and mystical yogis were standing behind him. He was playing the Damaru, a drum, and holding snakes while throwing ashes in the air. His associates were dancing wildly behind him. The whole scene was full of ecstasy and fury.

Amongst all that wild play, the face of Lord Śūśanta Shiva reflected the light of the crescent moon in his dreadlocks. His body was damp due to the constant flowing of the Gaṅgā river from his topknot. His brow was compressed together like Cupid's bow, decorated with sandalwood paste and ashes.

His forehead was the resonance of eternal peace and satisfaction. Smiling at me, that Pūṣa. O Lord Shiva said, 'Oh my son, Vidyāpati, you are very, very dear to my heart. I am pleased by the sacrifices made by the family lineage of yours as well as by your beautiful poems and prayers dedicated to me.

Now I want to decorate your heart with the necklace of love for my Lord.' In my dream, I asked my Lord, 'Who is Your Lord?' Lord Shiva replied, 'My Lord is Kṛṣṇa.' Then I asked, 'And what is that love?' Lord Shiva replied, 'It is my boundless love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.' As soon as Lord Shiva said Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's names, he started shivering and trembling in ecstasy and dancing wildly with his associates.

Witnessing this beautiful condition of my Lord, I decided to sing the unlimited glories of love of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the most beautiful way so that the Lord of my life, Shiva, would be pleased. I thought, 'If just the names of this Divine Couple made Lord Shiva feel this much joy and happiness, I should dedicate my life to sing about their pastimes and their glories to please my Lord Shiva in the best way.'" Harish.

So, the scholars say, after that dream, Vidyāpati started writing about the loving affairs of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And because he was blessed to do so by Lord Shiva, as he described in the dream, no one opposed this sudden change in his poems from, you know, glorifying Lord Shiva to glorifying, you know, Kṛṣṇa.

Yet even more so, the scholars say he wrote about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He wrote more about Rādhārāṇī than Kṛṣṇa. Which is why we can understand Lord Caitanya was so interested to hear his poetry at Gambhīra temple. Because, as we know, one of the reasons that Lord Caitanya appeared in this world was to try and understand Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's love for Him.

In Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 6.5, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes famously: "Desiring to understand the glory of Rādhā's love, the wonderful qualities in Him that she alone relishes through her love, and the happiness she feels when she realizes the sweetness of His love, the Supreme Lord Hari, richly endowed with her emotions, appeared from the womb of Śrīmatī Śacī-devī, as the moon appears from the ocean." So, although Vidyāpati was a strict follower of Lord Shiva, he had no hesitation to compose poems about Śrī Rādhā because his Ishta, Lord Shiva, so much hankered for the loving glance of Śrīmatī Rādhā.

As seen in his epic, Śrī Rādhā Kaṭaka-bha. This is a poem, you could say, or a song, or the hankering of the heart of Lord Shiva. It's found in the Uttara-khaṇḍa. We can recite a few verses so we can see how Lord Shiva feels about Śrīmatī Rādhā.

There, Lord Shiva says: "Oh Goddess, worshiped by the kings of sages!

Oh Goddess, who removes the sufferings of the three worlds!

Oh Goddess, whose face is a blossoming lotus!

Oh Goddess, who enjoys pastimes in the forest!

Oh daughter of Bhaṭānu!

Oh companion of Vraja's Prince!

When will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me, Lord Shiva?

Oh Goddess, staying in a vine cottage by an aśoka tree!

Oh Goddess, whose delicate feet are as splendid as red blossoms!

Oh Goddess, whose hand grants fearlessness!

Oh Abode of transcendental opulences!

When will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?

Oh Goddess, who playfully shooting the arrows of Your glances from the curved bows of Your auspicious amorous eyebrows have completely subdued Nandā's son Kṛṣṇa!

When will You cast Your merciful sidelong glance upon me?" Now, hearing the poetry of Lord Shiva, we're again reminded of the maxim, because it brings forth so many, what, beginning to awaken so many spiritual emotions, hopefully in our hearts.

We're reminded of that maxim from Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 1.95, that we quoted last week. "Kim artham?

What is the use of a bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but not cause the head to bend?" "Wow!" That I love that poetry, you'll say because it brought memories, or it reminds me of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā and the cowherd boys and Balarāma.

Many scholars whose works I read in preparing this lecture today write that the important thing in Kṛṣṇa conscious poetry is that it should generate a feeling of wonder in the heart of the listener. It should generate a feeling of wonder in the heart of the listener, like we call that not modern, modern day, like a "wow" experience.

But I prefer the scholars' way of saying it, "generate a feeling of wonder in the heart of the listener." An example of this is a verse I found in the um, Vṛndāvana Research Institute, written by a medieval poet named Rasalīna.

Interesting name, Rasalīna. He writes: "Amala-śata-nara-ga-marata..." The translation is: "And so beautiful!

It's just so beautiful, wonderful are Govinda's eyes, white as if filled with pristine heavenly nectar, black as if full of the deadliest of poison, and reddish as if filled with the most intoxicating wine. If He glances even once at someone, that person simultaneously lives due to the nectar, dies due to the poison, or stumbles around due to the intoxicating wine." Kṛṣṇa, they say, that the interesting thing about this particular poetic verse is that it uses all the colors found in Kṛṣṇa's eyes and attributes various qualities to them.

Poetry, one ācārya concludes in this way, "The magic is produced in this way. The magic is produced." Now, another technique used in Divine poetry to generate this feeling of wonder in the heart of the listener is called Anuprāsa. Anuprāsa. Śrī Balaḍeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa defines Anuprāsa in his Prameya Ratnāvalī, chapter nine, verse one: "He says, a similarity of syllables in a poem or a verse is called Anuprāsa.

The different syllables are similar in a poem or verse, and it brings forth some feeling of love for Kṛṣṇa. That's called Anuprāsa." Another definition of Anuprāsa is given by Kavi Karapura in Alankara Kaustubha, 7.2. He writes: "Anuprāsa is the literary ornament formed when similar-sounding syllables are repeatedly Anu and excellently C arranged, prāsa." Now, it's really interesting.

I found that Śrīla Prabhupāda also spoke once on the beauty of Anuprāsa.

That's why I'm including it, because Prabhupāda spoke about it during Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam class on June 3rd, 1968.

He was speaking from the verse, 10th Canto, 14th chapter, text number 58. Now, the verse in part, there's no need to quote the whole verse here, but the verse in part is, many of you will know, "padam padam." We've heard that verse many times.

And if you listen carefully, the syllables "padam, padam," they're repeated for a purpose. So, Śrīla Prabhupāda said in that class, speaking on this Anuprāsa, he said: "This is very nice poetry," speaking about the verse. "It is very nice poetry. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in every verse, there is poetic genius.

Now, you see, in this verse, 'yam, padam, padam,' you see Anuprāsa, anuhāsa. What is it called in English?

The same word repeated. Padam, padam, yam. You see, nicely made." Quoting directly, Śrīla Prabhupāda was a poet.

Now, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī utilizes Anuprāsa in his famous Traividhya, very beautiful composition. I was reading today, citra-kavya, he utilizes this Anuprāsa by composing a verse that repeats only one consonant, not a syllable this time, but a consonant. See if you can catch it.

I had to practice because this is so intricate, but he repeats the consonant again and again and again. I think you'll catch it: "nā-nā-nā-nā-nā-nā-nā-nā-nā-nā-nā-nā..." I did it. But listen to the, it's a very simple verse, but it's the beauty of it is this repetition of this consonant. "Did not the many-headed Lord Brahmā, who impels the various demigods, offer prayers with tears streaming down his face, trying to pacify Lord Kṛṣṇa, the killer of Śakuni?" Harish.

So, anyway, it's again, transcendentally technical, but interesting, nonetheless, for even us less scholarly persons. Śrī Kṛṣṇa. So, next week, we will discuss the lives of Vidyāpati and Jayadeva Gosvāmī, the two other original poets that really captured the attention and heart of of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Um, but for today, we'll leave you with more poetry from, really, our favorite poet, Śrīla Prabhupāda, because he's the one who, you know, is by his mercy, helping to awaken these, um, feelings of love in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And, um, I chose a favorite poem of Śrīla Prabhupāda, everyone.

Most devotees know it from his Jaladuta diary, 1965. I won't read the Sanskrit, but just the poem itself. And I'm sure you'll feel some deep emotions here. Prabhupāda wrote this on the Jaladuta: "Oh brothers, I emphatically say to you, you will obtain your good fortune from the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa only when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī becomes pleased with you. Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Siddhanta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who is very dear to Lord Gaṅgā, the son of mother Śacī, is unparalleled in his service to the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

He is that great saintly spiritual master who bestows intense devotion to Kṛṣṇa at different places throughout the world. By a strong desire, the holy name of Lord Gaṅgā will spread throughout all the countries of the Western world and all the cities, towns, and villages on the earth.

From all the oceans, seas, rivers, and streams, everyone will chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa. As the vast mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu conquers all directions, a flood of transcendental ecstasy will certainly cover the land. When all the sinful, miserable living entities become happy, the Vaiṣṇava desire is then fulfilled.

Although my Guru Mahārāja ordered me to accomplish this mission, I am not worthy or fit to do it. I am very fallen and insignificant. Therefore, oh Lord, now I am begging for Your mercy so that I may become worthy, for You are the wisest and most experienced of all.

If You bestow Your power, by serving the spiritual master, one attains the absolute truth and one's life becomes successful. If that service is obtained, then one becomes happy and gets Your association. Due to good fortune, my dear Lord, oh Supreme Personality of Godhead, because of my association with material desires, one after another, I was gradually falling into a blind well full of snakes, following the general populace.

But Your servant Narada kindly accepted me as his disciple and instructed me how to achieve this transcendental position. Therefore, my first duty is to serve Him. How could I ever leave His service?

Prabhupāda Mahārāja to Lord Narasiṁha, 7.9.28: 'Oh Lord Kṛṣṇa, You are my eternal companion.

Forgetting You, I have suffered the kicks of Māyā birth after birth. If today the chance to meet You occurs again, then I will surely be able to rejoin You. Oh dear friend, in Your company I will experience great joy once again.

In the early morning, I will wander about the cowherd pastures and fields, running and frolicking in the many forests of Vraja. I will roll on the ground in spiritual ecstasy. Oh, when will that day be mine?

Today, that remembrance of You came to me in a very nice way. Because I have a great longing, I called to You. I am Your eternal servant, and therefore I desire Your association so much. Oh Lord Kṛṣṇa, except for You, there is no other means of success.'" Harish.

Thank you, Prabhupāda.

Our favorite poet. So, Prabhupāda, that concludes our lectures on stimulation for ecstatic love, based on poetry.

And, yeah, we'll be back again, uh, next Friday. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the.

Maṇḍala.