Hari Krishna everyone and welcome back once again to our series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Rādhā, oṁ viṣṇupād paramahaṁsa parivrājakācārya śrīmad abhaya caraṇāravinda bhakti vedānta svāmī Prabhupāda's glories.

So we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 120. And herein, we'll continue discussing Śrīmatī Rāṇī's lotus feet, in particular, once again, the anklets that decorate her lotus feet. But before doing so, I'd like to share with you a very beautiful poem by Śrila Raghunathadasa Goswami, entitled Raghunathadasa Goshwami, wherein he mentions many of the stimuli that we have been discussing in this series for a long time.

The series of stimulation for ecstatic love, I was thinking, it's actually a perfect synopsis of all these 120 classes to date. He writes, and it's so beautiful: "A cottage in a grove on the banks of Yamuna, the great Govardhan Hill, the banks of the Yamuna, Kusum Sarovar, Manasa Ganga, the daughter of Kalinda, the Yamuna, with their many waves.

Vṛndāvana, Gokula, the breeze, the trees, creepers, and reeds of Vṛndāvana, the different varieties of colorful birds, the deer, the cooling breeze from the Malaya mountains, the peacocks, the bumblebees, the pastimes with the flute, the flute itself, the buffalo horn bugle, the footprints of cows in the dust of Braja, the row of blackish rain clouds, springtime, the moon, the conch, and the calves.

All these I know to be very favorable for the pastimes of Rādhā and Krishna.

I recognize in them transcendental stimuli for making the Lord's charming pastimes more intense. I refuse to go anywhere if stimuli for devotional service are not there, for to abandon them is to abandon life itself. For to abandon them is to abandon life itself." So appropriate for all of us, that particular quote.

So regarding Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's ankle bells, the Catuḥśloka 14.228 describes how all ankle bells in Goloka Vrindavan are made of what?

Touchstone, cintāmaṇis. Catuḥśloka 3.4.17 says: "tāṅgaṅga-maṇi-mayaṁ ca taṭaṅgaṁ..." Meaning, "The anklets on the damsels of Brahmaloka are all made of cintāmaṇi stone." And Śrila Jiva Goswami describes the anklets of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in his Gopala Campu, Uttara Khanda, 34th chapter. He writes: "tasyā gaja-gāminyāḥ..." Translation: "Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who walked with the gait of a maddened she-elephant, her anklets made a sound, 'ting ting ting,' like chiming bells, and this chiming created shivering in the hearts of the other wives of Krishna." He writes like that.

Then he goes on: "The two anklets that decorate the two lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī are like delightful wagtail birds. Hearing the sounds of these anklets, Hari experiences the joy of winning over the ten directions. Hari experiences the joy of winning over the ten directions just to hear the ankle bells of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." So nice.

A note here: according to Vedic literature, in dealing with positive and negative omens, it is considered extremely auspicious for a king to hear the sounds of a wagtail bird when he departs his kingdom to win over all directions. I found that as well.

Now, for today, I'd like to share with you a – it's a well-known pastime in which the famous devotee named Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa once found an anklet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and was able to return it to her and have her darśana.

It's famous, it's very famous pastime. Um, but repetition again is necessary to really understand and appreciate something in Krishna consciousness.

Now, much can be said about the life of this great devotee Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa, also known, we'll hear later, as Śrīnivāsa Paṇḍita. But today, we're concerned about his service to Śrila Jiva Goswami as a young man in Śrīdhāma Vrindavan, 500 years ago.

Pleased with the service of Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa, at one point Jiva Goswami entrusted him with the service of sweeping the sacred grove of Śrīdhāma Vrindavan every day. Of course, we know that Vrindavan is where many of Śrī Rādhā and Krishna's pastimes take place.

Now, the practice of serving the dhāma in such, you could say, a menial way, is called dhāma-sevā. And it's actually an important part of living or visiting in the dhāma. Dhāma-sevā, asarya, can take the form of, um, like weeding gardens, cleaning ponds, sweeping the ground, securing trees to their supports, planting and caring for flowers, or cleaning of paving stones and pavilions.

You might want to note that to do some menial service in Vrindavan. Now, it's described that as Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa swept Vrindavan, he was thinking as follows: "This is the same dust that once touched the feet of Krishna and the gopis." This is a meditation.

Doing his menial service, he's thinking, "This is the same dust that once touched the feet of Krishna and His gopis." And as he was thinking in this way, it's described he muddied the Earth he stood on with a steady stream of tears.

So, as we know, the pastimes of Rādhā and Krishna are eternally going on in Vrindavan.

Krishna's manifest pastimes took place 5,000 years ago, and everyone could see.

But His unmanifest pastimes, unmanifest to normal vision, take place every day and night, even now in Vrindavan, if only we had the eyes to see. So, it's described that during this period of Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa's life, one night Krishna and His gopis were absorbed in singing and dancing in unmanifest lila.

Because we're speaking about 500 years ago in Vrindavan, and at one point, as the pace of this dancing increased, a golden anklet bracelet, ankle bells named Mañju Gōra, Mañju Gōra, which was studded with beautiful sapphires, etc., slipped off the left foot of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and fell in that dancing area, actually unnoticed by anyone.

So, we go ahead a little bit. Early the next morning, Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa arrived for his daily service of sweeping that same Vrindavan. And upon reaching it, he noticed, it's described, jasmine creepers and other flowers lying scattered everywhere, and the parrots, cuckoos, and black bees, they were singing morning songs with more enthusiasm than usual.

And it's described that in gratitude for the service bestowed upon him, he began rolling in the dust of Vrindavan, crying tears of joy and happiness. The dust of Vrindavan. Now, it's really interesting. In my research, I came across in Vrindavan Mahatmya, where he describes how the ground, or the dust of Vrindavan, is actually made of different substances.

You know, we think of dust as dust. But Braja is extraordinary. So, the dust of Vrindavan is made of different substances. This is really interesting. He writes: "In some places, the ground of Braja is made of camphor dust. Wow!

In some places, the dust is made of saffron. In some places in Vrindavan, it's made up of ground-up musk, and in some places, it's made up of aromatic substances used in religious ceremonies." Wow. So, as Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa started cleaning and sweeping the Vrindavan, suddenly he saw a glittering object under a pomegranate tree, which was lighting up the grove with its radiance.

And coming closer, he saw to his surprise a divine golden anklet studded with sapphires, emanating an otherworldly fragrance. The ankle bells were emanating an otherworldly fragrance. It was sticking out of the ground. So famously, it's described, using an iron spade, he gently unearthed what turned out to be an anklet.

Now, it's mentioned that as soon as this iron spade touched that anklet, the spade turned into solid gold. The spade turned into solid gold. Then, as Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa held the ornament in his hand, this is really nice. Currents of divine ecstasy surged throughout his body and mind.

Currents of divine ecstasy surged throughout his body and mind. And suddenly, he heard an ākāśa-vāṇī. We've described this before. ākāśa-vāṇī means, like, a voice from the sky. So, this voice was saying, "Keep this anklet very carefully. Keep this anklet very carefully." So, understanding, of course, that the ankle bells, or the anklet, were not ordinary and that it, perhaps even more importantly, it belonged to some exalted personality, he tied it carefully in a corner of his cloth.

Now, around the same time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī realized she had lost one of her favorite ankle bells. And she asked Lalita-sakhi to go back to Vrindavan and retrieve it. Now, generally, such a service would go to one of her maidservants.

But Rādhārāṇī had her reasons for sending Lalita there, which we'll reveal later. So, Lalita-sakhi, disguised as an ordinary village girl, went back to Vrindavan. And there she saw Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa, and she approached him and introduced herself as Rādhā-dāsī, Rādhā-dāsī, and explained that she was a resident of the village of Yavata.

She said that the previous evening, her sister had come to Vrindavan to pick flowers and became frightened upon hearing the roar of a tiger. So she quickly ran away while not noticing that golden ankle bells, the golden ankle bells on her left foot, had fallen off somewhere in the grove.

So, she, in this disguise form, asked Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa if he had found it. And he replied, "Yes, I have." But it's described, his spiritual intuition, his spiritual intuition, told him that this so-called village girl was anything but ordinary, and he concluded that she was hiding her true identity.

And therefore, he refused to give her the anklet. He said, "Something's off here. Or something's on here. He said, 'I think I have found what you are looking for, but how could you and your sister, obviously simple villagers, afford such a costly item?'" So, Lalita-sakhi replied, "Sir, we may be villagers, but we are not poor.

Now, please give me the anklet." But Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa persisted. He said, "Dear girl, I want to see for myself if your sister is as wealthy as you. If she is, please take me to her. If what you say is true, I will happily hand over this anklet." Now, Lalita-sakhi was getting impatient with Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa, but she could recognize his spiritual depth.

So, she restrained herself and took him to nearby Lalita-kunda and told him to bathe there. She took him there. She said, "Now, now, you bathe here." Like, "Why Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa?" He was confused.

He thought, "If this girl's sister is a simple village girl, why do I have to bathe before meeting her?" So, he paused and he said, "Young lady, can you please tell me why I have to bathe now?" At this point, Lalita was getting frustrated that things were going more slowly than she would have liked, because Rādhārāṇī was waiting.

So, at that point, she took great mercy, great mercy, on Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa, and suddenly she revealed her original form to him as Lalita-sakhi. And it's described that upon beholding the, um, what's the quote?

The unrivaled beauty of Rādhā's foremost friend. The unrivaled beauty of Rādhā's foremost friend, Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa fainted. Hare Krishna.

So, Lalita then revived Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa with the touch of her lotus hand. And then she gave him what? Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's mantra, which consists of 15 syllables and is full of six divine opulences.

Let's repeat that: Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's mantra, which consists of 15 syllables and was full of six divine opulences. Then she again requested him to bathe in the lake, which he gladly did this time. And entering Lalita-kunda, fully dressed, he completely submerged himself.

And upon resurfacing, he was stunned to find out that he had taken on the form of a most beautiful Braja-gopi, complete with dress and ornaments. And then, by the unfathomable potency of Yoga-maya, both Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa, as a gopi, and Lalita-sakhi entered the unmanifest, eternal feature of Vrindavan.

Entered the unmanifest, eternal feature of Vrindavan lila, where Lalita escorted this new gopi to a grove where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was sitting on a throne, surrounded by her friends. Now, when Viśākhā-sakhi saw how Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa had assumed the form of a mañjarī and appeared, how's it described?

As resplendent as gold. She addressed her, or him, "O Kanaka Mañjarī, you have come. O Kanaka Mañjarī, you have come." But the ecstasy of seeing his worshipable deity, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, was too much for Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa. And to the amusement and curiosity of the other gopis, he fainted again, this time at the foot of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's throne.

And when he came to, Lalita said to him, or her, "Here is my sister. You wanted to know whether she could be the rightful owner of this anklet or not." So, what do you think?

What do you think?

So, it is written then, when in his gopi form, Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa gazed at Rādhā, the gopis, and the kunja, his senses and mind became, quote, "overwhelmed by the inconceivable grandeur of the sweet rural atmosphere surrounding him." Śrīdhara, he became overwhelmed by the inconceivable grandeur and the sweet rural atmosphere surrounding him.

And unable to speak, he, or she, simply reached out to give Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī the magical anklet. And as he did so, Rādhā pulled him towards her with her right hand, and she gratefully accepted the ornament with her left. Then she said, "I am very pleased with your devotion and with the service you render by sweeping the kunj.

I want to bless you through the anklet that you have brought to me." So, then she pressed her anklet into Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa's forehead as Kanaka Mañjarī, leaving a mark, a mark that had the shape of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's lotus foot.

Wow. The śāstra says that, and I quote, "Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī mixed sandalwood, camphor, honey, and along with saffron, rubbed the mixture on a moonstone, and then using part of the anklet, affectionately made a resplendent dot in the middle of the tilak on his forehead of that devotee." And once that was done, Lalita named this now new, unique tilak with the resplendent dot in the middle, Śyāma Mohana.

They named the tilak this new tilak, Śyāma Mohana. Then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said, "From today, your name will be Śrīnivāsa, meaning literally, one who gives bliss to Rādhā." She continued, "Continue in your service, and one day you will attain me forever.

Forever." Wow. "Continue in your service, and one day you will attain me forever." As she said that, Śrīnivāsa, now his new name, appeared inscribed on his chest. It just appeared. Then Rādhārāṇī requested Śrīnivāsa to return to the material world and share his good fortune with others.

However, the prospect of impending separation from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī caused Śrīnivāsa to start crying uncontrollably. With tears in his eyes, he begged Rādhārāṇī not to send him back to the material world and deprive him of service to her lotus feet.

So, it's written that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's heart melted with pity, and to relieve Śrīnivāsa's, his new name, Śrīnivāsa's distress, she manifested a beautiful deity of Lord Śyāmasundara directly from her heart and asked Lalita-sakhi to give it to Śrīnivāsa. Then she said to Śrīnivāsa, "Dear Śrīnivāsa, as long as you live in the material world, you should keep yourself engaged in the loving service and worship of this deity.

In this way, you will not suffer due to separation from me. After that, you will return back to my eternal service in this eternal abode." Wow. Now, that small deity of Śyāmasundara can be seen even today in the Śyāmasundara temple, one of the main seven temples in Vrindavan.

He's just by the side of the large Rādhā-Krishna deities who are worshipped by Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa.

So, you can go there and see that small deity. What a privilege, what an honor, what a blessing. So then, newly named Śrīnivāsa, bowed down to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And when he looked up, everything had changed. Rādhā, Lalita, and the eternal realm of Vrindavan had all vanished.

All disappeared. And once again, he was in the garden in the kunja where he'd found the anklet, back in the clothes and the body of Durvāsā Kṛṣṇadāsa. But by the touch of the Mañju Gōra anklet, his iron spade, he saw, had become golden.

And looking at himself in the reflection of a puddle of water, he saw that he had attained a bright golden complexion. And on his forehead was the Śyāma Mohana tilak in the form of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's foot with a resplendent dot in the middle.

And he saw reflected in the puddle on his chest was written Śrīnivāsa Kṛṣṇa. So then, with the divine deity of Śyāmasundara in his arms, while shedding tears and with his heart overwhelmed with love, he started running to Śrila Jiva Goswami's bhajana to tell him everything that had happened.

That's a perfect ending to those pastimes. Thank you. We have more classes on Vrindavan's lotus feet as a stimulus to awaken our love for the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Krishna.

And we will continue next Friday. Śrīla Jiva, the revealer of the dhāma, Kṛṣṇa.