Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 28. 28. Today, we will discuss a very important personality, actually hundreds and thousands of them actually, who play important roles in Kṛṣṇa's Vṛndāvana pastimes and without a doubt stimulate each and every Vaiṣṇava's love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

And who could that be?

Well, go mātā, Kṛṣṇa's adorable cows. If anyone is familiar with Vṛndāvana pastimes, they'll know that out of all the Vrajavāsīs, Kṛṣṇa's cows probably spend the most amount of time with the Lord.

There's that prayer from Viṣṇu Purāṇa 1.19.65: "Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is the worshipable deity for all Vedic men, who is the well-wisher of cows and brāhmaṇas, and who is always benefiting the whole world.

I offer my repeated obeisances to the Personality of Godhead known as Kṛṣṇa and Govinda." Now, in that verse, it's very clear how dear two things are to Kṛṣṇa: brāhmaṇas and cows. Brāhmaṇas, because they carry on the message of Godhead before and after Kṛṣṇa's presence on this Earth; they're always preaching the message of Godhead.

And cows, because they fall into the group of Kṛṣṇa's favorite devotees, who are they?

Vrajavāsīs. So cows must be very special again, because Kṛṣṇa spends the balance of His day with them in the pasturing grounds of Vṛndāvana.

And that actually starts very early in His life. At five years of age, in five years of age, Kṛṣṇa was given the charge of the calves. And it was all meant to be. I was thinking this morning because when Nanda Mahārāja requested the sage Gargamuni to do an astrological reading at Kṛṣṇa's birth, he said, "Since your son was born in the year called Vibhavasu, Vibhavasu, Vasu, and the whole universe will be pleased with him.

And since he was born under the Rohini constellation, he will be master of many herds of cows. And because his ascendant is Taurus, he will doubtlessly be the protector of innumerable bulls." This was the prediction. So again, that all began at the tender age of five, and it meant that Kṛṣṇa spent the balance of His time first with the calves, and eventually with the cows and the bulls, His favorites.

In Vedic culture, the day is divided into eight yāmas. Y-A-M-A-S. Yāmas, or literally eight parts of the day, and each part consists of three hours. So, 8 times 3 is 24 hours. So Kṛṣṇa spent a good portion of those eight yāmas with His cows.

The Śāstras say that Kṛṣṇa's day pastimes are more visible to the Vrajavāsīs than His night pastimes, which are, you know, obviously more confidential and reserved primarily for the Gopis. I was reading that even the demigods can benefit from taking darśana of Kṛṣṇa during the day.

Lord Brahmā, Indra, and the other demigods, they often come to Vṛndāvana in their special airplanes, their flower airplanes, to observe Kṛṣṇa during the day, but never in the night for the same confidential reasons.

So, what does Kṛṣṇa mostly do during His visible pastimes in the day?

Well, unlike most boys who go to school and study and learn manners, Kṛṣṇa just herds and plays with His cows. The Vaiṣṇava poet Citra-sevaka has written, "So nice cows in front of Him, cows behind Him, cows are everywhere. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the protector of cows, loves to be surrounded by them.

He has filled the land of Braja with so many cows that even Vaikuṇṭha is forgotten. It was for the sake of the cows that He held up Govardhana Hill." We thank that poet. So cows are very important, not only in the spiritual world but in the material world as well.

As we've all heard before, the cow is one of our natural mothers. The Vedas say we have seven natural mothers: a real mother and birth mother, mātā; the wife of the spiritual master, guru-mātā; the wife of the brāhmaṇa, purohitāṇī; the wife of the king, rāja-mātā; the nurse, dāyī; and the Earth, mātā.

And I was reading that our birth mother and the nurse are considered sisters. The wife of a brāhmaṇa, along with the wife of the guru and the queen, are also considered sisters. And cows and Mother Earth are considered sisters, too.

The cows and Mother Earth, therefore, Mother Earth is often depicted as a cow. Here in India, you see paintings like that; Earth is depicted as a cow. So, during the time when Kṛṣṇa was in Vṛndāvana, cows were in such abundance that there were puddles of milk everywhere, it is described, and there were even streams of milk flowing throughout the land.

I read that when Lord Indra came to Vṛndāvana, it comes from time to time, but on one visit he came to Vṛndāvana, it's described, he was surprised to see milk flowing everywhere.

Now, it's a fact, the demigods sometimes get confused observing Kṛṣṇa's pastimes and being unable to fully comprehend why Lord Viṣṇu, as they say, Kṛṣṇa, and His snake-bed, Ananta Balarāma, would walk barefoot through the remote countryside of Vṛndāvana.

And Viṣṇu walking barefoot?

And they were amazed that these two supreme souls, whom the personified Vedas and Upaniṣads constantly praise, would sometimes become the object of childish jokes told by simple cowherd boys who were not even purified by second birth. This is how they slide.

And they were shocked when those cowherd boys would climb upon Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma's shoulders and steal food from their plates or decorate them with peacock feathers that they picked up off the ground. So that's why, as I mentioned, Indra was surprised that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma lived in a village and its surroundings had large puddles and rivulets of milk flowing with milk.

However, it's for that very reason that Vṛndāvana is also known as Śyāma-gaurī bhūmi. Śyāma-gaurī G-O-R-I. Śyāma-gaurī bhūmi.

It means literally that Vṛndāvana has two rivers: one white and the other dark.

How's that?

The dark river is the Yamunā, and the white river is the milk flowing throughout the land. Another interesting fact I found is that Śāstra describes the milk of Vṛndāvana's cows as not only white but different colors as well.

Well, I read that. I like that. So the brown milk of Vṛndāvana's cows is known as “pītāmbara.” The golden-colored milk of Kṛṣṇa's cows is known as “suvarṇa.” Pearl-colored milk is called “muktā-prāyam,” and beige milk is referred to as “dhumila.” Kṛṣṇa's Lord has cows producing five kinds of colored milk.

And I found a beautiful verse in Gopāla Tāpanī Upaniṣad 1.8, where Lord Brahmā says, "Govinda means Lord of the cows of Braja, as well as Lord of the Earth. In fact, He is the Lord of everything described in the Vedas." So, in my research, I came across numerous pastimes and references to Kṛṣṇa and His cows.

A short piece, for example. One time, Yaśodā started to say to Kṛṣṇa, "Listen, my dear son, in this universe, there is an ocean of milk." Mother Kṛṣṇa interrupted, "How many cows does it take to get enough milk to fill an ocean?" And this made the Gopis nearby giggle.

Mother Yaśodā, who was also laughing, said, "My darling son, the milk ocean was not made by cows." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Maya, how can there be milk without cows?" It's a stroking, you know, little Kṛṣṇa's face.

He sort of replied, "My darling son, the one who gave cows the ability to transform grass into milk can also make milk without cows." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Maya, who is that?" So lowering her head in respect to the Lord, she replied, "He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Although all-pervading, He is invisible to material eyes, and therefore you and I cannot see Him." So hearing this about Himself, Kṛṣṇa smiled softly and drifted off to sleep. That's a nice last name, isn't it?

Now, someone said that the cows in the material world are cousins of the cows in the spiritual world. Some years ago, when we began our lectures on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana, actually four years ago, we once mentioned that Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura wrote amazing details about the cows in the spiritual world, and I feel those details are worth repeating here appropriately.

He said that the cows in the spiritual world come from two categories: one, those that are nitya-siddha, in association with Kṛṣṇa, meaning those who never left the spiritual world. And number two, those who are sādhana-siddha, those who have achieved perfection by sādhana-bhakti, like we're doing by following rules and regulations of devotional service.

And I was thinking, you know, as we've all experienced, it's sometimes a challenge. The goal is far away to achieve Goloka Vṛndāvana by practicing.

Although we have faith that works. But in this regard, I also read, it was very comforting. It is difficult to understand the secret of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One who advances by the instruction of previous ācāryas and follows in the footsteps of his predecessors in the line of disciplic succession will have success.

Of this, there is no doubt. We'll have success of this. There is no doubt. Comforting. Let's keep going. Now continuing with his description of cows in Goloka, he writes, "It's so beautiful. Such cows are like cintāmaṇi jewels that fulfill any desire, and their moving is the most beautiful poetry.

Those happy cows are just like pleasant summer. They always lift their ears to hear Kṛṣṇa's flute, and as they wandered the Earth in Gokula's pastimes, they resemble bubbles of the milk ocean as well as the chuckles of Lord Śiva.

And they are the infant children of the moonlight." The cows in the spiritual world, they are infinite children of moonlight. Now, there's something else very extraordinary about Kṛṣṇa's cows. Being self-realized souls, pure devotees of the Lord, they are trishārdha, it's described.

Meaning, those who can see or sense past, present, and future. For example, with the cows, whenever there's a problem in Vṛndāvana, like Lord Indra pouring torrents of rain down on the village, or a demon coming to attack Kṛṣṇa, the cows cry and behave differently with the boys.

So, for the boys, this is a sign, and the boys are cautious, and they go tell Kṛṣṇa about the situation. "Something's going to happen. The cows are telling us." And also, when anything good happens, the example is given, the appearance day of Śrī Rādhā, or a festival like Holi or Dīpa-vallī, all the cows move in the eastern direction and happily play with the cowherd boys.

So then the boys know something really good is going to happen. Now, we emphasize several times that Kṛṣṇa spends the balance of His day with cows. And Śāstra gives a more detailed description in this regard that Kṛṣṇa stays with His cows from 8:24 AM in the morning until 8:24 PM in the evening.

There's a detail for you. He stays with His cows from 8:24 AM in the morning to 8:24 PM in the evening. And while herding His cows, He has many pastimes, like playing with His friends, killing demons, eating food with His friends, sending messages, and sometimes making excuses to leave the boys and the cows to visit Śrī Rādhā at noon at Rādhākuṇḍa.

Um, and also playing with His cows. Now, playing with cows is known in Sanskrit as gokrīḍā. Gokrīḍā, and it takes the shape of Kṛṣṇa and His friends decorating the cows' bodies with henna. You know, they put the henna on their hands, that dye, and then they put their hands all over the cows.

So the cows have the hands of the cowherd boys all over them. The cows like that. And after that, they would place heavy golden bells around the cows' necks and also around their legs. And then they would fix a golden covering on each horn, horn of the cows.

They put, you know, gold around the horn, each of the horns of the cows. Then they would comb their tails and then tie them with colorful threads. And after this, they would... I find it really interesting. They would place decorative masks on the cows' heads, or, you know, on their faces, decorative masks.

And then they would feed them leaves from the Khadira tree, K-H-A-I-R, Khadira, which made the cows very energized. And after that, they would put a special type of toy, to describe, to the cows' ears, which would make them very excited and want to run and frolic with the boys.

Now, it is said, of all the boys, and how many cowherd boys are there?

Unlimited. Of all the boys, Kṛṣṇa is the best in dealing with the cows. Of course, He is Gopāla. It is written that He is the most expert in calling them, binding them up with the rope, or binding them with the rope attached to a wooden stick, riding on carts and holding their tails to make the cart go faster, decorating cows, petting cows, milking cows, feeding cows, and collecting the cow dung, collecting the dung of the cows.

Kṛṣṇa is the best at that. Treating the cows with herbs, He's the best. He's the best at running behind or in front of the cows. He's the best fighting with bulls, and He's the best controlling angry bulls and protecting cows, and finally, satisfying them all with His sweet flute playing and lovely face.

He satisfies all the cows with His flute playing and with His lovely face. So much information we found. Now, the main places where Kṛṣṇa herds His cows are Nandala, Jāva, Vṛndāvana, and Govardhana.

And Kṛṣṇa's Goshala is technically in the village of Gāṅgāpura near Nandagāma. And I read that Śrī Rādhā's Goshala is in Baḍoli village near to Varṣāṇā. Baḍoli. Some more nectarian details. Kṛṣṇa has a stick, a flute, a rope, a bugle, and a black blanket for herding cows.

His stick is to show the ways for cows where to go. His flute is used to call them all together and take them back home. His rope is used to play with them and bind them. His bugle, you know, His buffalo horn, our brother, yes, buffalo horn is used to call for lost cows and indicate the direction they should walk in to get home.

And His black blanket, I thought that was interesting. His black blanket is for controlling mad cows, as well as for sleeping on it in the forest when He gets tired herding the cows. Oh, you know, some artists can depict that wonderful pastime.

Kṛṣṇa is taking rest in the afternoon, perhaps after lunch, He's resting on a black blanket. So sometimes, Rādhā and Her Gopi friends, they make an excuse to walk by the places where Kṛṣṇa and His friends are herding cows. They're on their way to sell their milk products in the market, but they go a little, take a little diversion there, and they make sure they walk by where Kṛṣṇa is herding cows so that Rādhā can appreciate Kṛṣṇa's beauty.

However, due to social customs, she's bound to keep her head completely covered when she's around the boys like that. So it's so sweet. What does she do?

It says she gazes through her duppata, like the ladies wear on their heads, she gazes through her duppata into the eyes of Kṛṣṇa's cows, who are always staring at Kṛṣṇa. It's described like gazing upon a beautiful painting, and she sees a reflection of Kṛṣṇa in the eyes of the cows, and in this way she becomes happy.

It's also accustomed, she can't look directly at Kṛṣṇa, so she looks in the eyes of the cows who are staring at Kṛṣṇa, and she sees Kṛṣṇa's reflection. When that's enough for her. Now, there's a beautiful pastime involving Kṛṣṇa's cows.

It's related. It's told by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Sangeeta. Very beautiful book, Maharaja wrote Kṛṣṇa-Sangeeta. And there he takes reference from Rūpa Goswāmī's Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, 2.6, as well as Garbha Saṁhitā, fifth skandha. We hear how after leaving Vṛndāvana for Mathurā, you know, Akrūra came to Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma from Vṛndāvana to Mathurā.

Kṛṣṇa actually came back at one point, it sometimes debated. But in as I quoted, it's described, Kṛṣṇa came back at one point on a golden chariot to meet the Vrajavāsīs. Now, in Kṛṣṇa's absence, how would you say Vṛndāvana had become like a wasteland.

But upon His return, with that quick visit, He instantly transformed Vṛndāvana into a pleasure paradise.

Neither the manicured gardens of heaven, it is described, nor was it cintāmaṇi forests, could compare to the paradise of Braja. And when Kṛṣṇa's chariot appeared on the horizon, out of curiosity, His cows followed it with their eyes. "What is this chariot?

Tell me." And then they saw that it was Kṛṣṇa. And Uddhava?

Actually, how did they discover?

Oh, yeah. When a favorable breeze brought the scent of Kṛṣṇa's body to their nostrils, they once recognized their Gopāla, and they came running. They came running despite the fact that their udders were full, Gopis, their udders were full. Despite that, the cows moved very quickly with their tails and ears raised out of love.

And Kṛṣṇa, seeing them, He lovingly called out to them, "Go mātaḥ!" With so much love.

It's reciprocal. So the cows, they kept replying to Kṛṣṇa as they ran. It's called lowing, lowing again and again, raising a big cloud of dust with their hooves. And again, Kṛṣṇa called out to them, this time with His familiar, "What is it?" He...

He. That's what you're reading scriptures. Kṛṣṇa called to them. He. And when His cows, who heard that sound many times, heard the call that Kṛṣṇa reserved especially for them, the entire herd of cows escaped the control of the cowherd boys, and they ran towards Kṛṣṇa's chariot.

So first, the Gopis try to control their herd. But when they saw two cloud-like figures, it's described, upon the chariot, the cowherd boys stood still, not daring to hope, yet unable to restrain their thoughts. "Kṛṣṇa is back." So, as soon as the cows surrounded the chariot, Kṛṣṇa got off, and He caressed the cows with His hands, as He very affectionately called their names again and again.

He inquired about their welfare, and as they drank His beauty with their eyes, smelled Kṛṣṇa's fragrance with their noses, and licked Him with their tongues, that's what cows do. And of affection, of licking. Then they licked Kṛṣṇa. They love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone's ever been loved before.

So Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh, mothers, have you missed me as much as I have missed you?" His cows replied by trying to embrace Kṛṣṇa with their bodies.

And as they did so, He was back on the chariot. Now, because He had to go throughout the whole of Vṛndāvana, as they did so, the chariot rocked back and forth.

You know, the cows are there. Like the chariot rocked back and forth. And Kṛṣṇa used... He gazed adoringly at their beauty and charm. That's how we should see cows. He gazed adoringly at their beauty and charm. And Kṛṣṇa laughed while He cried, saying, "There were no such cows in Mathurā.

There were no such cows in Dvārakā." Hari Bol!

Thank you so much for cows. Yeah, we love it, isn't it?

We love to go on and on about cows. Kṛṣṇa's favorite animal, and our favorite animal as well, because Kṛṣṇa loves them, we love them, and we protect them. So, thank you. And, um, yeah, we'll be back in a week with another class on cows.

So, until then, Śrī... Kṛṣṇa's cows, He, in this world and the next.