Dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series from the glories of our beloved Śrī Vrindavan. I was just thinking this morning, we've been giving this series of lectures for four years now, almost to the day. Four years, a very nectarean service.

So, once again, we're continuing with our mini-series on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," based on Śrīla Prabhupāda's "Nectar of Devotion," Chapter 26.

Studying the material, it's possible we have a few more lectures in this series, and then we'll move on to something else. For that, I'm thinking of doing a 10-part series on the Gopal deity, that might even be found on Govardhan Hill 500 years ago, known now as Śrīnāthji, and presently worshipped in North Dwaraka in Rajasthan, a very famous deity.

Anyway, today I would like to discuss Krishna's bugle.

Krishna's what?

It says buffalo horn in English. It's a buffalo horn. And like all the items we've spoken about in this series, Krishna's buffalo horn plays a significant role in His *braja-līlā*.

In my research, I learned that Lord Śiva also has a buffalo horn, which plays an important role in his pastimes, but more about that later in the class. So, according to the dictates of not just *śāstra*, not just *śāstra*, the scripture of *Nāṭyaśāstra* by the illustrious Sage Bharata Muni, Krishna's buffalo horn is instrumental, very important in *vācik*, *vācik* meaning a pastime that is performed using dialogue, singing, poetry, etc.

A compendium of the Performing Arts, like drama, music, dance. Some scholars poetically, and I say poetically, refer to it as the fifth Veda, saying it takes words from the Rigveda, from the Sāma Veda, gestures from the Yajurveda, and emotions from the Atharvaveda.

And I was reading that the dramas of our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, like he based those on this particular ancient scripture. Now, in this *Nāṭyaśāstra*, Bharata Muni describes four different types of *nāṭaka*, meaning dramatic actions. Like, there are many dramatic actions.

And the first one he describes is called *āngika*, which means performing a pastime with the expressions of the body, like bodily movement. And the second is *vācik*. Again, *vācik* means performing the pastime with the help of dialogue and singing and poetry, etc.

The third, which is discussed, is *āhārya*. It means, you know, the wearing different colorful clothes or costumes, as well as different paraphernalia, like holding a flute or a bow or a sword, etc. discusses that. And the fourth is *sāttvika*, meaning how to perform drama with emotion, with emotion.

We would say with *bhāva*, with with love. So, regarding *vācik*, we'll just discuss one here. Regarding *vācik*, performing pastimes with dialogue, singing, and poetry, which are all done with one's mouth, we see that Krishna attracts these devotees by His sweet words and by mesmerizing them by His sweet talking.

So, He's employing this technique. Of course, it's all natural for Him. But unlike mortal beings, Krishna can also invoke very deep transcendental devotional sentiments by using His mouth to play musical instruments.

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10.21, there's a summary to that chapter in the beginning where we hear the following: "The Gopis declared, 'To see Lord Krishna playing His flute while taking the cows to pasture is the highest perfection for the eyes.

Hearing the song of Krishna's flute, the peacocks dance and all other creatures become stunned when they see them.

The ears of the cows stand on end as they drink the nectar of His flute song, and their calves are simply, they simply stand stunned. The milk they have been drinking from their mothers is still in their mouths.'" So, there's an example.

Krishna, but another instrument that Krishna plays from His mouth, which also produces profound spiritual emotions in the hearts of those who hear it, is the *būgūl*, or again, the buffalo horn.

The buffalo horn. Before doing this research, I knew nothing about Krishna's buffalo horn, but it's really interesting.

Like all the items that stimulate ecstatic love. So, this *būgūl*, on this buffalo horn, is known by different names such as *śr̥ṅgī*, *bagula*... excuse me. And the personal name of Krishna's buffalo horn is Mandu Ghoṣa.

His buffalo horn. Now, *Nectar of Devotion* describes that this, this Mandu Ghoṣa, it's always highly polished. Krishna's bugle horn is highly polished.

It's circled with gold bands. And in the middle of His buffalo horn, there's a hole. There's a hole. Now, Krishna blows a buffalo horn, not like plays a flute, but He blows a buffalo horn in Vrindavan in several specific ways.

The details, the love is in the details. And you can't play a buffalo horn like a flute. So, there's one hole, and He blows it in specific ways. One is for calling His cows to come back from grazing and come back to the *goshala* in the evening time.

Secondly, I was reading, He uses His buffalo horn to call for lost cows because, you know, we're in the pastimes, we often hear how a cow goes away, and Krishna has to find it, or one of the boys.

So He'll use His buffalo horn to call for lost cows. And thirdly, He uses His buffalo horn to call the *asuras*, *asuras* sent by Kamsa to fight with Him. They're in the area. So, "Come on, come on, and fight." He uses His buffalo horn to call them.

And just before starting the fight with them, Krishna blows His buffalo horn like a signal to begin the fight as well.

This is very important, as well as to invoke *vīra-rasa*. *Rasa* means the *rasa* of heroic or, um, how could you say, brave emotions. He brings that forth with the buffalo horn. And the Chariots say that just as Krishna's flute ignites the loving *śr̥ṅgāra* or the *mādhurya-rasa* in the hearts of His beloved Gopis, so the buffalo horn ignites this *vīra-rasa*, heroic emotions, in the hearts of the cowherd boys.

That's so nectarean. Now, Krishna also uses His buffalo horn, this is really interesting, to distract the mind of Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā when they're trying to catch Rādhā and Krishna together in their pastimes somewhere in the groves of Vrindavan.

In the section of *Vamśagītā*, we learned that when the Vraja Gopis heard the notes of Krishna's flute in the dark of the night, they all forgot their duties and came running to dance in the Rāsa-līlā.

Similarly, on hearing the loud sound of the buffalo horn during the afternoon while in the pasturing grounds of Braja, all the Gopis, all the cowherd boys leave their duties of herding cows and run towards Krishna to play with Him.

Similar pastime, but a different instrument He uses. For the Gopis, it's the flute, and for the boys, it's the buffalo horn. So, in a previous lecture, we described how Krishna's flute plays seven musical notes.

You may remember that's called *sapta-svara-dhāni*, the seven notes in Vedic music. In contrast, Krishna's buffalo horn is not played like a flute.

Again, it's blown like one might blow a trumpet, and it makes three distinct sounds, not seven, but three: a lower sound, a higher sound, and a very loud sound. *Śāstra* says that these three sounds appear in the Vedas. They're called *udātta*, *anudātta*, and *svarita*.

Veda-mantras are chanted in different meters using these three principle types of sounds. For what?

Well, to invoke the demi-gods, or even Krishna, Vishnu, to invoke Krishna at a sacrificial performance.

But in Braja, beloved Vrindavan, when Krishna blows His buffalo horn, it increases everyone's *bhakti*, everyone's devotion for Him.

And therefore, it is listed in, um, *Nectar of Devotion* as a stimulus for ecstatic love. In this regard, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Nectar of Devotion*, Chapter 26, which we're basing these lectures on, he writes as follows regarding these instruments: "There is a metaphorical statement about a Gopi named Tarāvalī.

It is said that Tarāvalī was bitten by the most venomous snake of Krishna's flutes.

Then, in order to neutralize the poisonous effect, Prabhupāda writes, she drank the milk produced by the buffalo horn in the hand of Krishna.

But instead of decreasing the poisonous effect, it increased it a thousand times. The Gopi was thus put into the most miserable, poisoned condition of *prema*." So, there's a very nice pastime. Um, described by the Vaishnava poet Līlā Shyām, whom we often refer to, wherein it's described just how Krishna got His buffalo horn, Mandu Ghoṣa.

How did He get it?

Now, this pastime is similar to one that many devotees are familiar with. We've, we've spoke on this pastime a couple of years ago, where Lord Śiva visits Nandagram to have *darśana* of the baby Krishna.

Remember, Śiva goes to Nandagram to have *darśana* with baby Krishna, but he's turned away by, uh, Mother Yaśodā due to his frightening appearance.

Now, Līlā Shyām's pastime differs in several interesting ways. Same pastime, but there's a little bit different. And this can be explained by the fact that when Krishna comes again and again to this material world, performing the same *prapanca-līlā*, evergreen, ever-fresh pastimes, they may differ slightly each time.

And this is confirmed as the *śāstric* reference. This is confirmed by Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī in his *Bhagavat-sandarbha*, 2.6. *Bhagavat-sandarbha*. He writes, "The pastimes of Krishna appear different, and sometimes these pastimes may even appear very bewildering." It is written, confirming that the pastimes happen again, it gives us a little variety, a little variety.

Also, in the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*, it's described that in different *advents* of Bhagavān Śrī Krishna, excuse me, Bhagavān, of Nṛsiṁha Deva, whose appearance day is coming up very soon, different *advents* of Lord of Nṛsiṁha, instead of appearing from a pillar, sometimes Nṛsiṁha Deva appears from a lotus flower.

Meaning that when it comes time to kill the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, you know, we always hear how He appears from a pillar, but the Purāṇa describes that at that moment, sometimes it comes from a lotus flower. I was really surprised when I read that in the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*.

I read also, sometimes He appears as a cat, and at other times Nṛsiṁha Deva just walks into town and then fights and kills. So, there's another example from the *Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa*. So, Līlā Shyām shares with us in his poem called *Yogi-līlā*, meaning the pastime of the yogi, in this case, Lord Śiva, how Krishna got His buffalo horn without hurting a buffalo.

We think of a horn, so without hurting a buffalo. So, of course, in Vedic culture, the horns were used, the skin of an animal was used. One time I heard Prabhupāda say, "Leather is a first-class substance, but only when the animal dies a natural death that it can be used." So, one time, Lord Śiva came to Vrindavan to take *darśana* of baby Krishna.

This is only natural because, in the Twelfth, Thirteenth, Sixteenth [Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam], it's described that Lord Śiva is Krishna's greatest devotee.

Famous verse: "Just as the Ganga is the greatest of all rivers, Uttama is Supreme amongst deities, and Lord Śambhu (Śiva) the greatest of all Vaisnavas, so Śrīman-Bhāgavatam is the greatest of all glories." The king of scriptures. So, there, and it's mentioned that Lord Śiva is the, uh, the greatest of devotees.

One time, I asked my dear Godbrother Swami a question. I said, "You know, we hear in the *Bhāgavatam* that Lord Śiva is the greatest of devotees, but we also know that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the greatest of devotees because of her, um, her pure devotion.

So, how do we understand this?" So, Mahārāja kind of chuckled and he smiled.

He said, "Yes, in the material world, Lord Śiva is the greatest devotee. But in the spiritual world, [someone else] is the greatest devotee." I thought that was a good answer. So, Līlā Shyām describes that when Lord Śiva arrived in Braja, he took rest under the shade of a banyan tree.

And after that, he came to the, to the palace of Mahārāja Nanda, begging for alms at the palace door. So, when the maidservant in the palace opened the door, Lord Śiva quickly said, "Bhikṣe de," meaning, "Oh mother, please give me alms." But upon seeing snakes crawling all over the body of this beggar, you know, Lord Śiva, the maidservant screams, and then she fell on the ground unconscious.

And Līlā Shyām goes on to say, hearing that the commotion, other maidservants came running, and arriving at the scene, they all froze in fear. For before them was a terrifying personality, covered in ash, with wild eyes, lips blue like the poisonous clouds of the month of Bhādra.

I like that one. Lips blue like the poisonous clouds of the month of Bhādra, completely covered by snakes, and a belly covered with the skin of a tiger. His abdomen was thin, I'm trying to remember, like the trunk of an elephant, and his chest was as wide as a male lion's chest.

His thighs were as big as banana tree trunks, and he had long dreadlocks dripping with *Ganga-jal*, with Ganga's water. And in one hand, he carried a *kamaṇḍalu* pot, like you see soldiers carry that pot, and in the other, he was holding a trident. *Triśūla*, *triśūla* means like a trident.

And a bow with arrows was hanging from one shoulder, and a cloth for begging, *madakari*, was on the other shoulder. And rudraksha beads hung around his neck, and his head was decorated with flowers and, what did they say, colorful pigments.

His waist was bound by *mūñja* grass thread, *mūñja* grass thread. And a buffalo horn, I told you we'd speak about Śiva and his buffalo horn, and a buffalo horn was strapped to his waist. And his feet were decorated with heavy copper ankle bells.

This is what these girls saw. Composing themselves, they asked, "O sage, you appear to be from the planet of the Buddhas. [unintelligible] Anyway, please tell us how we can serve you." So, Lord Śiva, it is heavy, but it's described, sweet voice replied, "Oh fortunate of all goddesses of Fortune in the three worlds, your servants in the courtyard of Mahārāja Nanda, please allow me to have *darśana* of baby Krishna." Now, hearing this, these Gopi maidservants were shocked.

And after recovering, they ran and told Mother Yaśodā of this strange, mysterious guest's request. So, coming to the entrance of the palace, and also seeing this frightening form of Lord Śiva, Mother Yaśodā said, "Oh, ferocious-looking *sadhu*, you have asked to see my son, the darling of Vrindavan, the darling of Vrindavan.

Surely you are exalted, but I'm confused. Are you the sage Durvāsā disguised as an old sage who has come to curse us?

Or are you an *asura* sent by King Kamsa to kill my son?

Or is this all an illusion of my senses?

Please ask me something other than the *darśana* of my son." So, Lord Śiva said, "Mother, I have a rule that I can only accept five alms while begging at any time and any place. So, please, I implore you, show me your son for five blinkings of my eyes, for five blinks of my eyes.

That's all I request." Now, Mother Yaśodā replied, "Oh, Baba, please be merciful upon me. I can give you five handfuls of emeralds, five handfuls of rubies, five handfuls of diamonds, five handfuls of sapphires, pearls, corals, and gold, or whatever else you want, but not *darśana* of my son.

He would be terrified upon seeing you." So, Lord Śiva said, "Oh, highly fortunate mother, I am separated from my life-heir, your son, who was the very source of my life, and who, in fact, is the source of everyone's life.

Know for certain that He is the only one who can return my life-heir to me." Wow. So, Mother Yaśodā said, "Oh, master, I do not know what to say, but I cannot give you what you want. Just a few days ago, Kamsa sent Pūtanā to kill my beloved son.

I cannot risk it again. So please ask something else, or come at another time with different desires than this. Please forgive me." And then Mother Yaśodā left to attend to her little son in the palace. Now, with that, Lord Śiva sat down on the doorsteps of the palace of Mahārāja Nanda, saying to the gatekeepers that he wouldn't go until he had *darśana* of Bālakṛṣṇa, meaning baby Krishna, Bālakṛṣṇa.

A few minutes passed, and then he started singing *bhajans* glorifying Lord Krishna.

Now, with that, suddenly inside the palace, Bālakṛṣṇa, baby Krishna, started crying.

And Mother, Līlā Shyām describes, she tried in various ways to calm him down. Nothing worked. She even tried to feed him her breast milk, but he even refused that. So, exasperated, Mother Yaśodā turned to her maidservants and asked them, "What, what could be done?" So, one Gopi maidservant spoke up and said, "Dear Mother Yaśodā, maybe Krishna is like this because someone somewhere at some time looked upon Him with evil eyes.

Evil eyes." So, Mother Yaśodā said, "Yes, I was thinking the same. Perhaps it happened when we were in the market last week. But who can remove such a curse?" So, the maidservant said, "I have heard that only a *sadhu* can remove the curse of an evil eye." So, Mother Yaśodā, she closed her eyes and she thought for a moment and said, "That is so.

Let us take Him to the Baba who came to our palace a little while ago to see my son. Please go find Him and call Him back." So, the maidservant replied, "My dear Queen, he is still sitting stubbornly outside the door of the palace." So, Mother Yaśodā very quickly, she took Krishna, it's described, covered in a gold-threaded, red, shiny silk cloth, and presenting Him to the Baba, to, we know, Lord Śiva, she said, "Bhava, I'm desperate.

Someone has cast an evil eye upon my child, and we are told that only a revered *sadhu* such as yourself can counter the curse. Please, I beg you, help us." So, gazing upon baby Krishna, you know, of course, Śiva gets the *darśana*.

Gazing upon baby Krishna, Śiva started shivering in ecstasy, and jumping up, he started singing and dancing very wildly in front of baby Krishna.

And suddenly, seeing the dancing of Lord Śiva, Krishna stopped crying, and He started laughing.

And all this went on for some time, as Lord Śiva would interrupt his dancing repeatedly to offer *baśanases*, to both Mother and Krishna.

He was dancing wildly, but he'd stop and offer *baśanases* from time to time. So, then somewhat confused, Mother Yaśodā asked, "Hey Baba, stop dancing like Lord Śiva at the end of creation, and just remove the evil eyes somebody cast upon my son." So, with that, Lord Śiva, actually Śiva means auspicious, with that Lord Śiva touched the lotus feet of Krishna, then he sprinkled Ganga water from his dreadlocks on Krishna's body like an *abhishēka*.

Then he offered Chandan to Krishna's lotus feet.

Then, with a fixed attention and in a mood of deep meditation, he slowly fanned Krishna with the deer skin he was wearing.

Now, I was reading the other day, actually, that fanning someone with the skin of a deer, who has died a natural death, is known as *Jaḍā*, means, well, *Jaḍā* is the very means of removing the curse of an evil eye.

It's the means by which you remove the curse of an evil eye. You wave the deerskin, you fan like that. Vedic culture is so interesting, I just love it. So, with that, Lord Śiva stood tall and ceremoniously and loudly, with great force, he blew his buffalo horn to protect Krishna. Śiva, I think, Krishna smiled.

And listening to the sound of Lord Śiva's buffalo horn, he started crying again. So, becoming worried, Mother Yaśodā bent down and she said, "Lala, what happened?

You're crying again." So, Krishna, still crying, he pointed his finger toward Lord Śiva's buffalo horn and he said, "Ma, I want His *śr̥ṅgī*." Remember, *śr̥ṅgī* is another name for a buffalo horn. "Ma, I want His *śr̥ṅgī*," meaning Lord Śiva's buffalo horn.

So, hearing that, Mother Yaśodā said to Lord Śiva, "Dear most Baba, my illustrious son is asking for your buffalo horn. Please be hot, be kind and give it to him. After all, it's simply a *bālahata*." *Bālahata* in Sanskrit means the desire of a baby.

The desire of a baby. So, at that point, Lord Śiva smiled broadly and very humbly offered his buffalo horn to baby Krishna.

Who, upon receiving it, gazed fondly at his beloved devotee, Lord Śiva. Hare Krishna.

So, this is the story, the pastime of how Krishna got His famous buffalo horn, which we described how He uses it in Vrindavan, called Mandu Ghoṣa, from Lord Śiva.

Haribol. So, Prabhus, I'm in Mayapur right now. I just came to Mayapur. I'll be here for a whole month doing more research for this upcoming classes on the Gopal deity, Śrīnāthji. But we'll finish today with a very nice quote from Śrīla Prabhupāda.

It's from *Nectar of Devotion*, this time, Chapter Four. Our beloved spiritual master writes, "As far as Krishna's friends in Vrindavan are concerned, they become greatly distressed when they cannot see Krishna even for a moment.

There is the following prayer by a devotee about Krishna's friends in Vrindavan: 'All glories to Krishna's associates, His friends who are just like Krishna in their age, qualities, pastimes, dress, and beauty.

They are accustomed to playing on their flutes made of palm leaves, and they all have buffalo horn bugles, or *mundits*, just like Krishna's, with jewels such as emeralds and with gold and coral.

They are always jubilant, like Krishna.

May these glorious companions of Krishna always protect us.'" Krishna has a buffalo horn, Śiva has a buffalo horn, and all the cowherd boys have buffalo horns.

So, thank you everyone. I hope you enjoyed and learned from this lecture, and that it's acted as some stimulus for increasing your love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His eternal consort Rādhā and all His friends and servants in Vrindavan.

Hare Krishna.

See you next week.