""Welcome back, once again, to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved, the friend of Inda, Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Kṛṣṇa-bhūtala-śrīmatī Bhaktivedānta Swāmīnīti. So, we are continuing with our mini-series, "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 21. In this mini-series, we have covered a number of items mentioned in Chapter 26 of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s *Nectar of Devotion* which can stimulate our love for Kṛṣṇa. We have actually been speaking extensively about all of them so that we can concentrate and fix our minds on these items because of their direct connection to Kṛṣṇa; they are often called *tadīya*, that which is in relationship to Kṛṣṇa.

We are not like the impersonalists who, through their meditation, attempt to free their minds of all thoughts in an attempt to eventually merge into the Brahman. No, we fill our minds with all things connected to Kṛṣṇa. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 3.28.28 says, and our quote here: "The devotee should concentrate on the nice garland on the neck of the Lord, which is always surrounded by bumblebees with their nice buzzing sound. And one should meditate upon the pearl necklace on the Lord's neck, which is considered to represent the pure living entities who are always engaged in His service."

In this regard, there are actually many such items for meditation. In *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.1.302, my beloved Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī gives a summary list of things which he says can help to awaken our love for the Lord. He writes: "Kṛṣṇa’s smile, the fragrance of His transcendental body, His flute, bugle, ankle bells, and conch shell, the marks on His feet, His place of residence, His favorite plant, Tulasī, His devotees, and the observance of fasts and vows connected to His devotion—all awaken the symptoms of ecstatic love."

Now, out of all of those, I have chosen today to speak about Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells. Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells, because according to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Antya 17.48, they are amongst the most important items connected to Kṛṣṇa. "Only the most fortunate can hear these four nectarean sounds: Kṛṣṇa’s words, the tinkling of His ankle bells and bangles, His voice, and the vibration of His flute. If one does not hear these sounds, his ears are as useless as small conch shells with holes." Wow. Actually, 17.43 goes so far as to say that once having heard the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells, one could not tolerate hearing anything else. Having once heard the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells, one cannot tolerate hearing anything else. 

"The tinkling of Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells surpasses the songs of even the swan and crane, and the sound of His bangles puts the singing of the cātaka bird to shame. Having allowed these sounds to enter the ears even once, one cannot tolerate hearing anything else."

I was thinking that while I have read that, proof that Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells are instrumental in Kṛṣṇa’s most confidential pastimes is stated again in *Nectar of Devotion*—because Prabhupāda gave us everything—as follows: A certain gopī once stated to her friend, "My dear friend, when I heard the sound of the leg bells of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I immediately started to go out of the house to see Him, but most regrettably, my superiors were present just before me at that time, and I could not go out." So here is a Vraja-vāsī, the purest of all devotees, and she heard Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells, and it just stimulated her love for Kṛṣṇa. She tried to go to the house, but she couldn't. So, Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells stand out as particularly important in His līlās, in His pastimes.

In śāstra, His two ankle bells are referred to as *haṁsa-gañjana*. That’s what they are called, *haṁsa-gañjana*. It is said that the tinkling sounds of these ornaments enchant the deer that are the minds of the dear-like gopīs. The tinkling sounds of these ornaments enchant the deer that are the minds of the dear-like gopīs. Again, *Nectar of Devotion*. So, ankle bells are very important in Kṛṣṇa’s *tadīya* and His paraphernalia. 

Of course, ultimately, all of Kṛṣṇa’s paraphernalia are important, and just hearing the names of Kṛṣṇa’s paraphernalia is enough to wake us up from our sleeping condition. For example, Kṛṣṇa’s two armlets are called *raṅgada*; the two bracelets that He wears are called *karāṅgada*. The signet ring He wears is called *ratna-mukhī*. Such sweet sounds. His yellow garments are called *suśobhana*. Kṛṣṇa’s pearl necklace, I discovered, is called *tārāvalī*, and His jeweled necklace is called *taḍit-prabhā*. You are dressing Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world; you say, "Please hand me the *taḍit-prabhā*." The locket He wears on His chest is called *hr̥dayābharaṇa*, and I was reading that within it is a picture of His beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kṛṣṇa’s jewel, very famous jewel, is called, of course, *Kaustubha*, and in the Kāliya Lake, the wives of the Kāliya serpent gave this jewel to the Lord with their own hands—that’s where He got it, the *Kaustubha*. 

Kṛṣṇa’s favorite shark-shaped earrings are called *ratira-ghaṭita-daivata*, and His crown is called *ratnapātra*, and His crest jewel is called *cāmara-ḍamarī* (be a nice name for someone, *cāmara-ḍamarī*). Kṛṣṇa’s peacock feather crown is called *navaratna-vidhumba* (navaratna-vidhumba), and His guñjā necklace—He wears those favorite seeds—but in Vṛndāvana, the guñjā necklace is called *rāgāvalī*, and His tilaka marking is called *mohana-dṛṣṭa-mohana*. And Kṛṣṇa’s garland of forest flowers and leaves, which actually extend, which are five colors and extend down to His feet, is called *Vaijayantī*, and it is ever-fresh. 

Now, we should also include Kṛṣṇa’s beloved eternal consort. Her jewel necklace is called *hāri-mohana*; her jeweled earrings are called *rocana*; and the pearl decorating her nose is called *prabhākari*. The locket which contains a picture of Kṛṣṇa that she wears is called *madana*, and her *cintāmaṇi* jewel is known... well, that’s the name, but it also has another name, that jewel she wears. And the auspicious jewel that she wears around her neck is called *ratna-mañjarī* because, it is described, it eclipses the simultaneous rising of the sun and moon with its splendor. It eclipses that rising, simultaneous rising of the sun and the moon; it’s so beautiful, it eclipses that with its splendor. Rādhārāṇī’s anklets are called *cātaka-rava*. It is described because their tinkling sounds resemble the warbling of cātaka birds—remember we gave a class on the cātaka birds. Her bracelets are called *maṇikara-bhūṣaṇa*. Such beautiful sound, *maṇikara-bhūṣaṇa*. And her signet ring—Kṛṣṇa has one, she has one—is called *vipakṣa-mardini*, and she wears a sash; her sash is called *kañcī*. 

And her ankle bells—she also wears ankle bells which, it is described, stun Lord Kṛṣṇa with their tinkling sounds—are called *ratna-gopura*. Her garments are called *meghāmbara*. It is described her upper garment is red like a ruby and it’s the favorite of Kṛṣṇa, and Rādhārāṇī’s lower garment is the color of a blue cloud, and that’s her favorite because blue reminds her of Kṛṣṇa. Rādhārāṇī has a jeweled mirror; it is called *sudarpana*, which means that which removes the moon-pride. A few more: her golden stick for applying mascara is called *narmadā*. She has a jeweled comb—excuse me, a jeweled comb—because a lot of intricate words here; her jeweled comb is called *cūḍā-ratna*. And her private flower garden, she has a private flower garden; it is called *kandarpakūlī*. Wow, so much nectarean detail. Love is in the details! Well, there you go. You can meditate on those; just hearing those sounds brings joy to the heart of even an aspiring devotee.

But back to the ankle bells. Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells—that’s the subject of the day. So, just to stress again how important they are, I would actually like to share a pastime. Śrīla Prabhupāda—everything Prabhupāda did on this earth planet was a pastime. I remember when Śrīla Prabhupāda installed our beloved Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Pārthasārathi in our Paris Temple in France in 1973, and we were all there. It was... you could say packed up tight, but we would use that term sometimes when many devotees are in a room. It wasn't a big temple room, but we were all packed up tight. And after the bathing ceremony, where, you know, the abhiṣeka—we installed the deities and chanted mantras, etc.—after the bathing ceremony, after the installation, Prabhupāda decided to go for a short walk with some of his disciples while the pujārīs dressed beautiful Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa for the first time behind the curtain on the altar. So I wasn't present on that walk; I stayed back and was helping, you know, in some small ways. But when he came back from the walk, I was standing there and I saw that when the curtain opened, Śrīla Prabhupāda stood looking at the deities for a very long time. He is just staring at them; it was mystical. For a long time, and the kīrtana was roaring—the kīrtana was roaring. So then Prabhupāda turned and he walked across the temple room to his very beautiful vyāsāsana, and as he was passing by, all of us could see there were tears streaming down his face. And then, as he sat on the vyāsāsana, he used the edge of his dhotī to dry his eyes, and then he started this lecture by saying the following. I will always remember; he said, "Meditation on the Lord begins from His lotus feet. Therefore, I am inquiring: why are there no ankle bells on the deity’s feet?" Meditation on the Lord, he said, begins from His lotus feet. Therefore, I am inquiring: why are there no ankle bells on the deity’s feet, on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s feet? To show the importance of ankle bells in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, deity form. That’s the pastime; He comes to the Earth and He remains here, and as the ācārya, Prabhupāda said, *arcā-vigraha* means the mercy incarnation of the Lord. Kṛṣṇa comes, and Kṛṣṇa goes, but in His deity form, He stays. So when Prabhupāda said that about the ankle bells, that had a profound effect on all of us, for we realized how in his love for the Lord, Prabhupāda was so attentive to all details. Again, love is in the details. So, nice pastime—ankle bells, modern-day pastime with ankle bells. 

I actually remember that moment each time I see the Lord’s lotus feet when I visit an ISKCON temple or any temple in India. When I see the feet, what Prabhupāda said comes right back to my mind, to my heart. Now, in preparing this lecture, I came across a beautiful part of Kṛṣṇa’s Govardhana-līlā, that pastime where Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells played a very prominent role. And that is that as Kṛṣṇa was holding up Girirāja to protect all the inhabitants from the fearful torrents of rain released by Indra, the King of Heaven, the residents of Vraja stood transfixed upon gazing upon His transcendental form, upon Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form holding up Girirāja. And it’s so nice, so sweet. At one point, one of the vrajabāsīs broke the silence, because they were just gazing transfixed by Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful form holding up Govardhana Hill. This vrajabāsī, he broke the silence, saying the following: "Look, since Kṛṣṇa stands emotionless, His ankle bells have become silent, like dumb persons. The sound of these ornaments crushes all pride, solves our problems, and diffuses all dangers. Although awake, these anklets appear to be a pair of white swans sleeping before a host of blue lotus flowers. These ankle bells must now be absorbed like self-realized yogīs in silent meditation upon Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. But we did see them move slightly, their meditation broken as Kṛṣṇa lifted Govardhana Hill." Hearing that soft tinkling sound, the demigods came to praise and worship Kṛṣṇa’s anklets, but the bells again became motionless and fell silent, embarrassed by all the attention. Wow. Why read or hear anything else? And again, this focuses our mind on the Lord. His paraphernalia focuses our mind on the Lord, which is intimately connected to Him. And by hearing, again and again and again, hopefully this will awaken that dormant love we have with the Divine Couple. *Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ* brings Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So at this point, I’d like to share with you a beautiful pastime regarding Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s ankle bells. So, one time in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa made a plan to meet at Govardhana Hill, near Govardhana Hill. Many of you have seen that Surabhi-kuṇḍa when you do parikramā around Girirāja. Now, to avoid attracting attention, the plan was that Kṛṣṇa would come alone from the south, and Śrī Rādhā, with one maidservant—so as not to attract too much attention—would come from the north, and they would meet at Surabhi-kuṇḍa. This was all planned in the morning by whoever planned all the day’s activities in Vṛndāvana every morning. Now, according to the ācāryas, Kṛṣṇa arrived at the appointed time, but Rādhikā was not there. So He thought, "Never mind, ladies are often late." But as time went on, it turned out that Rādhā was very late, very late. And at first, Kṛṣṇa, it was a little impatient, but as time went by, He became concerned, I would just say, for Rādhārāṇī’s safety, for a rumor, a vicious rumor, had reached Kṛṣṇa that Kaṁsa had heard of Rādhārāṇī’s breathtaking beauty and had been making plans to kidnap her and take her to Mathurā. So Kṛṣṇa thought, "I could not wait any longer; I must look for my Rādhā," and so He set out in the northern direction. 

However, Rādhārāṇī was not actually late because of Kaṁsa or any danger. The śāstra says rather she had taken a detour through the forest of Vilāsa-vana, the forest of pastimes. She had taken a deviation through the forest of Vilāsa-vana. Why? To collect some flowers for Kṛṣṇa. And while doing so, she had lost one of her ankle bells off one of her feet, her lotus feet. And after searching everywhere in Vilāsa-vana, she said to her friend, "I am sure I lost it somewhere here, somewhere amongst these trees and bushes, but where, I do not know. Where, I do not know." 

So now, we know Rādhā is a Queen, and therefore she has many ankle bells, many ankle bells, and she wouldn’t ordinarily feel the loss of one. But she was particularly fond of this ankle bell because Kṛṣṇa had given it to her at a very special moment. I was reading it was a delicate golden chain with studded jewels, and it had tiny golden bells hanging from it. So Rādhā was very determined to find that anklet, and at one point she called out to it by name. I remember the name; we were reading the name of her ankle bell. She called out, "Ratna-gopura! Oh, Ratna-gopura, where are you?" She heard no reply. How can ankle bells reply? Well, once again, everything in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma is fully conscious and facilitating the *mādhurya-līlā* of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. If you call out, "Ratna-gopura, Ratna-gopura, where are you?" but there was no reply. 

So just at that moment, Kṛṣṇa happened to be walking along a road nearby, and as He passed Vilāsa-vana, He heard a woman’s voice coming from the forest: "Ratna-gopura! Ratna-gopura, where are you?" So He thought, "I think that must be Rādhārāṇī’s voice," and He turned and He ran into the forest where He found Śrī Rādhā and her maidservant intensely searching the woods. It’s described their eyes fixed on the ground—just with your mind’s eye, just think like that—their eyes were fixed to the ground looking for that anklet. In fact, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was so absorbed in her search that she didn’t notice Kṛṣṇa until she came upon His two bluish feet. At that point, she looked up and said happily, "Oh, Śyāma, I’m so happy You’ve come." 

So Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear Rādhā, what are You searching for?" So she answered, "My dear One, I’ve lost one of my favorite ankle bells, the one that You gave me at that special time, and I’m determined to find it." So Kṛṣṇa, you know, He looked left and He looked right, and then He looked back at Rādhā and He said, "It doesn’t seem to be here, so let’s go now to Surabhi-kuṇḍa as we planned. Later, we’ll have another anklet made to replace this lost one." But Rādhārāṇī wasn’t going to go for that idea. She replied, "Absolutely not, Kṛṣṇa. I will not leave my dear anklet alone in these woods. Because it is perfectly conscious, I will not leave my dear anklet alone in these woods." 

So Kṛṣṇa tried again, but "Rādhā, let’s look for it another time." But when Rādhārāṇī frowned, Kṛṣṇa got nervous, because He didn’t want her to go into *māna*, into anger. So He surrendered, and He said, "Okay, I hope You find it." So it’s very sweet. He took Śrī Rādhā’s hand, and side by side they searched the forest floor. They looked under bushes and the trees and the cintāmaṇi dust in Vṛndāvana, you could... I can imagine around the roots of trees, but with no success. Simply could not find that anklet. 

So Śrī Rādhā eventually let go of Kṛṣṇa’s hand and, pointing, she said some distance away, she said, "You look in that flower garden over by the lake." Kṛṣṇa is like, "What? Way over there?" And Rādhā said, "I’ll look here with my maidservant, and together we’ll search the path also one more time." But Kṛṣṇa was getting really impatient; He wanted this, I could just say, this lost ankle bell situation to come to a conclusion. So while He was searching this flower garden—which I couldn’t imagine is like so far away—but she was so determined, while He was searching this flower garden by a lake called Vilāsa-kuṇḍa (the beautiful name, by Vilāsa-kuṇḍa), He came upon a beautiful desire vine. Now we’ve heard of desire trees, but we often hear how the trees also have vines going around them, producing beautiful fruits and flowers, etc. So He came upon a desire vine—it means like a *kalpa-latā*, you can pray for anything you want to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Apparently, you can also make the same request to desire vines, Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma ki jaya! And this desire vine had many multicolored flowers on it, and it was extremely aromatic. The śāstra says extremely aromatic. 

So He cut off a piece of that vine, and what did He do? He made it into a flower anklet, flower anklet—like sometimes we see people, they wear flower crowns—so He made a flower anklet. Then He called out, "Hey, Rādhārāṇī, my beloved, look at this!" And He ran over to where Rādhārāṇī was, and He bowed down to her sacred lotus feet, and He tied it around her ankle. Now Śrī Rādhā looked down, expecting to see her favorite anklet, but instead she saw a floral substitute—the best way I can put it, a floral substitute—and she was completely unimpressed. Completely unimpressed! So she chastised Kṛṣṇa—Rādhārāṇī, she chastised Kṛṣṇa, saying, "Why didn't You look for my precious jewelry instead of playing with flowers, Kṛṣṇa? Why didn't You look for my precious jewelry instead of playing with flowers?" 

So Kṛṣṇa went back to the lake where she told Him to look in that area, and He thought, "She’s so absorbed in that anklet; the entire day is going to be lost. I have to think of a better plan." So Kṛṣṇa, the master of all mystic powers, He took His flute, His vaṁśī, from His belt, and He dug the ground with it. He dug the ground with His flute, and as He did so, He prayed, "Hare Kṛṣṇa," He prayed, "My dear Mother Earth, please return my beloved’s lost ankle bells at once." Kind of a prayer and kind of a demand. And amazingly, as Kṛṣṇa said this, the hole He had dug with His flute suddenly became filled with limitless, unlimited amounts of ankle bell bracelets. Just try to imagine that. Some of which were identical to the one Rādhārāṇī had lost, and other ankle bracelets, anklets, were even more beautiful and more opulent. 

So now Kṛṣṇa called out, "Hey, Rādhā! Hey, Rādhā! I found it! I found the anklet! It’s over here!" So immediately, Śrī Rādhā and her friend rushed over to where Kṛṣṇa was kneeling, and when they looked at the ground, both of their mouths dropped open. One ācārya describes the scene, and I quote that illustrious ācārya: "As a greedy king would revel in his treasure chest of royal jewels, Kṛṣṇa was running His fingers through heaps of ankle bells in the ground, each one more dazzling and ornate than the one before." She was speechless. So Kṛṣṇa, not willing to take any risks, He dropped all the anklets in His hands—that were in His hands—onto the ground, and He picked up one that perfectly matched Rādhā’s lost ankle bracelet. He had so many, He dropped them all, then there’s the one that resembles the one she lost perfectly. Then He said loudly, "This is it! Here it is!" 

So Rādhā, she took the ankle bells from Kṛṣṇa’s hand and she asked Kṛṣṇa, "Where did all the other ones come from? Like, we were looking for one, now there’s like millions." So Kṛṣṇa smiled and He replied something wonderful. He said, "My dear Rādhā, by the constant touch of Your lotus foot, the lost anklet became a cintāmaṇi gem that transformed the earth it touched into many millions of ankle bells, many millions of ankle bells." Then He said, in a joking way, "Dearest, if You don’t put it on at once, then the whole of Vṛndāvana will be paved with ankle bells. Hurry up!" 

So Rādhārāṇī has it described, she smiled for the first time that day, and gracefully put her lotus foot forward and said, "Then You had better secure it on my foot Yourself, Kṛṣṇa, so it doesn’t fall off again." Such sweet pastimes. So Kṛṣṇa took the anklet from Rādhārāṇī and He carefully fastened it around her ankle, it’s described, taking as much time as He possibly could. 

Now, some Vaiṣṇavas say that many anklets with tiny golden bells can still be found on the banks of that Vilāsa-kuṇḍa in that particular forest at Vilāsa-vana. But they also say that such anklets can only be found by those who have unflinching and deep faith in the Divine Couple. Remnants of all those beautiful golden ankle bells are still there, but one has to have unflinching and deep faith in the Divine Couple to find them. And how to achieve that faith and love? The śāstra says, and I quote them: "All things lost are easily found in Vilāsa-vana. There, even souls who have lost their eternal identities as servants of Kṛṣṇa can find them, by the grace of this forest and the holy names of Kṛṣṇa: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. By chanting this Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, we can discover one day what is our eternal identity as servants of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and then one day join them in the spiritual world in that eternal identity as their servants in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma." 

So we’re finished today, trying to finish, we’re finished today with a beautiful prayer by Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī in his book *Stavamālā*. This is 6.25, short but very sweet and pertinent, and I quote: "If one decorates his body with the dust from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, then it will be very easy for him to attain Lord Giridhārī. I congratulate such a great soul who takes shelter of Rādhikā’s lotus feet, and I say to him: 'Well done, bravo, excellent.'" I’m going to say that one more time. Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī’s writing: "If one decorates his body with the dust from the feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, then it will be very easy for him to attain Lord Giridhārī. I congratulate such a great soul who takes shelter of Rādhikā’s lotus feet, and I say to him: 'Well done, bravo, excellent.'" Hare Kṛṣṇa. We’ll finish there with those words of Goswāmī ringing within our hearts. Thank you, thank you, thank you. Be back on next Friday; I’m back in Vṛndāvana again, so I’ll have time for some research.""