Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees, and welcome back once again to our ongoing lecture series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. But first, Oṁ Viṣṇu Kṛṣṇa Namaḥ. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Also, I’d like to offer my Guru Mahārāja another very beautiful prayer. I offer my obeisances to my spiritual master, who gave me beautiful, effulgent, transcendental knowledge, the beautiful form of a devotee, and who offered me his shelter. In one of his hands he is holding my hand, and with his other hand he is holding the lamp of knowledge, which helps me to cross over the dark ocean of the material world. Śāstra says my Guru deserves the greatest respect because only he can rescue one in the blinking of an eye. I bow down to him again and again and again. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, we are continuing with our miniseries on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be part 99. In this part of the miniseries, as you know, we’ve been discussing the transcendental qualities of Lord Kṛṣṇa that, in particular, distinguish Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa. In *The Nectar of Devotion*—the scripture *The Nectar of Devotion*, which is actually a summary study of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*—Rūpa Gosvāmī lists these four transcendental qualities as follows:

1. Kṛṣṇa is the performer of wonderful varieties of pastimes, especially His childhood pastimes, which we discussed.
2. He is always surrounded by devotees endowed with a wonderful love of Godhead.
3. He can attract living entities from all over the universe by simply playing on His flute.
4. He has a wonderful excellence of beauty which cannot be rivaled anywhere in the creation.

Now, in the original *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī lists these four qualities in a very poetic way. He does so in the Southern section, in the first wave. He writes a little differently—same four qualities, but very poetically. He writes:

*   First of all, Kṛṣṇa is a wave-filled ocean of the most astonishing display of *līlā*, or pastimes.
*   Number two, He is surrounded by loving associates decorated with incomparably sweet *prema*.
*   Number three, He plays sweet notes on His flute which attract the minds of all in the three worlds.
*   And number four, He astonishes all moving and non-moving entities with the beauty of His form, to which there’s no equal or superior.

Just very poetic. So today we’ll move on to the second of such qualities, namely, Kṛṣṇa surrounded by loving associates decorated with incomparably sweet *prema*. *Prema* meaning love. In his commentary on *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, our great ācārya, he writes that this incomparable *prema*, or love, possessed by the devotees who surround Kṛṣṇa is called *prema-priyādhyām*. And the deeper meaning of *prema-priyādhyām* is given to us by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura as follows: He says, *atulām-viśvamahā-bhāva-prema-maṇḍala-bhakto-yaḥ-saḥ*. Very beautiful Sanskrit. "He who has a group of eternal associates who are extremely loving and decorated with unprecedented *prema*, all the way up to the level of *mahābhāva*." That’s the description of that type of love. He who has a group of eternal associates who are extremely loving and decorated with unprecedented *prema*, all the way up to the level of *mahābhāva*—the deeper definition.

Now, in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.1, verse 21, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī gives us an example of the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees because sometimes we need examples. We have the philosophy, but we need to see that philosophy inherent in the characteristics of devotees. So he quotes—seeing the sweetness, how to see the sweetness in devotees—he quotes a verse from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, 31st chapter, verse 15. He writes about Kṛṣṇa: "When You go off to the forest during the day, a tiny fraction of a second becomes like a millennium for us because we cannot see You. And even when we can eagerly look upon Your beautiful face, so lovely with its adornment of curly locks, our pleasure is hindered by our eyelids, which were fashioned by the foolish creator."

So just how is this an example of the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees? Well, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī explains in his commentary that this example shows sweetness in the form of the eagerness of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees. So eagerness is unheard of in devotees of other incarnations. The *gopīs* are hankering so much to be with Kṛṣṇa that when they’re separated from Kṛṣṇa, one moment feels like a million years. So this is the characteristic of this sweetness.

Now, an interesting point here is that in that verse, the *gopīs* are calling the creator—meaning the secondary creator, Lord Brahmā (this universe ultimately is created by God, but He gives the creation the ability to create to His devotee, Lord Brahmā)—so the *gopīs* are calling Brahmā, who created everything in this universe, "foolish." Why? Because the blinking of their eyelids causes an obstacle in their viewing of Kṛṣṇa. In other words, they are just absorbed in the *sādhanā* of meditating on the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa. Such as His form—it is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss—and that form of Kṛṣṇa never ages beyond 16 years of age. Although He is the original person, He remains very beautiful. And because of their *prema*, because of their love for Him, they want to meditate on Him perpetually. Sometimes they have to blink their eyes, and for a moment they can’t see Him, so they’re cursing Lord Brahmā: "Brahmā, what have you done? You’ve created eyelids that blink for a moment so our meditation on Kṛṣṇa is disturbed." This is *bhakti*.

Now, further research reveals that this is actually a characteristic of the stage of *prema*-love called *rūḍha-mahābhāva*. This is all the science of love; it’s called *rūḍha-mahābhāva*. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has defined many characteristics of *rūḍha-mahābhāva* in his book *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*, chapter 14, verses 161 to 162. And the first characteristic is *nimeṣa-asahayatā*. *Nimeṣa-asahayatā*—this is the inability to tolerate the blinking of the eyes. This is a sign of *prema*, that one cannot tolerate, "I have to close my eyes for a moment and I can't see Kṛṣṇa." And this shows that the *gopīs* were experiencing this stage of *rūḍha-mahābhāva* when they spoke that verse. We don’t just philosophically accept them as great devotees; we can see their characteristics in that way. They’re so upset with Brahmā. So the ācāryas say this is a brilliant example of the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees. Love should be sweet, so there is sweetness in their anxiety—"I’m blinking, and for a moment I can’t see my Beloved." Like that.

Another example of the superiority and the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees is given by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī as follows. He writes: *āmandam-dhanyam-brahma-śatān*. "How greatly fortunate are Nanda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa’s father, the cowherd men, and all the inhabitants of Vraja, Vṛndāvana! There’s no limit to their good fortune because the Absolute Truth, the source of transcendental bliss, the eternal Supreme Brahman, has become their friend." First we hear the *aiśvarya*, the veneration of God: "Yes, He’s the Absolute Truth; yes, He’s the source of transcendental bliss; He’s the eternal Supreme Brahman." But that person has become their friend. This is Kṛṣṇa. This is *bhakti*. That verse is from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.14, verse 32. So in that example, because we have example and we have precept, in that example it is shown that Kṛṣṇa has become the friend of the Vrajavāsīs. Why? This is because of the sweetness of His devotees and the relationship that they cherish with Him. Love is reciprocal. In the *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa says, "All of them, as they surrender unto Me, to that degree I give Myself to them."

So another example given by Jīva Gosvāmī is from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.9.20. I love this verse: "Neither Lord Brahmā, nor Lord Śiva, nor even Lakṣmī, the Goddess of Fortune who is always the better half of the Supreme Lord, can obtain from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa—the deliverer from this material world—such mercy as was received by Mother Yaśodā." So someone may argue, "What’s so special about Mother Yaśodā? Didn’t Kṛṣṇa in other incarnations like Lord Rāmacandra also have a mother and father? Lord Rāmacandra, Sītārām, Lakṣmaṇa, Hanumān—we know Lord Rāmacandra, He also had a mother and father. So why does Śukadeva Gosvāmī glorify Mother Yaśodā so much?" So it’s interesting. In reply, the great devotee poet Harisūri—who we’ve been quoting for years now—he writes, "You have to listen carefully here: To whom He gave pleasure as a child, like Daśaratha and Kausalya and others, He did not give pleasure through His omnipotence. And to whom He gave pleasure through His omnipotence, like the four Kumāras, for example, He did not give them pleasure as a child. However, amongst all these devotees, the best example is Mother Yaśodā, to whom the Lord gave endless pleasure through His omnipotence as well as through His child acts, His naughtiness."

In other words, Mother Yaśodā is the only parent who saw Kṛṣṇa’s omnipotence because she saw in His mouth—you know, His friends accused Him of eating dirt, so she looked in His mouth and she saw the opulence of creation. So she saw the omnipotence, and at the same time she saw Kṛṣṇa’s childish nature playing as a small boy. At the same time, very deep. This *bhakti*—we don’t just say *bhakti*, love, devotion—there’s a science there, there’s a philosophy. One has to learn the philosophy first, work now, some later. So the ācāryas say that during the Dāmodara—meaning the childhood pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, as this month is coming up, Dāmodara—we’ll be singing a lot about Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes. Kṛṣṇa showed His omnipotence, ācāryas say, by refusing to get bound by Māyā Yaśodā; He’s all-powerful. At the same time, in that pastime He’s crying like an ordinary child. So this good fortune is not available to any other parent of God, or Bhagavān.

Now another example of the specialty of Kṛṣṇa’s relationship with the Vrajavāsīs and the sweetness of their love is seen in this verse from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.12.11, and I quote here: "In this way, all the cowherd boys used to play with Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of the Brahman effulgence for the *jñānīs*." You know, some people want to worship the energy of God; this is called the effulgence, the effulgence that comes from the transcendental form of the Lord. It’s magnificent. "So the cowherd boys used to play with Kṛṣṇa, who’s the source of that Brahman effulgence for the *jñānīs* desiring to merge into that effulgence, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead for devotees who have accepted eternal servitorship, and who for ordinary persons is but another ordinary child. But the cowherd boys have accumulated the results of pious activities for many lives, and thus they were able to associate with Kṛṣṇa as cowherd boys with the Supreme Personality of Godhead." How can one explain their great fortune? Some people want to merge into the energy of God, some people want to become God—how can you become God? God is always God; you can’t become God. But the cowherd boys, they just want to have sweet loving relationships with Kṛṣṇa—cowherd boys. This is Vraja. This is very special.

And finally, the sweetest of the sweet devotees are the cowherd girls of Vraja, the *gopīs*, as seen in the following verse from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.47.60, of whom Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the sweetest of the sweet because She has *mahābhāva*; She has the greatest love for Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we want to love Kṛṣṇa, so therefore first of all we’re praying to Rādhā: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." "Hare" is a vocative form of Harā, which means Śrī Rādhā. So, "My dear Rādhārāṇī, please engage me in Kṛṣṇa’s service." So these *gopīs*, they have the sweetest love, and that’s exemplified in the following verse from the *Bhāgavatam*: "When Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa was dancing with the *gopīs* in *rāsa-līlā* transcendental pastime, the *gopīs* were embraced by the arms of the Lord. This transcendental favor was never bestowed even upon Lakṣmī-devī, the Goddess of Fortune, or to any other consorts in the spiritual world," meaning Vaikuṇṭha, because the spiritual world is vast. There’s many planets; Kṛṣṇa lives on different planets and different incarnations, and He has His devotees there. But all those consorts of the Lord can’t compare to the *gopīs*. Rādhārāṇī—indeed, never was such a thing even imagined. In other words, dancing with Kṛṣṇa by the most beautiful girls in Svargaloka, in the heavenly planets, whose bodily luster and aroma resemble the beauty and fragrance of a lotus flower—the denizens on the higher planets, they don’t need deodorant, they don’t need to spray perfume. They have bodies—not transcendental bodies, this is not the spiritual world, but the higher planets—they’re so pure, they’re so pious that the fragrance is like lotus flowers. And what to speak of worldly women who are very beautiful according to material estimation? Nothing compares to the *gopīs* who were able to dance with Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world. So we can easily conclude that Kṛṣṇa is always surrounded by loving devotees decorated with incomparably sweet *prema*, or love.

Now, I recently heard a lecture by Śrīla Prabhupāda. He summarized this because elegance is truth spoken concisely; you don’t need to have a long-winded lecture, get to the point. So we’re speaking how, you know, the last few minutes, how Kṛṣṇa’s always surrounded by devotees. So eloquence is truth spoken concisely. So Śrīla Prabhupāda summed this up, saying, "You’ll never see a picture of Kṛṣṇa alone. Kṛṣṇa’s always with His devotees—if not like the cowherd boys, the cowherd girls, then His mother and father, Nanda-Yaśodā, or a peacock or a cow, who are also self-realized souls." Varieties, the spice of life. So there’s... when you see pictures of Vṛndāvana or paintings of Vṛndāvana, actually, the material world is just a perverted reflection of the spiritual world. So what we see here is a nasty reflection of what’s there. So there’s also animals, but they’re self-realized yogis in the spiritual world. You’ll never see—Kṛṣṇa’s always engaged in some *rasa*, some loving pastimes with His devotees. You’ll never see a picture of Kṛṣṇa alone.

Now the medieval poet Puruṣottama—he’s from the Haridāsa-sampradāya here in Vṛndāvana—he describes this idea or this concept of God always being surrounded by His loving devotees as follows, and I just discovered it recently in the library, the Vṛndāvana Research Institute in Vṛndāvana. He writes—this will probably melt your heart: "O brother, look at the darling of Vraja"—who’s the darling of Vraja? Kṛṣṇa. "O brother, look at the darling of Vraja. He’s surrounded by countless groups of strong, beautiful-looking cowherd boys during the daytime, and in the afternoon He’s surrounded by His cows. When He jumps into the sweet waters of the Yamunā river, which encircles Vṛndāvana..." The poet says all the *jala-caras*—I thought, "Wow, that’s a fish!" *Jala* means a living entity, right? So the poet, he’s so incredible, he calls them water *jīvas*—fish—they swim around Him. When He plays His flute, *vaṁśī*, all the air animals—he calls them air animals, that means birds—surround Him. You see sometimes when Kṛṣṇa is playing the flute, the parrots are flying, peacocks are flying. Numerous servants sacrificed their everything in the palace of Mahārāja Nanda, where Kṛṣṇa lives, for just a glimpse of His sidelong glances. Devotees satisfied if Kṛṣṇa just gives a glance to that devotee; that satisfies the devotee. "During the full moon night in that mystic forest, flocks of *gopīs* dance around Him." Isn’t that beautiful? During the full moon night in the mystic forest—what’s the mystic forest? Vṛndāvana. There’s so many mystical things that happen in Vraja. "Flocks of *gopikās*"—meaning the cowherd girls, the *gopīs*, the pure-hearted cowherd girls who love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone’s ever been loved before, but that love is on a transcendental platform—they dance around Him. The poet goes on, "Not only this, even when He is sleeping, the *paramahaṁsa-yogīs* in the forest surround Him in His dreams through their unbreakable meditation." Because the yogis are meditating on the feature of Kṛṣṇa within their hearts. God’s in the spiritual world; He’s all-pervading by His energies, but He also expands in the heart of every living entity, waiting for them to have a spiritual awakening and then guide them on the path back home to the spiritual world. So the *paramahaṁsa-yogīs*—they’re meditating on Him. So even when He is sleeping, the *paramahaṁsa-yogīs* in the forest surround Him in His dream through their unbreakable meditation. Is this not real poetry? This is poetry which melts the heart. There’s that famous verse we’ve quoted a number of times: what is the use of a bowman’s arrow unless it pierces the heart of his enemy? So what is the use of poetry, the saying goes, unless it melts the heart of the listener? And that poetry is transcendental poetry.

So the poet, Puruṣottama-dāsa, says, "By the mercy of Guru, one can also surround Kṛṣṇa eternally." Meaning what? The Guru delivers us from the ignorance of material existence, and with knowledge, He reveals the spiritual world and the path back home to the spiritual world. How does the Guru do it? Not by some mystic blessing; He just reveals knowledge. That’s the duty of the Guru: He lights up the path of how to get back to the spiritual world with knowledge. So our main connection with our spiritual masters is through hearing from them. Yes, we want their physical association—there’s *vāṇī* and *vapu*—that inspires us, but what’s most important is the instructions they give, and we have to follow those instructions to the T. And where will that lead? That will lead to that world which is eternal, full of knowledge, and bliss. It’s a no-brainer, to use a modern terminology. Is this world eternal? No. Is it full of knowledge? No, some, but mostly just material knowledge, little bit of spiritual knowledge. Is it full of bliss? Well, that’s highly debatable. This is a world of duality—up and down, black and white, boy and girl, happiness and distress. So an intelligent person doesn’t want Plan B; he wants Plan A, back home, back to the spiritual world. So this is a Guru; He can take us home to knowledge.

Now, one of my favorite Vrajavāsī poets—meaning Vrajavāsī means one who lives in Vṛndāvana—as you know, is a poet named Lalita-kiśore, who also describes very nicely how Kṛṣṇa is never alone. Kṛṣṇa is always hankering for the love of His devotees, and the devotees are hankering for the love of Kṛṣṇa. It’s like almost a transcendental competition, who can love one more. That’s love. Love in this world, the hard facts come; it comes and it goes. But love in the spiritual world, *ad infinitum*, it’s always increasing. So he also, Lalita-kiśore, he also describes very nicely how Kṛṣṇa is always surrounded by loving devotees. One of his poems—I also found this in the library, the Vṛndāvana Research [Institute] in Vṛndāvana—and listen to this. He writes, "Once Pārvatī"—who’s Pārvatī? The wife of Mahādeva, Śiva. "Once Pārvatī came to have *darśana* of her husband, Lord Śiva, where? On top of Mount Kailāśa, where He was sitting on a deer skin with His eyes closed in deep meditation." Now, seeing her Lord Śiva’s bull, Nandi, said to Śiva, Mahādeva: "O Lord of the three worlds, please look at us"—meaning him and Pārvatī—"with Your eyes full of mercy. Your graceful wife is standing here with her palms joined, wanting to be the object of Your kind glance. Her ears are charmingly decorated by sun and moon-shaped earrings. Who wants to hear anything else? What! Her ears are charmingly decorated by sun and moon-shaped earrings which control time and give benedictions to all the planets. O Lord of all the *avadhūtas*—what does *avadhūta* mean? It means a person who’s mad in ecstasy with *samādhi*, meditation on the Divine—O Lord of all those persons who are *avadhūtas*, please look at us, the devotees who have accepted Your shelter." Why would one take shelter of Lord Śiva? Because it’s described in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, the king of all scriptures, that Lord Śiva is the greatest of all devotees of Kṛṣṇa. He’s the greatest of all devotees of Kṛṣṇa; He’s a great servant of Kṛṣṇa. He’s in this material world; His service is to be in charge of the mode of ignorance. There’s ignorance, passion, and goodness, so He’s in charge of the mode of ignorance. So Śiva appears in that form—you know, long dreadlocks, covered by ashes and from crematorium, and snakes, and so forth and so on. It’s a service He accepts very humbly. And those in the mode of ignorance are attracted to Him, and they buzz around Him, they fly with Him when He’s going in His *savārī*, and by His association, being a Vaiṣṇava of Kṛṣṇa, they become Vaiṣṇavas. No easy task, to take someone from the mode of ignorance or passion to the mode of goodness, which itself is a stepping stone to transcendence. So this is Śiva. So, "O Lord of all *avadhūtas*, please look at us, the devotees who have accepted Your shelter." Hearing this, Lord Śiva opened His eyes. How many eyes He had? Three eyes. Two eyes and He has the third eye. What is the third eye? *Vaidyadhārī*? He can see things as they are. He’s never bewildered by the temporary, miserable nature of this world, although it may be advertised as something wonderful. Oh, He understands, and He knows the path back home to the spiritual world. So this is the third eye. People don’t really know; they talk about the third eye. The third eye is knowledge—how to get out of this temporary world into the spiritual world. That’s the third eye. So He smiled. He smiled at everyone, and He saw that His dear wife Pārvatī was shivering in the cold wind of Mount Kailāśa. I’ve... I’ve experienced that cold wind, actually. With many of you, you know, with the group of devotees, we went to Tibet and we traveled from Lhasa to Mount Kailāśa. Took many days and we did what they called a *korā* there in Tibet. We walked around—you can’t walk on the mountain because it’s too sacred; no one’s ever walked on Kailāśa—we walked around, took four or five days. You go up like this to 5,500 meters, you go back down, a rigorous climb, mystical, seeing Mount Kailāśa. So being so close to Śiva and Pārvatī and Nandi, of course we’re struggling, *sādhakas*, we’re trying to become enlightened, but even there we felt the presence of Lord Śiva. I... it’s hard for me to explain, he could feel His mercy there, and I was praying, "Please make me a devotee like You, fully immersed in Kṛṣṇa Consciousness." So it was freezing cold, freezing cold. So when Śiva awoke from His meditation, He saw Pārvatī; she was shivering in the cold. So He called her, and she sat on His lap. So then Pārvatī asked Him—this is so wonderful. Through the *śāstras*, through the scriptures, through the eyes of the saints, we can see things that could never be seen with mundane vision. How blessed we are to have the association of saints who have this *parā-vidyā*, this knowledge, and who know the scriptures. A saintly person doesn’t make things up; He just repeats what’s there in these eternal *śāstras* and sets the example how to realize them. So here we go. Pārvatī asked Him, "O Lord of Kailāśa mountain, why do you like to stay in isolation away from everybody? What is the reason of this isolation?" Just describe—Sanskrit—*aikāntika* means far away from the mass of the people, no disturbance. So Śiva smiled and He said, "O fortunate lady, listen to me carefully. To meet the son of Nanda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa, we all need to isolate from time to time and meditate on the Divine pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. As Kṛṣṇa had the pastimes here in Vṛndāvana, 5,000 years ago, He is the Supreme controller. While doing so, in my *aikāntika* meditation and in my solitude here on top of Mount Kailāśa, while doing so, I say to my mind, 'O mind, become a cow in His herd.' This is Śiva’s meditation. 'My dear mind, become a cow in Kṛṣṇa’s herd of cows.' And been doing, 'O my heart, become a garland which hangs on His chest, Kṛṣṇa’s chest.' 'O my moon-crown'—because you always see on Śiva He has His dreadlock, His top knot, there we see Mother Gaṅgā flowing down into the material creation. Because she flowed with such power she would destroy the universe, so Śiva stepped in and took the Gaṅgā on His head because He’s so powerful, there’s no problem; He stopped that powerful Gaṅgā and she flowed more smoothly so we could go to Rṣikeśa and bathe in her purifying waters. O, all glories to Mahādeva, Lord Śiva! So there’s also on that top knot a the moon, the half-moon, there in His hair." So He said, "O my moon-crown, become cooling sandalwood paste on Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. O my snake armlet"—we talked about the snakes, right?—"become a turban on Nandalāla," means little Kṛṣṇa. "O my *ḍamaru*"—what’s a *ḍamaru*? I’ve seen in Vārāṇasī, it’s the drum that the Śiva-*bhaktas* have; they have the *triśūla* and so He has the original one, Śiva—"So, O my *ḍamaru*, two-sided drum, you become ankle bells on Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. O my dreadlocks, *jaṭā*—you know, people like to have dreadlocks, it’s like cool—who’s got the original dreadlock? Lord Śiva—with their transcendental... 'O my *jaṭā*, become an *āsana* for Giridhārī.'" Who’s Giridhārī? Giridhārī means Kṛṣṇa who lifted Govardhana Hill as a seven-year-old boy. He’s God, but He retains His godhood even in His childhood. So, "O my dreadlocks, you become an *āsana*." *Āsana* means a cushion, like I’m sitting on a cushion now. "Become an *āsana* for Giridhārī." "O my soul, become dust at His lotus feet."

So Pārvatī said, "O Svāmī"—because sometimes husband is called Svāmī, meaning one who can control the senses—"O Svāmī, You are Yogirāja." *Rāja* means king, so "You’re king of yogis, because You can sit here in... on Mount Kailāśa and not be disturbed by the material element, and You’re constantly fixed, *aikāntika*, on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Please describe those who are fortunate devotees of Kṛṣṇa. You’ve described so many things to me. I’m particularly interested—who are the fortunate devotees of Kṛṣṇa? Because without the devotees, we can’t approach Kṛṣṇa. Just like if you want to meet the prime minister or the president, how? Who can go? But if you meet me, a family member, or you meet a friend of the prime minister, you’re easily introduced. So how are we introduced to Kṛṣṇa? Through His devotees." Like one time our Prabhupāda said in his humility, "I do not know who is Kṛṣṇa; I only know my spiritual master." So she’s saying, "Please describe those who are fortunate devotees of Kṛṣṇa." So Mahādeva said, "It’s very beautiful. O Pārvatī, one cannot understand the great fortune of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s devotees. One who has had the association of His devotee—not Kṛṣṇa, but His devotee—even for a single moment can get free from the clutches of the god of death, Yamarāja."

He went on. "Once Nārada traveled through all the Divine planets to see who’s the most fortunate devotee, because devotees are scattered throughout this material creation—not that they belong here; it’s like we’re strangers in a strange land—but they come here out of their causeless mercy to enlighten us as to who we are, who is God, and what is our eternal relationship with Him. So they’re scattered, not only here in the Earth planet, higher planets, there’s devotees, lower planets—who wants to go there? There’s devotees, will go out of their compassion to enlighten throughout the 14 worlds. So one who gets the association of His devotees even for a single moment—*lava-mātra*—that person has the opportunity to become freed from reincarnation, from *saṁsāra*, the repetition of birth and death."

So then he tells the story. He says, "Once Nārada, the Great Sage, traveled through all the Divine planets to see who is the most fortunate devotee—out of all these devotees, like you know, who’s the most fortunate. So he came to Brahmā, who we mentioned in the beginning of this lecture, and told him the most fortunate devotee is Indra, who is the master of the heavenly planets. But Bṛhaspati is even more fortunate than Indra because he’s the master of Indra, he’s the Guru of Indra. But the Divine Goddess Sāvitrī is more famous because she’s the mother of Bṛhaspati. And more than Sāvitrī, the Sun God is fortunate because he’s the husband of Mother Sāvitrī. More than the Sun God, Lord Viṣṇu, incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, is fortunate because His one eye is the Sun and the other is the Moon. More fortunate than Viṣṇu is Kṛṣṇa because He controls Lord Viṣṇu and all the *devatās*. But more fortunate than Kṛṣṇa are His devotees who always surround Him in loving devotional service. O Father Brahmā, we should all serve the lotus feet of such devotees who play, fight, eat, sleep, and relish every moment with the flute player, Kṛṣṇa." That’s my favorite. The lotus feet of such devotees—what are they doing? Are they just in meditation in some caves somewhere? Are they merged into the effulgence of God? No. They’re playing with Him, they’re fighting with Him—you know, like boys will be boys—eating with Him, they’re sleeping with Him, and they relish every moment with the flute player, Kṛṣṇa, from *sāra*—He who carries the flute.

So Brahmā nodded his head in agreement and joined his palms, remembering the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees. Kṛṣṇa says elsewhere, "One who says he’s My devotee is not My devotee. One who says he’s the devotee of My devotee, he’s My devotee." So Śiva continued, "O Pārvatī, my mind always serves the devotees of the Lord who allow me to enter into the Land of Love." What’s the Land of Love? Disneyland? Some famous park somewhere? Thailand? Hawaii? No, the Land of Love of Śrī Vṛndāvana, where the breeze of dedication flows limitlessly with the breeze of dedication—meaning everyone is dedicating themselves to this naughty boy, Kṛṣṇa—it flows limitlessly. So Pārvatī said, back and forth, "O Lord of my heart"—this is, O Lord of my heart, she’s the consort of Śiva—"glories to You who gave me the best of ornaments, the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees."

So this poet, Lalita-kiśore, concludes: "May my shelter always be in the association of Vraja-bhaktas who for many days together get lost in meditation on the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, sitting in the *raja*—what’s the *raja* in Sanskrit? *Raja* means dust. So who wants to sit in dust, like nobody? But Vraja-raja means the dust of Vṛndāvana. And what is the dust of Vṛndāvana? The dust of Vṛndāvana is sacred because Kṛṣṇa walks with Śrī Rādhā and the *gopīs* or His cowherd friends all over this transcendental land, and His lotus feet touch this dust, and it becomes transformed into supreme mercy. So therefore, when we first come to Vṛndāvana, what do we do? We roll in the dust. A materialistic person may think we’re crazy—yes, we want to become crazy with love for Kṛṣṇa. So this dust of Vṛndāvana is very special; it’s one of the things that grant us entrance into Vṛndāvana. You can’t just come here on a bus or a car or a horse-cart; you have to come, you have to come with a pure consciousness to see things as they are. So to come here and see Vṛndāvana, we need the mercy of the dust of Vṛndāvana."

So in, she says, "May my shelter always be in the association of Vraja-bhaktas who for many days together get lost in meditation on the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa while sitting in the *raja*, the dust of Vṛndāvana, and drinking the water of the Yamunā as they constantly sing the holy names of the Lord: 'Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.'"

So in conclusion, let us hear from one of the six Gosvāmīs, the six disciples of Caitanya Mahāprabhu who came into Vṛndāvana. And as we know, we have many pastimes here. One of those Gosvāmīs is Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who also glorifies this principle of associating with devotees in his *Śrī Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, verse 1. It’s really nice. He writes: "One who has never worshiped, even once, the dust that sprinkles from Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet; who never took shelter, even once, of Her abode, Śrī Vṛndāvana, which is marked with the lotus feet; who never spoke, even once, to the devotees colored in Her love—how foolish are they who think that such a person can plunge, can plunge into the mystical sea of nectar that is Śyāma Kṛṣṇa."

Well, thank you, prabhus, for giving me this opportunity to share with you all this nectar of Śrī Vṛndāvana. As we’ve mentioned many times, my dear god-brother, His Holiness Śacīnandana Mahārāja, in his research about this transcendental land, this where love reigns supreme, he wrote there’s 60 billion holy places now. So as we traverse this transcendental land through these lectures, through the eyes of Guru and Kṛṣṇa and the saints, let us relish every moment. Because, as Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, the great logician, said, human form of life is so, so valuable that even one moment cannot be gained back for all the gold in the world. So we have to utilize our time properly. And one of the best ways to utilize our time is to organize ourselves in such a way that *śravaṇam*—we have time for hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa, because that brings what? *Smaraṇam*—it brings remembrance of Kṛṣṇa. And if we practice, practice, practice, practice remembering Kṛṣṇa, and it becomes natural as it will—we’re practicing, but practice makes perfect—then at when that moment comes that we have to leave these mortal frames, we’ll be naturally thinking of Kṛṣṇa. And *dhyāna*, that meditation gained after many minutes, hours, weeks, months, years, it will bear the fruit of *prema*, love, and that love will be our ticket back home, back to Godhead. So this is the best use of our time. We’re busy as bees in this world, and that’s required, but everyone should come to Vṛndāvana and hear these pastimes and wander in these forests of Vṛndāvana, even though it’s changing because it’s called *Kali-yuga*, it’s still Vraja. And we are going to start our Kārtika *parikramā* in a couple of days, so please, all of you, say your prayers. We have about 350 devotees with us, and other devotees; my *śikṣā-guru* Dīnabandhu will be going out, and different god-brothers and god-sisters, we’ll be taking different groups. If you can ever make it for Kārtika *parikramā*, please join us. If not, we’ll be speaking about Vṛndāvana for as long as we have breath in this body. So thank you very much. See you next Friday. Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

May Śrī... all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the *dhāma*. Hare Kṛṣṇa.