Very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series in the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

So, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 10. For this lecture, we will focus on flowers: what role flowers play in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes and how they can act as a stimulus for awakening love for the Divine Couple.

There's a very nice verse in the śāstra, in the śāstra subhāṣita, about the potency of both flowers and saints. It's as follows: "By taking shelter of great souls, even a lowly person can achieve the impossible, just as an ant, in the shelter of a flower that has been offered on the head of Lord Śiva, can actually perform the feat of touching the crescent moon." So beautiful.

There are also two of my favorite statements by Śrīla Prabhupāda about flowers.

In Bombay, on January 19, 1975, he said, "Flowers are the smile of Kṛṣṇa. Flowers are the smile of Kṛṣṇa." It's not a long statement, but it doesn't need to be. It's like a sūtra. And there's that saying, quoting Swami Vivekananda, "Elegance is truth spoken concisely." Also, once, when describing to some disciple pujaris how to do deity worship, Prabhupāda commented that, "Flowers are the jewels of Kālī-yuga.

Flowers are the jewels of Kālī-yuga." Now, there's also a famous photo of Śrīla Prabhupāda that appeared on an early BBT publication of the Kṛṣṇa book, on the back of one of the two—was divided into two parts, two books.

This was in the old days, I think in the '70s or '80s. We used to distribute these big Kṛṣṇa books, and it showed Prabhupāda holding a golden-colored campaka flower.

And as the photographer took the photo, Śrīla Prabhupāda said that Lord Caitanya's transcendental body was the same color as that flower, golden.

This is surely, I could just say, "seeing with the eyes of devotion." Now, even our beloved Kṛṣṇa himself affectionately refers to flowers in His immortal Bhagavad-gītā, chapter 9, verse 26, where He says, "If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit, or water, I will accept it." And such offered flowers take on great importance for devotees as a means of stimulation for ecstatic love.

How so?

Well, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, chapter 12. It's a little long, but it's very significant here. As far as Mahārāja Ambarīṣa is concerned, he actually performed all the items of devotional service. He first of all engaged his mind upon the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.

He engaged his words and his power of speaking and describing the transcendental qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He engaged his hands in washing the temple of the deity. His ears in hearing the words of Kṛṣṇa. And his eyes in beholding the deity.

He engaged his sense of touch by rendering service to the devotees. And he engaged his sense of smell by relishing the fragrance of flowers offered to Kṛṣṇa, by relishing the fragrance of flowers offered to Kṛṣṇa. He engaged his tongue in tasting the Tulasī leaves offered to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.

His legs in going to the temple of Kṛṣṇa. And his head in offering obeisances to the deity of Kṛṣṇa. And a similar instruction is given in *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, chapter 22, verse 122. It states, "One should circumambulate a temple, recite various prayers, chant softly, chant congregationally, smell the incense and flower garlands offered to the deity, and eat the remnants of food offered to the deity." And wearing, you know, just wearing garlands of flowers that have been offered to Kṛṣṇa is actually one of the 64 limbs of devotional service described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

In *Upadeśāmṛta*, verse 6, where Śrī Uddhava is described as saying, "Simply by decorating ourselves with the garlands, fragrant oils, cloves, and ornaments that You have already enjoyed, Kṛṣṇa, and by eating the remnants of Your meals, we, Your servants, will indeed conquer Your illusory energy." Śrīla Prabhupāda also quotes another verse from the Purāṇa in support of wearing flower garlands offered to the Lord.

He writes, "O Narada, whenever the nirmalya, remnants like garlands, etc., taken from Kṛṣṇa's deity, touch the body of an individual, they become free from all diseases and sins. They become free from all diseases and sins." Just see how powerful and purifying are the flower garlands offered to the Lord.

So in these ways, and so many more, we can understand the importance of something so simple as flowers that help to awaken our love for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and the glory of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

I'm very fortunate to be sitting here now in Vṛndāvana.

The glory of Vṛndāvana is that there are unlimited kinds of flowers to offer to Kṛṣṇa and to be used in His service.

For example, a sample of different flowers that are here in Vṛndāvana: there are mallikā flowers, there are lavanga flowers, there are jūtī flowers, utpala flowers, kadamba flowers, campaka flowers, śatapatra, aravinda flowers, yes, flowers, śirisha flowers, kuṇḍa flowers, ketakī—there's ketakī flowers, there's kuśāmbha flowers, and kiṁśuka flowers.

This I was reading. I haven't seen all of them or appreciated the aroma once offered to Kṛṣṇa, but that is a list the ācāryas give. But for today, I thought we would just focus on one of those flowers. I mean, it seems we can give lots of classes on flowers.

We'll just focus on the famous kadamba flower. Now, I did some research. According to the book *Rajanighaṇṭu*, it's an ancient Ayurvedic encyclopedia written by a very famous Kashmiri royal physician hundreds of years ago. He describes that there are 27 trees on the planet Earth which are known as *deva-vṛkṣa*, *deva-vṛkṣa* trees, meaning literally trees on which demigods eternally reside.

Put that in your mind's eye. These 27 trees—this is where demigods reside on the Earth planet. And one of these 27 trees is the kadamba tree, which produces kadamba flowers. Now, the specialty of Śrī Vṛndāvana is that all these 27 types of trees used to be found in Braja in the olden days.

They're scattered around the world, but all 27 of these trees used to be found in Braja in the olden days. Therefore, it's described, when Kṛṣṇa came to Braja 5,000 years ago, it was already a reservoir of all auspiciousness. It's as if the demigods were just waiting for Kṛṣṇa to come to receive Him and participate in His Braja-līlā.

Now, there's a famous story that's been passed down from one generation to another here in Vṛndāvana.

It's a nice little story. And that is that several centuries ago, when the Mughals unfortunately attacked Vṛndāvana, as you know, most of the deities were moved to other states in India, in particular Rajasthan.

Now, after this happened, after all the deities had been moved, the story goes, a little boy asked his grandfather, "O elderly father, please tell me, whom shall we worship now?

Whom shall we worship now?" So the grandfather, he smiled at the boy and said, "Son, Kṛṣṇa eternally resides in the tāmāla tree, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in the kadamba tree.

Therefore, don't worry, we will simply worship these transcendental trees." Wow. Therefore, don't worry, we shall simply worship these transcendental trees. And in Vṛndāvana, to this very day, the tāmāla and kadamba trees are still worshiped.

I can verify that, having traveled all over Braja. Now, in many places in śāstra, we find that whenever Kṛṣṇa feels separation from Rādhā, He embraces a kadamba tree. And whenever Rādhā feels separation from Kṛṣṇa, she embraces a tāmāla tree because the tāmāla tree has a dark complexion like Kṛṣṇa, and a kadamba tree has a golden complexion like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Very beautiful. Now, before diving into the nectarian ocean of, how can I say, kadamba pastimes, let's hear a little bit more about kadamba trees so that we can appreciate and relish these pastimes even more. These lectures are meant to be relished, unlike worldly news or worldly activities.

In chapter 27 of the *Charaka Saṁhitā*, which is an ancient scripture describing surgical operations in Vedic times—wow, they had surgical operations in Vedic times—*Charaka Saṁhitā*, therein we learn that the kadamba tree's stems, flowers, and leaves increase one's life, increase one's knowledge, fertility, and they increase the effulgence of one's face.

Here in Vṛndāvana, I see that you know, chutneys and pickles are still made from kadamba leaves and flowers.

And I was reading, there are actually two different types of kadamba trees. One kadamba tree blossoms with very small flowers, and it's quite short. And the other grows in Bengal and blossoms with very big flowers. These Bengali trees are much taller.

You know, in Braja-bhāṣā language, it's commonly said, "Rādhā's complexion is like a kadamba flower." And in Bengali, it's said, "Gaṅgā's complexion is like that of kadamba flowers." Now, again, in that Ayurvedic encyclopedia we mentioned, in verse 9:97—how did I get it?

I've been having a research institute, a gold mine for ISKCON—now, there it said that the kadamba tree has seven different names. Lots of details, but you know, love is in the details. So, what are the different names of the kadamba tree?

Puṣpa, śurābhi, lala... Now, the same book also lists three sub-varieties here we go of kadamba trees. And all these varieties and sub-varieties still exist today in Vṛndāvana's forest, even in Bengal.

The kadamba tree also grows in different parts of Braja. Now, also in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, we found a friend of the poet Suradāsa, who we often quote.

The great Suradāsa, whose samādhi is there at Chandhrāsarovara, a friend of his whose name was Govinda Dāsa, wrote famously, it's very famous here in Braja: "Young Śrī Kṛṣṇa climbs up a kadamba tree and calls out to His cows. Hearing the enchanting sound of His flute, they come running from wherever they are.

He also calls to all His friends who gather the cows together." The poet Govinda Dāsa's Lord calls His brother Balarāma. Kṛṣṇa is calling His brother Balarāma and says, "Let's go home now." Balarāma, He also sings very beautifully, "O mother, look!

Everywhere are blossoming kadamba trees. Thus, garlands are made out of kadamba flowers, ankle bells and bracelets are made of kadamba flowers, and the kunjāvana grove is made from kadamba leaves and stems." I love that Kunjavana grove!

The poet Govinda Dāsa says, "My dear mother, look at the opulence of the kadamba trees existing in Vṛndāvana solely for the pleasure of Lord Kṛṣṇa." Now, in Vṛndāvana, there's actually an entire forest of kadamba trees.

An entire forest. It's called Kadambavana. This forest is actually situated on the far side of Govardhan Hill, and it extends from the southern tip of Govardhan all the way up to Uruvakund. My dear Godbrother Govinda Mahārāja, he once pointed out to me just at that southern tip of Govardhan Hill, just around the corner, there used to be a big forest of kadamba trees.

He mentioned this to me many years ago. And now it makes sense. Of course, many have been cut down for agricultural purposes. I don't know why. It's so unfortunate. But he did say that when he first came to Vṛndāvana, there was a forest of kadamba trees, and that's confirmed.

That's Kadambavana, and it goes all the way up to... which is close to Rādhākun. Now, when our dear Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to Vṛndāvana, in search of Kṛṣṇa, you could say, it's described that upon seeing the forest creatures in Kadambavana—because, you know, He did—so when He came to Kadambavana, circling around the southern point there, and He saw the forest creatures, He would faint in ecstasy because they're all Braja-vāsīs, no part of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.

So at that moment, when He would faint, the deer would come forward and lick the foam from His mouth. Birds drank the tears that fell from His eyes. How fortunate!

And upon regaining consciousness, it's described, He would continue to wander through Kadambavana on His parikramā. And at one point, I was reading, He came upon a kadamba tree whose flowers were in full bloom, and which reminded Him, of course, of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the same color.

And as a result, He cried in ecstasy, causing the trees to flood the ground beneath them with their own tears. Wow. Śrī Vṛndāvana dhām!

It's all about love. Witnessing all this, the... how's it said... the nearby deer fainted. And it said that while searching for Kṛṣṇa, either in a cave, or in Govardhan Hill, or on Govardhan Hill, nearby Govardhan Hill, or in the forest, and not finding Him, Lord Caitanya would roar with grief.

He would roar with grief—a roar that's described to stop peacocks from dancing and cause them to cry in fear. And because of these ecstatic ecstasies of separation felt by Mahāprabhu, in which His heart repeatedly broke and His body appeared to sustain injuries, His companions became fearful for Him.

So after Lord Caitanya completed His Govardhan parikramā, the Braja-vāsīs, out of love for Him, concern for Him, they actually requested Him to leave Braja and go back to Jagannātha Purī from where He had come. His ecstasies were so great.

As they were also in Gaṁbhīrā Temple in Purī, but, you know, the Braja-vāsīs became worried because as Mahāprabhu was going around Vṛndāvana, these ecstasies sometimes caused Him to fall to the ground, etc.

So they actually said, "Please go back." Glory!

This is nectar. Now, as far as the Divine Couple, Sundara, are concerned, the ecstasies that they felt even for us were no less than those experienced by Lord Caitanya. Of course, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa yuga-avatāra confirms that the combined forms of God and Kṛṣṇa appeared as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

So He felt ecstasy. So the ecstasies they felt 5,000 years ago and their pastimes in Vṛndāvana were no less than those experienced by Mahāprabhu.

I found a quote by one ācārya. It's so nice. He writes that "A single moment in the Kadambavana forest inspired within them, the Divine Couple, far greater happiness than the vast nectar ocean formed when all other spiritual ecstasies were pulled together." It's said that Kadambavana, being blessed by every wonderful fragrance, sweetness, and charm, attracts the heart of even the Goddess of Fortune.

And in that transcendental forest, flowers blossom year-round. And śāstra says that... how's it said... Kadambavana forever echoes with the voices of birds like male and female parrots, parrots who recount the confidential pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as well as cuckoos with their soft enchanting... it's actually written k-u-h-u, the cuckoos.

Now, for a līlā, for a pastime, we've had some tattva there about kadamba trees and kadamba flowers. One līlā, one time in the kadamba forest, Kadambavana, Kṛṣṇa was late for the rendezvous. And as time went on, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī became very anxious, and Her anxiety is described to have turned into distress.

And in Her distress, She became so emaciated that Her golden and coral bracelets, I thought that was very beautiful, Her golden and coral bracelets slid off Her wrists, slid right off Her wrist and fell to the ground, one by one.

It's described like that, one by one. When you read these things, we repeat these things, we want to make sure that every detail is given. It just adds to the appreciation of Braja-līlā. So Her friends, the gopis, the Braja-gopis, I like to say, the cowherd girls, the milkmaids, the milkmaids of Vṛndāvana, they tried to comfort her, but they knew that only the sight of Kṛṣṇa could truly console her.

So one intelligent gopī was sent to find Kṛṣṇa, with the order to bring Him back very quickly. However, when it became dark, she was unable to follow Kṛṣṇa's footprints. So she followed the compass of her heart. The needle of that compass was her love for Kṛṣṇa, and its true north always pointed in whatever direction He was.

So it's poet—such poetry our ācāryas give us. Finally, that gopī found Kṛṣṇa, where?

In a grove of kadamba trees with blossoming flowers, kadamba flowers, where she saw many peacocks dancing, all alone with Kṛṣṇa. So this milkmaid of Rādhā said to Kṛṣṇa, "O my dear, but unhappy friend, Rādhārāṇī eagerly waits for You at [Śrī Vṛndāvana].

She risked everything to escape from her in-laws and braved the dangers of a dark, it's described, snake-infested forest just to be with You. How could You insult her by lolling here in Your father's kingdom, unable to find You?

She constantly embraces You within her heart, thus she wanders about in agitation. One moment she gets up to leave, and the next moment she sits back down. She is so distracted that she does not care even to arrange her hair and clothes.

Instead, she calls out in a piteous voice and showers the undergrowth with tears as she rolls on the ground. Sometimes Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī runs back and forth, sometimes she falls down unconscious, and at other times she rips her sari in frustration, breaks her flower bracelets, and scatters the pearls of her necklace.

At one moment she talks to a tree, and at the next moment she stumbles towards the Yamunā River with her eyes filled with tears. She requested me as follows: 'O friend, please find my Kṛṣṇa, and when you do, tell Him with words filled with devotion that I place all my love at His lotus feet.

Tell Him, tell Him, Kṛṣṇa, how could You possibly neglect someone who considers her own life insignificant when compared to fulfilling Your every desire and reciprocating with Your youthful love?'" Hare Kṛṣṇa!

Isn't that wonderful from the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Vṛndāvaneshwarī?

So the ācāryas say that as the nearby forest creatures heard these piteous cries and loving appeals, they were filled with the pain of separation and sympathy for Rādhārāṇī's suffering. The forest animals, of course, remember that everything in Vṛndāvana is personal.

Everyone is a fully realized soul. Everyone is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, a purely devotee of Kṛṣṇa, in a variety of ways. So when these enlightened forest animals heard these words, they were filled with... I just love this... the pain of separation and sympathy for Rādhārāṇī's suffering.

And in that condition, the deer and birds wailed, the trees and creepers shriveled up, the bees stopped humming, the fish stopped swimming, the flowers wilted, stones softened, and water solidified. So, realizing Rādhārāṇī's pains of separation as the gopī described to Him, quickly, Kṛṣṇa quickly stood up and followed that gopī to the rendezvous site for that day.

And upon His arrival, Rādhārāṇī's ecstasies immediately changed from separation to meeting, from *viraha* to *sambhoga*, from separation to meeting. As Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says so nicely, "Such are the ever-fresh pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa within the groves." And He looks, gives a further hint of such pastimes in his *Gandharva-gāna-pāṭalā-aṣṭaka* in an appeal to the Divine Couple, says in verse 5, speaking of himself: "When will this person serve Your lotus feet that adorn the three worlds by massaging them, as You were sitting together on a cushion made of flowers in a grove, while making sweet jokes with each other?" Wow.

So, let us finish today with two prayers by one of our great heroes, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who describes so nicely the pastimes, the um, the līlās of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and the līlās of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And in his *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, he says very nicely, relevant to today's class: First of all, he says, "I bow down before the great trees of Vṛndāvana, which are filled with leaves and sprouts, matted bees, the tumult of many birds, nectar of streams of nectar honey, and branches bowed down with many splendid, wonderful fruits and flowers." Prayer number two: "I pray to become a tree in Śrī Vṛndāvana dhām and please Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa with my limitless, splendid, sweet fruits, my unlimitedly splendid, fragrant flowers filled with splendid pollen and splendid honey, my splendid host of birds, and my splendid twigs and buds.

Oh, let me become a flowering tree in Śrī Vṛndāvana." Thank you so much.

And a final, I hope, humble prayer by me. It's actually a traditional quote I've come across, used by Vaiṣṇavas upon completing their lecture series for their lectures. "If there were any errors in my presentation, may the learned souls correct me.

However, if there was anything nice in it, my talk, that it belongs to my Guru and not to me. May you be glorified throughout the three worlds. Thank you, Prabhupāda." Well, we have lots more nectar on flowers.

I think even we can continue with some kadamba flowers, but we have more nectar from our Gosvāmīs and various poets, and our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda on flowers.

So give me some time, one week, and we'll be back again. Thank you so much. My predilection.