Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Viṣṇupada, Krishna bhūtale, Śrīmad Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda.

Namaste Sarasvatī Devi. We are continuing with our mini-series on stimuli for ecstatic love, based on Śrīla Prabhupāda's *Nectar of Devotion*, chapter 26, wherein it is described in great detail the various paraphernalia and articles related to Krishna that help stimulate or awaken our dormant love for Him.

In this regard, Śrīla Prabhupāda would use the simple analogy of a baby’s small shoes.

When a mother sees her child’s shoes somewhere, those shoes immediately remind her of her child. In loving devotion, in the same way, when a devotee sees, hears, or touches things related to the Lord, his feelings of affection and love for the Lord are awakened.

In the last two lectures, we discussed how the sound of Krishna’s flute awakens feelings of ecstatic love in the hearts of pure devotees.

Chapter 31 of *Nectar of Devotion* gives an example. He writes that once, the cowherd boys in Vṛndāvana were vainly searching after Krishna for a long time, and for that reason, their faces became darkened and their complexions appeared faded.

Just then, they heard the faint vibration from Krishna’s flute coming from a nearby hill, and immediately, all of them became very much enlightened. *Nectar of Devotion* says that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī also experiences ecstatic love when in contact with certain things connected to her beloved Krishna.

For example, many ācāryas say that black is actually Śrīmatī’s favorite color because Krishna is famous, meaning He who has a dark bluish-black complexion like a rain cloud.

In this regard, Rādhārāṇī often wears a dark blue sari so that she can always remember Krishna.

She is reminded of Krishna during Amāvasyā, the moonless, dark, black night, and Kṛṣṇa-pakṣa, which means when the moon is waning, again, it's dark out.

So she remembers Krishna.

She remembers Krishna from the Kṛṣṇa-sāra, which means the black deer that she often sees in Vṛndāvana.

I was reading Kṛṣṇa-sāra also is a name for Śrīmatī, meaning she who takes Krishna as the essence of her very existence. Śrīmatī is also reminded of Krishna by the brahmaras, which means the bluish-black bumblebees, described whose effulgent color and frantic buzzing awaken her love for Krishna.

Then there is the kajal, or the black eyeliner cosmetic, which reminds Rādhikā of Krishna in whichever way she glances because her eyes, along with her mind and heart, are always surrounded by the dark Śyāmasundara, or Krishna.

Then, kastūrī, the black musk dot on her chin, placed there by her Gopi friends, is also a constant reminder of dark Krishna.

Then the ācāryas say that the winter season, like what winter season, also always reminds her of Krishna and helps to awaken her love for Krishna with its long, dark nights.

Anything dark bluish-black like a monsoon cloud, then there's the famous dark Tamāl tree. We've discussed that many times, how it always puts her into ecstasy when she sees it. It reminds her of Krishna.

There's also the monsoon rain clouds, which resemble Krishna's dark hue.

The ācāryas say, along with their rumbling, which sounds like Krishna's flute to her, she's Krishna conscious.

Blue lotuses in Vṛndāvana, of course, remind Śrīmatī of Krishna, as does the dark Yamunā River.

And even evening, called “chāyā” in Hindi, reminds her of Krishna, as well as the deep blue sapphire gem, which she wears in bracelets and necklaces to always keep Krishna in her thoughts.

So in this way, I was reading, it's really interesting that sometimes the bluish-black color of Krishna has the opposite effect on Śrīmatī.

Like what we just described, how the śyāma color reminds her of Krishna everywhere, but sometimes this color, bluish-black like a monsoon cloud, it has an opposite effect on Śrīmatī.

It's all part of, you know, Rādhā and Krishna’s loving dealings, though.

But anyway, how?

How does it have the opposite effect?

Well, it's described that once, when Śrīmatī heard how Krishna was showing some affection to another Gopi, she became transcendentally angry.

Manohara, is the word in Sanskrit, but this surprised number of friends. This is described by Sarasvatī in his *Rādhā-rasa-sudānidhi*, text 89, how her friends became surprised. And he writes, "One Gopi addresses Śrīmatī, ‘I know that you like the dark night when the moon is waning, the newly blossoming blue lotus, black bumblebees, the black deer, the dark Tamāl tree, the dark monsoon clouds, and the dark Yamunā River because they remind you of Krishna.

But why then do you dislike charming Krishna who resembles them in name and form?’" But Rādhārāṇī, being so upset with Krishna, didn't answer her friend.

Instead, she started to reject Krishna.

How so?

By vowing, "Never again to look at anything bluish-black like a monsoon cloud." This was her reaction. She was angry at Krishna.

So then, the ācāryas say she cast off her blue sari, blue bangles, and sapphire necklace and put on a red sari with ivory bangles and a pearl necklace. It’s just the opposite. And she wiped off the musk dot on her chin, then the kajal around her eyes.

Then she replaced all these items with white sandalwood paste decorations. The ācāryas say she even went so far as when she saw a rain cloud coming, she opened up an umbrella to block its view. We've all seen paintings, you know, right?

Rādhā is looking in the sky, and there's the blue, the bluish-black monsoon cloud, and she's experiencing ecstasy. Not this time, she took the umbrella and blocked its vision. Then what did she do?

She whitewashed all of Vṛndāvana's Tamāl trees and even refused to meet her own girlfriend named Śyāmalā.

I was reading, she wouldn't even look at the peacocks because their feathers reminded her of Krishna's turban.

It’s also described that when she saw her own black hair reflected in her mirror, she broke that mirror into a hundred pieces. And when the sun set that night, she covered her eyes with her palms to prevent from seeing the darkness of night.

The opposite effect. Now, of course, these are all wonderful expressions of love and are all part of Rādhā and Krishna’s loving pastimes in Vṛndāvana.

Because what causes separation?

But in the separation, they develop an intense desire to meet again. So it's all part of Krishna's plan, because in Vṛndāvana, ultimately, such loving dealings, well, they all went on a sweet note.

And all that is bluish-black like a rain cloud again becomes sweet and beautiful within the mind and the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. It was always a good ending in Vṛndāvana.

Krishna consciousness, anyway, that's that's my introduction.

I was reading those things, I just had to share them. But for today's lecture, I would actually like to discuss how mirrors, something so simple as a mirror, play a very prominent role in being a stimulus for awakening ecstatic love for Rādhā and Krishna, which is the theme of these lectures.

Now, I did a lot of research. Mirrors are very much involved in Krishna service.

I was reading that in the eightfold daily pastimes of Krishna, Krishna looks at himself in the mirror at all those eight times of the day as they begin.

So he looks good to meet Rādhā. And mirrors in Krishna's pastimes, they even have different names.

Like there are different types of flutes and different types of sticks and whatever. So there are different types of mirrors, and they have different names. I mean, it's the details that make this so interesting. Like, for example, darpaṇa, that means mirror.

A mirror is also called pratibimba darśaka, meaning beholder of shadow. Mirrors can also be called rūpa vāhaka, meaning they are carriers of beauty, or kama śāsana meru, the platform of Cupid's kingdom, or mukura, another name for mirror, and arśī, which means a woman’s mirror.

One of the services of Śrīmatī’s maidservants is to show these mirrors to Śrīmatī after dressing her. Like we do indeed, those of you who do pujā, you know, we dress the Deities, then we show a mirror for the Lord's pleasure.

That's one of my favorite parts of doing pujā each morning. So when these maidservants do this after dressing Rādhāranī, I was reading, they hold the mirrors with two hands, one hand on top of the mirror and the other hand on the bottom of the mirror.

And after showing the mirror to the Divine Couple when they are together, these maidservants then place the mirrors to their hearts with the prayer that the form of the Divine Couple displayed in the mirror will remain forever in their hearts.

Wow. Now, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura reveals his heart's desire to offer a mirror to Śrīmatī in his book entitled *Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma*, verse 33. It's one of my favorite books, *Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma*. He writes as follows: "O mistress Śrīmatī, your limbs are perfumed with natural fragrance, but still, I will worship them with kuṅkuma powder and offer you a līlā kamala, a lotus flower in your hand.

Then they will happily show you a mirror embedded with gems and precious stones in which to see yourself." Hare Krishna.

Beautiful prayer. Now, the ācāryas describe that Śrīmatī herself uses a mirror to see if her declarative face will please Krishna.

And she usually uses three types of mirrors in this regard. Lots of mirror details. She has three types of mirrors that she uses personally. To see a large image of her face, she uses a concave mirror. To see a normal image of her face, she uses a normal mirror.

And to see a small image of her face, she uses a convex mirror. There you go. But actually, she has many types of mirrors. I had to look around a lot. And her favorites are: a mirror in a gold frame embedded with emeralds, a mirror in a mother-of-pearl frame, a mirror in an ivory frame, a mirror framed in jade stone, a mirror framed in zardozi.

I had to look up zardozi. Zardozi is gold embroidery on a velvet cloth. So she has a mirror with a frame of silver, and a mirror placed in a frame of pearls, and a mirror framed in exotic wood. Now, there are also what are called prākṛtika darpaṇas.

These are natural mirrors that are available in the Vṛndāvana forest.

In what sense?

Well, first of all, Krishna uses these mirrors to see himself, to be sure that He is attractive to Śrīmatī.

So what are these natural mirrors in Vṛndāvana that Krishna uses to make sure He's looking well for Rādhā?

Very interesting. One such mirror is Yamunā Devi, the River Yamunā, whose waters, on a clear, calm day, it is described, perfectly reflect Krishna's perfect form.

All glorious Devi. Another natural mirror is crystal white Govardhan-śilas, which are shiny, and which Krishna, after decorating himself, looks into.

He looks into the śilas. Another natural mirror that Krishna looks in to see how He's looking is the gold plate upon which Krishna eats His meals.

I was reading, it's very smooth and shiny and gives an excellent reflection. And finally, other natural mirrors are the eyes of His cows, which constantly stare at Krishna without blinking.

They're natural mirrors. Now, of course, as one can imagine, there are many pastimes related to these various transcendental mirrors. For example, one rainy day, Śrīmatī, being bound by social customs, could not leave her home in Varṣāṇā. So, as a result of feeling intense separation from Krishna, she just fainted.

And when Lalitā, her dear friend, entered the room, she tried to revive Śrīmatī but was unable to do so. So she, Lalitā, who's known as, I was reading, the one whose mind runs faster than the seven horses of the Sun God, the one whose mind runs faster than the seven horses of the Sun God, started thinking of ways to revive Śrīmatī.

And eventually, she came up with an ingenious plan. She began putting mirrors everywhere in the room. I mean, everywhere. On the floor, on the walls, on the ceiling, the corners. She's putting mirrors everywhere. Then it's described that Lalitā, who, quote, "has control over the climate and clouds by dint of a boon bestowed on her by Pūrṇamāsī Yoga-Māyā," transformed all the individual dark clouds in the sky outside into different shapes of Krishna.

Then she arranged that these cloud-like images of Krishna entered the wind, entered through the windows of Rādhā's room, and reflected on the many mirrors everywhere.

Then Lalitā, who's described as also expert in playing a flute, just like Krishna played a specific melody, which is known to awaken souls who are experiencing separation from Krishna.

And with this, when this sweet sound of the flute entered the ears and heart of Śrīmatī, she opened her eyes and saw Krishna's form dancing in the reflection of all these mirrors.

And so then, in ecstasy, she stood up, I was reading, and started running in all four directions of the room trying to catch the image of Krishna everywhere in those mirrors, and spinning around and laughing, she thought that she was dancing with Krishna.

And in this way, Lalitā created an illusion to help Śrīmatī overcome feelings of separation from Krishna with mirrors.

I was also reading that inspired from this pastime, which is well-known in Vṛndāvana, the Rajput kings of Rajasthan made similar rooms in their palaces.

They are known as Śīś Mahal, Śīś Mahal or Palaces of Mirrors, to capture images of Krishna for the pleasure of Śrīmatī.

Jai Śrīmatī. Now, one such mirror palace can be seen at the Amber Fort in Jaipur, Rajasthan. I've been there. The mirrors everywhere. Such a mirror room also exists in Vṛndāvana, near the Govinda Dev Temple, at the back side of Brahmakund.

You can go there. There's also the famous pastime that took place at Kusum Sarovar, where Krishna very carefully and with much devotion, one time decorated Śrīmatī’s hair with her permission.

I told that a few years ago. And when He finished doing so, Rādhā gazed into the mirror to see His work. And as she did so, Krishna walked around behind her to peer over her shoulder.

But as Śrīmatī looked into the mirror, her first impulse was not to look at herself, but to look at Krishna's reflection, not her own.

It's described that like a thirsty cakora bird, she drank the rays from His moon-like face, now even more beautiful due to His service of decorating her hair. But finally, their eyes met, and He said to her, "Dearest, what do you think?

Did I decorate your hair nicely?" Then, only for Krishna's pleasure, did Śrīmatī examine her own reflection, her hair.

Then she spoke to Krishna in the mirror, "Shyāma, no one has ever decorated me as nicely as you have.

You are truly the presiding deity of adornment." Another beautiful description of Krishna, she said, "You are truly the presiding deity of adornment.

You have outdone even my dearest friends." And I was reading that Rādhāranī also wears a mirror ring on her small finger. She wears a mirror ring. Why?

Due to strict social customs, she has to cover her face with her purdah, her veil, making it, you know, difficult or impossible to see Krishna.

But when she looks down at the mirror ring on her finger, this allows her to have the reflection of Krishna as darsana.

She has darsana of Krishna in the reflection in the ring, meaning that anytime He's standing nearby, she can have darsana of the Lord with that mirror ring.

And she also has a small mirror frame in the shape of a heart that she wears as a necklace. Now, the specialty of that mirror, you could say pendant, is that it captures the form of Krishna whenever she brought it.

She gets a rare opportunity to look at Him, you know, sometimes there are those sidelong glances. So the mirror captures the form of Krishna independently.

And it's described that this image of Krishna stays in this mirror pendant for more than 24 dundas.

Now, one time in a lecture, we described that one dunda is 24 minutes. So we do the math. That the image of Krishna stays in that pendant for 24 dundas, it means 574 minutes, or 9.6 hours.

And she has that often, she gets that glance, and in the, and she gets to see Krishna, and He sees her, and catches it in the mirror.

So therefore, Rādhā always covers that pendant with a cloth so that no one can see the mirror with her beloved's image in it. Wonderful pastimes in Vṛndāvana.

So I would like to end with a beautiful poem by Taj Bibi. You remember we discussed her, this beautiful, this wonderful devotee. She was Muslim, but she became a great Vaiṣṇavī in Vṛndāvana.

She was a poet. I'd like to finish with her poem. Very beautiful poem she wrote: "O Sākhi, I showed a mirror to the Divine Couple who were intoxicated in each other's beauty, and when they looked into the mirror, they felt lost in it.

I was completely aware of their eye talk, meaning talking by eye motions. Indeed, indeed, it took away all the material desires and worry from my heart. Why am I sitting in this house?

I should go out and chant the holy names of the Lord." Taj talking to herself, "Your heart is like a mirror. Clean it and glance always at the beautiful form of the Divine Couple." Hare Krishna.

Mirror pastimes. Just by hearing these mirror pastimes, somehow, even in our hearts, this love of Krishna gradually awakens.

O glorious revealer of the norm. So we'll be back in a week. Actually, I'm in New York City right now in America. I have jet lag, but still I wanted to serve all of you by sharing with you all these wonderful pastimes.

And I'll be back next week as well. So thank you so much. December Marathon. Okay, back home. Back to Godhead. Krishna.