Hare Krishna, everyone.

Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So we are continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part sixty-four. For this lecture, I would like to discuss how transcendental devotional poetry serves to awaken our love for Rādhā and Krishna and everything connected to them.

I was really waiting to deliver this lecture; there is a lot of nectar. To begin to set the groundwork, let us give the Webster dictionary—it's a popular dictionary in the West—its definition of worldly poetry. And I quote here: "Writing that formulates a concentrated imaginative awareness of experience in language chosen and arranged to create a specific emotional response through meaning, sound, and rhyme is called poetry." But unlike worldly poetry, which, of course, deals with the affairs of this temporary world, Krishna conscious poetry is known as *uttama-kāvya*, which literally means "first-class poetry" because it deals with Krishna's name, fame, form, pastimes, etc.

It also creates a specific emotional response through meaning, sound, and rhyme, like we heard Webster's Dictionary describe, but in a purely spiritual, devotional way. Therefore, such poetry is also referred to as *bhakti-vardhana-mahīṣī*, meaning "the queen of increasing unconditional devotion." Now, a Vṛndāvana scholar named Narahari Dāsa, of the late seventeenth century, he wrote very nicely.

I found this in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute.

He wrote as follows: "Such poetry repairs the broken hearts of devotees. It quenches the thirst of separation from great souls. It makes everyone laugh. It makes everyone cry. It heals the wounds of Māyā's victims and increases love for Krishna.

It is capable of doing this and all the more." Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in his *Śaraṇāgati*, verse one, I believe, or part one, "Vṛndāvana-related poetry is actual poetry among all varieties of poetry.

Along with its permanent, everlasting roses, such poetry is the soul of all other poetry, due to which all other poetry and their temporary shadow-like roses sustain their existence. That Vṛndāvana-related poetry is indeed truly worthy of being called poetry.

May such exclusive Vṛndāvana-related poetry, which is the essence of all poetry, be my topmost poetry, Krishna." Now, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states that any writings, poetry, or prose, or any writing specifically about Rādhā and Krishna, are like *śaraṇī*.

It's a cooling preparation known today as *śarbat*. In that regard, he composed a verse in the introduction to his *Nāṭaka*— *Vidagdha-mādhava Nāṭakam*—as follows: "The *śaraṇī* drink of Śrī's pastimes is capable of defeating the joyous sweetness of the moon's nectar.

It is also fragrant due to the cooling camphor of Śrī's love. May this *śaraṇī* drink drive away all of your thirst caused by walking on the difficult, troublesome pathways of the material world." Now, I found a verse in the *Agni Purāṇa* 3.36.3 that reaffirms that Krishna conscious poetry is topmost because it awakens *bhakti*, or divine love, within the heart for Rādhā-Krishna.

Let me quote: "In this material world, a human birth is very rare, and amongst humans, wisdom is rare. Still amongst the scholars of wisdom, poetry is even more rare. But amongst the poets, the poetry which melts the heart with its *rasa* is the rarest, and by Papa's grace, we have access to this rare poetry about devotional service to Krishna." Gaurāṅga Dāsa Babājī was once asked how to achieve love of God.

He replied, "It only costs five honors." His audience couldn't understand what he meant, so he elaborated. He said, "Go to the market and purchase Narahari Dāsa's *Nāma Kṛṣṇa Prema Bhakti Chandrikā* for five honors. If you read and meditate on those poetic books daily, you will develop love for Krishna." An example of Narahari Dāsa's simple devotional Bengali poetry is from one of his songs.

We'll just quote one line; it's enough: "Goṅgā-śaraṇera Dhana Hāṁ—the treasure house of divine love in Gokula Vṛndāvana has descended as the congregational chanting of Lord Hari's holy names." Poetry, in its essence.

Now, in preparation for this lecture, it became very apparent to me that poems are a very, very prominent part of our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava history. Our tradition of poetry actually goes back, you could say, more than a thousand years. And here are some—not all, of course, but some of the names of our most prominent poets through the ages.

Of course, I can't mention them all again, but just by hearing these names, we feel our hearts becoming purified: Jarādhara, Gopāla Svāmī, Vidyāpati, Dāsa Caṇḍīdāsa, Caitanya Dāsa, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, Rāmānanda Rāya, Gadādhara Paṇḍita, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Gopāla Bhatta Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Narahari Cakravartī, Śyāma Dāsa, Raghava Paṇḍita, Śarana Ṭhākura, Narottama Dāsa, Śrīyāma Nanda Paṇḍita, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Rasika Gāre Svāmī, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, and our own beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda.

What a list of names!

They are all great poets. And as you can guess from that list of names, poetry played a very important role during the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, 500 years ago. The illustrious Narahari Dāsa, this poet from Vṛndāvana, describes that as follows.

It's really nice: "May the art of poetry of Vaiṣṇavas be victorious. It rules over the heart of one and all. Manifests everyone's desires and showers everyone in bliss. May the darling son of mother Śacī, Śrī Caitanya Natavara, be victorious.

He places his left arm on the shoulder of Rāya Rāmānanda, his right arm on the shoulder of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, and listens to the splendid and deeply meaningful poems of Vidyāpati and Caṇḍīdāsa." Narahari Dāsa says, "When will that day come when I will compose uncountable poems to satisfy the hearts of devotees and become known as Śrī Gaurāṅga-śaraṇa, a soul who took shelter under Gaurāṅga's lotus feet?" Śrī Gaurāṅga-śaraṇa—what a name.

Now, in Vṛndāvana, I was reading.

Scholars say that there are three different categories of exalted Krishna conscious poets: They are *līlā-smṛti* poets, *anubhava-darśan* poets, and *anugraha* poets.

The *līlā-smṛti* poets are those who are present with Krishna and participate in His pastimes.

It is described they appear in this Kali Yuga on the earth during Lord Mahāprabhu's pastimes to write about the essence of those pastimes, and whatever they write, their poems come from their memory of whatever they have seen. The second type of poets are *anubhava-darśan*.

These are pure devotees who are capable of seeing the Lord's ever-ongoing pastimes, and in His unmanifested *līlās* in Śrī Caitanya Caritāmṛta, they see with spiritual vision and they write poems for us. The third type of poets, *anugraha*, are poets who, by the mercy of their Guru and their sincere practices in devotional service, become exalted and then write poems about pure devotion and its loving moods.

So, three categories of poets. I thought that was interesting to share. But in reality, all Vaiṣṇavas and Viṣṇu-bhaktas are meant to become poets. All of us. In a lecture on June 6, 1969, Śrīla Prabhupāda said to the assembled devotees, "For the Vaiṣṇava, there is one qualification: become poetic.

You should all—everyone should become poetic. But that poetry, that poetry language should be simply to glorify the Lord." And while recording that famous recording Prabhupāda did of *Pañca-tattva Mahāmantra*, which we often hear, at one point Prabhupāda said, "Practically all Vaiṣṇavas, they are transcendentally poetic.

This is one of the twenty-six qualifications of the Vaiṣṇava to become a poet." And actually, I was thinking, becoming true poets in Krishna consciousness will help us to win the hearts of the massive people, prospective devotees.

In *Ādi Līlā* 1.195, we hear a very famous verse about poetry: "*Kaḥ kavesḥ kaḥ kaḥ*, what is the use of a bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?" So important.

Let me recite that again: "What is the use of a bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?" Actually, I went deeper into that, and the origin of that verse is in *Nala Champu* 1.5 by an ancient poet named Trivikrama Bhatta.

We thank him from afar. Now, Trivikrama Bhatta, again, is a poet from the distant past. And I was reading that again in preparation for this lecture. Different poets in the past have highlighted different aspects of poetry. We're getting a little technical here, but it needs to be said.

They've highlighted different aspects of poetry. Some poets say that true poetry lies in the meaning of the words. Other poets say that true poetry is in the *rasa*, in the devotional mellow, or the experience that one has from hearing that poetry.

Some poets say that true poetry is the literary ornaments—figures of speech that decorate the poetry, like rhyme, etc. Other poets say that true poetry is the various qualities or *guṇas* of the poetry. For example, some poetry may elicit a mellow in your heart with very soft syllables, and others use very harsh syllables to bring forth spiritual emotion, like that.

So, it's quite deep. But here's something even deeper. Śrīla Kavikaraṅpura, in his *Alaṅkāra Kaustubha*, chapter 1, writes that *kāvya*, poetry, is a living person. Wow. *Kāvya*, transcendental poetry, is a living person. And he composes the following verse in that scripture to describe what he calls the *kāvya-puruṣa*, or poetry personified.

I'll recite it very slowly. He writes: "Personified poetry, *kāvya-puruṣa*, has his body made out of words and their meanings. Devotional suggestion is his life's air. *Rasa* is his soul. *Guṇas*, poetic excellences, are present in him. He is decorated externally with *alaṅkāra*, or literary ornaments.

Then he says, 'Some faults may be present in him, but they are to be neglected.'" Now, initially, I thought it odd that Kavikaraṅpura wrote that this personified personality of poetry, *kāvya-puruṣa*, may have some faults present in him, but they are to be neglected.

But then I remembered the *Śrīmad Bhāgavatam*, verse 1.5.11, and Śrīla Prabhupāda's purport therein, which clarified the matter for me.

So, the verse: "On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the transcendental glories of the name, fame, form, pastimes, etc., of the unlimited Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental words, directed toward bringing about a revolution in the impious lives of this world's misdirected civilization.

Such transcendental literatures, even though imperfectly composed, are heard, sung, and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest." And in the purport, of course, Prabhupāda just reveals everything.

In the purport, Prabhupāda elaborates.

He writes, "Presenting this matter, Krishna consciousness in inadequate language, especially a foreign language, will certainly fail, and there will be so many literary discrepancies despite our honest attempt to present it in the proper way.

But we are sure that with all our faults in this connection, the seriousness of the subject matter will be taken into consideration, and the leaders of society will still accept this due to its being an honest attempt to glorify the Almighty God." Now, there was one poet whom we haven't mentioned.

Actually, I was saving his name, saving him and his *līlās*, and that is Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura. Bilvamaṅgala, his incomparable poetry, including his magnum opus *Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta*, actually won him the name Līlā-śuka. Now, Bilvamaṅgala depicted love in separation in such verses as follows: "Oh, my Lord, oh, friend of the helpless, You are the only ocean of mercy.

Because I have not met You, my inauspicious days and nights have become unbearable. I do not know how I shall pass the time." Now, Krishna eventually rewarded Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura's loving devotion by granting him direct vision of Himself, which actually assured Bilvamaṅgala's entrance into the spiritual world at death.

But it's very interesting that Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī's commentary on the final verses of *Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta* take the form of a dialogue between Bilvamaṅgala and Krishna, who has just revealed Himself along with Śrīmatī Rādhā to Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura.

And Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī describes Bilvamaṅgala's ecstatic bliss upon seeing the Lord. But because of that ecstasy, for whatever reason, he can't properly describe Krishna; he's just overwhelmed.

So he called the Lord an "indescribable mass of bliss." "Lord, You are an indescribable mass of bliss." So Krishna said, "Bilvamaṅgala, I want to hear about that sweetness.

Please describe it." So Bilvamaṅgala responded, "I can only offer respect to that ocean of sweetness because it's beyond words." So Krishna continued to tease him.

He said, "Bilvamaṅgala, if words cannot describe it, use your mind to envision it." So again, Bilvamaṅgala excused himself. He said, "My Lord, Your sweetness is beyond thought, as much as it is beyond words." So Krishna replied, "If something cannot be expressed by words or thought, how can it be perceived?" So Bilvamaṅgala said, "Lord, Your sweetness reveals itself to those whose hearts are overcome with the mood of loving You, which arises from having envisioned You, which in turn causes a longing to see You directly." So at that point, Krishna changed the subject.

And He said, "By calling me a mass of bliss, are you saying that I am the impersonal Brahman?" So Līlā-śuka smiled and said, "No, Lord.

You are the brilliant sapphire ornament of Gokula, whom I adore. You are the brilliant sapphire ornament of Gokula, whom I adore." So pleased with this devotee, Krishna said, "Bilvamaṅgala, all this book of yours, *Kṛṣṇa-carita*, is such nectar for My ears that I stand before you to offer you a boon.

Please make a request. What else do you desire besides seeing Me and My beloved Śrī Rādhā?" So Bilvamaṅgala, he paused for a moment.

And he said, "Oh, Krishna, for the next hundred days of Brahmā, may this book, which is nectar for Your ears, flood the hearts of those who are devoted to You." So Krishna fulfilled Bilvamaṅgala's desire by saying, "So be it." And then He spontaneously offered another benediction.

He said, "Bilvamaṅgala, your book will be dear not only to devotees in general, but even to experts in devotion, even to My gopīs." I like that part, "even to My gopīs." Then Bilvamaṅgala, filled with wonder that such an august audience would relish his book, he thought something simple but sweet.

He thought, "How astonishing!

How astonishing!

Elegance is truth spoken concisely." Then Krishna tested him.

He said, "Devotees will be attracted by your unprecedented poetry, Līlā-śuka. Devotees will be attracted by your unprecedented poetry." And Bilvamaṅgala, he shook his head and said, "You asked me to make a request, and so again, I beg, poetry aside, let devotees taste the fragrance of Your sweetness as it is glorified in this book." And then Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, he says the Lord clapped His hands.

Sometimes I've heard devotees say, you know, when the *kīrtana*'s over, we shouldn't clap our hands, we should just say *Haribol*. But here the Lord clapped His hands in pleasure and exclaimed, "Līlā-śuka, you have purchased Me with your compassion for others and your love for Me.

You have come to Brahmā, and now you should taste it, and now you should taste it." Wow. Of course, our very own Śrīla Prabhupāda was a masterful poet in his own right, in every right.

It is his poems that penetrate our hearts and cause our heads to spin, as that verse we quoted earlier in the lecture. So, I thought it would be most appropriate today to finish with one of Śrīla Prabhupāda's poems, the one that touches everyone's heart all the time.

When we read it, it is the following. It's actually a Vāsā-pūjā offering Prabhupāda wrote to his own spiritual master, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.

And Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī was so touched by this particular poem that he had it printed in the *Gauḍīya Maṭha* magazine, *The Harmonist*. Prabhupāda's offering to his Guru Mahārāja.

Now, the original copy, I believe, was actually typed out by Śrīla Prabhupāda, was lost for many years, until one day in the 1970s, when Prabhupāda was still present with us, devotees were cleaning Prabhupāda's rooms at the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple in Vṛndāvana and found in one of Prabhupāda's old trunks the offering.

It was tucked away, you know, folded and tucked away somewhere. So, when they told Śrīla Prabhupāda they had found it, he was very happy and he ordered it to be printed in *Back to Godhead* magazine, like as Guru Mahārāja had ordered to be printed in *The Harmonist*.

He ordered it to be printed in *Back to Godhead* magazine for our benefit. Let us finish today with the poetry of our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda: "Adore ye, adore ye, all the happy day, Blessed than heaven, sweeter than May, When he appeared at Puri, the holy place, My Lord and Master, His Divine Grace.

Oh, my Master, the evangelic angel, Give us Thy light, light up Thy candle. Struggle for existence, a human race, The only hope, His Divine Grace. Misled we are, or going astray, Save us, Lord, our fervent pray. Wonder thy ways, to turn our face, Adore Thy feet, Your Divine Grace.

Forgotten Krishna, we fallen souls, Paying most heavy, illusion's toll, Darkness around, untraceable, life, As what is unknown to all, it's full of brace.

That's Your gift, Your Divine Grace. Absolute is sentinent, Thou hast proved, In personal calamity, Thou hast moved. This gives us life, a new and fresh, Worship Thy feet, Your Divine Grace. Had You not come, who had told the message of Krishna, Forceful and bold, that's Your right, You have the mace.

Save me, O fallen, Your Divine Grace. The line of service, as drawn by You, Is pleasing and healthy, like morning dew. The oldest of all, but in new dress, Miracle done, Your Divine Grace. Hare Krishna!

There's nothing more to be said." For us, thank you so much. And I'm in Surat, Gujarat, right now. We're continuing with our tour of India with a small group, and we'll be back next, uh, next Friday. Hare Krishna. Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu Nityānanda Śrī Advaita Gadādhara Śrīvāsa Gaura Bhakta Vrinda ki jaya!