""Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Namaste, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, we are continuing with our miniseries on "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," and this will be Part 86. In this lecture, we will continue to discuss music and musical instruments used in devotional service, which can help to stimulate our love for Kṛṣṇa.

Now, the word *saṅgīta* is the Sanskrit term for music, and this term is formed by adding the prefix *su* (sam) to the Sanskrit verbal root *gai* (gai). Śāstra says, "A musical performance consists of musical instruments (*vādya*), dance (*nṛtya* or *lasa*), and singing (*gāna*)." So, last week, amongst *vādya*, or musical instruments, we discussed the *mṛdaṅga*, and we will continue the discussions today as I came across some really interesting information about this very special drum.

First and foremost, I came across an article written by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. It was published in his *Sajjana-toṣaṇī*, Volume 7, Issue 2, published in 1895. This article that he wrote was entitled "*Mṛdaṅga-vyākaraṇa*," meaning "A Critique of the Book Called Ocean of Mṛdaṅga Beats." He wrote a critique on this book, *An Ocean of Mṛdaṅga Beats*. In this book, it contains lessons on how to play the *mṛdaṅga* drum, and in that book, the author gave a śloka on the title page. The śloka is in Sanskrit, but I’ll give the translation: "Those who do not know the quality of music and poetry are almost like animals without a tail. Those who do not know the quality of music and true poetry are almost like animals without a tail."

So, while such a statement can certainly be taken as true, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura presented a little bit of a different angle of vision. He wrote: "In our opinion, the glories of music and true poetry are not properly described in this śloka, for when music is played on a suitable instrument, even animals in a forest feel great appreciation. Wow, for when music is played on a suitable instrument, even animals in a forest feel great appreciation." And he went on, "Since the time of Mahāprabhu, it is doubtful if there is anything more pleasurable to a jīva than the sound of the *mṛdaṅga* and the *manohara-śāhī kīrtana*, which have become so prevalent in our times. Those who do not understand *tāla* and rhythm, *māna* (tempo), *rāga* (main composition), or *rāgiṇī* (secondary compositions) can also feel supreme ecstasy simply by listening to *manohara-śāhī*."

Then he goes on with his critique on the book. He says, "This book has been prepared in order to perpetuate the text of *Mṛdaṅga Beats*. We wish that those who do business with *mṛdaṅgas* will one by one continually discuss this." So, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura commented on the opening statement in the book. Then he continues, "Śrī Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura Mahāśaya composed the following śloka in his *Śrī Śrī Śacīnandana-aṣṭaka*, which indicates the glories of the *mṛdaṅga*." Quote: "Kṛṣṇa saw that in Kali-yuga everyone is attached to vice or sin; thus, He appeared in the form of Śrī Caitanya, who is an ocean of mercy. The sound *tik-ṭan, tik-ṭan* of the *mṛdaṅga* seems to say: 'Shame on them, shame on those men who do not accept Him as Kṛṣṇa.'" Beautiful, isn't it? Śrī Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura Mahāśaya.

So, while reading this critique of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura on that book, I was particularly curious about his statement that again, since the time of Mahāprabhu, it is doubtful if there is anything more pleasurable to a jīva than the sound of the *mṛdaṅga* and the *manohara-śāhī kīrtana* which had become so prevalent. So I was wondering, what is this *manohara-śāhī kīrtana* that he's referring to, which gives so much pleasure to the devotees? I'd never heard that term before. So I researched, and I learned that well, kīrtana in Bengal developed through contributions from different poets like the Gosvāmīs. Though Jīva Gosvāmī's works were composed in Sanskrit in the 12th century, they actually had a profound influence on later Bengali poets who wrote and composed songs about the love of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, like, you know, Caṇḍīdāsa and Vidyāpati, who lived in the 14th and 15th centuries respectively. And all these poets explained the *rāgas* and *tālas* in which their songs were to be sung, but the actual style of singing prevalent during their time cannot be ascertained. They explained how their music was to be played, but the actual style is not known today.

And the present form of Bengali kīrtana that we know so well, of course, was developed by the followers of Lord Caitanya, especially Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, who I was reading was well-trained in classical music in Vṛndāvana. Now, the style of kīrtana done by Narottama—remember Narottama, Śyāmānanda—the second generation, the original second generation just after Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the style of kīrtana done by Narottama is called *guraṇahāṭī*. *Guraṇahāṭī*. From that *guraṇahāṭī* style, some of the direct disciples of Narottama dāsa developed a style called *manohara-śāhī*. That's where it comes from. A little like Narottama's, but they changed it a little bit; they developed it, let's say a little bit, *manohara-śāhī*, which I was reading was mixed with some local folk tunes. And this *manohara-śāhī* style was actually practiced by very expert musicians. So that's the style of kīrtana that Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was referring to when he wrote, "Again, since the time of Mahāprabhu, it is doubtful if there is anything more pleasurable to a jīva than the sound of the *mṛdaṅga* and the *manohara-śāhī kīrtana* which had become so prevalent," which was developed by some of the disciples of Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura.

It was just so wonderful to find this historic fact, how kīrtana has evolved. Even before the time of Mahāprabhu, we were mentioning, then with the appearance of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, then Narottama, then his disciples. I was also reading that during the time of Śrī Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, there were rigorous training centers for kīrtana in the āśramas of Vaiṣṇava gurus whose students used to learn the techniques of music in these very rigorous schools. We don't have that; it's interesting. Later, these, unfortunately, these training centers on how to do kīrtana disintegrated, and gradually kīrtana became more simple, like we have today. Of course, just recently, our beloved Bihari Prabhu, my dear godbrother, he's actually doing a—he is developing a kīrtana training program online, which will come out very soon, which will, in the same mood, be training devotees how to do kīrtana, how to play the harmonium, how to play the *mṛdaṅga*, what are the melodies, what is the mood, etc. It's a great contribution that Bihari Prabhu is making.

So in those olden days, or we're talking about 400 or 500 years ago, two different forms of kīrtana were practiced by Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, two different types: namely, *nāma-kīrtana* and *līlā-kīrtana*. *Nāma*—of course, in *nāma-kīrtana*, the name of Kṛṣṇa was and is today repeated by a gathering of devotees who, you know, with simple melody and rhythm, while in a temple or going on procession through the streets of towns and villages with *mṛdaṅgas* and *karatālas* while singing Kṛṣṇa's holy names. And *līlā-kīrtana*, which was prevalent during that time, included the lead singer singing but also stopping sometimes and speaking on different aspects of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. He would sing and then describe some pastime, especially the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And some devotees nowadays are interested in reviving this type of *līlā-kīrtana* as well; it's authorized.

Of course, all this began with the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu 500 years ago. He himself made a very bold prediction how this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa in various ways would spread. Words from His lotus mouth: He said, "In every town and village, the chanting of My name will be heard." And as we discussed last week, such chanting, of course, along with the instruments like the *mṛdaṅga* drum, give great pleasure to pious people and especially to devotees of the Lord. You may remember last week we quoted our beloved Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's song: "This when I hear the sound of the *mṛdaṅga*, in my heart I always desire to join in the kīrtana. And when I hear the bona fide songs describing Lord Caitanya's pastimes, my heart dances in ecstasy."

Nevertheless, although it's true that the pious and especially the devotees experienced great bliss from such chanting and hearing the sound of the *mṛdaṅgas* and the *karatālas*, unfortunately, it has the opposite effect on those who are adverse to devotional service, inimical to the Lord and His devotees. I was thinking much like Arjuna says in *Bhagavad-gītā*, Chapter 11, verse 36, he says, "O Master of the senses, Kṛṣṇa, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus everyone becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offer You their respective homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee here and there. All this is rightly done." It seems this has been going on since time immemorial: devotees love it, and non-devotees, they don't like it.

Now, a case in point, how not everyone likes the sound of Hare Kṛṣṇa and the beautiful sound of the *mṛdaṅga*, is of course the famous pastime of the Chand Kazi 500 years ago, who ordered his soldiers to break the *mṛdaṅga* drums in a saṅkīrtana party ordered by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu on the streets of Navadvīpa. But there's another similar pastime, perhaps not as well known by devotees, that I would like to share today concerning another Muslim ruler in Odisha, in Orissa. His name was Sher Khan (S-H-E-R K-H-A-N). Now, the principal devotee in this pastime is our beloved Śyāmānanda Prabhu, from the famous second-generation trio we mentioned earlier: Narottama, Śrīnivāsa, and Śyāmānanda, who, if you remember the lectures we gave about those great personalities a couple of years ago, were trained up by Jīva Gosvāmī. After the departure of Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda from this world, they were second generation, so they were trained up by Jīva Gosvāmī. And after their training, Śyāmānanda, he went to preach in Orissa with the help of his disciple Rasikānanda to spread the glories of *nāma-saṅkīrtana* they heard from their gurus. And then they served their gurus by going out and spreading *nāma-saṅkīrtana*.

Now, while touring Orissa, Śyāmānanda Prabhu—it's described—engaged everyone he met in the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa. It is said that by his divine influence, practically the whole of Orissa appeared to be turning into Vaiṣṇavism. Wow! However, as is the case, in one town, a very devout Muslim ruler named Sher Khan—again, he went with his soldiers one day to confront Śyāmānanda, who was going through this king's area, this particular town in which he lived, with an ecstatic kīrtana party. And he approached Śyāmānanda; he stopped the kīrtana. He said to him, "If you continue this chanting," he threatened, "I shall have you all chained up and flogged." Flogged is like whipped.

So, Śyāmānanda, he stopped the kīrtana party, but the next day he and all his devotees returned to the streets. Now, the devotees, they were apprehensive at that time, but it's written about Śyāmānanda, true spiritual warrior, it's written: "Oblivious to everything except Lord Caitanya's order and the bliss of chanting Kṛṣṇa's holy names." Everyone was, like, fearful, but he had full faith in the holy names and the instructions of the Lord. So he was oblivious to everything except Lord Caitanya's order and the bliss of chanting Kṛṣṇa's holy names, and he ordered the devotees: "Start singing again!" And learning that Śyāmānanda was disobeying his orders, as the news spread to Sher Khan, he took a big group of soldiers this time and he marched to the place where the kīrtana was going on. You know, they literally marched, you know, one, two, three. It gives a certain—if an army marches somewhere, it creates fear in the enemy—so he marched to the place where this kīrtana was going on. And when they got there, he had his soldiers smash all the *mṛdaṅga* drums and tear away all the *karatālas* from the devotees' hands. Just envision this in your mind; it's not just some story, it happened. It's what turned out to be a pastime. And they're, you know, tearing away the *karatālas* and smashing *mṛdaṅgas* and beating the devotees.

But it's described before the soldiers could do more damage, Śyāmānanda, from his heart, he called out to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa for help. It said that Śyāmānanda's calling, it's like chanting, was like Prahlāda Mahārāja's chanting as he was tortured by his father, or Haridāsa Ṭhākura's chanting as he was whipped in the marketplaces. These are historical incidents: Prahlāda's calling out, Haridāsa's calling out with full faith—Hare Kṛṣṇa. So Śyāmānanda was calling out like that. His call was fully transcendent. And as a result, suddenly, all the hair and the beards of this Muslim king and his soldiers caught fire! And it's described that the flames quickly spread to their clothes, and it forced the entire army and the king to seek shelter by jumping, weapons and all, into a nearby lake. They're on fire, so they run, they jump in the lake. And then, humiliated before his subjects, Sher Khan and his men retreated to their palace, where the king hid himself in his quarters. It's described, unable to comprehend what had happened and why.

Now it even gets more interesting, all these pastimes. That night, it's described, Allah—the name for God in Islam—Allah came to Sher Khan in a dream and angrily slapped him. Allah told the king that his name, Allah, and the name of Kṛṣṇa were the same, and what's more, he said that Lord Caitanya was his most confidential form. Wow! Allah—he told the king that Lord Caitanya was his most confidential form. So on the following day—well, Śyāmānanda went back out, can't stop devotees like that—on the following day, the king again appeared alone. It's described he walked alone to where the kīrtana party was going on, not dressed in all his opulent clothes with his crown and jewels and sword, but in a very humble way. He appeared before Śyāmānanda and his chanting party without soldiers or weapons, and he fell down *daṇḍavats*. *Daṇḍavats* means you fall down like a rod on the ground. He fell down like a rod in front of Śyāmānanda and crying and crying and crying, he begged forgiveness. This is the result of *sādhu-saṅga*, association with devotees. It wasn't even in a favorable way, but somehow Śyāmānanda was kind upon him, and he begged forgiveness.

He begged forgiveness, and right then and there, he stood up, and Śyāmānanda embraced him. And during that embrace, Sher Khan whispered in his ear, "Please initiate me into the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra." And Śyāmānanda Prabhu did just that. Stood back, right then and there he initiated them on the spot! There was no big fire *yajña* and throwing of the grains and the mantras; he initiated them on the spot. And that Sher Khan, he received the spiritual name, Caitanya-dāsa. "Your name is Caitanya," and later he became a very prominent disciple of Śyāmānanda. He became a very prominent disciple. I was reading that, it's like, wow, the hair on my arm almost stood up. So it may be surprising that Śyāmānanda Prabhu gave him initiation so quickly there on the street, but there's a famous quoted effect from the *Tattva-sāgara*:

"If by chance or good fortune one gets a guru, it doesn't matter whether one is in a temple or the forest. If the spiritual master agrees, one should take initiation immediately, without waiting for suitable time or place. If by chance or good fortune one gets a guru, it doesn't matter whether one is in a temple or the forest. If the spiritual master agrees, one should take initiation immediately, without waiting for a suitable time or place."

Of course, in our International Society for Krishna Consciousness, we have necessary guidelines to assure the spiritual master that the disciple is qualified, but this is interesting to hear how in some circumstances this śloka may be applied. All Kṛṣṇa. So my main point is we should not be afraid to go out and chant the holy names with *mṛdaṅgas* and *karatālas*. Remember what Lord Nṛsiṃha said to the Chand Kazi, who I mentioned earlier sent his people to break the *mṛdaṅgas* of the devotees in public. In the following verses, the Kazi himself is recounting that pastime. It's all in *Ādi-līlā*, Chapter 17:

"Nṛsiṃha, placing His nails on my chest—again, Kazi speaking—the lion said in a grave voice: 'I shall immediately bifurcate your chest as you broke the *mṛdaṅga* drum.' It appears the Kazi was there actually. 'Kazi, you have forbidden the performance of My congregational chanting; therefore, I must destroy you. Be very much afraid of him.' I closed my eyes and I trembled. The Kazi says, *siṃha-nāda śuni kampa haila mora gāya*. Seeing me so afraid, the lion said, 'I have defeated you just to teach you a lesson, but I must be merciful to you. *śuna kazi, śuna, prāṇa na-i'*. On that day you did not create a very great disturbance; therefore, I have excused you and have not taken your life. *yadi punar-api, kintu, yadi punaḥ, ei mata karo, kariya, kariyā kara, kīrtana, *kariya kīrtana, na karaha yadi, taibe amāra, para, na, para, kariya'*. But if you perform such activities again, I shall not be so tolerant. At that time, I shall kill you, your entire family, and all the meat-eaters."

Kṛṣṇa! Oh, we're protected by the Lord because we're doing His work. He comes and He goes, but His devotees, the dear sons and daughters of the Lord, they take up the same mission of the Lord, so they get some special protection.

Now, last week we briefly mentioned how overjoyed our Śrīla Prabhupāda was upon receiving one of these *mṛdaṅgas* we've been discussing in so many ways last week and this week as well. How overjoyed Prabhupāda was; we just mentioned it, how he received a *mṛdaṅga* from India shortly after he had begun his preaching in the USA. And we gave many quotes how dear the *mṛdaṅga* is to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Well, I found a detailed account of that particular pastime of Prabhupāda receiving the first *mṛdaṅga* in the West, in my dear godbrother Mukunda Mahārāja's book, *Miracle on Second Avenue*. Everyone should read that book, *Miracle on Second Avenue*; it's been out for a while, and I thought it would be a most appropriate way to finish this lecture today, which is Part 2 on the *mṛdaṅga*. Actually, I'll read the text in part as Mahārāja wrote it. I think that's probably the best way to do it, from the person that experienced it, it's really nice.

"A delivery truck pulled up next to me"—Mahārāja speaking in first person—"and the delivery man said, 'Hey, buddy, do you know where the Hare Kṛṣṇa Temple is?' 'Just over there,' I said, pointing across the street. I watched him double-park and unload a large wooden box. A guy named Murāri, one of the newly initiated San Francisco devotees, came outside to sign for the delivery, and I ran across the street, my interest piqued. The first thing I noticed was the Hindi writing on the sides of the box. Other markings on the box indicated it had traveled from New York by train via Union Pacific, which was a delivery company at that time. 'What is it?' Murāri asked. 'I don't know,' I said, 'but I hope it's what I think it is. Let's get something to open this.' Several devotees gathered around me on the sidewalk outside the temple while I pried open the top with a claw hammer. Inside, nestled in a bed of well-packed Indian newspapers, was the drum we'd all been waiting for. Ever since the New York devotees had called us to tell us it had arrived in America from India, it was the real thing at last."

I love that. "It was the real thing at last."

"Murāri and I lifted the box inside the temple to—inside the temple and unpacked the drum properly. It was cylindrical, sloping to a bulge near the middle, about 3 feet long. Its beautiful red-brown exterior covered with small reddish straps pulled tight around its circumference. One end was a lot larger than the other." Of course, it's the first time devotees are seeing a *mṛdaṅga*. "Then Mahārāja said, or he wrote, 'The Swami had told me that the drum was called a *mṛdaṅga* and that it was the forerunner of the tablā. If you cut a *mṛdaṅga* in the middle, he had said, and place each end upright, you have a tablā.' As I saw my first real *mṛdaṅga* before me, I saw that he was right. I tried banging the leatherheads a few times; they resounded loudly—the small end high and sharp, and the large end rich and deep. 'Let's tell the Swami it's here,' Jīyaki suggested. 'He should play it first.' Jīyaki and I went next door and took the elevator up to Prabhupāda's fourth-floor apartment. We knocked. 'Yes?' he called to the door. 'Come in.' 'Swami, the *mṛdaṅga* has arrived,' Jīyaki blurted out excitedly. Śrīla Prabhupāda's eyes opened wide. 'It is here,' he said. 'Yes, in the temple, we unpacked it.' 'I will come in one minute,' he said. We took the elevator down so we'd be back at the temple before he arrived, but as we were opening the old elevator's door, we saw Swami already at the bottom of the stairs, heading out to the temple. 'He really wants to see that *mṛdaṅga*,' I observed. Jīyaki nodded. 'Come on, hurry up,' she urged. We followed him out into the sunny street and into the temple. I picked up the *mṛdaṅga* and handed it to him. He smiled broadly and sat down on the ledge that ran along the large front windows. As he felt the drum all over, my mind flicked back to the way the musicians at the recent Mantra Rock Dance in San Francisco had fondled their instruments like a precious loved one, a priceless treasure, or the way a parent might hold their child. Placing the drum in his lap, the Swami played a few beats, delicately tapping the small end with his fingers on his right hand and striking the large end with his left palm. Then, without saying a word, he tore off a yard-long portion of his *dhoti*, his cotton *dhoti*. It was a substantial part of his *dhoti*, but not enough to expose his legs. This piece of cloth he wrapped tightly around the *mṛdaṅga* so that the pointed ends of the cloth met in a hard knot over the bulge of the drum. 'This must never come off,' he said. 'It is necessary to protect the *mṛdaṅga*. The drum is called a *khol* in Bengali. It is made from earth; it will break very easily. Never remove the cloth.' We all nodded. 'This instrument I have played all my life,' he said. 'When I was a child, my father insisted that I learn *mṛdaṅga*. From an early age, he would have let me play it all day every day. Except for my mother, except for my mother, I would have missed school altogether.' You know, she—we heard last week how she complained. He paused, striking the drumheads again and again. 'Bring water,' he said. 'How much?' Jīyaki asked. 'A little,' he replied. Jīyaki went to the temple kitchen and came back with a styrofoam cup half-filled with water. 'That's sufficient,' Prabhupāda said, reaching for the cup. Holding it with his left hand, he dipped the ring finger of his right hand into the water. 'I will show you how to take care of this *mṛdaṅga*,' he said. Never lifting his eyes from the drum, he turned the *mṛdaṅga* so that the large end was facing upward and was level with his chest. With the deafness of a lifelong drummer, he ran his wet finger around the edge of the drumhead, dampening its small, cream-colored margin. 'This must—this you must do regularly,' he said, 'with a little water, like I'm showing.' He didn't explain why, but I assumed it was a maintenance technique to keep the application from eroding or cracking at its outer edges. Later, through following the Swami's watering instructions, I also discovered that regular dampening helped keep the heads taut. I mean, you play them, as good sound comes out. Swami continued to test the sound of the drumheads, striking each and attentively a few times while listening closely, his head cocked. 'Very good,' he said after some time, and headed back to his apartment. After a few minutes, I followed him. I found him writing at his makeshift desk. 'Swami, would you teach me to play the *mṛdaṅga*?' He looked up from his work. 'Yes,' he said. 'When you want today, get it,' he said. 'Just bring it, I'll show you.' I ran down the stairs to the temple and carefully carried the *mṛdaṅga* to the elevator, not wanting to risk dropping it in the stairway. He was waiting for me in his rocking chair, chanting on his beads. 'You sit here,' he said, indicating the new rug on his floor. The drum sat in my lap. The Swami put down his beads and sat opposite me, cross-legged, close enough so that he could hit the drum too. 'Every sound, every beat on *mṛdaṅga* has mantra,' he began. 'Always you must say the words of the mantra. The sound of the drum should sound like words.' 'How can a drum sound like words?' I asked. 'Watch,' he said. 'You must strike the drum with a different portion of your hand for each beat. There's a special place on the drum for each beat. Watch.' He hit the drumheads and spoke these sounds: *kṛ*, *kṛ*... the small end he struck with his second finger, with his third, fourth, and fifth fingers locked together. The large end he hit with his four fingers held flat. 'You hear the sounds?' he asked me. 'I think so,' I said. 'Listen again. Watch,' he said. First *kṛ*, then *gā*, *gā*, *gā*, *gā*. You see?' I nodded. 'Now you do. Now you do,' he said. At last, I tried to hit the drum and say the mantra, but it was hard to do it at the same time. I closed my eyes and focused all my attention, I'm playing correctly while speeding up. After some time, our session finished, and it went back down to the temple, carrying the *mṛdaṅga* very carefully all the way."

Thank you, Mukunda Mahārāja, for sharing that pastime with the beloved *mṛdaṅga* arriving in America for the saṅkīrtana movement to spread all over that country and the world. And thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda, for introducing us to this most beautiful enchanting, which we are playing on your behalf all over the world now, to spread the chanting of the holy names. So, Prabhupādas, this ends our little series on *mṛdaṅgas*, and, yeah, next Friday we'll do another musical instrument, the *vīṇā*. The *vīṇā*. All glories to Prabhupāda.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you.""