""# Stimulation for Ecstatic Love Part 056 - Kṛṣṇa’s Bodily Fragrance

Hi everyone, a warm welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. So today, we're continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love and this will be part 56. In this lecture, I would like to discuss the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s body. We will see that of all the items of stimulation for ecstatic love that we’ve discussed for the vrajavāsīs, the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s body is perhaps the most potent and overwhelming.

Here’s a preview: in *Gopāla-campū*, Volume Three, Chapter Six, which is entitled "The Attainment of All Desires," text number six, therein the devotee Gopālakumāra is entering Goloka Vṛndāvana, where he meets Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa shows him special mercy. Gopālakumāra says:

> "In such a way I lived in this grove, this kuñja, this most attractive ornament of Vṛndāvana, and one day while immersed in an ocean of weeping I fell unconscious. Then the crest jewel of all who are merciful appeared before me. With his own lotus hand—a hand cool like nectar and always pleased to hold his flute—he wiped the dust from my limbs. It wasn’t easy, but that greatest of cheats playfully stirred me back to consciousness by filling my nostrils with his unique, heady fragrances, which I’d never known before."

Hare Kṛṣṇa, there’s an example of how the vrajavāsīs—because he became a vrajavāsī—are affected by the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s body. Now, my dear departed godbrother Gopī-pādānanda paraphrases Sanātana Gosvāmī’s commentary at that point. He wrote: "Śrī Madan-gopāla Kṛṣṇa appeared in person to Gopālakumāra to award him the highest perfection. Gopālakumāra was in a deep swoon—it’s a nice word, swoon—oblivious to everything around him, but Kṛṣṇa’s presence awakened one of his senses, namely the sense of smell. Kṛṣṇa, the most expert enchanter, knows very well how to stir the senses of even an unconscious person." Thank you, Gopī.

So, just what exactly is the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s body? We know in detail from a pastime of Lord Caitanya in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Antya-līlā, Chapter 19. Therein it’s described that on one full moon night in the month of Vaiśākha, which is April-May, Caitanya Mahāprabhu went to the garden called Jagannātha-vallābha in Jagannātha Purī. Now, this garden was full of blossoming trees and creepers exactly like those in Vṛndāvana, and it’s described by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja that as he wandered around the garden, Mahāprabhu saw an aśoka tree in the distance and, to his amazement and great satisfaction, he suddenly saw Lord Kṛṣṇa standing beneath that tree. And Lord Caitanya immediately began running towards the tree, but after a few steps, Kṛṣṇa smiled and quickly disappeared from under that tree. And in text 88, we hear something really amazing.

Because the entire garden was filled with the scent or the aroma of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body, Caitanya Mahāprabhu smelled it and fell unconscious at once. So, Gopālakumāra was awoken by this aroma of Kṛṣṇa’s body—awoken from his unconsciousness—whereas Caitanya Mahāprabhu smelled that aroma and he fell unconscious. Either way, something amazing.

Then, coming to Mahāprabhu, he recited a śloka that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī once spoke, describing to her gopī friends how she always hankers for that transcendental aroma of Kṛṣṇa’s body. It’s a famous verse; it’s in Antya-līlā, Chapter 19, verse 91, and I found it’s also quoted in *Govinda-līlāmṛta* 8.6. Śrī Rādhā says:

> "The scent of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body surpasses the aroma of musk and attracts the minds of all women. The eight lotus-like parts of his body distribute the fragrance of lotuses mixed with that of camphor. His body is anointed with aromatic substances like musk, camphor, sandalwood, and aguru. Oh my dear friend, that Personality of Godhead, also known as the enchanter of Cupid, always increases the desire of my nostrils."

So, in Rādhārāṇī’s words, we hear specifically exactly what are the particular fragrances in Kṛṣṇa’s form or body. Then Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja goes on to say that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, his mind thus stolen by the scent of Kṛṣṇa’s body, ran here and there like a bumblebee. He ran to the trees and plants, hoping that Lord Kṛṣṇa would appear, but instead he only found that beautiful aroma.

So, I was thinking, you know, one day we also hope to smell the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form, isn’t it? When will that day be ours? But those who will never have that opportunity are most unfortunate. I found in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 23.3, where Mahāprabhu confirms this. He says: "One’s nostrils are no better than the bellows of a blacksmith if one has not smelled the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s body, which is like the aroma of musk combined with that of the bluish lotus flower. Indeed, such combinations are actually defeated by the aroma of Kṛṣṇa’s body."

Mahāprabhu—now, devotees may not be so familiar with all of these, or some of you any of these scents or perfumes, so I thought to take a moment to explain a little bit about them. It will help us appreciate Kṛṣṇa more before we move on.

To begin with, what is aguru? Aguru or aguru oil, we have today its modern name is agarwood, and it’s explained in *Gopāla-campū* in the spiritual world it’s said to produce a natural fragrance. Just the tree is always producing; all the aguru trees are producing this wonderful fragrance. However, in this world, not all aguru or agarwood trees produce a fragrance. I was reading one out of thousands of agarwood trees gets infected accidentally by a parasitic mold, and in response to this infection, that one particular tree starts to produce a resin which has this particular fragrance that is desired. This resin slowly grows inside the entire tree over the years, and after many years it becomes the tree from which aguru oil is produced. In the modern world and modern society, this aguru oil—which people use, but you know, devotees like to use it for their deities—is extremely expensive, up to $100,000 per kilo, I read. As a result, there’s many imitation agarwood fragrances available for a lesser price, but how could you say they’re not the real deal? Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So now, what is musk? Oh, we’ve heard of musk, but actually real musk is extremely rare to be found today. And like aguru oil, there are many imitations; you can get cheap perfumes that they say are musk. But actually, many of you will be surprised to learn that real musk is produced by a species of deer called white-bellied musk deer, who are found actually only in the Himalayan Mountains, and actually they’re an endangered species today, unfortunately. So, these beautiful deer produce what they call musk pods—little pods with tiny granules of musk inside—and when these deer die naturally, this pod with small granules of musk is extracted from the navel of the deer. Now, I also read that in olden times and ancient times, pujārīs or mahants of temples or even sādhu-santas, they could take a small silver spoon and they could place it inside the navel without hurting the deer, the male deer, and bring forth these pods with the granules of musk inside. Somehow they would do like that without hurting the deer. Of course, that’s not done anymore.

I was reading in the *Encyclopaedia Britannica* that a small grain of real deer musk can scent millions of cubic feet of air. That aroma can scent millions of cubic feet of air. Actually, I have a little experience of this in a tiny way because about a year ago one sādhu gave me a few granules of actual musk. He said it was 100 years old or something. He gave me a few and as I walked into his bhajan-kuṭīr, I could smell; they were just a few there. And he gave them to me, and this kavaṭa—which I explained to you a couple months ago—holds many precious items, you know, cloth of different sādhu-santas and Śrīla Prabhupāda’s hair and you know different special items I have in here, and I opened it up and I put these granules of musk inside, and even as I’m sitting here, I can smell the musk. Somehow it comes through the metal; so potent it is, it’s almost mystical. And so, that’s how musk is obtained. And the ācāryas say, interestingly enough, that in the spiritual world musk is produced simply by the potency of Yoga-māyā; they don’t have to go through this whole process with this beautiful deer. Musk is produced by the potency of Yoga-māyā.

Now, our beloved Rūpa Gosvāmī actually mentions deer musk on Kṛṣṇa’s persona in his *Padyāvalī*, verse 165. A gopī is speaking about her contact with Kṛṣṇa; she says:

> "Dear sakhī, first I saw a splendid blue effulgence, then I smelled the fragrance of deer musk, then I heard a playful flute music, then I heard the sweet tinkling of a sash of bells, then I saw waves of wonderful handsomeness encircled by a stationary lightning flash. As a result of this, I experienced immense, natural bliss within myself."

So, you note that in the very beginning, "then I smelled the fragrance of deer musk." She might be rounding.

Now, camphor. Actually, real camphor is produced only from the camphor tree, and the wooden chips of this tree are roasted and condensed, and then this gives off a certain vapor. There’s a certain process which in that way it’s collected. But I was reading that by the early 19th century, almost all camphor-producing trees have been depleted by deforestation, unfortunately, so nowadays most camphor is produced from turpentine. Kṛṣṇa.

Now finally, sandalwood. Sandalwood is probably the most known of the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body, but actually real sandalwood has also become somewhat of a rare item in modern times also due to deforestation. Śrīla Prabhupāda refers to this fact in a letter I found to my godbrother Nayanābhirāma Dāsa on August 22nd, 1971. Prabhupāda writes: "Malayan sandalwood is famous, as in Malaya, but nowadays in Malaya there’s only rubber trees. But still in the market, sandalwood is known as Malayan sandalwood." In ancient times, sandalwood was also highly valued, of course, and to some extent even a rare commodity. Then Cāṇakya Paṇḍita writes in *Nīti-śāstra*, Chapter 2, verse 9:

> "There does not exist a ruby in every mountain, nor a pearl on the head of every elephant; neither are sādhu-santas to be found everywhere, nor sandalwood in every forest."

There’s another one of my favorites: "There does not exist a ruby in every mountain, nor a pearl on the head of every elephant; neither are sādhu-santas to be found everywhere, nor sandalwood in every forest." An interesting fact about sandalwood paste: it keeps one cool in the summer and warm in the winter. And according again to Cāṇakya Paṇḍita in his *Cāṇakya-nīti-śāstra*, the wood referred to as *candana* in Sanskrit comes in various colors: Rakta-candana (red), rakta-kṛṣṇa (reddish-black), rakta-śukla (reddish-white), harita (greenish), raktīta-śukla (yellowish-red), and śukla (pure white). I haven’t seen all of those, but they exist.

And last year here I read how Vaiṣṇava poets often use analogies of sandalwood in reference to the cooling effect of the association of sādhu-santas for all of us while we burn in the fire of material existence. The poet Paramānanda Dāsa, for example, writes in *Brajabāsī-padāvali*:

> "Śrī Vallabha-nandana, subha-vadana, candana-ṭaraṇā."
> "The son of Vallabha, Jīva Gosvāmī, is worshiped by everyone because he is the one who steals the fire burning in the material world and applies cooling sandalwood paste on the forehead to give bliss."

There’s another verse by an anonymous author which I really like:
> "Candanaṁ śītalaṁ loke, candanādapi candramāḥ, candracandana-madhye tu, sādhu-saṅgaḥ śubhāśubham."
> "On this planet, the intrinsic nature of sandalwood is that it’s very cooling. Amongst other refrigerants, more cooling than sandalwood, however, is the moon. And even more cooling than sandalwood and the moon is the association of a sādhu."

Hare Kṛṣṇa. So, as we were discussing, in Vṛndāvana-līlā all these fragrances are mixed and applied to Kṛṣṇa’s body, and this creates an aroma that steals away the minds of the gopīs. Now, we have already heard how the chief gopī, Vṛndā-śaraṇī, swoons from the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s form. But more can be said, for the ācāryas say to satisfy her constant longing for the sweet fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental limbs, Rādhārāṇī sometimes smears her own limbs with musk oil and thinks, "Kṛṣṇa is just beside me, Kṛṣṇa is just beside me." And when she smears scented oil, such as rose oil, on her limbs, she appears to Kṛṣṇa as a walking bouquet of roses. And Śrīla Prabhupāda further elaborates in his *Rāsa-sudhā-nidhi*, text number two:

> "When the aromatic breeze from the edge of Rādhārāṇī’s garment touches Kṛṣṇa, he whom liberated yogis fail to attain thinks his life has now become a success."

Now, while preparing this lecture, I remembered how about 3 years ago we discussed in our Vṛndāvana series where exactly Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa procure or get all these amazingly wonderful scented, fragrant oils, and I thought it worthy of repetition. So, these divine aromas, these perfumes, etc., come from a place in Vṛndāvana called Gāndharva-kuñja, or sometimes Gāndheśvara. They’re Vṛndāvana perfume makers; they keep flower gardens within this kuñja and make these scents or these aromas from the seasonal blossoms. And while herding their cows, Kṛṣṇa and his cowherd friends sometimes they come to Gāndharva-kuñja to test the available scents. The ācāryas say to test the available aromas. It’s said that the boys are happy with any of these scents, but Kṛṣṇa is only interested in the ones that will attract Śrī Rādhā. And once, while visiting Gāndharva-kuñja, Kṛṣṇa took his friend Subala aside and asked, "Friend, I’m looking for a magic potion, the aroma of which will subdue Śrī Rādhā’s contrary nature and make her surrender to me; which one of these will do so?" On Subala’s advice, Kṛṣṇa tried one perfume, putting some on his body, and took it with him. It’s written that the cowherd boys, always eager to imitate Kṛṣṇa’s ways, also dabbed themselves with the same perfume, later on to the amusement of their parents when they got home—like, "What are you boys doing? You smell very... some perfume? You’re wearing perfume?"—to the amusement of their parents when they got home.

Another time, Kṛṣṇa took the best perfumes available at Gāndharva-kuñja, and in a desperate bid to attain Rādhā’s company, disguised himself as a female perfume merchant. And in this way, he was able to gain entrance to Rādhā’s palace and show her samples of his perfumed oils. The ācāryas say that in this way he was not only able to sell her some perfumes, but he also personally got the opportunity to apply them to her wrists. Right, Kṛṣṇa.

Here’s a beautiful remark that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said to one of her intimate gopī friends:

> "Oh sakhī, what shall I say to you? I have fallen in love with Kṛṣṇa. My body and heart, careless of dharma, are wild after him. Since his handsome form filled my eyes, I haven’t been able to see anything else. My bodily hairs stand on end, and since I first heard his flute song, I haven’t been able to hear anything else. My nose is wild after the fragrance of his body, my tongue will speak nothing but his name, and my heart simply searches after more of his virtuous qualities, causing disturbances throughout my body. My husband and elders see all these symptoms and rebuke me. I pray to the Sun God to conceal the meaning of my irrepressible smile, and I count the moments to the next meeting with my lover."

Coming to the close of today’s talk, I’d like to share a beautiful pastime again related to this beautiful fragrance from Kṛṣṇa’s form. One day, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had a scheduled meeting with Kṛṣṇa in a beautiful grove not too far away from the palace where she lived at Yāvat with her husband, mind you, with her mother-in-law Jaṭilā and her sister-in-law Kuṭilā, all of whom were always, as you know, on the lookout that she didn’t meet secretly with Kṛṣṇa. So, one day, Rādhārāṇī made an excuse to all of them that she was going to pick flowers outside the palace. Now, Jaṭilā initially agreed, but as the day progressed—you know, Rādhā had gone out—but as the day progressed, she began to worry that Rādhā was gone for a long time, so maybe, just maybe, she was meeting with Kṛṣṇa. So she sent her daughter Kuṭilā to scout around the area outside in the fields and the pastures and the forest to see if Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were meeting.

Now, in time, Kuṭilā actually came to the place where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were together. She came near to that, but Paramātmā had arranged that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had posted several of her gopī friends as lookouts. So, when they spotted Kuṭilā coming, they ran to tell Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa very cleverly hid themselves in a nearby forest. But the ācāryas say there’s always a problem in Kṛṣṇa hiding somewhere, and what’s that? It’s that he can be easily discovered because his transcendental body is extremely fragrant, and that fragrance pervades an area. So, actually, in fact, it’s said that when Kṛṣṇa leaves a place, his distinctive aroma or fragrance stays in that place for at least a daṇḍa. So, I checked what a daṇḍa is: 20 minutes. Kṛṣṇa may be somewhere, but when he leaves, the transcendental fragrance of his body stays for 20 minutes. Wow!

So now, when Kuṭilā came upon the scene where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were hiding, she smelled Kṛṣṇa’s sweet fragrance and she said out loud, "Ah, I know Śrīmatī is here somewhere nearby!" So, in hearing this, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are hiding, but they quickly devised a new plan. And a minute later, Rādhārāṇī came out of the forest with a basket of flowers, you know, slowly, as if she’d been just picking some flowers. But due to this pervading strong aroma of Kṛṣṇa’s form, Kuṭilā said, "Śrī Rādhā, I know Śrīmatī is here; you probably have been meeting him." But as we know, Sanskrit words have different meanings, so *Śyāma* or Kṛṣṇa, as we know him, can also mean nighttime—the word *śyāma*. So Rādhārāṇī said to Kuṭilā, "Oh Kuṭilā, no, the night is no longer here; you can see morning is coming, the sun is shining." So Kuṭilā got very frustrated and she said, "Rādhā, I mean Hari—another name of Kṛṣṇa, he who takes away all inauspiciousness—Hari is nearby, I can smell him." But in Sanskrit, the word *hari* can also mean lion. So, clever Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, with a smile on her face, she said, "Oh Kuṭilā, you smell a lion? You have saved our lives! Thank you! We must all leave immediately!" And sure enough, seeing that she was not making any progress, Kuṭilā stomped off, left. So such are the wonderful, blissful pastimes in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

So, I would actually like to close today with a beautiful verse I found in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Canto 11, Chapter 1—actually, it’s two verses, 6 and 7—revealing the overall exquisite beauty of our beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa. Go, Śrīmatī! Therein it’s written, and it’s so nice:

> "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is a reservoir of all beauty. All beautiful things emanate from him, and his personal form is so attractive that it steals the eyes away from all other objects, which then seem devoid of beauty in comparison to him. When Lord Kṛṣṇa was on the earth, he attracted the eyes of all people. When Kṛṣṇa spoke, his words attracted the minds of all who remembered them. By seeing the footsteps of Lord Kṛṣṇa, people became attracted to him, and thus they wanted to offer their bodily activities to the Lord as his followers. In this way, Kṛṣṇa very easily spread his glories which are sung throughout the world by the most sublime and essential Vedic verses. Lord Kṛṣṇa considered that simply by hearing and chanting those glories, conditioned souls born in the future would cross beyond the darkness of ignorance. Being satisfied by this arrangement, he left for his desired destination."

Hare Kṛṣṇa, he was thinking about us in the future. Thank you, Kṛṣṇa. Wow. So there you have it, the beautiful fragrance from Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental form. Thank you, prabhus, and we’re back next Friday. I think we’ll next Friday we’ll discuss the transcendental fragrance of Śrīmatī’s form. All by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, may... Hare Kṛṣṇa, Jaya Śrīla. See you soon.""