

Hare Krishna everyone, and a warm welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Viṣṇupāda Kṛṣṇa-pāda Śrīmatī Bhaktivedānta Svāmī, Prabhupāda. All glories to Prabhupāda! So, we’re continuing with our miniseries on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 137, in which we will continue our discussions on the art of disguises in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana pastimes. In Vṛndāvana, disguises serve to stimulate, or you could say, ignite love in the hearts of the Rājas. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in his Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Gaṇoddeśa Dīpikā, verse 202, how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s gopīs use disguises to spy on Rādhārāṇī’s rivals, namely Candrāvalī and her gopīs. It makes the pastimes much more exciting because everyone remembers Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa much more intensely. Anything that can increase our remembrance of the Lord can be a stimulation for ecstatic love. The exact verse that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes is as follows: “Sakhī’s friends act as clever spies, disguising themselves in various ways, and move amongst Rādhārāṇī’s rivals, Candrāvalī and her friends, to discover their secrets.”

Spies. And as we’ve been discussing in previous classes, Kṛṣṇa himself uses disguises in his poem called “Disguised Reality.” It’s a nice title, “Disguised Reality.” The poet Paramānanda Dāsa describes how Kṛṣṇa, although He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the source of all that be, out of love for his most intimate friends, conceals his godhood by disguising himself, how? As a simple cowherd boy. The poet writes, “The gopas say to Kṛṣṇa, ‘O vision of Cupid, O Gopāla, today’s yogurt is so sweet. We have stayed with you in this forest of Kuṁudan for many days but have never tasted such sweet curd like this.’ ‘O gopa, you play with the boys, tease the beautiful gopīs, run behind the cows. You also run behind the cows.’ The poet Paramānanda Dāsa says, ‘I know you, O Lord of the three worlds, disguised as a cowherd boy playing in the forest of Braja. I know you disguise as a cowherd boy playing in the forest of Braja.’” So therein, we hear how Kṛṣṇa disguises himself as a cowherd boy. But the cowherd boys also use disguises in their service to Kṛṣṇa. Everyone’s using disguises.

There’s a popular pastime in Vṛndāvana in this regard that many of you must know, but it’s worth repeating many times. Here it is. One day, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī made a very nice flower garland for Kṛṣṇa, and she gave it to Vṛndā Devī, saying, “Please take this garland and give it to Kṛṣṇa.” Vṛndā Devī thought, “Subala Sakha is a prīya-narma-sakha, he’s very dear to Kṛṣṇa. If Subala Sakha takes this garland and gives it to Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa will become very pleased.” Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura glorifies Subala Sakha in verse 22 of his famous Vṛndāvana Vihāra, he writes as follows: “Filled with deep love for Him and anxious that they may be separated, Subala never, even in dreams, lets go of the hand of Kṛṣṇa, the moon of Gokula. Subala’s heart is sprinkled with the waters of the swiftly moving mountain stream of devotion to Śrī Rādhā. I offer my respectful obeisances to Subala, whose body trembles with love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.” How he concludes it: “I offer my respectful obeisances to Subala, whose body trembles with love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.” It’s interesting, the prīya-narma-sakhas, cowherd boys, are actually Kṛṣṇa’s most intimate cowherd friends. They understand and are submissive to Kṛṣṇa’s dealings with the gopīs. Actually, Kṛṣṇa has, I was reading, four kinds of friends. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.3.21, it states: “In Gokula, Kṛṣṇa has four kinds of friends: sakhas, priya-sakhas, and prīya-narma-sakhas, in that order of intimacy. Of these four, only the priya-sakhas, those cowherd boys like, for example, Subala and Madhumaṅgala, can slightly enter into the confidential kuñja pastimes of Rādhā and Mādhava, special boys.”

Further on in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.3.43, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda confirms this. He writes, “Of the previously mentioned classes of friends, the prīya-narma-sakhas are the best. They are able to enter into Kṛṣṇa’s very intimate pastimes and have a special mood, sakhī-bhāva. They have a special mood, sakhī-bhāva.” Now, an example of Subala’s good fortune is given in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Sahāya-bheṭa, number eight. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī told her friend Bhaktimatī Īśvarī: “What service to Kṛṣṇa is there that Śrīman Subala cannot enter into? When Kṛṣṇa ends up in a quarrel with His girlfriends and they walk out on Him, Subala pleases them with different words and brings them back to Him. He makes a wonderful resting place for them in the bower house, the flower house, and He fans them when they are tired.” Wow. Śrīla Prabhupāda shares the following in Nectar of Devotion, chapter 41: “In the same light, ‘My dear Kṛṣṇāṅgī,’ a name for Rādhā, ‘my dear Kṛṣṇāṅgī, O delicate one, just see how Subala is whispering your message into Kṛṣṇa’s ear. How he is delivering the confidential letter of Śyāmalā Devī silently into Kṛṣṇa’s hand. How he is delivering the betel nuts prepared by Pēlikā into Kṛṣṇa’s mouth. And how he is decorating Kṛṣṇa with the garland prepared by Tārakā. Did you know, my dear friend, that all these most intimate friends of Kṛṣṇa are always engaged in His service in this way?’” So, special cowherd boys.

So, Vṛndā Devī gave the garland to Subala Sakha. Now, at that time, Kṛṣṇa was sitting on the banks of Rādhākuṇḍa. It was midday. So, Subala Sakha came, and he gave the garland to Kṛṣṇa. Then he explained everything: who had prepared the garland, how it had come to his hand, and how he was handing it over. So Kṛṣṇa said, “O, I was just sitting here thinking about Rādhārāṇī when you brought me her garland. My mind is very much disturbed. Please help me. Please help me. Bring Rādhārāṇī here. Please bring her here. I want to meet her.” So Subala Sakha said, “Well, my friend, this is not a good time. It’s noon time. It’s quite impossible to bring Rādhārāṇī here now. Please give up this hope.” So Kṛṣṇa said, “But my dear friend, my mind is very restless and disturbed. Unless you bring Rādhārāṇī here to me now, I will drown myself in the Yamunā River and finish my life. I cannot survive.” So Subala thought, “O, my friend cannot survive. He will drown in the Yamunā. All right, then, somehow by hook or crook” – it’s described like that, “hook or crook” – “I must bring Rādhārāṇī and give pleasure to my friend.”

So, the friends’ mentality is always to give pleasure. And the cowherd boys always understand Kṛṣṇa’s mentality. They know what Kṛṣṇa is thinking and how they can help Him and give Him pleasure. All glories to those cowherd boys! Such are the activities, in particular, of these prīya-narma-sakhas. They are very dear to Kṛṣṇa. This is sakhya-rasa. Sakhya-rasa, a very sweet mellow. So, Subala Sakha is very expert in all these activities. So, what did he do? He went to Yavata, Rādhārāṇī’s in-laws’ house, palace. And Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law, Jaṭilā, had just finished taking her lunch and was sitting at the doorstep, facing the window of Rādhārāṇī’s room. And when she saw Subala, she said, “Hey, why have you come here at noon time?” She knows. Oh, this boy has come for some purpose. Yes, he’s a naughty boy. So she said, “Why are you coming here at this time?” Now, another name of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is Jaṭilā-dṛṣṭi-biśitā. It’s a name for Rādhā, Jaṭilā-dṛṣṭi-biśitā. It means she who is afraid to see Jaṭilā. Now, as long as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī stays in Yavata, she thinks that her mother-in-law Jaṭilā may suspect something of her amorous affairs with Brajendra Nanda, and whenever she sees her, she becomes afraid. Hence the name Jaṭilā-dṛṣṭi-biśitā. It’s very interesting.

So, Subala, with as much humility as he could command, said, “O Mother, one of my calves is missing. I have searched all over the expected places, but I couldn’t find him. And at last, I’ve come here. He might have wandered into your courtyard. Mother, will you please go in and see if my calf is there? I will be freed from anxiety if I know my calf is here or not.” So, at that point, Jaṭilā, this is her mood. She became very angry. She said, “I have already finished my lunch. I cannot move myself. You go inside and see.” Just say, Yoga Māyā, you go inside and see. So, Subala Sakha was expecting her to say something like that. But it was difficult to go inside because she was sitting at the doorstep. But now I got the opportunity. Actually, all of Kṛṣṇa’s līlās, they take place by the wonderful arrangement of Yoga Māyā Puramāsī. So, it’s described, remembering Yoga Māyā, Subala Sakha prayed and then entered into the inner apartment where Rādhārāṇī was. And there he told everything to Rādhā. He said, “Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa is sitting on the banks of Rādhākuṇḍa, intensely thinking of you. You have to go there, otherwise, He said He’ll drown Himself in the Yamunā.” So, Rādhārāṇī said, “How can it be? This is an awkward time, and my mother-in-law is sitting there at the doorstep. How can I go?” So, with the eyes of Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law, Jaṭilā, and her sister, Kuṭilā, on Rādhārāṇī, Subala Sakha considered how to get Rādhārāṇī out of the palace to see Kṛṣṇa.

Now, at this point, Ācāryas have commented that nothing is impossible for Kṛṣṇa’s devotees. For Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā, “The one who is constantly engaged in My bhajana with love, I give him pure intelligence.” So, Subala Sakha, he actually has the same appearance. It’s interesting, as Rādhārāṇī. So, what he did is, he gave his dhoti, his kurtā, and his turban, everything, to Rādhārāṇī, saying, “You put all of this on, and give me your sārī. I will put on your sārī and remain here.” So, the exchange closed. All this happened actually on Gopāṣṭamī. And now that Rādhārāṇī was dressed in his clothes, Subala Sakha told her, “Pick up a calf out there in the courtyard. I saw one. Hold the calf to your chest like this, and leave.” Now, remember, Subala Sakha had come to get his calf. So, Rādhārāṇī did as Subala told her, and dressed in the form of Subala Sakha, she picked up a calf from the courtyard, pressed it to her chest, and started going out. And when she came to where Jaṭilā was sitting, Rādhārāṇī, asking Subala, said, “Mother, I got my calf.” So, Jaṭilā replied, “O, you got your calf? All right, very good. Now go away. Get out.” Because she was thinking it’s Subala. So, in this way, Rādhārāṇī, in the dress of Subala Sakha, got out quickly and went to Rādhākuṇḍa as quickly as she could and met her beloved Kṛṣṇa.

But it’s described when she got there in that disguise, she looked so much like Subala Sakha that even Kṛṣṇa didn’t recognize her. So, Kṛṣṇa was really disappointed that Subala had not managed to bring Rādhārāṇī to Him. He became very upset. And when disguised Rādhārāṇī saw how much Kṛṣṇa missed her, she decided to have a little fun. And imitating Subala’s voice, she said to Kṛṣṇa, “Listen to this, brother. Brother Kṛṣṇa, I couldn’t find any way to bring Her here today. Her mother-in-law was so upset about all the gossip going around about you and her that she decided to keep Rādhā at home and personally guard the door to her room. I’m so sorry, but don’t worry. After I failed at Yavata, I went to ask Candrāvalī, Rādhārāṇī’s competitor, if she would like to meet you, and she said, ‘Of course, if you order me, then I will bring her here right away.’” Now, this was the test, right? When Kṛṣṇa heard these words, he fell into a swoon. The word is used, into a swoon, crying out, “Hari Harad Har!” And seeing this, how could you say loyal confirmation? Śrī Rādhā was very pleased with Kṛṣṇa. He had passed the test where his loyalty was. And dropping the calf, and after taking off Subala’s turban, she ran to embrace Kṛṣṇa in her mind’s eye. She ran to embrace Kṛṣṇa. So, Kṛṣṇa, of course, was delighted, and together they enjoyed the afternoon in each other’s company. Hari Krishna.

However, the plot thickens. There remained a problem. Subala Sakha himself was still in the palace, wearing Rādhārāṇī’s sārī. So, how is he to get out? Well, generally, we know that at noon time, the braja gopīs all go to Suryakuṇḍa to offer pūjā to Surya. And now was that time. So, all these different gopīs started coming out of their homes to go to Suryakuṇḍa. So, Jaṭilā called out, “O daughter-in-law, my daughter-in-law, aren’t you going to Suryakuṇḍa today to offer a pūjā to Surya Deva?” And imitating Rādhā’s voice, Subala Sakha said, “O yes, yes, Mother. I’m going. I’m going.” So, in this way, Subala Sakha got out of the palace, out of the house, and later in the day, he went to meet Kṛṣṇa. And it’s described when they met that afternoon, Kṛṣṇa looked at Subala, and Subala looked at Kṛṣṇa, and both of them had a good laugh.

So, all this is sakhya-rasa in Braja. The sakhas, the friends of Kṛṣṇa, always help Him and give Him pleasure according to what He wants. And this pastime is known as Subala Mīlana. Subala Mīlana. And is one of the most loved, you could say, disguised pastimes in Braja, again on Gopāṣṭamī. And because the Ācāryas, because Rādhārāṇī shared her own form with Subala, she’s also called Subalāstra-sarūpā. Unlimited names. I never knew this. Subalāstra-sarūpā. Goswami says this in one of his lectures. “She who has placed her form in Subala.” She’s also known as Subala-prīti-toṣiṇī. Subala-prīti, which means, she who is pleased with Subala’s love. Hari Krishna.

So, I would like to conclude today with a śloka I came across in my research, which so beautifully glorifies a number of Lord Caitanya’s associates. I’ve yet to find the distinguished author, but I think it’s appropriate to finish with a śloka glorifying Lord Caitanya, because without His mercy, what do we understand about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? And without the mercy of His associates, what can we know about Lord Caitanya? So, this is a really beautiful śloka that I came across. I think you really appreciate it. “What was sanctioned by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu by His descent was intimately known only to Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī. It was adored by Sanātana Gosvāmī and served by Rūpa Gosvāmī and his followers. Raghunātha Gosvāmī tasted that wonderful thing fully and enhanced it with his own realizations. And Jīva Gosvāmī supported and protected it by quoting the scriptures from different places. The taste of that divine truth is desired by Brahmā, Śiva, and Uddhava, who respect it as the supreme goal of life. What is this wonderful truth?” Śrī Śrī, that the highest nectar of our life is the service to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. This is most wonderful.

“Oh Bhaktivinoda, the author writes, ‘O Bhaktivinoda, you are our master. It is within your power to allow them to bestow their grace upon us. You are in a position to bestow the highest gift ever known to the world upon us all. It is at your disposal. O Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, please be kind to us and grant us your mercy.’” All right Krishna. Well, thank you, Prabhu. I’m still on the Baltic Sea coast on our, you know, festival tour. I mentioned last year, it’s 34 years going on now, maybe 35, but very successful. Also, perfect chemistry up here. It’s the summer, the families come up, we have a family show, and theaters, and dramas, and kīrtans, and prasādam, and thousands of people every night. And we’re very busy, but this was one of my favorite services, going deep into Braja, sharing it with all of you, by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dhāma. So, we’ll be back next Friday. Śrī Śrī. All glories to all the spiritual pastimes. All right, thank you.
