

Hare Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda. All glories to him. So, once again, we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 103. Now, as many of you may remember, last week we entered our lecture by saying that we were concluding the four qualities of Kṛṣṇa that distinguish Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa. And the subject of last Friday’s lecture was the fourth quality, namely rūpa-mādhurī, His extraordinary beauty, which astonishes all moving and non-moving entities. Well, I have actually decided to continue speaking on that quality because I came across more nectarian information on rūpa-mādhurī, Kṛṣṇa’s extraordinary personal beauty, and that is specifically the beauty of His face, His beautiful face.

Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful face is very charming. It is described very beautifully by Govinda Dāsa. There are several Govinda Dāsas actually in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, but this is one of the eight ācārya poets of Ballabhācārya. He writes as follows: “Oh, brother, look at the moon-like face of Kṛṣṇa. His broad forehead is a resting place of all good fortunes. His nose is the pride of Cupid. His lips are all-auspicious. His cheeks are cups filled with sweet nectar. His ears are fans of divinity. His eyes are lakes of love. His eyelashes are like the petals of a rose. His brows are the bow of Lord Śiva. His chin is the estate of luxury or opulence.” Govinda Dāsa would sacrifice his everything for the lotus-like face of the Lord, for the lotus-like face of the Lord. Very beautiful description.

So, again, Kṛṣṇa’s face is very charming. In fact, Kṛṣṇa’s face is so charming, I was reading that He Himself hankers to see it in His incarnation of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 2.45, we hear as follows: “Caitanya Mahāprabhu continued, ‘My dear friends, I have not the slightest tinge of love of Godhead within My heart. When you see Me crying in separation, I am just falsely exhibiting a demonstration of My great fortune. Indeed, not seeing the beautiful face of Kṛṣṇa playing His flute, I continue to live my life like an insect without purpose.’” Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He wants to see the face of Kṛṣṇa, His face.

So, it’s interesting, I did some research and found out that the Sanskrit term for face is mukha. Mukha. Other synonyms for mukha are vaktra, āsyam, tunda, and lapatam—a little technical there. The term mukha, I discovered, is derived from the verbal root mukh, meaning literally to break or to shatter, as in the Sanskrit phrase, “that which breaks down grains, etc., by crushing is known as mukha, or the mouth.” So we also see the word mukha in regards to face, isn’t it? In the Bhagavad-gītā, 11th chapter, text number 11, where Arjuna saw Kṛṣṇa as Viśva-rūpa—viśva-mukha, “he who is with faces in all directions”—literally, he who is with faces in all directions. And this, of course, is the Virat Rūpa form of Kṛṣṇa, who has all sorts of faces in all directions. We’ve seen the painting. However, this form was, as you know, very terrifying to look at. Therefore, Arjuna asked to see the four-handed form of Kṛṣṇa, followed by the Lord’s original two-handed form. And those four-handed and two-handed forms are described in the ŚB 10.2.24 and other places as mukhajabhuja. The term mukha here again means face, and the term ambuja means lotus. Therefore, the term mukhambuja, mukhambuja, and the term mukha can mean two things: mukhambuja means “his face is like a lotus” (this is the literary ornament named upama or a simile), and the second understanding, “mukhambujaṁ eva,” “his face is the lotus.” His face is the lotus.

Now, this is a little technical again. There’s a subtle difference between these two understandings. In the first understanding, the face of Kṛṣṇa is being compared to a lotus. In the second understanding, the face is being directly equated to a lotus. And this is a literary ornament named rūpaka, a metaphor used to denote extreme similarity between two objects. Ācāryas have described this, so I’m sharing it with you. Thus, depending on what impression a particular poet or author wants to give, they can either compare Kṛṣṇa’s face to a lotus or directly equate it to a lotus. They can compare Kṛṣṇa’s face to a lotus or directly equate it to a lotus.

But the question may arise here. The question may arise: why specifically a lotus? Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face? Why not describe Kṛṣṇa’s face, or for that matter, other parts of His transcendental form, His lotus eyes, etc., why not other flowers? The simple answer is that the lotus is the only flower which was not created by Lord Brahmā. Yes, isn’t that interesting? The lotus is the only flower which was not created by Lord Brahmā. Remember, he was born on a lotus flower. And hence, the lotus is not a creation of Brahmā; therefore, it’s the only flower which deserves to be equated to Kṛṣṇa’s face, since Kṛṣṇa’s face is also not a creation of Lord Brahmā. Scholars say that His lotus face is always decorated with a smile that removes the sins of all moving and non-moving entities. So beautiful. And Bhāgavatam 10.29.48 says, “vāsudeva śrī-mukha-ambujam.” I like this: “His beautiful smiling face always increases the loving desires of the gopīs of Vṛndāvana. May He be all glorious and happy.”

Now, also, sometimes Kṛṣṇa’s face, the only subject matter of this lecture, is also compared to a moon. For example, in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.133: “tomal n tomār canda-vadana“—”I wish to catch your lotus-like feet upon my heart and see your moon-like face. I wish to catch your lotus-like feet upon my heart and see your moon-like face.” And Śrī Govinda Svāmī also says in his illustrious Govinda-valī, “candrāśī-vadana“—”He has a face resembling the moon.” We look in the dark sky, what’s beautiful? The stars, and amongst all the stars is the moon. However, I was thinking here, another question may arise: the moon has many phases of waxing and waning, so which phase of the moon is Kṛṣṇa’s face comparable to, the waxing or the waning? And the reply is given by Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, where in his Govinda-līlāmṛta, 8.4, he writes: “candra-ānanda-canda-nakha“—”As He holds His charming flute to His lips, His face looks as beautiful as the full autumn moon.” As He holds His charming flute to His lips, His face looks as beautiful as what? The full autumn moon. Like that.

Now, excuse me, if we go deeper, and always we want to go deeper and deeper. As we go deeper into the subject of Kṛṣṇa’s charming face, charming face, the ŚB 2.5.37 says that Kṛṣṇa’s mouth, part of the face, mouth, it’s the birthplace of the brāhmaṇas. The brāhmaṇas represent His mouth; thus, feeding a brāhmaṇa is considered to be feeding Kṛṣṇa directly. And where is this confirmed? This is confirmed by Lord Ṛṣabhadeva in ŚB 5.5.23. He says, “When people know My motive after performing rituals according to Vedic principles, they offer food to Me with faith and love through the mouth of a brāhmaṇa. When food is thus offered unto Me, I eat it with full satisfaction. Indeed, I derive more pleasure from food offered in that way than from food offered in the sacrificial fire.” I’d like to recite that again: “When people know My motive after performing rituals according to Vedic principles, they offer food to Me with faith and love through the mouth of a brāhmaṇa. When food is thus offered to Me, I eat it with full satisfaction. Indeed, I derive more pleasure from food offered in that way than from food offered in the sacrificial fire.” To the mouth of a brāhmaṇa.

So, we’ve given many details specifically on Kṛṣṇa’s face because of all of His rūpa-mādhurī, His astonishing beauty, His face is considered the most beautiful. He has many beautiful features in His transcendental form, His vigraha, but of all that astonishing beauty, the ācāryas say His face is the most beautiful. And that is why ŚB 2.2.13 actually recommends a gradual process in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but culminating in His face. It recommends meditating from the Lord’s lotus feet up to His smiling face. Just like we start ŚB First Canto, we go to the Tenth Canto, which is describing His wonderful pastimes in Vṛndāvana; that’s the goal. So we start from the feet and we meditate upwards to the lotus face of the Lord. We read the Bhagavad-gītā First Canto to the Tenth Canto, to the Twelfth, and that’s very nicely described in ŚB 2.2.13. It states, “The process of meditation should begin from the lotus feet of the Lord and progress to His smiling face. The meditation should be concentrated upon the lotus feet, then the calves, then the thighs, and in this way, higher and higher.” The more the mind becomes fixed upon the different parts of the limbs, one after another, the more the intelligence becomes purified. And meditating on the form of the Lord, one of the results is that our intelligence becomes purified, and we can see things in the proper way.

Now, so potent is this most charming feature of Kṛṣṇa, His face, that in Kṛṣṇa book, chapter 29, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states that “One who has been captivated by the beautiful smiling face of Kṛṣṇa will lose all attraction for material enjoyment.” And then Śrīla Prabhupāda directly quotes Rūpa Gosvāmī, wherein one gopī is advising another, a very famous passage which all devotees know: “One gopī is advising another, ‘My dear friend, if you desire to enjoy the company of material society, friendship, and love, then please do not go. See that smiling boy, Govinda, who is standing on the bank of the Yamunā, playing His flute.’” His lips, brightened by the beams of the full moonlight—so those lips are part of His beautiful face, and He’s playing the flute with those lips.

Now, just how beautiful Kṛṣṇa’s face is, because, you know, again, details, and love is in the details. Just how beautiful Kṛṣṇa’s face is, it’s described in detail in Bhāgavatam 9.24.65. There it’s described: Kṛṣṇa’s face is decorated with ornaments such as earrings resembling sharks. His ears are beautiful. His cheeks are brilliant, and His smiling is attractive to everyone. “Whoever sees Lord Kṛṣṇa sees a festival. His face and body are fully satisfying for everyone to see. But the devotees are angry at the Creator for the disturbance caused by the momentary blinking of the eyes.” That’s how deep, how intense is a devotee’s meditation on the all-beautiful Lord. Just blinking the eyes! “Ah, Brahmā, you created these eyes which blink!” I’m quoting the gopīs, actually.

Now, how can we be sure? Okay, how can we be sure that these many beautiful descriptions of Kṛṣṇa’s charming face are in fact accurate, the specific details are given? Well, one very convincing way is that when Parīkṣit Mahārāja’s great-grandson, Janamejaya, wanted to make a deity or deities of Kṛṣṇa similar to Kṛṣṇa to console the people of Vṛndāvana after Kṛṣṇa’s departure, he actually asked the mother of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Uttara, to describe the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s body. Why? Because at that time, she was the only living person who had actually seen Kṛṣṇa. She was the wife of Abhimanyu and the daughter-in-law of Arjuna. Now, upon being asked by Janamejaya, she first described to a sculptor the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, which then became the lotus feet of the Madana-mohana deity, whom the sculptor first carved. Madana-mohana, as you know, was later discovered 500 years ago by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. So that’s what the feet of Kṛṣṇa looked like. Then she described, remembering Kṛṣṇa, the middle portion of Kṛṣṇa’s body, which the sculptor then included in the form of the Gopīnātha deity. And finally, she described the beautiful face of Kṛṣṇa, the charming face of Kṛṣṇa, which we now see in the face of Govindajī. The Govindajī deity, as you know, is presently being worshiped in Jaipur, Rajasthan. And it’s so interesting, I was reading that as soon as Uttara saw the beautiful face of Govindajī, she covered her face with her veil, for looking at one’s elder in-laws was not allowed, even for the queens in those days. So she covered her face, and Kṛṣṇa—seeing His face, she covered out of shyness. And it’s also written that after covering her face, she became ecstatic and started to dance in ecstasy. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Such is the history of the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement from beginning to end. Of course, there’s no end, eternally it’s simply ecstatic. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, devotees, this is part one of the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s face. And next week, we’ll continue with part two, because there’s a lot of nectar. I always say, “Seek, and you shall find.” So I love going through this treasure chest of our scriptures and finding all these jewels to share with you, authorized jewels, all backed up by quotes from śāstra. So, for now, let us conclude with an appropriate verse from Kṛṣṇa-carita by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. It’s short and sweet. It’s verse six: “May His Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face, filled with the honey of the sound of His flute, with two tender cheeks acting like sapphire mirrors, with half-closed lotus eyes like flower buds, blossom in the lake of my mind. Blossom in the lake of my mind.” Thank you, Bhakti. We’re very grateful to you for that wonderful book, Kṛṣṇa. So, Bhakti, thank you. Yeah, part two next Friday.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. And most important, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn. Hare Kṛṣṇa. See you next week.
