Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste Sarasvatī Deve Gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, I've just come back from Russia, where, as many of you know, I was briefly detained. But I'm now back home in Vṛndāvana.

Before we begin today, I would like to share with you a verse from Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī's *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta-śataka*, verse 61, which has given me a lot of solace and a lot of pleasure to be back here home in Vṛndāvana. He writes:

"Śrī Vṛndāvana is my greatest attainment, my greatest deity, my greatest friend, my greatest teacher, my greatest religious duty, my greatest wealth, my greatest glory, my greatest austerity, and my greatest knowledge. What more need I say? Śrī Vṛndāvana is eternally everything to me. Śrī Vṛndāvana is everything I have searched for in this world."

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be part 146, in which we will continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's disguises.

But I must beg your pardon, for today's lecture will be shorter than usual because of my ordeal in Russia. I had very little time to prepare. Actually, I prepared this class on the flight from Moscow back to Delhi. But anyway, a little shorter, but short and sweet.

So, this pastime is by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī from his *Vidagdha-mādhava*.

Once upon a time, when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were enjoying together in a meadow, or kuñja, in Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa decided to tease Śrī Rādhā for the purpose of increasing Their attachment to each other.

So, while They were sitting together, He said to Her purposefully, "My dear Candrāvalī."

Of course, we know Candrāvalī is Rādhārāṇī's main rival gopī.

Then He pretended to be embarrassed.

"Oh, what did I say?"

But Rādhārāṇī was fooled.

So, the pastime continues.

She said, "How is it possible that after hearing this name my two ears do not explode?"

So Kṛṣṇa tried to pacify Her. He lifted the edge of Her veil and said, "O radiant one, don't misinterpret My affectionate words and sour the sweetness of our pastimes. Sour the sweetness of our pastimes."

But Rādhā then slapped Kṛṣṇa's hand, got up, and walked away.

Then, looking back, She said, "I will not remain here to be the puppet of a rascal like You."

Now, Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that Kṛṣṇa wasn't expecting that Rādhārāṇī would walk away, and He became very upset, knowing She would want nothing to do with Him now.

So what did He do?

As He's done in other pastimes like this, He went to Śrīmatī Vṛndā-devī with a plan in mind. Upon meeting her, He asked her to provide Him with clothes and cosmetics by which He would masquerade, or disguise Himself, as a young gopī and, in this way, be able to meet Rādhārāṇī and ask for forgiveness.

He was asking the right person, of course, because Vṛndā-devī, as we've discussed many times, has various cottages throughout the forests of Vṛndāvana where she stocks everything needed for facilitating Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes—little storehouses.

It may be a gopī disguise for Kṛṣṇa to wear and pacify Rādhārāṇī's anger, as in this case. Or it may be bathing clothes for His or Her water sports, or utensils and ingredients for cooking a feast. Everything is there by her arrangement.

Whatever it is, Vṛndā-devī has it on hand.

So Vṛndā gave Kṛṣṇa a gopī outfit and cosmetics, and He ran off to put on His new disguise.

When He returned, Vṛndā decided that His—or rather her—name, because He was going to be a gopī, would be Nikunja-vidyā.

Nikunja-vidyā. A famous pastime.

Then Vṛndā-devī went in search of Rādhā to persuade Her to meet this new gopī.

Actually, not far away, Rādhārāṇī was complaining to Her friends Lalitā and Viśākhā about how Kṛṣṇa was such a nonsense fellow.

Now, usually when Lalitā and Viśākhā hear these stories from Rādhārāṇī about how Kṛṣṇa is mistreating Her, they become very angry with Kṛṣṇa.

But this time they refused to sympathize with Rādhārāṇī.

Lalitā said, "Rādhā, everyone knows that Kṛṣṇa cannot think of another woman in Your presence."

And Viśākhā said, "And now that You have criticized Him, He will be reluctant to meet with You again."

So, at this point in the pastime—this is an interesting pastime—Rādhārāṇī actually became regretful. She regretted what She had done.

Then She said, "I wonder where Kṛṣṇa is now."

And just at that moment, Vṛndā came.

Overhearing Lalitā's question as to where Kṛṣṇa was, Vṛndā-devī said, "Oh, I know where He is right now. He is pouring out His sorrows to the gopī Nikunja-vidyā."

So then Lalitā and Viśākhā looked at each other and, in unison, said, "And who is Nikunja-vidyā?"

Vṛndā said, "Just see your ignorance. Who is Nikunja-vidyā, you ask? Nikunja-vidyā is the goddess of Vṛndāvana, and actually she's my younger sister. She's famous as the protector of the treasure chest of Kṛṣṇa's secrets—the protector of the treasure chest of Kṛṣṇa's secrets—and she always knows where Kṛṣṇa is."

So Viśākhā said to Rādhārāṇī, "Let's go see Nikunja-vidyā at once and beg her to help You meet Kṛṣṇa again, and You can apologize."

So Rādhā hurried with Her friends to where this gopī, Nikunja-vidyā, was.

And when They arrived there, She saw this beautiful girl sitting on the floor making earrings from peacock feathers.

I love that part—making earrings from peacock feathers.

And Vṛndā-devī said, "That's my sister Nikunja-vidyā."

So Rādhā turned to Vṛndā and said, "Your sister is extraordinarily beautiful. Even though we've never met, I somehow still feel very attracted to her and very eager to speak with her."

So Śrī Rādhā approached this new gopī and said:

"O Nikunja, knower of the groves—wow, knower of the groves—where is He who lives within these groves?"

So beautiful.

But Nikunja-vidyā didn't reply.

Then Vṛndā hinted to Rādhā, "Show my sister some affection. Show her some affection."

So then Rādhā sat down very close to Nikunja-vidyā and said:

"O goddess of Vṛndāvana, please bestow your mercy upon Me so that I may again meet and serve My beloved Kṛṣṇa."

But still Nikunja-vidyā didn't respond.

So then Rādhā extended Her arms and embraced the silent goddess.

Rūpa Gosvāmī writes, "the silent goddess, Nikunja-vidyā."

And with that touch, the gopī Nikunja-vidyā suddenly became extremely responsive—extremely responsive.

Lalitā and Viśākhā were watching, and they were very happy to see Vṛndā's sister Nikunja-vidyā return Rādhā's embrace.

The gopī returned Rādhā's embrace.

But then suddenly Nikunja-vidyā began to kiss Rādhā, and some of the gopīs became very alarmed.

So Vṛndā-devī said, "No, no, no. Don't worry. Such expressions of affection are not uncommon for goddesses. Such expressions of affection are not uncommon for goddesses."

But with that kiss, Rādhārāṇī suddenly realized what was going on—that Nikunja-vidyā was actually Kṛṣṇa in disguise.

And She screamed:

"Deception! Deception!"

And immediately disentangled Herself, saying to Him, "A fine trickster You are."

And at that point, Vṛndā-devī couldn't hold back her laughter, as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa made up and continued Their loving pastimes.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

I told you—short, but sweet.

Thank you, Prabhus.

So, I'm in Vṛndāvana, back home in Vṛndāvana, all by Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Really, it's only by Their mercy.

And in a few days I'm going to Māyāpura. We're going to have our Kārtika parikramā, about three or four hundred devotees, beginning of Kārtika next week in Māyāpura.

And then we'll visit Śrīla Prabhupāda's special places in Kolkata—where he was born, where he went to school, etc., etc.—and then Jagannātha Purī for a week.

I'm really looking forward to that.

Thank you.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. All glories to the devotees all over the world.

Jaya!

All glories to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
