Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Oṁ Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Bhū-tale, Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So today we're continuing with our series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 133, in which we will continue our discussions on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's dress and attire in a very interesting way, and that is the attire, the dresses, in which They appear as disguises—disguises in Their pastimes. It's an interesting angle.

Of course, we all know that the use of disguises is an integral part of Vraja-līlā. We've given many lectures where Kṛṣṇa uses disguises. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura mentions four in particular in his *Camatkāra-candrikā*. It means “a moonbeam of complete astonishment,” a moonbeam of complete astonishment.

He writes therein:

The first mischievous, playful pastime is the meeting in the box.

In the second pastime, Śrī Kṛṣṇa disguises Himself as Abhimanyu to meet with Śrī Rādhā.

In the third pastime, He disguises Himself as a female doctor and goes to treat Śrī Rādhā.

Finally, in the fourth pastime, Śrī Kṛṣṇa disguises Himself as a beautiful female singer in order to meet with Śrī Rādhā.

Also, another example—there are many—but during the churning of the Milk Ocean, while distributing nectar to the demigods, to make the demons confused and distracted from the nectar, Kṛṣṇa disguised Himself as a beautiful woman known as Mohinī. A famous pastime.

And of course, we have the paramount disguise pastime, where Kṛṣṇa disguises Himself as a devotee to appear as Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu 500 years ago.

In that regard, I recently came across a very beautiful prayer written by a poet named Māravādāsa. He wrote—I think you'll really like this:

“Sing the glories of Śacī Purandara Lāla, Śacī Purandara Lāla, who is none other than Madana-mohana in a disguised attire of golden hue, wearing the golden glow of Śrī Rādhā.

He is melting the hearts of all the atheists.

He is the shelter for the fallen, water to the thirsty, and bliss to the devotees.

Disguised as a devotee, Kṛṣṇa Himself preached the glories of Golokera Prema.

Golokera Premadāsa dances in bliss hearing the name of the disguised Kṛṣṇa known as Gaurahari Kṛṣṇa.”

Wow.

Now, in Sanskrit, the word for disguise is *chadma*—c-h-a-d-m-a, *chadma*. It can also mean deceit, fraud, or pretense. And disguising with an attire or a dress is called *chadma-veśa*.

Now, a great scholar and paṇḍita of ancient times from South India, whose name was Cūḍāmaṇi, describes various kinds of disguises in his book *Kalā-vilāsa* as follows:

One disguises by changing one's voice.

Two, disguises using cosmetics.

Three—this is interesting—disguises by changing one's gait, which means walking.

Four, disguises in the darkness or at nighttime.

Five, disguises using attire or dress, the subject today.

And six, disguises using magic.

I thought that was interesting.

Now generally, disguises are used to distract or confuse someone, but in Vṛndāvana disguises help to increase the rasa known as *utsukatā*. *Utsukatā* means eagerness, by making pastimes more exciting.

In this regard, a great saint of Vṛndāvana from the mid-seventeenth century wrote in his book called *Vṛndāvana-mahimā*—it's a little technical here, but as follows:

“Chāturī,” he writes, meaning smartness, cleverness, or expertise, “is situated in every action of the gopīs and the Divine Couple. The pastime of disguising with attires, cosmetics, actions, and props are all a sign of their chāturī.

When the hearts of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are filled with excitement, curiosity, love, playfulness, restlessness, and the desire to see each other, they seek shelter in the art of disguising.”

They seek shelter in the art of disguising.

In Bharata Muni's famous *Nāṭya-śāstra*, which I was reading, and which is known as the fifth Veda among scholars, he describes disguising as an art of heroes, or *nāyakas*—an art of heroes, an art of heroes.

Now, regarding Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's disguises, the poet Candraśekhara Kavirāja describes:

“Unlike Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā generally does not sustain her disguised forms for very long.”

Unlike Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā generally does not maintain or sustain her disguised forms for very long due to the following reasons:

Number one, overwhelming love.

Number two, a flood of tears due to separation.

Number three, a smile which reveals the disguise due to shyness.

And four, her lack of cunningness.

Therefore she is known as the most innocent.

The most innocent.

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—the most innocent.

So now, the following two pastimes are told by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his *Gopāla-campū*, in the section called *Pūrva-campū*, Chapter 29, Verse 88, and again Chapter 29, Verse 92.

So one day during springtime, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was married to Abhimanyu, Kṛṣṇa's shadow at the time, and living in Yāvaṭa, was visiting her parents in Varṣāṇā.

Other ācāryas write that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī would come to Varṣāṇā at different times, like the spring festival, her own birthday, her parents' day, and Durgā-pūjā. She'd come home.

They say that she would stay for a few days, or sometimes she would even stay at her previous home in Varṣāṇā.

Her girlfriends, her sakhīs and mañjarīs, would also visit their parents, and because all these gopīs were out from under the watchful eyes of their in-laws, they were more free to move about and meet Kṛṣṇa.

Now this was especially true for Śrī Rādhā, for while in Varṣāṇā she didn't have to worry about Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā looking for her as they always do. But still she had to be careful because there were always rumors going around everywhere in Vṛndāvana that she and Kṛṣṇa were meeting.

Rumors, rumors, rumors.

These opportunities resembled, you could say, the same ones that the gopīs took advantage of to meet Kṛṣṇa when the elder residents of Vraja were on pilgrimage to holy places. They were away.

So Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī continues that while Śrī Rādhā was in Varṣāṇā meeting her family, in order to meet her, Kṛṣṇa dressed Himself up as a gopī learned in astrology, yoga, mantra, and tantra.

And after learning from His parent spies that Rādhārāṇī was walking outside the Varṣāṇā palace, Kṛṣṇa appeared on the footpath before her.

And she immediately saw through Kṛṣṇa's disguise.

This time there was no fooling. Rādhā immediately saw through Kṛṣṇa's disguise.

But to humor Him—their pastimes are very sweet—to humor Him, she asked:

“O great astrologer, knower of all things, my dear gopī, what place of residence gives supreme bliss?”

And Kṛṣṇa replied:

“The cowherd pastures of Kṛṣṇa.”

Then Rādhā asked:

“And what is the essence of life for all beings?”

And Kṛṣṇa, disguised as a gopī, said:

“Singing songs about Kṛṣṇa.”

So then Rādhā asked:

“What bestows incomparable auspiciousness?”

And Kṛṣṇa replied:

“The desire to obtain Kṛṣṇa.”

Then Śrī Rādhā asked:

“What is the most enjoyable thing?”

And disguised Kṛṣṇa replied:

“The beauty of Kṛṣṇa.”

And finally Śrī Rādhā asked:

“What is the ultimate attainment in this creation?”

Kṛṣṇa smiled in His disguise and said:

“The company of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

And then they embraced. He was revealed.

So, the second pastime.

On another occasion, Kṛṣṇa appeared at Varṣāṇā, this time disguised as a female doctor. He employs this disguise often, actually.

And on this occasion, in a melodious voice that hypnotized the gopīs, He offered a complimentary consultation for Varṣāṇā's princess.

How kind of Him.

At that time, Śrī Rādhā just happened to be suffering from a high fever caused by the anguish of separation from Kṛṣṇa.

So the doctor—Kṛṣṇa disguised as a female doctor—was taken to her inner chambers, where she greeted the patient, Śrī Rādhā, by touching her feet.

And Rādhārāṇī's sakhīs who were attending her told the doctor that Śrī Rādhā was suffering from a lover's heartache.

A lover's heartache.

And so she proceeded to take her pulse.

Meanwhile, she sent the gopīs to bring items like damp towels and sandalwood paste, which she needed for the consultation.

And while the gopīs were running about here and there to find these items, they heard Śrī Rādhā call out in alarm:

“O friends! This doctor should be taking my pulse to prescribe medicine for my love-torn heart. But alas, she”—Kṛṣṇa disguised as a female doctor—“is not only touching my wrist; she's touching all my other limbs as well!”

So the gopīs quickly rushed back to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's room to find their queen completely cured by the new doctor's treatment.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Some wonderful nectar.

So today I have to conclude. I'm still in China. I've got two programs today. It's going very well.

Wherever I go and meet people here in China, they're interested. Many are very interested.

And when we have programs, we have to have small programs, not too loud.

But the audience always chants with us. They always dance in ecstasy, and many of them cry, actually.

It's very interesting traveling here in China.

So we have to finish today.

I thought we would end with a few verses from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Utkalikā-vallarī*.

So he writes:

“O King,” referring to Kṛṣṇa,

“O King whose transcendental form is more splendid than the blossoming blue lotus flower.

O Queen Śrī Rādhā, whose splendid beauty has stolen the glory of gold.

O King dressed in silk garments as splendid as lightning.

O Queen dressed in beautiful garments as splendid as musk.

O King dark with a splendid complexion.

O Queen dark with youthful beauty.

O King golden with transcendental fame.

O Queen golden with a splendidly beautiful complexion.

O King and Queen who are the handsome crowns of everyone, please eternally display Your sweetness within my heart.”

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Prabhus.

Thank you so much.

We'll be back next week, next Friday, with more nectar on disguises in Vraja-līlā.

O Śuka, revealer of the dhāma, please bless us.

Kṛṣṇa Śakti.

Thank you so much.
