Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and welcome back again to our lectures on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami.

Before we begin, I would like to recite two very beautiful verses from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Padyāvalī* to honor the great souls like Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas who are guiding us on this path home, back to the spiritual world, most notably Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

The first is Text 54 from *Padyāvalī*:

“Let us bow to them whose radiant sandals deliver those stuck in the dried mud of the ocean of life. By hearing the two syllables ‘Kṛṣṇa’ from them, all our hairs dance as we are overcome by bliss.”

And Text 55:

“O Earth, for as long as the sun and moon do shine, please bear that best of men, that pious person whose mind is motionless with joy as he remembers Hari, whose body bristles, whose eyes overflow with tears of bliss. Why bear the burden of those others who have resolved to come and go in this abode of birth and death?”

Is that wonderful?

So we are continuing with our mini-series on stimulation for ecstatic love, and this will be Part 97.

As most of you know, we have been discussing the first of Kṛṣṇa's four transcendental qualities that distinguish Him from Lord Nārāyaṇa, namely that He is the performer of wonderful varieties of pastimes, especially His childhood pastimes.

So for the last few lectures we've been focusing on these childhood pastimes, and with great pleasure we'll continue to do so in this lecture.

Now, at the beginning of His childhood, called *kaumāra*, Kṛṣṇa, I was reading, is actually very chubby, and His limbs are described as tender as blue lotuses. The edges of His eyes are white, and His small teeth are just beginning to show.

And the ācāryas say that during this time Mother Yaśodā can't take her eyes off her son as He sucks His big toe and throws His legs up in the air, while sometimes crying and sometimes laughing.

Now Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes about this early stage of Kṛṣṇa's life in his *Padyāvalī*, Text 107. It's very beautiful. He writes:

“When can I see Kṛṣṇa, lovely and alluring like a blooming blackwood tree, His lotus face pressed to His mother's breast while He wiggles His lotus toes?”

Rūpa Gosvāmī.

So I was reading that during this period of Kṛṣṇa's life, Mother Yaśodā covers Kṛṣṇa with protective charms, and every morning she hangs a tiger's claw around His neck. She also ties a cord around His waist and a string around His wrist, and then paints tilaka marks on different parts of His body.

Then she smears mascara around Kṛṣṇa's eyes to protect Him from the glare of the sun.

And towards the end of this first stage of childhood, Kṛṣṇa occasionally crawls about. But when He reaches the middle part of this period of His childhood, He is rarely dressed in clothes and becomes proficient at crawling. It is described that He is barely dressed in clothes and becomes quite proficient at crawling.

And at that time He pleases His parents with the charming way He speaks in broken language and begins to form words.

But I was thinking that perhaps the most notable feature of this period is Kṛṣṇa's discovery that He can have foodstuffs other than His mother's breast milk—like butter and yogurt—which He relishes with enthusiasm.

And during this period, Mother Yaśodā often takes Kṛṣṇa in her lap and showers Him with her vātsalya-bhāva, with her love.

And in this regard, Rūpa Gosvāmī describes Mother Yaśodā very beautifully in Verse 128 of his *Padyāvalī*. He writes:

“Her lotus-naveled child in her lap, her complexion like new clouds, garbed in multicolored clothes, I constantly bow down to Yaśodā, who delights the whole world. I constantly bow down to Yaśodā, who delights the whole world.”

All glories to Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Now, during the final stage of Kṛṣṇa's childhood—we're moving on here—years one to five, actually, that area of *paugaṇḍa*, Kṛṣṇa is on His feet, walking about.

And at this stage He and His friends begin again to herd calves and play games in the fields just outside Gokula. But the ācāryas say they don't go very far. They remain under the watchful eyes of the older cowherd men. But it's good training.

The ācāryas write that at this particular period of Kṛṣṇa's childhood, dressed in a short dhotī, Kṛṣṇa carries a stick in His hand in imitation of the cowherd men and wears a peacock feather in His hair, which is braided and tied in a topknot.

Why all these details?

Because love is in the details, and this is how we fall in love with Kṛṣṇa.

The ācāryas go on to say that in the nearby pasturing grounds, Kṛṣṇa eats His lunch not at home, as previously, but with His friends.

And actually, I found many descriptions of this noontime pastime in my readings, especially last week, where Kṛṣṇa takes prasādam with His friends each day. It's always a big thing, and it's all about eating.

You know, boys will be boys.

And it's always done in a fun and loving way, with lots of joking.

And it's amazing. Śrīla Prabhupāda refers to this joking mood in a purport in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.13.11. He writes—and I'm quoting:

“When Kṛṣṇa was eating with His cowherd boyfriends, a certain bumblebee came there to take part in the eating. Then Kṛṣṇa joked, ‘Why have you come to disturb My brāhmaṇa friend Madhumaṅgala? Do you want to kill a brāhmaṇa? This is not very good.’”

Then Prabhupāda continues:

“All the boys would laugh and enjoy speaking such joking words while eating. Thus the inhabitants of Svargaloka, the higher planets, were astonished at how the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who eats only when yajña by Viṣṇu is offered, was now eating like an ordinary child with His friends in the forest.”

This is Vraja.

Now, in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.8.29, we hear about the elder gopīs famously complaining about Kṛṣṇa's childhood activities. This is a central theme in Dāmodara-līlā.

“O dear friend Yaśodā, your son sometimes comes to our houses before the milking of the cows and releases the calves. And when the master of the house becomes angry, your son merely smiles.

Sometimes He devises some process by which He steals palatable yogurt, butter, and milk, which He then eats and drinks. When the monkeys assemble, He divides it with them, and when the monkeys have their bellies so full they won't take more, He breaks the pots.

Sometimes, if He gets no opportunity to steal butter or milk from a house, He becomes angry at the householders, and for His revenge He agitates the small children by pinching them. Then, when the children begin crying, Kṛṣṇa goes away.”

Gopīs.

So if we analyze that, we see the gopīs are directly accusing Kṛṣṇa of stealing butter.

Now there are many commentaries—well, let's just say there are many commentators—who give various arguments to, what could you say, protect Kṛṣṇa from the allegation of stealing.

Your God is a thief?

So there are many commentators who give various arguments to protect Kṛṣṇa from the allegation of stealing. Some say that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Others may say that the gopīs wanted Kṛṣṇa to steal, so He was simply fulfilling their desire.

Something like that.

However, our illustrious and famous poet Hari Sūri, I was reading, gives a brilliant argument to protect Kṛṣṇa from this allegation of stealing. He writes as follows:

“Kṛṣṇa thought, ‘In all those beautiful homes there is milk, yogurt, etc., that has to be stolen. However, I should never get implicated in the act. Thus, wherever I go to steal, I will make sure that the boy of the home is also present with Me.’”

Thinking in this way, Kṛṣṇa always took the boy of the home with Him whenever He would steal from a particular home.

Kṛṣṇa's logic here is that if the boy at the home knows about the stealing, well, technically it's not stealing. Kṛṣṇa is simply assisting the boy of the home to take milk and yogurt from his own home.

So in this way Hari Sūri protects Kṛṣṇa from the allegation of stealing that was given by those elderly gopīs.

Now then, Hari Sūri explains that actually Kṛṣṇa never ate anything alone. Even when He stole yogurt or butter, He always divided it between His friends.

This is because Kṛṣṇa was following an eternal rule. He calls it an eternal rule that He Himself has mentioned in the Vedas.

For in the Ṛg Veda 10.117.6 it is said:

“Kevalāgho bhavati kevalādī.”

Very simply put:

“One who eats alone eats only sin.”

Interesting, isn't it?

“One who eats alone eats only sin.”

And Hari writes:

“Remembering His own words in the Vedas, because Kṛṣṇa is the source of the Vedas, Kṛṣṇa never ate alone. He first distributed to others and then He ate Himself.”

Thank you, Hari.

So I was thinking this is actually a very important instruction for all of us. In the modern world, people often eat food alone—for example, in an office cubicle or whatever.

But our Vaiṣṇava tradition tells us to eat with family, or in particular to eat with other Vaiṣṇavas.

And if nobody is available, I was reading in śāstra, one should mentally dedicate a morsel of food to an insect, a bird, or an animal.

It's in the śāstra.

If you're alone and there's no one around, then mentally dedicate a morsel of food to an insect, a bird, or an animal.

“My dear insect, please.”

In this way, one should never eat alone.

Now Hari Sūri gives another reason why Kṛṣṇa fed butter, yogurt, etc., to the monkeys.

It's because Kṛṣṇa felt that He had not sufficiently reciprocated with them in Tretā-yuga as Lord Rāmacandra, when they helped Him fight the war with Rāvaṇa and build a bridge over to Laṅkā.

Thus Kṛṣṇa, in Dvāpara-yuga, reciprocated by feeding them with *sneha*.

Now Hari says that *sneha* in Sanskrit has two meanings. One meaning is butter, but another meaning of *sneha* is affection, as we know.

Thus this great scholar Hari Sūri says so beautifully:

“Kṛṣṇa was feeding them sneha, affection for Him, while feeding them sneha, butter.”

To the monkeys.

Is that wonderful?

Kṛṣṇa was feeding the monkeys sneha, affection for Him, while feeding them sneha, butter.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

What a way to end today.

Thank you, Hari Sūri. Thank you, Rūpa Gosvāmī. Thank you, Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

That's it for today.

We're still on the first of Kṛṣṇa's four transcendental qualities, and we have more information about Kṛṣṇa's childhood pastimes. And that's good because Kārtika is coming up, and the more we know, the more we can relish the month of Kārtika and the glorification of Kṛṣṇa.

So see you with more Dāmodara next Friday.

Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya!

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you.
