Everyone, a warm welcome back again to our ongoing series in the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. I'm very happy to be with all of you again. So today we are continuing with our mini-series entitled "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," with a particular item we hope may awaken our love for the Divine couple, who are Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā. That item is today sandalwood, and this will be part nine.

Now, one of the many benefits of eventually awakening our love for Kṛṣṇa will be that we become detached almost effortlessly from this miserable material world. Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive, and Caitanya Caritāmṛta has said you can't give up something unless you get something better. So we can give up this world because we have the best—Kṛṣṇa. This is confirmed in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.46.21, where Nanda Mahārāja says to Uddhava, "Smṛti ānīla pāṅga." 

It's very beautiful. As we remember the wonderful deeds Kṛṣṇa performed—His playful side, long glances, His smiles, and His words—we forget all our material engagements. But as we know, even more important than forgetting all of one's material engagements or attachments is becoming fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore, in the next verse, 22, Nanda Mahārāja says, "When we see the places where Mukunda enjoyed His sporting pastimes—the rivers, hills, and forests He decorated with His lotus feet—our minds become totally absorbed in Him." 

We also know that the result of being fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa consciousness is that eventually our pure love for Him will awaken. Therefore, Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī concludes in verse 27, "Thus, intensely remembering Kṛṣṇa again and again, Nanda Mahārāja, His mind completely attached to the Lord, felt extreme anxiety and was overcome by the strength of His love." So let us discuss today how sandalwood in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes may contribute to that goal of being overcome by the strength of love.

Actually, sandalwood has become somewhat of a rare item in modern times, with so much deforestation going on. Śrīla Prabhupāda refers to this fact in a letter to one of my godbrothers on August 22, 1971. He wrote to him, "Malayan sandalwood is famous as grown in Malaya, but nowadays in Malaya there are only rubber trees. But still in the market, the sandalwood is known as Malayan sandalwood." Even in ancient times, sandalwood was a highly prized commodity. Śrīla Prabhupāda often quoted this verse from Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 2.9: "There does not exist a ruby in every mountain, nor a pearl on the head of every elephant; neither are sādhu's to be found everywhere, nor sandalwood in every forest." 

Now, an interesting fact is that sandalwood paste keeps one cool in the summer and warm in the winter. I think most devotees relate sandalwood to the cooling effect, but actually, it also keeps you warm in the winter. It's almost mystical. According to Chanakya Pandit in his "Arthashastra," sandalwood, again known as chandan in Sanskrit, comes in various colors: red (rakta), black (kṛṣṇa), reddish (pīta), greenish (harita), yellowish-red (rakta pīta), and whitish (śveta).

Last night, I was interested to read how Vaiṣṇava poets often use analogies with sandalwood in reference to the cooling effect associated with a sādhu's house while one is burning in the fire of material existence. Here's a nice one: the poet Parmananda, whom we often quote, writes, "Nandana bandana śaśital chandan tapa harassa." That's Braj Bāsa. He writes, "The son of Baladeva (Balarāma) is worshiped by everyone because he is the one who steals the fire burning in the material world and applies the coolant sandalwood paste on the forehead to give bliss." That's so beautiful!

The son of Baladeva is worshiped by everyone because he is the one who steals the fire burning in the material world and applies the coolant sandalwood paste on the forehead to give bliss. By his numerous writings, or here's another one: "On this planet, the intrinsic nature of sandalwood is that it's very cooling. Amongst other refrigerants, more cooling than sandalwood is the moon, and even more cooling than sandalwood and the moon is the association of a sādhu." 

And of course, sandalwood paste, as we'll be discussing, is an integral part of Kṛṣṇa-līlā. In the very beginning of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 1.8.32, Kuntī Devī poetically refers to this in an analogy about Kṛṣṇa's birth. She says, "Some say that the Unborn has taken birth for the glorification of the great pious kings, and others say that You took birth to please King Yadu, one of Your dearest devotees. You appeared in his family as sandalwood appears in the Malayan hills." Nice analogy!

You appeared in his family as sandalwood, which is so much appreciated, appears in the Malayan hills. In the 10th Canto, chapter 90, verse 19, the gopīs use a similar analogy, you could say a romantic appeal to Kṛṣṇa. They say, "O Malayan breeze, whatever have we done to displease you so that you stir up love in our hearts which have already been shattered by Govinda's sidelong glances?" 

Now in "Gopāla Campū," there's another nice sandalwood analogy used by the gopīs in a letter to Kṛṣṇa, who at that time was living in Mathurā. They wrote a letter to Kṛṣṇa, who was living in Mathurā. The "Gopāla Campū" says, "One evening in Mathurā, a scented message arrived from the gopīs." When Kṛṣṇa read it, His resolve to stay in Mathurā and to keep His promise to Mahārāja Ugrasena crumbled like a sandcastle in the tide. "O Beloved," the letter read, "separation from You has confused our lives. Now the forest has become our home, and our homes a forest. Sandalwood burns our bodies, so we think fire will cool our limbs. We would welcome death to end our pain, but Your bold promise to return to Vṛndāvana has become an obstacle to such relief. What's more, every moment we are away from You feels like a millennium." 

This is real love; this is the love that we're trying to achieve through every activity we do in Kṛṣṇa consciousness from day to day. This is the goal we should never forget. 

Now, one way that sandalwood is part of Kṛṣṇa's līlās is that each day early in the morning, under Mother Yaśodā's supervision, I was reading that the cowherd boys decorate Kṛṣṇa's face with sandalwood and other auspicious substances, beginning with His tilaka. Śrī Rūpa Chintāmaṇi, text 16, states that the tilaka on Kṛṣṇa's face is only on His forehead, but some authorities say it extends to His nose, much like the tilaka that we, as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, wear today. 

Chapter 4, verse 17 describes that to apply tilaka on Kṛṣṇa, His servants gently grind gorochana (gorocana) together with sandalwood and apply two vertical lines on Kṛṣṇa's face. Then they fill the space in between with black aromatic musk. Under Mother Yaśodā's supervision, there's a servant boy named Makaranda, and he's the most expert in applying this tilaka. Just like, you know, there are devotees who apply tilaka, and then there are devotees who apply tilaka. I'm not so good at it, but many times I see devotees; it looks perfect how they do it. So that perfection is actually there in Makaranda. He puts the tilaka on Kṛṣṇa. 

Still, other boys also do this service, sometimes using kunkuma instead of gorochana. Just a detail for you: sometimes using kunkuma instead of gorochana. "Govindalīlā" chapter 3, verse 65 describes that the gopīs, because they come into the service as well, like to paint Kṛṣṇa's forehead crimson color with kunkuma. The boys do their service, and then some of the gopīs come and they paint Kṛṣṇa's forehead crimson color with kunkuma, which the śāstra says reveals His passionate nature and also points to His subservience to Śrī Rādhā, whose feet are smeared with red lac.

Now, whenever Kṛṣṇa's tilaka fades due to exerting Himself, you know, in the forest with the boys or in the rasa-līlā, His friends reapply it, meaning boyfriends and girlfriends using natural pigments like mānashīla from Govardhana Hill. Now, you have to excuse me; I do a lot of research, and I couldn't figure out what mānashīla is, but they replace it with mānashīla from Govardhana Hill. 

Along with tilaka, Kṛṣṇa's forehead sports a dot of sandalwood paste in the center of His forehead, sandalwood pulp at the edges, curly locks of hair along its border, and designs drawn in minerals as well. Wow! Kṛṣṇa's all-attractive! Now, the spot of sandalwood in between these two vertical lines of tilaka just above Kṛṣṇa's eyebrows serves as a mystical charm that hypnotizes the gopīs, who become attracted to gazing at their lover's face. You see how important sandalwood is in the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa? The spot of sandalwood in between the two vertical lines of tilaka just above Kṛṣṇa's eyebrows serves as a mystical charm that hypnotizes the gopīs.

We become attracted to gazing at the lover's face with sandalwood paste. Now, in his "Hari Bhakti Vilāsa," it describes how when Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇas chant the syllables of the Kāmā Gayatri mantra, you know we have seven mantras as brāhmaṇas, and one is the Kāmā Gayatri mantra. Within that Kāmā Gayatri mantra, there appears the name Kamadeva. He writes that the syllable "Ka" is equivalent to the full moon of Kṛṣṇa's face; the syllable "Ma" is His right cheek; the syllable "De" is His left cheek; the syllable "Va" is that spot of sandalwood on His forehead; and the syllable "Ya" is the half moon of His forehead itself. So, next time the brāhmaṇas, the devotees who are brāhmaṇas, chant that line of the Gayatri mantra, you can remember that "Va" is the spot of sandalwood on Kṛṣṇa's forehead.

Now, moving on, we dug into "Madhava" 42b. There are two parts, so it's part B. Our great hero Goswāmī writes that once Viśākhā-sakhī warned Rādhā of three things that had the inconceivable power to attract people to Kṛṣṇa: His flower garland, His name, and the mysterious sandalwood paste on His forehead. 

Merry Kṛṣṇa! Now, in the book describing Kṛṣṇa's pastimes with the cowherd boys, we've mentioned this book many times in our discourses. It's called "Prayojana Bhakti Rasaḥ." It's in chapter 9. It describes that after the cowherd boys decorate Kṛṣṇa's face, we've gone through that. Now the face is decorated, and the girls that decorate, then the household servants come into the picture next. They dress Kṛṣṇa in elegant royal robes, they took a jeweled dagger in the sash around His waist, and they smear sandalwood paste all over His limbs. Then they put a scepter in His hand, then they tie Kṛṣṇa's hair in a topknot and bind it with the red and golden string and crown it with the handsome peacock feather. That scripture goes very deep into sākhya-rasa.

Finally, the boys place a delicate wreath woven out of tiny flowers on His head, but Kṛṣṇa's morning pastimes are not over yet. The cowherd boys also apply perfumed oils on His transcendental form, but it's described they're not so necessary because Kṛṣṇa's body naturally smells extremely beautiful. In fact, His bodily fragrance has been compared to the pleasing aroma of musk, sandalwood, aguru, saffron, and camphor ground and mixed together into what is called chatuśāma. 

The aroma, I was reading, of chatuśāma is extremely attractive to the bhajagopīs and can be best compared to the fragrance of lotuses mixed with camphor. Now, in the purport to Śrī Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Ādi Līlā, text 197, Śrīla Prabhupāda cites the "Gurū to Puranha" to give the exact composition of this chatuśāma. There it is stated: "Two parts of musk, four parts of sandalwood, three parts of aguru or saffron, and one part of camphor mixed together form chatuśāma." 

Now, this formula I also saw mentioned in "Hari Bhakti Vilāsa" 6292 years ago. I was reading that the perfume makers, those who made the perfume in Vṛndāvana, would distill oils from various flowers, especially rose, jasmine, and hina, as well as wood like sandalwood and aguru wood. They used other substances as well, like musk and saffron and amber. I was reading that Mother Yaśodā would purchase the best quality perfumes, which are called sugandha. The best of perfumes are called sugandha. She would purchase all these perfumes, sugandha, to use for Kṛṣṇa's massage, to scent His bath water, to perfume His hair, and to anoint Him after He was dressed. 

Hmm. So, and also she would regularly give these perfumes in invaluable bottles to Śrī Rādhā and her friends as presents. I was reading that at Kṛṣṇa's birthday celebrations, perfumes were one of the gifts given to every visitor who came to Nandagrāma. 

So these perfumes, of course, they're different from modern-day perfumes in which alcohol is the base for the distilled essential scent. Traditional scented oils in Vṛndāvana were either undiluted, or sandalwood oil was used as the base, but there was no alcohol, and that type of oil, that type of perfume, that we're talking about remains on the body much longer—15 to 20 times longer than scents mixed with alcohol. And of course, alcohol is impure and cannot be directly applied to the body of a deity. These pure oils that we're speaking about have no restriction; you can use any oil that's made in that natural way without alcohol.

Now, we're still there in the morning pastimes. After Kṛṣṇa's friends dressed Him and applied perfumed oils and sandalwood on Him, they would go with Him out to the pasturing fields with the cows and the chariots. They say that to keep Him cool during hot summer days, they would apply sandalwood paste again to the two outer portions of His brow, which would make His forehead resemble a mystical gemstone. 

Now, in the "Eyes of Hariya Kadambini," 5.14, Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, one of our heroes, writes that, "At the end of the day when Yaśodā and Rohinī would welcome Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma back from the pasturing grounds with their cows, as part of their affectionate greeting, they had sandalwood perfumed water sprinkled along the road coming into Vṛndāvana." Talk about love! They had sandalwood perfumed water sprinkled on the road that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and all the cowherd boys and the cows would walk on as they came to Vṛndāvana. This is culture! This is our culture! 

We are hopefully one day to become rājabāsīs, so therefore, these lectures are important so we could know who we are, who is Kṛṣṇa, what the spiritual world is like, and what we hope to achieve. So important! 

Now, in "Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi," he says that sandalwood also played an integral part of Vṛndāvana Iśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's life. Her maidservants also daily massaged and anointed her with scented oils, for it is said, "A princess's bath is incomplete without them." Who needs any of the literature that these literatures which we're studying? It's described that these perfumes mesmerized her just as they did for Kṛṣṇa. To surround herself with the scent of Kṛṣṇa's body, Rādhārāṇī sometimes smeared her own limbs with musk oil. Thus, even in her own home, she continued to think, "Kṛṣṇa is just beside me," because Kṛṣṇa has that musk scent as well. So she put it on, and that would fortify her feeling of Kṛṣṇa's presence. Quite deep! The aroma of her hair fortified that feeling of Kṛṣṇa's presence. 

So in this way, Rādhā was always, how could you say, intoxicated with the love her perfumes gave her. Now we mentioned the scent of Kṛṣṇa's body, but the scent of Rādhā's body is also given in "Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi." It's also there: "Seek, and ye shall find." It says that the natural fragrance of Śrī Rādhā's body is like a flower garden sprinkled with camphor dust. Just in their minds, I tried to picture this or smell it. The fragrance of Rādhā's body is like a flower garden sprinkled with camphor dust. 

And when she smears scented oil, such as rose oil on her limbs, she seems to Kṛṣṇa to be like a walking bouquet of roses, especially thinks like that when she meets Kṛṣṇa. She's like a walking bouquet of roses. Here in this world, people put on perfumes to attract people to them, but in the spiritual world, the gopīs and others go to the perfume of Kṛṣṇa's body to become more attracted to Him. This is the proper use of perfumes: everything in Kṛṣṇa's service. 

He says, "When the aromatic breeze from the edge of Rādhā's garment touches Kṛṣṇa, He whom liberated yogis failed to attain thinks His life is now a success." Then in "Govinda-līlā," return 21.24, it says, "I found that Rādhā uses white chandan to cover her body during nights of the full moon. This reduces visibility, and thus her family members can't see her when she goes to meet Kṛṣṇa in the forest because it's all bright out." So she has to go through the forest so that she may not be noticed. She used that white sandalwood, as we discussed different colors. 

So she uses the white sandalwood so no one can see her. So nectarine! When Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa do meet, their secret meeting in the forest writes in his guitar, "I apply sandalwood paste on the Divine couple." So she gets it twice: she covers herself to go to meet Kṛṣṇa, and then Ananga Manjarī, she's there, and one of her services is to apply sandalwood paste on the Divine couple. So much nectar!

Now, sandalwood also played an important role in the pastime of the deliverance of the Kāliya serpent. I was reading 10.16, verses 65-67. Śrīla Viśwanātha Chakravarti Ṭhākura says that after Kāliya was chastised by the Lord, Kāliya said to Him, "Now although I am the most sinful, You gave me the most mercy. You have not put your foot on others' heads and marked them with Your disc and conch. So with great respect, along with my wives, we will offer You cooling sandalwood pulp from my hand." 

But Kṛṣṇa replied, "But applying these ointments will take time." So Kāliya said, "Yes, when you're a devotee, you want to spend as much time as you can with how do you go to a Vaiṣṇava?" So Kāliya said, "Yes, then please sit, my Lord." And after making Kṛṣṇa sit down, Kāliya and his wives applied sandalwood pulp all over the Lord's body to cool Him down from the poison. The hot poison came from Kāliya, and it is said that that fulfilled their heart's desire and that they had attained the mercy of the Lord. 

So then they left the Yamunā as instructed earlier by Kṛṣṇa. Hā Kṛṣṇa! So a lot of nectar about sandalwood, and we have more. We have more, but I think we'll finish today with the verse from "Umāli." This is actually verse 41. He's quoting another saint; it's a short verse, but it's very pertinent to our discussion today. 

"One who daily sings the glories of Yaśodā's son, glories as cooling as sandalwood and camphor, is never troubled by Kali-yuga; rather, at every step, he finds a torrential flood of the sweetest nectar." So we'll be back; we'll be back in one week with more about sandalwood in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes as a stimulus for developing ecstatic love.

Take all the fallen conditioned souls, and Śrīla Prabhupāda, be glorified in the three worlds.