
"Let's all stand up for a couple of seconds, raise your hands up, and jump 10 times up and down.

And now turn around your axis 10 times, and now turn to the right 10 times in the opposite direction. Now you can sit down and stand up again, raise your hands in the air again, jump 10 times. Now raise your hands very high and shout loudly.

Maximum... once again, hands raised.

We are delayed for about 40 minutes, but I think that it is not so scary for all of us. This is a special time; these are memorable moments that we want to carry with us throughout our lives.

Because there are so many devotees here, not only from St. Petersburg but from everywhere, gathered to sing, dance, and try chocolate cake. One day, Śrīla Prabhupāda came to us in Geneva. He had just arrived; he was in his room, and the president of the temple told me that he was hungry. He said, "You can buy him a couple of chocolate bars from the road."

And I, being a servant, did what the temple president told me. He unpacked two chocolate bars for him, put them on the table, and offered them. He said, "I was very nervous," and said, "Prabhupāda, I'll give you some chocolate." Prabhupāda said, "Okay." I broke off a piece and gave him some dark chocolate; he made such a face and gave it to me, "No." And I never liked dark chocolate, but from that moment on, I liked it. And then Prabhupāda tried another bar of chocolate, lighter, sweeter, and said, "I want another piece." I gave him another piece, put the rest of the bar on the table, offered prasādam, and went out. Later, we saw the devotees off. At the beginning, he sang the prayers of the Six Gosvāmīs, and there were several matajis. They were told that they needed help cleaning the room. They all wanted to stay for the lecture; a couple of matajis agreed, but I said, "I didn't want them to get maha."

I showed, "With what enthusiasm should you clean the room?" Prabhupāda was the first to run up the stairs, and I was the first to enter. I saw—I saw he bit off a chocolate bar a little, and there was a mark from his teeth. I carefully wrapped it, put it in my pocket, and left the room. They said, "We thought that you would help us clean the room." I said, "Well, yes, I have already cleaned the most important thing." I kept this chocolate bar in the refrigerator for a long time, and I hid it there, wrapped it in a spinach leaf or something like that so that no one would steal it. Before going out, I took a small piece of chocolate.

For many years I discussed whether it is possible to eat chocolate or not to eat chocolate, but I found out that in so many moments, Prabhupāda allowed devotees to have chocolate that in the end, they were forced to remove this point. For me, this was never a question because I saw how my spiritual teacher took chocolate and his prasādam, of course, as well. I usually prefer Vedic sweets. I always remember the chocolate cake, and on the way here we discussed what the cake would be like. I talked about how before the trip with me, he ate ascetically; he usually very rarely took sweets. But the first time, when he arrived in St. Petersburg and tried the chocolate cake, he said he wanted to do this. He said that when he tried it, it seemed to him that it was unearthly chocolate. But of course, the most important ingredient that is added to this cake is devotion, without which the Lord does not accept any service, and this is the hallmark of devotional service. Here, there is such love and devotion that it seems that it can be cut with a knife, and therefore, when 20, 30, or 40 years pass, I think that many of you will remember this as a very wonderful festival.

We are very happy to be here and in your company; enjoy these moments. For us, every moment brings the greatest joy. We just want the day to never end. We never sat and listened for a long time, so now we will sing a short kīrtana before the lecture, a few more ritual ceremonies, and at the end, we will have [music].""