Hare Krishna, dear devotees.

Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vrndāvana Dhāma. I'm addressing you from Śrī Mayapur today. Nama om viṣṇupadaya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtalé Śrīmad-bhaktivedanta-svāmi-iti. So today, we're beginning a short series on the summer season in Vrindavan.

As we've discussed, uh, before several times, there are six seasons in Vrindavan's year, which, once again, are poetically known as the joy of monsoon, the pleasure of autumn, the satisfaction of winter, the happiness of the dewy season, the beauty of spring, and the auspicious season of summer. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, in his Gopāla Campū, text number 24, he very beautifully describes Krishna in relationship to the six seasons as follows: "Oh Lord, charming as spring!

Oh Lord, pleasant is summer!

Oh Lord, splendid as the monsoon season!

Oh Lord, with the limitless playfulness of autumn!

Oh Lord, with the wonderful handsomeness of winter!" Unquote.

So beautiful. It's interesting that we've heard summer described here as auspicious and pleasant, because anyone who's lived in India in the summer, the first word that comes to their mind—from my mind, at least—is most likely "very hot." Hot!

Actually, one of our ācāryas writes in that particular connection. He writes: "The sun shines brightly at this time. The summer season brings scorching hot winds that make one feel as if he's breathing a poison-filled air. Due to the intense suffering experienced during the day, any mention of the word 'daytime' instills fear in the heart." So, it is like that.

Nevertheless, in general, our ācāryas have described summer as auspicious and pleasant. How is that?

Well, it's because Vrindavan is transcendental to the modes of nature. It's always untouched by matter. And for those who have spiritual vision, the unique characteristic of all seasons simply serve the pleasure pastimes of Rādhā and Krishna. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes in Braja-Vilāsa-Stava, one of our favorite books: "Though the six seasons with their qualities occur at different times in Vrindavan, Krishna enjoys pastimes of all seasons every day." And he continues, "All the seasons render service constantly to Krishna in Vrindavan." The Gopis serve Krishna by making ornaments from flowers in all the seasons.

That's interesting. And in Kṛṣṇa-Bhāvanāmṛta, chapter, uh, of Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he writes that one time, Vrinda Devi called all the six seasons, personified, together to hear what their services were while serving Rādhā and Krishna in Vrindavan in different seasons.

She said, "Oh, seasonal goddesses, adorn the forest for Rādhā and Krishna's pleasure.

Oh, Śānta, goddess of springtime, you go to Govardhana Hill and stay at the Rāsa Sthalī." What is the Rāsa Sthalī?

The Rāsa Sthalī is the place where Krishna performs the Rāsa dance in the springtime.

And she continued, "Oh, Śāradā, goddess of autumn, you stay on the bank of the Yamunā in the land of desire trees. She said, 'Oh, rainy season, rainy season, you stay east of Rādhākuṇḍa.' And, oh, Hemanta, the season between autumn and winter, serve the divine couple west of Rādhākuṇḍa." And she continued, "Oh, winter, serve Rādhā—uh, serve Śrī Rādhā north of Rādhākuṇḍa.

And, oh, summer, summer, serve Śrī Rādhā inside the water of Rādhākuṇḍa to make the water pastimes more successful. Serve Śrī Rādhā inside the water of Rādhākuṇḍa to make water pastimes very successful." So then, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he continues. He says, "Hearing these words, the seasonal goddesses, who," he described, "are experienced like no others, offered their obeisances to Vrinda Devi and went to do their services as was proper." And then he writes, "For who will not endeavor to become blessed like this?

Who will not endeavor to become blessed like this?" So much nectar.

Now, uh, Ānanda Vṛndāvana Campū reveals just how Krishna appears during the summer time, because, you know, it's—each season is a little different.

So maybe he dresses a little different, acts a little different, speaks a little different in different seasons. So Ānanda Vṛndāvana Campū reveals how Krishna appears in the summer time.

It says, "He wears a strand of pearls bordering his hairline and forehead. He wears a shimmering gold dhoti that blows in the warm wind. He wears garlands of mallikā buds, cooling flower ornaments, and sandalwood paste. All this is on his attractive, transcendental form." Now, Ānanda Vṛndāvana Campū also describes the Gopis during the summer season there.

It's described that they're decorated with, um, ear ornaments of śiriṣa flowers, crowns of patala flowers, garlands of mallikā flowers, and bracelets, bracelets of kuṭaja flowers, of flowers. I don't know what a kuṭaja flower is, but they have bracelets made of those flowers.

There are a number of pastimes that take place in summer. For example, the chastisement of the Kaliya serpent, the killing of Naraka-asura, and Krishna's swallowing the forest fire.

They all happened during the, during the, um, summer time, and other ones as well, but those were three that I mentioned. And there are lesser-known pastimes, but just as valuable. For example, one summer day, Krishna, the cows, and the cowherd boys, as they traversed the Vrindavan forest searching for fresh grasses—because that's what the cows are doing; they're looking for fresh, tasty grasses.

So, actually, the cowherd boys follow them. So, as they traversed the Vrindavan forest searching for these grasses, they came across an orchard that is now known as Badali-Vadaali. And the Śāstra describes that it was the middle of the day and unbearably hot.

So the boys and cows, they went and they sat under some trees and they waited for the heat to subside, but it didn't. And it's described that, to the boys, it felt like it would last forever. At one point, Krishna laid down and he put his head on the lap of one of his cowherd friends.

And two other boys, they fanned him with a leafy tree branch. It's described while two other boys, they massaged his hands and his feet. Then one of the boys said, "Hey, Gopāla, you have shown us your mystic powers in the past.

Can you do something about this heat?

It's so hot, we can hardly breathe." And, um, he said, "Oh, a refreshing rain or cooling breeze would be just the remedy for this distressing situation. Just look at your friends and cows, Krishna, and see how they're suffering." So, always wanting to care about his devotees, Krishna took his flute, his veṇu, and he immediately played a very special melody on his flute, calling all the clouds for their help.

And no sooner had he done this that a cloud appeared above him, which gradually expanded itself into the entire sky to form a huge umbrella that blocked out the powerful glare of the sun. And then, as a cooling breeze began to blow from the north, tiny, uh, droplets of water showered down upon the area where Krishna and his friends were.

So it's described that in a matter of moments, the atmosphere felt just like spring, not summer, but spring. And the gopas, the cowherd boys' fatigue and discomfort, it all disappeared. And the cows, they rose to their feet to graze again, well, it's described by being bathed in the refreshing rain that was falling.

So, the cowherd boys, they, uh, very happily glorified the clouds as Krishna's "two true friends." That's what the boys said, "Krishna, those clouds, they're your true friends." Of course, it's a very simple pastime.

Krishna plays his flute, and a cloud appears.

But one ācārya, he writes, and I quote him, "Because a cloud appeared at Krishna's request and released a very pleasant and cooling rainfall, which is called 'badala' in Sanskrit, the cowherd boys, they very affectionately named that place Badali-Vadaali." And it's described they always remember it with great affection.

All right, Krishna.

So, one last note. Um, as simple as the Badali pastime is, it's very rich with rasa, as are all of Krishna's pastimes with his parents, the cowherd boys, or Krishna's lovers, the Gopis.

It's all different types of rasa, different types of loving affairs, loving exchanges. Even though it's a simple pastime, it's just pregnant with rasa. And such pastimes are relished by the paramahaṁsas, the topmost, swan-like devotees of the Lord. But anyone, if they're sincere, can come to that platform and taste the same nectar.

But it's only possible by the mercy of the Yuga Avatar, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We're always tying in the Vrindavan and the Mayapur pastimes because, actually, they're non-different. Different moods. So that exalted state of being, being able to see the rasa, experience the rasa, the very simple activities of Vrindavan's life, it's only possible for the people of this age, Kali Yuga, by the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

It is said that to understand Rādhā and Krishna, we need the mercy of Lord Caitanya.

But to get the mercy of Lord Caitanya, we need the mercy of Lord Nityānanda. And to get the mercy of Lord Nityānanda, we need to do as he did and in various ways preach to the brāhmaṇas and madhyas. This ISKCON movement is a, it's a missionary movement.

It's meant to deliver, well, eventually the whole world, the whole universe. Thus, once again, we see a distinct connection between Lord Krishna's pastimes 5,000 years ago and Lord Caitanya's pastimes 500 years ago.

In this regard, I would like to conclude today by sharing with you a very beautiful poem by a devotee who was a contemporary of, well, Śrīla Narottam Dāsa Ṭhākura. He appeared at that particular time. His name was Haridāsa. And his poetry is not only accepted but relished by our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavācāryas.

Now, in his old age, he walked from his birthplace, Mayapur, to Vrindavan. And he wrote the following poem along the way. And when he finally arrived in Vrindavan, and he went to Sevākuñja, and just as he arrived in Sevākuñja, he left his body.

But by his mercy, he left behind this beautiful poem. So, here's the poem. "Oh, Lord of my life, when will the land of Mahaprabhu allow me to see the land of Rādhā and Krishna?

When will that day come when I will eat sweet rotis cooked by the brush of Balarāma and listen to beautiful songs describing their love for Rādhā and Krishna?

In Nadia, there are banana trees, and in Vrindavan, there are groves of pilu trees. In the forest of banana trees in Nadia, Sundar Gauraṅga is sitting in the cool shadow, joking with his friends. My heart's desire is to hear these jokes coming from his sweet lips and laugh along with his friends.

There, in Vrindavan, the Divine Couple are making riddles for their sakhīs to solve. Seeing the sakhīs unable to solve these riddles, the Divine Couple laughs. My heart's desire is to sit in these kuñjas of Braja and witness these pastimes.

Well, my friend, meditating on Krishna taking tax from the Gopis, I am crying day and night.

My heart is melting in the heat of separation from Brajabumi, which is the abode of the highest exchange of loving dialogues. The wind's dual nature is to stop the burning fire as well as to increase the forest fire. Similarly, the land where Mahaprabhu had his pastimes is making me feel more separation from the land of Vrindavan.

But witnessing a forest of mango trees pacifies my separation from Vrindavan. Oh, Navadvipa, you are worshipped by great sages like Śiva, Nārada, Śeṣa, and Brahmā. Please grant me residence in Braja so that I may worship the lotus feet of Rādhā-Krishna, the source of Caitanya-purodha, the treasure house of the love of Śrī Caitanya.

I worship the lotus feet of the devotees who are always traveling to Vrindavan from Navadvipa. They are like bumblebees who are intoxicated with fragrant and sweet rasa between two jasmine flowers. My heart is flowing in waves of humility, seeing the beautiful glories of the two non-different abodes of the Lord and his devotees.

It is like a weighing scale: one who is on the side which goes down sees the other side higher in the sky and more glorious. Similarly, the devotees who live in Braja sing the glories of the Navadvīpavāsis, and the devotees living in Nadia sing the glories of the Vrajavāsīs.

Oh mind, the two boats of Rādhā-Krishna, Nadia and Braja, are like two eye colors, white and dark, the two ways to breathe, exhale and inhale, the two banks of a river, and two faces of a coin.

I, Haridāsa, feeling separation from Vrindavan, take shelter of Nadia. I am blind in two ways: physically, and not being able to see the two non-different from one another." Wow. That was just pure nectar. You just hear that, you feel your heart becoming purified and your attachment to Vrindavan and Mayapur rising simultaneously.

All right, Krishna.

So, that's our first, um, discourse on the glories of, um, summer in Vrindavan, and we can realize also in Mayapur. And we will be back in a couple of days, um, with more nectar about summer in Śrī Vrindavan. All glories!

Thank you.