Hare Krishna,
And welcome to our Festival of India this summer 2018 along the Baltic Sea coast here in Poland. We're spending a lot of time on the beaches chanting and dancing, distributing Purushottam, distributing books, inviting people to our big cultural extravaganza in the evening.

Along the coast here, we have a program, we have a festival every day actually, except for Mondays. So, you think how many festivals?

Something over like thirty-five festivals this summer, but not small festivals, big festivals, festivals for the people. I'm spending a lot of time on the beach. When I was young, I was born in California near San Francisco, so in my youth, I used to spend a lot of time on the beach with my friends, and then I got into surfing.

So that went on for years up and down the California coastline into Mexico surfing. And then when I joined the movement, I was thinking, "Oh, I have to give that up." The life on the beach, of course, it wasn't, nothing anything very special, it's just sense gratification, but Krishna fulfilled that attraction for the outdoors and the fresh air and the waves of the ocean.

He fulfilled that desire by putting me here in Poland every year along the Baltic Sea coast, going out with a hundred devotees every day, instead of just laying in the sand and swimming in the waters, we're swimming in the nectarean ocean of Shri Krishna sankirtana, walking on the sands, dancing, singing, pulling people into the wonderful world of Krishna consciousness with His all-attractive Krishna consciousness movement.

So here we are, 29 years on the Baltic Sea coast with so many wonderful devotees with our Festival of India program. When will that day come?

Some attrition, Krishna.

In the spiritual world, Brahma-samhita states that every step is a dance, every word is a song, and there's a festival every day. So, through these events, through these cultural events, these cultural extravaganzas, we present various cultural items of Vedic culture, or better, the culture of the spiritual world, Goloka Vrindavan.

We introduce people to the wonderful world of Krishna consciousness.

We have dancing, we have kirtans, we have amazing theatrical productions, we have magic shows, we have puppet shows. We make it actually a family affair because, of course, up here on the coast, people are coming with their families for vacation, and we make it very entertaining for them.

They come into this amazing festival, very colorful, very exotic, very professional. We've been doing this for 29 years. So, each year we try to increase not only the quantity of the festivals we do, but we also try to increase the quality.

We have many talented devotees from various countries around the world, in particular Russia and Ukraine. Our devotees, many of them are trained in ballet, gymnastics, art, music, so forth and so on, and they join us, and we use their talents to present a very colorful, festive, exotic program, and it steals the hearts of the people.

People actually plan their vacation around our event, that's how big it's become. We average about five to six, sometimes even seven thousand people every day at our events, no exaggeration. You can see from the videos, thousands and thousands of people are coming to participate in our events.

They go to our website during the year and they see when we're going to be in a particular town and they plan to come to that town at the time we're doing our exact. It's become so popular that sometimes the mayors of different towns along the coast, they compete to have our festival in their town at a particular time.

So we're very, very popular. As Krishna, there should be Krishna.

One translation of Krishna's name means the all-attractive Personality of Godhead, so His movement is also non-different than Him, it's also all-attractive.

And we make it like this. Prabhupada, one time he said, "We will take the world over by culture." When will that day, Krishna?

Oh, Krishna, Krishna.

And this is the original culture, the culture of the soul, the culture of the living entities' ecstatic loving relationship with the Lord, very festive and joyful and completely satisfying. So we make our festival like that, and people come in droves, by the thousands.

They're actually waiting for us. We distribute about ten thousand invitations a day, but I think that even if we didn't distribute those ten thousand invitations, people would just come because the word's out that the devotees of Krishna are in town with the greatest show on earth.

One time, a person came to our festival last year, and he was in the entertainment business, and he said that your shows are almost as good as Cirque du Soleil. I said, "Come on, Cirque du Soleil at the top professional show, one of the top professional shows in the world." He said, "No, you, you're improving every year, your acts are very amazing, very talented devotees," he said. "I said, 'almost as good as the Cirque du Soleil.'" You're getting there.

He said, "But actually, it's better." So what do you mean?

He said, "Because you have a message." Cirque du Soleil is basically entertainment. They have a little theme they make up or something. Said, but you have a message. He said, in all of your productions, I know there's a spiritual touch to everything you're doing.

And when you give your lecture, I give a half-hour, 40-minute lecture on Bhagavad Gita, said you tie it all together, and you help us understand that spirituality is an important part of our lives, and it can be fun as well, and adorable.

Additional chanting, please. Mahaprabhu is so kind, and His most exalted representative, Śrīla Prabhupāda, is very kind that they've entrusted the service of spreading His holy names all over the world to our humble selves.

So we feel very honored, very privileged. We take every day like gold. We wake up in the morning, and we just think, Prabhupāda, we thank their previous avatars, we thank Chaitanya Mahaprabhu for giving us the mantle to go out and chant at the top of our lungs and dance in ecstasy in the sands of the beaches of the Baltic Sea coast.

And you can see, you'll see in this video, what is the reaction?

People who know nothing about Krishna consciousness, the holy names are so merciful that immediately awakens a sense of joy and happiness in their hearts, and they dance with us on the beach, they dance with us on the streets, they dance with us.

They get the taste. And in the evening, they finish their day by coming to the Festival of India with the devotees of Krishna.

You know, hearing, not hearing. Feeling very satisfied in heart. Not here on the Baltic Sea coast. If any of you in the future would like, please join us for the chanting of the holy names here in Poland. The ecstatic tsunami of spreading Shri Krishna's holy names in this country.

Thank you very much. How to Krishna!

Jai Śrīla Prabhupāda!

Shri Krishna sankirtana!

Yaha goal!

And the...