All right, devotees, everyone, very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vrndāvana. Today, I am addressing you from San Francisco, California, United States of America, but my heart is with all the devotees and the people in the great country of Ukraine at a very trying time for everyone.

So, Hare Kṛṣṇa. nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine namaste sarasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-paścimadeśa-tāriṇe We're continuing with our study of the summer season in Vrndāvana.

The summer season is one of the six seasons that exists simultaneously in Śrī Vrndāvana. A question may be raised here that if all the six seasons exist at the same time, wouldn't they clash with each other?

I mean, you would have hot weather in December, you would have cold weather in the summer. So, how is it they exist simultaneously?

Well, the answer is very simple: Mother Pūrṇimāsī, Yogamāyā, who arranges all the pastimes of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vrndāvana, she arranges that each season exists separately in a different forest. And so, the Divine Couple, as part of their pastimes, they simply walk from one forest to another, enjoying the unique features of each of the six seasons.

As we've stated a number of times, the joy of monsoon, the pleasure of autumn, the satisfaction of winter, the happiness of the dewy season, the beauty of spring, and the auspicious season of summer, which we are discussing now. For example, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains in his Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta that when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa want to refresh themselves after a blissful day of pastimes, they hurry to a particular forest called the "Joy of Summer." And Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that this forest is full of blooming śiriṣa flowers, śiriṣa flowers, and very thick clusters of pāṭalī and kuṭaja flowers.

And after entering this forest, he says, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa sit in a pleasant spot where there's a cooling breeze, and they refresh their bodies, which have become, he uses the word "faded," from the fatigue of walking all day long.

And at this point, Viśvanātha goes into a very... it goes into beautiful detail, writing as follows: "The water birds call out blissfully to the clouds and flap their wings to form a canopy to block the rays of the sun.

Countless flocks of swans, cranes, and egrets continuously glide over the gentle waves of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Well, the goddess of the forest, whose name is Vana-lakṣmī, who is," he describes, "dear to all the seasons, serves Kṛṣṇa by her beauty while decorating herself with flower blossoms of summer." A very beautiful insight.

And I was reading in Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta, Śrīla mentions another very interesting fact about these six seasons in Vrndāvana. It's really interesting. He writes that Vrndāvana's bees, you know, the bees drink honey from various flowers that grow in the different seasons.

In other words, in each season, there are unique flowers that grow, and the bees like to go to all these different forests where these seasons are existing simultaneously and drink honey from the flowers that grow in that season. I'll quote him here: "Kṛṣṇa said, 'My dear Śrī Rādhā, just look at the great festival of young bees by your pond, Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

In the spring, they drink the honey from the blooming new mallikā flowers. In the summer, they drink from the soft jasmine flowers. In the monsoon, from the utikā flowers. And in autumn, from lotus flowers. In the hemanta season, they drink from the kuṭanṭaka kuṭanṭaka flowers.

And in winter, they drink from the best of the kuṇḍa vines.'" The medieval Vaiṣṇava poet Kiśorī Dāsa shares a wonderful summer pastime of Kṛṣṇa's early childhood in his book called Bālalīlā, meaning Kṛṣṇa's early childhood pastimes. And I was studying this book, it's very, very, very beautiful.

He writes there that one year, when spring ended and the heat of summer came very quickly. I've experienced that here in India. As soon as spring finishes, it's not that, you know, summer takes some time to come on like it does in the West, you know, June, then July, and August are really hot.

Summer just comes on really fast. So, one year, when the spring ended and the heat of summer suddenly arrived, mother Yaśodā's servants, on her request, put the following items in a small kuṇḍa where mother Yaśodā planned to bathe baby Kṛṣṇa to cool him down.

So, in that kuṇḍa, they put a sandalwood paste, the juice of the banana tree trunk. They put in, uh, *jāminī* fish. Had to look that up. *Jāminī* fish. These are small, very small fish that make bubbles from their mouths while in the water.

So, you know, the bubbly water makes Kṛṣṇa refreshed. So, it comes naturally, not from some electrical pump like nowadays in a bath, but from these little fish, the bubbles come from their mouths. And her servants placed a *guggulu* smoke nearby for drying Kṛṣṇa's hair after the bath.

So then he goes on to describe, overwhelmed by motherly love, mother Yaśodā took Kṛṣṇa in her arms and started kissing his cheeks, as mothers do. And as she started kissing his cheeks, Kṛṣṇa began laughing and laughing and laughing. So mother Yaśodā said, "My darling little son, what makes you laugh so much?

I always kiss you, but you don't laugh. So, why are you laughing today?" So Kṛṣṇa answered, "Māyā, I laugh because the color of my cheeks are red as a result of playing Holī during spring." Remember, we talked all about the Holī pastimes. "And I'm throwing colors, of which red is the most prominent.

So the color of my cheeks are red as a result of playing Holī, which, you know, spring just finished. And those red colors stick to your lips when you kiss me, and it looks so funny, your lips are all bright red." Hearing Kṛṣṇa's reply, mother Yaśodā also began laughing.

So the poet Kiśorī Dāsa says, thus, they found themselves lost in the happiness of vātsalya-rasa. And he continues to write that when mother Yaśodā noticed that there were color stains, you know, all over Kṛṣṇa's body, she, who the poet describes as the deity of innocence, mother Yaśodā, the deity of innocence, she took Kṛṣṇa to this special kuṇḍa which had been prepared by her servants and put him in the kuṇḍa and started rubbing his body with the dough made of white rice and turmeric powder, white rice and turmeric powder.

And in order to remove all these, these stains, you know, from playing Holī in springtime. But as hard as she could, she was unsuccessful in removing even one stain from the colors of Holī on his body. So finally, after some time, tired and exhausted, she exclaimed, "These stains are not going away, what do I do?" So the poet Kiśorī Dāsa writes, little Kṛṣṇa spoke to his mother in broken words, saying, "Māyā, they say that these are the color stains of love.

They say that these are the color stains of love." And hearing these words of Kṛṣṇa, a gopī who was standing there holding an umbrella over mother Yaśodā and baby Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh mother Yaśodā, here, Lālā speaks such a deep philosophy at such an age!" And with that, all the other gopīs, they all started laughing.

So at this point, mother Yaśodā again tried to move all these different color stains on Kṛṣṇa's body. But again, she was unsuccessful. So little Kṛṣṇa is smiling. He said, "Māyā, I told you, these are the stains of love, and they cannot be removed so easily.

You can't remove them so easily. These stains of love will only go away with the water of love, with the water of love." So, how is that?

What the poet goes on to explain: Just at that moment, due to the hot summer weather, a drop of perspiration fell from mother Yaśodā's forehead onto Kṛṣṇa's chest. And as it did so, all the colored stains on Kṛṣṇa's body vanished immediately.

The water of love from his mother, such as vātsalya-rasa. So, Kiśorī Dāsa says that happened as a piece of camphor disappears by coming in contact with fresh air. Then mother Yaśodā, she took Kṛṣṇa from the kuṇḍa, dried his body with a... with a silk cloth.

And then she... he describes, she dried his curly hair with the *guggulu* smoke. I've never seen that in India. This is something that's been lost with time. She... she dried his hair with this, with this, with the smoke from, from the *guggulu* wood.

And then she took Kṛṣṇa to his room. It was time to go to sleep and placed him in a bed made of pure sandalwood and covered him with a pure white silk bedsheet. All these details of love. Now, Kiśorī Dāsa, he describes that throughout Kṛṣṇa's room, he describes the room in many details, but I noted that he writes there were many fountains of rose water.

Wow!

Fountains of rose water. And seeing the flowing water reflected in a mirror on the wall, Kṛṣṇa stood up on his little feet in bed. He wanted to see his image in the mirror, but because the water was flowing, the reflection, his image in the mirror was not clear.

So baby Kṛṣṇa became irritated and he fell back into his mother's lap and started sucking his big toe. Now, one ācārya comments as follows: "The Lord who sleeps on Anantaśeṣa is now sleeping on mother Yaśodā's lap, where his throne is the chest of mother Yaśodā, his *chatra* (umbrella) is mother Yaśodā's eyelashes, his *cāmara* (yak-tail whisk) and peacock fan are mother Yaśodā's hair, and his two gatekeepers are the two hands of mother Yaśodā." Then that ācārya concludes, "Kṛṣṇa, who feeds everyone and satisfies everyone with his loving pastimes, is now drinking his own confidential *rasa* from his big toe." Hare Kṛṣṇa!

We must thank all these poets. Then, as Kṛṣṇa started to fall asleep, he said, "Māyā, why is it so hot today?" Because, you know, summer just started.

So, why is it so hot today?

It's very interesting. Mother Yaśodā's reply. She replied, "My dear son, there are six reasons why it is so hot in summer in Śrī Vrndāvana. The first reason is because the Bhaṭācāryas burn Holikā each year." Remember, we told that pastime.

Holikā is Hiranyakaśipu's sister. We... we told that pastime. She sat with Prahlāda in the burning fire. She didn't survive, but Prahlāda did. So, the first reason is because the Bhaṭācāryas every year they burn an effigy of Holikā, therefore the air becomes exceedingly hot.

Then she went on, "The second reason is because the Sun God comes to see his daughter, Yamunā, in the summertime, and he's riding on seven horses, which represent the seven days of the week. So, every day of the week, there's no respite, it's hot, hot, hot." Then she said, "The third reason that Vrndāvana is so hot in the summer is because the cowherd boys go to the forest to herd the cows each day.

And because their mothers worry so much about them, about their sons, their anxiety makes the entire atmosphere of Vrndāvana very hot." Then she said to Kṛṣṇa, "The fourth reason is because lovers become separated in the summer season because it's so hot, you can't go outside.

And that separation between these lovers is so intense, it makes the weather very hot." Then she told little Lālā, "The fifth reason is that after Śivarātri, which we know takes place, takes place in the spring season, Lord Śiva, he opens up his third eye, which causes the hot weather of the summer." Now, after hearing all these reasons as to why summer is so hot in Vrndāvana, Kṛṣṇa's eyes became very large in amazement.

And he asked, "Māyā, what is the sixth reason?

The last reason that it's so hot?" So, I like this answer.

Mother Yaśodā answered, "O Lālā, summer becomes so hot because Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva appeared during the summertime. Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva appeared in the summertime, and because of his fury, he alone created the heat of summer." Wow!

So, finally, Kṛṣṇa asked mother Yaśodā, "Māyā, who is Lord Nṛsiṁha?" So mother Yaśodā replied, "Oh, he is half-man, half-lion, who kills the asuras and then crushes them with the sharp nails." Now, while Kṛṣṇa was listening to this description of Nṛsiṁha-deva and his pastimes, his eyes became even bigger, and the poet says his hair stood on end, and he started feeling fearful.

So, noting that Kṛṣṇa was scared while listening to his own, about his own furious form, mother Yaśodā continued saying, "But Lālā, in becoming so ferocious, he protected his little devotee Prahlāda, who was just a child, just like you, my darling baby.

So, have no fear." Then, placing Kṛṣṇa in her lap, both she and Kṛṣṇa, the poet describes, fell into a deep, blissful sleep. Yogamāyā. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Summer pastimes. We'll finish today with a relevant verse from Caitanya Caritāmṛta, one of my favorite books by Rūpa Goswāmī, when he writes, actually, it's a conversation between mother Yaśodā and baby Kṛṣṇa at bedtime. So she speaks first, "O my rising dark moon, my child, you are not yet asleep." So Kṛṣṇa says, "No, Māyā, sleep has not yet come to me." So she says, "Then listen, my son, I will tell you a bedtime story that will make you fall asleep very quickly." So Kṛṣṇa says, "And what is the story?

I've never heard. Please tell it." But Yaśodā then told the story. When she came to the sentence, "Then Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva appeared from the pillar and he was very eager to kill the demon," a smile suddenly arose on child Kṛṣṇa's lips.

This is how Rūpa Goswāmī finishes the stanza. A smile suddenly arose on child Kṛṣṇa's lips, remembering his pastime as Nṛsiṁha. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. Summertime. And as in the other seasons, we've already described, we... we have more pastimes. We'll research them and relish them and share them all with you in the next few classes. So, see you in a couple of days.

All glories to Śrī Śrī Guru and Gaurāṅga!

Kiśorī Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma ki! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava ki!

Kiśorī!

Kiśorī!

Please protect the devotees in Ukraine. Go to Premananda!

J.J. Rādhā!

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

See you soon.