"*00541*.*
"### Summer Pastimes in Vṛndāvana - Part 2

Hi everyone, welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Vṛndāvana. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve...* 

So, this is our second lecture in our series on the summer season in Vṛndāvana. We pointed out in our previous lecture that although the heat of summer in India is practically unbearable, this was not necessarily true when Kṛṣṇa was present on this planet five thousand years ago. Śrīla Prabhupāda explains this phenomenon in *Kṛṣṇa* book, Chapter 18. He writes as follows: "While Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were enjoying life in Vṛndāvana in the midst of the cowherd boys and girls, the season gradually changed—summer. The summer season in India is not very much welcomed because of the excessive heat, but in Vṛndāvana everyone was pleased because summer there appeared just like spring." 

Śrīla Prabhupāda goes on: "This was possible only because Lord Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, who are the controllers even of Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, were residing there. The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana were never disturbed by the scorching heat of the sun or high summer temperatures. The lakes of Vṛndāvana are surrounded by green grasses and various kinds of lotus flowers bloom there, such as kahlāra and kañja."

"And the air blowing in Vṛndāvana carries the aromatic pollen of those lotus flowers. When the particles of water from the waves of the Yamunā, the lakes, and the waterfalls touch the bodies of the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they automatically feel the cooling effects. Therefore, they were practically undisturbed by the summer season." 

A nice insight from Śrīla Prabhupāda. Nevertheless, Mother Paurṇamāsī and Yogamāyā make it appear that Kṛṣṇa and the eternal residents of Vṛndāvana experience inconveniences in the summer. Why? So that the devotees may render even more services to the Lord to keep Him cool. And there is a wonderful summer *līlā* pastime in this regard that I came across, written by a medieval poet from Vṛndāvana. His name was Nandadās, and he entitled his poem *Banumati*.

Now, there are a number of such authoritative Vaiṣṇava scholars and writers who have appeared in previous centuries who we hear from and learn about Kṛṣṇa and even Lord Caitanya's pastimes, and Śrīla Prabhupāda encourages us to do so. I’ve quoted a few times the last few months Prabhupāda’s words in the purport in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.1.1: "Within the past 500 years, many erudite scholars and ācāryas like Jīva Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa and many other distinguished scholars even after the time of Lord Caitanya made elaborate commentaries on the *Bhāgavatam*, and the serious student would do well to attempt to go through them to better relish the transcendental messages."

Yes, so in *Banumati-gopī-līlā*, Nandadās writes about the gopī named Banumati and her *sevā*, her service in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Now, I was researching, and some of our Gauḍīya ācāryas say that Banumati—or they refer to her as Banumati-mañjarī—appeared in *gaura-līlā* as Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and I read others say that she was Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī. So, Banumati lived in a village near Nandagrām during Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and the family into which she married, they were very strict—very, very strict. They followed all the social norms, social customs, and they told her never to see Kṛṣṇa, even in dreams. And they warned her that He is the controller of the hearts of all the gopīs in Vṛndāvana; His eyes are filled with magic, for whoever stares just once at them gets lost in those eyes and never returns to normal material life. 

And they actually made her promise; she had to take a vow never to look upon the son of Mahārāja Nanda. They said, "Who wanders in the streets of Vraja casting His sidelong glance at all the young cowherd girls." However, their instructions had the opposite effect on Banumati. So many instructions—"Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, don’t do this, Kṛṣṇa, don’t do that, don’t do this"—she was hearing about Kṛṣṇa so often it had the opposite effect on her. For after listening to all these descriptions of Kṛṣṇa every day, her love for Kṛṣṇa only increased, and day and night she just meditated on meeting Him. But she had one anxiety; she had, as I just described, one worry in her heart, and that was about her promise to her in-laws never to meet Kṛṣṇa.

Then it so happened—of course, everything happens in Vṛndāvana by the arrangement of Paurṇamāsī and her assistant, Vṛndādevī—it so happened that on one very hot summer day, Banumati met a close servant of Raṅgadevī, one of the eight aṣṭa-sakhīs or close intimate girlfriends of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So to that gopī, the maidservant of Śrī Raṅgadevī, Banumati just opened her heart, and she revealed that the only desire in her heart, her only desire, was to see Kṛṣṇa with her own eyes and to meet Him. She said to this new gopī who she met, "My dear gopī, I am not suffering from the heat of this hot summer; rather, my body is burning in separation from Kṛṣṇa. Each moment I am drinking the hot lava, the hot lava of intense separation from Him. Please tell me, how can I overcome this situation?" 

So, her new gopī friend replied, "My dear Banumati, it is very easy, very easy to meet the darling of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa." So then Banumati replied, "Well, but what about the promise? What about the promise I made to my in-laws and elders? What about my *dharma*? What about my chaste character? And what will people say? The rumors." So her new gopī friend replied—it’s really, it’s very deep, it’s very beautiful—she replied, "My dear Banumati, in Vṛndāvana, a promise can be broken if it becomes an obstacle in meeting one’s beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa, and the ultimate *dharma* is to surrender everything to the son of Mahārāja Nanda and allow Him to rule your life without expecting anything in return." 

So beautiful. Then she continued, "As for your chaste character, it will be successful only if you give your heart and soul to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. And when that goal is achieved, rumors in society are nothing but useless gossip compared to the goal that you have achieved. My dear friend, I tell you the truth: the path of loving Kṛṣṇa is not easy, for the burning pains of separation from Kṛṣṇa are a constant factor. But in time, you will relish how the highest love of Kṛṣṇa is bliss in separation. The highest love of Kṛṣṇa is bliss in separation."

So then Banumati asked her gopī friend, "Okay, okay, now how can I meet Kṛṣṇa? I accept everything you said. How can I meet Kṛṣṇa?" Then her friend replied, "It is only by the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī that one can achieve Kṛṣṇa." 

Let me take you to Her now; She is in Varṣāṇā. So they left. Banumati was in ecstasy, and when they arrived in Varṣāṇā, Banumati saw Śrī Rādhā sitting in a kuñja, in a grove made of a special grass called *kuśa*. Pujārīs will know that here in India we offer the *kuśa* oil to the deities in the summertime to keep them cool; it’s made from couch grass, *kuśa*—a special grass. And there, Banumati saw some of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's close friends, sakhīs. They were sprinkling Rādhā with fragrant water to cool Her while others were fixing a *jala-yantra*. I had to look up *jala-yantra*; they are fixing a *jala-yantra*, turns out it’s a water fountain to keep the atmosphere cool. The water fountain. Other sakhīs, I read, were rinsing water from the wet clothes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and Śrī Rādhā Herself—beautiful insights—Śrī Rādhā Herself was sitting with Her lotus feet in a small pond of cooling water; it says cooling water called *hauz*, where lotus flowers were constantly blossoming—usually they blossomed, you know, at the same time—they were blossoming. 

So to further cool down Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī from the summer heat, a few sakhīs were putting sandalwood paste on Her hands while others decorated Her forehead with *kuṅkuma*. Now, Banumati recognized all these attempts to cool Rādhā as *śītalā-vidyā*. I had to look that one up—*śītalā-vidyā* means the science of applying cooling articles. Now our poet Nandadās, he writes: "Rādhā knows the heart’s desire of those who engage in Her service." Thus She knew the desire of Banumati and said, "Dearest one, welcome now to the group of *Kṛṣṇa-anurāgiṇī*." Beautiful name for someone! *Kṛṣṇa-anurāgiṇī*—it means that group of gopīs who love Kṛṣṇa, because some gopīs are more attached to Kṛṣṇa and some gopīs were more attached to Śrī Rādhā. So Banumati, she is now part of *Kṛṣṇa-anurāgiṇī*. Rādhā welcomed her: "Welcome to the group of gopīs who love Kṛṣṇa." 

And then Rādhā said, "Dear one, soon Kṛṣṇa will come in the *phūla-bāṅglā*." *Phūla-bāṅglā* means the flower house. "And we will welcome Him by, to begin with, by sprinkling rose water on Him." She said, "When the harsh summer rays of the sun hit Kṛṣṇa’s soft body, then His eyes become red and His throat becomes dry. Dearest Banumati, please arrange, get all the paraphernalia together for this *śītalā-sevā*." The goods, the paraphernalia for cooling Kṛṣṇa down. Now remember, Banumati, she was hankering for service to Kṛṣṇa, because love—when you love someone, you want to show your love, you want to express it, and it’s done through service. So Banumati now has a service to get all this paraphernalia together, so she is in bliss. And the poet writes: she quickly arranged for all the articles to relieve Kṛṣṇa from this intense heat of the summer sun. 

She prepared, first of all, a silver *surāhī*—a silver *surāhī*—I had to look it up, a *surāhī*—a *surāhī* is a long-necked pot filled with the cool water of the Yamunā. A silver *surāhī*. Then she arranged a perfumed oil made out of gulāb, jūhī, kuśa, and candana. Then she got together wet handkerchiefs dipped in kewra water, K-E-W-R-A; we use that in our pūjā here in Vṛndāvana. Then she made a drink, a drink out of sweet flowers. Now the specific nature of this drink is that it cools the heart, it cools the mind, and it cools the body. I thought that was really interesting; you know, we cool ourselves here in Vṛndāvana in the heat of the summer, we turn on the AC, it cools the body, maybe the mind, but I don’t know about the heart. But this drink she made out of sweet flowers cools the heart, the mind, and the body. Vṛndāvana is such a wonderful place. 

So after some time, Kṛṣṇa arrived, and He arrived at the height of the sun—it was straight up in the sky—midday. So Kṛṣṇa went straight to this *phūla-bāṅglā*, this flower house. Now Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, She welcomed Kṛṣṇa by offering Him, you know, because Banumati had prepared so many things, She first offered Kṛṣṇa camphor mixed with candana, or sandalwood paste, and then both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they sat on an *āsana*, and what was the *āsana* made of? A lotus petal. They sat on an *āsana* of a lotus petal. Then, to the delight of Banumati, Rādhā introduced Kṛṣṇa to the new gopī, Banumati. This described Banumati became stunned seeing the beauty of Kṛṣṇa, and what did she do? She started dancing in ecstasy while singing the glories of Kṛṣṇa, who Nandadās says was looking like a cooling sapphire in the heat of summer—who Kṛṣṇa is the eternal heartbeat of all the residents of Vraja and who holds a *phūla-choḍī*—*phūla-choḍī* means a stick made out of flowers. 

And then our poet—we thank our poet—the poet concludes by saying, and I’ll quote him: "I worship the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Their gopīs who swim in the ocean of sweet loving pastimes in all types of weather given by Mother Nature." I like that last line, "in all types of weather." You know, we’re talking about six seasons, we’re going through them gradually, and all in all these seasons there’s various ways to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s sweet pastimes. 

Now, in our poet Nandadās’s poem, we heard how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī offered Kṛṣṇa camphor mixed with candana or sandalwood paste to cool Him down. Now, I was reading further; Rūpa Gosvāmī also mentions in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* other ways that this cooling sandalwood is used in Kṛṣṇa’s service along with *tilaka*. Kṛṣṇa’s forehead sports a dot of sandalwood paste at its center, sandalwood pulp at its edges, curly locks of hair along its border, and designs drawn in minerals, all embellishing it further. The spot of sandalwood in between the two vertical lines of *tilaka* just above Kṛṣṇa’s eyebrows serves as a mystical charm that hypnotizes the gopīs, who become attracted to gazing at their lover’s stately face. And he continues, to keep Kṛṣṇa cool during the summer, Kṛṣṇa’s loving cowherd boyfriends apply sandalwood paste to the two outer portions of His brow, which makes His forehead resemble a mystical gemstone, a mystical gemstone. 

Then Rūpa Gosvāmī reveals something I found just amazing; he writes, Viśākhā once warned Rādhā of three things that have the inconceivable power to attract people to Kṛṣṇa. And what are those three things? Kṛṣṇa’s flower garland, Kṛṣṇa’s name, and the mysterious sandalwood paste on His forehead. 

Viśākhā once warns, actually, of three things, he writes, warns that have inconceivable power to attract people to Kṛṣṇa: His flower garland, His name, and the mysterious sandalwood paste on His forehead. Now, further research reveals that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura mentions in his famous book *Jaiva-dharma* that sandalwood paste is one of the favorite 16 *śṛṅgāras*, or ornaments, that Rādhā wears. In other words, just as Kṛṣṇa wears or uses sandalwood paste in so many different ways, so amongst Rādhā’s *śṛṅgāra*, or Her paraphernalia, sandalwood is one of the things used to bring out Her beauty, and perhaps the ornaments become more beautiful being on Her body. But he mentioned 16 *śṛṅgāras*, they’re really beautiful *śṛṅgāras*, of which sandalwood is one. I’ll recite the 16 ornaments that decorate Rādhā: 

*   An elaborate bath
*   The brilliant gem on Her nose ring
*   Her blue sari
*   The sash around Her waist
*   Her curly locks
*   Her dangling earrings
*   The sandalwood paste smeared on Her body (one of the ornaments)
*   The flower arrangements in Her hair
*   A fine garland
*   A lotus flower that She joyfully holds in Her hand
*   Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says Her chewing a betel leaf
*   A dot of kastūrī musk upon Her chin
*   Kajal mascara around Her eyes
*   Colorful designs painted on Her cheeks, like modern-day gopī dots
*   Her feet painted with red *alaktaka* tint
*   And Her brow decorated with *tilaka*

These are the 16 *śṛṅgāras* he said which shine with divine splendor. Wow. 

And even nowadays, five thousand years after Kṛṣṇa’s appearance on earth, Vrajabāsīs continue to do their best to keep Kṛṣṇa—nowadays in His of course His deity form, which is not different than Him—cool during the summer months. Jīva Gosvāmī writes in *Gopāla-campū*, Chapter 17, that sandalwood continues to play an important role in such *sevā*. He writes as follows: "In the summer, the devotees take the deity on water excursions and places where there are cooling breezes. They anoint Him with sandalwood paste, ardently fan Him, decorate Him with jeweled necklaces, feed Him very palatable foodstuffs, and bring Him into the pleasantly cooling moonlight. In this way, they serve the Lord as far as their abilities enable." 

So nowadays, Kṛṣṇa’s always the center of everyone’s attention here in Vṛndāvana, so the deity is not different than the Lord, so the devotees, they make these arrangements to keep the deity cool. All the temples—I was here last summer and I visit the temples—they’re doing their very best, their level best we say, to facilitate the Lord keeping cool. 

And finally, devotees themselves, they also try to keep cool in Vṛndāvana’s hot summer seasons so that they can serve the Lord. I was researching like that; in Chapter 45 of *Kṛṣṇa* book, Śrīla Prabhupāda reveals how such residents of modern-day Vṛndāvana deal with the summer heat. He writes, "This art of decorating can still be seen in various temples of Vṛndāvana during the summer season. It’s called *phūla-bāṅglā*. The dais, the throne, the walls, and the ceilings are all fully decorated and a small aromatic fountain of flowers is fixed in the center. Because of these floral decorations, the people fatigued from the heat of summer become refreshed." 

So we’ll close today with another quote from Śrīla Prabhupāda where he specifically refers to devotees using sandalwood to cool themselves down. And those of you who are connoisseurs of *Kṛṣṇa* book, you’ll be familiar with this quote; it’s on Chapter 90. Prabhupāda writes, "Because India is a tropical country and sandalwood is very cooling, people in India use sandalwood pulp as a cosmetic even now during the very warm days of the summer season. Those who can afford to do so apply sandalwood pulp to their bodies and feel cool all day. In India, it was the system that after bathing and sanctifying the body by applying marks of *tilaka*, one would offer obeisances to the deity, take some candana-prasāda"—what does that mean? *Candana-prasāda*? It means some of the sandalwood paste, and it dries, it’s the next day when the deity has His bath that’s taken off, sometimes rolled into little balls or whatever, and given to the pilgrims as *prasāda*—"so one would offer obeisances to the deity, take some of this *candana-prasāda* from the room of the deity," Prabhupāda writes, "and apply it as a cosmetic to the body." He concludes, "This was called *prasāda*."

Thank you. That’s lecture number two on summer pastimes in Vṛndāvana. And summer lasts, you know, a few months, actually most of the year is quite hot here in Vṛndāvana in India, so we will be discussing, lecturing on more summer pastimes as the weeks go by. So thank you very much for listening, I hope that you enjoyed this section of this series. 

*Śrī śrī gorā-nitāi kī jaya! Śrī śrī kṛṣṇa-balarāma kī jaya! Śrī śrī rādhā-sundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!* 

Kṛṣṇa. Thank you.""