Hello everyone, and a warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and most importantly, Viṣṇu-padāya kṛṣṇa-prema-svāmī-śrīmate bhaktivedanta Svāmī Prabhupāda.

We are continuing with our series on the summer season in Vṛndāvana.

This lecture is number six, actually. In Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Prabhupāda's book, in chapter 18, Śrīla Prabhupāda gives a wonderful description of summer in Vṛndāvana.

He writes, "The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana were never disturbed by the scorching heat of the sun or high summer temperatures.

The lakes of Vṛndāvana are surrounded by green grasses, and various kinds of lotus flowers bloom there, such as the kañjara, kashijotpal, and the air blowing in Vṛndāvana carries the aromatic pollen of those lotus flowers.

When the particles of water from the waves of the Yamunā, along with the lakes and the waterfalls, touched the bodies of the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they automatically felt a cooling effect.

Therefore, they were practically undisturbed by the summer season." But as we described in a previous lecture, Mother Pūtanā, and Vinda Devī, they make arrangements for the inconvenience of summer heat as a means to facilitate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana.

In this way, summer gives the Vrajavāsīs extra services to keep Kṛṣṇa cool. For example, the ācāryas say that Mother Yaśodā and her gopī assistants would make butter every day by churning yogurt, then she would feed Kṛṣṇa the leftover buttermilk, sweetened or salty, depending on the time of the year.

This drink cools the body in summer. So, Yaśodā would provide Kṛṣṇa with plenty of buttermilk, salted and lightly spiced during the summer months, to keep them cool. Also, the hot days of summer facilitated the Vrajavāsīs' loving exchanges with Kṛṣṇa in another very interesting way.

I was reading that when Kṛṣṇa would come back from herding the cows in the forest each day in the summer, it was a great relief and a source of unlimited joy for the Vrajavāsīs who were not only tired and exhausted from the summer heat, but they were burning in pangs of separation from Kṛṣṇa.

Now, Kavi Karnapura writes in his Ānanda Vṛndāvana Campu, and I'll quote again here, "The Vrajavāsīs took immense pleasure in seeing their beloved Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma after a long summer day.

Kṛṣṇa's beautiful dark blue curly locks peeking out from the edge of His limestone white turban enchanted the eyes of everyone. The dust rising from the hooves of the cows created an auspicious atmosphere. Gentle breezes added a comfortable sensation. The breeze, purified with the touch of Kṛṣṇa's transcendental body, soothed and satisfied all the Vrajavāsīs as they watched the Lord returning with His boys and His cows." So, summer with this hot weather has its role to play in Vṛndāvana lila, facilitating more rasa.

Now, ācāryas say that there are two places, I was reading, two places in particular where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa go to get cool in the hot summer. Two places they go to get cool in summer. Now, one is the kuñjas of Braja, and the other is the caves of Govardhan Hill.

Now, a kuñja is defined as a large garden, which is denser than a forest, but whose trees are no larger than the size of a human being. It's very dense, but the trees are, you know, about the size of a human being.

And within these kuñjas are smaller groves called nikunjas. We have the big, and then you have the nikunjas. And these nikunjas, these smaller groves, are actually where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa rest and enjoy their playful pastimes. And because these nikunjas are so small, there's a very limited space in them to sit or to stand, so only Lalita Sakhi can go inside when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa require some service.

It's fascinating information. Now, in these smaller nikunjas, there are only small lanterns filled with fireflies to give light. Now, amongst these nikunjas, there's even a smaller version, a smaller version called nibṛtini, where even Lalita doesn't go in, just Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

They they rest there, so no one can disturb them. And in these nibṛtinis, the only light comes what comes from what are called their mirror rings of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They have rings with like mirrors, the mirror rings of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, which reflect in their ornaments, their śṛṅgāra, causing enough light so they can just see each other.

And lastly, there's the smallest kuñja, which is called nivṛta nikunja. An āśraya in which the only light is the reflection of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's eyes. Wow, so sweet. Now, Kavi Karnapura writes of these various kuñjas in his illustrious Ānanda Vṛndāvana Campu, saying that the Indira Devīs keep a variety of pleasurable substances like pañca and candana and pots of cool sandal-scented water inside these kuñjas.

And he says there's also containers of refreshing drinks like madhu and mango nectar waiting to satisfy the divine couple and to relieve their fatigue. So, with this really interesting, detailed information, we get a better understanding of the song of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, which we all know very well.

We sing it every day before any class. Jaya Rādhā Mādhava. This is a song by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, which Śrīla Prabhupāda introduced into our society very early in the movement.

It's from his Gita-mālā. Devotee knows that by heart. Translation is: Kṛṣṇa is the lover of Rādhā. He displays many loving pastimes in the groves of Vṛndāvana, the kuñjas.

He is the lover of the cowherd maidens of Rāsa, the holder of the great hill called Govardhan, the beloved son of Mother Yaśodā, the delighter of the inhabitants of Braja, and He wanders in the forest along the banks of the river Yamunā.

Now, the other place that I mentioned where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa go in the hot summer are the caves, the caves of Govardhan Hill. And again, in Ānanda Vṛndāvana Campu, we hear that "During the summer, the pathways become hard and dry from the blistering heat of the sun.

A person's fingernails become brittle and crack. But inside the caves of Govardhan, where Kṛṣṇa enjoys with His beloveds, there is always a soothing and cooling atmosphere due to its natural springs and small ponds of water." Govardhan. Now, again, you know, spending time in the Vṛndāvana Research Centre, we have that golden opportunity.

There are many śāstras, and I found one book by the poet Kiśora Dāsa, who we quoted several classes ago. And in his writings, he reveals a very beautiful summer pastime in that work, in one of his works. Now, Kiśora Dāsa was a medieval poet and he was initiated into the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava line of Gadādhara Paṇḍita's paramparā.

Now, he writes that one day Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were sitting in the shadow of a banyan tree on a very hot summer day, when Śrī Rādhā said, "My beloved Kṛṣṇa, I'm very thirsty, and as a result, my throat, my lips, and my whole body are very dry." So, Kṛṣṇa replied, "My dear Rādhē, don't worry.

I will run and get some cool water from the waterfalls at Govardhan Hill." But Śrī Rādhā said, "Kṛṣṇa, no. This thirst will not go away with cool water. This thirst will only go away by the sweet melodies of your flute.

Whenever your flute comes to the ears of Braja's Gopis, it provides a refreshing rain of mercy which helps to quench our thirst. To always be with you, there is an endless drought and our desert-like hearts, that even the rain from our eyes, what's the rain from our eyes are tears, that even the rain from our eyes, our tears, cannot believe because most of the time we're separated from you.

It is only the monsoon melodies of your flute which can bring life again to the dry desert of our hearts." So then Kṛṣṇa smiled and said, "Oh, this can only be because I play your all-merciful names with my flute.

Devotees chant your names on beads, brāhmaṇas chant your names on their fingers, paramahaṁsas chant your names with their breath, mahā-bhāgavatas chant your names in their heartbeat, and me, your lifetime servant, Devi, I chant your names on my flute. Therefore, with your permission, I will now play my flute, which will bring us even closer than we are now." So, Śrī Rādhā smiled with her approval.

So, Kṛṣṇa began playing his flute. Now, I read that the particular melody that he chose was the beautiful candragātha rāga. Remember we were discussing rāgas the other day, how different melodies were played at different times of the day to bring forth certain loving sentiments.

So, on this particular occasion, he chose the candragātha rāga, which I found out is compared to moonlight, which cools the body, mind, and heart. If you play that rāga, it's like moonlight that cools the body, the mind, and the heart.

Now, Śrī Rādhā quickly recognized the melody, but because it contained the name of her topmost rival, Candrāvalī, she became very upset, and she said, "Kṛṣṇa, you're not chanting my name. You're chanting Candrāvalī's name." And she stormed out of the kuñja without saying another word.

But as Kṛṣṇa ran behind her, at one point she disappeared. He's running right behind her, you can see her, but she just disappeared. So, Kṛṣṇa stopped. He was stunned. He's thinking, "How can this be?

Where has she gone?

I was right behind her." However, the ācāryas say that in this particular case, Vinda Devī had deployed a disguise called candra-antar-dhāna, candra-antar-dhāna, which means a disguise in which, although a person is present, they cannot be seen by others. Something akin to being invisible, but a particular power that Vinda Devī has.

Rādhārāṇī was there, but Kṛṣṇa couldn't see her because of candra-antar-dhāna. So, Kṛṣṇa gave up trying to follow Śrī Rādhā, and after some time, she, Rādhā, arrived back at her home, Varṣāṇā. Just to say the word Varṣāṇā. And there she revealed to her girlfriends how much Kṛṣṇa had upset her.

Consoling her, you know, all her friends agreed that they always do, Kṛṣṇa's actions have been very inappropriate, and she had done the right thing by leaving Him. However, later in the day, her girlfriends saw that Śrī Rādhā was becoming restless and was often going to the window in her room and gazing out, as if looking for someone, someone.

When suddenly, her pet parrot, who lives in a golden cage, became restless. Now, the ācāryas say that Śrī Rādhā's parrot has a special characteristic that he always acts, speaks, and behaves according to Śrī Rādhā's heart feelings. I thought that was very sweet.

Her her parrot, she has a personal parrot, and the special characteristic of this parrot is that he always acts, speaks, and behaves according to Śrī Rādhā's heart feelings. So, seeing his restlessness, because she's restless, seeing his restlessness, Śrī Rādhā came forward and, while feeding that parrot little pieces of fruit and some nuts, she said, "My dear parrot, please say, Rādhē, Rādhē." So, the parrot repeated, "Rādhē, Rādhē." And at that point, Viśākhā, Viśākhā, who was standing nearby, she said to Śrī Rādhā, "Rādhe, every day you tell your parrot to say, Śyāma, Śyāma, Śyāma, Śyāma.

Why are you asking him to say your own name today?" So, Śrī Rādhā replied, "Viśākhā, because I want to do what makes Kṛṣṇa happy.

If my name comes to His ears and He feels pleasure, then it means my life and the voice of this parrot are both successful. It means my life and the voice of this parrot are both successful." Viśākhā, devotional life means to do activities which give pleasure to your master, even if they do not give you pleasure.

So, when Viśākhā heard this, you know, she frowned and she said, "But, but dear Rādhā, you're glorifying Kṛṣṇa while He's having fun with Candrāvalī at this very moment. You should be angry with Him." So, she, Rādhā, she just, you know, thought for a minute and she said, "Yes, that is true.

But if I put aside my mind, my anger, then I can go to see the Lord of my life, and that will mean everything to me. Let me burn my pride in love and reach the cooling lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.

Let me burn my pride in love and reach the cooling lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa." So, at that point, Viśākhā, you know, she paused for a moment, you know, and she kind of looked out the window, and what did she see?

She was stunned to see Kṛṣṇa walking towards the palace, and with her voice shaking, she said, "Śrī Rādhā, your Kṛṣṇa is coming. You were willing to give up your pride to see Him, and He, though the King of Vṛndāvana, has agreed to approach you as a humble servant.

Just see how love is reciprocal." Oh, glorious to you. Now, as Kṛṣṇa approached the palace, Śrī Rādhā came outside to to greet Him, and when they met, they embraced, and all the sakhīs, they bathed them with a shower of flowers.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Really wonderful pastime. So, a little short today, but we'll conclude with a few verses from, it's one of my favorite books actually. I've carried it for the last 20 years with me. Ujjvala-ramaṇī-vilāsa, verses 11 to 16. Just listen to, you know, Rūpa Gosvāmī's Rūpa Mañjarī.

So, he knows these, these sentiments. He writes, "O King, whose flute is very eager to sing the glories of Śrī Rādhā, the deity of pure love. O Queen, whose tongue tastes the sweetness of chanting the glories of Lord Mukunda, the joy of the world.

O King, the sweetness of whose lotus eyes traps the swan of the heart of Śrīmatī, who is the crown of Braja's girls. O Queen, the net of whose side-long glance expertly catches the regal fish of the Prince of Braja's heart.

O King, whose flute music is a cup for drinking the ocean of the eternal patience of the daughter of the Gopa King's friend. O Queen, whose very graceful songs enchant the dear of the heart of He who enchants the entire world.

O King, who when you hear the name Rādhikā forgets all playful arts. O Queen, who when you hear the two syllables Kṛṣṇa becomes stunned and motionless. O son of the King of the Gopis. O daughter of the best man in Gokula.

Bowing down and placing folded hands above His head, this unfortunate person begs you both for a certain gift. O King and Queen, the lakes of whose hearts are filled by the swiftly flowing nectar mountain streams of your great mercy.

Please be kind to this wicked person. Please show him the luster of the transcendental happiness that is the guarantee of being able to see you one day in the future." Some real nectar there. And I believe we have perhaps one more summer pastime to share with you, and we'll be back in a couple of days.

Thank you. Śrī Śrī Gaurāṅga. Ki jaya. Kṛṣṇa.