"*00403*.*
"All right,  everyone, a very warm welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Thank you for being with us, Śrīmatī Bhaktivedānta.

So, we are continuing with our series on the summer season in Vṛndāvana. This will be the fourth lecture in the series, and as we mentioned in our last lecture, the six seasons of Vṛndāvana exist simultaneously in Vṛndāvana, each one in a different forest. In this regard, I found a really interesting feature of the six seasons in Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s famous *Govinda-līlāmṛta*, Chapter 12, wherein Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes that the trees in one very special forest in Vṛndāvana all show the signs of the six seasons simultaneously. Each tree—he describes the phenomena as follows: on a single tree, one branch has new shoots, another has flower buds, and yet another has blooming flowers. On another branch, the leaves are green, and on another, they are white. One branch has unripe fruit, while another has fruit in the process of becoming ripe, and yet another has fully ripened fruit. There were all the signs of the six seasons in one tree, and there’s a forest of them—special forests. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja concludes by saying, "This forest of Vṛndāvana is decorated with the opulences and sweetness of all the six seasons. Filled with love for you, Kṛṣṇa, this forest yearns to taste the happiness of directly serving you." How beautiful.

Now, I was also reading that Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura notes a similar phenomena in Chapter 14 of *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta*. Therein, he writes that Kṛṣṇa is speaking to Śrī Rādhā, noting how there are specific birds present in each of the seasons in Vṛndāvana and, accordingly, a forest. But while walking, He and Rādhā come across a scene where all these unique seasonal birds are all together. Kṛṣṇa says, and I quote, "My dear Rādhā, look, the pīkās, tīṭibhas, cātakas, swans, śukas, and hārītakas have all joined together, singing their own unique songs. Here we can hear all the six seasonal birds together at the same time." I thought that was really beautiful and worth sharing.

So for today’s lecture, I would like to focus on how the various deities in Vṛndāvana’s temples are worshiped in summertime. You may remember we discussed some time ago, a couple of months ago, how Vṛndāvana’s deities are worshiped in the winter; it was all very interesting. So now, we’ll discuss how the deities are worshiped in summer. In the month of Jyeṣṭha—May or June—when summer in Vṛndāvana begins in earnest, all the temples change their *sevā*, or worship, according to the weather. It is actually said at that time the Sun God, riding on his twelve horses, comes to Vṛndāvana to see his daughter, which causes the hot weather in Vṛndāvana—it’s one of the reasons—and he also comes with his sister, Lū. Her name means "hot winds."

Now, with this onslaught of the summer season, Vṛndāvana’s deities don't wear bright clothes because that attracts the sunlight, such as red, yellow, and saffron, and neither do the pūjārīs wear these colors during the summer season. So what do the deities wear? It’s very interesting; they wear the finest white mal-mal cotton clothes. There is a type of cotton, mal-mal, with very small borders of blue, green, pink, off-white, and other very light colors. Now, I was reading this cotton is so fine that one can actually see through it, and it can easily pass through a small finger ring. So sometimes, the mal-mal cotton is printed with designs of sandalwood paste and turmeric; I’ve read that somewhere.

Now, I was also reading that most major temples in Vṛndāvana, like Rādhā-Ramaṇa, Rādhā-Vallabha, and Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, have special large water fountains around the area of the temple where devotees can congregate and keep cool, as well as smaller fountains on the altars for refreshing the deities and for the pleasure of the deities. In the afternoon, Brajavāsīs traditionally visit the temples and sing songs in *rāgas*—summer melodies. Because a *rāga* is like a melody that fits the particular time of the day, brings out the mood of that day; different types of *rāgas*. So the summer *rāgas*, which are sung by the Brajavāsīs in the afternoon for the pleasure of their deities—there is a list of the major ones: Malhāra-rāga, Bahāra-rāga, Megha-rāga, Sāraṅga-rāga, Bhairava-rāga, and a few others.

I found a beautiful description of Kṛṣṇa playing a summer *rāga* for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I found it in a book by a medieval Brajavāsī poet; his name was Vallabha Giridhara. And he writes, "O friend, Lord Hari is sitting with His beloved Śrī Rādhā in the shadow of a kuñja. Taking permission from Rādhā by folding His palms, Kṛṣṇa began playing a summer *rāga* on His flute called Sāraṅga-rāga." But this is interesting: while doing so, enchanted by the beauty of Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa missed a part of the melody. So when He finished, the poet describes, the treasure house of all artistic endeavors, Śrī Rādhā, started playing Her vīṇā—that’s Her favorite instrument—Her vīṇā in the same *rāga*. And when She came to the part of the melody that the poet Vallabha Giridhara says Kṛṣṇa knowingly missed—Kṛṣṇa knowingly missed—Śrī Rādhā played that part louder to show Him the correct way to play it, to play that Sāraṅga-rāga. Then Vallabha Giridhara says that in appreciation for playing the Sāraṅga-rāga on Her vīṇā properly, Kṛṣṇa happily offered Śrī Rādhā His very own *aṅka-mālā*. *Aṅka-mālā*—what’s an *aṅka-mālā*? I had to look it up. *Aṅka-mālā* is a garland that goes around one’s neck. We’re very familiar with that; He took it off and gave it to Her, and then He embraced Her. Very sweet summer pastime.

Now, during the summer season in Vṛndāvana, all the temple room windows—you just imagine you’re in the temple room and there are windows there—all the temple room windows are covered with curtains made from a dark brown grass called *kaśa* or *kuśa*. We know of this grass; this grass’s sweet smell and cooling nature is very famous in Braja. Actually, I know that the Brajavāsīs also make a sweet, perfumed oil, *kuśa* oil, from this grass—dark green, very strong odor, sweet odor. And I was also reading that every afternoon, for the *rāja-bhoga-ārātrika*, the noon *ārātrika*, at that time, the temple pūjārīs sprinkle Yamunā water on these grass curtains, which causes the atmosphere to become cooler, especially when that breeze, that *lū*, comes, and it comes up usually in the afternoon; it’s very powerful, blows through the windows, then everything becomes very cool because of that *kuśa* grass.

And I was also reading that in most temples in front of the altar in summer, there’s a very large fan made from thick, colorful cotton cloth hanging from the ceiling with a rope attached to it. Now, this is for the pilgrims; this is some special mercy, you can do some deity *sevā*. Pilgrims and devotees are allowed to pull on that rope, which creates a special breeze for the deities. There’s always a long line, I’ve seen, to pull that fan. In olden times, this type of fanning was used to cool down kings and emperors in the royal courts of the Rajputs, the Marathas, and the Mughals, but we know it’s best to fan the King of Kings, Lord Kṛṣṇa. Rūpa Gosvāmī writes in his *Gāndharva-samprārthanāṣṭakam*, verse 6, he writes as follows: "About fanning: O Vṛndāvaneśvarī, after enjoying loving pastimes with Śrī Kṛṣṇa on the banks of Your Kuṇḍa, Your lotus face is brilliantly decorated with drops of perspiration. Both of You are relaxing on a jeweled *siṁhāsana* beneath the desire tree. When will I be able to soothe You when You are present in such a condition by fanning You with a *cāmara*?" Fanning you; this is it. Every Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava’s desire: you get a taste for that when you go to the temples in Vṛndāvana in the summer and you can pull that rope, and the fanning is there for the deity. All preparation.

Also, as one can imagine, sandalwood with its cooling effect plays an important part in keeping Vṛndāvana’s deities cool in the summer. In summer, the deities can be seen decorated with sandalwood paste and different designs—like I’ve seen designs of lotuses and leaves and flowers, etc., on the deities. And I also know that at the Toṭā Gopīnātha temple—Toṭā Gopīnātha temple, a favorite temple of ISKCON devotees in Jagannātha Purī—there’s a tradition of writing "Rādhā" in Bengali in big letters with sandalwood paste on the chest of Toṭā Gopīnātha. Each morning during summer, the pūjārīs do that; they write in Bengali "Śrī Rādhā" on His chest. But besides having a cooling effect on the deity with the sandalwood, there is a deeper, more subtle, more *rasika* reason for this. The ācāryas say that when Kṛṣṇa herds His cows in the hot season, summer season, under the sun, He feels the heat, but much more troublesome is the burning fire of separation that He feels from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī because He’s in the forest all day. So a moment seems like a millennium for Her and for Him. So more than just the heat of the summer, He’s burning in the fire of separation. So the pūjārīs, they write the name "Rādhā" each day on Toṭā Gopīnātha’s chest, or you could say His heart, in sandalwood paste with a Tulasī tree twig, which the ācāryas say helps to relieve the burning, hot pangs of separation that Kṛṣṇa, or Toṭā Gopīnātha, feels for His dearly beloved Śrī Rādhā. So if you go to Jagannātha Purī and you happen to see that "Śrī Rādhā," now you know the practical reason, and you know the *rasika* reason.

Now, in Jaipur during the summer, the Vṛndāvana deities that are there—Govindaji, Vinodaji, and other deities—they’re also decorated with designs of sandalwood paste, primarily on their foreheads and their cheeks. And if you’ve been to Jaipur in the summer, you can see Govindaji; He has a very broad face, and so on His cheeks and His forehead, there’s beautiful—the pūjārīs are very expert at painting those designs on His face—and Gopīnātha and others as well. And during the summer in Jagannātha Purī, I was reading, the deities of Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā are offered camphor powder on their foreheads and their noses to keep them cool. You perhaps you want to use some of these traditional techniques in the worship of your deities in the summer.

And there’s also a very old summer tradition in Vṛndāvana known as *Kuñja-nikuñja-utsava*, or the tradition of placing deities each evening in a "Phūla-bāṅglā." A "Phūla-bāṅglā"—we discussed this "Phūla-bāṅglā" in another class, I think. Kṛṣṇa came into the kuñja; the Gopīs had prepared this Phūla-bāṅglā, which literally means a flower palace, for Him. So every evening in the summer in Vṛndāvana, such a flower palace is made for the deities, and it’s made out of—you can note this down—pink roses, jasmine flowers, and mogrā flowers. And that little flower palace or hut, however big you want to imagine it, it’s placed on a platform called a *jaga-mohana* just outside the deity room. You have the altar, and there’s always a platform before the altar, so it’s placed there, and the deities are brought forward and they sit in that cool flower palace to give darśana to their devotees. Now, in the case where the deities are very large, then they are brought out in the form of their smaller version called *utsava-mūrtis*. The deities are so big sometimes they can’t receive the full traditional ritual, so the smaller deities are brought out—non-different than them—and they’re offered that *sevā*. I’ve seen that devotees and pilgrims, they love this tradition when the deities are brought forward in this flower palace because it gives all of us the opportunity to see the deity up closer. This is especially true in Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple; they have these beautiful flower palaces. You can almost touch them, but you can’t touch them, but they’re so close, you see all the details on Rādhā-Ramaṇajī. It’s a special time. Oh, summer’s so hot, it’s so difficult, but hey, you get to come closer to Rādhā-Ramaṇa.

So on special festival days, the Phūla-bāṅglās they’re made from different elements, not just flowers. I was researching it. One type of Phūla-bāṅglā is made of *kuśa* grass or *kaśa* grass; it’s called the *kāśaka-bāṅglā*. And then there’s a palace made of mango leaves; it’s called a *kerī-bāṅglā*. Then there’s a palace, Phūla-bāṅglā, made of banana tree trunks; you go to the temple and on the platform there’s banana tree trunks, and the pūjārīs call that a *keṭalī-bāṅglā*. And there’s also, in the summer times, you may come across in some temples more expensive versions like a little palace made of sandalwood; I’ve seen that, very intricate, very beautiful, designed and carved; that’s called the *candana-bāṅglā*. And then the most expensive one you may come across is called *śītala-bāṅglā*; it’s made of silver, pure silver. Rādhā-Ramaṇajī has one of those, and you can see it in the summertime.

So throughout the summer, there’s another nice *sevā* for the deities of Vṛndāvana called *lapaka-sevā*. It has a rhythm to it, right? Where pūjārīs, they wet special cotton handkerchiefs especially made for this purpose, and they take them and they move them like this in front of the deities, which sprinkles the water—tiny drops of water—and it settles on the deity’s bodies. I’ve seen them do it in a very beautiful way; they fan like this, or they move like this in intricate patterns when the water goes on the deity; cools them down.

Now, during summer, Vṛndāvana’s deities are very lightly decorated in special jewelry—nothing too heavy. For example, jewelry like pearls, sapphires, emeralds; it mentions seashells, sandalwood, and flowers. And I also found in my research that in the summertime, food offerings for the deities are placed on the altar in clay bowls and clay dishes, which are cooler, obviously, than metal plates or even silver plates that might be offered in summer, but they’re too warm. So every detail is there to please the deity and make Him cool. It’s very hot summer with these hot *lū* winds coming through. However, I also read that water pots for the deities to drink from are silver, but they’re covered with wet white cloth to keep them cool. I don't know why, but they—the water is often in silver pots, but to keep the water cool they’re covered with these wet cloths like this. Every detail is thought out to please the deity; this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So there’s a special mantra that the pūjārīs use to offer this water in silver pots. Now, the Sanskrit is quite long, so I’ll just recite the mantra which—you know, they’re offering water. Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā: "Offer Me a fruit, leaf..." something very simple, but with devotion. So they’re offering water with the following prayer. The pūjārī says, "May the waters of the Yamunā in this container bestow a pleasant, cooling feeling to Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Braja. May this offering of water also be a service to Śrī Rādhā on our behalf." Really nice. Other details of service to Vṛndāvana’s deities in summer include not offering foodstuffs which increase the heat or the warmth in the transcendental forms of the deities. It’s interesting, so when the cooks are cooking for the deities, they use less spices, less ghee, and items like dried fruits and seeds are not offered in the summer; apparently, that increases the heat in the body of the deity.

Now, one last interesting piece of information is that large or heavy—meaning like gold ornaments, jewelries, or turbans with heavy embroidery—are not offered to the deities in the summer. As I was mentioning earlier, very light decoration they do with *śṛṅgāra*. Heavy gold, heavy silver, lots of jewels, heavy embroidery, it’s a no-no. It’s too hot, not offered to the deities in the summer. And in my readings, I came across a really nice historical incident in this regard concerning one of my heroes—and you may, he may also be one of your heroes based on a lecture I gave a couple months ago concerning Mānsiṅgh, that great general in Emperor Akbar’s army 500 years ago. You may remember he’s a great devotee; he arranged the red sandstone for building the Govindaji temple. He used to come to Vṛndāvana frequently after fighting battles in different parts of India. So, one time he came to Vṛndāvana in the month of June, you know, hot seasons, hot summer season, to visit the temples. And on this particular visit, news of his visit spread very quickly, so all the pūjārīs in the temples they started dressing the deities in heavy gold and silver and, you know, jewels and embroidered cloth, as I guess you could say as a way to impress the general.

But when Mānsiṅgh arrived and he went to the different temples and took darśana of the deities, it’s written that he was very disappointed to see them in such clothes with lots of heavy jewelry in the harsh, hot weather of summer. But when he went out to have darśana of Govardhana Hill, he was relieved to see the deity of Śrī Gopāla—who might have been discovered or found, or now He’s known as Śrīnāthajī—dressed in soft white cotton clothes, which we mentioned in the beginning of this talk, soft white cotton clothes, with neck beads only made from tiny shells and a long, thin rose garland. And on Śrīnāthajī’s forehead, he was decorated with—it was decorated with—sandalwood paste, and everywhere in Śrīnāthajī’s temple, as we discussed earlier, there were water fountains keeping the temple premises cool. Mānsiṅgh also saw, it’s interesting, pūjārīs pouring pots of *kewrā* water—*kewrā*—it has a beautiful scent; I use it in my pūjā—he saw pūjārīs pouring pots of *kewrā* water mixed with camphor on the temple floor. Every effort was being made to serve Śrīnāthajī in the traditional way, the natural way, you could say. He also saw a very famous musician; his name was Kumbhan, and he was playing a sitār in a summer *rāga*, just adding to this pleasant atmosphere. Now, Mānsiṅgh was so happy to see this *sevā* of Gopāla, or Śrīnāthajī, that he immediately donated a large piece of land on the outskirts of Govardhana Hill for the service of Gopāla, of Śrīnāthajī, because in those days the deities literally owned lands where their vegetables and their grains and their fruits for their service were grown, as well as flowers. So he gave a huge piece of land just near Govardhana Hill, being pleased with the traditional way, the natural way of serving the Lord.

So these are some of the traditions in which the deities in Vṛndāvana are worshiped in the summer season, and it’s interesting to note that these ways of keeping the deities, their servants, and the pilgrims cool in summer are still practiced in most temples in Vṛndāvana. I’ve seen it in most temples, at least, you know, where the deities and the altar, etc., and even around—there’s no air conditioning—they keep it traditional, the traditional Braja, which is the best way to live, and they keep cool.

So I would like to conclude today with a quote from my very dear god-sister, Yamunā-dāsī, which I found on a wonderful website; you may have visited this website, it’s called "The Yamuna Devi Legacy Project," on the Yamuna Devi Legacy Project. And there I was reading that Yamunā once wrote about her early experiences in India, and it’s very revealing, very instructive for all of us. And I’ll just recite what she wrote, quote—she’s speaking about her time in early days in Vṛndāvana:

"The summer of 1972 was a challenging time for all of our small party. It was the first time in my life that I had undergone such insurmountable austerity. The heat in Vṛndāvana was incredibly unbearable, and some people were going to the hospital with heat exposure. The temperature hovered around 115 to 125 degrees Fahrenheit, and we had no fans, no screens, no windows, sometimes very little water, and we were eating just some boiled dal soup and chapatis as per Śrīla Prabhupāda’s instructions." She goes on, "It was a daunting experience. So I would pray each day, 'Please, my Rādhā-Dāmodara, help me to conquer this heat, to become impervious to it, deal with it as Prabhupāda before me, and as the Gosvāmīs do today. Let me tolerate it better tomorrow than I have today.' I have often reflected on an instruction," she writes, "Śrīla Prabhupāda gave me some months earlier in Calcutta. He must have foreseen me—he must have foreseen me in this situation—for he chuckled as he said, 'Yamunā-dāsī, in Vṛndāvana you must become fireproof. Sometimes the heat is unbearable there. You’ve already lived in London and you have become waterproof—so much rain was there—so now you must become both fireproof and waterproof; then you can live anywhere and everywhere and not be bothered.'"

So she goes on: "So on the spiritual platform, Vṛndāvana was one of the most glorious places to be in; we were surrounded by the lotus shelter of our ācāryas and great Vaiṣṇavas and Prabhupāda’s, but on the material side, it was a whole new type of service." Harī Kṛṣṇa, Yamunā-devī-dāsī.

So that’s some of the traditional ways which the Brajavāsīs worship their beloved deities, just focused on the deities, keeping them cool in the summer time in that hot weather, and that *lū*—that wind which blows so hard, that’s like hot poisons described sometimes—keeping the devotees, the pūjārīs, and the devotees cool in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. So thank you very much. I hope that this lecture has given all of you some solace as well from the difficulties that we’re all aware of now that are happening in the world, in Europe and Eastern Europe. My heart goes out to everyone affected—not just the Ukrainian devotees, but the devotees in Europe and Russia and everywhere who feel the pains of what’s going on. Let us pray that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva protects all of our Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs. All right, Kṛṣṇa, so I’ll be back in a couple days with more solace, with more nectar from Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. All glories to Śrī Śrī Guru and Gaurāṅga.""