"*00210*.*
"So, dear devotees, we are just about to go out on *harināma-saṅkīrtana* as well, experiencing it—it's very windy, it's very cold. Unfortunately, today there's no rain; these are not ideal circumstances for going out on the town, but anytime is a good time for going on *saṅkīrtana*. Śrīla Prabhupāda used to speak about the urgency of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, both in our own lives for becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious and for spreading the message. There's a saying in the show business that "the show must go on." When will that day come? When will that day come? *Kiśora-kiśorī*. 

So, we're not deterred by hot weather, or cold weather, or wind, or whatever. We want to fulfill the desire of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Lord Caitanya to give all these people out here on the boardwalk and Kołobrzeg an opportunity to hear about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to come to our festival, and experience the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We're dependent on Kṛṣṇa, we're dependent on Kṛṣṇa’s devotees, we're dependent on the demigods. The demigods are, as we know, all devotees of the Lord; they have responsible posts in the material creation. And we would request our brothers and sisters up there in the heavenly planets to cooperate and help us spread the mission of Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. He is the *yuga-avatāra*. His desire is to spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement to every town and village, specifically through the loud chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Prabhupāda does write in a purport in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* that in general, there's an intimate connection between human society, demigods, and the Supreme Lord. They are administrating this creation, and generally, people are getting the results of their pious and impious deeds. The demigods are working in that way—like sometimes there's storms, sometimes there's sunny weather according to the karma of the people. But we're requesting the demigods to perhaps clear the skies, let the sunshine come through, and fulfill the ultimate desire of the Lord to bless this planet with the holy name, Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. 

It's quite miserable out; you know, it's gray, it's dark, people are somber. But I think when they see how happy we are chanting the holy names, dressed in our *dhōtīs*, and with our smiling faces and the effulgence there, that will catch their attention. They'll see, "Oh, this is unusual! People are smiling in this weather!" And they'll take the invitation and they'll look at it, and they'll see there's a wonderful event, a big, colorful event going on in town, and perhaps they'll come and participate with us. So we want to thank... the sun is just coming through the clouds now. This is a sign—He's showing His willingness to help us. So let the *saṅkīrtana* begin. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.

It is love.

Now.""