All right everyone, a very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

First, nama om viṣṇupadaya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedanta-svāminīti nāmine. So, we are continuing with our series on the summer season in Vṛndāvana.

You may remember in our last lecture, we discussed the traditional ways that Vṛndāvana's deities are worshiped in the hot weather of summer.

Much of that information we gleaned from Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī's Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. However, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī explains in his book Dṛḍha-bhakti-nilaya that there are further ways of worshiping the Lord which are not written in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. In Dṛḍha-bhakti-nilaya, he writes, "To remove cold in the winter season, supply the deities with warm clothes, a stove, heater, and hot spicy foods.

In the summer season, offer the Lord cold drinks mixed with ice and cooling ingredients." And he continues, "In both winter and summer, after eating, one should make a nice bed for the Lord and request Him to take rest in it." And he says, "In the winter, give Him sufficient rest, but in summer, you can give the Lord an extended amount of rest because summer days are longer." That's so nice.

Then he concludes, "All of these rules of the established ācāryas must be followed." So, there you have some more detailed information on how to worship the Lord and your deities in summertime. So, in our Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I found another beautiful summer pastime in the book Yuga-milan.

It has a nice ring to it, Yuga-milan-katha by Kṛṣṇa dāsa. Now, I did some research; he was a poet who lived around the time of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and he wrote specifically in the Brijāṣa language. Now, most of his poetries have unfortunately been lost in time, but scholars say that his way of describing pastimes is known as līlā-samādhi, līlā-samādhi, which means that just by listening to the līlā, one becomes fully immersed in the pastime.

So, Kṛṣṇa dāsa writes, "Once on a very hot, sunny afternoon, Kṛṣṇa was sitting under the shadow of a kadamba tree in a forest called Viraha Nikandana. Viraha Nikandana, which translated literally means the forest of pacifying burning separation, the forest of pacifying burning separation." And we'll see why as we go on here.

Now, at this time, all of Kṛṣṇa's cowherd boyfriends had gone to Bhadravana to play ball, and Kṛṣṇa was just, you know, taking a break from herding the cows. Now, I was reading, the poet writes that Viraha Nikandana Vana is very special for us, why?

Because he writes, "It's filled with the sweet smell of guñjā vines, the shadows of tamāla trees, the bitterness of neem trees, the intoxication of mālatī flower vines, the colors of sadhābahāra flower trees, and the love of kadamba trees." Very special for us.

Now, as Kṛṣṇa started to fall asleep under the kadamba tree, suddenly a big shower of kadamba flowers started falling down on Him. Our poet says, "As if welcoming Him to the forest." So, Kṛṣṇa smiled, and picking up one kadamba flower, He started smelling it.

And as soon as He smelled the sweet fragrance of the flower, His body started feeling intense separation from Rādhā. All these ecstatic symptoms started appearing on His body. And our poet says, "This was due to the fact that the color of the kadamba flower is exactly the color of Śrī Rādhā's complexion." And that reminded me that there's that photo of Prabhupāda, you know, with a beautiful flower there, and it's a yellow-gold color.

Maybe it was a kadamba flower, I don't know. And he was looking at that flower and he was saying, "This is the color of Śrī Caitanya Mahaprabhu." Famous photo and caption there. So, Kṛṣṇa became ecstatic just smelling and seeing the color of this flower because it reminded Him of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

And within moments, Kṛṣṇa was calling out to Śrī Rādhā as follows: "O Rādhā, you are the sunshine of my life, the moonlight of my passion, the ocean of my love, and the sky of my happiness. You are the sunshine of my life, the moonlight of my passion, and the ocean of my love, and the sky of my happiness.

Where are you?

Please become visible to me." Now, after listening to Kṛṣṇa's appeals to His beloved Śrī Rādhā, the vines, the vines of the forest spoke up. Now, remember, in Vṛndāvana, everything is personal.

All living entities there are fully realized, pure devotees of the Lord, including the vines. So, the vines of the forest, they spoke up and said to Him, "Dearest Kṛṣṇa, you are in the forest of separation. Whenever the Gopis and Rādhā feel Your separation, this forest gives them shelter, and we pacify them with songs." So, curious, Kṛṣṇa turned towards the vines and He asked, "Dearest forest vines, what songs do you sing to pacify Śrī Rādhā and Her Gopis?" And the vines replied, "Very nicely.

We sing songs about meeting one's beloved, so they become pacified." So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Then you must know how much separation Śrī Rādhā feels when she's away from me." And the vines replied, "Oh yes, we do." And then they explained, "Apart from You, Śrī Rādhā's body burns in separation like the summer season.

Her eyes flood with tears like the monsoon season. Her hands and feet become cold like the winter season. Her heart breaks into pieces like leaves falling in the autumn season. Her breath becomes fast like the dewy season, and her desires blossom like flowers in the spring season." Transcendental poetry, poetry.

Now, Kṛṣṇa became mesmerized hearing the feelings that Śrī Rādhā undergoes in separation from Him. So, He said, "My dear vines, being separated from Śrī Rādhā, my body feels weak and is burning like the surface of the sun, like the hot lava of a volcano, like melted gold, and like the fire of a blazing yajña." So, the vines said, "Oh, then let us ask Vāyu-rāṇī.

Vāyu-rāṇī, Vāyu-rāṇī is the queen of winds in the forest. Let's ask her to go and collect dust from the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā, and that dust will soothe your feelings of separation." So, the Vāyu-rāṇī quickly went to Varṣāṇa, where Śrī Rādhā was sitting in a beautiful kuñja, beautiful grove.

And blowing by Śrī Rādhā, she took some dust from Her lotus feet. Then she returned to Viraha Nikandana Vana and gave this dust to the vines, who mixed the dust of Rādhārāṇī's lotus feet with Yamunā jala, with Yamunā water, and then those vines, they smeared that mixture all over Kṛṣṇa's body.

Now, the poet Kṛṣṇa dāsa writes, "What was the effect?

On His forehead, it worked like a cintāmaṇi gem. On His throat, it worked like nectar to the thirsty. On His chest, it worked like a sapphire gem, and on His arms, it worked like cold winds in the rain, altogether making Him feel a million times cooler than sandalwood paste, because He was burning in separation." Then at last, the vines, they wrote Śrī Rādhā all over Kṛṣṇa's body with sandalwood paste and the twig of a Tulasī plant. Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Rādhā.

Now, when Kṛṣṇa saw the names of Śrī Rādhā on His body, He felt satisfied. Actually, I found that Bengali saying, "Gaur-śyāma hai antar bahir." The form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are as one love. The difference is just the colors of their complexions.

When Kṛṣṇa's body is covered by the dust from Śrī Rādhā's lotus feet, His pain and separation is pacified, as we see in this pastime. So then, Kṛṣṇa thanked the vines and Vāyu-devī, the wind of the Vṛndāvana forest, for easing His separation from Śrī Rādhā.

But then He admitted, "My body feels rejuvenated after this treatment, but my heart, my heart is still feeling separation from Śrī Priyā." Another beautiful name. "My heart is still feeling separation from Śrī Priyā. Let me run now to Varṣāṇa, where the queen of my heart always stays with her girlfriends, with her sakhas." And as Kṛṣṇa raced out of the forest, the vines, the trees, and the pathways of this exceptionally mystical forest cheered Him on, wishing Him the best in His meeting with Śrī Rādhā.

Now, Kṛṣṇa is the master of all mystics, and so He reached Varṣāṇa in a matter of seconds. And there He found Śrī Rādhā and Her friends swimming in a clear pool of water, a little kuṇḍa, to keep cool from the summer heat.

And our poetic comments that Śrī Rādhā made the fish in that pond feel ashamed by her expert swimming. And when Śrī Rādhā saw Kṛṣṇa, she very shyly welcomed Him. But Lalitā-sakhī, who we've discussed many times, is always protective of Śrī Rādhā.

She whispered something into Vindhā-devī's ear, and then Vindhā-devī very quickly came forward and said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, you are in Gopi territory now. In order to stay here, you have to entertain, entertain all of them as well as Śrī Rādhā." So, Kṛṣṇa, "Okay, to entertain everybody to stay here, I'll find some type of entertainment." So, He thought for a while, and then He suddenly came up with an idea.

He said, "I will hide under the water here in this pond, and all of you Gopis, along with your Queen, can try and find me. This will be our entertainment." So, then, after asking the Gopis to close their eyes, Kṛṣṇa entered the pond and He hid under a very large lotus leaf.

Sometimes in India, we see that there are lotuses in a pond, but sometimes, sometimes there's a big leaf, a huge leaf with a load of flowers. So, He hid under. He hid under such a lotus leaf. And then, opening their eyes, Śrī Rādhā and the Gopis very eagerly jumped into the pond to search for Kṛṣṇa.

But as time passed, they were unable to find Him, and they became anxious for His safety, because they were thinking, "No one can hold their breath this long." So then, after another fruitless search, Śrī Rādhā and the Gopis finally came out of the water and sitting on the bank of the pond, they just started crying incessantly.

That all of a sudden, just in your mind's eye, you can picture this, all of a sudden Kṛṣṇa leapt out of the water onto the bank of the pond with this big lotus leaf on His head. So, the Gopis were overjoyed to see Kṛṣṇa safe and sound.

But seeing this large green, you know, lotus leaf drooping over Kṛṣṇa's head, it caused them to laugh so hard that the poet says they all fell over. And then, after a short time, they became, you know, composed, and they carefully wrapped the divine couple in colorful dry towels, and then they offered them a full āratī, a full āratī.

And at the end of the āratī, the Gopis stood before Kṛṣṇa and they awarded Him the name, awarded Him the name Jala-jīvan. "We will call you Jala-jīvan, meaning literally, one whose life exists even under water. Jala-jīvan, one whose life exists even under water." And, you know, there are several instances, many actually, where Kṛṣṇa spends a long time in or under the water, like during the Kāliyā-damana līlā when He fought the Kāliyā serpent.

I think it was seven straight hours He was in the water of the Yamunā. And when Nanda Mahārāja was taken to Varuna-loka, under the waters of the Yamunā, we know that Kṛṣṇa went there to save him. He was under the water for a long time.

So, Jala-jīvan, one whose life exists even underwater. So, our Kṛṣṇa dāsa, we can say ours because, you know, he's a great Vaiṣṇava and he's enlightening us with these pastimes. He ends this beautiful poem by writing, "I really like this.

I pray to the Lord of good times that my good days will come soon, and I will swim in the pond of love with the divine couple and witness them enjoying their loving pastimes." So sweet. So, I thought today, we could end with some very beautiful verses from Govinda-lilāmṛta by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, pertinent to what we've been discussing today.

So, he writes: "Seeing you both enter the forest cottage, this forest of Vṛndāvana has become very happy.

On the pretext of its vines moving as the Gopis walk by them, Vṛndāvana forest is dancing in ecstasy and shaking its garments of sumana flower pollen.

This forest rejuvenately welcomes you both by placing a wonderful carpet of multi-colored flowers on the path before your lotus feet. The splendor of your moon-like faces has caused the moonshine-studded pavements here to melt. Vṛndāvana forest has now taken that moonstone water, mixed it with śimaka grains, dūrvā grass, and exquisite lotus flowers growing by the path, and presented that mixture to both of you as water for washing your lotus feet.

This Vṛndāvana forest now offers you both arghya water mixed with dūrvā grass and sumana flowers and various new shoots.

This forest also offers you ācamana water mixed with jaya fruits, cloves, jāti fruits, and fresh buds that have fallen on the path before your feet. Vṛndāvana forest rejuvenately anoints your limbs with the fragrance of its own sandalwood, musk, aguru, and kuṅkuma carried in the breeze.

This forest dusts your bodies with the scented powder of many kinds of flower pollen. This Vṛndāvana forest offers āratī to you on the pretext of a swarm of bumblebees carrying waves of aromatic pollen from various flowers.

It offers you incense on the pretext of moving campaka flowers. It offers you a lamp. It offers you foodstuffs in the form of its own delicious fruits." All glories to Śrī Vṛndāvana's forest party, Kṛṣṇa.

So wonderful. So, we'll end there. I pray that this lecture today has inspired all of you in your love for the twelve forests of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

Thank you to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn.

So, we'll be back in a few days. Śiśu-gopāla ki! Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma ki! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara ki!

Vṛndāvaneshvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ki! Śyāma hi!

See you soon. You.