
"Hi everyone, just finishing up our three-week tour here in the United Kingdom, in England. Kind of sad to go because it's been such a wonderful experience. Our UK yātrā, of course, is an old yātrā—old in the sense that Śrīla Prabhupāda came here in the beginning years of the Krishna consciousness movement. It's a very mature yātrā; many mature devotees have taken up big responsibilities. Like behind me is the Bhaktivedanta Manor, the famous Manor that George Harrison actually bought for us. He did a lot of service for our movement here. Many of my godbrothers and godsisters have lived a good portion of their life here in the UK yātrā, so it’s nice to come to a yātrā that has stood steady over the years and is very successful—a lot of mature devotees, a lot of wonderful gṛhasthas, a lot of children coming forth taking birth in the devotee families here.

Our programs have been like anywhere that I travel in the world. I’ve been giving lectures to devotees, and I really enjoy the lectures that I’ve been giving to the public. The yātrā is very innovative. They have—I can’t remember the name, but they have a place downtown called 108 Studio, that’s what it is, where people can come and it's an introductory program to Krishna consciousness. I did that program and gave a straight talk of our philosophy with some humor, and we had a rousing kīrtana. All the new people were jumping for joy, and those are the kind of programs I really like: bringing people into contact with Krishna consciousness for the first time to see that seed of devotion that’s there in everyone’s heart. According to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, the seed of love of God is there in every living entity’s heart, but through the process of chanting Hare Krishna, hearing some kathā, philosophy, something about Krishna Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and then just chanting...

I was thinking about this when I first came to London with Śrīla Prabhupāda actually in 1971. So many of my disciples know that story: how I flew with Prabhupāda from New York to London, and on the plane, I was very eager to see—you know—what is London? I thought maybe Prabhupāda was going to give a talk at the 7 Bury Place temple, and I imagined maybe the Beatles were going to be there or something. Yamunā devī, I knew, was going to cook the feast. But I was late for that program because I waited for Śrīla Prabhupāda’s luggage with his books for translation to come off the airplane. I waited for that and then I brought it to the temple some time later. I had the opportunity to take it into Prabhupāda’s room, and he slapped me on the back in firm appreciation and said, "So much endeavor in this material world, but when I take you back home, back to Godhead, everything will be easy and sublime." So that’s my memory; for me, that’s London.

A few days later, Prabhupāda called myself and one of my godbrothers into his room at 7 Bury Place, our first temple in London, and I was a little nervous. Prabhupāda asked me and my godbrother to go on to France to help the fledgling community there. Prabhupāda could see I was a little nervous, so he reached into his drawer and he gave me one of his pieces of clothing—his top piece. He gave it to me, it was a chādar, and he said, "A gift from a Vaiṣṇava is a very special thing." I treasured that cloth. I wore it, it became tattered, then I donated it to Dinanātha and Yamunā devī’s museum. And Prabhupāda’s final encouragement, like an instruction for life, here in London he said, "You preach boldly and you have faith in the holy names. Now go." So I went on to France.

So, that is London for me. London’s like Vaikuṇṭha because of Prabhupāda coming here and being with him here, and coming to London from time to time through the years and seeing how it’s developing. You know, Soho Street, the beautiful temple there with the famous cafe Govinda’s, and so many important personalities, etc. But I do remember when Prabhupāda first came—well, one of the trips he came to London, he arrived and the newspaper reporters were there to greet him. "Swamiji, how do you like London?" and Prabhupāda said, "London is hell," but the movement is gradually turning London, like every place in the world, into Vaikuṇṭha. It’ll take some time, of course.

But a very nice reception we’ve had here. I just have, you know, kīrtana after kīrtana after kīrtana in my mind. As you’ll see in this video, one of my favorites was the kīrtana we did on Oxford Street, famous Oxford Street. Now, we talk about location, location. They talk about a restaurant—if you want it to be successful, it’s all about location, location, location. So we have a temple on Soho Square, which is one of the prime places downtown, right off one of the busiest streets in the world, Oxford Street, and devotees go out and harināma there every single day. They give out invitations to the temple to come back and see beautiful Rādhā-London-īśvara. I heard one time that Prabhupāda said they were his favorite deities. It’s a whole pastime how Prabhupāda actually got those deities himself from one of our life members, and they just worship with so much love and devotion. It’s a small temple, but a lot of activity goes on there. They go on harināma every day.

So I was invited to go in—you know, the word spreads—I think we had 200 devotees there, going down Oxford Street, and no one complained. In fact, I saw a policeman kind of dancing with us as we went by. You know, in many cities in the world, if you go out unannounced on harināma, there’s going to be some complaints or there are some rules. People loved us. All the shop owners were smiling and waving, and people passing by—of course, you know, that street was full of people from all over the world. It’s like one of the harināma capitals of the world, London.

I remember I used to come here in the 70s and do harināma with Śrutakīrti. He is one of those principal devotees who helped spread Krishna consciousness in the early years here, and he had a lot of association with Prabhupāda as well—a wonderful devotee. He passed away some years ago; I’m sure he’s with Śrīla Prabhupāda somewhere spreading Krishna consciousness in this universe. Very lovely devotee. But I remember the harināmas we had with him back then; it was a little difficult. People didn’t know us so well. We hadn’t become so famous. George Harrison made his famous... you know, the prime ministers, different prime ministers have come here to Bhaktivedanta Manor; we’re known for that. So people know us, and in general they love us. And I saw that the proof of the pudding is in the eating—that’s a British saying, "the proof of the pudding is in the eating." The Brits and bobs, they have their sayings here. But, wow, that Oxford harināma...

And we went to Brighton, Brighton on the sea. We did harināma there; all the tough guys on the street, you know, the tough guys, the hooligans, their hearts were melted by Lord Caitanya’s mercy in the chanting of Hare Krishna. And yeah, we chanted with them and they embraced me at the end and they said, "You’re one of us, you know. We know you love us, we know you have love for everyone, you know, we love you." And these are the experiences I’ve had here in the UK. We have these experiences all over the world, but it’s kind of condensed here. It’s kind of condensed. And yeah, harināma in Brighton by the sea and people dancing with us. We had a public program there as well.

And I went to our Avanti Schools. ISKCON has developed many schools for children around the London area and other places as well, approved by the government, appreciated by the government. In fact, the previously, the Queen of England, she came to one of our Avanti Schools—one of our Avanti schools—a public school, that many devotee children were there as well. And so, just to see how in time Krishna consciousness can be established in this world, it’s a good example. Prabhupāda spent a lot of time here, you know, in the early years in the pioneer days, establishing Krishna consciousness. So this yātrā should give us faith that in time Krishna consciousness can become prominent, can be accepted even by the government, even by the Queen, even by the King, and famous personalities like George Harrison. It’s a very good example how Krishna consciousness can be established in society.

If you have any time, if you’re a world traveler, you’re on your way to some place, stop in London and visit our many programs here, and like we did, chant and dance in ecstasy. All glories to all the wonderful Vaiṣṇavas, past, present, and future, who have established this yātrā. I take the dust of their feet upon my head, and I pray that I can come back here again. I really relished it. And the amazing thing was the weather was really good. The other time I came to London, you know, it’s famous with that saying, at one time "the sun never set on the British Empire," how usually the sun never rises in England, kind of a joke—but it’s true, this time for three weeks we had sun every day. I think the demigods arranged it so, you know, the preaching could be smooth and easy. We could—of course there’s a lot of traffic here as well, but anyway, everything was set in such a way that it was like a magical mystery tour here. But I look forward to coming back again. If you have time, visit this very mature, very blissful yātrā, the London yātrā, and all the temples in this country. They’re all going very well, very moving, and very, very successful. So all glories to the UK yātrā. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, who came here and planted a seed of Krishna consciousness in London and turned it from hell, gradually, gradually, someday.""