
"I am standing here before our mantra yoga tent, where we have been having kirtan with some of the best chanters in ISKCON for the last five days at the Woodstock Poland Rock Festival. I am feeling quite emotional and feeling mixed emotions because this event is almost over, and it means that the loud chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa which has reverberated throughout this event is going to come to a close. We have been chanting up and down the main thoroughfare of the festival for four hours every day for five days, so I don't think there is a person here who hasn't heard those 32 syllables, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, chanted with so much enthusiasm, so much love and devotion. That means 2.2 million people—I’m not exaggerating—the thoroughfare goes right through, and there are these little hills that come up, and the tents are there, and the holy names are reverberating back and forth, back and forth. Certainly, for people who come to our village, Kṛṣṇa’s Village of Peace, there are many things going on: we have our food distribution—160,000 plates, we are passing that number now—we have our face painting, we have our gift shop, we have yoga, we have questions and answers. But really, this particular tent is the life of our festival, it's the heart of our festival, it's the meat, it's the real purpose, the meaning of our festival. Just like the heart—the blood goes through the heart, it takes oxygen and it gives oxygen to the rest of the body—this is the body of life. So, the life of the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, the life of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, is chanting the holy names. 

So here, it has been going on for 12 hours a day without stopping, and it is fulfilling the prediction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Five hundred years ago, He predicted that the chanting of the holy name would be heard in every town and village of the world, and it is happening. People are whispering "Hare Kṛṣṇa," they are mentioning "Hare Kṛṣṇa." We are in the newspaper, there are different temples, but there is something special about this event—that the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is being chanted at the top of the lungs of the devotees. And these devotees are so sincere; they come from so many countries around the world. They are so sincere to share the chanting with others that it goes right to the hearts of the people, and it becomes a big event. People chant with us; tens of them chant, hundreds of them chant throughout this event, tens of thousands have chanted with us. So it's really an ecstatic thing. You know, for 500 years, so many great Vaiṣṇavas were contributing to that prediction in their own ways, upholding the tradition of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, chanting themselves, somehow thinking how to spread the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa beyond the borders of India. But it wasn't until our generation—the second generation and now the third generation—that we were blessed to see that prediction come true. We are truly blessed to be living at this historic moment in the history of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, where that prediction of Mahāprabhu is coming true, and in a big way, here at the Woodstock Rock Festival. Loud and clear, everyone is hearing those 32 syllables, and this is actually giving the greatest satisfaction to the hearts of the Vaiṣṇavas.

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda—his love for God was very deep, and I saw personally when people were chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, his eyes lit up. He loved to see the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra spread far and wide. So I am feeling very emotional because we have been helping him in that way, but in a few hours, the lights go out, and we go on to other services. So this type of chanting is really satisfying. Jīva Gosvāmī says in the *Bhakti-sandarbha* that he mentions Dvārakā, Mathurā, and Vṛndāvana; he describes the mood in those places. He says the mood in Dvārakā is perfect, the love for Kṛṣṇa is perfect, but because of intimacy, it is more perfect in Mathurā, and it is most perfect in Vṛndāvana—the pure, unalloyed love of the Gopīs. So in a similar way, we chant japa. Prabhupāda said that is the most important instruction that the spiritual master gives the disciple; it sets the foundation for our lives and waters the seed of our devotion. The chanting of japa is perfect, the chanting in our temples is more perfect—they call that our kirtan festivals—that is more perfect, it gives us more enthusiasm, purity. But the very best way, the most perfect way of chanting, is to take the chanting to the people. This is what Mahāprabhu did; He would go out every day in the morning and evening with His kirtan party and spread the chanting far and wide. So that is my personal feeling, it is my humble realization: that this type of chanting, taking the chanting to the people and engaging them in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, getting them to dance with us and getting that spark of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that's the best. Because that pleases Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu the most. The holy name is Kṛṣṇa Himself, and He is most pleased when we are helping Mahāprabhu fulfill the prediction to take this to every town and village. So we feel that satisfaction here. It's a taste; I don't know how I am going to live without it—maybe I have to wait till the next Woodstock. To see tens of thousands of people chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, fulfilling the predictions of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, taking it to the people where the holy name wants to be the most—this is the real happiness in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

So thank you, Prabhupāda, for allowing us. One time you said that just as Lord Rāmacandra, He conquered Laṅkā, He conquered Rāvaṇa with monkeys and bears, so you said, "You are conquering the world with your disciples." We are like your little monkeys and bears, but please keep us engaged in this wonderful process. One day we will really become qualified and we will help you spread the saṅkīrtana movement throughout the fourteen worlds. Hare Kṛṣṇa, all glories to the chanting of the holy name, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Thank you, Caitanya. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""