She was an atheist. Mom prays to him. She was a scientist. She didn't believe in a younger god, a pauper. And when I joined, knowing Kṛṣṇa, she was so angry. I was 19 years old. She called me and preached to me on the phone.

All the scientific arguments were presented. They knitted Gagarin, and I was a beginner devotee. I couldn't defeat her, so I never answered her phone. And she came to the temple and preached to me. She was very intelligent. He even had a special degree.

I was the most intelligent in her university. Hers was so angry with me. Everyday things like this, but every year on my birthday, I sent her flowers of different kinds. Mine, by the citizens themselves, a review of the housekeeper.

She asked why you send me thunderstorms on your birthday. Silicone. More about this group. And mine because you did all the work on my birthday. I just hatched, and she really appreciates it. I'm always in touch with her. And once I invited her to Europe.

I was the president of a temple in France. And she simply had strong arguments, but she loved the drawdowns. She loved children very much, and she is a very serious bonus, a universal god. And through, let's say, a year later, I sent her books by mail.

And she sent them to the garage, put them lying around where there was dirt and oil. And many years passed. And 6 years ago, where she called me on the phone, it was in London. It was two o'clock in the morning.

I answered Vatican realism. This is mom. Mom, mom. Two o'clock in the morning. I want to go to Vṛndāvana.

She says that to go in time. How do you know about the existence of time?

And come back home, take me on time. I thought she drank a little. As I tell you, these. I'll call back in 4 hours. Make a call. Moonstone on a stone. No, don't come. And now I'm in Paris. And I hung up.

Sex overlay on the Malecon. And at six o'clock in the morning I called her. They were invested. And my brother answered the phone. Peter, I'll pick it up. I say, Peter, let me pass the phone to Mom. There was silence.

Respect. They let him talk to Mom. There was silence. The film is exactly the days of the spectrum, small. And Peter, just immediately give me the phone. Phones Bray. Mom just died. Oksana, everything happened. Some kind of accident happened at night.

Not she had cancer with Exmo. I had six months of dollars. There was no hope for it. And she died. I feel so sorry because I hung up. And when she died, she said something. You'll be happy with the girl.

Yes, she said, I cried, Mom. Thoughts before, charms over from the bar. And when I cried, Mom said, stop crying, I'm not this body. Ignatyuk Shishina, I'm returning to Kṛṣṇa. I think, and at that moment she left this world.

Before sleep, dishes, my year, Lamazi, will become another Deming. I say, yes, it's impossible. My mom is a scientist. She doesn't believe in God. But now you're on hot tea and the road. My brother answered. I know that she doesn't believe in God, but she's changed a lot.

Sex, Matsuda, matches, lunch. And the initial end, it happened. That giants patch or laconic. And 6 months ago, when they found out, drinks the rest of the diagnosis of cancer, she sat in a chair, reward herself, sneezed, Mariupol. And my brother said that she called sometimes.

I told her that I don't believe in science anymore because science claims that after death nothing will play God young frying pan. And she said, go to the garage, your older brother over there. He sent books. And so bring me now all these books of the revolution.

He was wheels called side doors. And this my brother says I went to the garage, got a book. And it said Bhagavad Gita. Here, your risks, side door. And this is what it's called Bhagavad Gita. Until approximately mango kodaline will be given out.

And Mom sat in a rocking chair and read this book online all day. And she underlined some parts that they couldn't understand. And she ordered a cassette. At that time, there were cassettes of my lectures. She ordered. I bought her a cassette recorder.

And she listened to 5 lectures every day because lectures help to understand the meaning of the wretched. Did I like the office distinguishing doors existed Mercedes a king?

And thus she changed. She believed that there is and washers, that there is a God. And my conclusion was an agreement that Śiva, cereal to defeated all the statements crushed planet Newtown LDSP. For I'm asking, brother, since you haven't told me about this before, because Mom didn't want to bother you with your important work.

Ravaillac knitting needles. You use two other types of bison. Old man's nonsense. She said, "Don't bother your brother. An empty white hand. We'll continue to give it like this." And on the last day, she was very worried. He was sick and stroked Jen.

You lived to see it. She said, "The one who is born in Vṛndāvana leaves for Vṛndāvana.

The one who lives in Vṛndāvana sends from time to time.

And the one who dies in Vṛndāvana, here after death goes to Vṛndāvana herself." That's why my mom wanted to go to Vṛndāvana.

Her advertisement. So she called me on the phone and I hung up. Archive. You and I cried like a child. You say, X-Files, us, a game. Even though I was a sannyāsi for 45 years already. A guru. I cried and became in it only because we all have human nature.

Arjuna was also worried and sewed. Krupa comments, he says that it's normal, that we were human, that it's natural to experience our own revival. We're preparing, one way or another, my brother. He hung up the iPhone and I went on a plane to accept the outlived sphere.

My benefit, it's not that it was a funeral with Marik, this is the boss's, there were memories and the edge of millions. And they cremated my mother, the game itself. They fought with people at the moment and my brothers and sisters didn't have any money.

These are pheromones. I am. And they said, "Listen and go to the crematorium and paid." Because we lived in San Francisco, these ashes scatter over the ocean. Freedom, finale. And went to the crematorium. And I arrived and told these workers that I came to pay for the cremation of my mother.

And but he looked at the paper and said, "Oh no, well, we cremated the bodies, burned the bodies, your mother, but one way or another, we haven't been able to scatter the ashes over the ocean yet, so you don't need to pay, we have nothing to do, we made a mistake.

Kiperman, so you keep the money with you, trying and we will lower your people into the ocean tomorrow." And there was a lot of that somewhere around 8,800 dollars shrew you will find. They were like purchases, but we didn't pay, they didn't return it, but they told me that I didn't need to pay anything for the games, even my finger.

And I had $800 in my pocket. And they said I didn't need to pay for your headphones, and we'll put the ashes in the ocean tomorrow. I said, "Let me get it back." And they returned my ashes. And I went to the airport, bought tickets to India.

And I flew with my ashes. My mom was in business. And I went to Vṛndāvana.

All by taxi. 5 kilometers. I got to the Yamunā. And I sat on the river. And he gave me grain. And I said, "Mom told me that your last wish was to arrive on time, despite the fact that at that moment I personally couldn't bring you, but I am fulfilling your wish." Yes, I went to the middle of the river.

And I said a prayer to the river. It's not even easy for him, please, to get my mother into the spiritual world. And because 5 personalities can allow us to enter in time, to stay in Vṛndāvana in your spiritual body, permission is needed.

These personalities are expressed. This is the Yamunā River, Lord Shiva, Brahmā Devi, which Howard Hunt will give. And the dust of Vṛndāvana.

So when we arrive at the branded one, we pray to these five personalities. The Kate apparatus. And when I was on him, I didn't pray to him, "Please, horns, I'll open the city gates for my mother so she can enter into a long life." And at that moment I poured out the ashes, and he fulfilled her wish.

The church, what do we know?

Or further, gold. One way or another, anyone who pronounces the name Kṛṣṇa at death goes to the spiritual world. And in Python, the group carefully agreed with one of my spiritual brothers, they had a fight. If you, of course, yes, he said that his mother, she, dying, says, "Where is your Kṛṣṇa?" Now he tried more, says, "She returned to the spiritual world, my Argus, and my mother also returned."