Hare Krishna,

We're out on Śrī Kṛṣṇa's saṅkīrtana, specifically Harināma, out here on the streets of one of the major cities along the Baltic Sea coast, Mints, Joya, on our festival India tour here in the summer. We're coming out every day with a large party of kīrtana-ears, about anywhere between sixty and a hundred devotees, and we're chanting the holy names, helping to fulfill the prediction of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who said that one day His name will be heard in every town and village of the world.

We've been doing this along the coast here for almost three decades now, and we think we've got a good formula down. We try to do it very much like Lord Caitanya did it five hundred years ago. Basically, we're just singing Hari Krishna with musical instruments, and naturally, this makes the devotees very happy.

So therefore, the people become attracted. We dress in our traditional clothes, kurtas and dhotis, and the ladies wear very beautiful saris. We wear flower dots. We dance in a synchronized, choreographed way to capture the attention of people. Of course, mainly it's the chanting of Hari Krishna which attracts the people, because this is a transcendental sound vibration.

Damah Chintamani, Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, rastra signify that the holy name of Krishna and Krishna are nondifferent.

His name, His fame, His form, His pastimes, His paraphernalia, they're all absolute. So when the holy names are chanted with devotion, as much devotion as we can muster within our hearts for the pleasure of the Lord, the Lord is present there.

Krishna is described as all-attractive.

So therefore, where there's the loud chanting of the holy name with little devotees, accompanied by various musical instruments, it becomes all-attractive. The whole situation, the whole scene becomes attractive. In this way, we give people a little idea of what the festival is going to be like.

You could say actually, deciding on saṅkīrtana is in and of itself a festival. Coming out and chanting and dancing and singing and awakening our love for God, or our love for Krishna, being very happy.

This is something people just don't see. We've got a lot of competition because there's a lot of things that are apparently attractive in this world. Krishna says, "Daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā," this divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is very difficult to overcome.

People are attracted to these material energies. We've got a bit of a challenge on our hands to present Krishna as He is, all-attractive, with the Hari Nama party, so that people give up their attraction for whatever is happening around here and they focus on us—not us, they focus on Krishna and His holy name, and they become curious.

Because you don't, you just don't see things like this in the material world. People go, they pay for entertainment, they go to a disco, they go to a football match, they go to this. You see something a little different, something attractive, something joyful, so you just don't generally see it on the street.

So it's very unusual, so they, they inquire. And we have these very beautiful invitations. Everything we try to do in a very professional way as well. You know, we have to make it more attractive than the material energy again, so professional, devotional, colorful, exotic.

The end result is they take the invitation to read the invitation. And under the invitation, we have several prominent local personalities who speak very highly of our event. In their minds, this gives us some authenticity, and we give the schedule of the program and some colorful photographs.

So the next step after seeing the Hari Nama party is to come to the festival. The whole idea of the Hari Nama party is not just to have Harinamas, although that's very nice, but to have some follow-up. The Harinamas out here to advertise the bigger event, the big festival.

So people come because they see the invitation and they're attracted, and when they come to the festival, they're not disappointed. We have theater, we have dance, music, martial arts, and around the festival site, there are twenty or thirty, ten to fifteen different aspects of India's ancient spiritual culture.

So it's step by step, we bring people into the wonderful world of Krishna consciousness.

And this is Lord Caitanya's formula. This is the original formula. The original form is, you got to take it to the people. I mean, you can advertise in newspapers and the internet, and you can advertise in so many different ways, but really, it's the personal touch that really brings people to our events.

It's the personal touch. When you meet a devotee or you see a group of devotees, sādhu-saṅga, sādhu-saṅga, sarv a-śāstre kaya, love and matra. Sadhu sanga, keśava—śūnyatā hoi. Even just one moment's association with a devotee can begin one on the path to perfection.

So how are people going to get association with devotees?

We have to leave our comfort zones, but to come out of the temples, come out of our apartments and our homes, are we to come on the street?

Oh, it's a bee-hive with the people. We can't be afraid to come out and associate, because we're not here to associate, we're here to give association. And the association of devotees, my dear, is something very special. Even though people may be covered by the modes of ignorance or the mode of passion, still, the association of devotees and the holy name is so potent, it touches their hearts.

That's the power of Krishna consciousness.

The spiritual energy is more powerful than the material energy. One thing is that when we come into town with a big, colorful, exotic, blissful chanting party like this, with so many devotees, everyone's so happy, and devotees are smiling, we really become the preeminent force in the town.

This is the way it should be. You can see in this video, people are waving, people are smiling, they're buying books, they're taking invitations. So this is the success. This saṅkīrtana has to be very powerful, very beautiful, very exotic, and and and it has to be chanted in the proper mood to actually glorify Krishna.

And when we come out here and we chant like this, we're really coming to to share our good fortune with the people. This process, go lokam dhāma, hari nāma saṅkīrtana, is coming directly from the spiritual world. So a powerful spiritual force here, and the force is that it purifies the heart very quickly.

Very quickly, this is the magic of saṅkīrtana, that it just changes up the heart very quickly. So you see people jump up, they never met us before, they start dancing with us, sometimes they embrace us, they hug us, and they thank us for coming.

So what greater service there is to humanity than to awaken someone's God consciousness immediately to the process of chanting. Are saying at that party, we don't see us in them. Krishna says in the Gita that He's the generating father of all living entities.

So we don't consider ourselves better, we're just—my prophets great speakers, we consider ourselves a little more fortunate. So we come out here and really to to share our good fortune with the people. And when you have that mood, people welcome you.

We're welcoming them into the wonderful world of Krishna consciousness.

We're happy out here on Śrī Kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtana, and from this, we make a big leap into the festival. Krishna, this just gets better and better and better.