Hare Krishna, I'm standing here before our mantra yoga tent where we've been having kirtan with some of the best chanters in ISKCON for the last five days at the Woodstock Poland rock festival. I'm feeling quite emotional and feeling mixed emotions because this event is almost over and it means that the loud chanting of Hare Krishna, which has reverberated throughout this event, it's going to come to a close.

We've been chanting that back and down, up, up and down the main thoroughfare of the festival for four hours every day for five days. So, I don't think there's a person here who hasn't heard those 32 syllables, that the Hare Krishna mantra chanting with so much enthusiasm, there's so much love and devotion, and that means 2.2 million people.

I'm not exaggerating, the thoroughfare goes right through, and there's these little hills that come up and all that the tents are there on the holy names reverberating back and forth, back and forth. And certainly, people who come to our village, Christmas village, there's many things going on here.

We have our food distribution, 160,000 plates for passing that, that number now. We have our face painting, we have our gift shop, we have yoga, we have questions and answers. But really, this, this particular tent, it's the life of our festival, it's the heart of our festival, it's the meat, it's the real purpose, the meaning of our festival.

Just like the heart, the blood goes through the heart, it takes oxygen and it gives oxygen to the rest of the body, gives life. So, the life of the Hare Krishna movement, the life of the Gaudiya Vaishnavas, is chanting the holy names.

So here, it's been going on for 12 hours a day without stopping, and it's fulfilling the prediction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu that 500 years ago, He predicted that the chanting of the holy name would be in every town and village of the world.

And it's going, people are whispering Hare Krishna, they're mentioning Hare Krishna, we're in the newspaper, there's different temples, but there's something special about this event that the Hare Krishna mantra is being chanted at the top of the lungs of the devotees.

And these devotees are so sincere, they come from so many countries around the world, they're so sincere to share the chanting with others, that it goes right to the hearts of the people and it becomes a big event. People chant with us, tens of them chant, hundreds of them chant throughout this event, tens of thousands have chanted with us.

So, it's, it's really an ecstatic thing, you know. For 500 years, so many great Vaishnavas were contributing to that prediction in their own, in their own ways, upholding the tradition of Krishna consciousness, chanting themselves, somehow thinking how to spread the chanting of Hare Krishna beyond the borders of India.

But it wasn't till our generation, the second generation, and now the third generation, it was until our generation that we were blessed to see that prediction come true. We are truly blessed to be living at this historic moment in the history of Gaudiya Vaishnavism where that prediction of Mahaprabhu's is coming true.

And in a big way, here at the Woodstock Festival, going rock festival, loud and clear, everyone's hearing those 32 syllables. But this is actually giving the greatest satisfaction to the hearts of the Vaisnavas. Good, smile. Hi. This is Prabhupada's happiness, and he was here of course.

His happiness, his love for God is nearly deep. And we saw, I saw personally when people were chanting Hare Krishna, their eyes lit up.

He loved to see the holy name spread far and wide. So I'm feeling very emotional because we've been helping Prabhupada out in that way. But in a few hours, the lights go out, we go on to other, other services.

So it's this type of chanting, it's really satisfying. Jiva Goswami says in the Laghu-Bhagavatamrita that he mentions Dwarka, Mathura, and Vrindavan. It describes the mood in those places. He says the mood in Dwarka is perfect, the love for Krsna is perfect, but because of intimacy, it's more perfect in Mathura, and it's most perfect in Sri Navadvipa Dhama, the pure unalloyed love of the Gopis.

So in a similar way, we chant japa. Rupa Goswami said that's the most important instruction that the spiritual master gives the disciple. It sets the foundation for our lives in waters the seed of our devotion. The chanting of japa is perfect.

The chanting in the temples, our temples, is more perfect. They call that the archan, kirtan. That's more perfect, it even gives us more enthusiasm, purity. But the very best way, the most perfect way of chanting, is to take to chanting to the people.

This is what Mahaprabhu did. He would go out every day in the morning, evening, this kirtan party, and spread the chanting far and wide. So that, that's my personal feeling, is my humble realization that this type of chanting, taking, attending to the people and engaging them in chanting Hare Krishna, getting them to dance with us and getting that part of Krsna consciousness, that's the best because that pleases the Spiritual Master the most.

The holy names of Krsna, *namo namah*, and He is most pleased when we are helping Mahaprabhu fulfill the prediction, the prediction to take this message to the people. So we feel that satisfaction here. It's a taste. I don't know how I'm gonna live without it.

Maybe I have to wait till next Woodstock. The tens of thousands of people chanting Hare Krishna, fulfilling the predictions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, taking it to the people where the holy name wants to be the most.

This is the real happiness in Krishna consciousness.

So thank you, Prabhupada, for allowing us. One time you said that that's just as Lord Ramachandra, He conquered Lanka, He conquered Ravana with monkeys and bears. So you said, "You're coming, you're conquering the world with your disciples. We're like your little monkeys and bears." But please keep us engaged in this wonderful process.

One day we'll really become qualified and we'll help you spread the *sankirtana* movement throughout the fourteen worlds. Hare Krishna!

All glories to the chanting of the holy name!

All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu!

Thank you, Prabhupada. Hare Krishna.

It's not hi.