"*00549*.*
"We've come to the part of Vṛndāvana called Gokul. Many wonderful pastimes took place here during Kṛṣṇa’s childhood. We know that Kṛṣṇa originally appeared in the jailhouse of Kaṁsa, but for His protection, Vasudeva and Devakī transferred Him from there in Mathurā to this Pārā-nanda Vraja-gokula, where Kṛṣṇa grew up. He spent three years and four months here, and then, because Kaṁsa was sending so many demons every day, Nanda Mahārāja moved to Nandagrām. So many pastimes—Kṛṣṇa killed many demons here. There are many, many different līlās that took place in Gokul, but Gokul is also famous for another thing: that here in Gokula are the samādhi mandirs of two very famous rasika devotees. 

Because of the beautiful poetry that they left behind—glorifying Vṛndāvana, glorifying Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, glorifying in particular Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—these two devotees, they took birth 500 years ago, but even today their poetry is very popular in Vṛndāvana. It is said that what is the use of a bowman's arrow unless it can pierce the heart of his enemy? And in the same way, what is the use of poetry unless it can enter into the heart and bring forth prema, or love for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa? People like poetry because it brings forth different emotions, but generally, poetry is on the material platform, mundane loving pastimes; it doesn't really satisfy the heart as much as devotional poetry does. 

So these two personalities, they gifted the entire world, actually, with their poetry. What is interesting is that both of these personalities—one was a Vaiṣṇava and one was a Vaiṣṇavī—originally took birth during the Mughal times, 500 years ago, in Muslim families. They were devout Muslims, but by Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement, both came in contact with Vṛndāvana, both came in contact with the spiritual atmosphere of Vṛndāvana, both came in contact with Vraja-vāsīs, and they had a change of heart and they converted to Vaiṣṇavism. 

I’ll just give a little history because it's so interesting. The first person we will mention, his name originally, as a devout Muslim, was Rājiyā Khān. Rājiyā Khān was a young man when he came in contact with Vṛndāvana and Vraja-vāsīs. We won’t go into the whole history, but when he came to Vṛndāvana, again, he fell in love with Vṛndāvana, he fell in love with Vṛndāvana’s deities and the devotees and the whole atmosphere 500 years ago, and he became a Vaiṣṇava. He lived the life of a sādhu in Vṛndāvana, but his particular sevā was writing poetry, and his poetry—people loved it so much that they said, "Well, perhaps we should change the respected Muslim name." So he said, "As you like." So instead of calling him Rājiyā Khān, they gave him the name Rasakhān. Rasa means the mellows of devotional service, which he was so expert in bringing forth in the hearts of the devotees. And the interesting thing is, they didn't change the name "Khān," which is a respected name in the Muslim faith; they called him Rasakhān. I was trying to figure out why they didn't change both names, and a little more research led to the answer. The answer is that in Hindi, "Khān" can also mean a gold mine. We have the word *khān* in Hindi; *khān* can mean a gold mine. So, because everyone saw this personality as a gold mine of bhakti, or devotion, providing Kṛṣṇa, they kept the name Rasakhān. Rasakhān: he who is a gold mine of rasa, loving devotion to Kṛṣṇa.

I’ll just recite a little bit of his poetry. So much could be said, but we can't speak about him the whole time here because we have other personalities. But we can get an idea of what a devotional poet is, what a rasika he actually was, by, let's say, some of his final poetry. He writes that he's getting old, and he's telling Kṛṣṇa—if it's Kṛṣṇa’s desire—he's expressing what he would like to be in his next life. In old age, this is something that people contemplate—the writing’s on the wall. So those who have an understanding of life after life, they may contemplate, "What will I be in my next life?" So a materialistic person may daydream of so many material situations, but a devotee always wants to remain connected with Kṛṣṇa, life after life, until he has an eternal life of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the spiritual world. So just see, just listen to how this devotee expressed his desires. If I have to take birth again—now he wrote in Braj-bhāṣā; I won't recite the Braj-bhāṣā, I’ll just give the translation, we’ll go through it—he writes, "My dear Lord, in my next life, if I become a human, please bless me to be a cowherd girl in Gokula." Then he writes, "When Indra was throwing his thunderbolts, He who became the umbrella for Braj, meaning Girirāja Govardhana, let me become a rock at His lotus feet, that I reside at the lotus feet of Girirāja Govardhana," very much in our line. Then he writes, "And if I have to become an animal, if I have to become an animal, okay, let me become a calf in Kṛṣṇa’s team in Nanda Bābā’s herd." Then he says, "Kṛṣṇa, if I can—if You say I cannot be any of those things, but I can only become a bird—then if I become a bird, then make me a bird on the branch of a kadamba tree on the bank of the Yamunā."

This is only a small portion of his poetry. Śrīla Prabhupāda said one time, "If you want to understand the ocean, the salty nature of the ocean, just take one drop and taste; you can understand the whole ocean." So in this way, you can appreciate this great devotee, Rasakhān. He was so appreciated during his lifetime in Vṛndāvana that the devotees brought his body to Gokul, and you'll see in this video, they constructed a beautiful samādhi for him. It's been renovated in recent times because it's such a popular place; people come to get his blessings, that the government, they were obliged to renovate and make everything very nice. Thousands of people come to take darśana at the samādhi because when we approach the samādhi and we pray to those personalities, they're present there and they're in their transcendental state, and they can reciprocate with our prayers.

Now the second person I'd like to mention was a queen in the court of the Emperor Akbar, also 500 years ago. We spoke about Akbar in Vṛndāvana in various lectures the last few years. Akbar was Muslim, he was a Muslim emperor of much of India—all of North India and part of South India—but he was a very pious emperor and he was open-minded; he was interested in other faiths, other religions. We discussed many times how he facilitated some of the Gosvāmīs during his time in Vṛndāvana, helped them construct the Govindajī Temple. Now, he had many wives, and one of his principal wives, her name was Tāj Bībī. He married her when she was quite young because she was the daughter of Akbar’s spiritual mentor. So when the spiritual mentor passed away, Akbar was thinking, "Who's going to take care of this young girl?" He couldn't find a suitor for her because she was so highly qualified, so he married her and he made her one of his principal queens in his empire. 

Akbar, he used to spend time in Delhi and also in Agra; he had two bases, you could say, where he would meet his officials and have discussions about how to expand the empire and maintain it. So at one point, he left Delhi and he went to Agra, and he was away for about a week. So he called for his favorite queen, Tāj Bībī, to come and spend some time with him. So she consented, of course, and she was taken in a convoy; she was on a chariot with beautiful horses, surrounded by guards, etc., in a very beautiful Islamic dress. And as she was going from Delhi to Agra, she was reciting the Quran; she was well-versed in the Quran, a very devout Muslim girl. But as they were going along—naturally, between Delhi and Agra is Vṛndāvana and Mathurā—so to make a long story short (I actually lectured for two hours about it today), but as she was passing by in the convoy in Vṛndāvana, they were going quite close to the village of Vṛndāvana, they heard the ringing of a bell announcing the ārati of Govindajī Temple. She heard this, so somehow or other that transcendental sound kind of touched her heart, and she stopped the convoy. She said to the warriors who were carrying her along, "What is that beautiful sound?" So the leader of the party, he said, "Madam, you do not have to worry; it's coming from the temple of a small Hindu god who's living in Vṛndāvana." So she said, "Oh, chhota Allah?" Allah means, with the Muslims, there is no God but God and Muhammad is His prophet. So she said, "Oh, a small Allah?" So she said, "I want to see that Hindu god." Somehow, that ringing of the bell had purified her heart, so she said, "I want to go see." So they said, "No, you can't go. I mean, you have an appointment with your husband, the emperor, and he'll be upset if we're late." She said, "I'm the queen; you take me there." 

So the whole caravan went into Vṛndāvana, and all the Vraja-vāsīs were like, "Whoa, here comes the Muslim Emperor Akbar’s queen! Like, what's going on? Is this good or bad?" But they kept going towards the Govindajī Temple. And when they arrived, all the Muslim soldiers, they turned their back on the temple to look away, and only this queen, she got out with a few servants, very curious. She entered into the Govindajī temple and there she had a darśana of Govindadeva, the very deity found by Rūpa Gosvāmī. And taking darśana of Govindajī, she became mesmerized by His beauty, actually. And for two hours, she just stared at Him. The scribes write that at one point, tears came. This is a transformation; this is the power of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa appears in many ways: He appears in His deity form, He appears in the form of His Holy Name, His instructions—but because it's all transcendental, so powerfully spiritual, it can affect our hearts. So she had a change of heart, and she was just staring for a long time. So at one point, one of her maidservants said, "My dear Queen, we have to leave." So Tāj Bībī, she turned to her maidservant and she said, "I will not leave here. I will stay here in Vṛndāvana with this beautiful form of the Lord, Govindajī, for the rest of my life." 

Transformation—it's all mystical, but it's described: we're wandering into different universes and different species of life, life after life. But if we're fortunate, somehow the Lord, taking compassion, He intervenes—asks Kṛṣṇa Himself or His representative—and in their association, even for a moment, the heart becomes purified; some attraction comes. This was the mystical process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So this reminds me: she wanted to stay in Vṛndāvana, she wasn't going to go because she had darśana of Govindajī. She turned her attention away from everything material in this world, opulence, etc. Reminds me of a verse written by Rūpa Gosvāmī in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* (1.2.309), which many of you know, but let's just quickly recite it here: 

> "My dear friend, if you are indeed attached to your worldly friends, do not look at the smiling face of Lord Govinda as He stands on the bank of the Yamunā at Keśī-ghāṭa, casting sidelong glances. He places His flute to His lips, which seem like newly blossomed twigs. His transcendental body, bending in three places, appears very bright in the moonlight." 

In other words, if you want to hold on to your material desires, okay, but don't go to Vṛndāvana, because in Vṛndāvana, you'll meet Kṛṣṇa, you'll meet Yamunā-devī, you'll meet Govardhana, you'll meet Rādhārāṇī, and you'll meet devotees, you may meet your spiritual master, and all these things are much more attractive than anything this material world has to offer. So, a little bit, it says: "You want to hold on to your material attachment, but don't go to Vṛndāvana." And we can see what attachments this queen must have had—she had everything—but she gave it all up for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

So she never went back to her husband; she actually formally renounced her role as queen and she became a very, very devout, very advanced, pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, actually. She lived in purity. And what does "pure devotee" mean in Kṛṣṇa consciousness? It doesn't mean one is just pious or a lover of God, but one understands the different, intricate mellows, the ways of loving Kṛṣṇa, because Kṛṣṇa has revealed to that devotee all of His attractive features and the opportunity to associate with Him as a servant, as a friend, as a parent, or as a lover—the special nature of vraja-bhakti. 

So she stayed and she took initiation from a Vaiṣṇava guru. She was living in white, just a white sārī, you know, with a shaved head and tilaka; the queen took dīkṣā. Let's just see, it's possible for this Kṛṣṇa conscious movement to actually spread all over the world; this story gives us faith. And she wrote over 400 poems. 400 poems. And I'll conclude here: at the end of her life, she desired to leave her body in front of Śrīnāthajī, or as we know Him, the Gopāla deity discovered by Mādhavendra Purī. She became attracted to different deities in Vṛndāvana. She said, "I want to leave..." She was very old, in her 90s, highly respected for her poetry, loved by everyone, and she said, "I want to die in front of Gopāla." So they carried her on a cot out to Govardhana Hill, and in the presence of this beautiful deity of Gopāla, who we know now is not there—He's staying in Nathdwara—she left her body. And as she left her body, she composed a poem, and just as she finished that poem in glorification of Kṛṣṇa, she left her body. So I'm going to conclude here, because in this video you're seeing her samādhi. You're seeing how beautiful and well-maintained this samādhi is, why? Because she was a great Vaiṣṇavī who helped us understand what is not an easy thing to understand and much, much more difficult to achieve. We need a lot of kṛpā, a lot of mercy. So she did it, and her samādhi is called "Tāj Bībī Chhatri." Chhatri means the umbrella, the umbrella of Tāj Bībī. 

And here's the poem which she left the world with. Whatever mentality one has at the moment of death, that will take one to their next destination. Very clear where she went, because look at her meditation at the moment of death. Her poem was called "Holī." She's looking at the deity as she's leaving her body. The poem, coming from her heart: 

> "O sakhī, the beat of countless drums has started. Let us go and see the play of the Holī festival heralding that dark-complexioned enjoyer, Kṛṣṇa. Our in-laws are opposing us, but what else can we do? I dare to hear the beats of countless drums; what else can I do? I went to the Yamunā to fill my water pot during the Holī festival in hopes of meeting Kṛṣṇa, but He came and broke my pot at the bank of the Yamunā. Oh, just see! Holī is taking place near to the palace of Nanda Mahārāja. Let's go and play, sing, and laugh together. After all, this is a big celebration. Various other instruments are being played by the cowherd boys, and Kṛṣṇa is playing His flute. He is decorated with the peacock feather crown and a beautiful cloth is tied, tightly bound around His waist." 

Tāj says, as I wish (she's using her name), Tāj says, "Oh, just see! The Lord of Tāj is coming; He's dancing towards me." 

When, when will that day be ours? 

So you see how she came from a certain condition to the beautiful life, the perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in Vṛndāvana. So it's for that reason she left 400 beautiful poems like that. For these reasons, the Vraja-vāsīs so much loved her that they also brought her body out here to Gokul, and very near to the samādhi of Rasakhān, they placed her in samādhi as well. So we've come here, like many pilgrims, to remember her renunciation, and much more, to remember how she embraced vraja-bhakti here in the land of the playground of God, the playground. We spent a wonderful day here singing and dancing, reciting her poetry, and taking prasādam in this wonderful, beautiful garden. They maintain it so nicely. So when you come to Vṛndāvana, please take the opportunity to come to Gokul and see these samādhis with these two great devotees, a Vaiṣṇava and a Vaiṣṇavī. Thank you very much. We'll continue with our parikrama now; tomorrow we're going on Govardhana. We'll have a lot to share with you in that program as well. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Nām.""