"*00352*.*
"### Tasting the Mellows of Love

So, I’ve chosen a verse from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 4, verse 56:

*rādhā-kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktir asmād*
*ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau*
*caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ*
*rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam*
 **Translation:** The loving affairs of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are transcendental manifestations of the Lord’s internal pleasure-giving potency. Although Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are one in Their identity, They separated Themselves eternally. Now these two transcendental identities have again united in the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. I bow down to Him, who has manifested Himself with the sentiment and complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, appearing as Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.

Śrīla Prabhupāda explains in the purport that the description of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa from the diary of Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī is a condensed explanation. It takes great spiritual insight to understand the mystery of these two personalities—one who is enjoying in two. According to Vedānta philosophy, there is no difference between the potent and the potency; they are identical. We cannot differentiate between one and the other any more than we can separate fire from heat. 

Once again, tomorrow is the auspicious celebration of the appearance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s eternal consort. When people see a picture of Kṛṣṇa and ask, "Who is that girl?" our standard answer is that she is the Lord’s eternal consort. He refers to her as *ārādhanīya*, she who offers the best worship to Kṛṣṇa, and from this word comes the name Rādhā. As explained here in both the verse and in Prabhupāda’s purport, she is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa—she is the expansion of the Lord’s pleasure potency. In other words, He expanded Himself as the personality of Rādhārāṇī for pleasure.

Why would God expand Himself as two? The answer is very simple: to enjoy. We have all experienced that you cannot really enjoy alone. On the basis of that principle, Kṛṣṇa, who is the Supreme Enjoyer, creates unlimited living entities to enjoy with Him. A very practical example is a family: a man and a woman are happy together, but the potency is there to expand the family; the parents love the children, and the children reciprocate with love to the parents. This is particularly true regarding Rādhārāṇī because she is the expansion of *hlādinī-śakti*, the pleasure potency of Kṛṣṇa. We can imagine how much pleasure she gives to Kṛṣṇa.

This is interesting to us because the whole purpose of our lives now is to awaken our dormant love for Kṛṣṇa. Everyone wants to love and be loved, but our love is misplaced in this world. When you become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, you will know your relationship with Kṛṣṇa, and you will be perfectly happy in that relationship. Rādhārāṇī’s love is the topmost; her love is called *mahābhāva*. There are only a few personalities who have that topmost pure love for Kṛṣṇa. Of course, it is easy for Mahāprabhu because He is a combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Mādhavendra Purī witnessed all these beautiful, intimate, loving relationships between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in his meditation, and he came to the world to speak about it to those who are qualified to hear. It’s like having a treasure chest with jewels inside; he appeared in this world and opened up the treasure house of love so we could get a peek at the nature of the Vrajavāsīs' love for Kṛṣṇa. 

Throughout Vedic history, the relationship was primarily one of master and servant. When Mādhavendra Purī came, he showed us the cowherd boys, the Gopīs, Nanda, and Yaśodā. He broke open the storehouse of love of God. That personality who was bluish-black like a monsoon cloud in Dvāpara-yuga has now appeared in Kali-yuga as a golden avatāra. How can I recognize Him? Because He is always surrounded by His devotees chanting. That is the key to the treasure chest. By the mercy of that chanting, you get the key to open up that storehouse of love of God. 

It is so simple you might miss it. People think there must be a complicated solution to get out of this material world, but Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "Chant and your life will be sublime." He didn't just say "happy." Mādhavendra Purī understood this; he gave a little taste, and Mahāprabhu broke open the storehouse. 

How did He help us understand the mystery of how the people of this horrible age get to achieve the topmost goal of Vraja-bhakti? He traveled from Eastern India toward Vṛndāvana, but He took a detour to see His two intimate associates, Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmī. They had been forced into the service of Nawab Hussain Shah, the Muslim king at that time. Besides being transcendentalists, they were very capable, practical men who knew how to govern, handle money, and navigate politics. They accepted that role to protect the Vaiṣṇavas, but at their residence, they created a "Gupta Vṛndāvana" (hidden Vṛndāvana). They had a little farm with Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Govardhana Hill, and all these places at home, where they were able to live the lives of pure Vaiṣṇavas.

When Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to visit them for the first time, He came around some trees, and Rūpa Gosvāmī saw Him. Mahāprabhu was seven feet tall, very beautiful, His effulgence emanating *prema*, chanting, "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" I visited recently in Bihar and saw the footprints of Mahāprabhu on a rock; when He chanted, the rock melted. His feet were quite large, and I bowed down to get mercy. 

Rūpa Gosvāmī was overwhelmed, and from his heart, through his mouth, he spoke the most significant verse: *namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te*. "Look at this incarnation of Kṛṣṇa; He is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa Himself because He is giving Vraja-bhakti to the people of Kali-yuga." 

Rādhārāṇī controls Kṛṣṇa with this love. This is a confidential truth: Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhā says. Because of this *mahābhāva*, she controls Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa loves it. She is in charge of devotional service. If someone desires devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he must first approach Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She blesses us with that service to Kṛṣṇa, and through that service, we become purified and awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa. 

We must be very careful not to misunderstand her love as mundane lust. Mundane lust is like iron, and transcendental love (Kṛṣṇa consciousness) is like gold. Her love for Kṛṣṇa is very pure, uncontaminated, and completely spiritual; there is no selfish intention. We are cleansing the heart, and as we become more qualified, we can go deeper and deeper into these layers of service. 

Tomorrow is the appearance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Celebrate, dance, sing, cook, and speak about her. You are hers, and she is yours. This is an advanced stage, but the longest journey begins with the first step. You are all going in the right direction.""