"*00402*.*
"### Teachings and Pastimes of Haridāsa Ṭhākura (Part 1) **Indradyumna Swami, Māyāpura** 
*Jaya Śrī-Kṛṣṇa-Caitanya, Prabhu Nityānanda, Śrī-Advaita, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda.*

I thought for my short stay here in Māyāpura, we would have a short seminar, and I was trying to think—there are so many subject matters in Kṛṣṇa consciousness—what the seminar might be on. I always like to speak about the holy name. As Śacī-suta Mahārāja knows, I would say, "Should I speak on this? Should I speak about chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa?" It might be nice to speak about someone who exemplifies that chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa by their teachings and by their practice in life. Naturally, the personality who came to mind was Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura. And why not? Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura is a very, very popular personality in the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.

Actually, every day we are reminded of the glories of Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura. When we finish our *kīrtana*, we chant the *praṇāma* prayers, beginning by calling out the names of our immediate ācārya, our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, then we say *vancha-kalpataru-bhyaś ca krpā-sindhubhya eva ca*, *patitānāṃ pāvanebhyo vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ*—glories to all the devotees—and then generally, the person chanting with great gusto, he goes, *nāmācārya Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura kī jaya!* So, this is significant. He is given great prominence in our tradition, and in particular, the fruit of this great tradition, ISKCON, has given him great prominence. Again, Śrīla Prabhupāda lists Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura as one of the 32 spiritual masters that he lists in the introduction to *Bhagavad-gītā*. As I travel around the world, I often see now sitting on the *vyāsāsana*, wooden deities of *nāmācārya* Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura sitting next to the Tulasī plant, and the devotees sit there, like Haridāsa Ṭhākura did 500 years ago, and they chant their *japa*. Now, this wasn't so in the beginning of our movement, but because of the devotees' love and appreciation for him as an exemplary devotee, both in *sādhana* and preaching, now you see his *mūrti* everywhere. And of course, he was extremely popular during his time. For example, Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī were best friends with him.

There is a saying: you can judge someone by their friends. If you meet someone and you can't figure that person out, just see who that person associates with. If that person has a certain presence but associates with low-class people, you can really understand what their heart is like. But if that person has very *sāttvika*, very high-class Kṛṣṇa conscious friends, then you can know, "Oh, he must be of the same caliber." What is the association, what are some of the personalities associated very intimately with Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura? Although we know he was born in a low-class family, he was very close to high-class Vaiṣṇava personalities like Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī.

Particularly when Haridāsa Ṭhākura was living in Jagannātha Purī under the Siddha-bakula tree, which Lord Caitanya planted, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī would come daily to have his association. They were friends on the transcendental platform. We need friends. There is a saying in society: we are all social animals. Human beings, they like to hang out in herds, like buffaloes and deer. You know, everyone wants association. Life would be very lonely without friends. "I get by with a little help from my friends"—that’s not *Bhagavad-gītā*, that’s something else! But what is friendship in the material world? Although it's glorified as friendship, it's actually quite degrading, because people become friends and they like the same sinful activity; they like the same women, they like the same men, they like the same degraded movies, they like the same drugs. So, "This is my friend." But that type of friendship is dragging you down to hell, so that's not really friendship; that's exploitation.

Sometimes I mention that I was in America a few years ago, and they have these bumper stickers they put on the back of their cars, their vans, or the trucks, and it says something really important to them. We got behind one car and the bumper sticker said, "Real friends don't let their friends drive drunk." We have to follow that—that's a good start. The longest journey begins with that. But real friendship is to be found in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When we come together and we like the same music, we like the same *kīrtana*, we like the same scripture, we like the same food, and by enjoying those things with our friends for Kṛṣṇa's pleasure, we elevate ourselves in friendship. This is real friendship, and this is the friendship we should seek.

So, Haridāsa Ṭhākura's friends were the immediate associates of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. From that alone, we can understand what an exalted personality he was. And he is popular now, and he will be popular for the next 10,000 years as the *sankīrtana* movement expands and people learn about the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra* and that person who best demonstrated that chanting. Most of us are familiar with his life story. It would make a great movie. I’m sure someday, when the movie makers wake up and understand what they should be doing a movie about, it’ll be a blockbuster. One of my godbrothers, Rūpa Vilāsa Prabhu, he wrote a big, thick book about Haridāsa Ṭhākura, and in that book he wrote in one paragraph that Haridāsa Ṭhākura's story has everything: love, conflict, drama, temptation, the blood of the *qāzī*, philosophy, bliss, the reversal of fortune, tragedy, victory, the inspiration, and most importantly, transcendence. His essential teaching process was that the happiness we all seek can be found in the few syllables of the *mahā-mantra*. And this truth is as much relevant today as it was 500 years ago.

So, as we know, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He is the *yuga-avatāra*, so He brings the *yuga-dharma*: chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. But when the Lord comes for His purpose as the *yuga-avatāra*, He never comes alone. He brings His associates with Him, and they help Him. Just like I came to Māyāpura and I brought ten devotees to help me. By Prabhupāda's grace, I have lots of responsibilities and I need help because I can't do it all alone. I’m so busy, I hardly have time to answer my email; I have hundreds of emails waiting. Yes, so I brought disciples and friends and well-wishers to help so I could do what I have to do here, and that is chant, dance, and preach. When I was in my *āśrama* last year in San Diego, California, one disciple stayed in his house; he was washing my clothes, cooking my food, cleaning my room. It is, you know, usually you have ten people like that, you're just like a king or something. I can't do this all the time; I've got work to do. So, *kṛṣṇa-kīrtana-saṅga-kīrtana-prāṇī-kṛta*. Mahāprabhu, this incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, comes in a disguised form as a devotee, but He'll be recognized because all the people around Him are assisting Him, are chanting and dancing, even the children, and singing Hare Kṛṣṇa. Mostly the children.

The interesting thing is that you know, Lord Caitanya, He recognized Haridāsa Ṭhākura amongst His associates as particularly noteworthy for two things. And Sanātana Gosvāmī nicely describes the two qualities of Haridāsa Ṭhākura that are most outstanding. Would you like to know the two qualities of the *nāmācārya* that are particularly endearing to the heart? Forgive my Bengali: *apani ācari' bhakti kariba pracāra / āpani ācāre kebā, ācāra nā kare pracāra*. Okay, some behave well but do not preach the cult of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, whereas others preach but do not behave properly. Then Sanātana Gosvāmī says, *ācāra-pracāra-nāmera karaha tuṣṭa / ācāra-tumi sarva-guru, tumi jagat-a-tāraka*. "Haridāsa Ṭhākura, you simultaneously perform both duties in relationship to the holy name. By your personal behavior and by your preaching, therefore I say you are the spiritual master of the whole wide world, for you are the most advanced devotee in the world."

So, if you’re listening carefully, what are the two things? Number one: he was the perfect example of someone who chanted Kṛṣṇa and also he preached those glories to others. Some devotees chant but they don't act properly; some devotees act properly but they don't preach. That’s okay, to each his own, we have our own process of advancement. From the very beginning, Haridāsa Ṭhākura, he chanted his lakhs of names, 192 rounds every day. One hundred thousand names he would chant in his mind. Just like Gurukṛpa Gosvāmī, he has his beads, he is chanting, but then you also notice when something's going on, he has his clicker, and even though he's talking and doing things, he's also chanting in his mind. Who knows, I don't know how many rounds he chants, but that's *bonafide*, everything's going on in his mind. It's going, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare."

Today when I went to them, this is an art you can learn. Yes, *bhakti-yoga*—but you were so close—he has his beads but he also has this little clicker on his finger. It's like you can hardly see it, and he’s chanting the names like this. I saw. So, 100,000 names he would chant, Haridāsa Ṭhākura. And then, 100,000 names he would chant softly, like that. And 100,000 names he would chant as loud as he could, for the benefit of other living entities, even immovable living entities like grass and trees and plants. And now, it takes about 22 hours to chant 192 rounds, so he had two hours left over. So, what would you do? Have a pizza or something and, you know, then maybe take a little nap? No, he'd go out and preach! Therefore, *nāmācārya*, the great example of chanting the holy name. And we can't imitate, but we can try to follow in his footsteps and finish our sixteen rounds every day.

But he earned—not earned, he merited—the title. He wasn't seeking it, he wasn't looking for that title, but they gave it to him. Everyone could recognize. It said that the glories of a Vaiṣṇava, they go before him. Before he arrives, already the people know this *sādhu* is coming. Our movement is, someone merits it and he becomes *sankīrtana* leader, regional secretary, GBC, so we know whom to go to to get help in Kṛṣṇa consciousness or inspiration. Dangerous, you know, as neophyte devotees, we get these big titles, and then we think, "Ah, I am someone, I'm important, I have a big title." Prabhupāda warns us in this *Śikṣāṣṭaka*; there's so many, he could have said volumes of things. But *na dhanaṃ na janaṃ na sundarīṃ kavitāṃ vā jagadīśa kāmaye*. He mentions this: beware of being proud of your title. "I am temple president," "I am regional secretary," "I am sannyāsī," "I am guru." No, *dāsa-dāsa-dāsa-anudāsa*—servant of the servant. Our title is just a facility. For Prabhupāda, original passport, his name: A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami. His home: he put Vṛndāvana. His occupation: he put "Servant of his Divine Grace Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura." That's what his occupation was! He could have put "Teacher," you know, "Ācārya." He put "Servant of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī." This is everything. An ācārya does is for our instruction, the little things and the big things. Not that just the big things he does is glorious, but even the little things he does is glorious, because it's all in devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

So, you couldn't get a bigger title than *nāmācārya* Haridāsa Ṭhākura, the great teacher. But the thing was, if you looked at his character, you wouldn't think that he possessed that title because he was *tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā / amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ*. He was also the personification of that verse, which stresses humility, humility, humility. So, we are—because he's Ācārya, that means he's the teacher, we're the students—we have to be like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Again, we can't imitate him, but we can imbibe his mood. And that mood is very much described by Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura in a purport that he wrote to the *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. He writes, he says in the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, there are only two principal instructions. Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī summarizes, there are only two principal instructions: (1) develop a taste for chanting the holy names; (2) display compassion for the fallen souls.

There is a saying in modern society that you can have a "mission statement." It's kind of like your whole life compressed into a statement: who you are, what you want to be, and what you want to accomplish in your short time here on the earth. So, a mission statement of a materialistic person might be: "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die." This was the mission statement of the gladiators in Rome: "We who are about to die, salute you, O Emperor." The gladiators—I memorized such a look when I was nine, but it wasn't a real slogan, it was just nonsense. "We are about to die, salute you." And what was the mission statement? Eat, drink, and be merry, probably tomorrow we're gonna die in the combat in front of the Emperor. See, *oṃ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā / cakṣur unmīlitaṃ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ*. Today, though, what is our common mission statement? Develop some *nāma-ruci*, some real taste for chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, and show compassion to the fallen conditioned souls by going out in the streets and chanting very loudly.

So Haridāsa Ṭhākura was personally chosen by Caitanya Mahāprabhu for this purpose. There is a saying: many are called, but few are chosen. So there were many associates of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, but it's like Prabhupāda said when he talked about New York in the beginning; he said, "In the beginning, Kṛṣṇa sent me a few good men." I always lamented I wasn't there in New York in 1965, so I’m praying my next birth I can be one of those few good men that Prabhupāda called to help him in the beginning. The genius, actually, one time Prabhupāda revealed, he said the ācārya, the spiritual master, as he goes through preaching in different lifetimes, he takes with him a certain group of disciples who help him in that mission. Better than going back to Godhead, would be to be part of that transcendental roadshow, that troop going from planet to planet, universe to universe, preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the material world. Mahāprabhu chose different associates to accomplish different parts of His *sankīrtana* movement. This is described in *Antya-līlā*, chapter 5: *haridāsa-nāma-mahimā-prakāśa, sanātana-bhakti-siddhānta-vilāsa*. Caitanya Mahāprabhu exhibited the glories of the holy name of the Lord through Haridāsa Ṭhākura, who was born in a family... similarly, He exhibited the essence of devotional service through Sanātana Gosvāmī, who had almost been converted into a... So through Haridāsa, He exhibited the glories of the holy name, and through Sanātana Gosvāmī, He demonstrated the essence of devotional service. Like we have that *Sanātana-śikṣā* in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, so many relevant instructions to aspiring devotees. And *śrī-rūpa-nāma-mahimā-premā-rasa-līlā-bhūti-parimā-caitanya-akīla*. The Lord also fully exhibited the ecstatic love and transcendental pastimes of Vṛndāvana through Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Considering this, who could understand the deep plans of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu? And one ironic twist in this whole arrangement was, you know, Rūpa and Sanātana and Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya and Advaita Ācārya and so—these were all very elevated Brahmins, born in Sarasvatī Brahmin families. But the amazing thing was that Haridāsa Ṭhākura, he took birth in a low-class family. In some ways, you can judge a person's past by the present birth. Of course, I cannot change by the mercy of guru and Gaurāṅga there, but it's indicative: the family you take birth in. We don't hold that against you, but there's some indication there—you go to the family and the lineage going back to a particular sage in days of yore. Like after I took *sannyāsa* here in Māyāpura in 1979, I took off on my own in bare feet, just like you should do, like to travel around the world to far-out places in bare feet and just depend on Kṛṣṇa. So I did it one time, he's done it another time, I went to South India and I would visit the different temples.

So I went to one temple and the door was closed. It was like a big gate protecting the temple. So I knocked on the door and this Brahmin opened the temple; he was shocked. He said, "I'll only let you in if you tell me what is your *gotra*. You have some high-class *gotra*? Otherwise, you can't come in our temple." *Gotra*? I don't have any *gotra*. I didn't know; it's just a new saying. "I *gotra*? No, I don't *gotra*. Who's the sage who's delivered your family?" I said, "Yes, Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda!" "Oh, ISKCON? Come on in!" *Jaya, Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya!*

So in this age, *kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ*—everyone is born *śūdra*, except of course the children here, they have this special privilege to dress up. So what's our hope? Our hope is described again by Śrīla Prabhupāda: bell metal can be changed into gold by a mystical process. So a low-born person addicted to sinful activity can become a qualified Brahmin, a Vaiṣṇava, by proper training and initiation. So what's the point? The point is that Haridāsa Ṭhākura is obviously a liberated soul, but he took on the seva of being born in that low family to give inspiration to us that no matter how low our birth is, or even our sinful activities, by the mercy of guru and Gaurāṅga, who give us the holy names, we can be elevated to the platform of... and we shouldn't take that lightly. Why? *Amāninā mānadena*—I have told you many times, when Prabhupāda was glorified—"Oh, Prabhupāda, you're the greatest Vaiṣṇava"—he blushed and he looked down, he said, "A Vaiṣṇava," he said, "a Vaiṣṇava is very exalted. I am trying to become a Vaiṣṇava." This is how we should feel: I'm not qualified, I am trying to become a Vaiṣṇava.

Life is short and then you die. There's so little time, Prabhupāda preached in Geneva—anything can happen at any time. So don't be surprised when things go wrong; he said, "Be surprised if things go right." So there's the essence: *nāma-ruci, vaiṣṇava-sevā*. That's it. You develop some taste for these holy names—you take it when you're chanting in the morning, that's the most important part of your day—and *japa*, and whoever you meet, wherever you meet them, then introduce them to this culture and *vaiṣṇava-sevā*. Then you render some service to the Vaiṣṇava. You consider everyone more advanced than you, so therefore you can serve everyone.

Like in the airport one time, there was a *nāma*—Prabhupāda was giving *darśana*, and then there was an announcement that all the devotees should stand up and be prepared to leave the airport. Prabhupāda was the first one to stand up. "Prabhupāda, why are you standing up?" "I am not a devotee, I am also a devotee. I am following the instruction." This is golden opportunity we have. Every day is like gold. Why? Because *Bhāgavatam* says, *kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṃ tretāyāṃ yajato makhaiḥ / dvāpare paricaryāyāṃ kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt*. Whatever result was obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating on Viṣṇu, was available, that he in Tretā-yuga by performing sacrifice, and in Dvāpara-yuga by serving the Lord's lotus feet, can be obtained in Kali-yuga simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. So it's nothing new, it was there in the past as described in that verse, but as always, we need someone to show us. And for us, we have the great inspiration in the personality of Haridāsa Ṭhākura. And how that pasttime unfolded, I will tell you tomorrow.

It's very interesting because Haridāsa Ṭhākura is a combination of three personalities. Don't ask me how that's possible, but so we'll explain who these three personalities are and how they came to be the greatest ācārya, Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura. And for now, we will spend our valuable time for a few more minutes chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Or maybe you'd like to go home and go to sleep? Who wants to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa? Who wants to go home and go to sleep? Not one hand! I'm pretty tired anyway; I'll do my best here.

*Nāmācārya Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura kī jaya!*
*Kīrtana-nanda Hari-nāma-sankīrtanāya kī jaya!*
*Śrī-dāma-māyāpura-dhāma kī jaya!*
*The appearance day of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura kī jaya!*
*Installation of the new cakra on Wednesday kī jaya!*""