"*00410*.*
"Once again, I'd like to welcome all of you to one of Vṛndāvana's most sacred kuṇḍas, or lakes. If you haven't noticed it yet, it's just behind us, and it has a beautiful parikramā path which you can walk around. I will be speaking on this lake this morning. There is much to be said; practically speaking, it is one of the many kuṇḍas and many lakes that go around or circle Govardhana Hill. Previously, there were many, many lakes that circled around Govardhana Hill. This is one of the remaining ones here; actually, we are just maybe a two-minute walk from Govardhana Hill. Because of the buildings and the trees, you can't see it, but the hill is just next door. 

But first, I would like to speak about a great saint whose samādhi is here. This saint is famous for having composed 100,000 devotional poems or songs about Kṛṣṇa here in Vṛndāvana in his work entitled *Sūr-sāgar*. *Sāgar* means an ocean of melody. We all have experience of an ocean of saltwater, and Prabhupāda says in *Kṛṣṇa* book that there are oceans of ghee, oceans of milk, oceans of pomegranate juice—seriously, in the universe, these things are beyond our imagination, but they exist. So, his famous work is entitled *Sūr-sāgar*, ocean of melody, just like when Gundica is playing her violin; it's like an ocean of melody, many different types of waves, so beautiful. She is leaving tonight; she is the first violin in a big, big orchestra in St. Petersburg, and they say you have to come back now, everyone loves her music.

So, this particular saint, he composed 100,000 devotional songs called *Ocean of Melody*, but unfortunately, only 8,000 remain. And this great saint's name is Sūradāsa. Those of you who watch or listen to my Friday afternoon lectures, I often quote Sūradāsa because he is such a devotional poet. Whatever poem he writes, whatever song he writes, it just touches the heart of even the neophyte devotee, what to speak of the intermediate or advanced devotee; his poetry just brings forth Kṛṣṇa. There's a saying in India: "What is the use of a bowman's arrow unless it pierces the heart of his enemy?" And similarly, "What is the use of poetry unless it brings forth Kṛṣṇa-prema?" So, poets are very important in our tradition because we're trying to bring forth this Kṛṣṇa-prema, this bhakti that's locked within our hearts.

Now, I first came in contact, I guess you could say, with Sūradāsa some years ago. I was searching through our ISKCON Folio for poets and musicians whose works I could take and include in my classes. Reading different poets, you know, the arrow didn't pierce the heart. Then I came across a poem by Sūradāsa that was entitled *Caraṇa-kamala*, which means "lotus feet," and it was so beautiful. Actually, I wrote it down: "I offer prayers on the lotus feet of the worshipable Lord Hari. By His mercy, a lame person crosses mountains, and a blind person sees everything. A deaf person hears, and a dumb person again speaks. By His mercy, even a poor person may walk with the servant holding an umbrella over his head. The Lord of Sūradāsa is full of compassion; therefore, I offer my obeisances unto His lotus feet again and again."

Now, in that poem, this great saint Sūradāsa, whose samādhi is only 50 meters from here—we're going to go later and do daṇḍavats to his samādhi-mandira—in that poem, he says, "By the Lord's mercy, a blind person can see everything." Now, the amazing thing is I inquired a little bit more about him, and I discovered that this poet-saint, Sūradāsa, was literally blind from birth. He was born blind in a village called Sihi, which is near Agra, I think. He was born in the year 1479, and he was born in an extremely poverty-stricken brāhmaṇa family. But he proved himself to be a very, very special child from the beginning. It's said that as a child, from two or three years on, he had this mystical ability: anyone who lost something, he could find it. You know, somebody in the village lost something, they'd come to his mother's house and they'd say, "Can I borrow your boy for a few hours?" and then they'd come and he'd find it for them. She's a good wife, Bhaṇikā; she also has this ability. I swear, whatever we lose, that girl can find it. I'm always losing my glasses, you know, I put my pen here, my beads, or my phone, and she finds it in the most strange places. I don't know how she finds it. She has this little siddhi—where you say, "I lost my heart in Vṛndāvana, can you find it?" No, leave it there. 

Actually, I was reading that one time his father did a ritualistic ceremony for some function—he was a brāhmaṇa—and he was given two gold coins. He put them on the table, but that night two rats came and stole the coins, and his father was looking everywhere for them. But the little boy woke up and he said, "Daddy, I know where they are," and he found them in some corner of the house or something, wherever the rats had left the gold. By the time he was eight years old, he could predict the future with pinpoint accuracy. This little boy, nine years old, he could predict the future. So everyone was coming knocking on the parents' door: "Can you tell me what's going to happen in six months? Can I get over this disease?" The little boy would say, he'd explain everything. Nine years old, he's blind, but he could find the coins and he could predict the future.

But the most important thing about this little boy is that he had this very strong desire to hear about Kṛṣṇa. As a little boy, it's said that while other children were out playing—you know how we have children here, there, everywhere, they're not listening, right?—the village children, when the children were playing in the village, he would come to his mother and say, "Can you tell me Kṛṣṇa stories?" But the ācāryas say the real depth of his relationship with Kṛṣṇa was revealed one day when he was a little boy; I think at that time he was six, and he fell into a well. You know, sometimes in the village, they have these wells and they're not really protected, and sometimes, unfortunately, little children out of curiosity are looking, and he fell in the well and he remained there for six days. Nobody knew where he was, but the whole time he was there, he remained very calm and he was thinking of Kṛṣṇa and praying, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa." So on the seventh day, Kṛṣṇa appeared with Rādhārāṇī. Kṛṣṇa appeared and reached down and pulled him out of the well. 

And Rādhārāṇī was standing right next to Kṛṣṇa, and not knowing who she was—because he's a little child and he was kind of shaken by the experience—he grabbed her ankles. He grabbed Rādhārāṇī's ankles. So she suddenly said, "Little boy, I'm Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, I'm Kṛṣṇa's consort. Could you please let go of my ankles?" But Sūradāsa didn't let go because he wasn't sure about her identity, because he was blind. He said, "I can't be sure you're Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī because I can't see you; I'm just holding on to your ankles." It's an amazing pastime. So Kṛṣṇa just smiled and restored his eyesight. He was actually able to see; he got his vision. He could see Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī standing in front of him. So, taking advantage of that moment, Kṛṣṇa said, "Little boy, I'd like to give you a boon. What would you like? Would you like to keep your vision now? Would that be a good boon? Now I give you your sight, you can see the rest of your life." 

So Sūradāsa kind of folded his hands and he gazed upon beautiful Kṛṣṇa just standing so benevolently before him, ready to give him a blessing. And you know what he said to Kṛṣṇa? He said, "My dear Lord, I prefer to remain blind, as I do not wish to see any other form than yours and your dearmost consort, Vṛndāvana-īśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I prefer to remain blind; all I want to see is you and her." So for the rest of his life, he was blind. Now, unfortunately, as a result of being blind, he was often ridiculed and made fun of by his friends—"You're this and you're that"—always making fun of him, laughing at him. But as a result, he quickly became detached from material life, and in a spirit of renunciation, he left home at the age—I think it was well before he was 10 years old—he left home and wandered around like an ascetic. 

It may come as a surprise to us that such a young boy could leave home, but there are many examples in our Vedic culture of young boys who are really determined to be Kṛṣṇa conscious; they just walk away and become sādhu. One famous personality, Nityānanda Prabhu—he was by the time he was five, he was very renounced. One day he was with his mother down by a river and he said to his mother, "Mom, can I take sannyāsa?" She said, "What?" "Mom, I want to take sannyāsa, I want to renounce this world." "But you're only five, mom." So, not to disappoint him as a little boy, she said, "You can take sannyāsa one day when you are on the verge of death." She's thinking, "He's going to grow old and when he's old on the verge of death, then you take sannyāsa." She thought, "Okay, let's go back to the house." 

Now, is that the finish of the story? He looked in the river and he saw some crocodiles, hungry crocodiles, so he jumped in and started swimming towards the crocodiles. And the crocodiles, they thought, "5-year-old boy, yum, yum, yum," and they started swimming towards him. His mother screamed, "Oh, my child, look, the crocodiles are coming to eat you! You're on the verge of death!" He kind of turned around and smiled at her, swam back to the shore, and there was some old torn orange, saffron clothing that some sādhu had rejected. He took off his child clothes, put on that, and said, "Goodbye, mother, taking sannyāsa." This is history, this is a true story, and he walked and became one of the greatest sannyāsīs in Vedic history. 

So, we don't judge one's level of spiritual consciousness by age, but rather by the depth of one's realization. That Nityānanda Prabhu left home when he was five; Prahlāda Mahārāja, he left home when he was five. So there are examples; of course, that was a Vaiṣṇava case, there are not so many examples now. I don't think it's even possible to leave home at five; you just stay home and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa with your parents. So, before he was 10, Sūradāsa also left home to renounce the world in pursuit of God, Bhagavān. 

Now, there are so many holy places in India, from the North to the South; that's why India is such an attractive place. There are so many holy places because the Lord appeared in so many incarnations, and He has so many devotees who take shelter of His lotus feet, and they build temples commemorating Him and His pastimes and so forth. So, where did he go? He's a sādhu; sādhus don't go to the big cities to enjoy, sādhus go to holy places to do their bhajana. So where did he come to do his bhajana? He didn't have to go so far because he was from Agra. Agra is not so far from Vṛndāvana; he walked here to Vṛndāvana, straight to the banks of the Yamunā River. 

He became enriched by the mercy of Śrī Yamunā. Why the Yamunā? There are so many sacred rivers in India, why did he choose the Yamunā? That we can understand from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 1.1.6; it's a beautiful verse glorifying the river: "All glories to Śrī Yamunā, the daughter of the Sun God and sister of Yamarāja. She is the beloved of Kṛṣṇa, the killer of Mura, and has exceeded the greatness of Gaṅgā in her friendship with Him. Having made intimate friendship with Mathurā-devī, she always embraces her, and disguised as ordinary water, her waves flow with the honey of the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa." Remember, he's blind, but he's walking along, finding his way to the banks of the Yamunā. 

Now, here in Vṛndāvana, he gradually started writing as a teenager, then in his early 20s, and he became a very accomplished poet, musician, and composer of devotional songs. He could play many kinds of different musical instruments, and his voice was like honey, very sweet. Now, by this time, the deity of Gopāla had been found by Mādhavendra Purī, and devotees were worshiping Gopāla; He was one of the most famous deities in Braja. Here at Govardhana Hill, there was one old bābā who would sit there every day and sing devotional songs to Gopāla. He passed away, so the Vaiṣṇava community was looking for someone who could sit and sing all day, who wasn't engaged in other work or different activities, and they selected Sūradāsa because he was blind—he couldn't work—and his voice was just like honey. So he would sit at the lotus feet of Gopāla and sing day and night devotional songs. The songs that he wrote, he would sing to Gopāla.

Now, the thing is, the songs that he was composing were describing in great detail the beauty of Gopāla, the deity. You know, if you can see something in detail, you can write a nice song about it or write a description, but if you can't see it, how are you going to write about it? So Sūradāsa was starting 100,000 poems about Kṛṣṇa, many of them about Gopāla. And the head priest there, he's thinking, "How does he do it? He's blind, how does he give such beautiful descriptions of the deity if he's blind?" So this head pujārī just couldn't figure it out—"How is he doing this?"—so he wanted to test Sūradāsa to see what's going on. 

So one day, he dressed this deity of Gopāla—we know Him now as Śrīnāthajī—in only a single strand of pearls. Took a long strand of pearls around the waist like that, just a single strand of pearls. He dressed the deity in just a single strand and the curtains closed. The pujārī is just, you know, the curtain opened, and there's Sūradāsa with his little clicker, tambourine, or something, singing. Many people were there, famous people, famous sādhus. He says, "Dear Sūradāsa, describe to us now what Gopāla looks like." So he took one of his musical instruments—Sūradāsa is blind—he took his instrument. It's written that he burst out laughing, seeing with transcendental vision how Kṛṣṇa was only dressed in a string of pearls. He started laughing and he composed a very famous bhajana. Would you like to hear it? He wrote: "See, Lord Hari is stark naked! He looks beautiful in every limb clothed in pearls; His nakedness adds to the beauty of every limb." And he concluded with one famous line: "Sūradāsa joins the milkmaids of Braja in joyous laughter: Hā! Kṛṣṇa only has some pearls on today, that little boy!" 

So this particular instance convinced everyone of his unique ability to see the Lord with transcendental eyes. When one's eyes are covered with the salve of love, one can see Kṛṣṇa in everything transcendental. Now, 100,000 songs, that's a lot, so his fame spread very quickly. Now, in Delhi, which was the capital for the Emperor of much of India, Akbar, Akbar had one legendary musician named Tansen; he was the main musician in the Emperor's musical court. So, one day Tansen, he came to Vṛndāvana—sometime he was also a devotee, a Hare Kṛṣṇa devotee in the court of the Muslim King—he was singing for Akbar a song composed by Sūradāsa, and the nature of this song made Akbar start to cry. He's an emperor, Muslim, but he's hearing this song composed by Sūradāsa; tears started coming down his eyes. So Akbar said, "Tansen, I want to reward you for composing the song," and Tansen said, "I didn't write it, Sūradāsa wrote it." "Who's Sūradāsa?" "He is the saint who lives in Vṛndāvana." 

So Akbar is thinking—he's a little materialistic—he's thinking, "Oh, if this saint Sūradāsa can write such beautiful songs about God, he can also write some nice songs about me because I'm the Emperor." So he said, "You go to that Vṛndāvana, wherever it is, and you bring back the saint; I want to ask him to compose some songs about my glories." So when Sūradāsa arrived—because you know, the King, you have to come—Akbar said, "Very quickly, just quickly compose some song about me. You must have heard of me, I'm the Emperor, everyone loves me, everyone's given their heart to me." So Sūradāsa said, "No." "You don't say no to the Emperor!" After the Emperor's gone to so much trouble to bring you before him and make a personal request, Akbar was like, stunned. "Why, why are you refusing the order of the Emperor?" 

Now, here's this blind Sūradāsa, you can't even see the Emperor, you know? Sūradāsa said, "Give me an answer." So Sūradāsa—you know, his eyes got real moist, tears started coming down his cheeks—"I've given my heart to Kṛṣṇa and there's no room inside for anyone else. Sorry, I've given my heart to Kṛṣṇa and there's no room inside for anyone else." Thinking of Kṛṣṇa, you know, he just thought of Kṛṣṇa because that's what lovers do; they think of the beloved. He just at that moment thought of Kṛṣṇa, took his musical instrument, and composed a new song about Kṛṣṇa in front of the Emperor: "Akaṇṭha-kuraṇḍa," one-pointed attention, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, hey!" And I heard this some time ago, I was thinking, "What song did he compose in front of the King, you know, the Emperor? He must have been really brave, he's just thinking of Kṛṣṇa." What song did he compose? And I found it, I found it a few days preparing for this. I don't even have to ask if you want to hear it, I know you do. 

So here it is. Remember, he's spontaneously coming from his heart and he's a beautiful singer, his voice is resounding in this hall with the Emperor, and the Emperor is like, "What?" So he's saying, "I know no one other than my counter-protecting Gopāla. How can I throw away this priceless diamond to collect glass beads instead? If you have a tiny drop of immortalizing amṛta, a mountain of poison can have no effect on my heart, to my words, and to my body. No one else is as attractive as my Gopāla, my Govinda. My Śyāmasundara has brought me enormous riches; for my Lord, I have given up everything, even my caste." 

So, when he finished singing, Akbar was speechless. He couldn't—he heard the song glorifying Kṛṣṇa, he didn't know what to say. Everyone's heart had been pierced by this arrow of devotional love coming from Sūradāsa. No one was speaking; just Tansen, two or three minutes later—Tansen, the main court poet, remember that, in the court of Akbar—he said something very famous. Seeing how Sūradāsa was affected with this bhakti, Akbar was affected with this bhakti, all the court people, everyone was just somehow affected by the words of this pure devotee. Everyone's heart had been pierced by these devotional words. Tansen stood up and he spoke the following: "Some are hurt by a warrior's arrow, some are tortured by pain, but those whose hearts are touched by Sūra's lyrics are pierced through again and again and again. Some are hurt by a warrior's arrow, some are tortured by pain, but those whose hearts are touched by Sūra's lyrics are pierced through again and again and again." 

Kṛṣṇa. Now, many of—because he lived here in Braja, many of his songs were in the Brajabhāṣā language; that's the local language of the villagers here. So the people of Braja were very much endeared to him because they're also lovers of Kṛṣṇa, and any song glorifying Kṛṣṇa resonates with their heart. He became so famous. They say he knew how to turn their hearts with three things: his devotion, his poetic genius, and his musical skills. You can take the world over if you have bhakti and you're a poetic genius, you know how to speak, and you have some musical skills. Just like Śrīla Prabhupāda, he conquered the world! He's conquering the world because he had the same pure devotion; he could speak so wonderfully to Western people and convince them about deep esoteric truths in the Vedic literatures, and Prabhupāda was an expert musician. 

He wasn't like some of the sādhus at that time who spoke and sang of the formless Supreme, the Brahman, the Absolute who has no form, no name, no identity. There were many people preaching that philosophy as well and singing that philosophy, Māyāvāda. So I found another song where Sūradāsa kind of challenges those Māyāvādīs. He wrote the following: "My mind runs in circles, bewildered, finding nothing to grasp. No support in the formless, who they say is faceless, with no attributes, no lines, no characteristics—yet they consider it in every way inaccessible." So Sūradāsa has decided to sing of the beautiful Lord incarnate, Śyāmasundara, and His all-attractive pastimes. "I don't want to hear about this formless Absolute, I'm just going to sing a song about Kṛṣṇa." In summary, that's what he said. 

Now, Sūradāsa was very well aware of the deeper pastimes of the Lord and His devotees in Vṛndāvana. Historically, it's known that he openly sang of the gopīs' pangs of separation from Kṛṣṇa, meaning *viraha-līlā*. In fact, he came to the conclusion that that's the only real love—the love between God and His devotee, the love the devotee has for God, and the love God has for His devotee. That's the only meaningful love, that's eternal love; it gives full satisfaction. So he composed a song of the—like the gopīs are singing after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana. You know, *Sūra* means "one who cuts your attachments." Sādhus don't hold words back, they speak the truth; sometimes, "Oh, that hurts." So he's going to speak about love here, so just get ready. Of course, love for Kṛṣṇa means everything connected to Kṛṣṇa; it means the guru, it means the Vaiṣṇava, and the Vaiṣṇavīs, we understand that. But here's the words, the poem, the words in his poem he puts in the mouth of the gopīs. The gopīs are speaking here after Kṛṣṇa left: 

"No one has ever become happy loving, because they're feeling cheated by Kṛṣṇa—He left. So no one has ever become happy loving. The moth loved the fire, but the fire consumed her; no one has ever become happy loving. The bee loved the lotus, but the flower became its prison." They're angry; they love Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa has left. "What kind of lover are you, Kṛṣṇa? You left us!" They're giving different examples. "No one has ever become happy loving. The deer, drawn by the sweet sound of the hunter, had to bear an arrow in her heart; no one has ever become happy loving. We, who loved the honey-moon Kṛṣṇa, were dumbstruck when He left us, orphaned us. Without our Lord, we suffer; our tears are always flowing, for no one has ever become happy loving Him." They love Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa left. So they say, "How can anyone be happy there? What's the meaning of love?" But actually, in that separation, their love for Kṛṣṇa is increasing and increasing and increasing. So this is the mystery of *viraha-līlā*; in separation, one's heart grows fonder. But this is their mood when Kṛṣṇa left. So Sūradāsa also gives us a glimpse into the transcendental pastimes of the Lord and so beautifully expresses them so we can also become enriched. 

So we've heard, you know, in relationship to our Six Gosvāmīs, how they had their favorite places of bhajana. We talked about Rūpa Gosvāmī at Cakra-tīrtha on the banks of Mānasa-gaṅgā; that's where Śanātana Gosvāmī liked to live. We hear how Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī liked that forest that we stayed in, and we heard how Rādhārāṇī likes Rādhā-kuṇḍa like that. So he liked to do his bhajana on this lake, this particular spot we were at. Now, Sūradāsa, just over this particular lake—for the followers of the sampradāya of Vallabhācārya, the Puṣṭi-mārga—this is their most important place. It's like we have Rādhā-kuṇḍa; the Puṣṭi-mārga people, this is their most important place, Candrasarovara. So Sūradāsa was initiated into that Puṣṭi-mārga. Therefore, his—he left his body in 1581, and his samādhi is just—we'll go afterwards—it's just over there to take pray-obeisances. Actually, he left his body here, and historically, it's said that his final words were very inspiring to his followers. As he lay there just about to leave his body, the son of Vallabhācārya, his name was Viṭṭhala, he asked Sūradāsa, "Sūradāsa, you're about to leave your body, what are you thinking about?" 

So at that moment, Sūradāsa composed what would be his last song, conscious to the very end. When the biggest challenge comes to leave this mortal frame, totally fixed on Kṛṣṇa—just like you see Araṇya, that famous photo, he's just about to leave his body and the devotees are putting a microphone to his lips and he's giving his final commentaries on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, fixed to the end. Just like our Mahārāja, he left his body some months ago, he's leaving his body with this last breath—the last word was "Mission, mission!" All glories to... so what was Sūradāsa's last word? What was his last poem? You know, I was reading this and it came to the end of the page, you know, what was the last song? And I had to turn the page to see what his last song was. And I just waited for a minute, kind of like excited, like, "What was it?" I didn't turn the page, like wait, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, I turned the page, and here were his last words: 

"Kṛṣṇa's beautiful eyes are like cañcīka birds, full of rasa, very restless and slightly reddened due to intoxication. Seeing this, my life cannot remain in the cage of this body any longer." He left. "Kṛṣṇa's beautiful eyes are like cañcīka birds, full of rasa, very restless and slightly reddened due to intoxication. Seeing this, my life cannot remain in the cage of this body any longer." So the Puṣṭi-mārga people, they come here, they all say for the same reason, they come to his samādhi. You can see this parikramā path; they're probably going to his... and how did they pray to Sūradāsa? Because we're going to go see the samādhi. This is how you can pray to this great saint, because when you pray at these samādhis, they hear you and they reciprocate. Not like a grave; the personality, by mystic power, by the transcendence, they hear your prayers and they can reciprocate. So what do his followers pray for? His inner vision, by which he saw brought in Kṛṣṇa's eternal pastimes. When you go, it's a simple prayer: you bow down, "My dear Sūradāsa, please give me the same inner vision that you had to one day see Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's eternal pastimes." 

And by his grace, he's brought us to this sacred lake, Candrasarovara, pristine, pure, transcendental water. Actually, any body of water, for that matter, in Vṛndāvana, is—we should consider it transcendental. I read something really interesting the other day, Śrīla Prabhupāda described that some lakes, let me remember, some lakes like Govinda-kuṇḍa are filled with Kṛṣṇa's bath water; other lakes like Śyāma-kuṇḍa are filled with water from many holy places; and other lakes like Nārāyaṇa-sarovara filled with the liquid form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's love. These are not ordinary water; this is liquid prema, you have to see like that, or hear like that, and accept. And I also read that during the month of Kārttika, all the holy lakes of the universe take shelter in Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and in this month of Kārttika, all the holy lakes in the universe, they come and take shelter in Śyāma-kuṇḍa. So you can bathe in any lake! 

So here's one such lake. If you didn't bring your bathing clothes, you can put the water in there. I know this is a little cold now, so... but about this lake, Candrasarovara, I found a very beautiful reference in Garga-saṁhitā, Canto 3, Chapter 8. So you can focus your mind on this body of water: "Candrasarovara, Mānasa-gaṅgā is Govardhana Hill's eyes; Candrasarovara, his nose; Govinda-kuṇḍa, his lips; and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, his chin." This is a nice verse for Govardhana bhaktas: "Mānasa-gaṅgā is Govardhana Hill's eyes, Candrasarovara his nose, Govinda his lip, and Śyāma-kuṇḍa his chin." 

So there are a number of pastimes that took place at the banks of this holy lake. It's described in scripture that this is where Kṛṣṇa once performed the springtime rāsa-līlā. And there are different rāsa-līlās in different seasons, but one description is that the springtime rāsa-līlā took place here. But it's interesting that at that time that that rāsa-līlā was performed here, there was no lake. It was just forest; there was no water. They just came to dance under the full moon in the nighttime here. And that particular rāsa-dance lasted for a night of Brahmā, and it was attended by all the demigods from higher planets who were flying above, you know, their flower airplanes a little bit up in the sky watching the rāsa-līlā, hoping against hope someday they could also... 

When an ācārya, he describes that from their perspective, from the demigods' perspective, the rāsa-dance appeared like a brilliant sapphire set in the middle of a gold band, and other times like sapphire and gold bands intertwined. Why hear anything else? This is all we need to hear, everything else is a distraction. Describing the rāsa-dance, contestants of Kṛṣṇa's līlās, from their perspective: at other times, that rāsa-dance resembled an exquisite sapphire paired with a flashing diamond, both fixed at the center of a band, appearing sometimes like solid gold, at other times like sapphire and gold. It's written that the demigods who were fortunate enough to see the rāsa-dance stared in wonder at the incredible, incredible ways the gopīs moved their feet and hands with flashing eyebrows and playful smiles. I can't do it, I'm a conditioned soul. 

Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that as the dancing reached the climax, Kṛṣṇa enjoyed the pleasure of the gopīs' company by embracing them, caressing them, and glancing lovingly at them as He displayed broad, playful smiles. And the ācāryas say that amongst all those demigods watching, the one who was most affected was the demigod of the moon, Candradeva. He was the most affected by seeing this rāsa-līlā. He was the most affected, they say, because he got to serve the rāsa-dance by hovering as the moon planet, giving light and illumination for all the performances. Like you know, you're dancing in the dark, but if someone turns the lights on, "Oh yeah, it's better, keep the lights on." So it's dark, but the full moon's there; Candra is giving his illuminating rays. He's so happy, "I get to do some service to the rāsa-dance!" He was in bliss, because our bliss comes from service. 

Actually, he's a demigod, he has his followers; they're demigod worshippers, but they have a certain prayer to Candra, not necessarily Kṛṣṇa conscious, but they admire him for his ability to illuminate stuff. It's a prayer to... you worship a demigod—we don't do that—but I'll tell you how they prayed... how the followers of Candra pray to him, it's interesting. Would you like to hear a demigod prayer? Don't memorize it, promise, promise this? Okay. "Our Lord Candra is of white complexion, wears white-colored clothes, and is adorned with white-colored ornaments. May that all-merciful Lord illuminate my intelligence and breathe confidence into our hearts." Okay, you want confidence and you want your intelligence illuminated, what about my Lord Candra? They're all demigod worshippers. "He is of white complexion, he wears white-colored clothes, and is adorned with white-colored ornaments. May that all-merciful Lord illuminate my intelligence and breathe confidence into my heart." Okay, what about praying bhakti for Kṛṣṇa? No, "I want confidence now." 

Remember, this rāsa-līlā took place, you know, a night of Brahmā, so he's doing the service of illuminating the rāsa-dance for a long time, and he's getting tired. But that didn't affect him because he was feeling so much ecstasy, just like we go on the parikramā, right? We get tired day after day after day, but we're feeling so much ecstasy, we wake up at 3:30 in the morning and get ready to go on the bus. So the ācāryas say the effect of watching this rāsa-līlā—the quintessence of all of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes—for such a long duration of time caused him to start experiencing the topmost ecstatic symptoms of love of God, eight ecstatic symptoms. He's, like, in the sky, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." So what are the eight ecstatic symptoms? Nectar of Devotion, Chapter 28. Imagine, he's the moon, right? He's up there watching, this is what he starts experiencing: becoming stunned, perspiring, standing of hairs on the body, faltering of the voice, trembling of the body, changing of bodily colors, shedding tears, and devastation. 

So one symptom mentioned here is shedding tears. When you're feeling ecstasy, you shed tears, and that's what happened to Candra; he started crying in ecstasy. And that's how we got the lake! This lake is the tears of ecstasy of Candradeva. You have permission to bathe in the ecstatic tears of this devotee, and that's why it's called Candrasarovara, "Lake of the Moon God." Now, Rūpa Gosvāmī, he gives special significance to Candrasarovara; says each day, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and their friends, they come to Candrasarovara for their pastimes. The pastimes after Rādhā-kuṇḍa—they have the pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, next they come here. So we must give so much respect to this lake; it deserves the highest respect, it deserves the highest devotion. Actually, Rūpa Gosvāmī, he shows us, actually, how much reverence and love he has for places in Vṛndāvana like Candrasarovara. He writes as follows: "Their hearts pleased by the rising waves of the kuñja-madhura-rasa, the Divine Couple enjoy pastimes in the beautiful groves of Vṛndāvana, aromatic with the many pleasant flowers and filled with many humming bees. Let us sweep these forest groves with our long hair." 

Now, two minutes more, I know you all want to go bathing, and the gopīs have a special pastime here at Candrasarovara. Can you guess what it is? They got the young girls, they love to come here. You know why they come here? For honey drinking. What, Manuka honey from New Zealand? No, they come here for honey drinking. That honey is collected from the trees in Vṛndāvana, it's mixed with different substances like yogurt and milk and different powders, and then the girls come... monkey nonsense, the girls come, and they sit on the banks of Candrasarovara, and they become slightly intoxicated with this honey beverage. And one ācārya, he commented, "They laugh and giggle as young girls do, but the source of their joy is always the young son of Nanda Mahārāja." And on the western side of this lake is a place where, you know, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa come just to rest, because they have lots of pastimes around, they like to come to Candrasarovara and just sit and rest here. And that place is called Śyāma-maṇḍala. Śyāma-maṇḍala, it's a beautiful name for a girl, right? We have, again, we have initiations coming up, so I'm collecting names. And the eastern side of Candrasarovara is a small temple, and the deities there are called Vṛndā-candra-bihārī. A nice name, right? Your name is Rādhā-candra-bihārī? Go to Candrasarovara and take a bath this afternoon! 

So these are some of the pastimes that take place here. We're very fortunate to come here and just take darśana of the samādhi of Sūradāsa, take some of this liquid prema of the lake on our heads; it's just nice to be back in Vṛndāvana. We were in Vraja-mandala for a few days in Jāvaṭ, Govardhana, Gopī-Dāmodara, etc. In appreciation of that fact, we'll recite one verse, we'll finish with one verse from: "All glories, all glories to this place where we are living, Lord Muralī's Vṛndāvana forest! He prefers residing here to residing in Vaikuṇṭha or even in the hearts of elevated saints. And in Vṛndāvana, while always tending His cows, He gives pleasure to the gopīs, whose love for Him and the mood of the rāsa-dance increases by His sweetly playing His flute." Jai Śrī Rādhe, Hare Kṛṣṇa.""