"*00547*.*
"Hi, Kṛṣṇa, everyone! A very warm welcome back once again to our lectures. So, we are continuing with our wandering through Vṛndāvana. And why? Well, because it's the very best place to achieve love of God, love of Kṛṣṇa, and that is what we want. Knowing that it is rare, we jump at any chance to be immersed, either physically, as I am fortunate to be now, or mentally, as you are now, by transcendental sound vibration. 

In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Madhya-līlā 8.70) and a number of other places as well, we find the following verse, and I quote: "Pure devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be had by pious activity in hundreds and thousands of lives. It can be attained only by paying one price, and that is intense greed to obtain it. If it is available somewhere, one must purchase it—purchase it without delay." That's Vraja.

So today, I would like to deepen our attachment to Vṛndāvana by relating a version of a pastime I spoke on last year. As we've discussed before, many of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are repeated with slight variations throughout Vraja-maṇḍala. The Rāsa dance is a perfect example; there's a special and unique Rāsa dance in each of the six seasons in Vṛndāvana, as well as numerous tax-toll pastimes in various places. We've discussed a few where Kṛṣṇa and His friends stop the Gopīs who are traveling from one place to another with their milk products. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa taxes the Gopīs on Govardhana Hill, sometimes He taxes the Gopīs of Varshana, and sometimes He taxes the Gopīs as they try to cross the Yamunā River. It happens in a lot of places.

In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Madhya-līlā 14.173), we hear from Kavirāja Gosvāmī, quote: "Being a cowherd girl, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī regularly carries milk in a container and often goes to sell the milk on the other side of the Yamunā. To cross the river, she has to pay the boatmen, and the spot where the boatman collects his fares is called Dāna-ghaṭi. Lord Kṛṣṇa stops her from going, telling her, 'First, you have to pay the fee, then you'll be allowed to go at the Yamunā.'" So, a pastime can take place in a variety of ways throughout Vraja-maṇḍala. Variety is the spice of life, and real life is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Last year, we told the famous pastime of Kṛṣṇa from Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī, wherein he describes how once Kṛṣṇa dressed up as a Gopī in order to get into Yāvaṭ. He had to come in disguise to see His beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. But there's another version of the same pastime wherein Kṛṣṇa actually transforms Himself into a Gopī; He doesn't disguise Himself, He transforms into a Gopī to visit Śrī Rādhā in Varshana. One pastime happens at Yāvaṭ; the other happens at Varshana. The Varshana version is described in great detail by Śrī Nārada Muni, another hero, in *Garga-saṁhitā*, Canto 2, in two chapters: Chapter 17, which is entitled *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-saṅgama*, which means the meeting of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and Chapter 18, which is entitled *Śrī-Kṛṣṇa-darśanam*, meaning the sight of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-candra. That's how it's described in *Garga-saṁhitā*. So, it is this version from *Garga-saṁhitā* that I would like to share with all of you today. 

Kṛṣṇa appears as a Gopī—it can also mean, and you'll hear her name later, that He's appearing as a very beautiful demi-goddess. So, one day in Nandagrāma, Kṛṣṇa woke up with a desire to test Rādhārāṇī's love for Him—not to test *if* she loved Him, but to test actually how deep and unalloyed was her love for Him. The exact verse in *Garga-saṁhitā* (Canto 2, Chapter 17, verse number 3) is *rādhikā-vijñāya-tapasī-sewane*—beautiful Sanskrit—and I quote: "Understanding the austerity Rādhā had undergone in her service with Tulasī Devī and wishing to test Rādhā's love, Śrī Kṛṣṇa went to King Vṛṣabhānu's place at Varshana."

So then, in order to enter the palace—it's a big palace out there—and Śrī Rādhā's quarters, Kṛṣṇa changed Himself into a beautiful Gopī. Verse 9 says, and I quote: "O King, transforming Himself into a wonderfully beautiful Gopī decorated with tinkling anklets, bells, rings, jewel bracelets, armlets, pearl necklaces, and a splendid nose pearl, and with beautiful dark braids like a sword, with the glory of sunrise, Kṛṣṇa gazed at King Vṛṣabhānu's beautiful palace." So, He transformed Himself into a Gopī; the whole intention was to test Rādhārāṇī's love. To get into Varshana, no disguise, just a Gopī, and He's standing before the palace of Vṛṣabhānu gazing at it. Now, that was quite a long Sanskrit verse, but the most important line in the Sanskrit I saw means that Kṛṣṇa actually transformed Himself into the form of a female cowherd girl. Of course, this is not surprising for us. In His pastimes of incarnating into this world, Kṛṣṇa assumes so many forms. There's that famous verse in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (*kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam...*), haven't quoted it for a while, quote: "All these incarnations of Godhead are either plenary portions or parts of the plenary portions of the puruṣa-avatāras, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. In every age, He protects the world through His different features when the world is disturbed by the enemies of Indra." And of course, one of those incarnations is the female Mohinī-mūrti. So, it's not surprising Kṛṣṇa can transform Himself into a Gopī.

Now, *Garga-saṁhitā* describes Kṛṣṇa was looking extremely beautiful in this persona as a Gopī, and He had no trouble entering King Vṛṣabhānu's palace—no trouble whatsoever—and He went undetected as a Gopī straight to Śrī Rādhā's quarters. Verse 10 of that chapter of *Garga-saṁhitā* reads: "Magically assuming the appearance of a young girl, Kṛṣṇa gazed at the glory of King Vṛṣabhānu's palace and then entered into the women's quarters." 

Now, as I was studying *Garga-saṁhitā*, I saw there's a beautiful description of the inside of the palace at Varshana. I'd heard a lot about the palace, but I never read a description of what it's like inside. As Kṛṣṇa walked towards Śrī Rādhā's quarters, *Garga-saṁhitā* says, and I quote: "There were many columns and doors splendid as ten million suns, where there were jeweled courtyards in which many jewel-like women glistened. There were beautiful women holding flowers and playing veeṇās, cymbals, mṛdaṅgas, and other instruments, singing of Śrī Rādhā's virtues. In those inner apartments of the palace, there was a large and splendid garden filled with many pomegranates, kunda, mandāra, and nimbu trees, where many bees, Garga says, where many bees mad after honey flew, where a fragrant, cool, gentle breeze blew scattering the pollen of many thousand-petaled lotus flowers, where cuckoo couples—I thought that was nice—where cuckoo couples, peacocks, cranes, and parrots cooed sweetly, and there were thousands of flower couches and thousands of artificial streams." This is the inside of Varshana.

Then the *Garga-saṁhitā* continues: "In their midst, Śrī Rādhā wandered in the palace courtyard, which was anointed with kuṅkuma paste and splendid fine curtains, and as she was standing, she was filled up to her ankles with śirīṣa petals anointed with drops of mālatī honey." As she was standing in this beautiful area, the palace courtyard, up to her ankles, her ankles were surrounded by śirīṣa petals, which were all anointed with mālatī honey. Now, when I read that she was standing up to her ankles with śirīṣa petals, I became curious: what are śirīṣa petals? I just got my mind going. So, I researched and I found out that first of all, these petals come from a tree that we know in the West as the acacia tree, sometimes referred to as the acacia śirīṣa tree, of which the flowers are very, very fragrant. 

And then my curiosity led me on more research to the *Nārada-pañcarātra*. Many devotees know this means the thousand names of Śrī Rādhā, and amongst those thousand names, it took a little while, but amongst those thousand names are four names of Rādhā that contain the śirīṣa flower. Rādhārāṇī is called *Śirīṣa-kusuma-modā*, which means she's as fragrant as a śirīṣa flower; she's called *Śirīṣa-kusumojjvalā*, meaning that she's as splendid as a śirīṣa flower; she's called *Śirīṣa-mṛdu-sādṛśī*, meaning that she's as glorious as a śirīṣa flower; and *Śirīṣa-kusumākṛti*, she's as beautiful as a śirīṣa flower. 

And then I found a most beautiful verse by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his *Śrī Hari-bhakti-kalpa-latikā* (Chapter 9, Text 8), when he compares Kṛṣṇa's feet to a śirīṣa flower. He writes, and I quote: "Let me take shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Hari, which are as precious as the most valuable jewels, as soft as fresh butter and śirīṣa flowers, and which are marked with the signs of the flag, lotus, barleycorn, a rod for controlling elephants, and many other similar markings." 

So anyway, when Kṛṣṇa manifested as a beautiful Gopī and entered into Śrī Rādhā's quarters, Rādhārāṇī immediately became attracted to her. Understanding this new girl was obviously someone very special, Śrī Rādhā embraced her unexpected guest and then placed her on a golden throne, and then she worshipped her with arghya and other auspicious substances. Then our beloved Śrī Rādhā, Vṛndāvaneśvarī, she said, "O most beautiful friend, welcome. Please tell me your name. I feel very fortunate that you have come today. Your glistening splendor, your sidelong glance, your words, your pleasing smile, and your very graceful emotions are as pleasing as Lord Nārāyaṇa, the husband of the Goddess of Fortune." She continued, "You are appearing to me as more dear than myself. Your form is like that of Vraja's prince who captured my heart long ago. It's mysterious, but I am as happy to be with you as I am with Him, Vraja's prince."

So at that point, Kṛṣṇa replied, "Dearest Śrī Rādhā, my name is Gopa-devatā." Kṛṣṇa was replying, but remember He's a Gopī. "Dearest Śrī Rādhā, my name is Gopa-devatā. I live in Gokula, just north of Nanda's palace in Nandagrāma. From Lalitā's mouth, I heard of the sweetness of your beauty and your virtues. Thus, out of curiosity, I have come to see you. Even in the city of Indra-dev in Svargaloka, no one has ever seen or heard of anyone like you." Now, what Kṛṣṇa as a Gopī is saying to Rādhā is actually very true. In Indra's heavenly abode, Svargaloka, there are many beautiful women—in particular, we hear of Rambhā, Tilottamā—these are the most beautiful women in Svargaloka, but their combined beauty doesn't equal even a fraction of Śrī Rādhā's beauty. How do we know? Because their beauty is material; they're in the material world. Of course, they have subtle material bodies, but their beauty fades in time, as everything does in this world, whereas Śrī Rādhā's beauty, her form, is totally spiritual, *sac-cid-ānanda*. Her form is completely spiritual; therefore, she's the most beautiful. Therefore, the beauty of the heavenly apsarās can never compare with that of Śrī Rādhā. 

And Śrīla Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī, he writes in *Śrī Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, one of our favorites, often quoted, 11th verse, 47, he writes, quote: "If Śrī Vṛndāvana mercifully allows me to see its queen, Śrī Rādhā, then I will consider the association of celestial women and precious jewels as poison, liberation as disgusting as spit, and the attainment of Vaikuṇṭha even as a source of anxiety. Moreover, by her darśana, I will relish the devotion of that cowherd girl of Vṛndāvana."

So, after identifying herself and revealing where she lives, Gopa-devatā excused herself, saying to Śrī Rādhā that she would return the next day. Now, as Gopa-devatā left, *Garga-saṁhitā* describes that Rādhārāṇī just burst into crying. At the same time, the hairs on her body became erect, her voice faltered, and she fell to the ground like a banyan tree struck by the wind. So, once out of sight, Kṛṣṇa assumed His original form as a cowherd boy—people may be surprised, the original form of the Lord is a cowherd boy—and He made His way back to Nandagrāma. But the next morning, He again assumed the form of the Gopī Gopa-devatā, and He returned to Varshana. And it's a very beautiful description in *Garga-saṁhitā* how Śrī Rādhā and her new Gopī friend Gopa-devatā just relished each other's association—their newfound friendship, talking together, laughing together, walking in the gardens together. They spent quite some time together until Kṛṣṇa decided it was time to test Śrī Rādhā's love for Him—the whole purpose of the pastime. 

And just how He tested her is very interesting, it's fascinating. He began by saying, quote: "Dearest Rādhā, I want to share something with you." So, she replied, "Yes, my dear Gopa-devatā, please do so." Gopa-devatā began: "You know, just the other day, I was walking to the market with my milk products on the narrow pathways of Govardhana Hill when suddenly, you know, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa, He stopped me—as He has stopped you many times—carrying a flute and holding a stick in His hand. He grabbed my hand, and while laughing, He said, 'You cannot go any further, you have to pay a toll tax.' And when I replied, 'Never,' He took my yogurt pot and broke it, and after breaking the pot, He grabbed my veil and ran off towards Nandīśvara Hill." Ran off towards Nandīśvara Hill. You can just envision Kṛṣṇa running away with her veil. 

So, Kṛṣṇa as the Gopī, He continued, "Śrī Rādhā, I know you're attached to Him, but this frivolous, simple, naughty cowherd boy, He has no good character. My dear saintly girl, don't be in illusion, give up your love for Kṛṣṇa." She's saying that to Rādhārāṇī—give up your love for this Kṛṣṇa, "He's a scoundrel, He's a rascal, He's a thief, He's cheating on you." Then *Garga-saṁhitā* says: "Surprised to hear these harsh and hateful words, King Vṛṣabhānu's daughter, Rādhā, smiled and eloquently spoke to Gopa-devatā." Now, the word *vismitā* in that verse indicates that Śrī Rādhā was extremely surprised, or shocked you could say, to hear such inimical words from Gopa-devatā, and the word *sarasvatī* in that verse indicates that Rādhā mentally worshiped Sarasvatī, the Goddess of Learning, for blessings in presenting her counter-arguments. And here they are. 

Śrī Rādhā replied: "My dear Gopa-devatā, why do you criticize Kṛṣṇa, who brings auspiciousness to His devotees, and His lotus feet are sought after by Dattātreya, Śukadeva, Kapila, Śuri, and Aṅgirā? Yes, He's a cowherd boy, but the cowherd boys protect our cows, they chant the cows' names, they unite the cows' beautiful faces. There's no better birth on this earth planet than that of a cowherd man here in Vraja. And my Kṛṣṇa, He's the protector of the Svargalokas, the Siddhas, the Munis, the Yakṣas, and the Muras. He's the master of all humans, Kinnaras, and Nāgas. Day and night, glorious great souls devoutly bow down to His lotus feet and make offerings to Him. My newfound friend, following His devotees here and there, Kṛṣṇa purifies the worlds. He loudly declares His love for His devotees. To those who worship Him, Kṛṣṇa gives liberation, but He does not easily give pure devotional service." Unquote. Those were her counter-arguments—actually, there were many more, there were pages and pages—but just to give you an idea how Rādhā was defending her beloved. 

So then, Śrī Rādhā closed her eyes and just meditated on her beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa in the form of the Gopī, seeing His beloved perspiring and full of longing for Him, her face filled with tears that were just pouring down her cheeks, He became pleased with her and understood that she had passed His test of love—His test of love in which she proved that her love for Him never wavered. So then, He suddenly manifested His original form as a cowherd boy, and *Garga-saṁhitā* describes, in a voice as deep as thunder, He said: "O girl whose face is like the moon, O queen of all beautiful girls in Vraja, O girl with all the virtues of youth, open your eyes! Look, called by your sweet words, I have come." 

We're coming close to the end of the lecture, but I don't want it to end. "O called by your sweet words," Kṛṣṇa said to Rādhā, "I've come. When will you come to us?" So, opening her eyes, Śrī Rādhā smiled, and she was overjoyed to see the love of her life sitting beside her, and so also were all her friends and maidservants, for once again she had proven her allegiance to Kṛṣṇa, born from her—how would you say—unique love for Him. She'd shown her *mahābhāva*, her unalloyed, selfless love for Kṛṣṇa—a love, you could say, unmatched by any other living entity in either the material or spiritual worlds. All glories to Vṛndāvana's queen, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī! 

Oh, thank you. Let us conclude today by the following prayers of Śrīla Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī again. We're mining—we're mining not gold or silver or jewels, but we're mining his *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*. Śataka 9—we'll close with his words, most appropriate. He writes: "When will I eternally reside in Vṛndāvana while dancing, laughing, and singing, while repeatedly displaying the symptoms of ecstatic love such as perspiration and becoming stunned, while shedding tears of love or meditating on my dear Lord Kṛṣṇa, the lover of Śrī Rādhā, and while being maddened by the mellows of ecstasy? When will my mind be intoxicated by merging into the ocean of Śrī Rādhā's loving nectarean pastimes? When will I give up everything, including liberation, like straw in the street and spend my life in the abode of Vṛndāvana, while wandering within her own forest? When will Śrī Rādhā, whose reddish lotus feet are decorated with sweetly tinkling ankle bells and beautified by the effulgence from her jewel-studded anklets, capture my heart?" I'm going to repeat the last one: "While wandering within her own forest, when will Śrī Rādhā, whose reddish lotus feet are decorated with sweetly tinkling ankle bells and beautified by the effulgence from her jewel-studded anklets, capture my heart?"

Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda and Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī, and thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda, for gradually revealing to us the glories of what is most dear to you: your beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We thank you so much, and we will be continuing, God willing, in a couple of days. We'll be back with more jewels that we have mined from the ocean, the *bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, the ocean of devotion to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. All glories to Prabhupāda! Thank you. *Śrī Śrī Gauṛa-Nitāi ki jaya!* 

See you soon. Thank you.""