"*00251*.*
"My dear Prabhus, we are most fortunate today, on the second day of our Kartik Parikrama 2023, to come to the sacred village of Campakalatā, which is actually the home of Campakalatā, one of the eight Aṣṭa-sakhīs, or the personal girlfriends of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Today we will be hearing about Campakalatā-sakhī in Śabda-brahma, or transcendental sound, but we are fortunate that in our International Society for Krishna Consciousness in Māyāpura, our world headquarters, there is Rādhā-Mādhava with the eight sakhīs there. So, you can go to Māyāpura and see her in her beautiful form. Probably many of you have memorized the names of the eight sakhīs because they are so prominent in our movement. Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā, Indulekhā, Raṅgadevī, Tuṅgavidyā, Campakalatā, and Sudevī—just to say those names, you can feel millions of lives of sinful reactions just flowing away from your heart just to hear those sounds.

Now, each of these prominent sakhīs, they each have their own village around the hill of Varṣāṇā, where Rādhārāṇī is living, which is very near to here. They are not very often in their villages because they are up at Varṣāṇā or around Vṛndāvana assisting Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in her pastimes. One of Rādhārāṇī's names is Ananya; it means that she is never separated from Kṛṣṇa. In the same way, these sakhīs—a little older, not older, but young girls but older than the mañjarīs—they are very attached to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, so they are also ananya; they are never separated from her. Now, it is interesting that each of these girls, these sakhīs, they also have a little group that helps them in their service to Rādhārāṇī. They are called mañjarīs. There is Rādhā, then there are aṣṭa-sakhīs, and then there are mañjarīs. They are much younger, but the ācāryas say because of their very young age, they get to do more confidential service. One time Prabhupāda said that, generally speaking, those who are members of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, they are aspiring to be mañjarīs in the spiritual world—servant of the servant of the servant, like that. So each of these sakhīs has eight girls who help them, just like we all know very well that Lalitā-devī, the chief of the sakhīs, or Viśākhā—but Lalitā-devī, her immediate assistant is Rūpa-mañjarī.

By some causeless mercy, Rūpa-mañjarī appears in this world as Rūpa Gosvāmī. But last night I did a lot of research, and I found out who are the eight assistants of Campakalatā—who are the little girls that helped Campakalatā in her service. I was wondering; I never knew it before. So, would you like to hear the names of those mañjarīs? I won't say wait till tomorrow because I just started my lecture. Padma-nayanā—you can repeat after me: Padma-nayanā, Pātrā, Kṛṣṇā, Navanīta-priyā (that's a nice name for a girl, Navanīta-priyā), Pradīpa, Sukarṇā (we are doing initiation this Kartik; if there are eight girls, we can all get these names), Sukarṇā, and number seven, Raṅga-yuktā. Venī, and Su-śyāmā. Oh, almost makes me want to be a girl! So you don't have to repeat that one. So, by the mercy of our ācāryas, we know many of the wonderful details and characteristics of Campakalatā, and what better place to discuss them than right here in her village?

So they say that she is two years younger than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. You can just close your eyes and see this in your mind's eye: her complexion is like a cluster of yellow golden campaka flowers. She dresses in the clothes the color of a cātaka bird—maybe we can ask Candra what the color of a cātaka bird is, I don't know if that's true, he just got it out of it. She is a master at cooking in all six flavors of food as described, different foods so that generally falls in the category of six different flavors. She is a master in cooking, but she is most expert—this is her unique quality—she is most expert in making sweet candy. She makes sweet candy for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and because of that very special talent, her girlfriends have, how would you say, a transcendental nickname for her. Like you know, different devotees, sometimes their names are long, so devotees they shorten the name, some say "Cūr..." where are you, Cāt...? A nickname, "Niṣṭhā." The gopīs, this is the spiritual world and they have—I just learned they have nicknames—so they have a nickname for her, they call her Niṣṭhā. Niṣṭhā means that she has sweet hands to make the candy.

Niṣṭhā also serves the Divine Couple by making necklaces for them. Cāmara-whisk—she is also good with the cāmara-whisk, excellent. Now, I was thinking that the first time someone may hear about these services, these savours in the spiritual world—you know, making candy and cooking and doing a cāmara or making candana—you may think these are really simple. You might think, "When I get back to the spiritual world, I'm just going to be fanning, I'm just going to be making necklaces, I'll get bored. It's making sandal paste all day, fan." But there is a deeper understanding, as we've heard many times in Kṛṣṇa consciousness: it's not what you do, but it's the consciousness in which you do it. The most important element in our service is bhakti, or love, or devotion. It's a very simple verse in the Bhagavad-gītā—somebody might miss it, it's so simple—but Kṛṣṇa says, "Offer me with love a fruit, a flower, or just a leaf; if you offer it with devotion, even though it's very seemingly insignificant, if the prema is there, the love is there, I accept it."

So even if you offer the simple services that we're describing but you're doing them with bhakti, Kṛṣṇa will be pleased with that service. And if Kṛṣṇa is pleased with your service, you yourself will be completely happy in your heart. And when we reach that stage of bhakti, or devotion, it's impossible to forget Kṛṣṇa; you'll remember him all the time. Now, that mood, that love of always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, was very nicely expressed by Alfred Lord Tennyson. He is, when I was young, one of my favorite poets, and he captured that mood of love and always thinking of Kṛṣṇa in one of his poems. It goes like this: "If I had a flower for every time I thought of you, I could walk in my garden forever." He wrote it in a mundane way, but we can think of it in the same way, in a spiritual way—real love, thinking of Kṛṣṇa. We want to think of Kṛṣṇa at every moment. So he writes, "If I had a flower for every time I thought of you, I could walk in my garden forever." Have so many flowers. That should be your next tattoo, we'll find some space! "If I had a flower for every time I thought of you, so many flowers, I could walk in a garden forever."

So Campakalatā, she is also the leader for the gopīs who take care of the trees, the creepers, the flowers, and the bushes all over Vṛndāvana. You can see, here is a nice forested area here, see the trees, look behind there, many trees, flowers, and bushes; that's her service. She also knows where every kind of fruit, flower, and root can be found in the Vṛndāvana forest. So these are some of her simple services, which are done in amala, your pure devotion. So now that we've been introduced to this divine personality, we can share with you one very nectarian pastime of Campakalatā. I came across a few, but I chose this one because, well, it's very sweet and there's lots of twists and turns. You know the path back home to Vraja is crooked, there's so many things happening, so many different plots.

As we know, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she goes to Sūrya-kuṇḍa to worship the sun-god. So that time was coming for Sūrya-pūjā, worshiping the sun-god. So the Aṣṭa-sakhīs were sitting with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and she turned to Campakalatā and she said, "Could you please go down to the Yamunā River to get me some water for the pūjā?" So Campakalatā got a beautiful pot, she put it on her head without holding it, and she walked down to the Yamunā River to get the water for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Lo and behold, as she got down close to the banks of the Yamunā River, she saw that Kṛṣṇa was playing there with his intimate friend Madhumaṅgala. So she stopped. She thought, "I want to hear what they're talking about." So she hid behind a kadamba tree, about where that pillar is, so she could hear them talking. She had her water pot; she's hiding, she's listening to what Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala are saying. I'd also like to hear what Kṛṣṇa—I do, I know—so I'll tell you.

So Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear Madhu, look how pleasant the weather is today. Let us play some games. You give me your ball and we'll play catch with it." But Madhumaṅgala got a frown on his face. He said, "Kṛṣṇa, I will not give you my ball because I'm afraid of losing it. I know your tricky ways very well." Rūpa Gosvāmī sometimes refers to Madhumaṅgala as vak-vak; vak means one who is always eating, is making funny jokes, and knows the secrets of his hero. This is vak-vak; so of course Madhumaṅgala's hero is Kṛṣṇa, so he knows Kṛṣṇa can be secretive, he can be a little tricky. So Madhumaṅgala said, "The other day, Kṛṣṇa, I saw you throw Śrīmatī's ball into the Yamunā, and it was swept away by the river's current. My ball is very rare, I don't want to lose it. I'm not going to give you my ball, we're not going to play with my ball." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Your ball is so special, like what did—where did you get it?" So Viṣū—you know he's always telling a little jokes—he replied in a sarcastically joking way where he got his ball. Kind of joking, he said, "Kṛṣṇa, my ball comes from my uncle's sister's brother's auntie's grandmother's elder son-in-law's ancestral village, that's where it comes from, hahaha." So Kṛṣṇa laughed, he said, "Okay, Madhu, you're so funny, but I promise you I will not throw your ball in the Yamunā." So Madhu said, "Now you're making promises, but I know, Kṛṣṇa, your promises have no meaning." Then Kṛṣṇa said with a smile, "Madhu, if I do happen to throw your ball in the Yamunā, then I will give you my own ball which is at my home." So Madhumaṅgala, he finally relented. He said, "Kṛṣṇa, you're so sweet, no one can say no to you." True, no one can say no to you.

So Kṛṣṇa said, "Let us play now." Remember, Campakalatā is right behind the tree there listening to all this, like, "Wow." So Madhu said, "Okay, we can play, but there's going to be some rules to this game." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Well, what are the rules to playing ball?" So Madhu said, "The rules are, if you fail to catch the ball when I throw it, you will become my play-horse and I will ride around on you as you crawl around on all fours, on your knees. If you drop the ball, I'm gonna play horse, I'll be on your back, you have to take me all around. And if I lose, you know, I'll carry you around." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Okay, let's play." Throwing the ball—you know, if you ever played ball, sometimes you drop it, right? Playing badminton, you miss. So Kṛṣṇa dropped the ball, and he lost the game, and he had to crawl around the dusted Vṛndāvana on all fours with Madhumaṅgala on his back: "Whoa, horsey, whoa!"

But we shouldn't just see it as some humorous pastime; there's a very, very deep meaning to that—that the Lord becomes subservient to the love of his devotees. This is, if you look at any dictionary, you look up God, the definition would be—everyone agrees, every religion—the Supreme Controller, he controls everything, material and spiritual. But the nature of love is that you can even control someone who is superior to you. Prabhupāda used to tell the story—it was from England, interestingly enough—but there was one famous high court judge, and one of his secretaries had an appointment with him, so he knocked on the door, but there was no answer. So he walked into the office, and there's the high court judge who everyone bows down to, or when he comes in, all stand when he comes in the courtroom, the judge—everyone stands up, the judge. But as the secretary walked in, the judge wasn't sitting regally behind his desk, he was playing horsey with his grandson. He was going around on all fours around the office, you know, "Nay, nay!" with his grandson, whipping his backside, "Go, horsey, go!" Why? Love.

So that's true in the spiritual world—not so much in Vaikuṇṭha, the official kingdom of God, with "sir, yes sir," which is also very nice—but this one planet, Vṛndāvana, their love reigns supreme, where the Supreme Controller takes pleasure, not just doing it out of duty—grandpa was doing that—he was enjoying it, being the horsey for his grandson. Kṛṣṇa takes pleasure in being controlled by the love of his devotees as their friend, as his child, as lover. This is Vraja, this is the message which the most recent incarnation of God, the most merciful incarnation of God, Lord Caitanya, brought to the world. We're actually fortunate to be born in Kali-yuga to hear that message. It wasn't known for a long time. In fact, when the gopīs from Vṛndāvana saw that Kṛṣṇa was, you know, on all fours going around with Madhumaṅgala on his back, they were amazed. They were thinking, "The Lord of the 14 worlds has become a play-horse for his devotee, Madhumaṅgala, what's going on?" But we know by the grace of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrīla Prabhupāda, we know these things, we are blessed.

So Campakalatā, of course, she was watching, and she understands because the gopīs control Kṛṣṇa with their love. Rādhā doesn't do what Kṛṣṇa says; Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhā says, because she is the topmost lover of Kṛṣṇa. So she knew what was going on, but she thought, "Oh, I have to get back to my service, Rādhārāṇī asked me to get a pot of water for the Sūrya-pūjā," she thought, "I have to get going now." But she decided to have a little fun. You know, you always read how the cowherd boys are teasing the cowherd girls, and the cowherd girls are teasing the cowherd boys; on a transcendental level, it's very nectarian. So before I go down to the river, I'm gonna tease Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala. So you just imagine Kṛṣṇa's, you know, on the ground carrying Madhumaṅgala, "Oh, horsey, ho, ho!" And so she calls out from behind the tree, "Oh, Madana-mohana! Oh, Madana-mohana, please help me!" So Kṛṣṇa stopped, he looks up, and he says to Madhumaṅgala, "Uh, we have to stop, I think someone's calling me." So it takes a little twist here, the story. Madhumaṅgala said, "No, someone's calling me. You're not Madana-mohana. Madana-mohana means one who attracts everyone's hearts, and I'm that Madana-mohana because I attract everyone's hearts with my funny jokes." So, you know, Campakalatā scratches her head, "Hmm, let's see, okay." She calls out, "Oh, Nanda-nandana, please help me!" So Kṛṣṇa looks up again, he said, "You see, Madhu, she's calling me, not you, because I'm the son of Nanda, not you."

So Madhu became a little nervous, a little scared, like who's calling out? Then he said, "Yes, my friend, we have to be careful, because I've heard there's many ghosts living on the banks of the Yamunā, and they may be trying to trick you. So let's go find that person. Let me go first because I'm an intelligent brāhmaṇa, I—you're just a Vaisya—I can go and find who this person is." So by this time, Campakalatā thought, you know, the teasing was over, and she was actually down at the river getting the water, and it was a heavy pot, trying to put it up on her head. So then she heard them coming. She turned around and she said, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa, you're here. Please help me lift this heavy water pot onto my head for the service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā." So Kṛṣṇa, you know, kind of teased her. He said, "I will not help you, Campakalatā. I am the son of Mahārāja Nanda. My mother does not allow me to lift heavy water pots of the servants of other kings. My mother does not allow me to lift water pots of servants of other kings. So, no." So Campakalatā said, "Kṛṣṇa, you're so proud!"

So then she turned to Madhumaṅgala. She said, "Lālā," because you know, Lālā means a little boy, "Lālā, can you help me?" Madhumaṅgala didn't like that; he's a brāhmaṇa boy, "I'm not a Lālā, don't call me Lālā! You want to know what is my name?" Campakalatā couldn't, she was holding her mouth so she didn't laugh in front of them, she yeah, "Okay, what's your name?" Madhumaṅgala said, "My name is Śrī, Śrī 108, His Highness, Lord of the demigods, master of all arts, the best singer of all Vedic mantras, knower of all Vedic meters and hymns, the only son of Sāndīpani Muni, and the crown jewel of all brāhmaṇas and knowers of the Vedas. So don't call me Lālā." So Campakalatā, she was kind of like offended by all this, and like, "You guys aren't going to help me put the water on, you're going to criticize me? I'm going to tell Rādhārāṇī!" Her exact words were, "Silly Madhu, you're just a boy, just beginning your studies in the scriptures you claim to know. I will go now and tell Vṛndāvana's queen, Śrī Rādhā, of how you and Kṛṣṇa are so disrespectful to us gopīs. You better watch out!" So she stormed off to meet Śrī Rādhā. They went to Sūrya-kuṇḍa, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī did her pūjā. And after that, Rādhārāṇī and Campakalatā, they were walking back to Varṣāṇā. As they were walking, Campakalatā, you know, thought that was the proper time to tell Śrī Rādhā what had happened at the river. She said, "Kṛṣṇa and Madhu, strong young boys, heavy water pot, it's your service, they refused to help me!" Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī became very angry. "Oh, those cowherd boys! We know those cowherd boys!"

So after hearing this story, Rādhārāṇī, she assembled all the sakhīs and all their teams—remember, they each have eight servants—all together, and she made a proclamation. She's the queen of Vṛndāvana, she's making a proclamation: "From this day forth, I shall never see Kṛṣṇa again. No more rendezvous, no more meetings." Oh, they don't like that, "hī" finished now. News spreads quickly, you know that. That news so the news spread very quickly. And when Kṛṣṇa heard that, because of this devious behavior at the ghāṭa of the Yamunā, Rādhārāṇī refused to see him, he was in great distress. That's the Lord of his life; what's he going to do without Rādhā's love? He lives on love, we all live on love. So he decided to disguise himself to come to see Śrī Rādhā. This is a repeating theme in Vraja-līlā, that Kṛṣṇa, he makes up different disguises so that he can get in there and apologize to her anger, pacify her mind, her anger.

Now, how do you get into that group of gopīs at, you know, Varṣāṇā? If you're a cowherd boy, there's probably a sign, "No boys allowed." Like when I was young, we had a treehouse next to my property in the forest, me and my friends put a big sign, "No girls allowed." So how do the cowherd boys go, and what to speak of someone who's been disqualified—"I'll never see him again"? How's Kṛṣṇa going to get there? The Brahman effulgence is emanating from his body, he's dark blue like a monsoon cloud, he has a peacock feather, here he comes. No, the gopīs are thinking very strongly like that, "He's offended our Rādhā." It's a strong emotion, it's not play, it's not a comic; these are real emotions, these are the real emotions, not the perverted reflection of those emotions in this world. "Oh Kṛṣṇa, he assembled all his boyfriends and he said, 'Boys, I've got to see a special personality, you know, I want you to dress me up as a gopī.'" And the boys went, "What, Kṛṣṇa? What? No, please, you have to dress me up as a gopī." Some of the boys fainted, and the rest of the boys said, "We're going to go play with the cows, we're out of here." So we know that Kṛṣṇa, he's the master of all mystic powers, so somehow or other he dressed himself up to be a very attractive young girl. I mean, if he can expand himself as Mohinī-mūrti and bewilder even Lord Śiva, certainly he can dress up as a young gopī to go to Varṣāṇā to apologize to Rādhā. It takes a little bit of a twist here; he's not going to apologize, it's just—you'll see what happens. I'll tell you tomorrow. No, I'm not going to do this every class, but it just sometimes keep you awake.

So this was his plan. He dressed himself up, and he appeared at the gates of Varṣāṇā to set up a shop to sell bangles. Boys, you know, they maybe have a cover or something. You look at all these girls, every single woman here has bangles. Bangles never go out of fashion! Sometimes I've seen the bangles up to here, "Haribol!" Oh, this young gopī has solid gold bangles on her right arm. Turn around, solid gold for Kṛṣṇa—not really solid gold, but maybe one day! So he, how do you say, he—Kṛṣṇa's there at the gates with this beautiful array of bangles, which you cannot even imagine. In your wildest imagination, you couldn't imagine how beautiful these bangles were.

So at that point, one point during the day, who happened to walk by? Campakalatā arranges all the sakhīs, she's walking by, and she noticed the bangle-selling gopī. If, and she's looking at her, him, she's thinking, "I have never, never seen such a beautiful young girl. There's something special about her." She said, "My dear girl, you must be new in this area. I've never seen you before, like, who are you?" So Kṛṣṇa, he, by his mystic power, he spoke in a feminine voice, "Oh my dear friend, I am from a very poor family, and I have two sons who are waiting for me to return with some money. Please take pity on me. I sell the most beautiful bangles in all different colors, inlaid with beautiful stones, like sapphires and rubies and diamonds and emeralds, not brass." So Campakalatā, she replied, "Oh dear bangle-seller, you are so beautiful, it's difficult to take my eyes off you. Your beauty is stealing my glances and your lustrous body is melting my heart." We're all searching for Kṛṣṇa; this is what we do, this is our main purpose in life, searching for Kṛṣṇa, calling out to Kṛṣṇa, "Come to me, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." I'm drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence; oh, you who give shelter to the shelterless, please just this one time extend your hand to save me.

So if you keep on the straight and narrow path of devotional service, one day you'll come face to face with Kṛṣṇa. What will happen? It's difficult to take my eyes off of you. Your beauty is stealing my glances. Your lustrous body is melting my heart. Get ready, what in the world compares to that darśana? Nothing. So run and find Kṛṣṇa. So then Campakalatā said, "Don't worry, I'm going to help you sell your bangles. Our queen, queen of compassion"—she referred to Rādhārāṇī as our queen of compassion—Campakalatā said, "Rādhārāṇī is the tenderhearted nature of Kṛṣṇa, the expansion of Kṛṣṇa, she's full of compassion. Kṛṣṇa can be hard like a thunderbolt; Śrī Rādhā, his love, soft like a rose. Don't worry, poor gopī, our queen of compassion will buy all of your bangles, and she will give you much more than your bangles cost. She is, after all, the daughter of King Vṛbhānu." She said, "Would you mind, you know, leaving your little stand here and in front of the palace? Bring a few bangles, would you mind coming in the palace?" So the bangle-seller said, "I think it's okay, I—yes, you, I can come for a few minutes." Yes, what he wanted to say is, "Yeah, it would be too much," the devotion is a sign of thief. So he said, "Yeah, I can come. Okay, this is the real love; everything else is perverted love." So Campakalatā took the hand of this bangle-seller, Kṛṣṇa, and led him into Rādhārāṇī's quarters. And when they came into Rādhārāṇī's quarters, it's described that she sat as effulgent as the sun, surrounded by many moons of her maidservants. And one by one, all the gopīs came forward to see the dazzling bangles. You know how girls are, just immediately they came, "Oh, look at that one, that's—when I wear that, Kṛṣṇa will be pleased, Rādhā will be pleased," they're thinking like that, not for themselves; everything's for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa, it's all about you, it's not about me.

So after some time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī called the bangle-seller over to show the bangles to her. But mesmerized by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's countenance, her beauty, in many ways, that the bangle-seller started, you know, shaking, kind of in an ecstasy, as he—the closer the bangle-seller came to Rādhā, he's shaking. And Lalitā says, "It's okay, calm down, calm down." He couldn't calm down, no. So as the bangle-seller came closer, Rādhā put out her hand, she said, "Um, dear one, you may place one of your bangles on my wrist, please. I'd like to see this one, how it looks for Kṛṣṇa." But when Kṛṣṇa, disguised so wonderfully as the bangle-seller, took the hand of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to put the bangle on it, he trembled so much and he fell down unconscious. Everyone's going, "What's going on? The bangle-seller came to sell bangles and now she's lying on the ground, totally unconscious." So all the gopīs came, "Oh, the poor girl! We have to revive her!" And Campakalatā, "Yeah, yeah, let's come on." But suddenly Campakalatā looks closely, and she sees a flute tucked inside the young bangle-seller's skirt, 'cause he never leaves his flute anywhere—it's a flute!

Aha! I remember, Kṛṣṇa had, you know, quote-unquote, offended Campakalatā, so say, "Whoa!" She stood up, she called out loudly, "This is not a gopī selling bangles! This is Nanda Mahārāja's clever son! My dear girls, he has once again tricked us with a disguise and made his way into Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's quarters, detected by all of us! He's so clever!" So the ācāryas say, of course, all the gopīs expressed their dissatisfaction with Kṛṣṇa's tricks, but internally in their hearts they were overjoyed, because the whole purpose of their lives as gopīs is to unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, despite so many obstacles placed before them. That's, for divine, by social custom, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are separated, but the whole purpose—the heartbeat, boom-boom-boom-boom—of the gopīs is to unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and there's many obstacles. So when they're finally together, the gopīs are in ecstasy. Some—there's, and there's some, but they both work to increase the bhāva-bhakti of all the residents of Vṛndāvana, that love is ad infinitum, increasing, it never reaches its culmination; it's always increasing eternally, not like the love here, it comes and it goes. So when Campakalatā revealed who it was, like, "Oh, oh, that rascal!" They're all saying, "He got back in again," but internally it's like this, you know, this turbulent emotion of different emotions in their heart, yes, but he's here, and she's here, this the turbulent rosary, like sometimes the ocean becomes full of waves, so this is the heart of a pure devotee, sometimes there, turbulence of emotions is there. He—that's what we're hankering for, not the emotion that comes from football and going to the disco and the bar, like. So it's so cute, they like this; all of a sudden, in unison, they burst out with cries of, "Well done, Kṛṣṇa, bravo!" And as Kṛṣṇa embraced Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, happily, laughed, because of her shyness, it's described, she closed her eyes, and then all the gopīs came forward to perform āratika for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And at the end of the ceremony, Campakalatā came forward, she said, "I have another announcement to make, dear girls: may Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa always be united with the ropes of each other's beauty."

And, we're going to wait for the rāsa, because I have one more thing to tell you. In a few minutes, we're going to walk to the samādhi of Vajranābha. Vajranābha played a very important part of the history of Vṛndāvana; he was the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, and after Kṛṣṇa finished his pastimes on this planet, went back to Goloka, the residents of Vṛndāvana were devastated in separation from him. So to mitigate their suffering, he established deities which are non-different from Kṛṣṇa all over Vṛndāvana, so the Vrajavāsīs could go daily and see the beautiful form of their Lord. Last night I found a beautiful verse, I just came across it somehow. The Garga-saṃhitā says this is really interesting, especially for scholars: then Vajranābha installed deities of Viṣṇu and Kṛṣṇa in Mathurā, in Vṛndāvana, in Harideva at Govardhana, in Govinda, and Baladeva—one day away from Gokula. In this way, Vajranābha installed six deities of Lord Hari. And I was reading he also established different Śiva-liṅgas, or deities of Mahādeva, Śiva, in various places of Vṛndāvana for protection of Vṛndāvana. For example, he established Gopīśvara in Vṛndāvana—Prabhupāda, you can go and see Madana-mohana mandira and Keśī-ghāṭa Mahādeva at—But I read on, and I read that our ācāryas say he also established the worship of Nṛsiṃha in various forests in Vṛndāvana, in particular, three forests he established mūrttis of—but later, due to the Mughal, Muslim invasions, only a few remain. But listen to this: one of those Nṛsiṃhas established by Vajranābha is in Kāman, and he's called Tri-nayana Nṛsiṃha. It means he can see past, present, and future—the deity Nṛsiṃha, Tri-kāla Nṛsiṃha, he can see the past, the present, and future. Therefore, he has three eyes: past, the present, and third eye here in—Śiva, you can see the future.

But there's another deeper meaning to this, being able to see the past, present, and the future—quite esoteric. Another version of that Tri-kāla Nṛsiṃha's third eye represents destruction, and the other two eyes represent mercy and patience. Instead of past, present, and future, it's mercy, patience, and destruction. This eye, the third eye, destruction—that's what this means. And it goes on to say about this one deity at Kāmyavana that if ever there's a major and sustained attack on Kṛṣṇa's earthly devotees, this third eye of Tri-nayana Nṛsiṃha of Kāman will open and cause the destruction of all the asuras on the planet, and there will be a revival of Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. Sometimes it comes to that. And in that theme, one time Śrīla Prabhupāda said to my God-brother Gurudāsa in 1971 in London, he said, "One day scholars will note how the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement saved the world in its darkest hour."

So let us conclude here in this beautiful village of Campakalatā with a verse by Rūpa Gosvāmī. It's actually the opening verse to his illustrious Vidagdha-mādhava—dug them out of, this is the last thing I'm going to say, so all ears: "May the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa reduce the miseries existing in the material world and nullify all unwanted desires, for the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are like śrīkhanda, a blend of yogurt and sugar candy; they overpower the pride of even the nectar produced on the moon, for they distribute the sweet fragrance of the concentrated loving affairs of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs." Thank you, but let's finish on a high note. Jaya Jaya Śrī-Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dhāma. Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""