The greatest story, dear Gurudev, you once told us that you would make a special arrangement with Krishna and the residents of Vṛndāvana so that there could be a horn section in the spiritual world.

But you said that we would first have to play a billion notes and would have to travel with you for the next ten thousand years before you would allow us to leave your side. As we look forward to the future, we reflect upon the amazing journey we have shared together.

The story of the Injured Swami horn section may have started in previous lives, but it picked up again in the year of 2008. Back when Ethan's hair was short and my hair was long, we were both budding jazz musicians studying at the University of Cape Town, and we discovered a mutual interest in spirituality.

We became friends, and as the years went by, our relationship continued to grow, along with Steve's spiritual path and my afro. By the kind invitation of Raj Krishna Prabhu, Steve and I were soon playing our instruments on the streets of the Durban beachfront for the Ratha Yatra festival of 2012.

Then, on that fateful Friday, a Good Friday, our lives would change forever. It was at that moment that we were captured, captured by the traveling monk, Śrīla Gurudev. You took this particular photo of us, and it was the first impression Ethan and I had of you, breaking through the crowd and leaning in with your camera to capture us.

Up until this point, I had only heard of this great adventurous swami, this Indiana Jones of our Krishna consciousness movement.

I didn't know who Injured No Swami was. I didn't even know what a swami was. After our stage performance, a devotee came with an urgent message: "Injured No Mirage wants to see you." And so we were summoned. You invited us for lunch at Govinda's. Śrīla Gurudev sat us down, fed us decadent prasadam, and asked us about our lives.

You told us about your preaching project on the Baltic Sea coast and that you were looking for musicians to join. And by dessert, apple crumble and ice cream, by the way, we found out that we would be going to Poland.

So in June of 2012, we packed our suitcases, boarded a plane, and were bound for the famous Polish tour. All the while, I was getting a crash course in Vaisnava culture from Steve. Sorry, Bhakta Steve. Bhakta Steve Prabhu, we should remember that Ethan was still new to all of this.

He had never stayed in the temple nor lived with devotees, and our customs, such as prasadam, prayers, early morning bells, were very foreign to him. Ethan would constantly be bombarded with a plethora of questions from curious devotees: "Are you a devotee?

Do you chant japa?

Why don't you wear doti?

When will you take initiation?" Dr.

Steve and I had to figure out creative ways for me to navigate these questions in a way that was diplomatic and made sense to the questioning devotee. But Śrīla Gurudev always made me feel welcomed and accepted. Śrīla Gurudev, you publicly announced that I was the only one allowed to wear pants on the stage, and you blessed my afro by saying, "Never cut your hair.

This is a sikha in full bloom." Throughout the history of jazz, they have always been pioneering figures, people who shape the genre by their personal musicianship, their vision, and most notably, the ability to bring the right kind of musicians together.

Miles Davis was famous for this. Ethan and I would often say that Indra. Dumbaniswami was the Miles Davis of ISKCON. We had this realization about Injured Swami at our first Woodstock festival. We never imagined ourselves playing back-to-back gigs for hour after hour, kirtan after kirtan, in a single evening.

The kirtans would move through various styles of music, all in the service to the Holy Name. From Mahatmaprabhu's rock and roll to Bibi Govinda's hybrid drag blues, to Achuta Gopi's soulful funk, to Mahadeva's midnight reggae, to Shri Pralad's sweet talents, to Chaturatma's cameo Tina Turner.

It was any musician's dream, and I was comforted to know that kirtan could be all of these styles. As Miles Davis brought musicians together in his bands, Śrīla Gurudev brought all these amazing kirtaniyas together on his Woodstock mantra yoga stage.

But then there were the IDs kirtans, the introduction kirtans, a complete genre and category of its own. More impressive is the fact that it's always the same melody every time, and we were bewildered as to how a person can sing the same melody every single time for over 40 years and still have it be epic every single time.

We must have done up to one thousand kirtans with you, Śrīla Gurudev, and we are still pleasantly amazed at how fresh it remains, as if for the very first time. You have taught us the meaning of Navadvipa. As Śrīla Gurudev likes to say, "Anandam buddhi vardhanam." Krishna consciousness is blissful when it is expanding.

The bliss expands along with our service. Our service to you, Śrīla Gurudev, expanded over the years as we inherited the spirit of your mission. Our roles in the Vaisnava cultural team evolved from being kirtan musicians to sold-out servants of the preaching mission.

Steve soon became Prem Premananda Kirtan Das, and Ethan, well, he kept his afro. We did a kitty show on stage called Nandalal. Often times before the lecture on the Polish tour, we would all be on stage together, and Śrīla Gurudev would sing to us.

And then he would say, "This is the pinnacle of your musical careers." But alas, sooner than we imagined, we found ourselves composing entire music scores for the theater productions and even taking on acting roles in some of the shows.

So much so that I had to learn a script in Polish and deliver these lines live on stage. One of your most recent instructions to me, Śrīla Gurudev, stated on three different occasions, was to study Disney shows and develop our Vaisnava cultural theater to that level.

I would never have imagined that watching The Lion King could be devotional service. You told us that if we joined you, we would see the world, and we did. From the festival tours of Europe to the parikramas of India, Sacred Sounds of Australia, to the kirtan tours of Kazakhstan, underground programs of China, to the Vaisnava cultural frontiers of America.

One year, we were supposed to return home in September, but we only came back the following year in March. It was an eight-month tour. But one of your greatest gifts has been the precious association of your beloved god family.

We've built an especially close bond with Badahari Prabhu. He became our spiritual uncle. At times, we've joked that perhaps he's the only one that really knows what we are playing. We are continually astonished at the amount of melodies that Hari Prabhu knows, whether it be a mellow Vṛndāvana meditation, a Festival of India invocation, a roaring Woodstock kirtan, Radha Haripurpu always knows what is appropriate and finds a way to include us.

We see your mercy manifest in this relationship, and we are ever grateful. Śrīla Gurudev, you once wrote in the Vyasa Puja offering to your spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupada, "I do not claim to be free from material desires, nor am I saying I am a pure devotee.

But let no one mistake it: service to your lotus feet is infinitely more satisfying than all the pleasures this world has to offer." Śrīla Gurudev, this statement resonates with us deeply. As I cannot say that we have attained pure devotional service, nor are we the world's greatest musicians, but we can say that no experience of this world can compare to the relationship we have with you and the service you have given us.

No amount of busking or professional gigs can compare to that moment in an ID's kirtan when you call our names to take a solo, or when you return to us during a kirtan and give a smile acknowledging the melody we had just played.

We do not know who Krishna is.

We do not know if the parampara actually appreciates our horn lines, but we know that all we have to do is satisfy you, and our life's purpose is complete. And you promised that you would arrange a place for the horn section in the spiritual world.

When one feels grateful, one gives the best of oneself. We've offered you our youth, our minds, and our talents. The best of what we have is seen through our music. Thank you for engaging the best of what we have to offer in the best way we could have asked for.

Thank you, your eternal horn section. Is. You.