Hare Krishna everyone!

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

Today our parikrama party is visiting the Temple of Radha Damodara here in Śrī Vrindavan. It's known amongst Gaudiya Vaishnavas as one of the seven main temples out of five thousand temples in Braja, and it's particularly dear to the members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

Actually, it's very special for a number of reasons. To begin with, it's situated in the auspicious place where five thousand years ago Radha and Krishna had many of their loving pastimes, including the famous Rasa Lila dance.

Five hundred years ago, it's where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked the Six Goswamis, His immediate followers, to go to Vrindavan for three particular reasons: to establish deity worship and thus build temples, to find the lost places of Krishna's pastimes, and to write books on the science of Krishna Consciousness.

So, each of the Six Goswamis had their temples, and Jiva Goswami established the Temple of Radha Damodara. That was his, or is, forever his worshipable deity, and it's interesting that Jiva Goswami was the only initiated disciple of Śrī Rūpa Goswami, and out of love for his disciple, Rūpa Goswami personally carved by hand the beautiful deity of Damodara.

So the temple was established by Jiva for the worship of Damodara. Also, on the altar, there are many deities, but on the altar, we see today the Govardhan Shila. The large Govardhan Shila that was given to Sanatana Goswami by Lord Krishna Himself.

So, Sanatana Goswami, he would actually do Govardhan parikrama almost every day when he lived in Vrindavan. Every day he would go and do Govardhan parikrama. But when he became elderly, it was difficult for him to do that. So Lord Krishna famously appeared before him one day and gave him a Govardhan Shila, and He said to Sanatana Goswami, "You don't have to do the, you know, twenty-four kilometer pilgrimage every day, the long walk every day.

You simply do parikrama around this shila." So that's there on the altar. It's very special also because who carried on the mission of the other five Goswamis after they departed, his samadhi is there, as well as the samadhi of his spiritual master, Rūpa Goswami.

Actually, out of respect for his spiritual master and his humility, he has made Rūpa Goswami's samadhi the prominent samadhi. Jiva Goswami is known as the Rasacharya, he's the teacher of deep loving mellows of devotional service, as expressed so beautifully in his Bhakti Rasamrita Sindhu and other literatures that he wrote.

In fact, Śrīla Rūpa Goswami glorifies Śrīla Rūpa Goswami in his Madhurya Kadambini 1-2. He writes, "In previous ages, many great souls took shelter of Bhakti Devi. In this age, however, with the grace of Krishna's dear associate, Śrī Rūpa Goswami, we have been given the wisdom to realize her in the form of rasa.

I therefore pay my obeisances to him constantly." Very beautiful glorification. Now, as we mentioned earlier, for ISKCON devotees, the Radha Damodara Temple is considered very, very special because it's where Śrīla Prabhupāda had resided for six years just after taking sannyasa, or not long after taking sannyasa. Śrīla Prabhupāda came to Vrindavan to prepare his mission for going to the West.

And after staying briefly in another temple, Prabhupāda moved to Radha Damodara Temple, where he rented two small rooms, two very small rooms, which you'll see here in the video.

And it was there that he began translating Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. One of the rooms served as a kitchen for Śrīla Prabhupāda.

We would also take prasādam. Śrīla Prabhupāda said, as he was taking prasādam every day, he would look out the kitchen window where he would see the samadhi of Rūpa Goswami and take inspiration for successfully preaching Krishna Consciousness when he went to the West.

Actually, Jiva Goswami has a verse in this regard of getting inspiration. He writes in his Śrī Caitanya Charitāmṛta, "Śrī Rūpa, eternal peace incarnate, identical in mood to Sanatana and his elder brother, and whose younger brother was Śrī Vallabha, is the means of my success and the good fortune of all the jivas." So in that mood, Śrīla Prabhupāda, living so closely to the samadhi of Rūpa Goswami, got so much inspiration from Jiva Goswami to take the teachings of Krishna Consciousness to the West.

He spent many years there, again, six years. And he said one time that he actually resides eternally in his rooms there. So those rooms are actually in possession of ISKCON. And every day, devotees go there, they clean Prabhupāda's little quarters, small quarters where his bed is there.

There's a table there, a cushion where Prabhupāda would write his purports to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you know, maybe four or five devotees considering they're very small.

And they also cleaned his kitchen. Just a few meters away, it's a service that goes on every day. Early in our movement, when Prabhupāda first took some disciples to Vrindavan, he actually held classes at Radha Damodara.

One time, during one of those classes, he said that the area between his Rūpa Goswami's samadhi and just across from the samadhi, there's another shrine, it's like a platform where Rūpa Goswami would do his bhajana. So Prabhupāda said, "The area between the samadhi where his sacred body remains and where he did his bhajans, maybe 10 or 15 meters distance, he said that is the most sacred place in the universe.

The most sacred place in the universe." So we were invited by one of the Six Goswami brothers who managed the temple for prasādam there, as well as a tour. And during the tour, we passed by the kitchen that Jiva Goswami had established for the worship of Lord Damodara.

The same place is there. And I was told many years ago that just across from that kitchen is a little space there, and that is where the Six Goswamis would meet regularly to have katha, discuss about Krishna, and have kirtan.

This is what they enjoyed together because each in their own way were fulfilling the mission of Caitanya Mahaprabhu by wandering around Vrindavan and finding the lost places of Krishna's pastimes.

And they were busy with their own temples, they were all also writing on the science of Krishna Consciousness.

They would live in different parts of Braja, but regularly they would come together for Krishna katha, for kirtan, and also, you could say, to plan the greater movement of Krishna Consciousness.

Krishna Consciousness was meant to spread all over the world, as Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "The chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra will one day be heard in every town and village of the world." So you could say this was the original headquarters of the sankirtan movement, in the sense that this is where the Goswamis wrote and established, or you could say, reinvigorated Vrindavan, made it visible to people, hoping that one day everyone would come to Vrindavan and take inspiration there from the loving Krishna's pastimes, Krishna-Balaram's pastimes.

Really, Jiva Goswami, especially after the departure of the other five Goswamis, the Radha Damodara Temple served as the headquarters of Krishna Consciousness at that time.

As we did our tour around the temple, which has been nicely renovated, I must say, by the Goswamis there, I was asked to speak in the courtyard on this big *asana*, which is generally reserved for, you know, very erudite, advanced devotees.

I felt very humbled, but one of the Goswamis requested me to sit there and to speak. And as I was speaking about the history of Radha Damodara and the Six Goswamis, especially about Śrīla Prabhupāda and his time spent there and his vision for spreading Krishna Consciousness all over the world, I was just thinking how proud, how proud Śrīla Prabhupāda would be that a humble member of ISKCON was speaking from that *asana*.

So again, this is where Prabhupāda planned and began the execution of his mission for the mission of Caitanya Mahaprabhu and fulfilling his own spiritual master's instructions to spread Krishna Consciousness in the English-speaking language, which he had instructed.

So you could say it began in earnest there at the Radha Temple, and where Śrīla Rūpa Goswami had certainly given Prabhupāda blessings to perform that mission in the West.

While visiting the Radha Damodara Temple, we just all of us just kept reminding ourselves that really, we were there only because of Śrīla Prabhupāda's invitation to come to Vrindavan, and it was by his mercy that we were taking this tour.

A tour on a very beautiful winter's afternoon in the auspicious *dhāma* of Śrī Vrindavan. Śrī Śrī the Six Goswamis. Thank you very much. I hope you enjoyed this video. Hare Krishna.