"*00275*.*
"### The Glories of Indulekhā

Once again, we find ourselves in a very special part of Vṛndāvana, in Indulekhā-kuṇḍa. As we have done many times, we discuss the place—actually, every place in Vṛndāvana is special. Even in the material world, some places appear to be special and some are considered ordinary, but unfortunately, they are all insecure. Śrīla Prabhupāda mentioned many times, repeating the advice he said, "I have been everywhere and seen everything. Would you like my advice? Just stay in Vṛndāvana and the holy dhāma."

This is all about the pursuing lands and collecting, and sometimes even comparing. When the Śāstras speak, they speak very strongly; it actually shakes us up a little bit. The concept of "good and bad"—as they say, it is like a tool—is personally expressed by the Lord. Some things are good, some things are bad. It is not very palatable to the ears of the mundane people, but it is like nectar to the devotees who are trying to develop the spirit of humility. 

There is nothing significant about this world in Krishna consciousness, but for devotees, every inch, every centimeter of this place is more than significant. It is extraordinary. It is a transcendental abode; this is a perfect replica of the spiritual world. You can worship the ground; the dust is a standard for worship. You can take an ārati plate with incense, a ghee lamp, water, a handkerchief, a flower, and a peacock fan. There are two corners, mosquitoes, blue-tongued kids—everybody knows about this.

Every Vrajavāsī knows that there is no difference between the dhāma and the Lord. What is the touchstone that we hear about? Śrīla Prabhupāda mentioned a touchstone—a materialistic touchstone. There are material touchstones and there are spiritual touchstones. A touchstone is a stone that, when you touch it to any other object, turns that object into gold. 

It is a historical fact here in India: 500 years ago, a traditional touchstone was given to someone. But he was so disinterested because he was reading the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and he had that stone sitting in a food cart in southern India. He thought, "I don't want this gold; the dhāma is the gold." Who in his right mind would throw a stone that could turn everything into gold into the garbage? But the person who is actually in his right mind understands things as they are and has tasted the higher nectar of Krishna consciousness. Material pleasure is very shallow.

So, that time, someone wanted that stone. He got it and tried to experience happiness by touching everything to gold, but the problem was he lived in the dhāma. He threw that stone into the Kālīya lake. After getting initiated into the mahā-mantra, one experiences the higher taste that comes from chanting Hare Krishna. 

All the material desires have been washed away like dirt in a march. They get washed away by chanting Hare Krishna, and then your spiritual desires awaken. A transcendental touchstone can help awaken those spiritual desires. The whole of Vṛndāvana is transcendental; the ground is a touchstone. That is why when people go on parikramā, they go with a sense of humility. 

We see the villagers, the husbands, the wives, the grandmas, the grandpas, and the little children—they are all walking in bare feet. The dust is the dhāma. It radiates into your body, into your heart, and it destroys our material desires and awakens the spirit. This is why people walk around in Vṛndāvana with their bare feet.

The trees are desire trees and the inhabitants are like Lakshmīs. This is the description in the Śāstras. It is much shorter, and you will feel the difference as soon as you arrive back in Vṛndāvana. The atmosphere will be totally different. Śrīla Prabhupāda says that the nectar is such that if someone comes to Vṛndāvana, even if they are not Krishna conscious, they can get some appreciation for this transcendental abode.

So, people purposely come here to live despite all the austerities—so hot in the summer, so cold in the winter, and there are bugs. Knowing and accepting these descriptions with faith is like an assurance. Sometimes the mind can be the best friend or the mind can be the worst enemy, and our conditioned material desires make us make up some excuse for why I should leave the dhāma. But understanding the transcendental potency of this dhāma, one should attempt to come here as often as possible. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda mentioned many times: "If you are going to get sick, you are going to get sick anyway. This is the material world. To get sick here is purification, so come and get sick here."

In Krishna consciousness, we have a wonder amongst us—Śrīla Indradyumna Swami is a wanderer. He has written about the dhāma. Even if your life is hard, we have work, but we should make a plan to come here. Just like every day in the life of a devotee is special, no matter where we live, because we are engaged in the nine processes of devotional service. Every day is special; important festivals, like Janmāṣṭamī or the months of devotion, show that there is extra special intensity.

Indulekhā-devī is one of the aṣṭa-sakhīs. She wears clothes that are like pomegranate color—a bright, fiery red. She possesses many wonderful skills. In the spiritual world, everything here in the material world is a reflection of the Lord's desires. 

In the spiritual world, they attend to the affairs of the Lord with real expertise. There is the Śāstra of reading palms; to this day, you can find persons who study that Śāstra and have a guru. They are practicing, and just like you can do a chart with your birthday, they can tell you your focus. But it has to be described in the Śāstras—the *Bṛhat-samhitā*. Without Krishna consciousness, the science and the culture and the life of Krishna consciousness—this whole world is just hocus-pocus.

It is interesting to note that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was also an expert in the science of astrology. He was the best astrologer, and probably beyond that. His whole mind was like an archive; he learned English by locking himself in a closet for a few days with an English dictionary. Astrology is valuable because it is like a roadmap. It is not necessarily something spiritual, but it helps you know when to speed up on the straight path and when to stop at the stop sign. So, astrology shows us what is ahead, so we can prepare ourselves.

The most important point is what the Lord decides. Krishna can intervene and change everything. That is the process of Krishna consciousness because our destiny has changed from our past karma. We were wandering aimlessly in this world, but by the mercy of the spiritual master and the Lord, they intervene in our lives to say, "Stop your nonsense, chant Hare Krishna, go back to Godhead." Our destiny is changed by their mercy.

When you get initiated by a guru, they take your karma. You are just an inspector for the Lord. Some remnants are left just to keep you serious; don't get complacent about it. But this is the answer to the interesting question: "If you are the best at something, why give it up?" Because Krishna's mercy is greater than our insignificant, fallen, messed-up destiny.

Indulekhā-devī’s expertise is in garlands and ornaments, taking jewels like emeralds, sapphires, diamonds, and pearls and making beautiful necklaces. She is also very expert at concealing secret messages. She is very good at hiding them and taking them to the Divine Couple. 

In this world, secrets always get out. Śrīla Prabhupāda told a story: "If three people have a secret, it can only remain a secret if two of them die." 

And she has very close friends. Everyone has friends, but then you have friends who are "near and dear." Those types of friends are few in number. By human nature, you can only reveal your heart to someone you really have a long-standing relationship with. As we have discussed previously, real friendship is in Krishna consciousness, because the two friends share the same interest in serving Krishna; therefore, their association accelerates their spiritual life. Whereas in material life, friends do bad things and they all go to hell. 

As I told you a couple of years ago: "We are friends. Don't let friends eat meat." If one is not thinking about a spiritual destination, one is just wandering. These personalities are our heroes. We like to hear about details in their lives. When I was young, growing up in America, it was baseball players and football players. Now, we want to hear details about the pure devotees' lives because we are glorifying them. This is good.

This is part one. We will have part two, and we will also have part three. The history of this village—what does the name "Indulekhā" have to do with anything? The *Bhakti-ratnākara* describes that at one time, Rādhārāṇī was sitting in mourning. They began by dressing Her in a very beautiful blue dress. 

Then, Kṛṣṇa gave Rādhārāṇī a special golden eyeliner, or *kajal*. The gopīs were helping decorate Her in the direction of the service. *Kajal* protects the eyes and also enhances beauty. Years ago, villagers asked about this, and they said that *kajal* reflects the sun—like sunglasses. It keeps the glare away from the eyes.

It is a wonderful moment. When Kṛṣṇa starts playing His flute, the sound is wavering through the forest. There is a picture in one of Śrīla Prabhupāda's books of Kṛṣṇa playing His flute, and you see the gopīs on the side of the forest. The sound goes through the forest; all the birds are flying in ecstasy, the deers have stopped, and the cows have stopped sucking milk. The Yamunā River starts flowing backwards because of Kṛṣṇa's flute.

The simple answer is because Kṛṣṇa controls the gopīs. In the Tenth Canto, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* describes that when the gopīs hear the sound of Kṛṣṇa's flute, it enters their souls and goes into the nectar, and they run to see Kṛṣṇa. They say, "You are a cowboy, but you are controlling us! We are so angry at You because You played Your flute, which is our enemy. You control us by Your flute."

In that particular place, Kṛṣṇa stopped playing His flute and asked His beloved consort to sit next to Him. He noticed that her eyes were different that day—they were void of any material agitation. The gopīs were saying, "Because You started playing Your Vamsī, You controlled us." Kṛṣṇa heard that, and He got an idea. He looked around, picked up a pretty good-sized rock that was black in color, and said, "This same stone that Krishna touched to put the *kajal* on Her eyes is still there."

You can commemorate this pastime. Every devotee takes a little bit of that stone and puts it on their eyes in the *tilaka* placement. Therefore, these deities are very special and unique. This concludes the pastime of Krishna and Rādhārāṇī, being absorbed in transcendental mellows. 

So, why don't you stand up for a second? Everybody, put your arms in the air and jump up and down!

*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.*""