"*00442*.*
"So, by the fathomless mercy of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, we find ourselves in another very, very sacred place in Śrī Vṛndāvana, the famous forest of Kāmyavana. It is actually one of the 12 main forests in Vṛndāvana. We were discussing the other day that, in general, when we are in the West, we say we are going to Vṛndāvana; this is actually a general term. We are going to the forest of Vṛndāvana, in which there are many sub-forests—there are 12 main forests—and Kāmyavana is one of them. 

He states that there are five forests on the eastern bank of the Yamunā and seven forests on the western bank of the Yamunā River. And because our ultimate goal, all of us, is to become Vrajavāsīs, we should become familiar with Vṛndāvana and we should know what these different forests are. What are the 12 forests? Just like if you are from the United States of America, we have something like 50 states, so if you live in a particular state, you should be able to tell your friends what is the capital of the state that you live in. 

Like, I was born in California, so if someone asked me what is the capital of your state, I should be prepared to answer; I would say, "Sacramento." What are the 12 forests in our beloved Vṛndāvana? I will enlighten you about that transcendental fact. They are as follows: if you don't have a good memory, you should have a nice pen and paper—Vṛndāvana, Madhuvan, Tālavan, Kumudavan, Bahulāvan, Bhadravan, Khadiravan, Mahāvan—not Mahāvan, my disciple, but Mahāvan for us—yes. Now, the seven forests that make up the 12 on the western side of the Yamunā are as follows...

As we know, we discussed the other day, he lived for 48 years at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and he very much appreciated all the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana. And like him, we should also learn to love anything and everything that is connected to Śrī Vṛndāvana. In his *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, text 88, he glorifies these 12 forests of Vraja. By hearing his words, which manifest from his heart, just by hearing those words and trying to absorb them, we can also come to love the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana. So, listen to how he glorifies the 12 forests: "Filled with many large lakes, hills, and rivers; with many desire trees and desire creepers; fragrant and with many flowers; invaded by a great army of bumblebees intoxicated by the sweet aroma—the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana are splendidly beautiful. I bow down to offer my respects at every moment to these 12 forests which are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa."

So, Kāmyavana is one of those splendidly beautiful forests. That is how it describes the splendidly beautiful forests; one of them is Kāmyavana. By analyzing the name: as we mentioned the other day, *vana*—just the word *vana*—means forest. *Kāmya* in Sanskrit means desire. Of course, very often in our preaching, we attribute the word *kāma* to mean material desire or mundane love, *kāma*—you know, lust, anger, and greed—so *kāma* means like lust. The other day one of my disciples wrote me—I can't remember where—she said, "Gurudeva, why did you give me the name Kāmeśvarī, the controller of lust? Can you change my name?" I said, "No way! You have to understand the real meaning of *kāma* from the transcendental point of view." 

She said, "Yes, but we all know Cupid, his name is Kāmadeva." I said, "Yes, that there's that explanation as well. Kāmadeva does mean Cupid; he is the one who shoots the arrows of love into the hearts of the conditioned souls. 'I love you, I love you too.' What happened? Cupido, he is just flying around; that is his business, to keep everyone conditioned to the material world. I love you! Otherwise, how does a bug love another bug? Bugs are not very beautiful, but they get the arrow: 'Mrs. Bug, I love you!'" 

And it is true, this type of *kāma* or desire entangles us in material existence. Nevertheless, it is very much glorified. All the popular songs today are about *kāma*, about mundane love. No news, in every language of the world, it is just "boy loves girl, girl loves boy, boy lost girl, girl lost boy, whoa, whoa, whoa." It is all about *kāma*, mundane lust, and people are fascinated by it. I probably shouldn't mention this, but I remember one song from my youth about the power of Cupid: "Cupid, draw back your bow and let your arrow go straight to my lover's heart. Cupid, please hear my cry and let your arrow fly straight to my lover's heart for me." 

So, it is romantic, it is cute, it is catchy, but it is not meant for transcendentalists. Kṛṣṇa warns us about that type of desire in *Bhagavad-gītā* 3.37: "It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of the contact with the material mode of passion and later transformed into wrath, which is the all-devouring sinful enemy in this world." This is our real enemy. 

Enough of that. When we talk about Kāmyavana, we are talking about a different type of *kāma* or desire. Pure desire. In the material world, it is a perverted reflection, but in the spiritual world, there is desire; there is pure desire. This is a pure, pristine love for God, which is selfless, and it is actually there, deep in the heart of every living entity; it just has to be awoken. This pure love, *kāma*—pure love for Kṛṣṇa—is eternally established in the hearts of living entities. It is not something to be gained from another source. When the living entity is purified by hearing and chanting, that love naturally awakens. 

"Wake up, living entities! How long will you sleep in the lap of the witch called Māyā?" When someone is sleeping, how do you wake them up? They can't see you, they can't touch you, they can't taste you. So, which of the senses will wake you up? The sense of hearing. So, the best way to wake someone up who is sleeping is through sound vibration. And this deep, deep sleep of forgetfulness of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can be woken up by the oral sound vibration. 

So, this love is there, this pure love for Kṛṣṇa is there; it just has to be awoken through the process, mainly through hearing and chanting. And if we haven't experienced that love ourselves yet, we can see that love in very advanced devotees like Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. He had that love and he manifested that love very clearly when he was staying at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. When you love someone, you are completely dependent upon them. So the essence of his love is revealed in one very beautiful stanza from a poem that he wrote. He famously wrote, "I am yours, I am yours. I cannot live without you, O Queen. Please understand this and bring me to your lotus feet." So it is that type of love that we are aspiring for. You want to get rid of the mundane *kāma* and develop the pure love exhibited by great devotees like Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. 

Therefore, this forest is called Kāmyavana—it is the forest of desire, but not material desire; it is the forest of spiritual desire. This is the forest where, if one comes to live here or just visits here, just being here in the presence of this Dhāma awakens your spiritual desire. It awakens us to come here. Even if you don't know the glories of this abode, just coming here, the all-pervading atmosphere somehow awakens your spiritual desire to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, we have come here today. And it is made more easy, according to our ācāryas; it is made much more easy because every single tree in Kāmyavana is a *kalpa-vṛkṣa*, a desire tree. And if you sit next to that tree or you embrace that tree, that tree will help fulfill your spiritual desires. So the best place to sit is not right in front here; it is where that *bābājī* is sitting, under that desire tree there. He is probably going to start crying in ecstasy by the end of the program. 

Because of its superior spiritual significance, being the place where one's spiritual desires can be awoken, there are many, many, many unlimited pastimes that have taken place in Kāmyavana, the forest of spiritual desire. Many great devotees have come to reside here. Interestingly enough, this is one of the places that the Pāṇḍavas lived during their exile. We had a palace here, which we are going to visit a little bit later in the morning, and this is the place where the famous Akṣaya-pātra pastime took place, where Durvāsā Muni approached the Pāṇḍavas for something to eat, but they had already eaten. But Draupadī had that Akṣaya-pātra, that particular pot where she could feed unlimited personalities, so it is a whole pastime; we won't retell it right now. 

And this is also the place where Yamarāja asked Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira the 100 questions about life. He had to answer perfectly to bring his four brothers back to life because they had drunk the poisoned water of that lake. It is just maybe 100 meters from here, that lake is. We could spend many hours discussing the millions of pastimes that happened here. Actually, I gave a series of lectures on Kāmyavana during the pandemic; I think there were seven lectures, just about two-hour lectures about Kāmyavana. But I thought today we would focus on some of the lesser-known pastimes, just like one of the moods of our *parikramā* this year is to go to the places that are not so well known. We are going to go to different places that many of the *parikramā* parties don't even know about and don't go to. That is many of the places like that. So, in the same mood, I'd share with you some of the lesser-known pastimes that take place in this mystical forest of spiritual desire, Kāmyavana. 

Before it gets too hot—because I have an umbrella and you don't—so, interestingly enough, the very center of Kāmyavana is the ancestral home of Mother Yaśodā. Ancestral home means where one's parents, grandparents, great-great-grandparents lived. This is the ancestral home of Mother Yaśodā. And I was reading also that Nanda Mahārāja's family, they also lived in Kāmyavana for some time. So many great personalities lived here. Actually, Lord Caitanya, He also visited Kāmyavana in 1515. During this, the Lord performed *parikramā* of this forest, bathed in all the lakes, and visited all the pastime places before proceeding onto another destination. 

In my readings, I was curious to find out, another very interesting personality spent a lot of time here, and that was Durvāsā Muni. Durvāsā Muni would come here especially to reflect or meditate on Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. I found that in *Prema-vivarta*, Chapter 15, by Jagadānanda Paṇḍita, he says, "In ages long past, the great Durvāsā Muni would come to Kāmyavana to reflect on the pastimes that Kṛṣṇa had performed in the previous day of Brahmā as well as those He would perform in the present one." He came here in Satya-yuga; that is how long this place has been existing. Durvāsā Muni came here in Satya-yuga and he was taking a nap in the afternoon when some boys were playing nearby. These boys were looking at Durvāsā Muni while he was taking his nap, and they saw that he had these long, matted locks—like Mādhava Prabhu has on the back—but this Durvāsā Muni had these big matted locks, like, "Whoa!" So the boys saw those matted locks while he was sleeping. 

They decided to play a joke. One of the morals is: don't play jokes on *sādhus*. So, one boy took a knife and he cut off some of the locks of Durvāsā Muni's hair. I mean, imagine if you did that tomorrow—he is doing *kīrtana*, you cut off a big part, he is going to become angry! But one of the characteristics of Durvāsā Muni, he is very kind, but he can also become very angry, especially because yogīs, they keep their *tejas*, they keep their spiritual power in their hairs, they keep their spiritual power in their words, and Vaiṣṇavas, they keep their spiritual power in their *japa* beads. So they cut like that. 

So, later on, when he woke up here in Kāmyavana, he noticed a lock of his hair was missing, and he saw the boys were throwing it back and forth, playing with that lock of hair. So he cursed that one boy in particular who had cut his hair. He said to him, "Since you like to crawl around and cause mischief, then you become a crocodile and crawl around on the ground for an entire Yuga," which means four ages together. If you get the blessings of a *sādhu*, you can make very rapid advancement, but if you offend a *sādhu*, you can go to hell for an entire *kalpa*. So all his friends ran away, and he was standing there, and he fell on the ground crying, and he grabbed Durvāsā Muni's feet, and he expressed remorse and he begged for mercy. He said, "Okay, okay, I can't retract the curse, because when a brāhmaṇa makes a curse, he can't retract it, but I can make it a little bit—not so bad." Durvāsā said, "All right, this is Satya-yuga. When the Lord of this forest, Kṛṣṇa, appears in Navadvīpa-māyāpura in the age of Kali as the son of Mother Śacī, He will finally deliver you by *nāma-saṅkīrtana*." He appears in Kali-yuga, and by the mercy of *nāma-saṅkīrtana*, you will be delivered from this curse. 

He had to wait Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, and then partially into Kali-yuga. It is a long time to wait before becoming free from that curse. We are also cursed. We are also in this material world of birth, disease, old age, and death. We didn't have to wait a *kalpa*; we had to wait maybe 18, 19, 20 years until we met the devotees of ISKCON, and now we are becoming free from the curse of Kali-yuga by chanting. 

So we go back to Satya-yuga; immediately that boy became a crocodile. Crocodiles are very ugly—they are not like alligators. I like, but different than a crocodile. An alligator is very different. I saw some crocodiles recently when I was near R̥ṣīkeśa in the Ganges; they are very ferocious-looking. So this boy, who became a crocodile, took residence in a lake in Ghoṣa-dvīpa in Māyāpura, because, of course, that is where Lord Caitanya was to appear. So Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, and part of Kali-yuga, he was a crocodile living in Māyāpura. And you really mean crocodile; he used to terrorize all the animals and the people, everyone was afraid of this crocodile. Our own boy Vrajavāsī is here. 

Then finally, after four ages, Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared. When He was a little boy, He understood the situation, because He is *abhijñaḥ svarāṭ*—Kṛṣṇa is all-pervading and all-knowing—so He remembered, "I have to—He had this in His plan—I have to deliver this boy from being a crocodile. Let's go down to the river and have some fun, we'll go for a swim." There was a lake formed by the Ganges there. So as the boys were about to enter the water, some of the older men who were herding cows, they said to Nimāi, "Hey young boy, go away! There is a vicious crocodile in this water, very dangerous! You go home!" At that point, Nimāi Paṇḍita got a big smile on His face and He walked right into the lake. His friends, of course, they didn't know He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead yet—that was revealed later on. They said, "Nimāi, come out of the water! There is a crocodile!" 

This is how—and something miraculous happens. We have heard, you know, a pure devotee chant and how powerful that is. Prabhupāda was chanting, but all of us to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just imagine when the Supreme Lord chants His own holy names. And right in front of everyone's eyes, that crocodile surfaced to the top of the water, started coming at Nimāi Paṇḍita. So the boys said, "Nimāi, there's a crocodile, get out!" So He just smiled, and He said to the crocodile, "Follow Me." He came out of the lake, He turned around, and He just stood there, and that crocodile came out and put his crocodile nose onto the lotus feet of Nimāi Paṇḍita, and *poof*, he appeared again as that young boy, immediately attained his eternal spiritual form as a cowherd boy. We are back home, back to Godhead. 

So these pastimes took place here when Durvāsā Muni came to meditate on Kṛṣṇa, many pastimes of the Pāṇḍavas. But there are many wonderful pastimes of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa that take place in Kāmyavana. I'd like to share a few of those with you. One of my favorite pastimes that took place here in Kāmyavana—you could say it is still taking place, it is *nitya-līlā*—it took place in a *kuṇḍa* nearby, it is called... A very beautiful pastime of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa took place; it is a stone's throw from here. It is a beautiful, pristine, clear, clean lake with lotus flowers floating, etc., soft winds, different birds, swans in the lake, etc. 

And there, Kṛṣṇa and the Gopīs, they would perform a particular pastime. One day, a simple little pastime, but a very beautiful pastime: the pastime was that Kṛṣṇa would go with the Gopīs and then they would all go underwater and see who could hold their breath the longest. And the first person or persons to come up, they were the loser; the person who stayed down the longest was the winner. So Kṛṣṇa was thinking, "These are just fragile little girls, they don't have powerful lungs and a strong body like Mine; surely I am going to win this contest, they will come up first." 

So the Gopīs went, "One, two, three," everybody went under the water. But the Gopīs had a trick in mind; they very quickly came up and waited to see Kṛṣṇa's topknot, because Kṛṣṇa has this topknot, right? So they waited to see, you know, Kṛṣṇa came up after some time, they saw His topknot, *boom*, they went back down. So when they came up a minute later, Kṛṣṇa says, "Wow, you won! How did you do that? How did you hold your breath so long? How did you do that?" Gopīs said, "We just did, let's do it again, give me another chance." So they did it again, and the Gopīs played the same trick; they came up really fast, just waited for some time to see Kṛṣṇa coming up, seeing His topknot, *boom*, they went back down. And this time they really dug in, they said, "Kṛṣṇa, we win, you lose." So it happened 10 times. Kṛṣṇa started getting a little suspicious, like, "These are just fragile girls, I am a strong boy, how are they holding their breath for so long?" 

So at this point, Kṛṣṇa came up with a plan—this lake is just over there—"I'm feeling a little bit weak, but let's just try it one more time. Okay, one last time, one, two, three," everybody went under. So unknown to the Gopīs, Kṛṣṇa swam to the shore—as I mentioned—and there was a big rock in the water just at the shore, so He hid behind that rock. Okay, so He swam away. So pretty quickly the Gopīs came up, they are laughing, giggling, giggling, "Wait one more time, go see Kṛṣṇa's topknot and then we'll go under and then we'll come up, we win, you lose." So they came up waiting for the topknot, no topknot, no Kṛṣṇa. And they are waiting and they are waiting and no topknot, Kṛṣṇa's not coming. And they remembered that He said He was fatigued, so they started becoming frantic, "Where is Kṛṣṇa?" And they began searching for Him everywhere underwater, they couldn't find Him. 

And after several hours, their only conclusion was, "Kṛṣṇa must have died." So they are crying and they are crying and they are crying, and they went to the shore of the lake for, it is described by the ācāryas, a memorial service. That they were staring at the water that stole their lover and because of the tears flowing from their eyes, the lake started to rise. And because of the tears flowing from their eyes, the water was rising gradually, gradually like this. And when they cried all the tears they could cry, suddenly Kṛṣṇa pops up out of the water and He says, "I win, you lose!" That *kuṇḍa* deserves some attention—it is a *kuñja*. *Kuñja* again means that it is a grove, and this grove in Kāmyavana, it consists of very beautiful trees and flowers, a little river going through there, and lots of humming bees. 

Now, today, no one really—even then, no one really knew what that place was. Who can tell you where that special, special *kuñja* is here in Kāmyavana? You go anywhere now, you ask yourself, "Please, bābā, tell me, where is Ālta Pahāḍī?" Oh, no one knows. It is very confidential. Even 5,000 years ago, Kṛṣṇa didn't know where it was. What such a special *kuñja*, even Kṛṣṇa doesn't know! I challenge any of you, I challenge the whole world, the whole universe, anyone who can go out and find where is Ālta Pahāḍī, I will collect and give you 10 million dollars. I vow that right now, I promise you, I will give you 10 million dollars on the spot—not exactly sure I'll get it, but I'll get it, it is my challenge. 

How is it that we can't find this little grove with bees and flowers and trees and rivers? How come we can't find it? We can't find it because it is the exclusive resting place of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Śrī Vṛndāvana; when she wants to be alone, that is where she goes. That is why you'll never find it, because Vṛndāvana protects Rādhārāṇī. No, she's a busy girl; she's, you know, a milkmaid and she has Kṛṣṇa and her friends, when she wants some time alone, she goes to Ālta Pahāḍī. What a beautiful name! What does that mean? That is where Rādhā goes if she wants to be alone. You'll never claim the 10 million dollars; even Kṛṣṇa can't go there. 

The *sādhus* say that reason alone makes Kāmyavana a very, very special place. Just this one *kuñja* makes Kāmyavana glorious amongst all the other forests in Vraja—Kṛṣṇa who can't go there! 

I have to clarify that statement: actually, Kṛṣṇa can go on very special occasions, but only if He gets permission from both Lalitā and Viśākhā—written permission—then He can go. So the ācāryas write, I found that one time Rādhārāṇī was resting in this *kuñja* here in Kāmyavana when she noticed that the red lac of the soles of Her lotus feet had worn away from Rāsa-līlā, from dancing with Kṛṣṇa. She makes an exception, she calls some of her friends, and she said, "All the red lac has come off my feet from dancing, can you please paint this red lac back on my feet?" So they painted that red lac and then suddenly, even before it dried, she realized that she was late for a rendezvous with Kṛṣṇa, so she jumped up and made her way out of the *kuñja*. And as she did, she walked over some stones and those stones turned red because of the red lac on her feet. And some of those stones are still there, and you can see them, they have that red lac. They are called *citra-vicitra*. You can't take them out of Kāmyavana, they are worshipable because the red lac of Rādhārāṇī's feet is worshipable and it's on the stones. If we have time, we will go see them today. 

The other day when I was preparing class for Rādhā-kuṇḍa, I came across a verse by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali* wherein he refers to this red lac on Rādhārāṇī's feet. I couldn't use it then; now I am going to use it, perfect time. Would you like to hear the verse? Would you like to? Okay, it is *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*, text 14: "O Queen of Vṛndāvana, ever since Rūpa Mañjarī has filled my eyes with light, I have yearned to see the red lac decorating your lotus feet." The famous verse. 

So I am very comfortable with the umbrella. I can see some of you are starting to faint from the heat, so we will just tell one more pastime. This was a very wonderful pastime which shows how time just flies by in Kṛṣṇa consciousness; this is the definition of eternity. When you are doing something you don't like, time goes very slow, you are looking at your watch, but when you are doing something you like, time just flies by. So, what do we like most? Devotional service! Time just flies. I can remember I just joined the movement a few days ago, but really 52 years have gone by; I look in the mirror, that's me! 

There is a place called Aṭora, a famous place where one day Kṛṣṇa and His friends became so absorbed in play they failed to notice that 24 hours had passed by. Remember when you were young, you were playing football or something like that and the dust came and then you just didn't know what time was; your parents were getting really angry, "Where are you? Supposed to come home!" "Māmā, we were playing," but way past the time of your play, you should have come home for dinner. So this place of Aṭora, the boys became so much involved in playing they failed to notice the passing of time, but their parents did not. Aṭora is maybe 500 meters from here. So when their sons had not returned with their cows at the scheduled time, their parents climbed to the rooftops—you see here in Vṛndāvana, it's always this, you know, you can utilize the rooftop very nicely—so all the parents, they climbed to the rooftops to see where their sons were, but because the boys were having so much fun wrestling and playing, a cloud of dust froze in the air, hiding their pastimes. So they, the parents, just panicked. 

She was thinking that a demon had kidnapped and devoured her son and friends, so she just bursts out of the house without even a torch to find the way, and Nanda Mahārāja had to like firmly restrain her, "No, you can't go! I'll get some well-armed soldiers and we'll search the forests in two groups and we'll find the boys." Did you ever hear this story before? So two groups of soldiers—"This group, you go to Varṣāṇā, and you other boys or soldiers, you go to Kāmyavana." They came back empty-handed. She said, "All right, I'm going to go find those boys myself!" And sure enough, he came here to Kāmyavana and he heard the sounds of the boys shouting at Aṭora. Now bear in mind, this is a whole day had passed, a day and a night, so 24 hours. And when he came, the boys were just playing. "24 hours! My sons! They were gone!" Like, he got very upset, and he—but when he came, the boys were surprised: "Pitā, why have you come here?" Nanda Mahārāja said, "To bring you home!" But Balarāma said, "But we just got here! We just got here, we just just started to play." And the bābās said, "No, you know, we just have so much fun, we just got here, we have to go home now." 

Writes, although 24 hours had passed, the cowherd boys were so absorbed in play, and the cows were so absorbed in watching them, they all thought only a few moments had passed since they arrived at Aṭora in Kāmyavana. Nanda Mahārāja took them all home. And when the ācārya, he concludes, he says, "Just as a night of Brahmā had passed while Kṛṣṇa was absorbed in dancing with the Gopīs, a second night of Brahmā had gone by while Kṛṣṇa was playing at Aṭora in Kāmyavana." Just remember what I am saying: "Just as a night of Brahmā had passed while Kṛṣṇa was absorbed in dancing with the Gopīs..." So these were some unknown pastimes that we discovered by diving deep in the treasure chest of Kṛṣṇa's *līlās*. We could also go on for a night of Brahmā telling the pastimes. On page 46 there is a quote by Rāghava Ācārya: "Kāmyavana has so many holy places that it is impossible to mention them all." And there is a beautiful quote also by Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī about this place, Chapter 5, verse 17: "Kāmyavana is a forest that fulfills all desires and conquers the intelligence of all souls, who is known as Divine Cupid and who is personified as the Madana-mohana deity who is being worshipped here."

So, just one more little *līlā* here. On your left over here, this deity of Vṛndā Devī was carved by Bṛjad-nābha, the great-great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, 5,000 years ago. She is one of the five personalities who we can pray to for eternal residence in Vṛndāvana. It is another detail to memorize—those five personalities are Vṛndā Devī, Govardhana Hill, Yamunā River, Gopīśvara Mahādeva, and Vraja-raja, the dust of Vṛndāvana. So, Vṛndā Devī was carved by the great-great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, Bṛjad-nābha, and was worshipped in Vṛndāvana for a long time. But then because of foreign invasions and the passage of time, she was lost. For thousands of years she was lost, just as were many of the prominent deities. But when the six Gosvāmīs came to Vṛndāvana, Mahāprabhu had instructed them to re-establish deity worship. So each of them in their own way was looking for their *prāṇadhana*, their worshipable deity, deities hidden in the forests of Vṛndāvana. So we hear how Sanātana Gosvāmī found Madana-mohana, Jīva Gosvāmī found Govindajī, yes, and eventually a beautiful temple was built for Govindajī here in Vṛndāvana. 

But around the same time that Rūpa Gosvāmī found Govindajī and Vṛndāvana forest, he also discovered Vṛndā Devī, the original Vṛndā Devī deity, in a hidden place in a *kuṇḍa* called Brahmā-kuṇḍa in Vṛndāvana. So Rūpa Gosvāmī would personally worship Govindajī and he would also personally worship Vṛndā Devī. Worshipped this deity of Vṛndā Devī. We will hear more about her transcendental glories when we go to Vṛndā-kuṇḍa in a few weeks. But historically, when Aurangzeb—I even hate to say his name—attacked Vṛndāvana, the Vṛndāvana deities were moved away. And initially, Govindajī, Madana-mohana, and Gopīnātha—Govinda, Madana-mohana, and Gopīnātha—they came here to Kāmyavana in hiding. They stayed here, you know, worshipped in secret for about 28 years. The Muslims, they were getting wary that these famous deities were being worshipped out here, so the *pūjārīs*, they decided to move them and take them to Amber, let us say, eventually Jaipur. It is a whole pastime; I told it in the Govindajī series. 

Just saying the kings promised to build a whole city to protect the deities, that they were going to move Govinda, Madana-mohana, and Gopīnātha from here to Jaipur on bullock carts—took over a few years, it took several decades to get there. The same for Madana-mohana, the same for Gopīnātha. And then there was Vṛndā Devī left. All the other deities had gone, they were on their way, but then they took Vṛndā Devī and they put her on a bullock cart and they pulled her. This was the frontier of Rajasthan here; we have UP, then we have Rajasthan. Just when she got to the border going to Rajasthan, meaning getting out of Vṛndāvana, the cart stopped. 

Wait a minute, we just took Govinda-deva over the border, we took Madana-mohana over the border, we took Gopīnātha; why can't we take Vṛndā? Didn't go an inch out of Vṛndāvana. Then they got horses, then they got elephants; she wouldn't move. No, no, Vṛndā Devī refused to leave Vraja. So, why? How do we know why? All answers, all questions are answered in Kṛṣṇa consciousness by the mercy of a disciple of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. He wrote what Vṛndā Devī was thinking, why she didn't want to leave Vraja: "If I were to leave Vraja, how could the devotees have faith in Vṛndāvana if I were not present here?" Take a solemn promise: "I shall never leave Vraja, and Kṛṣṇa, eternally one and eternally separated."""