"*00537*.*
"I’d like to welcome you to yet another very special place here in our beloved Vṛndāvana; it’s called Ter Kadamba. The name itself is very significant and indicative of what actually takes place here. This sacred ground is saturated with līlā; you can just feel in this atmosphere how transcendental this place is. Pastimes took place here 5,000 years ago—very significant pastimes—and pastimes took place here 500 years ago as well. Their various associates and servants lived up on the hill, and when Kṛṣṇa was a child, they took care of him; but when he got a little older, they turned over some of the responsibility of taking care of the cows to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.

It is said we will be telling those pastimes in a few days on Gopāṣṭamī, but for now, let us understand this was a forest, and here he had exactly 900,000 cows. Each of them was a different color and a different shape; their faces were different shapes, and they all had special names. And Kṛṣṇa never forgets a name. "Man" means the best amongst men, and "put-down" means the worst amongst men; he is the best amongst all male personalities, therefore he is the perfect gentleman. And a gentleman is taught, at least in school, never to forget anyone’s name. You know, when you come and you meet someone, right? And you really become attracted to them, you’re inspired by them, and they inquire, "How are you doing? What is your name?" You come back next year and they don’t know who you are. It’s like, "Oh gosh, how are you? Oh, it’s fine, thank you." This is one of the challenges in being a spiritual master: being able to remember the names of all your disciples, especially when you get older—your 70s or 80s—we call that a "senior moment." A senior moment means you even forget your own name.

So, I remember in the early days on the Polish tour, I was initiating hundreds and thousands, and I would have, maybe the devotees remember, I had everyone wear a little round wooden piece here with their name on it so I could always address you by your name. He knows everyone’s name, and therefore he knows the name of every one of those 900,000 cows. So he looked forward to coming down from the underground every day to get all the cows together and then take them to the forests. But there’s another reason Kṛṣṇa likes to come to Ter Kadamba—he used to show up—now, can you guess what it is? It is that this is the first place where he gets to see Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in the morning. You know, he’s here getting his cows together and Rādhārāṇī is coming from Varṣāṇā to go to the market with the butter and the yogurt and all the milk products. She passes with her girlfriends somewhere along the road over there, and Kṛṣṇa is getting the cows ready, and that’s *pūrva-rāga*, meaning that they just get a glance, nothing more. Because of social custom, boys and girls are separated, but Rādhā goes and she glances like that, and Kṛṣṇa, he glances like that, and this is *pūrva-rāga*.

Coming from the heart, just from the glance, as Lord Śiva is saying, *Radhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa*, he’s just desiring a simple glance from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. He doesn't have to tell Kṛṣṇa, "Don’t be late." He’s never late; he’s always on time. The quality of a lady or a gentleman is always being on time. Prabhupāda was always on time; he was early. I learned that from him; Prabhupāda was always early. You know what it’s like when you host someone at your home? You invite someone over and they’re like an hour late; it’s not proper etiquette. To be on time—these days they say to be late is fashionable—but because he wanted to be on time, everything went very smoothly. He had no problem being on time because that’s when he got to see the merciful glance of Śrī Rādhā. These are loving exchanges before the meeting; this is all *pūrva-rāga*. *Pūrva-rāga* means all the love that goes on kind of in secret until finally one day they get to meet. So that happens here every morning; it means that it’s still going on.

As discussed many times, *prakāṭa* is when Kṛṣṇa was here 5,000 years ago, but he left, but he didn't leave—he is still present in Vṛndāvana in unmanifest pastimes. You can see when your eyes are covered with the salve of love, that salve you can’t buy in the pharmacy. That salve of love comes gradually by chanting.

So then, they’d all go out, this area, the cows would graze in the area, and all the cowherd boy pastimes they’ve been discussing in the last few weeks; then it came time for lunch. Kṛṣṇa would sit down and the boys would have their lunch pastimes, and then in the evening it was time to go home. So this was a forest of Kadamba trees, remember, and Tamāla trees, which is blackish in color. She goes into ecstasy thinking it’s Kṛṣṇa. In her ecstasy, when Kṛṣṇa sees a Tamāla tree, he remembers Rādhā, because the Tamāla tree has a light color, and when the sun shines on the Tamāla tree it’s golden, *taṭit-kānti-candra-vṛndāvaneśvarī*—reminds him of Rādhā.

So when it came time to finish the pastimes for that day, Kṛṣṇa would climb the tallest Kadamba tree here because the cows are scattered everywhere, right? He’d climb the tallest Kadamba tree and from the top of the tree he’d take his flute and *ter*—*ter* means "to call" in Sanskrit—he’d call the cows from the top of the tree with his flute, so therefore, *Ter Kadamba*. Yesterday we were discussing how Kṛṣṇa is very expert in languages; one of his 64 qualities is he can speak the language of the deer, the language of the foxes, the language of the butterflies—they also talk—and the language of the bees. He knows all the languages. He calls the name of the cow with his flute; like, you can hear different notes. Our girls are very expert at flute, violin, saxophone, but Kṛṣṇa, he can make the sound of a name of a cow by playing his flute.

I think so, that’s better, very good. Kṛṣṇa could actually say the name of the cows; he called them, they’d all assembled here, and then he had a long string of counter-beads, 900,000 pearls. So as each cow came in, he pulled down one pearl, two, three, four, five—I’ll be here for six hours—seven and eight, 900 pearls counted; when they’re all here, they go home.

Just to the front here, they’d all wait for Kṛṣṇa, and this was the festival we hear about every day. As Kṛṣṇa came home with his cowherd friends and the cows, all of Vraja was waiting because they felt so much separation from him. Because the moments of separation from Kṛṣṇa to them is like 12 years or more, you can imagine. Every day was fresh, it was all new, it was a new experience every day. Can you imagine what that festival was like, or is like? And it’s waiting for us; it’s waiting for us in the spiritual world. Why dally here? I want to go home immediately. When I was a boy, I used to like the war stories, and there was one—I forget the name of the war story—but the American boys were coming home, I think it was during the Civil War, and the boys were coming home from the Civil War in America. There was one song that the people used to sing as the soldiers came home, and it really stirred my heart. I liked that particular mood that they were being welcomed home after being gone for so many years in the war.

"When Johnny comes marching home again, hurray, hurray! When Johnny comes marching home again, hurray, hurray! The girls will sing, and the boys will shout, everyone will dance about, over the day when Johnny comes marching home again!" 

I thought of a mantra I want you to learn here, but that stirred me. So then when I read about Vraja, you know, that came and gone as a young boy, but when I hear about Vraja, I think of that song, how they’re dancing and singing as Kṛṣṇa comes home again. That’s in my mind. Yeah, I want to do that. All right, so it’s a place for many different transcendental *rasas*; you know, the *sakhya-rasa* with Kṛṣṇa’s friends, *vatsalya-rasa* with Mother Yaśodā nearby, and *mādhurya-rasa*, the Gopis going by. This is a special place. Rūpa Gosvāmī came to Vṛndāvana on the order of Mahāprabhu to renovate Vṛndāvana, to find the lost places of the pastimes. Rūpa Gosvāmī discovered this place by his transcendental vision, and it became one of his favorite places. Rūpa Gosvāmī liked to come here, right here, and do his *bhajana* where you’re sitting.

You know, we were talking about Sanātana Gosvāmī the other day, and he went after Gangā had Govardhana; he did his *bhajana*, that deity of Śiva, he did his *bhajana* there. Sanātana Gosvāmī liked to be near Madana-mohana. Another place used to be Rūpa Gosvāmī used to like to come here in this forested area because the way these trees were growing, you see, they’re kind of growing over like this to make a little house. You know, like kids like to make a house, girls' playhouse? So these trees, they grow up in such a way that they create a little house. You could hardly see inside; this is where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would enjoy their very sweet pastimes.

And these *kuñjas*, these little flower groves here and tree groves, they would come and they’d have their pastimes. So this reminded Rūpa Gosvāmī of that, so that you can see these trees just like 500 years ago. This is what it looked like, but even thicker. *Kalpa-vṛkṣa* means desire trees; they’re fully conscious. In separation from Kṛṣṇa, in the mood of Rūpa Gosvāmī, all the leaves would fall to the ground, be bare, barren—all the flowers, all the leaves. And when he would write about *sambhoga*, when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would meet, then the trees would blossom again as soon as he started writing, with flowers and leaves. That would be a special effect in a movie about the life of Rūpa Gosvāmī. Nowadays we have so many nice special effects in cinema, so the movie would be, he’s writing and crying in separation—all the leaves and flowers, you see that—and then he starts writing about Kṛṣṇa’s meeting, and then everything comes [alive]. That’s real cinema.

So, one day he was writing here one very important scripture called *Upadeśāmṛta*; Prabhupāda translated it as *The Nectar of Instruction*. The British government was doing a study if this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is bona fide or not. They gave several scholars all of Prabhupāda’s books, and they read all of Prabhupāda’s books, and the government said, "Just give us one book which explains very nicely the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement’s philosophy." So they decided, all these British scholars, that the book which most properly presented our philosophy and culture was *The Nectar of Instruction*. This is a little book. The painting, actually, on the altar here, it’s the deity of him writing. He remembers that it’s his dear brother, his elder brother Sanātana Gosvāmī’s appearance day. Sanātana Gosvāmī stayed a little further away at Pāvana-sarovara, a little lake at the base of Nandagrām. So he said, "It’s my brother’s birthday; I almost forgot. What do I have to offer him today? What could I do? I should be offering a feast; it’s his appearance today. What do I do?" He doesn't have any utensils for cooking; he would just go begging in the villagers around here, *madhukarī*. He’d go to four places every day; whatever the ladies gave him, that was his food. He couldn't cook a feast.

He’s lamenting, "This is terrible, I can't honor my older brother’s birthday. I don't have any feast to offer him; I wish I could come and embrace you." And he’s there and he’s writing and he’s lamenting like that. Suddenly, one young girl, she comes down to the forest here on a trail with this plate, a big plate of prasādam. So he’s surprised; she comes in and gives it to Rūpa Gosvāmī. He’s surprised because you know, usually he begs, but this beautiful girl gave a big plate of prasāda. He said, "Where did this come from? You didn't know there was a wedding today in Nandagrām? It was a big wedding, and they said to bring you some of the feast." Sanātana Gosvāmī was so—he called for his elder brother to come from—he came over here. He said, "You know, happy birthday!" Delicious—it was still warm, the salty items were warm, and the sweet rice, the *kṣīra*, it was still cold. So they took prasāda. They sat down and each of them took something, a little, and they put it in their mouth. And as soon as they ate it, they experienced the ecstatic symptoms of love of God just by tasting that.

Perspiring, and they couldn't talk properly, and became dizzy and felt unconscious and came back out. So sometimes he said, "Where did you get this prasāda? It’s bringing on ecstatic symptoms." He said, "Well, you know, one of the girls, she said there was a big wedding near to where you’re staying at Nandagrām, and this was a feast that they sent to you." Rūpa Gosvāmī was staying at Pāvana-sarovara, over at the foot of Nandagrām. He said, "There was no wedding today; is this girl who brought you this prasāda—" Started to describe her, because he saw her face to face. And as he was describing her, they both realized, because they were talking about her 25 transcendental qualities—because that was very obvious in her character, her behavior—they both realized at the same time, "Wait a minute, that personality was Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī!" She cooked and brought that prasādam to you for me. And when they realized that they had taken service from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—rather than give service to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—they felt very bad and they felt unconscious.

So they’re celebrated by taking the rest of that prasāda cooked by Śrī Rādhā given to Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmī. Her birthday celebration: she was well aware that she wanted to honor her devotees. The Lord loves those who love the Lord. All those things happened, and Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote *Upadeśāmṛta*. Rādhārāṇī brought the prasādam; it’s saturated with Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When we came here in the early 70s, ’73, ’74, we came here, there was a little grass hut and this was just all forest here; just a little grass hut with this painting of Rūpa Gosvāmī writing *Upadeśāmṛta*. In the background in the painting, you see Rādhārāṇī coming with the prasādam. You have to see that before you can see it on the front cover of *Upadeśāmṛta*, but look at the painting before you go. That’s the deity, there’s Rūpa writing and there’s Rādhā coming. It was just a grass hut, and now in the last 40 or 50 years, it’s developed into a very beautiful park here.

And that is due primarily to the devotion of the Bābājī here who lives here with one other sādhu, one of his *śikṣās*. The two of them, they take care of this place and you see what it’s become. He knows the pastime very well; often he reenacts the pastime for all of us, and the sweet rice comes out and he does this whole thing with the flute. But I think he probably did it 10 or 20 times today, yeah, ran out of sweet rice. But because he takes such wonderful care, it all manifests from his devotion to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and his deities of Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma. We always give some contribution when we come here; we give a donation so they can continue to flourish this wonderful place.

It’s very important when we come to these places to give some donation for our own purification, to make sure that these places keep flourishing for many centuries, for many millenniums to come. So, two nectarian kathās we’ve had today. Actually, one couple approached me during prasāda, and they’re from Bangalore; they had recommendation for initiation and they’re leaving tomorrow. So, right there on the banks of Kiśorī-kuṇḍa, I did the initiation; I took a little talk on the beads and I named her Kiśorī-kuṇḍā. Okay, Jaya, Jai Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Haribol.""