"*00279*.*
"Welcome everyone to the continuation of our seminar on the 100 questions asked by the Yakṣa. Dharmarāja repeatedly mentions in his books that asking the right questions and finding answers is the most important task of a person. All living beings are busy with questions and searching for answers. But unlike people, other forms of life are busy with questions: "Where is my food? Where will I sleep? How will I defend myself, copulate, and so on?" Although from morning to evening, everyone—both people and animals—are busy with questions and answers, since we have a huge advantage in the human form of life, a developed mind, we can ask spiritual questions and seek spiritual answers. For example, this is what the Vedānta-sūtra begins with. It is said that now that you have received the human form of life, your main task is to ask spiritual questions—ask about who you are in a spiritual relationship. Since human life carries special advantages, we also have a special duty to seek answers to these questions and get very clear answers before we die.

Nature, including you and me, is born in ignorance. We are born in material and spiritual ignorance. But unlike people, as they say in the Vedas, animals are born, live, and die in ignorance. But man, despite being born in ignorance, is destined to receive transcendental knowledge and enlightenment before death comes. And so, Śrīla Prabhupāda says that real human life begins from the moment we ask such questions, and it doesn't matter when we start asking them—at 5, 25, 40, or 75. Before we ask such questions, our life is no better than the life of refined animals. For example, if you are studying at the institute, you are 21 years old, and you meet a devotee on the street spreading your real human life; if someone meets you after that and asks how old you are, can you tell me "one day old"? They can answer you, "But you don't look like a one-day-old child." You can say, "Well, Mahārāja explained that real life begins with spiritual questions." And as a result of the influence of Kali-yuga, rarely does anyone awaken interest in real spiritual life, and we have degraded so much that we don't even know what spiritual questions to ask.

We are, of course, very skilled in asking questions; therefore, we have śāstras. Reader, know perfectly well what it is: a question asked by one great devotee and the answers to these questions which are given by another great devotee. The entire Bhāgavatam, from the first to the last canto, consists of various questions and answers in which spiritually exalted personalities ask. By reading Bhāgavatam, we learn what questions to ask and what are the correct answers to these questions. Also, Śrīla Prabhupāda defined this as an ideal quote: "Perfect questions, perfect answers." Krishna consciousness is that we know who to ask and we know what questions to ask, and thanks to the answers, we progress in spiritual life. Thanks to spiritual questions, we can overcome the influence of ignorance, which is the source of all our suffering, and Krishna Himself recommends that we approach spiritual mentors and thus achieve enlightenment in consciousness. One of the classic verses speaks about this consciousness; this is a verse from the Bhagavad-gītā which speaks about the importance of sitting on spiritual topics. Krishna says that we should find a guru and humbly inquire of him, and if having received answers to our questions, we will embody their lives through service, we will rise above the influence of nature and become transcendental. In other parts of the Vedic literature, we will find many questions and answers; if we live according to this knowledge, we can solve many problems. 

Yesterday, we described the background of the circumstances under which 100 questions were asked, and provided that Mahārāja answered all 100 questions correctly, his brothers could return to life. We can imagine how difficult it was. You all probably remember how you had to be nervous during final exams at school. Remember what pressure you were under at that moment? You understood perfectly well that if you answered the questions incorrectly, you would fail the exams; you would not get any results. If you answered poorly, you could only enter some non-prestigious educational institution. Good answers gave you very great opportunities, so you were nervous. I remember that when I was taking the exam, I was very nervous and my mother calmed me down, and sometimes students are so nervous that they do not pass the exam, of course. But a completely enlightened soul—and in the case of such exalted souls—they hear the answers that Krishna Himself gives them from within. 

Once, more precisely, a correspondent asked a question about where you get all your knowledge from, and the student sitting next to him did not immediately answer; he was immersed in thought. It seems the student herself said, "Our Guru gets answers from sacred books." The seeker looked at him and said the answer was wrong. "Krishna personally tells me the answer." This is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: "The one who serves me with love and devotion receives understanding, thanks to which he comes to me." Thus, in the hearts of pure devotees, by the grace of the Lord, transcendental knowledge is fully manifested. They never make mistakes. They never make any mistakes, and in the case of such pure devotees, such as Yudhiṣṭhira, Krishna Himself gives knowledge from within, unconditionally. That is exactly the position Mahārāja was in, being a close associate of Krishna, accompanying Him 5,000 years ago. 

So, the first question: after an hour and a half of introduction, we got to the first question. I started with such a question addressed to Yudhiṣṭhira: "Who is the best companion?" An interesting question, but of course, Mahārāja had to answer on a transcendental level for the benefit of all living beings. Therefore, he said, "My dear, the mind is the best companion." Because the mind is the very friend that can save from any danger. It is said that a friend is known in trouble. A broken position, and the mind is the force that can save us from material dangers. The purpose of the mind, as Śrīla Prabhupāda explained, is to distinguish between good from bad, right from wrong. And if we use our minds correctly, we will always make the right decision, act correctly. In consciousness, there are two paths we can take: *pravṛtti-mārga*, the path of sense gratification, and *nivṛtti-mārga*, the path of renunciation of sense pleasures, which culminates in the development of Krishna consciousness. And all the ācāryas, addressing our minds, remind us that material life is like nectar in the beginning but poison in the end; but spiritual development, Krishna consciousness, can be poison in the beginning because we have to follow so many prohibitions and restrictions, but in the end, it becomes the nectar of spiritual life. Therefore, thanks to our minds, we can decide what is best for us: do we want to enjoy a few moments through the senses, or do we want to enjoy forever? In Krishna consciousness, we need to make a choice, and in order to make the right decisions, we need a developed mind. Krishna says that above the senses is the mind, and above the mind is intelligence. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda once said in Detroit that the mind is so close to the soul. Sometimes our senses pull us, forcing us to perform a certain activity because it brings pleasure. Sometimes we are pushed by emotions, we say, "I just want to do this, don't stop me," but through reason we can understand that activities on the sensory and emotional level will not bring any positive results, and therefore we control ourselves and continue to act. But because our mind and senses pull us everywhere, the function of the mind is to understand what the consequences of our actions will be, and if the consequences are unfavorable, we must decide not to act in this way. Of course, there are always problems, but under the influence of Kali-yuga, for the most part, our mind is destroyed under the influence of sinful activities: intoxication, gambling, and illegal sex. Our mind is destroyed, we cannot make the right choice, and because of this, our suffering, everything, and our sinful consequences are increasing.

And what is the hope of the inhabitants of Kali-yuga, whose mind is destroyed by sensual pleasures? How can they use it? If you lack intelligence or if your intelligence is covered, use the intelligence of those who have it. Use the intelligence of spiritual leaders. And where can one find pure intelligence that will not be clouded? It is available in the Guru, in the Śāstra, and in the Sādhu. For example, I am not particularly educated in music theory, but if I repeat this without distortion, then everyone will think that I know everything. In fact, everything that we talk about, we learned, and receiving knowledge from Prabhupāda, we repeat this knowledge, and it seems that we know everything ourselves and act on the basis of this knowledge, thus demonstrating spiritual intelligence. For example, a reasonable method: if you do not know, ask someone who knows, you will also find out. Prabhupāda said that the most important knowledge is to know where what is possible to find. The conclusion: the most important intelligence is when we act in accordance with the conclusions given to us by Guru, Sādhu, and Śāstra, and this spiritual intelligence is completely infallible. 

Well, one question for one, there is an answer. There are only 99 left, and we take turns answering questions today. The next question is his. I smiled and said the answer to the first question is correct, your brothers have hope now. The responsibility lies with the other Prabhu to answer the second question. I asked: "How one can achieve something, how one can achieve the greatest?" And Mahārāja answered: "Everything desired can be achieved through the performance of austerities and through discipline." Let's repeat the question again: "How can one achieve greatness?" Answer: "Everything desired can be achieved through asceticism and discipline." Prabhupāda once said that even materialists nowadays perform asceticism. For example, we have a very developed medical science, and these people performed great asceticism to obtain the same. In other sciences, people perform great asceticism in order to obtain what they consider great. Basically, materialistic goals are pursued, and we can compare with this the asceticism performed by Lord Brahmā. Lord Brahmā was born in darkness; he did not know who he was or why he was there, and he also received information from two syllables: *tapa*, to perform in the same way. 

If we want to achieve true greatness, we need to perform transcendental asceticism, no matter what we strive for. Without asceticism, you will get nothing, but if we want to obtain transcendental benefit, we must perform asceticism for the sake of Krishna. Even the favorable results that we receive in life, we receive not only thanks to our efforts that we make. Prabhupāda explained that everyone makes efforts for the sake of wealth; some people work very hard and yet remain poor. Therefore, there is another important factor in performing austerities. The secret of obtaining the results of austerities is that the results are given by Krishna. Those who receive the desired results in this life must have performed some pious deeds in the past, because it is Krishna who gives all the results of our austerities. Sometimes He acts through His representatives such as the demigods. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that even those who worship the demigods receive what they want, but Krishna says, "In fact, these benefits come only from Me." Therefore, Śāstra recommends that we must perform austerities for the sake of achieving the transcendental. He says that thanks to these austerities we will purify ourselves and in the end we will achieve *brahmasaukhyam*, spiritual happiness, which is limitless. 

And as Mahārāja said, with the help of reason, we must understand what is really needed. If we perform austerities for the sake of achieving material benefits, we can receive them, or we may not receive them, because everything depends on our karma. The coolness of Mahārāja explains that material happiness and sorrow come to us automatically; we do not strive for disappointments, but they come. And sometimes we strive for happiness, but it is still not there. Therefore, he recommends saying to his friends: "Strive for what is unattainable in this world." We know that Lord Brahmā achieved success thanks to austerities and thanks to chanting. We can also understand: we have our austerities, and the main activity of Kali-yuga is chanting. This is a sacrifice that brings the highest satisfaction to the Supreme Lord in His most merciful form to us. The results we strive for—and this is not done without help—devotees understand that we receive all the results of our activities by the grace of the Lord, and thanks to such understanding, they can achieve what they really strive for. In the human form of life, the highest result is purification of the heart and awakening of love for Krishna. 

Next question: "What is nectar?" Amṛta said that milk is amṛta. Really an interesting answer; different people would answer this question differently. For example, ignorant people would say intoxicants. This is nectar for us in the mode of ignorance; a person feels that he is enjoying nectar with some can of beer in his hands. Those who are in passion will say that for a person, nectar is a walk somewhere in the forest. Yudhiṣṭhira walks on a transcendental level; he answers questions only in connection with Krishna, and therefore here is the answer that real nectar is milk. It is not clear. The two most dear objects for Krishna are brāhmaṇas and cows, and we can understand that cows are more dear to Krishna than brāhmaṇas because He spends all day playing with cows; in these games, they do not participate. And cows are such important animals in human society that it says that if you have an acre or a hectare of land and several cows, all your needs will be satisfied. People put a lot of effort to achieve very simple things; have land on which to grow food and have a cow, because a cow gives a lot of valuable manure. 

How can excrement be wonderful? Because cow dung has all the antiseptics; if you are injured, it can have a very strong disinfectant effect of all, killing bacteria. How did you manage to cure this infection by simply greasing the place on the cart? Cow dung can be used as fuel for a fire to cook food, and the food will have a different taste depending on the fuel it is cooked on. The best taste of food will be when cow dung is used for the fire. A little worse if firewood is used, worse than firewood, gas. If you want to please your spouse with delicious food, collect cow dung and cook on it. He will be ecstatic—although he will ask about horse manure in the apartment. Well, Mahārāja recommended this to us. I'm trying to make you happy. You can also cover all the walls and floors with cow manure, and so your house will be very warm in winter and cool in summer. A cow also produces milk. In New York, he said that cow skin is a first-class material; I was not against cow skin, but he said that skin can only be removed from a cow if it dies a natural death. Well, of course, the best product of a cow is ice cream. Can you imagine if dairy products did not exist in nature? We would have no ghee, no cheese, no burfi, no sundae. Every devotee knows that the best sabji vegetable dish is the one with as much paneer as possible. That's right, on Sunday feast, when you are served vegetable dishes, sabji, you don't pay attention to how much broccoli or potatoes there are, you look at how many pieces of paneer there are, and thanks to this, you understand. Who agrees? 

When I first came to Australia, on Sunday feast, the devotees said that today we would have tomato sauce, they called it. This is also what devotees cook in Australian restaurants; the most popular dish, which they called paneer, is what everyone really likes. Even from a scientific and medical point of view, we can evaluate milk, which Prabhupāda defined as a miracle food. There are two reasons for this statement. First of all, it is a whole food diet. You can live simply on milk. For example, children eat only milk, which gives them everything they need to maintain and grow, so it is a miracle food. And for example, yogīs, those who are determined to leave this world, can support their existence solely on milk and fruits. Once, visiting Kathmandu, Nepal, we went with the treasurer to visit a milk woman. What kind of milk woman is this—a woman who drank for 38 years only a little milk? Will he be thin and all crooked? But when we arrived, we saw that he was shining, he had a lot. That is, as if everything was fine with him, he was full of energy with a clear mind, and I asked, "Do you have a desire to eat something else?" He quoted this answer and said that milk is real nectar. So, this is whole food that is quite sufficient for a living being, but we can even more deeply comprehend this topic. What is the nectar of this special product that we call, which we use? 

The most important miracle of milk is that it restores brain cells or restores our mind, destroyed by the influence of Kali-yuga. We develop the ability to understand spiritual themes in the consciousness of Krishna. It is very important for us to understand philosophy because this knowledge protects us from the influence of material nature, and also an understanding of philosophy reveals to us the glory of the spiritual world. We need to understand the Vedic philosophy for longer than 11 minutes 28 seconds, then our consciousness begins to wander. For example, someone is telling Bhāgavatam and we are completely focused on what he is saying, and then the mind goes somewhere, remembers what is at home, and what is happening there, and what will we have for lunch, when will lunch be, and we are in such a state of suspension when we look and see nothing, just an empty picture. And after 50 minutes of the lecture, we come to our senses and ask ourselves what is this all about. And under the influence of the inspiration of transcendental knowledge, our eyelids begin to close, we are already immersed in—wake up yourself, did I fall asleep? I am not sleeping, I was not sleeping. But if our brain cells receive proper nutrition, we can immerse ourselves in transcendental knowledge and become conscious of Krishna. 

The decoration of the night is the full moon, and the decoration of the sage is the ability to forgive, the decoration of the country is a pious king, the decoration of the family is happy children, but knowledge is the decoration of everything. To understand knowledge you need brains. But since we only have half a brain working as a result of the consequences of our sins over many lives, you feed the cow. Take Prabhupāda's milk, you don't even have to add sugar. Milk is sweet in itself, and the next morning you will have a class on Bhāgavatam, and this is actually a scientific fact, it's a miracle. So before tomorrow's class, drink some milk, and you can also make ice cream from milk. 

Yudhiṣṭhira's next question is: "Who is a friend of a person given by the demigods?" This is not a question, this is such a blessing. So, the question is, "Who is the friend whose wife the demigods give?" Is such a friend—his wife's name is *kuśalī*? I want to repent first. Mahārāja read me the questions when we were driving here by car. A chance to do Śāstric research to find answers to confirm this answer. I will have to answer based on personal experience, but I remember one quote that comes from the most ascetic and learned, and when he said that if a wife is devoted, this is the highest blessing. I can say that this is truly a blessing based on personal experience. I don't know whether I mentioned or not that I have already been married to the same wife for 34 years. Personality, I'm still alive, I can honestly say that for me my wife was a very close friend always. Sometimes a spouse can be a source of purification for someone; can this be confirmed from scripture? Spouses can specifically cleanse us, although I will not warn you beforehand—this is such a subtle knowledge. That is, it is written in small print at the bottom of the document. 

And I also remembered the definition of a spouse. Husband or wife in Vedic culture, this implies responsibility, because without deep responsibility, one cannot exist. Modern married life begins with the fact that young men and women fall in love but do not take responsibility. And then when the love passes, they just follow their hearts, find someone else, and all this continues. And when we talk about a spouse and married life, this means accepting responsibility. And for the spouse of goodness, this is a great protection because in this world there is a lot of danger, and in fact, the husband protects the fidelity of his wife, and thanks to this, the mind is also under control because I have my faithful wife. This is what a true friend is, and especially when over the course of many years you have to go through many trials, relationships can deepen greatly. It is very interesting that usually wives are thought of in a certain way, but ultimately, husband and wife should become best friends, especially they should be friends in Krishna consciousness. The most important friend for us is Krishna, and if a husband and wife make commitments not only to each other but also to Krishna, then they can develop Krishna consciousness; then this relationship becomes completely different when we serve each other and help each other get closer to Krishna. 

I remember how I had a moment in my family life when I did not feel happy with someone else. No, not with anyone, and I thought, "Why am I so unhappy?" And Krishna gave me good intelligence. I realized: in fact, I should not enjoy this relationship. I should serve this person because the person whom I defined as my wife is a devotee of Krishna, and therefore it is my duty to serve her because she is a devotee. Suddenly, my mindset changed. And I felt happy; of course, this did not last very long. Other thoughts began to arise. In fact, we think that we will be very close with this person, that is, there is no one between us, only you and me. This relationship is based on the body, but between all of us there is someone: this is Krishna. We know that in all our relationships Krishna is present; this will no longer be a theory, but a practical reality. And when we help each other get closer to Krishna, these relationships open up more and more because family life begins purely on a spiritual level; otherwise, why start a family at all? It is a fact that through serving each other, through developing patience towards each other, these relationships become more spiritualized, and thus we understand that our spouse, who helps us in this regard, is our best friend. In fact, when entering into family life, we hardly know each other. In order to truly understand a person, many years are needed, therefore, commitments are very important.

My old friend Bhakti Varga told me one example. He was consulting a man who had already started his family life for the third time, and the man said, "Well, I don't love this same spouse anymore." He has been the president of the temple in Los Angeles for many years, and his family life has been going on for 40 years. An ideal family life. This man told him everything: "I fell out of love with my wife." And Bhakti Varga said that you cannot feel true love in less than 15 years. True love will take at least 15 years. If we truly share the values of Krishna consciousness in family life, we will be able to understand the meaning of the answer. Most likely, Yudhiṣṭhira would be very pleased with such an answer. So, by the grace of Guru, Sādhu, and Śāstra, we have successfully answered four questions and we have only 96 left. 

Tomorrow we will continue, and before, in conclusion, I would like to remind everyone that today is the day of the appearance of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and in the life of this pioneer of Krishna consciousness, there were many significant events. And one day, living on the bank of the Jalangi, he woke up in the morning and looked out onto the veranda, and he saw on the transcendental level on the opposite bank of the Māyāpur a giant temple, and he predicted that one day this temple would become the spiritual headquarters for Vaiṣṇavas of the whole world. And Śrīla Prabhupāda took this vision of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura very close to heart, and he really wanted all of us to participate in the embodiment of this vision in life and built this temple. In fact, it will be built because the desire of the Lord—he is known as all his desires are fulfilled regardless of the circumstances. Krishna is so powerful that he can manifest this temple in one second, but Krishna is very kind; he gives us the opportunity to help him in this service because we constantly repeat his name and ask him for service. 

So here it is, the service to fulfill Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's desire to ultimately satisfy the Lord by manifesting a temple in his abode. This is not just a burden to help in fulfilling such a sublime desire of the Lord himself, and we, of course, may not be able to directly build this temple, lay bricks or mix concrete, but we can sacrifice our own blood, our hard-earned money, in order to fulfill the desire of the Lord to donate some significant amount, and this responsibility is shared by all members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. This is not just the duty of those devotees who live in Māyāpur; this is a temple that belongs to each of us. This is our service, and when you walk along the path, you will see a small tent there; take it out and put it in a piggy bank so that at least a few bricks are paid for the construction of the temple. The benefit that we receive from the donation depends on at what time, in what place, and to whom we donate. If we donate to some poor person, this is of course good, but if we donate to Brahmā, this means that we are participating in the service of the Supreme Lord. And is it possible to imagine a better day on which to give a donation than the day of the appearance of the Ācārya who saw this temple about his spiritual vision on the day of the appearance? And there is no better goal than satisfying the desire of a pure devotee, and there will be no better time to give a donation than right now. Therefore, I recommend at the end of this lecture to rush to this tent to collect for donation and throw all the money that you have in your pocket as a donation in this box, and these are the donations that will be taken at the moment of death. 

When sweat throughout life, but nevertheless, this man became a devotee of Krishna under the inspiration of Śrīla Prabhupāda. Icons, and what kind of service this devotee was engaged in, there are many pages, but one service is very important: the day of the appearance of his spiritual master. Well, okay, let him return back to God. So I would like that through 10 minutes later this tent was completely empty and everyone ran out and quickly made a donation and then came back.""