There's a very beautiful verse glorifying Vṛndāvana spoken by Lord Caitanya.

It's in Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Chapter 21, Text 45. The darśana is very soft due to the mercy of the Supreme Lord, and it is especially opulent because of the mood of conjugal love that pervades every speck of dust in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Vṛndāvana is glorious because the transcendental glories of the son of Mahārāja Nanda are fully exhibited, and the last line is especially beautiful: "Under the circumstances, not the least anxiety ever arises in the heart of a devotee." And there's another verse I can share.

This is Kṛṣṇa speaking to His father, Nanda Mahārāja, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 10.4.24: "My dear father, our home is not in the cities, towns, or villages. Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills." So today, on the first day of our Kārtika parikramā, we find ourselves at Vṛṣabha Ghaṭ.

This was previously a ghaṭ on the Yamunā River. Five thousand years ago, the Yamunā River ran right where the parikramā mark is today. Actually, in those days, you could say Vṛndāvana was like an island.

At least this part of Vṛndāvana, not Braja Maṇḍala, but the village of Vṛndāvana was at that time surrounded by the Yamunā River.

She shifted in time by her own desire, but the ghaṭ remains here. A ghaṭ, of course, is a place where boats land to let people off from the river to the land, and it's a place where devotees come to bathe. Ācārya has described that this is the first ghaṭ in Vṛndāvana.

Of course, with their naked eye, when you look around, you see apartment buildings, you hear honking horns. But it is said that a saintly person sees through his ears, not through his eyes. Thus, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam brings Kṛṣṇa-līlā, remembrance of Kṛṣṇa, and that's the purpose of our parikramā: to always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget.

Lord Vṛṣabha had very beautiful pastimes here with Kṛṣṇa's gopīs. Everything's possible in Vṛndāvana.

Lord Vṛṣabha is actually quite popular in the Great Vṛndāvana or Mathurā Vṛndāvana.

There's another important ghaṭ called Viśrāma Ghaṭ. The history of Viśrāma Ghaṭ goes back to very ancient times, actually, you could say to Satya Yuga, when Lord Vṛṣabha, the boar incarnation, lifted the Earth, Bhūmi, from the Garuḍa Ocean. The Earth had been thrown there by Hiraṇyakaśipu, the first demon in the universe.

After killing him, Lord Vṛṣabha came to Vṛndāvana to rest, and he rested at Viśrāma Ghaṭ.

So, what did Vṛṣabha do at Viśrāma Ghaṭ here in Vṛndāvana when he came back to take a little break before going back to Vaikuṇṭha?

Well, he was with his eternal consort, Bhūmi Devī. The Lord always has His eternal consort with Him in any of His incarnations. Kṛṣṇa is the source of all incarnations, so He has Rādhā Devī, He has Lakṣmī Devī, and as Rāma, He has Sītā.

Of course, ultimately, they're all expansions of the original spiritual energy. He rescued her from the abominable ocean after Hiraṇyakaśipu had thrown her there. Vṛṣabha went and rescued her on the tip of His nose, and He picked her up and put her back in orbit.

Therefore, whenever you see a mūrti or deity of Vṛṣabha, He has Mother Earth on His nose. So, when they got to Viśrāma Ghaṭ, Bhūmi Devī realized this was Vṛndāvana.

So, she looked around and said, "I'm in Vṛndāvana.

My dear husband, please tell me something about this special place, Vṛndāvana." Vṛṣabha therefore began speaking the glories of Vṛndāvana.

He knows, of course, because He's an expansion of Kṛṣṇa Himself. He knows everything about Vṛndāvana.

He spoke the glories of Vṛndāvana to Bhūmi Devī millions and billions of years ago because it's the first place that Vṛndāvana's glories were spoken.

When devotees come for parikramā in Vṛndāvana, it's the first place they go to speak the glories of Vṛndāvana.

At Viśrāma Ghaṭ, Viśrāma Ghaṭ is also famous as the place where Kṛṣṇa came to take rest after killing Kaṁsa. After killing Kaṁsa, He dragged the king's body through Mathurā so that all the residents in Mathurā could understand the tyrant is dead.

So, these are some of the glories of Viśrāma Ghaṭ. And at Vṛṣabha Ghaṭ, again, Kṛṣṇa showed His form as Vṛṣabha to a group of curious gopīs. So, all this is called Kṛṣṇa-līlā. Nanda Mahārāja once said, "When we see the places where Kṛṣṇa enjoyed His sporting pastimes, the rivers, hills, and forests He decorated with His feet, our minds become totally absorbed in Him, and that alone is the purpose of going on parikramā." Haribol!

Hari bol!