"*00265*.*
"Hi everyone, a warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.* So, we are continuing with our series on the rāsa-dance, and today is part two. No doubt, the rāsa-līlā pastime is the topmost of all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* (2.1.209) quotes the *Bṛhad-vāmana Purāṇa*, wherein Kṛṣṇa Himself says as follows: "Śānti, yad yapi me—I enjoy many pastimes, and all of them are enchanting, but rāsa-līlā is so powerful that as soon as I think about it, I can’t explain what happens in My heart." So yes, rāsa-līlā, the rāsa-dance, is very, very deep.

Ultimately, it is relished mostly by rasika devotees. The Sanskrit meaning of *rasika* is "a connoisseur of bhakti-rasa, loving devotion." At the same time, however, hearing about the rāsa-dance is not forbidden for aspiring devotees, for sādhakas, if they hear this transcendental pastime from an authorized spiritual authority like Śrīla Prabhupāda or our previous ācāryas. In fact, Śrīla Prabhupāda summarizes the whole rāsa-līlā pastime, along with comments, in his book *Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead*, which we often refer to simply as the "Kṛṣṇa Book," and he gave it very early in the movement. And what is interesting is the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s* own statement on how hearing and chanting about the rāsa-dance, about rāsa-līlā, is beneficial for an aspiring devotee. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.33.39 says:

> Anyone who faithfully hears or describes the Lord’s playful affairs with the young gopīs of Vṛndāvana will attain the Lord’s pure devotional service. Thus, he will quickly become sober and conquer lust, the disease of the heart.

By hearing this specific pastime, we conquer lust, the disease of the heart. Also, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, we hear the same thing: "When one hears or describes with great faith the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa, such as His rāsa-dance with the gopīs, the disease of lusty desires in his heart and the agitation caused by the three modes of material nature are immediately nullified, and he becomes sober and silent." This is there in the discussion between Lord Caitanya and Rāmānanda Rāya.

And if more evidence is needed, he quotes his own spiritual master in the purport to that verse, saying: "Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī comments in this connection: Any person seriously inclined to hear about the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-dance as mentioned in the *Bhāgavatam* with great faith and a transcendental, spiritually inspired mind is immediately freed from the natural lusty desires found within the heart of a materialistic man." This is Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. And also, I read that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī said the following about hearing rāsa-līlā during a lecture he gave at Rādhā-kuṇḍa in 1932. I found it in the *Gauḍīya* magazine; the printing was 1934. Listen to what he says or what he told his disciples: 

> All these days, meaning most of his life, we have not spoken so much about līlā, but this is our most confidential asset. This is our only sādhya, perfection. One should not make the mistake of thinking that anartha-nivṛtti—overcoming impediments such as lust and greed—is the prayojana, the goal of life. One thinking like this will never enter into artha-pravṛtti, acquiring one’s actual need. For this reason, I will now begin speaking about aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.

I mean, we put so much emphasis, and we need to put so much emphasis, on cleansing the heart and everything, getting rid of the unwanted things, but that’s not the goal. The goal is pure love for the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And one more quote, if I may, from Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī in his commentary on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.33.39. What he writes is—it goes a little deeper, even:

> Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā is the very best of His pastimes. Indeed, it is the crown jewel of all the līlās. If one hears and then describes, speaking or writing about it with complete faith in the words of the scriptures, this will bring about his greatest welfare. If one does this regularly, he attains prema-bhakti even while material desires lurk within his heart. Eventually, the influence of that prema drives out the disease of lust and other ailments. These two processes go on simultaneously, but prema manifests first. Anyone can achieve success by following this process; no qualification is required. Of course, our qualification is that we sit at the feet of that master whom all other masters cited—Śrīla Prabhupāda—our only qualification.

It’s also important to mention before we proceed that there are two types of rāsa-līlā, rāsa-dances. One is called nitya and the other is called mahā—the rāsa-dance that happens every day, and the great rāsa-dance which is described as eternal. The *Ādi Purāṇa* mentions the *nitya-rāsa*, and our *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* describes the *mahā-rāsa* dance. And this *mahā-rāsa* dance is divided into two; there’s two types of *mahā-rāsa* dances described in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. One takes place in the autumn, *śāradīya*, and the other takes place in the springtime. So we’re getting a little technical here, but in this series, we’re speaking about the *śāradīya*, the autumn rāsa-dance, because they differ in different ways—I mean, there’s the rāsa-līlā dance, but the pastimes are a little bit different. 

So, we concluded in part one with, you may remember, Kṛṣṇa’s leaving the rāsa-dance with His most beloved, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Now, His ultimate purpose in this particular autumn dance was to demonstrate to the other gopīs how special she was, or is, to Him. So, this—the second part of our series covers the gopīs searching for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That’s what we’ll discuss today. And this lecture has five phases: discussing the gopīs’ madness in separation, discussing their inquiring from the trees and the deer as to where Kṛṣṇa had gone, then we’ll discuss their imitating Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and we’ll also discuss Kṛṣṇa’s enjoyment with—and eventually His abandoning—Śrī Rādhā and why He did that. So yes, it’s deep, but with Prabhupāda’s grace.

So, to begin with, the ācāryas say that the pain that the gopīs felt after Kṛṣṇa’s departure drove them to what we call *pramāda*, divine madness. They became mad, but again, it’s transcendental divine madness. And the ācāryas say that they became so absorbed in remembering Kṛṣṇa’s movements, His words, and His deeds that they ended up imitating Him. They were just so absorbed in Kṛṣṇa that they imitated Him. The ācāryas say eventually losing all distinction between themselves and the object of their love, and it’s described in such a state of consciousness they came to the point of declaring, "I am Kṛṣṇa," and their golden bodies turned the color of a monsoon cloud. How is this possible? I was reading the other day that very often when actors take on a particular role in a drama or a movie, they become so absorbed in it that it takes them a long time, after the production is done, to forget that role. They become very much like that person that they were portraying in the drama or the movie. That’s a mundane example, and here we have the gopīs totally absorbed in Kṛṣṇa. So, then they came to the point of saying, "I am Kṛṣṇa," and their golden bodies turned the color of a monsoon cloud. But in time, this madness subsided somewhat, and they just started wandering around Vṛndāvana searching for Kṛṣṇa.

And firstly, they inquired from the banyan tree at Vamśīvaṭa as to where He went. So, receiving no reply, they questioned other trees, and then they ended up questioning Tulasī plants and vines and creepers, and then the earth, and finally some deer. I remember this very clearly from reading Prabhupāda’s *Kṛṣṇa* book. And then, having inquired from every possible creature in the forest for a hint of Kṛṣṇa’s whereabouts but getting no answer, they became despondent and again felt what the śāstra describes as the ecstasy of complete madness. You know, we think of madness in a derogatory way, but in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, everything is sublime. So, they begin experiencing the ecstasy of complete madness, and in that state, they famously, as we read again in *Kṛṣṇa* book, acted out many of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, which the ācāryas say allowed them to taste some fleeting pleasure—allowed them to taste some fleeting pleasure. Now, an interesting example is how some of them, in reenacting Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, some of them played the part of demons because Kṛṣṇa, you know, killed the demons. So one gopī is a demon and one is, you know, pretending to be Kṛṣṇa, and they’re fighting. So some of the gopīs played the part of demons like Pūtanā, Tṛṇāvarta, Kāliya, Vatsāsura.

So one may wonder how these gopīs could assume the roles of demons. How could they be antagonistic to Kṛṣṇa, even if it’s—how would you say—make-believe? Well, a careful study of our śāstras reveals that they didn’t actually assume those roles. I was reading it’s really interesting: it was Yogamāyā who assumed those forms of the gopīs to play the roles of demons. Wow. And after that, you know, the fighting with the demons, the gopīs enacted—it’s described—Kṛṣṇa’s less ferocious pastimes by, you know, imitating Him as playing the flute or playing games or imitating how Kṛṣṇa devoured the forest fire or was bound by Mother Yaśodā. And even some of them imitated Kṛṣṇa’s lifting Girirāja Govardhana. And I read that while identifying with the Lord, which is called *tadātmya*—*tadātmīya*—as a child also imitated Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, but he was not as experienced in such advanced stages of ecstasy as with the gopīs, and therefore he didn’t experience the same bhāva or the love that they did. That’s just something I read; very interesting. 

So, by enacting Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, the intensity of the gopīs’ madness subsided, and they began wandering from forest to forest again in search of Him, again inquiring from everything they saw, you know, as to His whereabouts: "Where is Kṛṣṇa now?" At one point, a gopī noticed Kṛṣṇa’s footprints marked. How did she—how did she notice they were Kṛṣṇa’s footprints? Because Kṛṣṇa’s footprints are marked with very distinctive signs like a flag, a lotus, a thunderbolt, an elephant goad, and a barleycorn. That’s the marks that Kṛṣṇa has on the soles of His feet. Now, it’s really interesting that Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has commented on these markings on Kṛṣṇa’s feet, so I thought we’d just take a minute to—because the gopīs saw that, "Oh, here is Kṛṣṇa’s come here." So what did they see and what is the effect of seeing these auspicious marks on our beloved Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet? So, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura actually quotes the *Skanda Purāṇa* that on the sole of Kṛṣṇa’s right foot at the base of His big toe is the sign of His disc, His Sudarśana-cakra. And Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes that: "The six enemies headed by lust are destroyed for devotees who remember this mark." Then he says just below Kṛṣṇa’s middle toe is the mark of a lotus, and he writes, "The bee-like hearts of the devotees who meditate on this lotus become greedy to drink its nectar."

Then he describes that under the lotus is a flag, and he says—or he writes—"The devotees who meditate on that flag can attain victory over all anarthas and become fearless." Just meditate on that flag on the sole of Kṛṣṇa’s foot; you can attain victory over all anarthas and become fearless. Then he describes on the Lord’s right heel a sign of a goad. A goad is that metal instrument that persons who ride elephants—they control the elephant with that goad. And Viśvanātha says that if devotees remember this goad, their uncontrolled, elephant-like minds are brought under submission. Then he mentions at the base of the small toe of Kṛṣṇa is the thunderbolt, and he writes that "remembering this thunderbolt annihilates a mountain of sins." And this is all—this is not fictitious; this is all absolute truth. So you may have seen there’s paintings of Kṛṣṇa’s feet with the marks there. Now knowing the result of meditating on these marks, you can look at that picture and become purified and blessed. Then finally he mentions a barleycorn at the base of the big toe, and he says, "Remembering that brings all kinds of riches." Now there are other smaller symbols as well: there’s an umbrella, there’s four svastikas, there’s a fruit as well on the sole of the right foot. Then he goes on to describe the sole of Kṛṣṇa’s left foot. He says at the base of His big toe there is a conch, which he says if meditated on gives one all kinds of knowledge.

And there’s also on that sole of that foot the sky, a cow’s hoof-print, a triangle around which there’s four pots, there’s the half-moon, there’s a fish. And counting them all together, the right lotus foot and the left lotus foot of Kṛṣṇa, there’s 19 emblems in all together. So we’ll move on. Soon after discovering the Lord’s footprints, these girls continued following them for some distance until they suddenly saw another set of lighter and smaller footprints just to the left of Kṛṣṇa’s footprints that had markings similar to His. We won’t go in today to the markings on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet, but based on the position of these two pairs of footprints, the gopīs guessed what had happened: that Kṛṣṇa had taken this gopī away. We know her as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kṛṣṇa taken this gopī away. Now, according to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Rādhārāṇī’s very close friends—they’re called svapakṣa-sakhīs like Lalitā—when they saw these footprints of Śrī Rādhā, they remained silent out of respect. 

But Candrāvalī and her pakṣa-gopīs, the pakṣa-gopīs who, as we mentioned before, are Rādhārāṇī’s competitors, when they saw these footprints, they became distressed, like, "Oh, we have some competition here." They became distressed and they were unable to speak. Now, other gopīs, neutral to Śrī Rādhā—they’re called taṭastha-gopīs—the taṭastha-gopīs who find their happiness in serving Kṛṣṇa, they didn’t pay much attention here to the fact that there was some other gopī’s footprints and they didn’t make any comments. But the suhṛt-pakṣa-gopīs, who are described specifically as gopīs who neither obstruct the meeting of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa nor make any special endeavor for their meeting, but are still happy when the Divine Couple do meet—they spoke up. These gopīs spoke up and they spoke one of the most famous verses in all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism:

> Certainly this particular gopī has perfectly worshipped the all-powerful Personality of Godhead, Govinda, since He was so pleased with her that He abandoned the rest of us and brought her to a secluded place.

That verse—whoa—so important because it’s describing our beloved Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So, due to these varying perceptions, you know, different gopīs are seeing these footprints in a different way, various conversations went on as the girls continued following the footprints. Now, in narrating the conversations of these gopīs in his *Kṛṣṇa* book, Prabhupāda often repeats Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s name, leaving no doubt that the word meaning "she who perfectly worshipped" is an indirect reference to Śrī Rādhā. Now why am I saying this? Because critics accuse the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas of artificially exalting, you know, making her more prominent—making Rādhārāṇī more prominent—than the other gopīs. They say her name is never mentioned in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. But the ācāryas in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* directly refutes this claim. He writes, and I quote Śrīla Prabhupāda from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*: "Sometimes the critics of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* find it difficult to find Rādhārāṇī’s holy name in that book, but the secret is disclosed here in the word *ārādhanam*, from which the name Rādhā has come." And all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas share Śrīla Prabhupāda’s conclusion. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, for example, says in the following statement before the *ārādhanam* verse: 

> He writes, "Her worship—*ārādhanam*—consists of fulfilling the desires of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the Purāṇa is called *Ārādhikā*." 

So all the ācāryas are saying the same thing, and these pieces of evidence, you could say, substantiate that Rādhā is the dear-most consort, Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! So, as the gopīs continued following all the footprints, they came to a remote grove where they could see the Divine Couple sitting happily together in the distance, you know, laughing and joking and smiling at each other. But the entrance to that grove, it’s described, was guarded by a swarm of bees, and try as they might, the gopīs could not get past the bees initially to reunite with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. The Divine Couple themselves were—it’s described—they were startled by the sound of the gopīs trying to come in. So Kṛṣṇa quickly urged Rādhārāṇī to leave by another entrance, but she was too exhausted to move. All she could say was, "Kṛṣṇa, if you want me to go elsewhere, then you have to carry me. If you want me to go elsewhere, then please carry me." 

So the ācāryas comment that, "Trapped between the approaching gopīs and Śrī Rādhā’s reluctance to leave, Kṛṣṇa thought"—this is Kṛṣṇa thinking—"If the gopīs catch Me with Rādhā, they may quarrel again; then the purpose of My having disappeared with her will be lost. However, if I leave Rādhā, the gopīs will witness her ecstatic feelings of separation and thus recognize her superiority, both in terms of her devotion for Me and the pastimes we have enjoyed together." I’ll recite that again: "But if I leave Rādhā, the gopīs will witness her ecstatic feelings of separation and thus recognize her superiority, both in terms of her devotion for Me and the pastimes we have enjoyed together." He took her away, selected her. 

But as the gopīs started entering the grove, Kṛṣṇa said to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, "Quickly climb on My shoulder," but then He quickly disappeared. And the ācāryas say how—as unexpectedly as if Rāhu had devoured the full moon. So much beautiful poetry, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So you can imagine at that point, Śrī Rādhā was in shock. Her smile vanished, her eyes went dim, her face faded, and like a withered golden lotus she tumbled to the ground, reaching out desperately for Kṛṣṇa with her hands. And as she did so, she cried out—such a beautiful, from her lotus mouth, such a beautiful verse: *ha nātha ramaṇa preṣṭha*. 

> "O my life, O lover, O dearest one, where are You? Where are You, O mighty-armed one? O my friend, I am your most fallen maidservant. Quickly come to me and give me your darśana."

So I was reading that Gosvāmī explains that the word *ha* is a cry of pain expressing deep sorrow, and by the word *kvāsi* (k-v-a-s-i), *kvāsi*, Śrī Rādhā is indicating, "Where are You? You have so much love for me, so why have You left me alone and gone into hiding? Alas, because I do not know where You are, my heart is greatly troubled." Now, this word, if you may have noticed, *kvāsi* is repeated twice. The ācāryas say due to extreme perplexity—Rādhārāṇī is in extreme perplexity at this point—Śrī Rādhā faints. She fainted, but was visible to the gopīs entering the grove by her brilliant effulgence as she lay there. And arriving to where she lay, the gopīs felt great—what’s the word—empathy for her, empathy, and they tried in every way to revive and comfort her. Now, this is significant because, as we’ve discussed, even in this lecture, we know there’s some transcendental spiritual rivalry between some of the gopīs, for example between Śrī Rādhā and Candrāvalī, but the beauty of spiritual relationships can be seen in this attitude that all the gopīs were trying to comfort Śrī Rādhā. The ācāryas say that: 

> This is really beautiful: In the mutual pain of separation from Kṛṣṇa, even competitors’ feelings of rivalry transform into mutual affection. In the mutual pain of separation from Kṛṣṇa, even competitors’ feelings of rivalry transform into mutual affection.

All glorious to Kṛṣṇa consciousness! Wow. So then, well, I was reading Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes an unknown author again about these deeper feelings. He writes: 

> Separation from a mutual beloved awakens the spontaneous display of heartfelt affection in lovers. Separation from a mutual beloved awakens the spontaneous display of heartfelt affection in lovers.

Everyone wants to love and everyone wants to be loved, but that will only be satisfied in the realm of pure devotional service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So at this point, despite their best efforts, the gopīs could not revive Śrī Rādhā, and her condition put those gopīs in such distress that they all fainted—even those who were most determined opponents, their hearts also melted and they fainted. But then, I was reading—it’s so nice—but finally, the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa still lingering on the gopīs’ bodies reached Rādhā’s nose and caused her to awaken, and she sat up. And at that point, Rādhā and all the gopīs, they just sat there in a state of *vipralambha-bhāva*, or deep separation from Kṛṣṇa, until finally one gopī said, "He might be out of sight, but He must be nearby. He might be out of sight, but He must be nearby." 

So taking the hand of a friend for support, Śrī Rādhā rose to her feet, and joined by the other gopīs, started following Kṛṣṇa’s distinctive footprints. And as they walked along, I was reading, they gathered flowers to make a garland for Him as they searched for Him. So sweet: He’s abandoned them and they’re searching for Him, and as they’re going, they’re picking flowers and making a garland for Him as they’re searching for Him. But even though it was a full moon night, the dense trees—you know, the trees were very dense—they created such darkness that the cowherd girls could barely see each other, what to speak of Kṛṣṇa’s footprints. It’s a full moon, but the forest is so dense and so dark they can’t even see each other and they can’t see Kṛṣṇa’s footprints. So one girl suggested, "The forest Kṛṣṇa has retreated to is so dark that even moonlight will not enter. How can we follow Him if we can’t even see His footprints? Better we return to the Yamunā, the banks of the Yamunā, and let Him come to us." 

So one of the gopīs said, "Yes, no one can see Kṛṣṇa unless He wants to be seen. But if we chant His names and qualities, His heart will be moved." Prabhus, how important is that? "But if we chant His names and qualities, His heart will be moved, then He will reveal Himself to us without a doubt." Same theme there; chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa is the way that we will endear ourselves to Kṛṣṇa because we’re calling out His name in desperation. One time someone asked Prabhupāda, "What is the meaning of this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra?" And Prabhupāda could have given his standard reply, that "My dear Lord, my dear energy of the Lord, please engage me in your devotional service," but that time Prabhupāda said, "What does it mean, this Mahā-mantra? It means, 'My friend, my friend, my friend.'" This is how the soul should call out to Kṛṣṇa. So she said, "If we chant His names and qualities, His heart will be moved, then He will reveal Himself to us without a doubt." So all the gopīs, they agreed that this was the best course of action, and so they all went back to the banks of the Yamunā—exactly, they went to Govinda-ghāṭa—and there, deeply absorbed in Kṛṣṇa, they sang of Him in, you could say, a unified concert of voices. I think that’s a nice way to put it: a unified concert of voices. 

And that divine concert is now famously known as the *Gopī-gīta*. And that *Gopī-gīta* will be the subject of the third part of our series on the famous rāsa-dance. In a few days we’ll discuss *Gopī-gīta*, the songs of the gopīs. But today, I would like to conclude with a song that Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has written, and it’s called *Rādhā-rādhitā-rādeśa-rādhikā*. And we find that in his book *Kṛṣṇa*. So there’s three verses that I will quote. Here’s the first:

1. O Lord Kṛṣṇa, O Master of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Rādhā intently worships You and cherishes You, considering You more dear to her than her own life-breath. O Enjoyer of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, You become conquered by the exalted pure love of Śrī Rādhā. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
2. O Lord Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs observed a woman’s footprints next to Yours and surmised that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī had given up everything to follow You. When Your footprints suddenly stopped, then the gopīs surmised that You had disappeared to cause Rādhā to repent her own false pride.
3. O Lord Kṛṣṇa, when the gopīs found Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she described the amazing pastime that had happened. Rādhā and other gopīs then continually searched for You. O my dear Lord, You please protect me.

Thank you, Prabhu. We’ll be back in a few days with part three in this series on the rāsa-dance. Gracefully glorious. Thank you.""