"*00120*.*
"## The Great Teacher of the Holy Names

जय श्री चैतन्य, जय जय श्री चैतन्य, जय नित्यानंद। जय जय श्री चैतन्य चंद्र, जय गोविंद। नमः कृष्ण प्रभु नित्यानंद, श्रीवास भक्त, हरे कृष्ण। Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Rāma.

And dear devotees, today you and I will have a great privilege. We will be able to visit a place called Siṭā-bakul. It was there that Haridāsa Ṭhākura, in his time, during the time of the Lord, performed his *bhajana*. Haridāsa Ṭhākura is such a famous personality in our Vaiṣṇava tradition that I don’t even need to introduce him to you. No matter how many *ārātis* are performed in the temple, that many times we remember Haridāsa Ṭhākura, because after each *ārāti* we offer prayers to the Lord. And so we repeat after *kīrtana*. First we turn to our immediate *ācāryas*, and then we glorify all the devotees. And then we turn to Haridāsa Ṭhākura as our *nāmācārya* and glorify him. Then we read the Pañca-tattva mantra and continue.

I often travel around this world, and I see a huge number of small *mūrtis* of Haridāsa Ṭhākura made of wood. Devotees love to place this *mūrti* near the Tulasī tree and chant the holy names together. This is a fashion trend in ISKCON. And, of course, this was not the case at the beginning of our movement, but gradually it is expanding. Naturally, we want to be grateful to the one who makes all this possible. Of course, we are grateful to Nāmācārya Haridāsa Ṭhākura. An *ācārya* is someone who teaches us by example. And a *nāmācārya* is one who shows us the highest, the best example of how to chant.

The holy name is the *avatāra* of this age. This is stated in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. When we offer our obeisances to all those Vaiṣṇavas who have ever chanted, he is the best of those Vaiṣṇavas. He was chosen by the Lord of the holy name not simply because of some sentiments or feelings, but because he actually had the qualifications. This was written about by Sanātana Gosvāmī, who was a very close friend of Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī wrote the famous lines: "Some people behave correctly, but do not preach. Others preach, but behave badly. Someone, for example, preaches, but at the same time does not follow anything, and someone follows everything, but at the same time does not preach."

As for Haridāsa Ṭhākura, he writes the following: "O Haridāsa Ṭhākura, you simultaneously perform all your duties in relation to the holy name. You show this with your own examples, and you also preach. Therefore, you are the spiritual master of the whole world; therefore, you are the most advanced devotee in the whole world." This is the opinion of Sanātana Gosvāmī and all the Vaiṣṇavas of that time. Haridāsa Ṭhākura is very great. In fact, he is known as the one who chants *japa* best. *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.* He was a great example and inspiration for all those to inspire them to chant the holy names. 

In the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu there are two main points. Of course, the six Gosvāmīs told us completely about all the teachings of Śrī Caitanya, but there are two main ideas that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave us:
1. Develop a taste for chanting the holy names.
2. Develop compassion for conditioned living beings and give them the holy name.

In fact, the meaning of our existence is to find taste in chanting, and the meaning of our life is also to share this taste for chanting with others. This is what we live for. Such was Haridāsa Ṭhākura's contribution to the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Our *ācāryas* say that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu fulfilled his mission in this world with the help of those companions who surrounded him. Just like a good leader, he doesn’t do everything himself; he delegates some responsibilities. Certainly, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was able to spread the glories of the holy name throughout the world because he came in this Kali-yuga for that purpose. He is the Lord. But even now he continues to give this opportunity to everyone. He continues to preach.

There is a story when Śrīla Prabhupāda was walking with his disciples on the beach in Bombay. During these morning walks, he was often asked questions and gave answers. One of the disciples asked, “Śrīla Prabhupāda, since Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the Supreme Lord Himself, then why didn’t He personally spread the holy names throughout the world?” There was a humorous, transcendentally humorous moment. He demonstratively placed his cane on the sand, looked towards heaven, and said with confidence: "Why didn't the Lord spread the holy name throughout the world? Because He wanted me to do so." And in fact, that is what he did. But he left something for us too.

There is nothing more desirable than to serve a great master. Every day you and I pray for service when we touch our *japa*: *Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Hare, Hare*. "My Lord, please engage me in devotional service." At the time when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in this world, he bestowed this ability to form this flow of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu throughout the world. Kavirāja Gosvāmī writes about this: Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu revealed the prowess or glory of the holy names of the Lord through Haridāsa Ṭhākura, who took birth in a Muslim family. The Lord also completely accommodated the ecstatic love and transcendental pastimes of Vṛndāvana. He distributed them through Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. 

Understanding all this, who can actually penetrate the secrets of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's plan? Through Haridāsa Ṭhākura, Mahāprabhu spread the glories of the holy names. Through Sanātana Gosvāmī, he spread the basic philosophy. And through Rūpa Gosvāmī, he spread ecstatic love and transcendental pastimes in Vṛndāvana. How did Haridāsa Ṭhākura perform his chanting and preaching? He was known for his vows. He made a promise to repeat 300,000 names of Kṛṣṇa every day. That's 192 rounds a day. Let's be honest, sometimes we don't even manage to complete our 16 rounds. We finish reading our *japa*, but sometimes it is already late at night, and we almost fall asleep on the last round. Haridāsa Ṭhākura lived in this world, he had many responsibilities, but he still managed to repeat 192 rounds a day, which is why he is so charming to us.

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī writes that he was not born in the family of a true Brāhmaṇa. In fact, he was of low birth—from a Muslim family. We respect all authoritative religions, and we never criticize. But at that time, the Muslims attacked India, persecuted the Hindus, and ate meat. It is a real miracle that by chanting the holy names, although he was born in a low family, he gradually rose to the highest status. We know that he was a *nitya-siddha*, an eternally liberated soul, but the Lord arranges things to give us an example of what path we should take. His example is important because we remember the saying from the *śāstras* that in the age of Kali everyone is a *śūdra*; there is nothing to be proud of. It essentially shows the power and the mercy of chanting *Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, Rāma*. 

Sanātana Gosvāmī wrote: "Just as bronze can turn into gold by chemical processes, similarly, a low-born person who is attached to sinful activities can become a qualified Brāhmaṇa Vaiṣṇava by *dīkṣā* and proper initiation." If you need any more proof, look at your photo album from your high school graduation. Look at your picture when you were a teenager, and compare it to now. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda, addressing my generation, told us to look at ourselves: "Before you joined, you were all unhappy, you were dirty, sinful, just terrible. And now that you have joined this movement, you are dressed in beautiful *dhoti*s, you have *tilaka*, so you resemble the residents of Vaikuṇṭha." Śrīla Prabhupāda said that you were completely attached to sinful activities. How could you even take to devotional service? You were all fallen. But when you heard the sound of the holy name, you immediately came running. Such is the power of the holy name. 

In the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Madhya-līlā 1.141) it says: "Let the truth be spoken. Jagāi had only one sin: an addiction to sin. But even a faint reflection of your holy name is enough to burn to ashes the most terrible of sins." 

In 1451, 35 years before the appearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Haridāsa Ṭhākura was born in the village of Buḍhana (modern-day Bangladesh). His childhood is shrouded in mystery. Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was very fond of one scholar, Professor Nishi Kanta Sanyal, who wrote that one day a Vaiṣṇava was passing through this village while Haridāsa Ṭhākura was still a little boy. The gardeners/devotees would dance, chant, and recite *kathā*. By the grace of the Lord, this little boy naturally became attracted to chanting. Later, he took initiation.

Initiation is the blessing of chanting the holy name. A dim reflection of the name can purify the heart of sinful reactions. But if you want *prema*, you must chant the holy names after receiving initiation from a qualified Vaiṣṇava guru. These are very powerful blessings that help our hearts change. Such metamorphoses are visible: at first, a caterpillar is just crawling, then it turns into a cocoon, and then a beautiful, fully formed butterfly flies out. You receive initiation, and you are blessed to chant the holy name. Your chanting is your personal time with the Lord. Please take it to your heart and always cherish it as a precious gift. 

Kṛṣṇa came into this world to set an example for us; he also received initiation. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu received initiation from Īśvara Purī, who in turn was a disciple of Mādhavendra Purī. After receiving initiation into the holy names, Mahāprabhu returned to his guru and said, "Oh, my Lord, what kind of mantra have you given me? I just lose consciousness or I go crazy just by chanting this mantra. It makes me dance, cry, and chant loudly." Īśvara Purī replied, "This is the effect of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra: whoever chants it immediately develops this ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa." 

If you don't experience it, keep trying, try hard, because one day you will definitely attain that sweetness. We only get a dividend if we have invested something. In the *Skanda Purāṇa* it is said: "I see that the Kali-yuga is like a black poisonous snake with an open mouth and fangs. But do not worry, O devotee, and listen with faith. If you utter the name of Govinda even once, it will kindle a fire that will burn all the poisonous snakes to ashes."

Before Haridāsa Ṭhākura arrived in a village, his fame traveled ahead of him, just as at sunrise we first see the rays of the sun coming out from behind the mountain, and then the sun itself. Wherever he went, whole crowds were waiting for him. Raghava Paṇḍita dāsa wrote a book called *The Divine Name*, describing how all the pious inhabitants of the village greeted Haridāsa Ṭhākura as a great saint. They were inspired by his ecstatic symptoms and his love for the holy name. Who cares in what low-born family he appeared? By the power of the holy names, he attained the highest level. 

Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura writes in *Caitanya Bhāgavata*: "Haridāsa Ṭhākura was born in a low family, just as Śrī Prahlāda was born in a demoniac family and Hanumān was born into a family of monkeys. But despite this, the demigods always dream of being touched by Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Mother Gaṅgā begs him to enter her waters. Simply when you see Haridāsa, you become free from the fruits of your activities." 

Unfortunately, not everyone could understand his personality. Some are demonic and envious. They tried to deprive Haridāsa Ṭhākura of his glory. One person named Rāmachandra Khān even sent a very beautiful prostitute to seduce him. She entered his *bhajana-kuṭīra* and invited him to have an intimate relationship. He said, "Okay, but let me finish my chanting of the holy name." She sat next to him, and because he chanted the holy name purely, it immediately purified her. It is very important that the sound of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is constantly heard, as it purifies the entire space.

Later, the Muslim rulers became very angry with Haridāsa Ṭhākura because he changed his faith to Vaiṣṇavism and preached it to everyone. They arrested him and put him in prison. Prison is designed to cause suffering—the lights are on all night, you are not allowed to wear anything except a *gamcha*, and you sleep on the cold floor. The guards scold and frighten you. But devotees of that level are always in Vaikuṇṭha because they are in a relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 

His cellmates, who were scoundrels, realized he was a great saint. They prayed, "Pray for us, that we may be released from prison as soon as possible." Haridāsa said, "I will pray that you stay in this prison forever. Because when you weren't in prison, you never respected the devotees, and here suddenly you started to. Your present state of consciousness is very good because you have the time and opportunity to cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness with little opportunity for sense gratification. If you leave here, you will return to satisfying your senses and will degrade." This is the quality of a true devotee—humility and patience on one hand, and a fiery preacher on the other.

Subsequently, he was ordered to be beaten in twenty-two marketplaces. Usually, no one could survive this punishment. He was dragged through these marketplaces, yet he chanted the holy names of Lord Kṛṣṇa with great love. He didn't want to make Kṛṣṇa look unattractive. Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura comments that Haridāsa Ṭhākura didn't actually experience any pain. Like Prahlāda Mahārāja, who was mocked by Hiraṇyakaśipu, Haridāsa Ṭhākura did not feel pain because he was a *mahā-bhāgavata*. They are so busy in constant service to the Supreme Lord that external situations do not bother them. Lord Gaurasundara says in his *Śikṣāṣṭaka*: "Only one who is more tolerant than a tree can glorify Kṛṣṇa." 

Even more amazing is that he felt great compassion for those who were tormenting him. He prayed, "O Lord, please be merciful to them and deliver them from the sin they are now committing." Jesus Christ prayed similarly: "Forgive them, Father, for they do not know what they do." 

At the end of his life, Haridāsa Ṭhākura came to Jagannātha Purī to be with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It is a tradition to go for *darśana* of Lord Jagannātha at least once a day, but Haridāsa Ṭhākura was an example of humility. He thought he was low-born and did not go to the temple. The more you realize the greatness of God, the more you see your own insignificance. Humility is what adorns the crown of the truly holy. 

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu told him, "You can stay here. If you sit here and chant the holy names, you will simultaneously see the *cakra* of this temple, and it is equivalent to receiving the Lord's *darśana*." Love is always a two-way process. One day, Mahāprabhu came and saw Haridāsa Ṭhākura chanting under the scorching sun. He took a toothpick from Lord Jagannātha—a wooden stick the Lord uses to clean his teeth—and stuck it into the ground. It turned into a magnificent, shady Bakula tree. Haridāsa Ṭhākura loved to sit under it and chant his 192 rounds. 

One day, Mahāprabhu sent Govinda to take *mahā-prasāda* to Haridāsa. Govinda saw Haridāsa lying on the ground and chanting very slowly. Haridāsa said, "No, today I will fast because I haven't finished my *japa* yet." The next day, Mahāprabhu came and asked, "Are you ill?" Haridāsa replied, "My body is fine, but my mind and intelligence are disturbed because I cannot complete my rounds." 

Mahāprabhu said, "O Haridāsa, in this incarnation you have sufficiently preached the glories of the holy name. You don't need to repeat such a huge number of holy names a day." But Haridāsa revealed the real reason: "The real reason for my suffering, O Lord, is that soon you will wind up your manifest pastimes in the material world and leave it. I wouldn't want to witness that." 

The next day, Mahāprabhu came with a roaring *kīrtana* and his close companions like Svarūpa Dāmodara. He began to glorify Haridāsa Ṭhākura as if five mouths were speaking. Haridāsa, grieving in separation from the Lord, concentrated his eyes on the form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He touched the feet of Mahāprabhu and placed them on his heart. As the *kīrtana* grew, he touched the dust from the heads of all the devotees, applied it to his head, and looking at the face of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he left this world. 

Our *ācāryas* describe it like the departure of Bhīṣmadeva. Mahāprabhu lifted the body of Haridāsa Ṭhākura with his own hands and began to dance. The divine body was placed on a palanquin, and they came to the ocean shore. Mahāprabhu washed the body of Haridāsa Ṭhākura in the waters and said that from then on this ocean would be a place of pilgrimage. He dug a *samādhi* in the sand with his own hands, and placed Jagannātha *mahā-prasāda* and the flag from the temple in the *samādhi*. 

After this, Lord Caitanya went to the Nṛsiṁhadeva temple, sat there, took out his *sannyāsa* apron, and began collecting donations to hold a feast in honor of Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Even Svarūpa Dāmodara was amazed at how much love Mahāprabhu had for him. Kashi Miśra organized this feast, which was purchased with the donations Mahāprabhu collected. After the feast, there was a grand *kīrtana* in honor of this great personality.

Rādhe.""