"*00512*.*
"### The Lighthouse: Farewell Address – Polish Tour 2023

So, we are reading from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, First Chapter, text 21: "Knowing well that the age of Kali has already begun, we are assembled here in this holy place to hear at great length the transcendental message of Godhead and in this way to perform a sacrifice."

The age of Kali is not at all suitable for self-realization by the methods practiced in the Satya, Tretā, or Dvāpara yugas. Living a lifetime of a hundred thousand years, people were able to perform prolonged meditation. When the duration of life was one thousand years, self-realization was attained by worship of the Lord. With the maximum duration of life being 100 years only, and that combined with various difficulties, the recommended process of self-realization is that of hearing and chanting the Holy Name, fame, and pastimes of the Lord. The sages at Naimiṣāraṇya began this process in a place specifically for the devotees of the Lord; they prepared themselves to hear the pastimes of the Lord over a period of one thousand years.

By the example of these great sages, one should learn that regular hearing and recitation of the *Bhāgavatam* is the only way for self-realization; other attempts are simply a waste of time, for they do not give any tangible results. Śrīla Prabhupāda preached the system of *bhāgavata-dharma*, and he recommended that all those who were born in India should take the responsibility of broadcasting the messages of Lord Kṛṣṇa, primarily the message of the *Bhagavad-gītā*, because when one is well-established in the teachings of the *Bhagavad-gītā*, he can take up the study of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* for further enlightenment and self-realization.

Good morning. So, on the eve of our final program today, we are reading this very relevant verse. This is the sages, or perhaps a representative of the sages, saying that they had assembled at the place of Naimiṣāraṇya to perform a sacrifice for the people of this age thousands of years ago. This is their kindness—that they are thinking about not just themselves, but people in general. But not even just people in general; they are thinking of anyone and everyone who is born in the age of Kali.

Even nowadays, if someone is a "Good Samaritan"—you know, if there’s an old lady who can’t get across the street by herself, she has a cane and she’s hobbling, and somebody comes up and helps her across the street—people take notice: "Oh, this person is a Good Samaritan. He’s reaching out to help an old lady." Or somebody’s car breaks down, a Good Samaritan will stop, get out of their car, and help that person whose car has a flat tire. People notice these acts.

But mainly, people, especially in Kali-yuga, are just concerned about themselves—how they can obtain as much sense gratification, material enjoyment in this world, or just survive. Most people are just working to survive. There is a classic line from one of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s offerings to his Guru Mahārāja in the 1930s: "Struggle for existence, the human race, the only hope your divine grace." Meaning his spiritual master. It’s a realistic summary of what is going on in this world: basically, a struggle for existence. Even though there are so many conveniences in this modern age in 2023, still we all experience in our own way a struggle for existence: for money, for health, for whatever reason.

So, within this struggle for existence, which has been going on since the time of creation, if someone takes the time to think of another person’s welfare, people note that. But despite all good intentions, generally, that type of welfare work is on the bodily platform or the mental platform. You try to help someone physically, you try to help them with their mental problems, but there’s no understanding of the deeper issue—that we are here in this world because we’ve forgotten Kṛṣṇa. So we need some spiritual advice.

So many programs are established to help people who are struggling materially—medical programs, food relief programs, consultation for anxiety and stress, etc. Of course, the ultimate solution—we say in English, "panacea"—is a very strong word. Panacea means the ultimate solution where all problems are solved. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. How is that welfare work? One stroke: Kṛṣṇa consciousness. "All problems are resolved in this world. Having once returned to My abode, one never returns to the material world." And all problems are solved because in the spiritual world, there are no problems. There is no birth, disease, old age, death, stress, anxiety, conflict, or war.

And we are contemplating how to give people this panacea, this ultimate solution to all problems. It’s actually amazing, isn’t it? Thousands of years ago, they were at the beginning of Kali-yuga, and they were trying to come up with some solution not just for their own generation, but for 428,000 years, where people could take shelter from the difficulty of material life. What type of medical program can we establish? What type of food relief or housing can we arrange for the people? They weren’t even thinking like that; they were thinking of some spiritual solution. They were very wise. Each individual here or in the world should think that they were thinking about you and me. If someone is thinking about your welfare even though you don’t know it, you should be indebted to that person. They were thinking about each individual who unfortunately takes birth in Kali-yuga. So we are actually indebted to these several thousand sages at the beginning of Kali-yuga, sitting in the forest, thinking, "What can we do for the people who will be born in the next 428,000 years?"

They should be recognized, just like people like to recognize someone who excels in a particular field in modern society—a movie star, an athlete (they call him the "GOAT," the greatest of all time), or a war hero, or someone like Bill Gates, who gives billions of dollars. He said before he dies he wants to give away all his wealth for the welfare of society. That’s something, but as Prabhupāda said, it’s like blowing on a boil. The boil is painful, so you have to take the boil out; it has to be a surgical operation. With all due respect, the best thing that Bill Gates could do would be to give all his money to the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness and a big portion of it to the summer festivals that we are doing here along the Baltic Sea coast. Maybe then we would have hot water.

Actually, I was thinking last night, as I was watching so many people at the very end—like 10 o'clock—a full crowd stayed at that time. I was thinking, "No, this is amazing." But I was thinking, this isn't amazing. There are religious organizations that have functions where they fill football stadiums, and then someone comes forth and gives a lecture—like somebody speaks alone to a hundred thousand people. I’m thinking, "That’s where we should get to with our summer tour here along the Baltic Sea coast." Of course, it might be hard to find a hundred thousand people in the town where we were, but the idea is there. Prabhupāda said, "My only problem is I think big." The idea should be there, but to come to the point of being successful, that is a challenge. That’s what Prabhupāda meant. As much as people are being recognized for their superhuman feats in human society, much more important is to recognize sages like this who are thinking of our spiritual welfare, solving all our problems.

Each country has its highest recognition for citizens—in India, it’s the Padma Shri. It’s an award you get from the Prime Minister; it’s an official ceremony in different fields of activity like culture, dance, music, or war. They should give the Padma Shri to these thousands of sages who are thinking how to help all of us, our ancestors in the past, and all the people who will come in the future. Every one of them should get the Padma Shri. And I will go so far as to say every member of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness who is sacrificing for this great movement—there should be a long line to get the Padma Shri from the government of India.

Yesterday, I was signing books after the talk, and I looked to the side, and there was this long line of people with *Bhagavad-gītās*—maybe 15 or 16 people in line. We see this movement is producing results. There are a lot of people talking about solving problems in the world, but this movement is actually solving people's problems. They are buying *Bhagavad-gītās*, and in *Bhagavad-gītā*, they can find the solution to all problems. The results are there. We judge something, we say in Sanskrit, by the results. We also say, "Put your money where your mouth is." You are saying something, but let’s see your effort. What are you producing?

Prabhupāda said those who were born in India, who have the culture—and to some degree there is still some culture there—they should take up this message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and broadcast it all over the world. It says here primarily the message [of the *Gītā*]. So we see our god-brothers and god-sisters and the members of our movement in India, it is growing exponentially. I am amazed; every time I go to India, there are thousands and thousands of devotees. You go to a temple, I give a lecture, there are 4,000 people. And certainly, it is essential to establish or re-establish Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, as the foremost spiritual movement in India. That is so important. It’s not easy, because there is a lot of bogus philosophy, a lot of so-called gurus. So to establish ISKCON as of paramount importance in Bhārata—actually, that is the word. In Sanskrit, it can have different meanings. Formerly, the word "India" was not there; it was called Bhārata, because of a certain personality, a famous sādhu, a saintly person who appeared in India and practiced dharma. It is named after him. But *Bhārata* also means in Sanskrit "land of light."

India is the land of light. Not like England—England is a land of clouds, it’s an island, it’s always dark. Because the British Empire was once all over the world, they used to say the sun never sets on the British Empire, but now that empire is condensed into a little island, and the sun never rises in London. In India, it’s always—there is a lot of light, it is very hot now, 40 degrees in Vṛndāvana. If that light were to go out, the whole world would be plunged into the darkness of ignorance, and we couldn’t even begin to imagine how much people would be suffering. So it is imperative that that light, that knowledge, that art of living in this world so one can become free from saṁsāra and go back home, back to Godhead, it is imperative that that flame never goes out.

People think of India now as just Bollywood, but the glory of India is this. So our devotees, our brothers and sisters in India, are reviving this lost culture, and ISKCON is becoming very prominent in India; it’s saving the face of the Earth, giving people new birth. But the message has to go beyond the shores of India for the whole world. That was the message. Just like we have the lighthouse—people don’t even remember what a lighthouse is, they just want to go to the top so they can see the town. A lighthouse is to protect you from danger. There was no GPS hundreds of years ago, there was no WhatsApp, there was no way to send a warning to somebody; there was just this lighthouse on the shore so that boats didn't come too close to the land and crash into the rocks. It was a big light—a primitive method of warning someone of danger. That’s what a lighthouse is.

In the same way, India is like the lighthouse for the whole world, warning us against the perils of materialistic civilization and giving us the positive alternative: the lifestyle that we live as devotees, which can take us back home to the spiritual world, which is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss, whereas this world is temporary, full of ignorance and suffering. There is nothing—nothing compares to Vedic culture, to Vedic civilization. With all due respect, there are many religious traditions and spiritual cultures in the world, that’s fine, but the perfection of all of them is Vedic culture. The knowledge in the *Gītā*, the knowledge in the *Bhāgavatam*—that is far superior to what we will find in the other spiritual traditions. Again, with all due respect, it is so important that that tradition remains intact in India so that as time goes on, whatever chaos happens in this world, the solution is always there.

In my country, they used to say, "Go West, young man," for your fortune. But for your ultimate salvation, beyond just material prosperity—which of course is required, as Prabhupāda said human beings are not meant to live lives like cats and dogs, we need some material prosperity—but the highest purpose of life is spiritual salvation. So the deeper message is, "Go East, young man." Don't just leave India and go to America for IT technology and Silicon Valley, make a lot of money, and buy an iPhone. No, go East and study the message of the *Bhagavad-gītā*.

The mountain has to come to Muhammad; it was never just meant for the people of India, it is meant for the whole world. How do we know? Because in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa says He is the seed-giving father of all living entities. So all those who are wandering in this vast creation of material existence, they have to somehow at least get the opportunity to hear the message of *Bhagavad-gītā*. Kṛṣṇa spoke the *Bhagavad-gītā* for the whole world. The glory of India is this Vedic culture, and amongst the Vedic culture, the ultimate glory of India is the process given by the most recent incarnation of God, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The real glory of India, to tell you the truth, is when that message spilled out beyond the borders of India around the world. That is the real glory of India—not that India just had this culture for thousands of years and produced so many saintly persons. The real glory started 500 years ago when Mahāprabhu appeared. And then the defining moment of the glory of India was when Prabhupāda boarded the *Jaladūta* alone; he had one disciple on the docks, his first disciple, and he boarded alone to sail to the West. That was the quintessence of India's glory: that the message is now going to the whole world. It was meant to be like that.

We are very fortunate that we are part of that glory. But even the Indians are not just "Indians"; everyone is a servant of Kṛṣṇa. We are all ultimately meant to be servants of the Lord in Vaikuṇṭha and Goloka. It is interesting that those of other cultures, other births, other options in life, have taken up the message of India, taken up the message of Caitanya, taken up Prabhupāda’s message, and we are serving this glory of Vedic culture. I sometimes, sitting at the festival, look around and I smile because this is the Festival of India, but there is maybe a handful of Indian people putting on this performance; the rest of you are from 14 different countries. We are propagating Vedic culture with foreigners in Poland! Some people come to the lecture, come to the festival, they say, "Does anyone speak Polish here? We can’t even have any questions and answers." It’s just like—it’s all going on somehow by the mercy of Mahāprabhu.

Those who would represent this high culture and disseminate or preach this culture were brāhmaṇas. They built the architecture of where the faith could be practiced, they built temples with their hands, but only brāhmaṇas were qualified to speak. And to some degree, here also as well—because if you’re in the mode of ignorance and passion, how much will you understand? They could only worship the Deity; everyone could benefit by coming to the temple, but to give a lecture or to be a representative of this very exalted culture, that was the brāhmaṇas. And those brāhmaṇas were pure; they were not self-motivated; they were highly respected. People had the highest philosophy—they knew who God was. It wasn't just "God exists"; they knew that He was a person, they knew about His world, they knew about His associates. It was an impetus to go back home. They set the example of how to live a perfect life so people would be inspired to follow them.

But then that culture spilled out all over the world, and who is going to take it up? The people of the West—like, what are they? Brāhmaṇas? No. Are they kṣatriyas? No. Are they vaiśyas? They are not even śūdras; they are mlecchas and yavanas, meat-eaters, women-hunters. Prabhupāda used to say, "Just mad after sense gratification. How is the movement going to spread?" Historically, it’s like, how did this happen? He was thinking—he told us one time—he was thinking that how will the people of America be able to accept this message? No meat-eating, no intoxication, no illicit sex, no gambling. "They’re probably going to say to me," Prabhupāda said, " 'Old man, take your message back to India.' " He thought that maybe the Americans would just say "No way." He persevered because he said, "I had faith in the instructions of my spiritual master and I had faith in the Holy Names." And that is why everything happens, because of Prabhupāda’s faith in his Guru and faith in the Holy Names.

And a miracle happens. It’s just like that bell metal can be changed into gold by an alchemical, almost mystical process. In the same way, a low-born person could be turned into a brāhmaṇa, a Vaiṣṇava, by the power of dīkṣā or initiation into the chanting, the congregational chanting of the Holy Names. Mlecchas and this and that—not only into brāhmaṇas, but *suddha-sattva*, meaning pure goodness, persons who are empowered to spread the Holy Name all over the world. That’s all of you. You don't have to go East anymore; just stay in the West and preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You will become empowered and the world will become purified. This is all *Gaurā-śakti*, the internal potency of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It’s His internal potency that this is all happening. I think the demigods must just be amazed, like, "How did they do it, this summer on the Baltic Sea coast? So many festivals, so much prasādam, so many books, so many happy people." It’s all the mercy of Mahāprabhu.

Today, in the West, of course, it’s nice to go to India to get recharged, but this is our *prabhu*, it means our place of service. That may come someday, but this is the process. Caitanya Mahāprabhu states that those who serve the *saṅkīrtana* movement one day will get the darśana of Rādhā at His feet. One time, a devotee in Vṛndāvana went to one of the temples and he was watching the pūjā, and he was very inspired to see how the Deity worship was going on, kind of hankering to be able to do that one day. I bless you that in your next birth you can be born as a pūjārī here in Vṛndāvana's mercy. Someone blessed me, "If I am fortunate, I can take my birth in Vṛndāvana and worship the Deity." [I said] you should tell him that he should pray to take birth in the West and take up the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and become perfect and go back home, back to Godhead.

These are historic times. So many monumental events are happening in the world right now, and sometimes even devotees become affected by that—too interested in it. You know, amazing athletic events and political events and musical concerts and so many things like that; we become kind of distracted. The real history is how this movement is spreading like wildfire now outside of India. That should be written about on the front page of every newspaper in the world. I am amazed. Because my service, humble service at the festival, is the lecture, to see how people reciprocate—it’s like there is an immediate transformation of the heart.

I told you how one lady came to the festival and she bought a *Bhagavad-gītā* for her daughter. I said, "Oh, did you lose the other one?" She said, "No, I have twin daughters, so I bought one for one daughter, but then I realized I have to buy for the other daughter. Siblings are there, there may be some conflict there, so can you sign for my second daughter?" Two *Bhagavad-gītās* in one family! And she was a little upset because they were spending money—people, these are hard times, so they don’t have a lot of money—so she was kind of complaining to the husband, "Do we really have the money to invest in this book?" If there’s any fault, she said, "It’s your fault." "Yeah, you’re probably right." I said, "What’s going on here?"

She said, "Well, the other day, you came on the beach, you people, and they were singing on the beach and giving out invitations. I got an invitation; I thought, 'Wow, this looks amazing, a great cultural extravaganza from India, I’m going.' And my husband said, 'I’m not going, no way! I’m going to go to that with funny people, the way they’re dressed and they’re singing? I’m not going to go. I’m going to go with my friends to the pub and we’ll go around the village and drink all day, all night. You go to the festival, I’ll go drinking again.' "

"So, I came to your festival yesterday and I just had a wonderful time. I just had no idea; I still don’t understand what it is, but it’s just wonderful—the atmosphere, her wearing a sari, my face painted, and your talk, and the food. So, I went back home and told my husband—I had to wake him up because he drank all night—'It was a really wonderful festival, all right,' but I dragged him here tonight. I dragged him here, and then he sat in the lecture. My husband, his face just got bright and he was nodding and everything, and he just loved the talk. And then afterwards he said, 'I need that *Bhagavad-gītā*, I’m going to buy that *Bhagavad-gītā*.' I said, 'Honey, we don’t have the money.' 'We’ll get the money somewhere, I have to have this book.' "

This is *Gaurā-śakti*; this is the internal potency of Caitanya Mahāprabhu to change the hearts of the people outside of India, all around the world. This is the glory of India, it is. And this was all hoped for by the sages at Naimiṣāraṇya. They were trying to figure out exactly what was the process for this age because other ages had already come and gone—there had been meditation, there had been ritualistic activity, there had been temple worship—so they weren’t very confident that would work in Kali-yuga. So they just came to a point they couldn’t figure it out, and then Sūta Gosvāmī came and explained the essence of *Śrīmad-Bhagavatam*: devotional service to the Lord, which in the age of Kali means Mahāprabhu's process.

They were coming together to make plans for the people of Kali-yuga. We thank them, we are indebted to them, and we are very proud. We pray that our humble contribution—32 years here on the Baltic Sea coast for two months every year, living in these fairly austere conditions that we have here in this public school, sleeping in the classrooms and bathing in cold water, and the weather hasn't been ideal this year—we still pray that this can go on for many years to come.

This is the vision. Like they had a vision—Prabhupāda said they were ready to stay there for 1,000 years, it’s there in the *Bhāgavatam*. They were prepared to discuss and come up with a solution; they would sit there for a thousand years until they figured it out. So we should be prepared to carry on for a thousand years. This is our humble contribution to their vision, to Sūta Gosvāmī’s vision, of spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness, of the chanting of the Holy Names. I think big. "What can I do? I think big." So you have to think big to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the age of Kali-yuga. We have some competition—there are some people out there who really want to push the opposition, materialistic civilization—so we have some competition, but I think we can win because we have Kṛṣṇa on our side. It’s not really big, not just 100 years, but His vision was that He would be satisfied only when the 14 worlds were chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa.

We have a lot of mercy, and I want to thank all of you, from the bottom of my heart, for sacrificing your summer to serve so enthusiastically, so intensely, beyond and above the call of duty to make this the best of all the 32 years that we’ve been performing this *yajña* on the Baltic Sea coast. In any way that you think, in every department, any way you think about the festival, it was just so, so successful, and devotees remained so enthusiastic and bright and happy. We didn’t have any major problems this year. It was just *Gaurā-śakti*, the internal energy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Each and every one of you contributed to that, so thank you. Because the mood of the tour was just so sweet; we just loved doing what we were doing, isn't it? The cooperation was there and the [feeling of] one big happy spiritual family. It reminds me very much of when I first joined the movement in the early 70s; there was so much of a family mood. It’s still there, I know, in different parts of ISKCON, but it just brought back a lot of memories. So everyone is sacrificing for the whole, and your hard work and lots of devotion—it worked, the formula worked, and we were super successful. Thousands and thousands and thousands of people came in contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness in a most wonderful way. So thank you.

And the only reward that I can offer—although we serve without any desire for reward—but the only reward that we could think of in the proper context would be to give you the opportunity to come back again next year and do the same. The only thing we want after we’ve worked so hard is to have the opportunity to do the same again. We don’t want name, fame, money; we just want service. And that’s there every day in the chanting of our *japa*. What are we praying for? Nothing material, just: "Give me, give me a little service, Lord, at Your lotus feet, and I’ll be happy." But if you get a big service, wow, you should feel very fortunate, very blessed. And this was big service because we produced big results by Prabhupāda and Mahāprabhu’s mercy. But we got to witness that; it’s just something I’ll never forget, in my mind's eye, to see all those thousands of people enjoying Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That’s for me the perfection of life.

We could actually take quite some time speaking about each individual in this room; I think we’re about 150 or something. I could go on for a long time glorifying each and every person’s service here. As I look around the room, I see so many faces—I place those faces in the kitchen, on the *harināma*, stage crew, sound crew, you know, the truck drivers, those who are in the back there, the stage and then behind the stage, arranging all the material, putting the puppets away and doing this and that. I mean, I could go on for hours about each devotee, seriously. But rest assured that the Lord knows, because He is in your heart. I am 100 percent confident that He is aware of what we were doing; otherwise, how could we do it? It’s been a big boost for also the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness to see a positive, successful program going on in these days.

Many successful programs were going on, so we’re proud to be part of a movement which all together is spreading this dynamic message of love of Godhead all around the world. And as time goes on, we look forward to hearing of the success of other movements, of other efforts for Kṛṣṇa consciousness within our movement, around this planet. International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, which Prabhupāda said one time, "We will have our ISKCON in the spiritual world."

But I would like to give a special recognition today to Jayate. He took up the responsibility of practically all departments and all aspects of this tour this year. Probably most unexpectedly, he wasn’t aware it was coming, but being a very good devotee, good disciple of my humble self, he took up the mantle. And with his organization, I think, you know, you don’t always see it, but it’s not easy to be a manager. He did an excellent job of keeping everything together and moving forward. I was a manager for some years, like in the sense of a temple president in New Mayapur; it was probably the most difficult service I ever did. I enjoyed it, but it wasn’t easy because, you know, keeping everything together, keeping all the devotees satisfied, making sure the finances are there, how they’re spent, and arranging the service—it can be a transcendental headache. We were kind of in a critical condition because of the previous pandemic and the fact that the inflation in the world and so many things, but he persevered, and as a result, I think a great deal of the success we have to attribute to his management.

And let us not forget the sacrifices and the hard work that his good wife, Nandini, did for so many years. You know, we’re going back 20, 25 years. Nandini’s efforts are historic; they are in my diary, chapters often, and Nandini comes up as saving the festival and pushing it forward and finding the schools. Without her work in the past, there would have been no way we could have put the festival on this year. And of course, unfortunately, she wasn’t well enough to come this year—health’s not good—but we say in English, "We sorely missed her." But let us not forget that we are here partly due to her efforts for so many years. Becoming a little bit of a part of the stage show, you know, and under—she’s speaking, she’s dancing—I think we have something there in the future.

And it was good to see Alosh, you know; he came up as well. He’s checking the program out. He wasn't like the old days with Dina Dayal with the sword and everything, but I think we have a future with him as well. Such a family, contributed so much to this tour. And the *brahmacārīs*, who are the breadwinners—you know, they’re out there getting the donations for this festival—they’ve sacrificed a lot of their earnings for this tour over the years. So I think it’s important to mention them as well.

But of course, without you, what would it be? All of you. There’d be nothing, no festival. So a big thank you from me, and to your heart, your individual hearts, and please come back again year after year if you can. And last but not least, we have to thank the people. What would the festival be without the people? And the people were just wonderful this year. They came in huge crowds, and to varying degrees they appreciated the festival, but I think everyone left with a very nice impression, if not more, of our Kṛṣṇa conscious movement and what we have to offer the world. We actually love the people because they’re ultimately all our brothers and sisters. They just forgot God like we had once forgotten; they’ve forgotten, so we feel a kinship there. Ultimately a kinship there, and we feel very proud to welcome them into the fold of our movement by being guests in our festival. We’re going to miss the people, actually. And in our personal experience of interacting with them, they’re also going to miss us in big numbers; they’re going to miss us. I saw that, yes. And that alone is the success of our efforts this summer, the people will miss us.

To Gaur-Nitai, Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, that we’ll be granted the great privilege and honor to be able to come back and represent all of our founders and keep the message going, keep the flame burning.

How gloriously, assemble, devotees! How glorious! Assemble devotees, all glorious, all glorious! Thank you very much. Hari Kṛṣṇa.""