"*00295*.*
"Hi professional dear devotees, a very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. But first: *nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate...* 

With everyone's permission, I'd like to return to our wanderings through Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Of course, we'll do that as we have been doing, through *śabda-brahma*—through transcendental sound vibration—by narrating Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in His favorite abode. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī authorizes this in his *Padyāvalī* with several verses that I was reading the other day, which I'll share with you:

"I ask not for the joy of divine delight, Lord; even final liberation I don't desire. May the nectar of Kṛṣṇa's acts and play reach my ears every single day. Oh, these days of Kali do not ruffle him who daily sings the fame of Yaśodā's son. Each word sweet like a clear stream of nectar, soothing like sandal and cool lunar lights, we drown in an ambrosial ocean of Nanda-nandana's youthful play. What are the salty waters of liberation to us? Upanishadic discourse is nothing like the nectar of narrations about Hari; it does not melt the mind or make you shiver or lead to tears or bristling hair."

So today, I would like to take you to several places near to the forest of Kāmyavana. The first place is called Hārāsuka. Hārāsuka is a forested area where Kṛṣṇa took away Hārā—the Gopīs' distress—*aśoka*, after they waited for Him for a long time. 

So one time, as Kṛṣṇa was leaving Nandagrāma with the cowherd boys and the cows after enjoying a breakfast cooked and served by Śrī Rādhā and her girlfriends, Kṛṣṇa and His friends crossed paths with Rādhārāṇī and her friends who were departing for Yāvaṭa. As they did so, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa passed secret messages to one another through their assistants, wherein Kṛṣṇa agreed to meet Rādhārāṇī and her Gopīs later that day in the forest of Hārāsuka. 

But as the day progressed and the time arrived, leaving the company of the cowherd boys without being noticed was not as easy as Kṛṣṇa had hoped it to be. And the ācāryas give a specific reason for this: they say that the cowherd boys had not seen Kṛṣṇa all night, so they were hovering around Him like bees on a honeycomb. In fact, wherever Kṛṣṇa went, the cowherd boys just followed Him. Even if He moved to the back of the herd of cows, all eyes were upon Him, making it impossible for Kṛṣṇa to slip away even for a moment. But finally, with some clever help from Subala-sakhā, Kṛṣṇa managed to escape. He rushed as quickly as He could to Hārāsuka, knowing that if He was late, there would be a price to pay.

And He was right. Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scriptures describe the dynamics of Kṛṣṇa's rendezvous with the Gopīs. It is stated that when the appointed time for a rendezvous passes and the beloved has still not arrived, with each passing *daṇḍa*—which means 24 minutes—the happiness of expectation in meeting the beloved gives way to three things: disappointment, and then that turns into sorrow, and that turns into anger when the lover actually doesn't show up. Now, the ācāryas say that fortunately for Kṛṣṇa, He appeared just as the Gopīs were experiencing sorrow, the second of the three. They say this spared Him the consequences of having arrived after that sorrow had turned into anger. 

Nevertheless, it was not an easy task to pacify Śrī Rādhā and the Gopīs for Kṛṣṇa. So what Kṛṣṇa did—it's described—taking help from His divine potencies, He expanded Himself into as many forms as there were Gopīs waiting for Him, and He took each one of them separately, or like a couple, they went on a walk through the beautiful Hārāsuka forest. Now, Hārāsuka is a small forest, but Kṛṣṇa's yoga-māyā arranged for Him and each Gopī to be out of sight and mind of the others. As a result, He was able to console every Gopī according to her nature. So this is one of Kṛṣṇa's wonders, actually—that He can reciprocate with each individual soul to their full satisfaction. 

But another interesting point: I was reading the ācāryas say that He does so not only with His dearmost Gopīs but also with inexperienced practitioners, neophytes. Wow, He can reciprocate with each individual soul to their full satisfaction, meaning devotees of course—both advanced devotees and beginning devotees. So that is the forest of Hārāsuka, where Kṛṣṇa took away *hārā* (the Gopīs' distress), *aśoka*, as they waited for Him. 

Subsequently, there's a beautiful praṇāma-mantra for Hārāsuka that I was saving towards the end of this pastime because now you can understand how Kṛṣṇa solved the situation; He just expanded Himself with each Gopī and privately walked with them through the Hārāsuka forest without the other Gopīs who were with Kṛṣṇa seeing. That’s quite amazing. So here's the praṇāma-mantra for Hārāsuka: *namaste rājāya gopī-duḥkha-nivāriṇe rādhā-dāsya-padā-nena*. 

"Obeisances to the king of tīrthas, which took away all the distress of the Gopīs by gifting me eternal servitude of Śrī Rādhā. Please make me a most fortunate person, too."

But the ācāryas go on to say that on the occasions where Kṛṣṇa was late for His rendezvous with Śrī Rādhā and her Gopīs, where disappointment had turned into sorrow and then finally anger, He wasn't always as successful in pacifying them as He was at Hārāsuka. For when Śrī Rādhā and her friends become or became angry, they would leave the rendezvous spot and have nothing to do with Kṛṣṇa. If it went from disappointment to sorrow and then anger, He just didn't show up; they'd leave. 

So, one time not far from Hārāsuka, when Kṛṣṇa arrived too late for a meeting at a sacred place called Murāra, Śrī Rādhā and her friends had already stormed off. Kṛṣṇa just sat down, dejected; He was way too late. When His cowherd friends caught up with Him and saw how much He was in despair, they tried to cheer Him up in three ways: with comedy (like jokes and comedy, mime-type of theater) and affection. But the ācāryas say that "like a crow pursues a hawk, Kṛṣṇa's sorrow would not leave His heart." 

Now, the same ācāryas explain that crows are quite skilled in the air and they often attack much larger birds like hawks and eagles, and they pursue them relentlessly; they just don't let them get away. So like that, "like a crow pursues a hawk, Kṛṣṇa's sorrow could not leave His heart." Great analogy. So what did the boys do? They all surrounded Kṛṣṇa, feeling sorry for Him. Finally, they sat Him down on a tree stump at this sacred place, Murāra, and they said, "Govinda, play the liveliest tune you can on your flute, and watch the new dance that we have choreographed just for you." So Kṛṣṇa agreed—He was unable to ignore the love of His friends—but He only half-heartedly played His flute until Subala-sakhā whispered in His ear, "Kṛṣṇa, how many times has Rādhā been angry with You and then made up with You later? Don't spoil your day or the pleasure of your friends. Have faith in My words; she will be yours again, she will be yours again. In the meantime, enjoy the cowherd boys' performance, which is but an expression of their love for You."

Are you all so now near to this sacred place Murāra? There are two pastime places related to each other that I was reading about—you just go from one place to the next, from one nectar to the next in Vṛndāvana—and these two places are called Moṭī and Kīpana. Once, Kṛṣṇa met Rādhārāṇī at this first place called Moṭī, and He garlanded her with a stunning necklace of priceless pearls—*moṭī* pearls are called *moṭī*—so that place became famous as Moṭī. And it's mentioned that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was extremely pleased to receive this gift, although it would later become a source of embarrassment. How so? Because Grandmother Mukhara, one of the older Gopīs, would recognize it as one of Kṛṣṇa's own necklaces. Luckily, it's described Lalitā-sakhī was able to convince Mukhara by clever deception that the necklace was not actually Kṛṣṇa's, but an identical one Mother Yaśodā had given Rādhā for cooking Kṛṣṇa's breakfast. So Mukhara was pacified. 

Now, after receiving this pearl necklace, Moṭī, from Kṛṣṇa, Rādhārāṇī walked with Him to this other place I mentioned, Kīpana. And well, first before I tell the pastime, I'll mention the praṇāma-mantra that we found for Kīpana. That praṇāma-mantra is as follows: "Obeisances to the tīrtha which broadcast the glories of Kṛṣṇa along with Śrī Rādhā. O great tīrtha, obeisances to you; kindly be pleased upon me always."

Now, just as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa arrived in Kīpana, Kṛṣṇa suddenly vanished. They just—I was reading—they just got to a banyan tree to sit down and enjoy each other's association, and Kṛṣṇa just vanished. The ācāryas described it very nicely: "As if He were made of mist dissipated by the rays of the Rādhā sun." As if He were made of mist dissipated by the rays of the Rādhā sun; so beautiful. Now, where had Kṛṣṇa gone? Well, a demon had just entered Vṛndāvana, so Kṛṣṇa and His friends just raced off in order to kill this asura. But it all happened very fast, and Rādhā was like, "What?" Perplexed by Kṛṣṇa's mysterious disappearance, Rādhā asked her friends, "What *khabar* (message) did Kṛṣṇa receive to make Him leave so abruptly? Do you know?" So that place became known as Kīpana.

This particular part of Vṛndāvana, which we're discussing, is in and around Kāmyavana and it's full of pastime places relating to the—how did the ācāryas describe it?—the tasty foods of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. That's how it's described. This particular part of Vṛndāvana is full of pastime places related to eating the tasty foods of Vṛndāvana-dhāma, especially during the winter months of Pauṣa, when it's described the fire of digestion is the strongest. So the month of Pauṣa, December-January winter—well, people get extra hungry now about eating at this time of year. I heard this Prabhupāda said at a Bhagavad-gītā class in London on August 6, 1973. I'll quote Śrīla Prabhupāda about eating in the winter. He said, "When you are perplexed whether I shall eat or not, better not to eat. But when you eat, eat in the month of December, Pauṣa." 

So I was thinking, the essence of this statement is that excessive eating should always be avoided, but if one must eat, it's better to overeat in the winter when the digestive power is at its strongest. So there are four places in particular where eating pastimes take place in and around Kāmyavana, and they are Barīpha, Vatsavana, Mālāpura, and Sonkh. Barīpha, Vatsavana, Mālāpura, Sonkh. The cowherd boys, they know all these places because we've heard, isn't it, in previous lectures how hungry the cowherd boys get? So at Barīpha, the cowherd boys overate; at Vatsavana, they complained of hunger; and at Mālāpura, Kṛṣṇa conjured up a variety of sumptuous dishes; and at Sonkh, the smell of Rādhārāṇī's *chāñch* (buttermilk) that she made when the Gopīs were cooking attracted Kṛṣṇa. And just a brief note: the Vatsavana that I'm mentioning here is different than the place with the same name where Brahmā stole the gopas and calves from Kṛṣṇa; this is a second Vatsavana. 

As regards the cowherd boys eating in their work of herding cows—playing games and escaping from the demons who periodically come to kill Kṛṣṇa—the cowherd boys expend an extraordinary amount of youthful energy. All those activities take a lot. But how did they get their energy back? The ācāryas say in three ways; it's so interesting. They get their energy back by eating the fruits that grow abundantly throughout Braja, the lunch packs they bring from home, and the yogurt and butter they steal from the Brajavāsīs' storehouses. That’s how they get their energy back. And then it's said that, being from the families of cowherds, a significant portion of these gopas' (cowherd boys') diets is made up of dairy products—and their favorite dairy products: sweets, sweet yogurt, *makhana* (sweet butter), *rabrī*, and sweet rice.

Then the ācāryas explain that Kṛṣṇa's magical presence, which transforms any meal into an incomparable feast, is the most important ingredient in the cowherd boys' meals. It's written that Kṛṣṇa's presence adds extra sweetness to all things sweet, enhances the flavor of each dish in a meal, and makes every meal a veritable love feast that nourishes both body and soul alike. Now, on top of that, in Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa's mystic powers make fruit ripen out of season—the cowherd boys really like that one—make fruit ripen out of season, sweets appear out of thin air, bodies of water transform into lakes of yogurt, and small lunch packs manifest as endless supplies of snacks. 

One reason that Kṛṣṇa is their best friend: always, always, always Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys take prasādam together. Kṛṣṇa never takes prasādam alone. Even His breakfast—remember, we discussed His breakfast meal one time where Śrī Rādhā comes with her friends and they cook and serve? We've discussed that many times, we mentioned it in this lecture. Kṛṣṇa is always with His cowherd boyfriends, and lunch is always with them. So this is actually how we should take prasādam: we should take together because it's prasādam, and naturally, you know, we speak Kṛṣṇa conscious things in each other's association when we're relaxed like that. So we shouldn't take alone. Actually, I found a corresponding verse—it's quite heavy, it's quite strong, but I thought I'd mention it now. I found it in the *Ṛg Veda*, Maṇḍala 10, Sūkta 117, hymn number 6. It's strong, but it's interesting: "He who eats alone, eats only sin. He who eats alone, eats only sin." Now, of course, you know prasādam is transcendental, so there's no question of it being sin, but I'm trying to emphasize the importance of taking prasādam with the devotees. *Ṛg Veda*.

So on one occasion, the cowherd boys arrived at that holy place I mentioned, Barīpha, after a long journey from Nandagrāma, because we're talking about the area of Kāmyavana—so Kāmyavana is far from Nandagrāma—and when they arrived, they sat in a circle in the shade of a banyan tree, and their cows rested peacefully nearby. Now, the scriptures say that the boys had been snacking all along the way, and they were worried what was left in their lunch packs. Well, actually, they carry what we—sometimes it's described they carry lunch bags, or sometimes tiffins. So they were worried if there'd be enough left in their tiffin to satisfy their appetites. And one boy spoke up, he said, "My tiffin is as empty as my stomach." Another boy added, "I barely have enough to whet my appetite, why bother eating at all?" In this way, the boys complained to one another, and then they complained to Kṛṣṇa. So then Kṛṣṇa, He said with a smile—and I'm quoting the Lord here—"My dear friends, do not lament. We should always accept whatever we receive as Lord Nārāyaṇa's mercy. If we do, we will never be disappointed. By His grace, a morsel may satisfy any appetite; without it, even a feast will not be enough." Everything is depending on the Lord's mercy. So the cowherd boys, pleased by Kṛṣṇa's words of wisdom, they sat to eat the remnants of their lunches with vigor, with renewed enthusiasm and faith in Kṛṣṇa, only to find that as much as they ate, their tiffins were never emptied. I was reading: again and again they scooped sweet rice and butter into their mouths only to see it reappear in their tiffins, and when they'd eaten all they could, their tiffins were still full. *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Śrīla Prabhupāda kī, Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī!* And I was reading that as such, the Gopīs, the gopas—the cowherd boys—they were accustomed to Kṛṣṇa's miracles. And so they just spent the whole day praising Him over and over. But after all the praise, Kṛṣṇa simply joined His palms, He turned His lotus eyes to the sky, and He said, "My friends, it is all the mercy of Lord Nārāyaṇa." 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Now next to Barīpha is that particular forest, Vatsavana, that I mentioned earlier, where a somewhat similar pastime took place. Once, Kṛṣṇa, His friends, and the cows arrived there at Vatsavana extremely hungry, this time having consumed everything in their lunch packs on the way. Previously they'd been snacking and there was a little left, but this time in this pastime everything was gone. So it's said that the cows were content to graze on the grasses growing there, but the cowherd boys were disturbed by the growling of their stomachs. So finally, Śrīdāmā, he appealed to Kṛṣṇa. He said, "Oh brother, for lack of food we are too weak even to eat, not to mention eventually make our way back home. If You do not do something quickly, I think we'll perish on the spot." So Kṛṣṇa smiled and He did something simply wonderful. What did He do? He played His flute. Kṛṣṇa played His flute in such a way that the sound itself manifested pots of yogurt, *rabrī*, and butter. Now these substances—yogurt, *rabrī*, and butter—appeared in little pots all over the nearby fields; everywhere you looked, as far as you could see, there were these little pots. And the ācāryas write that the ravenous cowherd boys leaped on the snacks just as tigers leap from behind bushes upon an unsuspecting prey. You may have seen a video of a leopard or a lion chasing a prey; so just as tigers leap from behind the bushes—now in your mind, imagine the cowherd boys—"just as tigers leap from behind bushes upon an unsuspecting prey," all these boys leaped upon all this prasādam. And as they sat together eating, they happily glorified the prowess, you could say, of their friend Kṛṣṇa and His flute. I was reading that today in that particular place, Vatsavana, there's many lakes, and there's one lake that's called Rabrī Kuṇḍa—so we know where that came from! Probably there was just so much *rabrī* in the area it became a lake. There's Rabrī Kuṇḍa and there's also a Śaṅkara Kuṇḍa, and I heard that there's a temple of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa there as well. And it said that bathing in this particular place washes away all of one's sins. So another place to visit when we go on that grand tour, our grand pilgrimage tour, sooner than later, I hope.

Now another eating place is the sacred place called Mālāpura. Now, I believe I recounted this pastime about a year ago, but it's always nice to hear these things again, *śrotavyādīni*—today, because it's in the area, I'm going to discuss it. But first, I found a praṇāma-mantra for Mālāpura, and these praṇāma-mantras are so important because they reveal to us, as we've mentioned many times, the essence of a particular place or a message from that particular place. So here's the praṇāma-mantra from Mālāpura: *ananta-koṭi-miṣṭāna-prakaṭyasthāna-rūpiṇe namaste*. "Obeisances to the great tīrtha which is the location of manifestation of millions of sweets and which bestows immense joy upon Kṛṣṇa." What a wonderful praṇāma-mantra. 

So one day, while in Mālāpura, Kṛṣṇa boasted to His friends that as the Supreme Controller, He was able to do anything at any time. Now here He's addressing the cowherd boys that He's the Supreme Controller, or sometimes they may even realize that, but it doesn't mean anything to them because they're overwhelmed with ecstatic bhakti, love for Kṛṣṇa; they just consider Him the best friend ever—always "God, okay, that's cool, but He's our best friend." That *aiśvarya-bhāva* just dissipates in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, and that's the sweetness of the dhāma. So Kṛṣṇa boasted to His friends that as the Supreme Controller, I'm able to do anything at any time. So standing up, He announced, "Just test Me." So recalling the previous event at Vatsavana, the cowherd boys replied, "Okay, manifest many, many enjoyable dishes such as..." and they had a list: *laḍḍu*, *kṣīr*, and *sandeś*. "But Kṛṣṇa," they said, "after we finish eating them, the dishes should reappear exactly as they were before." Similar pastime. So Kṛṣṇa smiled as if to say, "Is that all?" And then He instantly manifested unlimited sweet and salty preparations which His cowherd boyfriends just devoured. But the thing is, as soon as they had finished eating one tasty dish, it reappeared again as it was before, and when the boys finally could eat no more, they saw the entire feast again there in front of them as if it was untouched. So this time they went under a big banyan tree, and laying down upon their backs and rubbing their stomachs, they admitted defeat. They rarely admit defeat to Kṛṣṇa! They admitted defeat, saying, "This is very cute; Kṛṣṇa must truly be that Govinda whom the scriptures call the primeval cause of all causes." And then they all fell asleep.

Now there's one last pastime I'd like to relate today, which took place at that fourth holy place I mentioned, Sonkh, where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her friends ended up after an extended search for Kṛṣṇa in the Vṛndāvana forest. They'd been searching for Kṛṣṇa, they went here, there, and they couldn't find Him, and they ended up at this particular place near Kāmyavana called Sonkh—and He wasn't there either. So although the Gopīs didn't find Kṛṣṇa in Sonkh, they did notice that the area was full of wild spinach, quality vegetables, and delectable roots. So the girls started talking, "You know what? Well, can't find Kṛṣṇa, let's pick all these food stuffs and let's have a picnic." And then they went to Śrī Rādhā with the idea. So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she said, "Girls, how can we cook with no utensils, no ghee, and no spices?" So she concluded, "Whosoever is hungry should be satisfied with the ripe fruit from the trees." 

But it's written that the majority of the Gopīs, they insisted on a cooked meal, which would be more appealing. And at the very moment when they expressed that desire, the land of Braja—like a philosopher's stone—suddenly manifested all the paraphernalia needed for cooking! This is Vṛndāvana; you could even go to a desire tree to get these things. All the desires of the devotees in Braja are fulfilled instantaneously. Why? Because those desires are not for themselves; those desires are connected to Kṛṣṇa. In a small clearing amidst some kadamba trees appeared pots, *woks* (you know, for cooking), bags of flour, a huge container of ghee, many containers of spices, and all kinds of cooking utensils. And the Gopīs just looked at each other in amazement and they started discussing—because it happened so fast—where'd they come from? So Rādhārāṇī said, "All these things were the blessings of Vṛndāvana." 

So once the girls busied themselves collecting firewood and their favorite vegetables, soon the whole forest area was crowded with—I was reading—cow-dung fires and Gopīs busily stirring steaming pots. But we should note, while doing so, while doing so, they were singing songs praising Śrī Kṛṣṇa's names, qualities, and pastimes. And as each preparation was almost ready, Vṛndāvana-īśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—the Queen of Vṛndāvana—she would personally prepare a *chāñch* (you know, of selected spices fried in ghee) and just at the right moment she would tip the *chāñch* into the pot and stir it. And then the ācāryas say as a result, each dish would reach perfection when Rādhārāṇī, who prepared the *chāñch*, poured it into the preparation. Now at this point, the ācāryas, they say that all these Gopīs had a common desire, but they were too shy to express it even to each other; they're very shy, the Gopīs. And what was that desire? They each had the same desire—what was that desire? They all wanted Kṛṣṇa to appear and accept the feasts that they had cooked with Him only in mind. They weren't cooking for themselves; that's not Braja. They're fully surrendered. So actually, when this whole idea came up of cooking the feast, it was for Kṛṣṇa. All they wanted was that Kṛṣṇa appear to accept the feasts that they had cooked with Him only in mind. *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī!*

So the ācāryas go on to say—and here I'd like to quote them directly: "Conscious of the heartfelt desire of the Gopīs, Vṛndāvana-dhāma deputed a meandering breeze to carry the aroma of their cooking to Kṛṣṇa, in order to attract that best of heroes to His eager heroines." Conscious of the heartfelt desire of the Gopīs, Vṛndāvana-dhāma deputed a meandering breeze to carry the aroma of their cooking to Kṛṣṇa, in order to attract that best of heroes to His eager heroines, the Gopīs. Now, at that time, Kṛṣṇa was grazing cows at the far side of Govardhana Hill. He was walking quietly along with His friend Madhumaṅgala. Now suddenly—remember, this breeze of these aromas going around by Vṛndāvana's grace to Kṛṣṇa—suddenly Madhumaṅgala froze, and his eyes opened wide, and his eyebrows raised, and he grabbed Kṛṣṇa's arm and he said, "Friend, do you smell what I smell? Do you smell that heavenly aroma? That aroma has the culinary signature, the culinary signature of only one person in our land. Do you know who? Do you smell it?" So Kṛṣṇa raised His nose and He replied, "I do, *bhaṭa*—that's His nickname—I do! And what you say is true. Only one person can cook like this. But how could she, Rādhā and her friends, be cooking in the wilds of Vṛndāvana?" Because, you know, neither Kṛṣṇa nor the Gopīs are at Nandagrāma or wherever; they're out in the wilds of Vṛndāvana. Wouldn't it be wonderful to be out in the wilds of Vṛndāvana? So Madhumaṅgala said, "The question, how could they be cooking, is irrelevant, My friend. The real question is: who are they cooking for? And the self-evident truth is that they're cooking for You." 

Now, as you know, we are often mentioning this particular cowherd boy, Madhumaṅgala, and the other day I was reading in Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi*, where he gives a list of different types, different categories of cowherd boys; they're not all the same, they all have different moods. He was mentioning *viṭa-sakhā*, etc.—maybe one day we'll give a class on the specific characteristics of these different groups. But anyway, for today, Madhumaṅgala is in the *viṭa-sakhā* group of cowherd boys, and rightfully so, because here's one verse from that illustrious scripture where Rūpa Gosvāmī describes this particular category of cowherd boys, *viṭa-sakhā*, of which Madhumaṅgala is one: "Is fond of eating, likes to make a commotion and cause laughter by his strange contortions, words, and clothing." So that really does sound like Madhumaṅgala, doesn't it? 

So within moments of smelling this heavenly aroma in the air, Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala took off, you know, following that aroma, and they finally arrived at its source, at Sonkh. But when they arrived, it said that the Gopīs, though they were outwardly delighted to see Kṛṣṇa, showed indifference to Him and Madhumaṅgala. It's all part of the pastimes. One Gopī, she said, "Here we are preparing a feast for the Sun God, but before we can even make the offering, these two are queueing up, plates in hand, showing the full extent of their religiosity!" But neither Kṛṣṇa nor Madhumaṅgala were discouraged, for they were used to—how is it described?—concealed affection. Concealed affection. And with very kind words, the two boys convinced the girls to invite them for lunch, and that's what transpired. And that place where the Gopīs happily fed them is now known as Sonkh. When I visited there many years ago, I saw several temples and lakes also dotting that area, and it's a very beautiful area. I remember there's a particular lake called Sonkh-kuṇḍa. And that Sonkh, that holy place Sonkh, it's said that even today one can smell the aroma of the Gopīs' cooking—a scent which lingers forever in the air. When we go on that grand *parikramā*, that grand *parikramā* at Kārtika, sooner than later, let's put this on the list, we can go there and smell that aroma of the Gopīs' cooking, which is accented by the *chāñch* of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī that drew Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala there. And when they were fed that wonderful feast—and why not? We can have a feast there. *Hare Kṛṣṇa.* 

So keeping in mind all the many cowherd boy pastimes that we have shared today, let us finish—yes, we have to finish—with the words of a wonderful devotee who wrote a book all about cowherd boy pastimes. It's called *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*? No, *Bhakti-rasārṇava*. Let him finish today with his words. So this is what he writes towards the end of his *Bhakti-rasārṇava*: 

"Living in Braja in the company of one's guru-sakhā, worship Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma at all times in the mood of a sakhā. Giving up all material desires—rejecting artha, dharma, kāma, and mokṣa—worship the two boys of kiśora age, aspiring for the feet of Caitanya, Nityānanda, and Sundarānanda. Nayanānanda Dāsa has spoken." 

So again, what can I add to the words of a pure devotee who wrote such a wonderful scripture about cowherd boy pastimes? And that's, I think, a really appropriate way to end today. Thank you, Prabhus. Isn't it wonderful that we can go to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma two times a week? And don't think we're not going; we are going. Rūpa Gosvāmī reminded us in the beginning of the class in this beautiful *Padyāvalī*. So I'll take your leave now, and I'll be back again in a couple days with a few more pastime places from these 60 billion sacred holy places in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dhāma. *Śrī Śrī Gauranitāi kī, Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa Balarām kī, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Sundara kī!*""