"*00252*.*
"Hi Kṛṣṇa dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his beloved Deity of Govindajī. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine.*

So, today we are continuing to follow Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Deity, Govindadeva—or Govindajī, as we say these days—as He evades capture and destruction during the reign of the Mughal tyrant Aurangzeb. So far, we have followed Him from Vṛndāvana to Rādhā-kuṇḍa and then to Kāmyavana. And then, of course, it may seem odd that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has to run from someone. Why does Kṛṣṇa have to run from someone? In *Bhagavad-gītā* 10.34, Kṛṣṇa says, "I am all-devouring death." So, how do we understand Govindajī’s fleeing here and there? Well, really, essentially, it is a pastime to give His devotees, who are always begging for sevā, a chance to serve Him. If Govindajī wanted, He could vanquish Aurangzeb and his entire army in a moment's notice. He is not a statue; He is a Deity. He is fully conscious. Śrīla Prabhupāda said in a lecture in Bombay, December 4th, 1974, and I quote: "Kṛṣṇa is ready to talk with you. He has come; He has descended in arcā-mūrti to talk with you, to be visible by you. Now make yourself ready and fit to talk with Kṛṣṇa. Then He will exchange conversation. This is possible." 

This is possible. So, even if for some reason the marble or the stone Deity breaks—say a finger or an arm or whatever—we repair Him and continue to worship Him or Her as the Deity, because we know the Lord is none different than that form. I recently saw two letters in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute. The first was from another one of our heroes, Jai Singh II, to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and he was telling Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura that several of the mūrtis, or several of the Deities in his kingdom—in particular in Jaipur at that time—they had become damaged. And he gave an example that one Deity had a broken foot, another Deity a broken finger; he mentioned another Deity where the toe had come off. Like that. And he wrote that the local pundits were telling him that those Deities have left those forms and that the marble or the stone forms should be thrown in a sacred river. And you see, that is what they do today in India. 

But Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, one of our beloved ācāryas, he did not agree. In his letter, he replied—and I saw it with my own eyes—he replied to Jai Singh II, "If your son loses a finger in an accident, do you throw him away? Of course not. And does your son leave his body because of such an injury? No, he doesn't. There is no śāstric injunction that the Deity should be discarded. Simply repair the Deities and continue their worship with love and devotion." Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura kī jaya! Such an important instruction, and I know that we follow that in ISKCON. 

So, those devotees who were serving Govindajī in times of happiness and distress, like we're discussing these last few weeks, they knew these things well. They understood there was no difference between the Lord and His form as the Deity; they were dealing with the person, the Supreme Person. There is that classical, beautiful, you could say straightforward verse in *Padma Purāṇa* warning everyone and anyone not to see so-called material things invested with transcendence in a mundane way. *Padma Purāṇa*: "That person who considers the Deity of the Supreme Lord to be dead matter made out of stone, wood, or metal; or the spiritual master, who is an associate of the Supreme Lord, to be an ordinary man who is prone to die; or the Vaiṣṇava to be coming from some particular caste; or the water which washes the feet of the pure devotee or the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be ordinary water, although such water has the potency to destroy all evils of the Age of Kali; or to consider the holy name of the Supreme Lord or mantras dedicated to Him, which are able to destroy all sin, to be ordinary sounds; or to consider the Supreme Lord of all, Lord Viṣṇu, to be equal with the demigods, is considered to possess a hellish mentality. A person who thinks in this way is certainly a resident of hell." What a powerful verse. 

So, we must thank Śrīla Prabhupāda for opening our eyes to see things like that. *Oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā...* I was standing in the darkness of ignorance, and I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master, who has opened my eyes with the torchlight of transcendental knowledge. So, the Deity is a person, and thus Govindajī’s "running away" from Vṛndāvana really just provided a chance for His devotees, who had full faith in Him, to serve Him under those circumstances. And foremost amongst them, in many ways, of course, was our hero Śivārāma Gosvāmī. We last heard how Govindajī, along with Śrī Rādhā and Kaśīśvara’s Deity of Gopīnātha, they left Kāmyavana for safer places. Unfortunately, they had to leave Vṛndā Devī behind, but as we discussed, that was her desire. You may remember how she appeared in a dream to Śivārāma Gosvāmī the night before the bullock carts were to leave for the next stop, from Kāmyavana to Bhaṭārā. In that dream, she informed him that she cannot leave Vṛndāvana, and we mentioned what she said to him in that dream. 

And that desire of hers is confirmed, actually, by Nanda-dāsa, the disciple of Śrīla Viśvanātha, who in his writings informs us exactly what Vṛndā Devī was thinking as she watched the other bullock cart with Govindajī and others depart. What was she thinking? It’s a famous quote. She was thinking, "I cannot leave Vṛndāvana. If I were to leave Vṛndāvana, then what would the devotees think? If I, Vṛndā Devī, were to leave Braja, how could the devotees have faith in Vṛndāvana? Kṛṣṇa may come, Kṛṣṇa may go, but I take a solemn promise: I shall never leave Braja." And to this day, we can go to Kāmyavana and see her in a beautiful temple there in all her glory. It’s actually one of the nicest darśanas in Vṛndāvana. 

So, this was the year 1675. Now, Govindajī’s destination of Bhaṭārā—it was, I was reading, quite some distance from Kāmyavana, and it took the bullock carts quite some time to reach there. And when it arrived, Śivārāma Gosvāmī, who was always thinking about the welfare of Govindajī—as Govindajī is thinking about the welfare of Śivārāma Gosvāmī, this is love, love is reciprocal—so Śivārāma Gosvāmī was disappointed when they arrived in Bhaṭārā because he immediately saw it was not a very developed place. It wasn't a wealthy place like Kāmyavana, because in Kāmyavana he could procure all kinds of goods and paraphernalia for the worship of Govindajī. But he quickly understood that in Bhaṭārā, which was really a small village, he would have difficulty even getting basic supplies. What's more, he considered there were no persons of royalty living there like there were previously in Kāmyavana; some of the royal family was living in Kāmyavana, which meant Govindajī would not get any charity or donations. 

And actually, the situation became critical after two months. So Śivārāma Gosvāmī, he traveled alone; he left alone and he traveled many hundreds of kilometers south to Amber, which was the capital, the seat of that king, Rājā Rām Singh, who had already offered so much help. And he personally related the difficulties that he was having in worshiping Govindajī in Bhaṭārā. So Rām Singh I kindly made an order, gave an order to shift the Deities to a fort another distance away, which was built by his father, Jai Singh I, and that fort later became famous as Govindagaḍh. And this fort, I was reading it, it’s where his father, Jai Singh I, used to come and spend time after winning big battles, and it was considered very safe because it was surrounded by a dense forest. So not only giving this fort for the protection of Govindajī, Rām Singh ordered his men to build in the fort a very extravagant temple for Govindajī. Just look at these kings! These are real kings, Rāja-ṛṣis, you could say. Rāja-ṛṣi means like a sādhu sitting on the throne; these are Rāja-ṛṣis, these are real leaders. So not only did he give this fort, which was obviously a very amazing fort, very protected, able to protect Govindajī—it was his father's one of his father's favorite places of residence—but he had a beautiful temple built there, and that construction started immediately. 

Actually, then he also donated an entire nearby village to Govindajī, the revenue of which he said was to be used solely for the maintenance of Govindajī. We have heard this several times in the last few weeks, that the kings would give villages or big tracts of land for the maintenance of the Deity, to grow fruits and vegetables, and if there was water there and so forth, or to sell those products and the money could be used for the maintenance of the Deity. And then finally, Rām Singh ordered 300 of his best soldiers to accompany Śivārāma Gosvāmī back to Bhaṭārā with orders to then safely escort Govindajī, Rādhā, and the other Deity, Gopīnātha, safely to the fort, which is, as I mentioned, another great distance. So it was there, by the combined efforts of Rājā Rām Singh and the sādhu Śivārāma Gosvāmī, who actually became very close friends—I was reading, very, very close friends—that Govindadeva, Rādhā, and Gopīnātha were safely worshipped inside the beautiful temple maintained by the revenue of a large village for 25 years. They stayed there for 25 years in this long trip from Vṛndāvana down to Jaipur. And we're discussing really the major places they stayed, because there are others; sometimes they would stay for a few days or a week somewhere else on the journey before they reached one of these major centers. But this is where the Deities stayed for 25 years; it’s the longest place they stayed in their 50-year journey between Vṛndāvana and Jaipur. 

I really want to go there and see that place on that fort. And during that time, Rām Singh had to deal with a lot of opposition at home, some uprisings, the citizens weren't happy with this or that, as well as troubles in other parts of his kingdom. And I was reading he was always in anxiety that the Emperor Aurangzeb might invade his kingdom and steal away Govindajī, but that never happened. And the sādhus, they give their point of view on this; the sādhus say why this never happened. They quote one famous verse, *dharmo rakṣati rakṣitaḥ*: "For one who protects dharma, dharma protects him." And Śivārāma Gosvāmī had full faith in the Deity of Govindajī, as did Rām Singh. Both of them had very strong faith in Govindajī, so both were protected. *Dharmo rakṣati rakṣitaḥ*; for one who protects dharma, dharma protects him. So both of these devotees, they were protected as they protected Govinda; Govinda protected them. They were fully surrendered to that Deity. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11.27.47 says: "Placing his head at the feet of the Deity, one should stand with folded hands before the Lord and pray: 'O my Lord, please protect me, who am surrendered unto You. I am most fearful in this ocean of material existence, standing as I am in the mouth of death.'" So we can learn from these two devotees, Rājā Rām Singh and Śivārāma Gosvāmī, how to take shelter of the Deity and receive their protection so that we can continue our service to Prabhupāda, pushing on the *saṅkīrtana* movement. 

So unfortunately, 14 years later, in 1688, our beloved Śivārāma Gosvāmī passed away of natural causes, and unable to bear his separation, Rājā Rām Singh departed the world 10 months later. What more can we say of these great men who risked everything, including their lives on many occasions, to rescue, protect, and provide for the worshipable Lord of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī? If not for their efforts, we would not have the great privilege to go to Jaipur to this very day, see Rādhā-Govinda standing in all Their glory on the altar there with Gopīnātha. So, we are actually, I would like to say, duty-bound to honor such devotees of the past; they should not be forgotten, rather they should be remembered, if only for our own purification and inspired by their character and their deeds. These two devotees—if need be in modern times, we should be prepared to take risks also on behalf of the Lord should such occasions arise. And then we can also be counted amongst such great souls, as you could say, what's that saying, "comrades in arms" in the war against māyā. Of course, we may not have to face in our lifetime such dire circumstances, but just to push on this movement, one is inviting trouble, because in the material world, to a greater or lesser degree, people have come here to forget Kṛṣṇa. So to remind them is no easy task. So sometimes there may be risks, but we should be prepared. Here in the lives of these devotees, we should be ready to take the risk if necessary, and then we'll be comrades in arms. 

I would like to think like that, as Shakespeare writes in *Henry V*, I think it's Act Four: "We few, we happy few, we band of brothers; for he today that sheds his blood with me shall be my brother." We remember the character and the deeds of devotees in the past to be inspired and carrying on the tradition that they participated in. Had not they done what they did, maybe we wouldn't be here doing what we're doing today. So it's always very nice to remember Vaiṣṇavas of the past, those who we know about, even those we don't know about, we can praise them. We can remember devotees of the present, and we can glorify devotees in the future. One of my favorite verses from the devotee poet Devakīnandana dāsa in medieval times, he writes so nicely: "I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of all Vaiṣṇavas, praying I will not commit offenses in my attempts to please them. To all Vaiṣṇavas who have ever been and to all Vaiṣṇavas who will ever be, I offer my obeisances at their lotus feet." Thank you, Devakīnandana Prabhu. 

Actually, I've been so inspired by Śivārāma Gosvāmī in his exploits to save Govindajī, in his service to Govindajī. I mean, remember when Aurangzeb's army descended that fatal day in Vṛndāvana? He was the one who rang the bell and rallied the troops, so to speak, and encouraged everyone to go back and hide their Deities, etc. And along with his team, he personally rescued Govindajī, hid them in the lake, made a plan, put to sleep all the Muslim guards with opium smoke, sent the bullock cart. I mean, these are—now it's easy to listen to, but you can imagine how intense it was at that time. How indebted we are to this devotee, Śivārāma Gosvāmī. And I never heard of him before, so I got inspired and I asked my good friend the Sanskrit scholar, Haridāsa from Mumbai, to compose a praṇāma-mantra for Śivārāma Gosvāmī, and I plan to say this mantra each time I go to Jaipur and have darśana of our beloved Govindajī. So here is the praṇāma-mantra for Śivārāma Gosvāmī—I don't imagine he ever had one, but he deserves it: *prabhuṁ śrī-śivārāmyakam...* I repeatedly pay my obeisances to the Gosvāmī named Śrī Śivārāma Prabhu, who was a servant of Śrī Hari till the very end of his life and who offered all his life-airs in the service of Śrī Govindadeva. 

And you know, sometimes we might, if somehow we could meet these devotees on our journey back to the spiritual world, such devotees like that. *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 11.7.44: "O King, a saintly person is just like water because he is free from all contamination, gentle by nature, and by speaking creates a beautiful vibration like that of flowing water. Just by seeing, touching, or hearing such a saintly person, the living entity is purified, just as one is cleansed by contact with pure water. Thus, a saintly person, just like a holy place, purifies all those who contact him, because he always chants the glories of the Lord." A perfect description of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, as well. 

So after the departure of Śivārāma Gosvāmī, the protection and the worship and the continued journey of Govindajī, it fell to his elder son, Kṛṣṇacandra Gosvāmī. Now you may remember that his father, Śivārāma Gosvāmī, also acted as his guru and had given him a personal instruction—he remembered—to stay in Kāmyavana and worship Vṛndā Devī because she didn't want to leave. So Śivārāma Gosvāmī said to his elder son, "You stay here and you worship her." So that simple instruction, he took as his very life and soul. So Kṛṣṇacandra Gosvāmī couldn't take over the worship of Govindajī, so that service then was to be taken up, or was taken up, by his younger brother, whose name was Govinda Caraṇa Gosvāmī. Govinda Caraṇa Gosvāmī. So now we hear about another wonderful devotee. 

So Govinda Caraṇa Gosvāmī then went to the fort, to Govindagaḍh, where Govindajī was still being cared for during that lengthy stay of 25 years—that period had not concluded yet. So he went there and he served. It is said that Govinda Caraṇa Gosvāmī was a master chef, and his specialty was making sweets. So that's what he did. I mean, he cooked every day for Govindajī, but he was really, really good at making sweets for the Lord. So one day he made lādḍūs for Govindajī and then sent them with some soldiers who were going to see the presiding king of Amber after Rām Singh, whose name was Vijaya Singh—later to be known as the great Jai Singh II. We're going to hear more about him a little bit today and in the final class actually, in a few days, on this great journey. Jai Singh II, such an amazing devotee. 

So at that time, he was called Vijaya Singh, and he was actually a young man, 10 or 11 or something like that, I can't remember. But still, he was seen as the king; he had his helpers, his assistants, and his ministers helping him rule the kingdom. So when our Jai Singh II tasted those lādḍūs as a young boy, he asked for seconds—that’s famous—"Can I have more?" because he liked them so much. In fact, later on, he sent one of his royal chefs—Jai Singh II sent one of his royal chefs—to learn the recipe of those lādḍūs from Govinda Caraṇa Gosvāmī at Govindagaḍh fort. He said, "You go up there, you learn that recipe, bring it back so we can have lādḍūs here." Now, it's really interesting that those same lādḍūs, that same recipe, are still being offered daily to Govindajī in Jaipur, every day in the Jaipur temple. And then they're sold or given to pilgrims. And I know for many of us in ISKCON, that's one of the special treats when we go for darśana of Rādhā-Govinda in the Jaipur temple. That big temple, there's a little corner where they're selling those lādḍūs—same recipe—and you know, the residents of that town, they like to buy them and then distribute pieces of those lādḍūs to all the pilgrims who are coming. I think I've had many in my lifetime, but I didn't know the history of those lādḍūs. It's so interesting. 

Now, I also in the institute, I was also reading that this Govinda Caraṇa Gosvāmī, he was always very well dressed, especially while doing pūjā for Govindajī on the altar. He was famous for wearing blue silk dhotīs and decorating himself with various types of expensive ornaments, jewelry, while on the altar. And once, some devotees asked him—they asked Govinda Caraṇa Gosvāmī—why he wore such expensive ornaments and nice clothes while worshiping Govindajī. So Govinda Caraṇa Gosvāmī replied—it's a very nice reply, and I quote him: "Just as a minister who represents the king dresses up nicely before going to see the king, so I worship the King of the fourteen worlds, Lord Govindadeva, and therefore I must dress nicely while I'm before Him, and all the while I'm representing Him." 

So after 25 years of being safely worshipped in Govindagaḍh, Govindadeva was finally moved to a town called Rājagaḍh, where He stayed for two years, because remember, the whole idea was to get Him down to Amber, the capital of the Rājput kings at that time. That was the whole idea, to get Him safely there. So He stayed in Rājagaḍh for two years, from 1700 to 1702, and from a document I found in the institute, I saw that His pūjārīs, Govindajī's pūjārīs, they felt uneasy for His security there—it doesn't mention why—so they wrote a letter to Jai Singh II requesting help. So Jai Singh II had Govindajī shifted to yet another village called Kāva in late 1702. By this time, Emperor Aurangzeb had become much, much older, more reclusive; as a result, his attacks on temples and Deities and his looting of Hindu towns and villages, it was all falling apart. And then finally, in the year 1707, he died. Aurangzeb died, which caused a huge celebration amongst the Hindu population in his vast empire. And it's quite a description, actually, of these celebrations at that time in history. 

And while I was reading about all the festivities, I won't go into the details here, but you can imagine while I was reading them, I was reminded of one verse from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Seventh Canto, Ninth Chapter, verse 14. Quote: "My dear Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, please therefore—this is Prahlāda speaking—cease Your anger now that my father, the great demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, has been killed. Since even saintly persons take pleasure in the killing of a scorpion or a snake, all the worlds have achieved great satisfaction because of the death of this demon. Now they are confident of their happiness, and they will always remember Your auspicious incarnation of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in order to be freed from fear." So, everyone was celebrating when the asura is killed or dies. And indeed, taking full advantage of Aurangzeb’s death, Jai Singh II had a beautiful temple constructed for Govindajī closer to Amber, his capital, in a village called Kāmā. 

I was reading that Govindajī was taken there in a big procession, and when He arrived, Jai Singh personally gave hundreds of gold coins to Govindadeva. And he actually renamed that village Govindapura, and he also donated a nearby village; it was called Juḍherā-pura, to Govindajī, again stating that all the revenue from that village would be used in Govindajī's service. So yeah, that's as far as we'll go today. We'll leave a couple more towns before the conclusion, but the dangers much decreased now for Govindajī. And we've just been introduced to Jai Singh II, but as I said earlier, he's actually a great devotee. He was a full-on Kṛṣṇa-bhakta, full-on. I read in one document in the institute; it was written by a court poet of Jai Singh. He wrote as follows: "Śrīyuta Jai Singh was the Bhagīratha of Kali-yuga. Like Bhagīratha brought Gaṅgā and dharma to the earth planet, similarly, Śrīyuta Jai Singh II brought the flow of dharma again to the earth after the evil deeds of Aurangzeb." He wrote like that. 

And a biographer of his time, or someone who wrote his biography, his name was Ātmarāma, he wrote a nice biography about Jai Singh II. And I was reading the biography, and he wrote that when Jai Singh was in Vṛndāvana, on one occasion actually putting down a rebellion by the Jats—remember, I mentioned they're fiercely independent people; for whatever reason, they had a rebellion—so he came to Vṛndāvana, which is saying with part of his army, and he put down that rebellion. And then what did he do? He bathed in Rādhā-kuṇḍa on the full moon of Kārttika, and we know that's a special day. He bathed in Rādhā-kuṇḍa on the full moon of Kārttika. And during the month of Śrāvaṇa in 1724, he performed the marriage of his daughter on Janmāṣṭamī in Mathurā. He could have done it in Rājasthān, but he brought her to Mathurā, Kṛṣṇa’s janma-bhūmi where He appeared. And on that special day of Janmāṣṭamī, he had her married there in Mathurā. And after the ceremony, he went on pilgrimage for several weeks of all the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana as a humble pilgrim. And then when he came back to Mathurā, he founded a number of religious establishments, it's written, as well as he celebrated Holī in Mathurā. Kṛṣṇa-bhakta! And in 1727, he again visited Vṛndāvana, and he offered his weight in gold at Viśrāma-ghāṭa. Viśrāma-ghāṭa—we've discussed this ghāṭa before, a very sacred place in Śrī Vṛndāvana. So he went there, and they weighed the scale; he sat on one side of the scale and they put gold on the other side, and he gave that to the sacred places of Vṛndāvana to preserve them and also to take care of the sādhus. And at that time, he also ordered the construction of many ghāṭas along the sacred Yamunā River. And then it was in 1732 he had a temple built for Sītā Devī and Lord Rāma at Viśrāma-ghāṭa. And four years later, in 1736, he had another very beautiful temple constructed at Govardhana Hill; he said, "This is for Govardhana, the Lord of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the lifter of Govardhana Hill." If only we had such rulers today. 

And in that regard, I'll finish with a purport of Śrīla Prabhupāda in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 6.2.7. Prabhupāda writes: "The king or, in modern times, the government should act as the guardian of the citizens by teaching them the proper goal of life. The human form of life is especially meant for realization of oneself and one's relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because this cannot be realized in animal life, the duty of the government, therefore, is to take charge of training all the citizens in such a way that by a gradual process they will be elevated to the spiritual platform and will realize the self and his relationship with God. This principle was followed by great kings like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Lord Rāmacandra, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, and Prahlāda Mahārāja." And we can add, in more recent times, Rājā Jai Singh II. 

So now he's another one of our heroes. So dear devotees, we'll be back with one last lecture about Govindajī as He enters His permanent residence in the City of Victory, Jaipur, built by Rājā Jai Singh II. We'll be back for that pastime as well, this beloved Deity of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. So thank you so much, see you in a couple of days. Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! And our Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""