"*00563*.*
"Hare Krishna, dear devotees. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of the twelve forests of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Happy to be with you; vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaś ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca. As you can see, we’re not in our usual studio; I’m still in Delhi, and our congregation member has again very kindly given us his recording studio to do our lecture today. We are grateful to him and hope it looks okay. 

So, we are continuing with our miniseries on Yāvaṭ, sometimes pronounced Jāvaṭ. As you may know, the other day I had the extreme good fortune to actually visit Yāvaṭ in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, where I took a number of photos and posted an album on Facebook. You can just imagine how excited I was to actually visit Yāvaṭ after doing so much research about it and giving a few lectures. During that visit, I was remembering the words of Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura from his *Prārthanā*, song 29, where he is just hankering to be in Vṛndāvana and appreciating that dhāma so much. This song was going through my mind; he writes as follows:

"O Lord Hari, when will I reside in Vṛndāvana and behold the beauty of the Divine Couple, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa? When will I give up the happiness of sleeping on a luxurious bed and when will I smear my body with the dust of Vraja? When will I give up enjoying the six palatable foodstuffs and when will I make madhukarī—like a bee in Vraja—to maintain my body? When will I wander through forest after forest doing parikramā, and when I am tired, will I take rest on the banks of the Yamunā? I will cool myself down beneath the shade of Vamśīvaṭ and sit in the kuñja with other Vaiṣṇavas."

Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, "When will that day come that I actually give up everything and go to Vṛndāvana?" So, let us all prepare ourselves for our big parikramā-mahotsava in the future by hearing more kathā of the wonderful pastimes that take place there eternally.

One day, Kṛṣṇa had managed to sneak into the Yāvaṭ palace and was meeting Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in her rooms, when suddenly, who should walk in but Jaṭilā, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law. At that moment, it’s described, Kṛṣṇa had to literally dive out the window, leaving His flute behind. But fortunately, Jaṭilā, as we mentioned before, is half-blind and didn't exactly see Him jumping out the window. She couldn't really make out what was happening, but as always, she suspected Kṛṣṇa. So she said to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, "Was that the rascal Kṛṣṇa? It was, wasn't it?" Of course, Rādhārāṇī denied it. Unfortunately, however, Jaṭilā saw Kṛṣṇa’s flute lying just before her on the table, and so she immediately concluded Kṛṣṇa had been there. So she yelled, "That was Kṛṣṇa! I knew it! This is His flute. At last, I’ve caught you red-handed with that rascal, Śrī Rādhā."

At that point, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī didn't know what to say, but bold Lalitā, bold Lalitā, she stepped forward and said, "Jaṭilā, that’s not Kṛṣṇa’s flute. Don't be ridiculous." So Jaṭilā was stunned, and she thought, "How could Lalitā deny that Kṛṣṇa has been here when His flute is here? It’s clear evidence He was here." So Jaṭilā said, "Well, Lalitā, how did this flute get here then? You girls don't play flutes; only Kṛṣṇa does. How can you deny the obvious?" 

But Lalitā was not even slightly discouraged by those words, so she folded her arms, she stood up straight, and with complete conviction, she said, "Jaṭilā, don't you know? Today, it’s raining flutes." So Jaṭilā said, "Raining flutes? That’s completely crazy! How dare you say such nonsense!" But without hesitating even for a second, Lalitā said, "Jaṭilā, look out the window." So it’s described, Jaṭilā went to the window, mumbling something about rascal girls lying and talking nonsense, but sure enough, when she looked outside, it was raining flutes. It was raining flutes! *Śivājī bhūmi, śrī-vṛndāvana-dhāma*. 

Lucky! So let us have faith that all this is true; this is absolute truth, and pray that one day we can, by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy, enter into such sublime pastimes. That must be our mood; we have to have that hankering and that faith. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura also writes in *Prārthanā*, psalm 17, in that same mood: "I have heard from the mouths of pure devotees that by the mercy of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, one can attain the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. O my Lord Sanātana Goswāmī, and the associates of Lord Gaurāṅga, all of you kindly fulfill these desires. Let the mercy of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī be upon me, for whoever has taken shelter of him is my master. When will Lokanātha Goswāmī, my spiritual master, take me with him and place me at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa? When will it ever happen to me that the dear most sakhīs will chastise their servant, Narottama dāsa?" Haribol, Śrīla Prabhupāda. May we imbibe that hankering and that faith.

So, some more nectar from Yāvaṭ. The following nectarian pastime is described by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his book called *Śrī Prema-saṁpuṭ*. He describes how one time Kṛṣṇa felt like testing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—testing her not in the sense of trying to defeat her, but to see deeper into her heart, to see her extraordinary, unique love that she has for Him. He just wanted to test her, to see that. 

So early one morning, He did a very remarkable thing. He disguised Himself as a demigoddess with a crimson-colored veil over His head. Kṛṣṇa is the master of everything, so we can be assured that He’s the master of disguise. So He disguised Himself as a demigoddess and entered into the courtyard of Yāvaṭ, and then into the palace, and into Śrī Rādhā’s quarters, into her rooms.

When Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī saw this charming young woman a little distance away, she addressed her friend Lalitā. She said, "O sakhi Lalitā, look, just look! Who is this beautiful young woman adorned with astonishing ornaments?" I like that: "astonishing ornaments." She continued, "Her radiance illuminates our whole courtyard; the whole palace appears to be decorated with blue sapphires." She had some special attraction for this demigoddess. 

So Lalitā approached the demigoddess and asked, "Dear one, who are you? Where have you come from, and is there any special reason you have come here?" But the young girl didn't reply; very shy. So Lalitā asked the same questions again, but again, the young girl didn't reply. So Rādhārāṇī was feeling some special attraction to this demigoddess, so she herself spoke up. She said to the demigoddess, "O beautiful one, who are you? It seems that you have appeared before us," Viśvanātha writes, "embodying the beauty of the entire world."

But still, the pretty girl didn't reply. So Rādhārāṇī continued, "Shy one, please introduce yourself. There’s no reason to be timid or reserved with us." Then she said something really amazing: "Please understand that I consider you to be my most intimate friend. Yes, indeed, please understand that I consider you to be my most intimate friend." Then she said to the demigoddess, "Has your beloved perhaps abandoned you, or did you find some fault in his character and therefore you left him? Is that why you can't speak? Actually, I think I know what happened," Śrī Rādhā said. "It must be that you were married, and you have family members like I do. Maybe you have someone like Jaṭilā or Kuṭilā. Perhaps they always surround you like Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā do here, and they're always defaming me, proclaiming my faults to everyone. Did this happen to you? Do you have some family members like that?" No reply. "Or is it that perhaps you have some sickness or some disease, and that is why you are carefully covering every single part of your body?" The disguise.

So when Kṛṣṇa in this disguise heard Śrī Rādhā speak in that way, underneath that crimson red veil, a gentle smile appeared upon His face, and He said in a feminine voice, "O supremely beautiful Rādhā, I’m actually from Śivaloka. I’m a demigoddess, and I’ve come here because I have a certain doubt." So everyone: "Oh, wow." 

So the demigoddess said, "Some time ago, a flute sound penetrated into our higher planetary system, and it had a very powerful effect on everyone living there. I saw with my own eyes hearing that flute sound: some people started crying uncontrollably, tears flowing from their eyes like torrents of rain; some people fainted; I saw others, their hair standing on end." So I decided to find out where this flute sound was coming from. Thus, I followed it down here to the Earth planet, and I wandered and came to Vṛndāvana and discovered it was coming from Vamśīvaṭ, from a very handsome young boy playing a flute under a banyan tree. And after closely observing for some time, I noticed that although He professes a unique love for you, in fact, He appears to love many young girls. I have watched His activities. He professes a special love for you, but Śrī Rādhā, He appears to love many, many young girls."

"So my advice is that due to that infidelity to you, you should leave Him immediately. He professes to love you most, but He’s with all these other girls; I advise you leave Him immediately." Now, remember that Kṛṣṇa has taken this disguise and is speaking like this to test Śrī Rādhā’s love for Him. 

So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī immediately jumped to Kṛṣṇa’s defense, you could say, and she said, "No, I will never leave Him. No matter how He treats me, I will never leave Him." And she said, "Actually, it’s everyone’s desire to serve Him and love Him, but our relationship is unique. It’s everyone’s desire to serve Him and love Him, which is true, but our relationship is unique, so I will not leave Him." She said, "My friends have noticed without envy that I am the one who pleases Him the most, so they happily engage in making arrangements for mine and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes together without any envy or jealousy."

So the demigoddess, she spoke next. She said, "But Śrī Rādhā, how can you be absolutely sure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s special love for you?" So this is really wonderful, this part. So Rādhā replied, "My dear demigoddess, the reason I am sure is we are not two persons; rather, we are one soul in two bodies. Therefore, I know." One soul and two bodies. Yes, you remember the other day we explained in detail how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is actually an expansion of Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure potency. When the Lord wants to enjoy, He expands His pleasure potency, and that becomes hlādinī-śakti personified as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So she said, "The reason I am sure is we are not two persons; rather, we are one soul in two bodies." 

And I also was reading in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Ādi-līlā* 4.56, it’s explained—same principle, very clearly: *rādhā-kṛṣṇa—ātma-dui deha-e-i ātmā*, they are one and the same, but they have assumed two bodies. Thus, they enjoy each other, tasting the mellows of love. And that way we can understand Rādhārāṇī’s statement; it’s not a mystery to her. Kṛṣṇa loves her the most.

So then Kṛṣṇa as the demigoddess smiled, and Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says with a perfect plan in mind, He said, "Whether He—meaning Kṛṣṇa—is far away or close at hand, if your beloved, simply upon your remembering Him, were to immediately appear here present before you, I would become confident with the intimate knowledge of your oneness and love." 

So then Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes, "After hearing the demigoddess speak as she did, Śrī Rādhā closed her eyes and fell into a deep trance of meditation on the Lord of her heart." He continues, "She appeared like a powerful yoginī sitting in a trance of meditation, her senses totally restrained and observing complete silence." 

So taking this opportunity, Kṛṣṇa, Viśvanātha writes, mystically and without anyone noticing, abandoned His dress of the demigoddess and embraced Śrī Rādhā, causing her to experience ecstatic symptoms. So then she opened her eyes; she was surprised. "Oh, my most beloved Kṛṣṇa is here! My meditation has brought Him here!" So at that moment, Lalitā-sakhī spoke up, saying, "Kṛṣṇa, what’s going on here? What a surprise to see You all of a sudden here." She said, "Only chaste ladies are eligible to enter into these inner apartments. Kṛṣṇa, the wind god himself is incapable of suddenly and unexpectedly entering here, but we must praise your good fortune, since the respectable lady of this house, Jaṭilā, is not at home for an amazing arrangement, nor is that resentful husband, Abhimanyu, here either. The tides of fate are in your favor." I love that part: "the tides of fate are in your favor." 

So people, you know, everyone thought the gopīs are like, "How did Kṛṣṇa get here?" Obviously, Rādhārāṇī’s meditation! So Kṛṣṇa, He said, "What fault is there on My part? I was simply playing in the courtyard of My father’s gośālā when, by chance, I suddenly became overwhelmed with remembrance of Śrī Rādhā. Immediately thereafter, it was as if some celestial being brought Me here." And as Śrī Rādhā and all the gopīs smiled in appreciation, one girl said, "Oh girls, what has happened to that beautiful demigoddess who was here amongst us? Where is she?" So no one could answer that question—where she went, how did she disappear—and neither were they concerned, Viśvanātha says, as they enjoyed seeing the Divine Couple together once again, against all odds, against all odds. Wonderful pastime. 

Now, the final words are very touching. I knew the pastime was there, so I was reading it and absorbing it, and you know, I actually spent a long time reading the book, but then I went to the end and I saw that how he concludes so beautiful. He writes: 

"In the year 1606 Śakābda—which is Christian era 1703—during the month of Phālguna (February-March), this poem, *Śrī Prema-saṁpuṭ*, became manifest to a certain soul while he was residing on the banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, drinking and being nourished by the sweet nectar of Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī’s words." 

So we are all forever indebted to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura for the many insights he has given us through his works, through his writings into Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes in Vṛndāvana. He knew Vraja; I was reading that. He himself lived in various places throughout Vṛndāvana, like Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Yāvaṭ, Govardhana, etc., as he confirmed in various statements in his books. 

And then I was reading that, like many preachers of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he too would sometimes come up against opposition during his lifetime. In particular, I’m remembering on one occasion he had a public debate with some scholars who would not accept Kṛṣṇa’s loving relationships with the gopīs as the highest eternal expression of divine love. They wouldn't accept that. But by quoting from Vaiṣṇava scriptures, especially *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, he defeated the argument that Kṛṣṇa was married to the gopīs. No, no, He’s not married in that rasa. So he was able to establish that Kṛṣṇa was not married to the gopīs, but had a different relationship. They didn't like that. Unfortunately, some of his defeated opponents after that debate took a vow to kill him. 

One day, those evil-minded men, armed with knives, waited for Viśvanātha at a place he would regularly pass by on parikramā. But at the allotted time when he would come by, instead of—they’re waiting there—instead of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who walks by? A very charming young girl picking flowers. So the scholars, they asked her, "Lalī, did you see Viśvanātha come by this path?" So she replied, "Yes, I saw him earlier, but he seems to have disappeared." It’s written that the girl’s sublime radiance acted to distract the men from their mission. So one of them asked, "Lalī, whose daughter are you anyway, and where do you live?" So the girl replied, "I am Śrī Rādhā’s maidservant. She is now at her in-laws' house in Yāvaṭ. She sent me here to pick flowers for Kṛṣṇa." Now, as soon as this little girl spoke those words, she disappeared, and in her place stood Śrīla Viśvanātha. 

Wow! And it’s written that the influence of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s personal presence in both his *siddha* and *sādhaka* form—*siddha* means as the young girl, liberated eternal form as a young gopī, and his *sādhaka* form means as the elderly Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura—the influence of his personal presence in both his *siddha* and *sādhaka* forms transformed those scholars' hearts, and they fell at his feet and they begged for forgiveness. 

There’s the following saying in relation to Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s three most famous books. The saying is: *kīraṇa-bindu-kaṇa*. These three books—*Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kīraṇa*, *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu*, and *Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇa*—are taken and used by the Vaiṣṇavas as their very wealth. Isn’t that wonderful? *Kīraṇa-bindu-kaṇa, ei tin-e vaiṣṇava-prāṇa*. These three books are taken and used by the Vaiṣṇavas as their wealth. This is our wealth, these līlās and the tattva, the philosophy that we study to properly understand these wonderful līlās. This is our wealth. 

In this connection, we also hear what’s said like that—we also hear the following verse sung everywhere: 
"Because he has shown the Viśvavāsīs (the residents of the material universe) the path of bhakti, he is called Viśvanātha, and because he is situated amongst the *cakra* (circle) of devotees, he is called Cakravartī. Śrīla Viśvanātha!" 

Wow, it’s so nice to speak about Yāvaṭ. It was really nice going there to visit. I hope you enjoyed the photos that we put up on Facebook as well as these ongoing līlās. I’m going to be in New Delhi for a few more days, so I’ll be back probably in this studio with some more nectar on Yāvaṭ or Jāvaṭ. So thank you for joining us today and keep well, and we’ll see you soon. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī kī jaya! See you soon.""