"*00451*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa. Just a goodbye to everyone who’s been watching our program down here in Woodstock 2017 in Poland. We’re just breaking down now; we were setting up, doing the festival, and now we are breaking down. It is a big, big effort. We’re trying to keep the place clean—we’re trying to leave the place cleaner than when we arrived here, one of the fine qualities of our festival program.

But yeah, it’s amazing how the devotees are working. They work hard to set it up, and then five days of chanting, dancing, philosophy, feasting, ratha-yātrā, questions and answers, kīrtana, etc. The same devotees who went to bed around three o’clock in the morning are back here at seven o’clock in the morning breaking down and packing up. We’re leaving to go back up to the coast, the Baltic Sea coast. We’re going to continue with our normal festivals—well, we call them "normal"—along the villages and towns of the Baltic Sea coast. Our next big festival is on Wednesday.

The police entered to help; these troopers were great. They did a great job; they did more than we ever imagined. Over 150,000 plates of prasādam served, ongoing 14 hours a day. Thanks to all the great leaders, the devotees—thank you, devotees. A big thanks to the devotees who transported the śāstra, who cooked the prasādam in the certain schools that we were renting to prepare prasādam. And mostly, thanks to the people, because really, this is about the people. Whether the Christians or the villagers, we just want to be apparent—we feel we really love the people here. They’ve responded so nicely to our message, to our prasādam, to our association. We have some friendships going back many, many years here. 

So, really, our hearts go out to all the Woodstock people who came and participated in Kṛṣṇa’s village—this peace. We look forward to seeing you next year at the ball field. We carry wonderful memories that we all experienced here at this great Mahā-vidyā festival, Woodstock 2017. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""