Devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Actually, today I'm addressing you from our beloved Māyāpura. So, we're continuing with our series on "The Binding Rope of Spotless Love," and this will be part seven, number seven in this series. We have focused mainly on Lord Kṛṣṇa's butter pastimes, uh, namely His stealing butter, makhan chor, and being punished by His mother, Yaśodā Mayi.

Now, one ācārya has summarized these pastimes in a most beautiful way, which I'd like to share with you. He writes as follows: In this pastime of Kṛṣṇa being bound by Yaśodā for stealing butter, there is lilānanda, meaning the Lord relishing the mellow of His own sweet līlā.

Lilānanda. Then there is also the devotee, mother Yaśodā, experiencing premānanda, meaning the pleasure of rendering loving service to Kṛṣṇa. So, he writes, these two types of ānanda, or bliss—the Lord's lilānanda and the devotee's premānanda—combined together to create an apūrva paramānanda, an apūrva paramānanda, meaning unprecedented supreme bliss.

The Lord and His devotee become drowned, he writes, in this ocean of ānanda. Then he writes, no one can describe it with language, for it's indescribable. That rasa viśaya, Kṛṣṇa is the reservoir of all rasas. He's the relisher, but He gives His devotee the opportunity to also relish with Him, with Him.

So, sweet!

Merry Christmas!

So, in this part seven, I would like to go deeper into our understanding of vātsalya rasa, which is actually the underlying theme of the month of nāmā dharma, or the month of Kartik, which of course has just finished, but we're going to keep going.

When we discuss viśaya rasa, the mood of parenthood between Kṛṣṇa and His devotees, we naturally think of mother Yaśodā, who's the very emblem of motherly love for Kṛṣṇa. There's a nice pastime that illustrates this well. There are many pastimes, but here's a nice pastime that illustrates this: that once, while sitting on the banks of Yaśodā-kuṇḍa, which is where mother Yaśodā would bathe Kṛṣṇa every day because it's right next to the kuṇḍa, Kṛṣṇa told one of His friends, and I'll quote: "Even when we visit here and various gopīs are eager to provide the best of food for us, Mother insists on making butter for me instead.

Sometimes we play in the water as she churns yogurt, and when she's finished, I see she washes the pots herself and insists on carrying the butter back home while her servants just carry the churning stick. Such is my mother, my friends," he said to his friends. "Such is my mother." Kṛṣṇa appreciates so much the love of His mother for Him, the special love that she has.

I was actually reading that, um, when mother Yaśodā would make butter by churning yogurt, she would then feed Kṛṣṇa the leftover buttermilk, either sweetened or salty, depending on the time of the year. This drink cools the body during summer.

So, during the hot season, she would provide Kṛṣṇa with plenty of buttermilk, the ācāryas say, salted and slightly spiced, and Kṛṣṇa and His friends would enjoy chatting while drinking this delicious beverage. So, in this way, we naturally think of Yaśodā Mayi as Kṛṣṇa's mother.

However, there are many other ladies, many other ladies in Vṛndāvana who serve Kṛṣṇa in the same parental mood, vātsalya rasa.

However, we should understand none of them actually give birth to Kṛṣṇa as Madhava Yaśodā does. It's only mother Yaśodā who gives birth to Kṛṣṇa in this way. No one is equal to her. Remember that verse we quoted a few times in this series? Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, 10.9.20.

Quote: "Neither Lord Brahmā nor Lord Śiva nor even the Goddess of Fortune, who was always the better half of the Supreme Lord, can obtain from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the deliverer from this material world, such mercy as received by Mother Yaśodā." I just love that verse.

Now, if the other women in Vṛndāvana are, you know, literally mothers of Kṛṣṇa, how do we understand the relationship of parenthood, of vātsalya rasa, with Kṛṣṇa?

Well, it's actually the motherly mood in which they serve Kṛṣṇa as a mother. It's their mood in serving Kṛṣṇa. For example, this is a good example. Kṛṣṇa would eat His meals at His mother's house, but the ācāryas say that He used to go to the other gopīs' homes between meals, between meals, and secretly eat their butter, yogurt, and other milk products.

And as we've heard so many times, those gopīs would constantly complain to Mother Yaśodā about Kṛṣṇa's misconduct, but the Vaiṣṇavas also say within themselves, they relished His stealing their butter as the highlight of their lives and the main source of their bliss.

And as such, they always thought they too were His mothers. This mood. So, in that way, one experiences embellishes, or the parental mood of loving Kṛṣṇa. It's also important to understand that Kṛṣṇa is dealing with the older gopīs. And by older gopīs, I don't mean in their 80s or 90s.

They're still young women, say in their 20s or whatever. Kṛṣṇa is dealing with the older gopīs was not based entirely on stealing and distributing their milk products. For example, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would sit sometimes with other cowherd boys in the courtyard of a friend, just playing or talking.

And in this way, they would enchant these older gopīs with their beautiful forms, their gestures, and their speech. Just by observing them, these gopīs would get so much satisfaction in this motherly mood. At such times, the, um, these gopīs would be pleased.

I was reading, to offer Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, you know, fruit juice to drink, some sweetmeats to eat, like that, in a kind of motherly way. And sometimes I read, they would even bring jewelry from their own treasuries and decorate Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma with those jewels.

It's written that the older gopīs considered Kṛṣṇa to be a walking good luck charm, whose presence brought all auspiciousness to their hearts and to their homes. And that fact alone more than made up for His naughty behavior. That fact alone more than made up for His naughty behavior.

So, Kṛṣṇa's naughty, but they forgive Him. In commenting actually, I was reading on Kṛṣṇa's naughtiness, Śrīla Prabhupāda gives a meaning of the term or the name Gopī-jana-vallabha.

He connects it to Kṛṣṇa's naughtiness. How so?

Prabhupāda writes, Kṛṣṇa would often go with His friends to a neighbor's home and steal butter or yogurt.

And if they were caught in the act, Kṛṣṇa would sometimes become angry and accuse His captor of being the thief. So, how, you know, Kṛṣṇa's stealing in the house, how can He accuse those who find Him of being a thief?

Because well, everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa anyway. And in this angry mood, Kṛṣṇa would sometimes pass urine inside the house. And when these older gopīs would go and bring this to Mother Yaśodā's attention, Kṛṣṇa would stand by, you know, listening quietly.

And if Kṛṣṇa thought that His mother was being persuaded by the gopīs' complaints, He would look so fearful that Mother Yaśodā would at once abandon any thought of scolding Him. Vātsalya rasa. And when the other ladies looked at Kṛṣṇa's beautiful face, their hearts, it's described, became so flooded with transcendental bliss that they forgot their complaints.

This is Kṛṣṇa, wonderful Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda explains it very nicely in Kṛṣṇa Book.

Quote: "Because of the features of Kṛṣṇa's face, the mothers were so attracted that they could not chastise Him. Instead of chastising Him, they simply smiled and enjoyed discussing Kṛṣṇa's pastimes." Wow. And Prabhupāda concludes, "Thus the Gopis remained satisfied and Kṛṣṇa enjoyed their happiness.

Therefore, Prabhupāda invites another name of Kṛṣṇa is Gopī-jana-vallabha: He who enjoys the Gopis.

He who invented such activities to please these Gopis, Gopī-jana-vallabha." Thank you, Śrīla Prabhupāda, for that.

Now, there's a very interesting pastime where Kṛṣṇa actually arranged that these older gopīs, these mothers in Vṛndāvana, could act more intimately as His mothers, rather than just observing or giving some sweetmeats or whatever.

There's a wonderful pastime arranged by Pūtanā-māsī, really, where these older gopīs could have more, a more intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa as a mother. It happened during the Brahmā-mohana-līlā, when Brahmā decided to play a trick on Kṛṣṇa and test if He was actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

We discussed this pastime very in great detail, I think, two years ago. But basically, Brahmā was confused because he had seen Kṛṣṇa, you know, in a very light, intimate way, eating and joking with His friends in Vṛndāvana.

So, he's thinking, how, how can this be the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appearing equal to His cowherd friends?

So, again, he decided to play a trick, and the trick was that he stole all Kṛṣṇa's calves and all of Kṛṣṇa's boys and hid them away in a cave for one year. Now, Śrīmad Bhāgavatam describes very nicely what happened next.

It's, uh, 10.13.18. I'll quote just to be safe here: "Thereafter, just to create pleasure for both Brahmā and for the mothers of the calves and the cowherd boys, Kṛṣṇa, the creator of the entire cosmic manifestation, expanded Himself as the calves and the boys." In other words, Kṛṣṇa became all those calves, and Kṛṣṇa became all those boys.

So, the Bhāgavatam goes on to explain that then, as if nothing was out of the ordinary, all these boys and their calves were actually Kṛṣṇa. Sang and danced their way back to Vṛndāvana with Kṛṣṇa Himself.

Then, upon arriving in Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa, in the form of the calves, ran to the cows, their mothers, and in the form of the cowherd boys, ran to their mothers and fathers in their respective homes.

Now, it is said that the cows greeted their calves very warmly, fed them with their milk, and experienced their affection for their calves in an even greater way than before. Well, why?

Because Kṛṣṇa. And in the same way, the cowherd boys' mothers, who the ācāryas say had always secretly maintained a greater affection for Kṛṣṇa than their own sons, now felt a new and very intense affection for their boys. Actually, śāstra says that the women used to think, quote: "Will I ever be as fortunate as Mother Yaśodā and have Kṛṣṇa as my child?" So, now Kṛṣṇa, having taken the forms of these boys, these older gopīs are getting that relationship, a more intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa is living in their home for one year.

Actually, so Kṛṣṇa fulfilled their desire, became more close. But vātsalya rasa, what's that verse in Bhagavad-gītā?

Kṛṣṇa says, "As they surrender to me, I reward them accordingly." So, here, these were vātsalya-vāsis. They're surrendering fully to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's fully reciprocating, and in the vātsalya rasa, He's become their, uh, the elder gopīs' child for one year. Now, it's very interesting.

Jīva Gosvāmī writes that during the year that Kṛṣṇa manifested Himself as His cowherd boyfriends, the older gopīs' love for Kṛṣṇa was twice that of Mother Yaśodā's. That's an interesting thing. Just for that one year, the elderly gopīs' love for Kṛṣṇa was twice that of Mother Yaśodā's.

Just how kind is Kṛṣṇa to give them this opportunity, these older gopīs?

So, then Kṛṣṇa went on to, uh, continue with the pastime. We won't go into detail here, but for one year, the cows were able to have that affectionate relationship with their calves, and the older gopīs, Kṛṣṇa in the form of their sons.

So sweet. Anyway, it's been wonderful discussing today. I have some important duties I have to attend to here in Māyāpura Dom. So, we'll, we'll conclude here. Um, really wonderful discussing Dāmodara-līlā, even after the month of Kartik, and seeing, as we often do, how the Supreme Controller is controlled by the love of His devotees.

So sweet. That's bhakti. And one ācārya has written as regards Mother Yaśodā, in this way, being able to control Kṛṣṇa with her love. He writes very beautifully, very rustic. He writes: "Even though His breathing is the origin of every atom, whenever Kṛṣṇa enters Vṛndāvana, for us He rejoices in the unlimited bouquet of fragrances that come from its flowers, plants, and produce.

Similarly, though Kṛṣṇa's hearing generates every type of sound and thus He hears everything, He is especially inclined to hear His glories sung in Vedic hymns. Even more so, His own sweet Holy names." Scriptures confirm that nothing escapes Kṛṣṇa's attention, but at times His pastime potency restricts His hearing so that He cannot hear His mother Yaśodā sneak up behind Him when He is stealing butter.

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So, we'll finish today with a beautiful prayer from Rūpa Gosvāmī's Pañca-pātra-varṇana, short but also very sweet: "Awakened at dawn by the sound of yogurt turning, Kṛṣṇa steadily entered a gopī's home, blew out the lamps, and stole a handful of butter.

I pray that child Kṛṣṇa may always protect me." See. Wow, thank you so much. Very relishable. I think that we can have one more class on Dāmodara-līlā, one more class. So, I'll work towards that next Friday. I hope that you enjoyed all this nectar.

Well, glorious.