"*00439*.*
"### The Hidden Pastimes of Govindaji - Part 5

Hi Krishna, new devotees! Welcome back once again. *Nama om viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gauravāṇī-pracāriṇe.*

We are continuing with our series on Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his worship of his beloved Iṣṭadeva, Govindajī. In our last lecture, we concluded with the departure of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī from this world. We mentioned that upon his demise, all of Vṛndāvana was plunged into lamentation. Desiring to understand and appreciate just how dear Rūpa Gosvāmī was to the Vrajavāsīs, I researched his departure a little bit more, and I was surprised to read that not only were the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas—the followers of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu—affected, but members of other *sampradāyas* as well.

You may remember in our last lecture we quoted the *Sādhana-dīpikā*, wherein it said about Rūpa Gosvāmī—and I’ll quote it again—that he could prepare deities, draw expertly; he was a master of astrology and mathematics; he was fluent in Sanskrit, Persian, Bengali, and other languages. He was also renowned as a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava philosopher and scholar, and he was well known to other *sampradāyas*. Of course, we know that all the Gosvāmīs were beloved by everyone, as mentioned in the *Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭakam* by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. We hear in the very first verse, and I quote: "I offer my respectful obeisances unto the six Gosvāmīs who are always engaged in chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa and dancing. They are just like the ocean of love of God, and they are popular both with the gentle and with the ruffians because they are not envious of anyone. Whatever they do, they are all pleasing to everyone, and they are fully blessed by Lord Caitanya. Thus, they are engaged in missionary activities meant to deliver all the conditioned souls in the material universe."

It is interesting that in the *Sādhana-dīpikā*, it is mentioned that Rūpa Gosvāmī was popular, in particular, with other *sampradāyas* at that time. One might naturally assume there would be some little tension perhaps between various *sampradāyas* with their significantly diverse goals, methodologies, practices, etc., but that wasn't the case for Rūpa Gosvāmī. Not only the gentle and the ruffians loved him, but apparently all kinds of transcendentalists also loved him as well, including members of other *sampradāyas*. I actually came across another quote by someone I mentioned in the last lecture: Harirāma Vyāsa. He was a devotee in the Rādhā-vallabha-sampradāya and lived during the same time as the six Gosvāmīs. In his book, *Vyāsavāṇī*, starting in verse 75, he writes a number of verses: 

"All glories to Sanātana and Rūpa, who are my heart and soul. These two brothers are the shelter of fallen souls and the knowers of pure devotional service. They are the water well of *prema* and the sweetness of Vraja. Their minds are always engaged in the devotional practice based on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and they are the gems of their family lineage. Their glories are expanded in the 14 worlds because of the beautiful art of verse and voice. The cooling shadow of the dust of their soft lotus feet removes the burning sensation of the sun of the age of Kali. I, Vyāsa, always worship these two brothers who are the beautiful devotees of [His] lotus feet."

It is a small example of someone from another *sampradāya* appreciating Rūpa Gosvāmī so much. When Rūpa Gosvāmī left this world, the loss was felt by all devotees of the Lord. Our ācāryas say that it was the glories of Śrīla Rūpa and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī that inspired the Rajput kings from Rajasthan, beginning with our hero Rājā Mān Siṃha, to maintain the high standard of worship that Rūpa Gosvāmī had established for Govindajī, as well as with the deity of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who—during the time of Rūpa Gosvāmī—was sent by King Puruṣottama Deva from Jagannāth Purī.

We will discuss that particular pastime in a future class—how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī came to join her Govindajī. But to begin with, to maintain a high standard of worship after Rūpa Gosvāmī left, the royal families of Rajasthan regularly donated large amounts of money from 1590 up to 1667, particularly for the *bhoga* offerings. I thought it was so nice how the royalty was supporting the deities. These royal families from Rajasthan also provided all the funds for deity outfits, festival expenses, flowers, and salaries for the *pūjārīs*. I was reading that whenever possible, they granted land free of tax for Govindajī’s ever-expanding herd of cows and for other purposes as well. For example, the other day in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I found out that today's Loi Bāzār—everyone knows Loi Bāzār, it's where devotees do their shopping—was previously the marketplace of Govindajī, which the royals of the Rajput dynasty established to sell the *mahāprasādam* (the *mahāprasāda* that He ate) as well as His dresses, outfits, and other worshipable items. The purpose of the royals in establishing that market was to attract pilgrims to Vṛndāvana. A special place, what we know now as Loi Bāzār, was Govinda Bāzār. It was actually Rājā Mān Siṃha’s idea. He arranged for the property that we now know as Loi Bāzār, and again, it was called Govindajī Bāzār in those days.

How did the name change? I also found that out. Around 150 years ago, some shopkeepers started selling woolen *cādaras* (shawls) on the street of Govinda Bāzār. In Brajabhāṣā, as well as the Hindi language, a woolen *cādara* is known as *loi*. After some time, that bāzār became known as Loi Bāzār. There you go! And I heard recently from the locals that all the shops of Loi Bāzār are on rent; they've been on rent for hundreds of years. Some of that rent goes to the Govindajī Mandir in Jaipur even today. Isn't that interesting? So, next time you go to Loi Bāzār, you'll have a different perspective. This is where you could get the *mahāprasāda* of Govindajī, and even now, part of the rent that those shop owners pay goes to Govindajī and His mandir in Jaipur. So sweet.

Another way the royal families maintained Govindajī was by giving precious gold and silver jewelry to Him on special occasions. I actually came across many letters and documents in the institute stating that these gifts were given in loving devotion to Govinda. These royal families were very attached to the temple and the culture of worshiping Govindajī. I read how they would often make pilgrimages to Yogapīṭha, where the big temple was established. This Yogapīṭha was for a long time one of the main places, if not the main place, for pilgrimage in Vṛndāvana. As the centuries went by, many people would come to Vṛndāvana, and Govindajī’s temple as it stood in those days was probably the main place of pilgrimage. Nowadays, it is not as popular, being situated some distance from the predominant village itself or on the border there. I hope that through this series of lectures, you will be encouraged to go there and take *darśana* of the temple. Nowadays, they are also worshiping *pratibhu*—they have established other deities of Rādhā-Govinda—but so much of our history is there; we should go there regularly and pay our respects.

Just to impress upon you again the paramount importance of that particular place, Yogapīṭha, where the temple of Govindajī is standing, I will read to you a few stanzas from the work of a very renowned disciple of Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. His name was Gaḍādhara Bhaṭṭa, and he wrote a very beautiful poem called *Śrī Vṛndāvana Yogapīṭha Varṇanam* in glorification of Yogapīṭha, where Govindajī was discovered and the temple established. This is very popular here in Braja. When you start inquiring how everything is connected, you find out these poems and songs glorifying Vṛndāvana are very popular; people sing them. Although we may not know them as Gauḍīya devotees, this particular work by Gaḍādhara Bhaṭṭa consists of 54 verses glorifying Yogapīṭha. I have read the 54 verses several times, but we don't have time to repeat them all. I will recite a few of them for you so you can gain more appreciation for Yogapīṭha. When you come here next time, you will go there:

"I offer my obeisances to the Lord’s lotus feet. By His blessings, this devotee says, I am able to tell something about the opulence of Vṛndāvana, where the crystal-clear blue water of the Kālindī river flows. The highest philosophy of the Vedas and Vedānta is situated here at Yogapīṭha. The forest there is filled with red, yellow, and white flowers. On every flower, there are intoxicated bumblebees drinking the nectar. In Yogapīṭha, swans, birds, cuckoos, and other birds sing songs in higher notes. Unlimited kinds of birds live there, and something that the mind isn't able to describe: the ground is decorated with various kinds of gems and pearls that, upon seeing their effulgence, even the king of night, the moon, feels shame. The trunks of the trees are like pillars of gold, and their creepers are like gems embedded in the pillars. In some places, bright camphor is placed, and in some other places, vermillion powder is situated there. For fragrance, there’s a small pond where the lotuses are blossoming and nectar-like green water [shines] like rubies embedded in an emerald. This place is very dear to the saints, where all the six climates serve the Divine Couple, which is beyond comparison. The parrots and birds are singing songs in the fifth note, as if they are in competition with each other, and are teaching others the notes of love. The forest of Vṛndāvana, Yogapīṭha, is situated in its full glories and bliss within the forest of blossoming Kadamba trees. Millions of Indras are sitting in hopes of getting *darśana* at that glorious place known as Yogapīṭha."

That is a few of the 54 verses written by that devotee. They wrote for us to inspire us in our love and devotion for Śrī Vṛndāvana.

At Yogapīṭha, the grand temple of Govindajī stood gracefully after its construction for almost 80 years, until the Muslim tyrant Aurangzeb—I don't even want to pronounce his name—ordered it destroyed. It is difficult to even mention this Muslim emperor, who is said to have destroyed thousands and thousands of temples and shrines throughout much of his empire in India. I was reading quite a lot about it in detail—how many temples and shrines of all different religious traditions, except of course Islam, [were destroyed]. To speak about him a little bit just so we can understand the history: Aurangzeb was born in a royal family; his father was actually the Emperor, in November 1618. He grew up being trained as a prince, and he was always in competition with three other brothers, all of whom aspired one day to be the emperor themselves. It was a lot of competition; there was no love. 

Historians say that as Aurangzeb grew and took on more responsibility, he eventually became emperor himself. His slogan was: "Either the throne or the grave." This is how he was growing up. He was known for that phrase. Aurangzeb demonstrated this conviction when he was in his 30s; he infamously murdered two of his brothers and drove a third out of India, and then he locked his father, the Emperor, in a jail in Agra’s Red Fort. He never made it out of there. The Emperor then declared himself emperor and celebrated. I was reading his scribes; they wrote: "When a celebration is adorned like paradise itself, even the skies rise up from their place to dance." This is nothing spiritual; this is just the motto that he imbibed. It was a huge celebration when he became emperor. 

With no opposition, Aurangzeb, by this time—he was in his late 30s or maybe 40—began his rule over a population of 150 million people. Now, that may not sound like a lot, but at that time in India, that was the greater portion of the country. He initially said that famous quote: "An emperor ought to stand midway between gentleness and severity." But historically, his rule was one of only severity, for he gave himself the name *Alamgir*, which means "Conqueror of the World." So, he would be pretty severe if he wanted to conquer the world, and therefore he ruthlessly conquered kingdom after kingdom during his 49-year reign.

We, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, were not spared of his cruelty, for on August 28, 1667—I really spent hours there at the institute—he issued what became known as the "Black Decree." This decree said, and I quote (it's not easy to quote it, but I will): "His Majesty the Emperor, eager to establish Islam, has issued orders for all governors of all the provinces in our vast kingdom to demolish the schools and temples of the Hindus and with the utmost urgency put down the teaching and public practice of this religion and their misbelievers." So this decree eventually led to the destruction of thousands upon thousands of temples and schools throughout India. But historians have noted that: "The Kṛṣṇa temples in Vṛndāvana were the first target of this decree." Aurangzeb was personally involved in the destruction of many of the temples here in Braj, especially Govindajī’s temple.

Soon after issuing this Black Decree, Aurangzeb was visiting Mathurā on some government business. That evening, after offering *namāz* at a large mosque, he was sitting outside relaxing and he saw some unusual bright stars—what appeared to him to be bright stars—twinkling quite high in the sky. Curious, he asked one of his ministers why these stars appeared particularly bright that evening, and his minister replied that the stars were in fact lights coming from the Hindu temple of Govinda Dev in nearby Vṛndāvana. 

Now, it was actually an Ekādaśī that day. These are probably a lot of new details that you've never heard, but we got this from the books in the institute. A lot of things come down to oral tradition, but this is what was written. There was a tradition in Govindajī’s temple that on an Ekādaśī, the *pūjārīs* lit up 51 very large ghee lamps on top of the temple, and it was very magnificent; it was very tall. So, 51 large ghee lamps on an Ekādaśī were lit up on top of the temple. Further research revealed that this tradition came from Jagannāth Purī in Orissa. Why? Because when Lord Caitanya sent Kaśīśvara—you remember Kaśīśvara—to Vṛndāvana from Purī to assist in Govindajī’s worship on the request of Rūpa Gosvāmī, Mahāprabhu instructed Kaśīśvara to implement the same manner of worship for Govindajī as was going on in the Jagannāth temple in Purī. Therefore, as in the worship of Jagannāth, the *pūjārīs* would light these huge ghee lamps on top of the temple. On that day of Ekādaśī in Vṛndāvana, Aurangzeb saw these lamps as far away as Mathurā. Some scholars say that Aurangzeb saw them from Agra—I used to tell that part—or even Delhi, but from our research in the institute, we concluded, because there are so many different descriptions, that Aurangzeb saw the lights from a mosque in Mathurā. 

Of course, he already knew about the Govindajī temple, and certainly he was planning to destroy it. But I read that when one of his ministers whispered in his ear that evening that his great-grandfather, Akbar the Great (who we spoke extensively about recently), spent 30 lakhs on building that temple with red sandstone, Aurangzeb became furious. I was reading, he was trembling, people moved away from him, and he said loudly: "How could an emperor of Mughal lineage build a Hindu temple larger than any existing mosque?" Then he ordered his minister to go with his army and begin demolishing Govindajī’s temple the next morning. They said it very loudly, actually. I was reading, and he concluded by saying, "And bring the top of this temple to my feet."

Fortunately, a Rajput soldier—remember, there were alliances between the Muslims and the Hindus, so we described that earlier—who was serving in Aurangzeb’s army, overheard Aurangzeb’s order. A few hours later in the night, he secretly went to Vṛndāvana, riding on a horse. The horse's name is there in the books written by the scribes; his horse was named *Pāvana*. Depending on how you pronounce it, it can mean different things, but written with the diacritics as it is in Sanskrit, *Pāvana* can mean "as fast as the wind." So this Rajput soldier rode on Pāvana—meaning he went as fast as the wind—and arrived at Govindajī’s temple. We offer him our deep respects. He knocked on the door of Śivarām Gosvāmī, the head priest at that time, who was living in a house just adjacent to Govindajī’s temple. When the Gosvāmī came to the door, the soldier said, "Gosvāmī, Aurangzeb is sending half his army to break Ṭhākurjī, Govindajī, along with the whole temple in a few hours."

Still groggy from being woken up in the middle of the night, Śivarām Gosvāmī ran and began ringing a gigantic bell that hung on the top floor of the temple. Hearing the loud ringing of that bell, all the *pūjārīs* and devotees in the vicinity came running to the courtyard of the temple, where Śivarām Gosvāmī told them about the impending danger for Govindajī. He also warned all the other *pūjārīs* and temples in Vṛndāvana of the danger—that Aurangzeb’s army was coming to destroy our deities and our temples. Knowing well that Aurangzeb had ordered the destruction of all Hindu temples, and his army was busy doing that, the devotees were speaking particularly now about the Govindajī temple. 

The devotees of the Govindajī temple began working furiously in the mammoth task of hiding Govindajī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Vṛndā Devī, and Yogamāyā in a nearby *kuṇḍa* (a lake) called Govinda-kuṇḍa. It’s a different lake from the Govinda-kuṇḍa we know out at Govardhana Hill. I’ve recently been to this Govinda-kuṇḍa near the Govinda temple; it’s in really bad shape. Such a historic place! Because this is where they took the deities and put them at the bottom of the lake to hide them from the attacking forces. It is a very historic place but in really bad shape, so perhaps one day some devotees or some pious persons can renovate that historic lake. That would be a nice *sevā* for any of you who are interested. 

Unfortunately, they moved the deities, but they were big deities and they only had a few hours. There was no time to hide all the gold and jewels and paraphernalia that had been given by the Rajput kings over the past almost 100 years. This really touched my heart: the devotees were more concerned about the many manuscripts, the many palm-leaf writings of the six Gosvāmīs that were being kept protected and preserved in the Govindajī temple. So, instead of taking all the gold and silver and jewels, the devotees—considering those writings to be infinitely more important—quickly gathered those sacred writings in a large wooden box. Several devotees carried that into the Vṛndāvana forest. They were thinking, "Where to put it?" They saw this huge field of mud—you could go up to your waist in it, actually—and they waded out into this mud and put this wooden chest at the bottom of this field of mud.

When I read that, my eyes filled with tears, thinking that myself and my team here in Vṛndāvana have, in one sense, been entrusted with the sacred service of, along with the Vṛndāvana Research Institute now, saving and preserving and eventually publishing those very same scriptures. I had a talk with the president over there, and he was telling me that previously, before this new management came in at the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, the previous management just wanted to protect those scriptures, but the new management said to me, "These ācāryas, all these great devotees, they wrote these books to be read. So let’s work together." Our team's going to focus on our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scriptures for now; we’ve got a whole plan. I'll tell you about the plan later. But anyway, these books of course were not only in the Govindajī temple; there were other places as well because the Gosvāmīs and their writers at that time wrote so many scriptures. Some of our primary scriptures were placed in this wooden box in the mud in this field to protect them. You see what these scriptures have gone through? We must rescue them now.

After securing the *śāstras*, the devotees quickly hid the women and children in various inconspicuous places like homes and houses, because often Aurangzeb’s soldiers would take women as slaves and then engage the male children in various ways in the army. So, the next morning, Aurangzeb’s Mughal army arrived. It was frightening; the scene is described as frightening. How they came on their horses, and they ascended the sacred Yogapīṭha hill armed with all kinds of tools and instruments to begin breaking the temple. My heart was beating when I read it. There they were met by many heroic Gauḍīya saints and *sādhus* embracing the pillars of Govindajī’s temple in the hope that the soldiers would not destroy them. But within minutes, all those Gauḍīya saints and those Vaiṣṇavas were slaughtered, and the work of destruction began. 

I read that the screams of the devotees who were being killed with swords and axes reverberated throughout Vṛndāvana, and while the destruction was going on, many of those soldiers were stealing the paraphernalia that was left behind—all the gold jewelry and other expensive items. Many details of the destruction are given by the Muslim scribes or the writers at that time who witnessed the demolition of the temple, but I’m not going to share that here. Just by going through these documents the last few days, I actually had to endure two nights of nightmares in a row; we had horrible nightmares. I am not going to share all the details, but with what I’ve said, you can understand basically that the soldiers destroyed four stories of the temple in two months' time. 

Now, the temple was actually seven stories tall, but three of those stories were small—we could say sub-stories. They weren't like a big story; they were like a mini story where especially different artistic activities would go on—*bhajans* and *yajñas* and past-time telling, etc. They weren't major stories. So the temple was technically seven stories high from the base, but because those small sub-stories were destroyed, that’s how you read it in the books—"four stories were destroyed"—but really it was like seven in one sense. Not only Govindajī’s temple; Aurangzeb’s soldiers were also busy destroying many temples in Vṛndāvana. But Aurangzeb, he had something against Govindajī’s temple because it was so magnificent—bigger than any mosque, etc. So he was kept informed of the dismantling of Govindajī’s temple over time. He’d get reports, and he just swelled with pride; he took great pleasure as each floor, or each small story as it was, was destroyed. That material—that red sandstone which had been given by Akbar for the construction of that temple—he used for the construction of various mosques in the area. 

Of course, he was very frustrated that his soldiers could not locate the many deities of Vṛndāvana that had been hidden before his army arrived. For example, in Vṛndā-kuṇḍa, they didn't figure it out; they didn't walk out into the forest and go through the mud. They didn't think that the deities would be put at the bottom of a lake. These were decisions that were taken very quickly, and it worked. The fate of those deities will be the subject of the next two classes—how our historic deities were rescued and how their worship goes on very nicely even today.

Aurangzeb was actually intent on the total destruction of Govindajī’s temple in particular. Very often that’s how he did it. There was a Keśava temple in Mathurā that he ordered to be destroyed; it was destroyed on a number of occasions previously, but there’s nothing left, and they built a mosque on that temple anyway. So he really, in his mind, there would be nothing left of Govindajī’s temple. But by the arrangement of the Lord, that was not to be. 

One day, Aurangzeb was sitting outside a mosque—maybe the same mosque, I don’t know—in Mathurā, inquiring from his ministers about the progress of the demolition of Govindajī’s temple. Mathurā was struck by a violent earthquake, and at the same moment, Aurangzeb was suddenly attacked by a swarm of—the scribes say—one thousand bees. One thousand bees, within moments, were stinging him all over his body. They got under his clothes and his head, and they were stinging him all over his body. As his body painfully swelled from all these dangerous, poisonous bites, he was quickly whisked away to the inside of the mosque. Writhing in pain there, he looked up to his physician—who is described as a pious Muslim—and in a desperate voice, Aurangzeb said, "Why is this happening to me?" His physician answered, "Sire, it can only be because of your order to demolish that which is sacred to those of the Hindu faith: the Govinda Dev temple." 

Now, that was a risky thing to say to Aurangzeb, but Aurangzeb took his physician’s words to heart and immediately ordered the demolition and destruction of Govindajī’s temple to stop. Hare Krishna! And that’s why today, Prabhu, we have the great privilege of taking *darśana*. It’s still a magnificent structure—what is actually left. It is described as an architectural wonder, actually. So that’s why we still have something to see. But soon afterwards, he built—listen to this—Aurangzeb built a small mosque, or you could say what they called a *miḥrāb*—like a small shrine—on top of the ruins of the temple. There, whenever possible, when Aurangzeb was in the vicinity of Vṛndāvana, he would go there, go up the stairs, and he would say his *namāz* (his prayers) in that little Muslim shrine that he built on top of the temple. It was there for centuries, actually.

Now, despite all of Aurangzeb’s exploits in his attempt to be *Alamgir*, Conqueror of the World, in the end he died a very unhappy man. I saw a document at the institute where a scholar named Jadunath Sarkar translated Aurangzeb’s last will and testament into English. I just grabbed that. "What did he say?" In that, Sarkar notes that Aurangzeb wrote or had written: "I know not who I am, nor where I shall go, or what will happen to me—a sinner full of sins. Now I will say goodbye to everyone in this world and entrust everyone to the care of God." He was greatly lamenting. He considered himself a sinner. I don’t know to what degree he actually lamented—certainly what he did was... anyway. So this is the fate of a person who gives trouble to Vaiṣṇavas; such a person dies with a heart full of regret and lamentation. 

It should also be noted that by Kṛṣṇa’s arrangement, a brave Kṣatriya king named Śivājī—many of you who are of Indian origin, your hair will stand on end when you hear Śivājī—he was a great warrior. He was actually a disciple of the Vaiṣṇava saint Tukārām. Many times, people just remember him as—I believe he was from Maharashtra—a very powerful warrior. But Śivājī was perhaps, first and foremost, a disciple of the Vaiṣṇava saint Tukārām. He soon arose to defeat the entire Mughal empire in India. In fact, I was reading that in Aurangzeb’s last words on his deathbed, he lamented that he was being defeated at the hands of Śivājī. These were his last words: "Negligence for a single moment becomes the cause of disgrace for long years. The escape of the wretched Śivājī took place through my carelessness, and I’ve had to labor hard against his army to the very end of my life as a result of it." Then he died. He had actually imprisoned Śivājī at one point, but Śivājī escaped and continued his battle against the tyranny of the emperor Aurangzeb. He was lamenting that he was losing everything as he died. In time, Śivājī’s successors defeated Aurangzeb’s entire empire and conquered back all the places that he had won over.

Now, another interesting note here is that in the late 1800s, that small structure that Aurangzeb had built—the little Muslim shrine on top of Govindajī’s temple—was removed by an Englishman named Salomon Gross, who at that time was a public servant in the British government. He was in charge of some of the affairs in the Mathurā district. He actually wrote a book about his activities here, a famous book. There in that book, I saw a photo—because this is the late 1800s, photography was there—a photo of Govinda’s temple with that shrine at the top, and another photo when it wasn't there. Oh, Hare Krishna!

So we will stop here. I think that it would be appropriate to remember all those devotees, those Vaiṣṇavas, those Vaiṣṇava saints, and those devotees who selflessly sacrificed their lives to try to protect that sacred temple of Govindajī at Yogapīṭha in Vṛndāvana. The temple is, as you know now, a great milestone in the history of the Lord Caitanya movement. Those *pūjārīs* and those saints and those devotees, they did their very best, embracing the pillars: "No, you shall not destroy this temple of our Lord!" They sacrificed their lives. So let us remember them, and we can appreciate them even more by quoting our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda and his purport to *Bhagavad-gītā*, 11th chapter, verse 55. I quote Prabhupāda:

"There are many examples in history of devotees of the Lord who risked their lives for the spreading of God consciousness. The favorite example is Lord Jesus Christ; he was crucified by the non-devotees, but he sacrificed his life for spreading God consciousness. Of course, it would be superficial to understand that he was killed. Similarly, in India also there are many examples, such as Ṭhākura Haridāsa and Prahlāda Mahārāja. Why such risk? Because they wanted to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And it is difficult; a Kṛṣṇa conscious person knows that if a man is suffering, it is due to his forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the highest benefit one can render to human society is relieving one’s neighbor from all material problems. In such a way, a pure devotee is engaged in the service of the Lord. Now we can imagine how merciful Kṛṣṇa is to those engaged in His service, risking everything for Him. Therefore, it is certain that such persons must reach the supreme planet after leaving the body." 

History. So, in a few days, we will describe another history class—you could say real history class—we’ll describe how all these deities who were hidden from the invaders, how eventually many of them made it to Rajasthan to the full protection of the Rajput kings there. We know that Govindajī and Gopīnātha and Dāmodara and Rādhā-vinoda, those famous deities, they made it to Jaipur, where their worship continues to this very day in a very wonderful fashion. We’ll describe other deities as well and where they are that have been [returned]. It’s really nice, nice *līlā* how they were rescued, and how again other devotees sacrificed their lives for these deities and for the movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as Śrīla Prabhupāda has nicely described. I really enjoyed researching and delivering this lecture, and I hope that you also appreciate it. So, we’ll see you in a couple of days. 

*Jaya-jaya, Rādhā-Goviṅda.*""