"*00416*.*
"Welcome back again to our discussions on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.* All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Today, we will continue with our descriptions of Kṛṣṇa and Vṛndāvana. I was reading in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* the other day that such discussions have a two-fold effect: number one, they free us from material existence, and number two, they help us to become absorbed in remembering Kṛṣṇa—*śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇam*. The verse I was reading was in the 10th Canto, 46th Chapter, verse 21. I will recite it for you:

"As we remember the wonderful deeds Kṛṣṇa performed, His playful sidelong glances, His smiles, and His words, we forget all our material engagements. When we see the places where Mukunda enjoyed His sporting pastimes—the rivers, hills, and forests He decorated with His lotus feet—our minds become totally absorbed in Him."

I think that says it all as to why we have been doing, and will continue to do, our lectures on our beloved Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

Today, I would like to speak about a point made in our last lecture, which was entitled "The Darling of Gokula." We heard that when Kṛṣṇa was in the age of *poganda* (7 to 11 years old), He carried a black, gold-capped staff in His hand. You may remember: what for? To control cows and calves, to play-fight with His friends, and number three, to declare Himself an eventual heir to Braja’s throne.

Now, I was very intrigued by the fact that Kṛṣṇa carried the staff in order to eventually declare Himself heir to Braja’s throne—in other words, to become King of Vṛndāvana. Why was I intrigued? Because we rarely, if ever, hear of Kṛṣṇa being King of Vṛndāvana, whereas we very often hear of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī being Queen of Vṛndāvana—*Vṛndāvaneśvarī*. Or you could say being queen of everything for that matter. In the *Śrī Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-stava-rāja*, written by Lord Śiva, in text 12, he writes: *mukunda-vadhū-karīśvarī*. "O Queen of Vedic sacrifices, O Queen of pious activities, O Queen of the material world, O Queen of the demigods, O Queen of Vedic scholarship, O Queen of knowledge, O Queen of the goddesses of fortune, O Queen of patience, O Queen of Vṛndāvana—the forest of happiness—O Queen of Braja, O Empress of Braja, O Śrī Rādhikā, obeisances to you." She is queen of everything; most importantly, she is Queen of Vṛndāvana.

So, just when and how did Kṛṣṇa become King of Vṛndāvana, as He aspired with that staff? And for that matter, when did Śrī Rādhā become Queen of Vṛndāvana? When was Her coronation? And what's more, if Kṛṣṇa did become King of Vṛndāvana, why then is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī more famous as the Queen of Braja?

Perfect questions, and I will try my best to provide the perfect answers. To begin with, we touched on the pastime of Kṛṣṇa’s coronation about one year ago, I think exactly, but I have discovered many new details that will help to answer the questions we've posed. The crowning of Kṛṣṇa as King of Vṛndāvana was, in essence, a playful pastime, or you could say a "play" pastime of Kṛṣṇa and His cowherd boyfriends when they were in the beautiful forests of Chatravana. *Chatravana* literally means "the forest of marvel and wonderment." What a name for a forest! People go to Yosemite National Park in America, but what about going to a forest of marvel and wonderment? That’s Kṛṣṇa consciousness; that’s Vṛndāvana.

The pastime begins with the cowherd boys tending their cows in Chatravana, and the boys, as they often do, were discussing how they might glorify Kṛṣṇa in a unique way. When suddenly, Śrīdāmā suggested, "Let’s coronate Kṛṣṇa as King of Braja." All the boys were like, really blissful at the thought, and at once they busy themselves with various arrangements for the coronation of Kṛṣṇa. And after much preparation, the cowherd boys sat Kṛṣṇa on—it’s described—a regal stone beneath a canopy of flowers, and then they crowned Him with a wreath of leaves and fresh buds. This is their playful pastime. So Kṛṣṇa, it’s described, happily assumed the role of King, and He appointed Madhu-maṅgala as the leader of a group of boys to go around and widely broadcast Kṛṣṇa’s new appointment as King of Braja far and wide.

So then Madhu-maṅgala and his friends, they wandered from forest to forest in Vṛndāvana, calling out, "Oh residents of Vṛndāvana, just hear this decree: the only authority now in Vṛndāvana is the son of Nanda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa, the crowned King of this land. Anyone found unlawfully picking flowers or fruits shall be brought before Him and severely punished. If you dissipate the King’s authority in even the slightest way, you shall be dealt with strictly and mercilessly!" And then Madhu-maṅgala proceeded to address not only the personalities, the other gopas and gopīs, but he started to address herds of deer with the same proclamation, flocks of birds, a muster of peacocks, a pride of lions, and even a school of fish. He said the same thing. Of course, it’s Braja, and everyone who heard his words was agreeable—except for one special group.

You can imagine, there was a group of gopīs collecting wildflowers nearby and they heard the news. So, what did they do? They ran excitedly to Lalitā Devī, where she and her attendants were lovingly decorating Śrī Rādhā in a beautiful forest grove. Now, as soon as Lalitā heard this news, her face flushed and her hands shook. She was upset, and as hard as she tried, she couldn't fix a certain flower crown upon Śrī Rādhā’s beautiful hair; she was just shaking too much. And turning to her friends, she said, "In reality, we should see Rādhārāṇī as Queen of Vṛndāvana. What does it matter that some cowherd playing 'make-believe king' foolishly thinks that we can be subjugated as easily as dumb forest animals?"

Then Lalitā held the crown playfully above Śrī Rādhā’s head and announced with a smile, "Let this crown made of forest treasures proclaim Braja’s real monarch!" And she placed the crown on Rādhā’s head playfully. As the gopīs cheered, Lalitā ordered Vṛndā Devī, "Oh friends," she said, "at once assemble a full battalion of gopīs to capture those rascals making their nonsense proclamation about their so-called King."

So, Śrī Rādhā smiled and she added, "Those who falsely claim authority over My kingdom should be challenged, defeated, bound hand and foot, and brought before Me for punishment." So Vṛndā Devī immediately armed thousands of gopīs with flower batons and sent them on to Chatravana. On the way, they soon encountered Subala, Madhu-maṅgala, and other gopas in their business of proclaiming Kṛṣṇa as King of Vṛndāvana. And suddenly, it’s described, the boys found themselves surrounded by thousands of angry gopīs, and all the boys fled in fear except Madhu-maṅgala. He’s kind of plump from all the sweets, so he’s less agile than the others, and he was captured by the gopīs and bound with a flower garland—this is Vṛndāvana—and then he was brought before Śrī Rādhā.

Who said, "I am the real authority over this land, but you promote an impostor as ruler of My kingdom. For that offense you must be punished, and soon your friends and your rascal leader will also be punished." Then Madhu-maṅgala hung his head very low and he whispered defiantly, "Make my punishment such that my belly is always full." And hearing this, Śrī Rādhārāṇī frowned. She clapped her hands twice and she ordered her gopī guards—she has gopī guards—she said to them, "Release him. This fake brāhmaṇa is only interested in filling his belly. Send him away with a message for this would-be king: 'Give up your false title, lands, and symbols at once, or pay the price.'"

She sent that message: "Take this message, Madhu-maṅgala, to your would-be king, Kṛṣṇa: 'Give up your false title, lands, and symbols at once, or pay the price.'" Then, with his hands still bound behind his back with a flower garland, Madhu-maṅgala ran back to Chatravana. When he arrived, Kṛṣṇa rose from His throne and He embraced Madhu-maṅgala and inquired, "How’s everything going with the proclamation?"

So then Madhu-maṅgala told Kṛṣṇa about everything that had taken place with Śrī Rādhā and Her gopīs. So Kṛṣṇa said, "How could this have happened?" And Madhu-maṅgala replied, "Well, this is the result of our pronouncing You King of Braja, but I think in truth the real monarch of this land, as far as I’ve seen, is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And we have challenged Rādhā’s authority, and unless You surrender to Her, Kṛṣṇa, I fear that You too will meet with such an ignoble fate as I have experienced. My friend, I implore You, please abandon Your impudence."

So Kṛṣṇa took this seriously. He considered the situation—maybe going to war with the gopīs or what—and then He smiled, and *śāstra* says He thought, "Surrendering to Śrī Rādhā might be more thrilling than defying Her."

I thought that was really nice: "Surrendering to Śrī Rādhā might be more thrilling than defying Her." So that’s what happened. Very soon, Kṛṣṇa and Madhu-maṅgala set out on the path to Rādhā’s camp, where Śrī Rādhā’s parrot spies had already informed Her of Kṛṣṇa’s intention to surrender. There’s no secrets in Vṛndāvana because these parrots are everywhere, and even today you see so many green parrots in Vṛndāvana; they’re so beautiful with the little red beaks. So they had already spread the information that Kṛṣṇa was coming to surrender.

But *śāstra* says that upon seeing Kṛṣṇa approaching, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s face turned pale, her limbs trembled, and tears began to well in her eyes. So Lalitā noticed this and she placed a reassuring hand on Rādhārāṇī’s forearm and she said, "Dear one, be steady. To accept surrender from a defeated rival, you must display the regal composure befitting a victorious monarch." Rādhārāṇī tried to calm down; she took a deep breath and she addressed her mind—Rādhārāṇī addressed her mind—"Oh friend, please be calm. Your desires will be fulfilled soon enough."

And then it’s written that Kṛṣṇa was blinded by the golden radiance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as He came forward, but it’s really interesting—as He chanted Rādhā’s name, the glare faded to reveal a most beautiful Śrī Rādhikā seated upon a jeweled throne, surrounding Śrī Rādhā with thousands of gopīs armed with flower weapons—*śobhanāvanam*. So Kṛṣṇa thought—seeing this, Kṛṣṇa said, or He thought—"I did well not to test My gopa army against such a superior military force." Then as He got close to Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa turned pale, His limbs stiffened, and He froze in His tracks as streams of tears shot from His eyes. What a beautiful description we’re hearing of *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma* by our previous *ācāryas*.

So then Madhu-maṅgala whispered into Kṛṣṇa’s ear, "Oh my love-struck friend, don’t let a few morsels of happiness deprive you of the feast of bliss awaiting you at Śrī Rādhikā’s side. Control your heart and keep walking, control your heart and keep walking." So as Kṛṣṇa came close enough for the gopīs to hear His footsteps, Rādhā thought, "I am most fortunate. Not only can I see Kṛṣṇa’s enchanting form, but I can also hear the tinkling of His ankle bells."

And as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa met, they came in front of each other, Lalitā-sakhī and Madhu-maṅgala—it’s described—they exchanged notable glances. Like, I mean usually there’s so much conflict between the two, but really everyone wants to facilitate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s meeting; the separation’s too hard to bear. So as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa met, they exchanged notable glances. Yes, I thought that was wonderful. Then holding Kṛṣṇa’s hand, Madhu-maṅgala cleared his throat and playfully addressed Śrī Rādhā, "Oh powerful Queen of Vṛndāvana, *Vṛndāvaneśvarī*, I have advised my friend Kṛṣṇa, the prince of Nandagrām, to submit to Your royal authority. Following my wise counsel, He has come here to surrender Himself to You unconditionally—unconditional surrender!"

So Madhu-maṅgala looked at Kṛṣṇa and then Rādhā before continuing, and then he said, "As a token of His subservience, Kṛṣṇa will offer You His most valuable possession: His priceless embrace. Please graciously accept it." When he said that, all the gopīs started giggling. Then stepping forward, Madhu-maṅgala took the wreath of flowers from Kṛṣṇa’s head and placed that wreath of flowers at Śrī Rādhā’s feet. Then Kṛṣṇa laid His flute on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s footstool where She places Her feet, and then He knelt before Her with folded hands. Then the cowherd boys, who had joined, they’d all come and joined, they loudly proclaimed Rādhā to be Braja’s Queen—*Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!* And they said, "And Kṛṣṇa is Queen as well." They said that She’s Vṛndāvana’s Queen, but they said, "And She’s Kṛṣṇa..." They said, "And Kṛṣṇa’s Queen as well."

Then Rādhā motioned for Kṛṣṇa to sit beside Her. She’s Queen, so He’s a subject now, so She motioned to sit beside Her. And *śāstra* states that Kṛṣṇa happily accepted to be subservient and obedient to Śrī Rādhā. Śrī Rādhā agreed to give Kṛṣṇa shelter from King Cupid, who constantly assaulted Kṛṣṇa with His dark arrows. Wow! Rādhārāṇī agreed to give Kṛṣṇa shelter from what? From King Cupid, who constantly assaulted Kṛṣṇa with the sharp arrows. And then meanwhile, you know, Madhu-maṅgala, he was dancing around in great happiness, and actually Lalitā-sakhī, she was pleased with Madhu-maṅgala, and to show her gratitude, she placed one plump *laḍḍu* in his mouth. And then Madhu-maṅgala munched on it and then he mumbled, "You committed a grave offense by shackling a brāhmaṇa! If you feed me 100,000 *laḍḍus*, then perhaps you will be freed from your sins, Lalitā-sakhī."

So Lalitā smiled and ordered that a large tray of sweets be given to Madhu-maṅgala, and he went off somewhere and ate them all—excused himself, "I have some important business," he said. So everyone laughed, and it was getting late, so everyone turned to go home, and as they left, they reminisced about this playful game they had that day, declaring Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī Queen of Vṛndāvana.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Such pastimes are very profound. You could say this is absolute truth. Sometimes people use that term, "What is the absolute truth?" Very seriously, this is the absolute truth, and the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are very profound. And as such, hearing specifically today how Śrī Rādhā controls Kṛṣṇa with Her divine love and how She is Vṛndāvana’s Queen, many Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs aspire to be Her servants. Actually, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī goes so far as to say in his *Sva-niyama-daśakam*, verses three and four—it’s so beautiful, very deep—he says, "I will never leave the feet of Śrī Rādhikā to go to Kṛṣṇa, even if Kṛṣṇa goes to Dvārakā and calls me there, I will not go. However, if out of some madness Rādhikā has somehow gone to Dvārakā, I will fly even faster than Garuḍa to serve Her there. Oh my gosh, I will never leave the feet of Śrī Rādhikā to go to Kṛṣṇa, even if Kṛṣṇa goes to Dvārakā and calls me there, I will not go. However, if out of some madness Rādhikā has somehow gone to Dvārakā, I will fly even faster than Garuḍa to serve Her there." *Sva-niyama-daśakam*, verses 3 and 4.

Now, it’s not over. It’s never over in Vṛndāvana; it’s just increasing *ad infinitum*. At this point, the plot thickens, as it’s said. The next morning, Candrāvalī—we gave a long class about Candrāvalī eight months ago, you may remember, she’s Śrī Rādhā’s chief competitor in love for Kṛṣṇa, wonderful gopī, but she’s Śrī Rādhā’s chief competitor in love for Kṛṣṇa—she heard about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s playful coronation and how She became Queen of Vṛndāvana. Now, everyone in Braja had understood that it was all in fun, but nevertheless, Candrāvalī was incensed; she was so angry.

And it’s described through hot tears she spoke to her best friend Padmā, who pacified her friend with a bold plan, which was that Padmā would convince Kṛṣṇa to crown Candrāvalī Queen of Vṛndāvana instead, because, you know, obviously Queen of Vṛndāvana means she’s going to have so much access to loving pastimes with her beloved Kṛṣṇa. So Padmā’s plan was that she would convince Kṛṣṇa to crown Candrāvalī Queen of Vṛndāvana instead, and not in play but in real, for real, and not in some distant grove but officially before all the Brajavāsīs.

So, a few days later, in the midst of a large crowd of gopas and gopīs in a market somewhere, Kṛṣṇa was there. Padmā approached Kṛṣṇa and she declared very loudly, so everyone could hear, "Quote: So now may the beautiful and qualified gopī whose name begins with 'Chandra' be the Queen of Vṛndāvana and its many residents. May that gopī and none other also be the Queen of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart." And when all the Brajavāsīs present heard this proclamation, they were shocked. Everyone turned and looked at Kṛṣṇa, expecting Him to say, "No, no! May the beautiful and qualified gopī whose name is Rādhārāṇī be the Queen of Vṛndāvana and its many residents. May that gopī and none other also be the Queen of My heart!"

But by the influence of the pastime potency of Yoga-māyā, Paurnamāsī, the word "Chandra" reminded Kṛṣṇa of Śrī Rādhā’s partial expansion, you could say—a Rādhārāṇī gopī whose name was Candra-kānti. This is a Rādhā-gopī described in *śāstra* as the personification of Rādhārāṇī’s effulgence, so none different than Śrī Rādhā. We’ll speak more about her in a few minutes. Now Kṛṣṇa, assuming that Padmā was speaking about this Candra-kānti—not Candrāvalī, but Candra-kānti—He let out a sigh saying, "Yes, let it be so." But hearing these words, Śrī Rādhā and Her gopī friends, they took it that Kṛṣṇa had actually revealed His real heart: that Candrāvalī should be crowned as Queen of Vṛndāvana.

Now it’s mentioned in the *Bṛhad-gautamīya-tantra*, *Matsya Purāṇa*, and *Padma Purāṇa*, and also I read in Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s *Mādhava-mahotsava*, that at that point the atmosphere became so intense, so caustic—that is a good word—it took the form of rust-colored mist hanging in the air. The atmosphere became so intense, it took the form of rust-colored mist hanging in the air. Thus, everyone left, hurried and left, and hurried home to share this unfortunate news that Kṛṣṇa had revealed His real heart: He wanted Candrāvalī to be Queen of Vṛndāvana.

So the next day, realizing that He’d been very much misunderstood, Kṛṣṇa thought long and hard about how He could get out of this predicament, but He couldn’t figure it out—it’s the *līlā*. So eventually, He decided to meet with Vṛndā Devī. And when He found her, He explained everything that had happened and He pleaded, "Devī, My life is in Your hands! If You do not save Me, I shall perish." So Vṛndā Devī said, "Kṛṣṇa, Your careless conclusion of Padmā’s words has deeply wounded Rādhā. This time You’ll have to do something really extraordinary to get Her back."

So then Vṛndā paused for a moment and then she said, "This news of Candrāvalī’s coronation is being spread by rumor; it does not sound like the sort of official decree that inaugurates a new monarchy. In my opinion, the best thing is if we publicly declare that Śrī Rādhā will be finally and officially coronated in a large public ceremony as Queen of Vṛndāvana. In this way, we’ll stop the ill rumors."

So, a little note here: some references say that there were only two coronations—the one the cowherd boys arranged spontaneously for Kṛṣṇa, which we described, and then the other one we described, the playful one where the gopīs arranged for Śrī Rādhā to be crowned as Queen of Vṛndāvana. However, *Bhakti-ratnākara* describes that some days after these two playful coronations, there was a final, grand, official, public coronation for Rādhā, and we’ll describe that in a minute.

So Kṛṣṇa seemed a little perplexed by Vṛndā Devī’s proposal for a public declaration, saying, "You know, that actually Rādhārāṇī is going to be crowned Queen of Vṛndāvana—how’s this going to work?" So He said, "Vṛndā Devī, how are we going to do this?" So Vṛndā Devī, she consulted her senior, Paurnamāsī, and they came up with a great idea. So the next day, Vṛndā Devī climbed on top of a large hill in Vṛndāvana and she commanded Lord Brahmā to speak from the sky. She told him what to say. So a few minutes later, Brahmā spoke—it’s described in a celestial voice from above—to all the residents of Vṛndāvana. He began, "Paurnamāsī, great yoginī, without delay make due arrangements that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī will be crowned Queen of Vṛndāvana. By seating Śrī Rādhā upon a jeweled throne and performing Her royal *abhiṣeka*, He will spread Her glory not only throughout Gokula, but also throughout the entire earth, and thus the entire universe shall rejoice. This royal bath, *abhiṣeka*, will proclaim the love for Rādhā cherished by the Brajavāsīs, and especially by Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, it should be performed on the full moon day of this month, the month of Māgha."

And then this voice from the heavens, Brahmā, addressed Śrī Rādhā, "O Rādhā, do not be shy to accept such public worship, because this ceremony bestows peace, prosperity, and happiness to all. You should embrace it as a service to the world." And then again, the heavenly voice, Brahmā, spoke to Paurnamāsī and ordered her to start the auspicious ceremony at once by observing the introductory rites called *adhivāsa*. And then the celestial voice fell silent.

So all the Brajavāsīs were amazed to hear these orders descending from the heavens, but it’s described that Candrāvalī and her friends, they suffered utter disappointment, while everyone else felt indescribable bliss. So at this point, I mean, everyone’s enlivened: "Oh, Śrī Rādhā is going to be crowned Queen of Vṛndāvana!" So what was the reaction? It’s described very nicely by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī: Paurnamāsī and Vṛndā Devī fainted in ecstasy, Rādhā went numb, unable to speak; her girlfriends embraced one another, Nanda Bābā entered a state of disbelief, and King Vṛṣabhānu proudly distributed gifts. Kīrtidā Sundarī planned how She would bathe Her daughter, and Mukhara, the old gopī, sang wildly. Mother Yaśodā immediately called for the festival to begin. The gopas, the cowherd boys, were all dancing, and Kṛṣṇa wandered about Barśānā clutching Subala’s hand—Kṛṣṇa wandered about Barśānā clutching Subala’s hand. What a description!

And after the shock of initial ecstasy had worn off, the Brajavāsīs busied themselves with arrangements for this scheduled ceremony. And I was reading, craftsmen constructed platforms, thrones, and canopies; women, they placed water pots with auspicious leaves in auspicious places; young gopīs fashioned decorative ornaments; and interestingly, it said that children distributed incense everywhere.

There were some serious obstacles created by Padmā over a few days, but eventually, the ceremony of crowning Śrī Rādhā went off with great—how do they say—pomp and circumstance. And Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī describes it in the most wonderful way, and in his *Rāja-vilāsastava*, text number 61, he writes, "Ordered by Brahmā, who spoke from the sky, Paurnamāsī Devī crowned Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī Queen of the beautiful forest of Vṛndāvana, brilliantly sprinkling the waters of the Mānas-gaṅgā and other sacred rivers upon Her head in the company of Sāvitrī Devī and other delighted demigoddesses. I pray that sacred place known as Unmatta-rāsa-sthalī—unmatta, the place where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī became overwhelmed with happiness—may sprinkle some transcendental happiness on me."

Hari Kṛṣṇa. That was pure bliss.

Anyway, before concluding today, as I mentioned earlier, I wanted to speak briefly about the gopī Kṛṣṇa thought of when Padmā said the name "Chandra" in her declaration to Kṛṣṇa. As we mentioned, she had meant Candrāvalī, of course, but Kṛṣṇa took it to mean Candra-kānti, who we mentioned was or is the personified effulgence of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Now, when I read that, I was again intrigued. I never heard of this gopī, and she’s the personification of Rādhārāṇī’s effulgence, and she’s in this particular pastime, and I wanted to find out more. So I did a lot of research, consulted some learned godbrothers, etc. And to begin with, I found that according to the *Padma Purāṇa*, Candra-kānti was an apsarā, and we know that the apsarās—or sometimes we refer to them as gandharvas—are all very talented dancers and musicians from the higher planets. But with more research, I found out Rūpa Gosvāmī went deeper, much deeper; he goes much deeper into this, especially in his *Śrī Māla-śrī-vṛndāvaneśvarī-nāmāṣṭaka*.

Verses 11 and 12, again: "Seek and ye shall find." There, Candra-kānti is described as an expansion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī who appeared as the gandharva—or he says, *gāndharvikā*—to teach others how to love Lord Kṛṣṇa. Here’s the verse from Rūpa Gosvāmī; he writes, "Sakhī is eternally young. She enjoys transcendental pastimes with Braja’s prince, and She expanded to become the Gāndharvikā Candra-kānti to teach others how to love Lord Govinda by dancing for Him." Now, he further states that Candra-kānti appeared especially to teach gandharva girls—because that’s what she, you know, the *Padma Purāṇa* said, that she’s a gandharva—so she appeared specifically to teach Gāndharvikā girls how to love Kṛṣṇa.

And then I found a quote from Jīva Gosvāmī, who states that these girls, these gandharva girls, they appeared during Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s coronation during the *abhiṣeka* bathing, and Paurnamāsī noticed them, and then she asked the girls to sing about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And because of their previous association with Candra-kānti, the songs these gandharva girls sang, it’s described, revealed their knowledge of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa according to Jīva Gosvāmī, describing the mutual love of the Divine Couple and the service the gopīs rendered to them. So it’s obvious that through Candra-kānti’s teachings, these girls had become well-versed and spiritually realized.

Now, in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Rūpa Gosvāmī further describes Candra-kānti’s—you could say—teachings by example. He says she was a celebrated, fair-faced girl in Vṛndāvana who observed strict celibacy, rejecting marriage, being determined to obtain Kṛṣṇa as her husband—typical gopī. She also faithfully maintained a daily spiritual regime, constantly meditating on the transcendental form of the Lord and chanting His glories. Now, again, Jīva Gosvāmī enters the picture; he elaborates on these statements by noting that the transcendental form of the Lord upon which Candra-kānti meditated was the deity of Kṛṣṇa—interesting. And then, well, moreover, *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* cites that Candra-kānti is an example of a *sādhaka*, again, teaching us, who cultivated a spontaneous attachment for Kṛṣṇa, first awakening ecstatic devotion—*bhāva*—and then loving devotion, prayer for the Lord. So this cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you could say, was her pastime because, well, she’s not different than Rādhārāṇī, but teaching us.

So again, Rūpa, Raghunātha, and Jīva, further readings revealed that they all say that Candra-kānti—they all identify Candra-kānti as Śrī Rādhā—but they explained that, however, unlike Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who was directly and fully a combination of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Candra-kānti is only a partial expansion of Rādhārāṇī. Now, Śrīla Prabhupāda, in his translation of verses 1.54 and 1.55 from the *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā* by Kavi Karṇapūra, Prabhupāda goes on to say that Candra-kānti also appeared—get this—as Gadādhara dāsa in Lord Caitanya’s pastimes. Those verses that he was referring to begin with. *Candra-kānti*, which means Candra-kānti was the embodiment of Śrī Rādhā’s potency. And Śrīla Prabhupāda’s translation of that is even more specific; he writes, Prabhupāda writes, "Candra-kānti, who is the effulgence of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." Then Prabhupāda says that although Gadādhara dāsa is famous as the luster of Śrī Rādhā’s body, he’s different than Lord Caitanya, who is characterized as having not only the bodily luster of Śrī Rādhā but Her emotions as well. It’s pretty technical, but it’s pretty deep and wonderful. So we can conclude that the gopī Candra-kānti is Rādhārāṇī’s personified effulgence appearing in three forms: as a gandharva, as a gopī, and later on as Gadādhara dāsa.

Kṛṣṇa, so I think that’s enough nectar for today. Let us conclude with some verses glorifying Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So these two verses come from Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī’s illustrious book entitled *Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi*. Two verses, perfect way to finish today:

"A transcendental splendor who bears the name Rādhā, who is the most sweet, who showers Her followers with the monsoon of glorious nectar, and who is worshiped in Braja-maṇḍala by hundreds and thousands of splendid maidens—more beautiful and glorious than millions of goddesses of fortune—shine in the heart of that most fortunate person who always keeps Her within his heart. 

"Śrī Rādhā, who was tossed to and fro by the great waves in the nectar ocean of bliss and love, who with the great wonder of playful glances from the corners of Her restless, reddish eyes enjoys a great festival of pastimes, who is filled with the most wonderful glory of love, and who is the most charming goddess in all the worlds, enjoys pastimes in the palace that is Vṛndāvana forest."

So, thank you very much, Prabhu. This has been—well, I really enjoyed sharing with you today these amazing glories of Kṛṣṇa’s becoming King of Vṛndāvana, but even more so, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī becoming *Vṛndāvaneśvarī*, the Queen of Vṛndāvana. And I look forward to researching in the bookshelf behind me for a number of hours to find some more nectarean pastimes that we can all relish, which will purify our hearts and will eventually awaken divine love, which will qualify us to—somehow or other, by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy—enter into these eternal pastimes in Goloka Vṛndāvana. So thank you, see you in a couple of days.""