"*00466*.*
"# The Glories of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī

Very dear devotees, welcome back again. *Viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe.* So, we are returning to our lecture series on our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. It’s good to be back again, essentially wandering through the twelfth forest of Vṛndāvana. Of course, the word "wandering" in English may not have the best connotation; the dictionary meaning of wandering is, "traveling aimlessly from place to place." But we are not wandering aimlessly in the Vṛndāvana forest through our series of lectures; in fact, we have a fixed goal in our wanderings. Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā* 2.41: "Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one." And what is our aim as aspiring Vraja-vāsīs? What is our aim in wandering in Vṛndāvana in the way which we are? That aim is made very clear by Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī in his illustrious *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, 1.47, and I quote:

> Where do living entities easily attain Kṛṣṇa? Where are the wonderful transcendental pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa found? And where can one see the highest form of bliss due to worshipping the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa? O brothers, O brothers, just listen as I tell you the secret: everything is available in this abode of Vṛndāvana.

Of course, no sane man or woman would ever wander through a forest alone, and in our wanderings in the forest of Vṛndāvana, we have the perfect guides. We have Śrīla Prabhupāda and we have our previous ācāryas. In fact, we have many devotees living here today in Vṛndāvana, like Dīna Bandhu, who has been taking devotees on *parikramā* for many, many years, and Bhakti-caitanya Mahārāja comes here as well, and of course, others. So we have our guides. Most important is to understand that it is actually the spiritual master who reveals the *dhāma* to his disciples. This is made very clear by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his *Mukta-carita*, wherein he says:

> I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master who reveals the holy name, Lord Caitanya, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, and the holy *dhāma*.

Rādhākuṇḍa has also described the spiritual master as the revealer of the *dhāma* that we find in his list of the ten offenses to the *dhāma*, which one should be very careful not to commit. He lists the very first offense as to disrespect one's spiritual master who reveals the *dhāma* to his disciple. And of course, he goes on to list other offenses as well, some of which are to think that the holy *dhāma* is temporary, to commit violence towards any of the residents of the holy *dhāma* or to any of the pilgrims who come there, to think that any of them are ordinary people, to perform mundane activities while living in or visiting the *dhāma*, or to earn money by commercializing Deity worship and *saṅkīrtana* in the *dhāma*. Like that, he goes on. But for us today, we will focus on Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s statement that it is the spiritual master who reveals the *dhāma*. We often say that a saintly person sees with his ears, not through his eyes, so we hear from Śrī Guru to understand what the mysteries of the *dhāma* are. The spiritual master is considered a representative of Balarāma, who we know is famous as the original guru. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.10.28, Kṛṣṇa says:

> Śeṣa is my *dhāma*, and as we know, Lord Ananta Śeṣa is an expansion of Lord Balarāma.

So when we come to the *dhāma*, it is essential that we take shelter of the spiritual master and our previous ācāryas to properly understand the glories of the *dhāma*. There is a common saying that when one goes to the *dhāma*, he should associate with and understand the *dhāma* through the holy persons who live there, and both their lives and their teachings can reveal everything about the *dhāma* to us. So as we enter back into Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma to wander with a purpose, I would like to share with you the life and teachings of a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava who, although perhaps lesser-known, may still be a source of great inspiration for us. Obviously, there are many known and unknown Vaiṣṇavas through the annals of time, all of whom we can take shelter of. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes to this effect in his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.1.1:

> Within the past 500 years, many erudite scholars and ācāryas like Jīva Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Vallabhācārya, and many other distinguished scholars, even after the time of Lord Caitanya, made elaborate commentaries on the *Bhāgavatam*, and the serious student would do well to attempt to go through them to better embellish the transcendental messages.

So in my studies in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I came across one such pure devotee whose name is Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Now, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was born sometime in the late 1500s. This we know for certain because he was one of the signatories—meaning one of the persons who signed Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s last will and testament—in the year 1608. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī compiled his will, and to make it authorized, he asked certain important personalities to come and sign along with him. There in his will, we find the signature of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He is also mentioned in the Vaiṣṇava *śāstra* which we referred to a few times, called *Bhakta-māla*. The *Bhakta-māla* was compiled by the author Nābhādāsa, and it was recommended by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī as an authorized source of Vaiṣṇava biographies. In fact, that is what the *Bhakta-māla* is; it is just listing so many different Vaiṣṇavas actually through thousands of years. So, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī considered it an authorized scripture and an embellishment of biographies wherein we find Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

I found that it was actually recommended as one of the books to study in the Gauḍīya Maṭha during the time of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī if anyone wanted to know the biography of any particular ācārya. Now, we should note here there is another *Bhakta-māla* written in Bengali by one Lāl Dās, and that book was rejected by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī as a *sahajiyā* book. Now, most significantly, as we begin to reveal the glories of this devotee, he became a disciple of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, one of the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana. And as you may remember, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was especially famous for his discourses, for his lectures on the *Bhāgavatam*. That was his *sevā* to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu while in Vṛndāvana. And after his departure from this world, his disciple Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī carried on with the same tradition. He would lecture every day at Govindajī’s temple on the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Like father, like son. Now, it is interesting that Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was from a family of brāhmaṇas in South India, and he lived in Andhra Pradesh. Now, while growing up there, he somehow or other became very attached to Vṛndāvana-dhāma, which is pretty far away, and there is no explanation given that I could find as to how, you know, so far from Vṛndāvana, he became very attached. Of course, some scholars I read say perhaps he became attached to Vraja by hearing from Vṛndāvana sādhu who may have passed through, you know, Andhra Pradesh.

As he was growing up in those days, you know, Vaiṣṇava saints and sages were traveling all around India to propagate the glories of the holy name. That was the order of Caitanya Mahāprabhu: "every town and village." So as Mahāprabhu traveled and propagated the holy name, so did his followers at that time. Anyway, somehow Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī achieved love for Kṛṣṇa. In fact, by the time he was a young man, he was famous for his Kṛṣṇa conscious poetry, much of which, interestingly enough, he was writing in the Vraja-bhāṣā language. Vraja-bhāṣā is very beautiful, but is basically just spoken here in Vṛndāvana. So yes, this is interesting, isn't it? He was writing in the Vraja-bhāṣā language. Now, how he eventually came to Vṛndāvana from South India, it’s really interesting, and I’ll share that story with you as a pastime. Now, after Govindajī’s temple was completed in Vṛndāvana, it took many, many years as you remember, and his worship was going on. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī would go to the *maṅgala-ārati* of Rādhā-Govinda every morning. He was the leading ācārya of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas at that time because by that time, Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs had departed for Goloka. So Jīva Gosvāmī every morning, he would go to *maṅgala-ārati*, and then after the *maṅgala-ārati* of Govindajī, he would go to Rādhā-Gopīnātha’s *maṅgala-ārati*, and then he would go to Rādhā-Madana-mohana’s *maṅgala-ārati*. These three *maṅgala-āratis* were scheduled at different times to enable devotees to attend all three. Tradition says that by seeing these three Deities, which we mentioned in the previous lecture are the three Deities we approach as Vaiṣṇavas to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one by one—tradition says that by seeing all three Deities, Govinda, Gopīnātha, and Madana-mohana in one day, all one’s sins are destroyed. And this tradition, actually, of visiting these three Deities in a day, it said it came from Jīva Gosvāmī; that is what he did. And, you know, whatever a great person does, the common person will follow in his footsteps, as Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā. So he was one of the most illustrious personalities living at that time, so devotees followed suit. And even today, some devotees still observe this tradition by driving from Vṛndāvana to Karauli, which is a good drive to see Madana-mohana, and then on to Jaipur, which is quite a drive to see Govindajī and Gopīnātha. So one day, after taking *darśana* of Govindajī, Jīva Gosvāmī was walking down the stairs of the temple on his way to see Gopīnātha when he observed a very saintly person sitting at the bottom of the stairs. Now, this saintly person was singing a very beautiful *braja-bhāṣā* song which is famous even today. It is known as *sakī haum śyāma raṅga raṅgī*.

The title means, "O beloved sakī, I have been transformed by the color of Śyāma, Kṛṣṇa." Actually, I will recite the whole song; this is so beautiful. Jīva Gosvāmī was mesmerized by hearing this song, so we should take a moment to hear it as well. It goes like this, not in the *braja-bhāṣā* of course, but the translation is:

> O sakī, I have been transformed by the colors of Śyāma. On seeing His beautiful form, I sold my soul to Him. I lost myself in His beauty. When I fall asleep, I lose myself in dreams of Him, and when I awake, I don’t see anything as separate from Him. It is as though my eyes have been trapped by His form like a bumblebee trapped at night in a lotus flower. When I hear that He has gone to graze His cows, I don’t know of what Kanai people are talking about, for He is always with me. But who will listen to me? Who will believe me when I say it’s all nonsense? He’s here with me. How can Gadādhara explain any of this? I’m like a dumb person trying to explain the taste of guḍa.

That’s what Jīva Gosvāmī heard. He stopped; he was stunned. It is said that he couldn’t move, actually. So when that saint had finished singing, Jīva Gosvāmī came to him and said, "You know, who wrote this? Did you write this beautiful poetry?" And the saint replied, "Oh no, I was coming from South India to Vṛndāvana when I met a saintly person known as Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, a very nice devotee of Kṛṣṇa. He composed these beautiful verses." So Jīva Gosvāmī said, "But if he lives in South India, how can he write such beautiful poetry without even coming to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the place where one appreciates the color of Kṛṣṇa? Worship of the Lord in South India is in the mood of awe and reverence, *aiśvarya-bhāva*, where the glories of Śrī Rādhā are not sung. I am very interested to know how this exalted devotee, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, wrote this beautiful poetry without coming here. Do you know anyone who can deliver a letter to him from me and bring him back here to Vṛndāvana?" So the saintly person said, "Oh yes, I have two prominent friends who can render this service for you. They can deliver your letter to Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī in South India."

So that night, Jīva Gosvāmī spent much of the night writing a letter to Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and the next day he delivered that letter to the saintly person. Now, in that letter, Jīva Gosvāmī quoted the first verse from Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s book, and here is the verse he is writing to Gadādhara, expressing his heart through this verse of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī:

> Without worshipping the pollen of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, without taking shelter in Vṛndāvana, which bears her footprints, and without respectfully greeting the great souls whose hearts are filled with deep love for her, how will one be able to plunge into the nectar ocean of love for Lord Kṛṣṇa? We need Rādhā’s grace.

So the saintly person took that letter with that very important verse of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he gave it to his two brāhmaṇa friends, and they very happily and very joyfully—let us say—served Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī by making the long journey from Vṛndāvana to Andhra Pradesh. Now, that’s a big state, a big place, and they were going anywhere and everywhere inquiring from people, "Do you know Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī?" So while searching far and wide, one day they came across a sādhu taking a bath from a well. The well water—he was taking his bath, and they asked him, as they did many others, "We are looking for a person named Gadādhara. Do you know him or of him or where he lives?"

So the sādhu, he stopped his bath, and he turned to them and he said, "Oh yes, I know him. But please tell me where you two are from." So those two brāhmaṇas, they answered, "Oh, we are from Vṛndāvana." And hearing the word "Vṛndāvana," that sādhu immediately fell down unconscious onto the ground and was trembling in ecstasy. So this immediately attracted a crowd of local villagers who then explained to the two brāhmaṇas that the sādhu who fainted was, in fact, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī himself. They said, "He is Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and because he is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, upon hearing the name of Vṛndāvana, he fell unconscious in ecstasy." Now when Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī regained consciousness, the two brāhmaṇas said to him, "We have come to take you to Vraja on the order of Jīva Gosvāmī." Now, upon hearing this, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī started laughing and dancing in ecstasy, and I was reading, even without finishing his bath, he immediately began running towards Vṛndāvana. In your mind’s eye, just try to see this; he is taking his bath, he immediately began running towards Vṛndāvana. In fact, some accounts say he ran all the way from Andhra Pradesh to Vṛndāvana; he ran the whole way. And when he finally arrived in Vraja some months later, as was the tradition we mentioned this some months ago, as was the tradition, he went first to Govindajī’s temple, where Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was lecturing on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, as he did every day. Now, upon hearing the recitation, the nectarean words coming from the lotus mouth of the pure heart of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, imbued with love for Vraja and for Kṛṣṇa and Vṛndāvana, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī again fainted in ecstasy. Now, seeing this, the devotees present they sent a message to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, who came very quickly to the temple to see who was this visiting sādhu who fainted in ecstasy. And when Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī came back to external consciousness, Jīva Gosvāmī came forward and said, "Bābā, who are you?" And when Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī revealed his identity, Jīva Gosvāmī started dancing in ecstasy. He was very happy, but without wasting a moment he said, "My dear Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, tell me, how can you write such beautiful poetry about Vṛndāvana without having taken shelter of Śrī Rādhā and without the association of the rasika devotees of Vraja?" So Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī became very humble; he said, "Yes, O Jīva Gosvāmī, before you I am lower than a blade of grass. Please give me your shelter so that I can truly understand and experience what I write about and what is the real Vṛndāvana."

So Jīva Gosvāmī answered, "Very well, but I am very busy with my service, so please take shelter of Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He does not have any disciples yet, so when he deems you fit, you may take *dīkṣā* initiation from him." Then Jīva Gosvāmī said to Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who just finished his discourse on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, he said to him, "This Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī is a high-class brāhmaṇa and a devotee of Kṛṣṇa from South India. Please accept him as your disciple and teach him the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa." *Vṛndāvana-īśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!* So he started learning, or let us say, deeply studying *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* from Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. And in a year’s time, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī gave him *dīkṣā* initiation into our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, into the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa. And Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was actually the only disciple—Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s only disciple. And I was reading that some time later, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī gave the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* that was given to him by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to his disciple Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. And when Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī finally departed this world, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī continued, as I said earlier, giving very deep discourses on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, following in the footsteps of his spiritual master. This is what we want to do; we want to follow in the footsteps of our spiritual master. Then we are always safe from the influence of the material energy and inspired to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, as Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said to his spiritual master: "I am simply running behind you, shouting 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.'" All right. So now, upon the departure of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī also inherited his spiritual master’s wooden shoes and a long Tulasī garland that was worn by Caitanya Mahāprabhu and given to Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī by the Lord. He inherited those precious items.

So one time on the occasion of Vasanta Pañcamī, which is the first day of spring, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was sitting on the banks of the Yamunā chanting a very beautiful *Yamunāṣṭakam*. *Aṣṭakam* means eight, so this *Yamunāṣṭakam* was eight prayers that he composed in glorification of Yamunā. And suddenly, as we can expect, tears came from his eyes, which fell down his cheeks and mixed with the mud on the banks of the Yamunā, and looking down, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī saw the topknot of a Deity of Kṛṣṇa—you know, sometimes our Deities have a little topknot there, Kṛṣṇa ties, Mother Yaśodā ties his hair like that in the topknot. He saw the topknot of a Deity of Kṛṣṇa protruding from that spot. So his tears just, you know, flowed from his eyes; he began digging in the mud, and several minutes later, he pulled out a very small, beautiful, black stone Deity of Kṛṣṇa, whom he later named Madana-mohana.

And when Jīva Gosvāmī was informed of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s find, he said, "It is Madana-mohana’s mercy upon him that he could continue the worship of Madana-mohana, which was interrupted for a very long time." So like his spiritual master Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī became very famous for his lectures on *Bhāgavatam*. And not only Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, I was reading, would attend those discourses, but also members of other sampradāyas as well living in Vṛndāvana, they used to come and hear his *kathā*. So popular he was. Now also at that time, the King of Bharatpur, which is not far from Vṛndāvana—it’s what, maybe a 45-minute drive, the palace is still there—at that time, the King of Bharatpur was also coming every day to hear the lectures of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. The King, he would come every day to hear the *kathā*, and in time he started developing a spirit of renunciation. He was even thinking of giving up his kingdom and becoming a renounced sādhu in Vṛndāvana. He would probably become renowned as well, of having been the king and given up everything to live in Vraja just to chant Kṛṣṇa. So he was getting this spirit of renunciation. "Now maybe I should give everything up and just, you know, live in Vṛndāvana." And when his wife, the Queen, saw this transformation taking place in her husband the King because of the lectures of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, she became very worried, to the point that she came up with a plan to stop her husband from leaving the kingdom, from leaving her; for all practical purposes, she came up with a plan to stop her husband’s newfound spirit of renunciation. So one day she called in her pregnant maid, who was eight months pregnant, and offered her a large amount of money to go to the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* lecture of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī that day and in front of the audience, stand up and announce that Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was the father of the unborn child still in her womb.

So that’s what she did. She was being offered a large amount of money, the maid. So the maid of the Queen came to Vraja and went to Govindajī’s temple, and there were many saints and sādhus and very important people there. And in the middle of the discourse, she started crying—perhaps realizing how foolish she was—she stood up anyway and called out, "O Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, you are becoming a famous devotee, but you have not told your disciples and the people in general that you made me pregnant eight months ago." She actually did it! Needless to say, everyone was shocked. And then Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, very, you know, equal-poised and calm, and he spoke up; he said, "My dear lady, of course this is not true. Perhaps you have done this only because you are in a desperate condition of life. As such, I pity you and I am concerned about you."

Now, hearing these compassionate words of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, this maidservant of the Queen, she relented, and with tears in her eyes, she related in that public assembly that her accusation was false, and she related how the Queen of Bharatpur had offered her money to do it. Now, it is interesting that the King of Bharatpur was present for the lecture, and hearing this, he rose up and drew his sword. He said, "I am going back to my palace and I will behead my wife." But Gadādhara said, "No, you cannot do that. Do not do this." He said, "This is all because your wife is so attached to you. You should know that your duty is not to renounce her or your kingdom, but to protect her and rule your kingdom as a *rāja-ṛṣi*, a saintly person sitting on the throne. Better you stay in your palace in Bharatpur and I will send my disciples daily to lecture on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* for you and your good wife."

So the King put his sword back in his covering, and he sat down. "Yes, yes, I will follow your instructions." So these are just some of the glories of this great devotee, Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, the illustrious disciple of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. And as a way that, you know, we are learning how to approach Vṛndāvana, how to live in Vṛndāvana, and one day how to attain the eternal realm of Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world—these great devotees are taking us on this path through the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana, where the aim is pure love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Jīva Gosvāmī was instructing him in that way. So I would like to conclude with a verse today from *Bhāgavatam* 11th Canto, 14th Chapter, text number 24, which for me really personifies this personality of Gadādhara Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. It’s short but very sweet and very instructive, quote:

> A devotee whose speech is sometimes choked up, whose heart melts, who cries continually and sometimes laughs, who feels ashamed and cries out loudly and then dances—a devotee thus fixed in loving service to Me purifies the entire universe.

Kṛṣṇa is speaking. Let me recite it one more time. Kṛṣṇa says:

> A devotee whose speech is sometimes choked up, whose heart melts, who cries continually and sometimes laughs, who feels ashamed and cries out loudly and then dances—a devotee thus fixed in loving service to Me purifies the entire universe.

So let us take shelter of Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, all the ācāryas who have come in their line, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, and our beloved spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, who is for us the revealer of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Māyāpur-dhāma, and Jagannātha Purī. Thank you so much, Prabhu. We will be back in a couple days with our wanderings in the twelve forests of Vṛndāvana. Thank you so much.""