"*00401*.*
"### The Pastime of Gayāsura

Hare Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees. Welcome back to our lecture series, *Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā*—*namaste sarasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe*. So, last week, we finished our series on the six seasons in Vṛndāvana with the final class on the monsoon season. Afterwards, I left Vṛndāvana; I traveled to several holy places in India, including Gayā, where Lord Caitanya took initiation from Īśvara Purī, as well as the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, where Mahāprabhu made wild animals chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and dance in ecstasy. It was an amazing place. From there, I went to Māyāpura and spent a week with the devotees there. 

Now, all throughout my journey, I was thinking about what we might speak about in the upcoming lectures. Being so much enlivened by all the places I visited that were connected to Lord Caitanya, I thought we could do a few classes especially on those places that I visited, like Gayā, the Jharikhaṇḍa forest, and finally, Māyāpura—all connected to Mahāprabhu. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in *Śaraṇāgati*, "Gaurāmāra ye-saba sthāna..." It is a famous verse: "All those places where my Lord Gaurasundara traveled for pastimes, I will visit in the company of loving devotees." And in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Antya-līlā, Chapter 4, verse 211, in the purport, Prabhupāda writes: "A devotee should make it a point of visiting all the places where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu performed His pastimes. Indeed, pure devotees of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu even want to see the places He simply visited for only hours or minutes." So, myself and a group of devotees, we were very fortunate to visit those places. So, let’s discuss the first one today. Our first stop will be the sacred abode of Gayā.

Although I had never been to Gayā, I knew it was an important place because Śrīla Prabhupāda mentions it over 50 times in his books. You see, in the Folio, Prabhupāda mentions Gayā over 50 times. Gayā is some distance from Vṛndāvana; actually, you have to cross over most of India. It’s situated alongside the Phalgu River, which itself is a tributary of the Ganges River. It is in the northeastern Indian state of Bihār, and the town of Bodh Gayā is six miles or 10 kilometers south of Gayā and is famous as the site of Lord Buddha’s enlightenment. We also visited that place. 

Historically, Gayā is mentioned in both the *Rāmāyaṇa* and the *Mahābhārata*, but its Purāṇic history goes back many millions of years. Actually, in Satya-yuga, there was a famous—or maybe better, we can say infamous—demon. His name was Gayāsura. You see, that’s where the town gets its name from. This demon’s name was Gayāsura, and he was the son of another well-known demon called Tripura-asura. This Gayāsura wanted a benediction to live forever—to become immortal for the purpose of controlling and exploiting people. So, what he did is he worshipped Lord Viṣṇu, and eventually, he somewhat pleased Lord Viṣṇu with his austerities. Lord Viṣṇu appeared before him and asked him what he desired. 

Gayāsura’s request was very much like Hiraṇyakaśipu’s; he said to Viṣṇu, "Make me immortal. I never want to die." But Viṣṇu just laughed at the demon’s foolishness, and the Lord proposed a compromise: "No one will be able to kill you, Gayāsura, except Me, Viṣṇu, or Brahmā, or Śiva." That’s kind of a compromise—no one can kill you except Me, Brahmā, or Śiva. So, Gayāsura accepted the compromise. Soon after getting that boon, he became proud—or as Prabhupāda would often say, "puffed up"—as demons do, and he went on to conquer the entire universe and make everyone’s life miserable.

Finally, Gayāsura became so arrogant he even challenged Lord Viṣṇu. In an interesting pastime, in a fight with Him, he actually won the fight by Viṣṇu’s grace and he tied Viṣṇu to a tree. But when all the atrocities of this demon became too much and people couldn’t tolerate him anymore, the demigods, as they do, approached Lord Viṣṇu for help. But Viṣṇu told them, "I am in a helpless condition; I am tied to this tree, there’s not much I can do." But the demigods, who were in anxiety because they are in charge of the affairs of the material world and under Kṛṣṇa’s direction, suggested that Lord Viṣṇu use His powers to turn Gayāsura into an inanimate, non-moving form, making it impossible for him to bother others. This is what they suggested to Viṣṇu: "You can’t do much, but at least you can make him into an inanimate, non-moving form, and then he won’t be able to bother anyone."

So one day, Gayāsura came to see how Lord Viṣṇu was doing, all tied up. And when he approached, Lord Viṣṇu said, "Hey Asura, once you asked Me for a boon and I granted it. Now, as you are more powerful than Me, I want to ask you for a boon." It’s a little diplomacy there. So Gayāsura, imagining himself to be as great as Lord Viṣṇu, smiled and he said, "Sure, I’ll agree to any requests you have. You just ask! You’re so puffed up, I’ll agree to any request you have, Viṣṇu; you just ask." Lord Viṣṇu immediately replied, "Gayāsura, transform yourself into a stone."

The wicked Asura at once understood that he had been tricked and he had to now fulfill Viṣṇu’s request. So, as it transpired, very slowly, Gayāsura’s body began changing into stone, starting from his feet upwards—just like rock-solid stone—his feet, his ankles, his shins, all the way up. And when his waist started to turn to stone, he suddenly had a change of heart. He begged Lord Viṣṇu, "Viṣṇu, please wait. I now realize my foolishness, and I express remorse, and I ask to be forgiven." If that’s the case—if someone, let us say even a devotee, may make a mistake or a serious offense—he can be rectified if he or she realizes their foolishness and expresses remorse and asks to be forgiven. It’s certainly possible. 

So, Gayāsura said, "I now consider myself to be Your devotee, and in accordance, I ask for three wishes to be fulfilled, please." Lord Viṣṇu is famous for being very, very kind to His devotees, so Gayāsura was acting like a devotee, and Viṣṇu said, "Yes, you tell Me, and I will fulfill your three wishes." It’s very interesting how quickly this Asura had a change of heart. It is a saying that the hardest lessons are the ones best learned. So he went through a difficult time, but he learned his lesson. 

Gayāsura said, "My first wish is: Please place Your lotus feet upon my heart and let everyone know that Your feet will always be upon the hearts of all Your sincere devotees." Viṣṇu smiled; He said, "So be it." Then Gayāsura said, "Lord Viṣṇu, my second wish is that those who always have Your feet upon their hearts shall attain *mokṣa*, liberation from the cycle of birth and death." Lord Viṣṇu smiled again and said, "Granted." Then Gayāsura said, "Lord Viṣṇu, my third wish is that if anyone with Your lotus feet upon their heart does not get *mokṣa*, liberation, then I may again transform myself into a living form." Looks like he had a little bit of the devil still in him! So, fearing that Gayāsura might again become influenced by the material energy and cause trouble, Lord Viṣṇu said, "So be it." Therefore, anyone who takes the lotus feet of Viṣṇu sincerely on their heart, they have to get *mokṣa*.

So then, the Lord placed His lotus feet on Gayāsura’s chest, making a large imprint with one foot in the middle of his chest—just took one foot, actually, and put it right on the chest of Gayāsura. And being satisfied with that imprint firmly on his chest, Gayāsura completely transformed into a stony statue, you could say. Now, that stone-like form of Gayāsura with this very auspicious imprint of Lord Viṣṇu clearly on his chest is the principal deity in the main temple in Gayā. Most of the demon’s body has sunk into the earth because this was Satya-yuga, and only his chest with the Lord’s footprint remains; it protrudes from the surface of the ground. Like, you go into the temple, there’s no altar; there’s just—in the middle of this everything stone there in the temple—in the middle of the temple is this mound, which is the chest of Gayāsura, and very clearly there’s an imprint in the stone. It’s really mystical, actually.

So millions of pilgrims they come every year to take *darśana* of the actual foot of Lord Viṣṇu. When we visited the temple, the temple was so full with pilgrims, we thought we’re never going to get in. But I guess their tour finished, and suddenly they just all walked out, and we were able—I was with the 15 other devotees—we came forward and we had *darśana* of that famous foot of Lord Viṣṇu. We actually put our heads on Lord Viṣṇu’s foot and we drank the water that the *pūjārīs* were bathing that foot with. Then, because we were more or less alone in that temple room and the *pūjārīs* were very favorable towards us—they all said, "Hare Kṛṣṇa"—we sat in a circle, 15 of us, around the footprint. There’s a kind of a silver railing around that footprint; we sat there and we had *kīrtana* for several hours. 

Now, I think it’s important to mention that this footprint of Lord Viṣṇu is especially significant to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. How is that? You know, Viṣṇu is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa; Kṛṣṇa is *svayam bhagavān*, He’s the original Personality of Godhead. So how was a footprint of Viṣṇu especially significant to a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava? Well, because Lord Caitanya Himself came to Gayā 500 years ago to perform the *piṇḍa-dāna* ceremony of His deceased father, Jagannātha Miśra. And while He was there—several times, actually, numerous times—He came to have *darśana* of that footprint, which is, of course, none different than Him. 

Now, the *piṇḍa-dāna* ceremony releases one’s relatives, one’s ancestors, who by their *karma*—having left their body—may be entangled in material life somewhere in another body in the universe; it frees them from that *karma*. Mahāprabhu, He was young at that time, in His early 20s; He came to perform this ceremony for His father. Of course, it’s understood that Jagannātha Miśra is an eternally liberated soul, he’s an intimate associate of the Lord, and therefore no such ceremony was required. Nevertheless, we understand that Lord Caitanya followed the social customs of the times, especially the spiritual rituals, as an example for the general population. But for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, liberation—and for us, ultimate liberation is going back home, back to Godhead—is achieved simply through devotional service to the Lord. We don’t have to perform so many rituals; everything’s there in the chanting of *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*, which is the *yuga-dharma*. It is in itself devotional service to the Lord, chanting His holy names, and by that alone we can achieve the spiritual world just by devotional service. Kṛṣṇa makes that very clear in *Bhagavad-gītā* Chapter 8, verse 28, wherein He says—and I’ll quote— "A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing sacrifices or rituals, undergoing austerities, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. Simply by performing devotional service he attains all these and at the end reaches the supreme eternal abode." It’s very clear.

So, *ācāryas* say that although Mahāprabhu, following social customs, went to Gayā to perform the *piṇḍa-dāna*—and it’s not that we can’t do it; I mean, I know that Prabhupāda allowed on several occasions devotees to go and do the *piṇḍa-dāna* ceremony, it’s not forbidden, everything helps—but really, our *ācāryas* say that there was a deeper, I could say a primary reason, that Lord Caitanya went to Gayā. What was that? That was to impress upon people the importance of accepting a spiritual master. I heard Prabhupāda say one time in Rome, "Every lady and gentleman should have a spiritual master to solve the problems of life and go back home, back to Godhead," because that’s the purpose of life. So to do that, you need a teacher, like we need a teacher in any type of education or process in life. So the *ācāryas* say that Mahāprabhu went to Gayā to impress upon people the importance of accepting a spiritual master, because it was there in Gayā, in the temple where Lord Viṣṇu’s footprint is, that Lord Caitanya met His spiritual master, Īśvara Purī. 

Actually, it was for the second time, because they had met—or at least it’s described in *Bhāgavata*—Īśvara Purī had noticed Lord Caitanya previously in Navadvīpa, but this time it was a much more important meeting, as confirmed in *Caitanya-bhāgavata* 1.17, verses 49 to 55, where Lord Caitanya says of that occasion—and we’re quoting *Caitanya-bhāgavata* here, we’re quoting Caitanya Mahāprabhu: "My journey to Gayā is successful just by My seeing your lotus feet." He’s speaking to Īśvara Purī. "If one offers *piṇḍa* at this holy place then his forefathers become delivered, but simply by seeing you, my dear spiritual master, tens of millions of forefathers get liberation. Therefore, your presence is even more auspicious than that of this holy *tīrtha*. Though all of the holy *tīrthas* pray for the dust of your lotus feet, therefore, O pūjyapāda—so nice—I am praying at your lotus feet to ferry me across the ocean of material existence and to cause me to drink the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet." 

Mahāprabhu... so Īśvara Purī replied on that occasion, "Yes, but I have understood that You are an incarnation of the Supreme Lord. This morning I saw a very auspicious dream, and now it has actually materialized. From that first day I saw You in Navadvīpa, I’ve always thought of You. I get such great pleasure seeing You, as much pleasure as I get by seeing Kṛṣṇa." So hearing this, Mahāprabhu bowed His head and replied, "This is My great fortune." And it was then that Mahāprabhu asked Īśvara Purī to initiate Him. Said, "My mind is becoming very restless in anticipation of this initiation." This is history; this is the real history. This is the only history we have to study. Īśvara Purī replied, "What to speak of *mantras*, I am prepared to offer You my very life." Wow. 

At that point, Lord Caitanya returned to His quarters; He stayed in a particular residence in a particular room, and there He went to cook *prasādam* for Himself. We actually visited that room as well. We saw the footprint of Viṣṇu, we saw the room, we stayed—we spent some time in the room where Mahāprabhu resided, still there—and we learned that Mahāprabhu cooked for Himself as *brāhmaṇas* do in India. But as He was doing so, suddenly Īśvara Purī appeared at the door, and standing there at the door, the threshold to the room, he began manifesting all eight symptoms of love of God. Mahāprabhu saw him and invited him in, and when he came in, Mahāprabhu served Īśvara Purī the very *prasādam* He had cooked for Himself, demonstrating how a disciple should render menial service to the master. Of course, Mahāprabhu’s the master of all masters, He’s the *ādi-guru*, but let us remember that He’s appearing not as directly as God Himself; Mahāprabhu’s appearing as a devotee to teach us the process of developing love for Him. So many wonderful examples! So He served His spiritual master *prasādam*. 

The next day, Īśvara Purī initiated Caitanya Mahāprabhu, where? In front of Lord Viṣṇu’s footprint in the main temple. Now, it’s written that when Īśvara Purī uttered the divine *mantras*—the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mantra* and he also gave Him the ten-syllable Gopāla *mantra*, part of our Gāyatrī *mantras*—when he chanted these divine *mantras* into Lord Caitanya’s ear, Mahāprabhu felt His first symptoms of spiritual ecstasy in His appearance on this earth. That’s the first time, at least that He manifested the first symptoms of spiritual ecstasy. It resulted in a single teardrop falling from His eyes onto that imprint of Lord Viṣṇu’s foot, making that imprint forever a pilgrimage site for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Now, I knew this when we walked into the temple, so I had no problem drinking the water as they were pouring it on that Viṣṇu’s foot, just thinking, "Perhaps there’s just an iota of Mahāprabhu’s teardrop there, somehow or other, by His causeless mercy." That’s what I was thinking when I was drinking that water. "Maybe there’s a little bit of that teardrop there. Please, Mahāprabhu, please purify my heart; someday awaken pure *bhakti* within my heart for the pleasure of my spiritual masters, so I can serve Him in His pastimes in the spiritual world." 

Then Īśvara Purī requested Lord Caitanya to go and chant these *mantras*. It’s very interesting, in a nearby little temple—it’s only 20 meters away—a nearby temple where there was, and there still is, a very ancient deity of Lord Nṛsiṃhadeva. Actually, He’s sitting—or standing, actually—as He did on the threshold to His palace. That’s actually where Lord Nṛsiṃhadeva killed Hiraṇyakaśipu; He was standing because He wasn’t inside or outside; He was on the threshold coming into the palace. So He stood on one leg, curved another leg, put the demon there, and ripped and tore out his intestines and along with that his heart and all his material desires, because he got liberated, Hiraṇyakaśipu. So there’s a deity like that, a very ferocious deity of Nṛsiṃhadeva, and that’s where Mahāprabhu first chanted His *dīkṣā mantras*. We had the good fortune—you can only fit one or two people at a time in that temple—we had the good fortune to also chant in front of that deity. What an experience that was! Oh my gosh. 

Then just afterwards, Mahāprabhu came out and He declared to whoever was present, "I shall not return to Navadvīpa; rather, I will now go to Vṛndāvana in search of Kṛṣṇa who has stolen My heart." The next morning, without informing anyone, Mahāprabhu left Gayā. Let’s just see how many pastimes took place in Gayā that we know about. You have to put it on your transcendental bucket list to go to Gayā; that’s where He got initiation, experienced His first ecstasy. So He left; He just started walking to Vṛndāvana, but it’s interesting, after walking a little distance, He heard a voice from the sky saying that the time had not arrived for Him to visit Mathurā-Vṛndāvana and that He should return to Navadvīpa and begin the *saṅkīrtana* movement by distributing the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mantra* far and wide. So of course, He’s the Lord, He’s present everywhere and He knows everything, but the pastime unfolded in that way, for whatever was His reasoning. He heard this voice: "It’s not time; go to Navadvīpa and start the *saṅkīrtana* movement." 

And we know that of course later on—we did discuss that, didn’t we?—we had a whole series on Lord Caitanya leaving Purī after taking *sannyāsa* for some time and traveling to Vṛndāvana, but that was after He established the *saṅkīrtana* movement. So Mahāprabhu returned to Gayā and then He went on to Navadvīpa. 

Upon His return to Navadvīpa, I was reading, the entire town of Navadvīpa was there to receive Him. Of course, we know at that time, except for Advaitācārya, no one knew of His divinity as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; they only knew Him as Nimāi Paṇḍita. But He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead; He was very attractive, and by that time, He was a famous scholar and much loved by everyone. So it’s described that as He entered Navadvīpa, all His friends and relatives rushed to meet Him, and they accompanied Him to His home, where there He narrated His experiences of His pilgrimage to Gayā. And it’s recorded He said, "My dear residents of Navadvīpa, by your blessings and good wishes, I could visit Gayā-dhāma and return without any difficulties." 

At that point, the senior leaders of Navadvīpa came and they touched Nimāi Paṇḍita’s head and blessed Him with a long life, and others chanted *mantras* for His protection. Some of the men came and, I was reading, they put their heads on His chest, as was the custom, and they prayed, "May blissful peace be upon You." 

So then, Mahāprabhu said—after those blessings—"My dear friends, I want to describe to you the wonderful places that constantly reminded me of Lord Kṛṣṇa on my pilgrimage to Gayā. As soon as I entered into Gayā, I heard the auspicious sounds of chanting, conch shells, and bells. Hundreds and hundreds of *brāhmaṇa* priests were chanting from the Vedas. They glorified Lord Kṛṣṇa and the place of pilgrimage where He had left the impression of His lotus foot. There in Gayā, they said to me, ‘Welcome to the holy spot where the Lord washed His lotus feet. In previous ages, when Lord Kṛṣṇa visited Gayā, He washed His own transcendental lotus feet at this place with the sacred waters of this area. Lord Śiva now holds that water upon his head with the full realization that this is the water from Lord Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.’ Therefore, this place of pilgrimage has become one of the holiest and is known as Pādodaka-tīrtha—the pilgrimage place where the Lord left the waters of His lotus feet." 

As soon as Mahāprabhu said those names, "Gayā" and "Pādodaka-tīrtha," His remembrance of the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu intensified, and streams of tears poured down from His eyes—just remembering that lotus foot of Viṣṇu. This is why I’m saying, if you can go there, you have to go there, because just by remembering that lotus foot of Viṣṇu, Mahāprabhu’s tears streamed down His eyes and He became extremely restless. Unable to control His spiritual emotions, He began crying out the name of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Actually, I was reading, so profuse were His tears of Kṛṣṇa-*prema*, it’s described they could have watered an entire flower garden. 

So the people of Navadvīpa, they said, "We’ve never seen Nimāi behave like this." Because before, He had His *ṭola*, His school, and He was teaching and He was beloved, of course, but they’d never seen these ecstatic symptoms, which were initiated when He was initiated by the holy names by Īśvara Purī. So now He’s coming back overwhelmed by these ecstatic symptoms. So they concluded, "It must be that Nimāi Paṇḍita has received the mercy of that transcendental abode, Śrī Gayā-dhāma." That was their conclusion—He went there and He got the mercy of that abode, and now He’s experiencing deep spiritual emotions. They said, "All glories to Śrī Gayā-dhāma." And while that is true, it’s even more, you could say, a transcendental reality that Gayā itself received the mercy of the *yuga-avatāra*. 

So today, let’s finish here. Next class, I think we’ll go on to maybe cover Bodh Gayā—that’s where Lord Buddha attained enlightenment; it’s only a half-hour’s drive from Gayā itself, let me think about that—or we can go on to the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. You’re not going to believe what I have to share with you about the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. It’s still as wild as it always was, and we went there anyway. Stay tuned. 

Let us finish today with the words of a very well-known and appreciated Vaiṣṇava who lived during the time of Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura. I’ve quoted him many times, Kṛṣṇadāsa, the great poet. I found in his writings a beautiful verse that he wrote—a poem, you could say. He wrote: 

"I offer my respects to the sacred dhāma of Gayā which is decorated with the lotus foot of Lord Viṣṇu, the visit of the great saint Īśvara Purī, the first teardrop of *śrī-rādhā-bhāva-gaurāṅga*, and the Lord Himself, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who took His new birth, *dīkṣā*, in the lineage of *prema*." 

Please allow me to recite that again; I love that name he gives Mahāprabhu, *Śrī-Rādhā-bhāva-Gaurāṅga*. "I offer respects to the sacred dhāma of Gayā which is decorated with the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu, the visit of the great saint Īśvara Purī, the first teardrop of *Śrī-Rādhā-bhāva-Gaurāṅga*, and the Lord Himself, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who took His new birth, *dīkṣā*, in the lineage of *prema*." 

Wow. All right, Kṛṣṇadāsa. It’s kind of—for me, it’s kind of like going there again, reliving that amazing experience we had in Gayā. I knew nothing of Gayā before, or I knew a little bit, but then all the pastimes of Mahāprabhu, Īśvara Purī... so thank you. And like I say, we’ll figure out what to lecture on in the next class; we’re back in a few days. 

As always, *Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya!* 

Thank you so much.""