"*00391*.*
"Go back to Govinda. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Dear devotees, in 45 minutes or so, we will have the opportunity to visit another very sacred and holy place: the village of Champahhati, which you could say is most famous as one of the residences, the main residence of the great Vaiṣṇava author and poet Śrīla Jayadeva Gosvāmī. So much could be said about where he describes the loving pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We will be touching on that in this lecture. But to put everything in proper perspective, Śrīla Jayadeva Gosvāmī was born in either the 11th or 12th century in a village here in Bengal called Kenduli Bilva, in the district of Birbhum, which is about 3 or 4 hours from here, not far away. Historically, he lived during the reign of a king here in Bengal whose name was Lakṣmaṇa Sena. After growing up, he had a tendency to write beautiful poems and beautiful songs, and he mostly just kept to himself, satisfied just writing and glorifying Kṛṣṇa.

As time went on, his works, his poems, and so forth, became very popular with the common people. In time, some of his material reached the ears of King Lakṣmaṇa Sena. Now, how does that happen? A sage is living in a jungle area like this, just satisfied, glorifying his Lord, writing poems and songs, and then all of a sudden, the king hears about it. How does that happen? In those days, there was a tradition that the king, because he was always very busy with management and warfare, sometimes needed to just kick back and have a little entertainment. So, the king would be entertained by court musicians and singers.

One day the king was sitting, the music was playing, the singers were singing, and this was all very nice. But as the choir sang, the king saw many of the singers swaying with tears in their eyes. All the singers were crying about what they were singing. This caught his attention. Listening more closely—because you know, kings are busy, the music is there, he's thinking about the next battle, whatever—he himself started listening more closely to the words that were being sung, and he started crying. So when the concert was over, he called for his chief minister and said, "What saintly person must have composed that song about Kṛṣṇa?" The minister said, "Well sir, it is a strict renunciate who lives alone in the forest outside the city." The king asked, "What is his name?" The minister said, "His name is Jayadeva Gosvāmī, and he is loved by the people." The king said, "Bring him here, I want to meet him. No one disobeys the order of the king. You go bring him here. I want to see him now."

The minister said, "Sir, this giant, he probably won't come. He shies away from royalty and opulence and lives in seclusion." This conversation between the minister and the king went on for several weeks, and the king was frustrated because he remembered those tears—tears don't come all the time; they come in moments of great grief or great joy, and these were joyful tears. He was so determined to meet this Jayadeva that the king dressed up like a common man and went incognito to the humble bhajan kuṭīr of Jayadeva Gosvāmī, just a few hours from here.

Like I mentioned, Jayadeva was popular. He was living in the forest, writing and so forth, so the common people loved him; they would all come and listen, no problem. So if the king comes, it is a big thing—security. He came incognito and in that common dress, he sat in front of Jayadeva when he was singing a song. Like we do sometimes after we sing, we give some commentary. So Jayadeva was speaking some transcendental knowledge and he asked for questions. The king said, "I have a question," and he took off his costume as a common man and revealed himself as the king. He invited Jayadeva to give up this simple life here in a grass hut and come live in the royal palace and write his songs there. The king said, "Everything will be taken care of for you." But Jayadeva showed no interest. He looked around his humble dwelling, very simple, and said, "Sir, I have everything here. In my heart, I am fully satisfied just worshiping the Lord of my heart by staying here and writing my poetry and songs. Thank you very much."

But kings, you know, they are smart. They know how to rule; they are diplomats. They know what is dharma because so many saintly persons are always coming to the palace to speak transcendental knowledge to enlighten even the king and the queen. Many of them are rājarṣis, powerful men but pious and saintly at the same time. So Lakṣmaṇa Sena said, "Jayadeva, yes, it's true what you say, and you have a right to stay in a secluded place because you are a renunciate. But take note, as a sādhu, you are meant to share your knowledge and wisdom with others. Without the association of saints like yourself, how will the common man ever become freed from the vicious cycle of birth and death?" It is written that at that point, Jayadeva went silent. The king said, "This is what we will do. There is a beautiful, very simple abode not far from my palace called Champahhati. It is a forest of campaka trees. We will make a simple bhajan kuṭīr for you there where you can continue your writing." He said, "Please, in this way, sometimes myself and others can come and take the dust from your lotus feet."

Being a Vaiṣṇava, Jayadeva knew the primary duty of a Vaiṣṇava is to deliver others, so he agreed. He moved to Champahhati, which we are going to visit in a few minutes, a very beautiful, forested area at that time. The king built him a little hut, and he was doing his writing there, and sometimes the king would come and pay his obeisances—just like heaven on earth. But as some time passed, Lakṣmaṇa Sena, for whatever reason, sent Jayadeva Gosvāmī to Jagannātha Purī for a special function. It is not explained exactly how it happened, but once there, Jayadeva became the court poet in the palace of the king at Purī. The other king noticed him as well and made him the court poet. He couldn't go back to Champahhati. There is a wonderful pastime of how he met his wife, Padmāvatī, but we will have to tell that another time. But he met his wife Padmāvatī, they married, and eventually came back to the forest of Champahhati.

Now it was during that period that the Gosvāmī began writing his magnum opus. It is interesting: within the Gīta-govinda, he very clearly designates himself as the author of that great book. I've seen in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute in Vṛndāvana, there are thousands and thousands of scriptures, mostly done on tree bark, etc., but very often there is no signature, there is no author, because they are very humble. They don't want to ascribe their name to something that is glorifying Kṛṣṇa. Very often you don't know who the author is. But this very, very, very famous book, we know who the author is. He writes: *kiṇḍubilva-samudra-sambhava-rohiṇī-ramaṇa-kṛta-kṛti-kṛta-vittan*—"He who appeared in the village of Kenduli Bilva, just as the moon rises from the ocean, has collected Śrī Kṛṣṇa's expressions of lamentation; that Jayadeva is humbly narrating this song." Okay, you got it. This book became very, very famous because Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive. Even today, if you go to Rāśī Bihārī Lāl in Loi Bazar, you will find two or three editions of Gīta-govinda. You can go online; it is there.

The Swami is glorifying this book, so when I get to Deva, I am going to go buy one. Originally, this book was written for the pleasure of the Lord, but it is originally intended for advanced devotees. It is not for everyone. Actually, in the introduction, Jayadeva Gosvāmī establishes the standard of who is qualified to read and hear the intimate pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as described in Gīta-govinda.

Here is the qualification: If your heart yearns for remembrance of Śrī Hari, which bestows all happiness; if you are hankering to contemplate upon Śrī Hari with intense affection; and if you are overwhelmed with curiosity to know about Śrī Hari's skill and amorous pastimes, then by all means, read this book. You may find this poetry very sweet and pleasing. But if you do not nurture these three desires, then this moving and lyrical literature is not for you. Only if your heart is full of intense lobham—greed—to fathom Kṛṣṇa's loving pastimes will you be able to appreciate this inspiring poetry. We say in Odisha: be careful. We know from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* that Mahāprabhu would regularly discuss these verses of Gīta-govinda, but he would only do so with very confidential associates like Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya. Someday maybe, but the longest journey begins with the first step. We have *Bhagavad-gītā*, *Īśopaniṣad*, and we can reflect on these things. We have senior devotees who can comment properly. But a word of caution: don't run to Rāśī Bihārī Lāl right now. Though Śrīla Prabhupāda made it very clear that of all the songs in Gīta-govinda, only the invocation known as *Daśāvatāra-stotra* is fit to be heard by his followers.

That is a popular song we all know, about the ten incarnations of the Lord. Very beautiful. I found a letter from Śrīla Prabhupāda to Citrānanda on July 15th, 1972. He wrote regarding the songs of Jayadeva Gosvāmī: "Those songs are for siddha-bhaktas, not for us who are sādhaka-bhaktas or learning bhaktas. Lord Caitanya never divulged them in public. He enjoyed them in the company of his selected three or four devotees. There is one song sung by Jayadeva, worshipping the ten incarnations. That song is all right for everybody."

Now, there is a very famous pastime about the time that Jayadeva was composing that great literature. One late morning, he was at his desk with his feather pen writing Gīta-govinda, and his wife, Padmāvatī, was cooking their lunch. Jayadeva was writing and writing, and you know how in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes it appeared Kṛṣṇa was being controlled by the love of the gopīs, and particularly one gopī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, that he was subordinate to these girls? He was thinking, "Gosh, what do I write now? How can I write that Kṛṣṇa, the supreme controller, is controlled by anyone, especially some girls?" Even in the West, if you go to a dictionary and look up "God," the definition is the supreme controller of everything material and everything spiritual. So how is it that Kṛṣṇa could be controlled by love? This is called writer's block. Now, if any of you are writers—I have my so many volumes of *Diary of a Traveling Monk*—many times I think, "What do I say?" So I go have some sweets or walk around the block, and I come back, and, "Oh yeah, now I know what to write." He just didn't know what to write at that part. I mean, how can it be explained? God is the supreme controller. Can he be subordinate to his devotees? He was getting confused. "I'll go take a bath in the Ganges. I'll be back in time for lunch."

Then one of the most amazing things ever to happen in Vaiṣṇava history took place. While Jayadeva Gosvāmī was away bathing in the Ganges, Kṛṣṇa, disguised as Jayadeva Gosvāmī, came to Jayadeva's house and walked in. You know, right now in my Friday series, "Stimulation for Ecstatic Love," we are doing the different disguises Kṛṣṇa takes to break the māna, the anger, of Rādhā—I think we are at 16 different disguises Kṛṣṇa has taken so far—here is a disguise: he disguised himself as a devotee, Jayadeva Gosvāmī, and walked in. Padmāvatī was surprised; lunch was not ready. "I mean, you just..." Kṛṣṇa, disguised as Jayadeva, said, "Yes, I am going to go back to my work now." Kṛṣṇa sat in the place, the seat of Jayadeva, took the pen, and wrote where Jayadeva had hesitated to write himself. Speaking to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was displaying jealous anger towards him, Kṛṣṇa implored, "Oh beloved, your tender sprout-like feet are the antidote to Cupid's venom. Please place your feet on my head as my ornament and glory. The scorching fire of Cupid's poison is unbearable. Please, therefore, let the touch of your feet quell the torment of my love."

Now, the most famous line is, "Put your feet on my head as my ornament and glory." Surely Kṛṣṇa is becoming subordinate to the love of his devotee. It is very clear for then, now, and forever. Yes, Kṛṣṇa is the supreme controller. But the mystery of it all, the knowledge that we have as Gauḍīyas, is that even God is controlled by love—pure love of his devotee, primarily Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Vṛndāvana pastimes. Rādhā doesn't do what Kṛṣṇa says; Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhā says. That is the beauty of rāgānuga-bhakti.

Okay, so Kṛṣṇa, disguised as Jayadeva, got up to leave and Padmāvatī said, "Oh, prasādam is ready." Kṛṣṇa, disguised as Jayadeva, sat down and had a full meal. She didn't realize what was going on. She didn't have to offer it to the deity; there was the walking, talking deity, and it was a big lunch. Even Kṛṣṇa was full. So he got up and did the ritual, and he said, "I need to go for another walk." So he left to go for another walk, and Padmāvatī... okay, she is cleaning up. There is nothing left. She is cleaning up. She was a good cook.

And lo and behold—this is an English phrase, I don't know how you say it in Russian—a few minutes later, who walks in the door? Jayadeva Gosvāmī. "Oh, Jayadeva, I'm hungry." "What are you talking about? You just had a big meal two minutes ago. You walked out and you're hungry again? Have you gone mad? What are you talking about? I didn't eat. I was bathing in the Ganges." "No, you came in a few minutes ago. I saw you with my own eyes. You went over to your writings, you wrote something, and then as you were leaving, I had you sit down. I fed you rice."

So Jayadeva went, "What?" He went over to that tablet where he had hesitated, and he saw those two verses which I quoted. There he saw in that wet ink: "Please place your feet on my head as my ornament and my glory." He went, "Kṛṣṇa!" Only Kṛṣṇa could have solved his dilemma. He realized, being the advanced devotee he is, that Kṛṣṇa had come in and written that line. So he screamed, "IT'S A MIRACLE! IT'S A MIRACLE! IT'S A MIRACLE!" Tears of ecstasy flowed from his eyes, and he called out, "Padmāvatī, my dear wife, you are most fortunate! Kṛṣṇa himself has written this line and accepted prasādam from your own hand." And then Padmāvatī fainted.

So this is a very famous scripture, *Gīta-govinda*, written by Jayadeva Gosvāmī and Kṛṣṇa himself. When it was finally finished—the Gīta-govinda took him a long time—he concluded this book with the most beautiful prayer. It will melt your hearts. He wrote, "Whatever is delightful in the varieties of music, whatever is graceful in fine strains of poetry, and whatever is exquisite in the sweet art of love, let the happy and wise persons learn that from the songs of Govinda." You can begin by reading it, just like before reading the 10th Canto, we go through the first nine Cantos of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; then we can understand the deeper meanings. So our ācāryas have written that after Jayadeva Gosvāmī completed *Gīta-govinda*, Lord Caitanya appeared to him and gave him his blissful darśana and revealed to him how he would appear one day in nearby Navadvīpa to begin his saṅkīrtana, because Jayadeva Gosvāmī appeared way before Lord Caitanya. Lord Caitanya appeared to him: "Hey, I am going to appear here in Navadvīpa one day." He gave him that blissful darśana.

In the dream, he said he should leave Champahhati and go back to Purī—remember he did some sevā for the king there. "Go back to Purī, and I will also come to Purī one day and relish your Gīta-govinda." And he went to Purī with his *Gīta-govinda*, and this beautiful long poem about the glories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa first spread throughout Odisha, then Bengal, then throughout India down to the present day. Very famous book. In fact, the book became so popular in Purī that the priests in the Jagannātha temple would read it to Jagannātha Svāmī every day, and the underlying understanding actually is that Jayadeva Gosvāmī wrote this for the pleasure of Lord Jagannātha. So that was accomplished. So he lived there for many years and continued his writings, and like all things come to pass, one day he left for the transcendental abode.

There are many more pastimes, but it is hot and it is late. I'll just tell you a few more. Many years after the departure of Jayadeva Gosvāmī, another king of Odisha, King Puruṣottama Deva, he actually wrote what he called *Abhinava-gīta-govinda*. You know, kind of in a competitive spirit, and he insisted that his work, his *Abhinava-gīta-govinda*, was better than Jayadeva Gosvāmī's. So he gave the instruction, "My Govinda should be read instead of Jayadeva Gosvāmī's." He is the king; you don't argue with the king—"Off with your head!" Now, of course, there were some objections, but due to the politically sensitive nature of the challenge, the temple priests decided to let Lord Jagannātha decide for himself which one he liked best. Now, no one was advanced enough to go up and ask Lord Jagannātha, "Which one do you like best?" So the priests took both books, Jayadeva Gosvāmī's *Gīta-govinda* and the king's *Abhinava-gīta-govinda*, and before they closed the temple that night, they put both books in front of Lord Jagannātha and locked the temple up for the night.

So, how is Jagannātha speaking? "Oh no, okay, I like that one." They had a plan. They put both books there, locked the door, and sure enough, the following morning when the priests opened the temple door, they found the pages of the king's book scattered all over the floor and Jayadeva Gosvāmī's *Gīta-govinda* nestled under Jagannātha's arm, close to his heart. You know how he has those short little arms? It was tucked under his arm, right like that, close to his heart. And Jagannātha had an even bigger smile than he usually has. The Lord had given his verdict.

Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Jagannātha Kārtika Parikrama 2025 in Jagannātha Purī in a few days kī! I'm not finished.

So another pastime took place about 300 years after Jayadeva Gosvāmī had departed this world. Again, in Purī, on that occasion, Lord Jagannātha had been laid down to sleep after his midday meal. Lord takes a little nap because, you'll see when we get to Jagannātha Purī, Jagannātha eats 52 times a day. What's 52 times? He can eat a billion times. All the prasādam is prepared by Lakṣmī Devī—that is a pastime we will tell when we get to Purī—but bear in mind there is a lot of mahā-prasādam in Jagannātha Purī, and it is so yummy, so tasty, and completely transcendental. I just love Jagannātha Prasāda there. The dahl. Oh my god.

*He Prabhu, jagat-pati, darśana deha more*—To me, Oh Lord of the universe, kindly be visible to me.

He is taking a nap. You know, he is pretty full after 52 offerings. He is taking his midday meal. Outside, when Jagannātha is sleeping, there was a florist—you know the people that make the garlands—and he was singing *Gīta-govinda*. It is meant to be sung in a garden near the temple grounds. It is said that Lord Jagannātha was so eager to hear this spontaneous performance by a florist of his favorite work—it is described that this *Gīta-govinda* is Jagannātha's favorite work—that Jagannātha left the temple. The Jagannātha deity snuck out of his own temple! Nobody saw him, and he went to where that florist, you know, who was singing, the simple devotee singing the song, and Jagannātha hid in the bushes, not caring for the thorns that were ripping his cloth, etc., and scratching his body, just to hear this bhakti. So for an hour and a half, the florist is singing in the bushes. And then Jagannātha realized he was supposed to get up from his nap at that time and they were going to open the doors and have ārati. So Jagannātha hurried back really quickly and got onto the altar. Boom, just as the doors opened.

But when the door opened and the priests saw him, they were shocked because all his clothes were torn from the thorns in the garden, and there were scratches on his body as well from all the brambles and thorns that he was hiding in. How did that happen? It was just an hour and a half ago. What happened to the Lord's clothes? What scratched his body? Everyone was confused. So afraid they might get in trouble, they all ran to the king. The king at that time was the famous Mahārāja Pratāparudra. They went to see, and there were so many discussions, and you know, astrologers were consulted, and nobody could figure out what happened to Lord Jagannātha. But one night, the king, King Puruṣottama, he had a dream in which Lord Jagannātha appeared to him and explained everything that had happened. Jagannātha was a little embarrassed; he was apologizing. "But this is what... my devotee was singing with so much bhakti, so much devotion, I went to hear him." So in that pastime, Lord Jagannātha, you could say, once again revealed his exclusive attachment to *Gīta-govinda*. As such, Mahārāja Pratāparudra, obviously a great devotee, he issued the following royal order.

It is actually 10 years before Lord Caitanya arrived in Jagannātha Purī, and it is written in the temple library. You can find this document. It is written what Mahārāja Pratāparudra ordered as a result of that pastime to the citizens of Jagannātha Purī. He wrote: "Performances of song and dance for Jagannātha-baladeva will consist solely of *Gīta-govinda* and no other work. Performers are therefore instructed to learn the songs of *Gīta-govinda* exclusively. Four musicians will accompany the dancers who enact *Gīta-govinda* before Lord Jagannātha. Others may follow in chorus. Temple officials who allow any other song to be performed will be deemed enemies of Jagannātha." So to the credit of the temple management, I believe this tradition is still carried on today.

So today, I'd like to conclude our glorification of Jayadeva Gosvāmī—and we'll be visiting his residence or nearby his residence in Champahhati—with a beautiful poem by a medieval poet named Vaiṣṇava Dāsa. He entitles it "God's Choicest Poets." I love it:

"Drink deep, O poets. It's like if you're thirsty, you open your mouth really wide and you pour that cool, refreshing water in. This is to nourish your heart, your soul, your all."

"All glories to Śrī Jayadeva, the crest jewel amongst poetic kings. All glories to Śrī Vidyāpati, the abode of rasa. All glories to Śrī Caṇḍīdāsa, the greatest connoisseur of rasa. These poets, Jayadeva, Vidyāpati, etc., Caṇḍīdāsa—these poets are unparalleled in their excellence in the three worlds. The creation of these poets were pristine songs describing Madhura-rasa. These songs were written in prose and verse, and they were relished by my Lord Gorācandra along with Rāya Rāmānanda and Svarūpa Dāmodara. When Rāya Rāmānanda and Svarūpa Dāmodara desired to awaken a particular mood within the Lord, they would sing these songs by these poets. Hearing their singing, even wood and stones would melt. Such were the sweet pastimes of these three individuals: Vidyāpati and Caṇḍīdāsa. Those moods and emotions of Śrī Rādhā which were hidden from the masses in general were demonstrated with great effort by my Lord Gorā to one and all. Now that he has disappeared from external vision, these rasas do not touch my heart. Even on listening to these songs, thus the Vaiṣṇava simply cries."

Gauḍīya-goṣṭhī-kī jaya! Village kī jaya!

Gauḍīya-Gīta-govinda 2025 kī jaya!""