"*00572*.*
"### The Limitless Nectar of Your Holy Name (SB 1.1)

Chapter 14 translation: The beings entangled in the terrible net of birth and rebirth can immediately free themselves by chanting, even unknowingly, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, which strikes fear even into fear personified. Commentary: It is written here that the name of Kṛṣṇa is feared even by fear personified. This means that the name of Kṛṣṇa is non-different from Kṛṣṇa, and therefore His name is Kṛṣṇa Himself. There is no difference, and therefore anyone can benefit from the holy name of Kṛṣṇa even in the midst of the greatest difficulty. And therefore, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, even if uttered unknowingly, can bring a person liberation from rebirth and from death.

Of the glories of the holy name, I have said some, because we know that the holy name has innumerable mercies and qualities. Scriptures say that Lord Kṛṣṇa has unlimited names, and therefore we know that from time immemorial, He utters at every moment a name of Kṛṣṇa. This is to say that they are truly infinite. It is interesting to note how, although Kṛṣṇa has innumerable names, our ācāryas teach us to chant the name of Kṛṣṇa. I often asked myself this question: if all the names of Kṛṣṇa are absolute, why are we encouraged to chant this mantra? It is an interesting question. If all the names of the Lord are absolute, why do we focus only on Hare Kṛṣṇa? There are many reasons; all the names are primary, and some names are secondary. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains to us that even if all the names are absolute, some of these names are primary and others secondary. So, I asked myself how I could say it in another way, because I didn’t like the idea of primary and secondary so much. Then I thought: there are some names that are of maximum importance and others that we can say have less importance. But to say that some have more importance or more power than others is a very strong phrase, and therefore in spiritual communities, when we make these types of statements, we must have some evidence; otherwise, the paṇḍitas do not recognize you. You will have already heard that one time, the name of Viṣṇu is equivalent to one name of Rāma, and three names of Rāma are equivalent to one name of Kṛṣṇa. He explains to us that the secondary names explain the magnificence and the greatness of the Lord, Īśvara. And it is true—the Lord is great, we are very, very small—and so we begin our journey by going through the first nine cantos of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in which we understand the greatness of the Lord, and then finally we can appreciate His sweetness in the Tenth Canto. It is a long journey, a work in progress. It is said that the longest journey begins from the first step, so it is important to begin to understand the greatness of the Lord. There are specific names regarding this greatness; for example, Viṣṇu, and another secondary name is Paramātmā, which means Supersoul.

We can also speak about the Lord's names in other ways. I spent a lot of time trying to cross the borders between one nation and another with documents, and sometimes I said, "Okay, the Lord is His prophet." In South Africa, I met the King of the Zulus; there are 38 million Zulu people in South Africa. I was in a hospital in my saffron-colored clothes, and this King came to me, saying, "But what are you doing here? You shouldn't be here, a person like you. Okay, you’re sick, but what are these beads that you are holding in your hand, and what are you muttering?" I said, "Oh, thank you for visiting me, Your Majesty." He said, "You’re welcome, but what are you muttering?" I said, "I am not muttering; I am glorifying the Lord by chanting His names." He asked, "What is your name for the Lord?" I replied, "Kṛṣṇa," with a smile. She replied, "You don’t look that sick, Kṛṣṇa." And I asked, "Your Majesty, in your Zulu culture, how do you call God, because the Lord has many names?" I replied, "In our culture, we call..." and I accepted it because all the names of the Lord are absolute. I asked what the name by which you call the Lord means, and what specific aspect of the Lord does it refer to? His answer shocked me; I was about to fall out of bed. The King replied, "uMvelinqangi," which means "the person who owns the most cows." In absolute terms, I said, "Wow." So they refer to the majesty, the greatness of the Lord. We have to go through this to get to Him.

But we will be able to go through this passage quickly because our founder, Prabhupāda, is a resident of Vṛndāvana. Now a secret has been revealed: Kṛṣṇa’s abode is not a representative place like Vaikuṇṭha, but His playground where the Lord maintains wonderful relationships with His devotees—with His friends, His mother, the gopīs—and thanks to this mercy, we can therefore know the most intimate names of the Lord. As you can see, you are already smiling when you hear them. So these names reveal the sweet confidentiality of the Lord’s names, and now we are spreading this confidential knowledge of the Lord throughout the world because most of the virtuous people, the pious, believe in God; they are religious. Religion essentially means awakening your dormant love for the Lord. But as I often say in my lessons, I want to go straight to the top, but you have to die; how can you love someone if you don’t know them? I have often heard it said that love is in the details. To give a worldly example, how come a man chooses a woman as his wife or vice versa? Because he likes the way she walks, the way she dresses, the way she talks; he likes what she likes too. So God likes the details. The same thing goes for us with Kṛṣṇa; we even have His phone number, which is the Mahā-mantra. It is the most incredible, wonderful thing. We have this information, and how can we have faith in this information? Because we got this information from a resident of Vṛndāvana who loves the Lord.

One of my sisters once asked, "From the scriptures, we know that the Lord is light blue and does not play a harp; He plays a flute so elongated that it almost reaches the ears, and His nose is the shape of a sesame flower, and His lips the color of a fruit." A little girl fights with her friends and loses, and He dances with some girls under the moonlight at midnight. And this sister of mine was confused; she said, "And He was wearing a peacock feather in His hair. But is it really true?" And for a moment, he lowered his head, shook his head, and said, "My dear daughter, do you think I am making fun of you? Do you think I am deceiving you?" Maybe we cannot know God, but we can know Śrīla Prabhupāda through His books and by listening to His lessons. We can constantly develop *śraddhā*, faith in what He teaches us. Once, Śrīla Prabhupāda, in his great humility, said, "I don’t know who God is, but I know who my Guru Mahārāja is." In the beginning, Śrīla Prabhupāda cooked for the devotees; he did the shopping, bought the ingredients, cooked, offered to the Deity, and later distributed to the people. Kṛṣṇa said, "I have never tasted such a good samosa in my whole life." He had said, "This is the best samosa we have ever tasted." At that moment, he had a kind of realization and said, "Yes, this is the recipe of mother Yaśodā." So if you want to speculate on the position of our spiritual master in the spiritual world, this will be revealed to us in due time. Patience is a very important quality in our process of *bhakti*. If we have faith, we know these primary names of the Lord by chanting the secondary names of the Lord; we awaken our appreciation for God, and our love for God—that is how Kṛṣṇa is known.

Vṛndāvana is His home; everyone knows Him, so it is not just our opinion as Kṛṣṇa *bhaktas* that these are the primary names. Kṛṣṇa is the most important name of the Lord. We say it here; we don’t say it in churches or in mosques. Kṛṣṇa—it means to motivate our statements with the *śāstras*, to motivate them with the opinion of the pure devotees, which are as good as the *śāstras*. Jīva Gosvāmī, in his work—something very profound—and when I heard this teaching, I said, "I am in the right movement." You would like to hear what Jīva Gosvāmī said? This is what made me say, "I am a Hare Kṛṣṇa, I will never leave this movement." He writes about all the names of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇa is the most important, and even the Lord Himself confirms it when He says, "My dear Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa is more important than all My names." It is important as a name because it comes from the most important planet of the spiritual world, Goloka Vṛndāvana. 

Jīva Gosvāmī says that Goloka means "cow planet," so it’s the planet of cows, just like the King said. When asked, "How many cows does He have?" he said, "A few hundred." And I replied, "Kṛṣṇa has an unlimited number of cows." The King replied, "But tell me more about this Kṛṣṇa. I want you to come and visit us in the land of the Zulus and preach to my people. I know that you have the Food for Life project; I open the doors of my country to you. Go and feed all the Zulus." He didn’t talk about money. So he gave us this opportunity; his name is King Goodwill Zwelithini. We became friends; he read my book, *Diaries of a Wandering Monk*, and after reading the first chapter, I came to visit him. He had an honorary title because he brought the message of the Lord to African countries. Then I thought, "But I’m not a brāhmaṇa, I’m not..." and then I said, "But if I add another title in addition to *sannyāsī* and *guru*, also 'warrior,' what will the GBC think of me?" And a couple of years ago, this King left the body; when I heard the news, I really cried. We were very good friends because we both believed a lot in the Lord; we liked to talk about the Lord, and sometimes I wondered, I would really like to have his faith. Kṛṣṇa is one of the primary names of the Lord, and He descends in this name. We talked yesterday about the ten incarnations of Kṛṣṇa, but the name of Lord Kṛṣṇa is the incarnation in this age. The Lord descends in different forms—half-lion, half-person, in the form of the tortoise, and in other forms—but in this era, He descends in the form of sound. Think of it like this: the sound is a form and it is very accessible. He said, "Make Her dance on the tip of your tongue." He was a poet. What is the point of having a bow and arrow if it does not point straight to the heart? What is the point of a poem if it does not melt the heart?

When you listen to him talking about Kṛṣṇa, you also fall in love, because it is contagious. What is it that we catch? We are infected by other devotees, as if we transmit this consciousness from other devotees. You cannot imagine how much we have fallen. How can we become devotees? His answer remained etched in the heart, like when Hanuman opens his heart and inside there is the Lord, Rāma. So if my heart opens, there is this answer: "You are very fallen, but when you heard the mantra Kṛṣṇa, you came running; you heard the chanting, you came running. That was your good fortune." The holy name has brought us to the movement. The holy name attracted you here; it will keep you on this path and will bring you to the feet of the Lord. These incarnations of the Lord, when they come into this world, they do three things. One wonders, "But what are you doing here?" An incarnation is like when you meet a distinguished person in the slums of a city and ask yourself, "But what is she doing here? What is the Supreme Person doing among the devotees?" To re-establish the laws of religion, this is what an incarnation does. And therefore, it is also said that this incarnation of the holy name must have these three purposes. The name of Kṛṣṇa accomplishes the liberation of people. Look at yourselves in the mirror; He has liberated you. Only you know how fallen and bad you were before. I saw the photo of a *sannyāsī*, a disciple of mine, who is now a very bright, shining *sannyāsī*. I saw him when he was a servant; how did you come to be like this?

The holy name kills the demons. The holy name is so merciful that it kills the demonic mentality in people, and they can thus become presidents of the GBC, temples in the movement, because we know that every saint has a past and every sinner has a future. The holy name therefore re-establishes the principles of religion: truthfulness, mercy, religion. It also re-establishes the principles of religion, which are cleanliness, truthfulness, mercy, austerity. We are giving a new generation to the world, as well as to ourselves. A brother of mine is a poet and singer-songwriter; he said, "Change the face of the earth and give a new birth to children." Prabhupāda said if it were not for this movement that spread the holy name of the Lord with the Mahā-mantra, the world would have been in even worse conditions. People consider many means to solve the problems of the world, such as poverty, injustice, wars, but in reality, what can do all this is the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, because it is not different from Kṛṣṇa. Do you think that Kṛṣṇa can solve these problems? The Kali-yuga is like a sky surmounted by black clouds of sinful activities that contaminate all the air. When the Lord Caitanya saw some black clouds approaching during the *saṅkīrtana*, He took the *kāratālas* and chased them away.

My brother said that when Śrīla Prabhupāda had gone to a court of justice, he said, "This place is polluted by the lies of the lawyers, because 'lawyers' means 'liars.'" I said this, and you know that the courts of justice are very organized places. Prabhupāda said, "Let’s do the kīrtana," and the disciples said, "But we are in a court of justice," and he said, "Kīrtana! All clean!" Then they started singing "Kṛṣṇa," and after 10 minutes, the judges... they were quite tense about it, and then it worried us. Now we have cleared the air. And so, knowing these things, we have the heavy and burdensome responsibility of bringing this message to the world. To do it, we first have to develop a taste, and therefore the doctor must first cure himself. Once we have developed a taste, we can go out into the streets. As the *ācāryas* teach this knowledge, Milan is the perfect city to do the *harināma*. I was walking and I was wondering why I am here as a tourist at the cathedral; I should do the *harināma*. I was saying all my disciples together with me in Milan—I thought, since I have a past as a book distributor, this is heaven for book distribution. I remembered Madhu-dviṣa Prabhu and two other prabhus who distributed books all in devotional clothes. He said, "It’s a beautiful community, yours; you have the most beautiful Deities, ISKCON, and so you can distribute these books."

So we must spread the holy name like this. And also, if you want to know what the manga means, you can ask, who is the personified something of it. Thank you. We are, because this is what Kṛṣṇa wrote, the original name of the Lord, and all other names are simply parts and particles of this original name of Kṛṣṇa. The original name of Kṛṣṇa is more powerful than any other name, and the result of chanting the holy names of the Lord is greater than chanting any other name of the Lord. So when we constantly recite this mantra, we may ask ourselves why we also have to appreciate the enormous fortune of having inherited this knowledge of these three names: Kṛṣṇa and Rāma. Sometimes we have to stop and think, "Wow, how blessed I have been." You know, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī wrote in this verse—another tattoo to be stamped on us—and it says, "Oh Lord, just like a miser continually collects, counts, and remembers his money, in the same way, let us please continually collect, count, and remember Your holy names." I have two and a half minutes left. Even though sometimes we devotees may feel depressed, down in the dumps, always remember: no matter what life throws at you, you can always remember all the fortunes you have received instead of complaining about what we don’t have. We must consider the wealth of what we have. What is the list of things we have that we are fortunate with? We can understand this from Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. He made a list of these fortunes that we have and wrote the *Manaḥ-śikṣā*. This list of these *ācāryas* is also our list of fortunate things, and so we conclude with this list: love for my spiritual master, the people of Vraja, the brāhmaṇas, the holy names, and the transcendental shelter. 

Here is the list of good fortunes that we have: "Oh mind, please cling to the lotus feet and pray for you. I cling to your lotus feet and I pray to you with these sweet words: please take away all the pride and develop within me the extraordinary love for my spiritual master, for Vraja-bhūmi, for the people of Vraja, for the Vaiṣṇavas, for the brāhmaṇas, for the Gāyatrī mantras, for the holy names, and for the transcendental shelter that is the eternal young couple of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa." My only hope lies in chanting His holy name, and it is recommended to constantly chant. We always hear people say "sing, sing, sing." It is also an instruction of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī: "Oh sādhu, if you cannot give up this world right away, which is like a dream, then day and night meditate on Vṛndāvana, worship Vṛndāvana, its King and Queen, and always chant their holy names." So, organize your existence so that it revolves around the Mahā-mantra. That means chanting holy names and sharing. This is the advice that Dāsa Gosvāmī gives in his commentary, the last tattoo I am talking about today. In the instructions of the *ācāryas*, there are two main instructions: develop a taste for the holy name and spread it throughout the world. We have been blessed to have this opportunity to spend these two days together chanting the holy name, and we will also have to take the responsibility of spreading this knowledge. We will go, and so it is true: we can save ourselves and we can also save the world. We must really believe it. This movement will save the world in its most darkest hours.""