Hare Krishna.

I have come to Bengal here in India on pilgrimage with twelve devotees to visit a very sacred place called Vishnapur. Vishnapur is a city here in Bengal, part of a greater area known as Vana Vishnapur. Vana means, of course, forest, like we have Vrindavan.

So, previously, this was a forested area, you could even say like a jungle. History goes way back. There was one king, forty-nine generations ago, who was given a beautiful deity of Krishna.

And that deity has been worshipped here for many generations. But around 450 years ago, the king of this city was King Viramitra. He was an interesting personality, ruled with an iron hand. When there were criminals and thieves in prison, he often sacrificed them to the Goddess Kali.

He would engage in human sacrifices. Other things he did as well, but we don't have time for that. But you can imagine what type of king he was. But interestingly enough, he was very attached to hearing Śrīmad Bhāgavatam. So one day his astrologer came to him and said, "Your royal highness, I can predict that very soon a very, very valuable treasure will be passing by our kingdom.

I recommend you send your soldiers and get that priceless treasure." So, it just so happened that Jiva Goswami in Vrindavan, he had a school. Many of you know, three very illustrious personalities graduated from that school: Narottam Das Thakur, Shrinivas Acharya, and Shyamananda Pandit.

So after educating them in the Bhakti-shastras, he requested them, as you could say, to repay the transcendental debt, to take the original books of the Goswamis to Bengal. Because at that time, in our Gaudiya history, Vaishnavas were living in Vrindavan, and Vaishnavas were living in Bengal because of the appearance of Śrī Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

So the Goswamis, they wrote their books in Vrindavan. So all the original copies, Bhakti-rasamrita-sindhu, Brihad-bhagavatamrita, etc., etc., Chaitanya-charitamrita, they were all written in Vrindavan, or they were there in Vrindavan. And Jiva Goswami wanted them sent here to Bengal to be copied for the pleasure of the devotees here.

So Shrinivas, Narottam, and Shyamananda, they came by bullock cart all the way across India. We were just passing. A bullock cart was moving very slow, so it took time. They stopped here. This is about 250 kilometers from Navadvip. They stopped for the night and they took rest under a tree.

And they all three fell asleep. And at that moment, at that time, the soldiers of King Viramitra, they came and stole the books. And you can imagine how these young men, these great devotees, how disturbed they were when they woke up and saw all the original books were gone.

They hadn't been copied yet. It was unbelievable how they were feeling. So they had to go and find them. But Shrinivas, who was the leader of the party, he said, "I will look for the books. I will find them." So he said, "Shyamananda, you go to Orissa, continue preaching.

And Narottam, you go to Kheturi, which is now, well, it's Bangladesh now, it was East Bengal, and you preach in your hometown there." To make a long story short, Shrinivas was searching. He came here to Vishnapur, to the kingdom of Viramitra, and he happened to come in the morning when King Viramitra was engaged in one of his most pleasurable activities, hearing Śrīmad Bhāgavatam.

But the speaker that day had a tinge of Mayavada philosophy when he was giving the Bhāgavatam class. Shrinivas Acharya arrived at that moment. He came in the hall and he heard this personality speaking with the tone. So he spoke up.

He said, "No, no, you are not correct. This is rascaldom. You are preaching impersonalist. Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, etc." He disrupted the whole meeting.

Such a strong devotee he was. So King Viramitra he said, "So you think you know more?" So very humbly, Shrinivas Acharya said, "Yes, I have the mercy of my gurus." So he said, "You speak." So Shrinivas Acharya got on the *vyasasana* and he gave a beautiful, very deep class on bhakti, on Braja-bhakti, completely defeating the Mayavada philosophy.

The king was so impressed by that one lecture. Just these few moments of association with the pure devotee, he got off his throne, he came and he paid full obeisances to Shrinivas Acharya. Not only that, at that very moment, he asked to be his disciple.

So some days later, Shrinivas Acharya initiated King Viramitra and his wife and his children. And as time went on, on the order of King Viramitra, who stopped the human sacrifices, by the way, the whole kingdom became Krishna conscious.

So King Viramitra so much adored his guru, Shrinivas Acharya, he wanted to serve him as best he could. So Shrinivas Acharya, he came up with the idea that we could turn Vishnapur, which was in many ways a holy place already, there were many temples, but into a Gaudiya Vaishnava city.

So Shrinivas Acharya and King Viramitra, they traveled all the way to Vrindavan. And there King Viramitra, under the guidance of Shrinivas Acharya, he was able to see what Vrindavan actually looked like on this earth, where the temples were, where the Yamuna was, where Giriraja, forest, etc.

He learned everything about Vrindavan with the idea that they would come back and establish Vrindavan here in Vishnapur. So that's what happened. Many of the temples you see in this video were established by King Viramitra or his descendants. And the original deity that the first king, forty-nine generations ago, who was worshipping, that's the main deity here.

And he's in an ancient temple. Actually, most of the temples over the last 450 years, the deities have been removed. Actually, I went to one home, descendants of the pujaris in those days, where many of those deities are being worshipped in that home.

But Madan Mohan, Shrimati Radhika Mohan, they are worshipping one of the original, most exquisite terra cotta. This is the material they use, terra cotta, um, temples. And King Viramitra established a very interesting policy. He built this huge temple with, you could say, many little altars, quite significant altar rooms.

And once a year, on Ras Purnima, he would invite all the deities in the city, in the surrounding areas, these ancient deities, to come and be worshipped in those individual temples in this big temple. I counted about 200 altars, maybe 300 altars in that one temple.

So during the Ras Purnima festival every year, which they were strictly following under the advice or the instructions of Shrinivas Acharya through time, all these deities would come into this one temple. Everyone's, all the different villages and towns, they'd have a four or five day festival.

Pilgrims would come and they could circumambulate all those deities in one day and see their worship. What a wonderful *rajarishi* we had before. *Rajarishi* means a saintly person sitting on the throne. He could administer, he could do what was necessary to provide the material necessities and government for a city.

But he was a saintly person. So King Viramitra was transformed by Shrinivas Acharya. So here we are visiting all these old temples, 500 years old, and the various deities and the saintly pujaris who are worshipping them. You feel the mood here.

It's a Gupta Vrindavan. It's actually a hidden Vrindavan. And as part of the bliss of being here, we're doing programs as well in the evening where people are gathering. Last night we had 2,000 people. Bengalis here are very pious.

The mood here is very, very, very sweet. I gave a lecture sharing with them how their culture, the culture of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, is being spread all over the world by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. And we had this rousing *kirtan* for 90 minutes.

It was amazing to be chanting and dancing with the people of Vishnapur and their surrounding areas. And we have another program tonight and the next night. We're combining preaching, a special opportunity to see these deities. I took *darshan* just the other day of the deities of Gaura-Nitai installed by Shrinivas Acharya himself.

My hair was almost standing on end, not due to ecstasy, but just excitement to have *darshan* of the very deities of Gaura-Nitai installed by Shrinivas Acharya. I prayed to them to be able to continue serving their mission, the mission of my spiritual master, Prabhupada, to empower me to be able to speak in such a way as to affect people's hearts and to keep me in their hearts.

We had *darshan* with Himavati Goswamini, who was the daughter of Shrinivas Acharya, a great devotee in our line. Her deities are Shrimati Radhika Raman. They're in the area here. We were actually just walking down the street and the pujari noticed us and asked us if we wanted to come in.

Those deities travel throughout the year to different homes, pious Bengali homes, or devotees' homes. They're ten days here, ten days there, ten days there. Somehow, by Krishna's arrangement, we walked by at the right time, and the pujari noticed, invited us.

And so we sat before the deities, and we prayed to her deities as well. So this is the real adventure, the adventure of Krishna consciousness, all by the mercy of my beloved spiritual master, Śrīla Haribol.