"*00550*.*
"Welcome back once again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We are continuing with our mini-series on "The Binding Rope of Spotless Love," and this will be part six. In part five, we concluded with Kṛṣṇa pulling down the twin Arjuna trees, thus freeing Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva from what you could say was the benevolent curse of Nārada Muni, and how Kṛṣṇa consoled his mother Yaśodā after she lamented for tying him up. We concluded with a really beautiful verse from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.11.34: *tadā yaśodā rohiṇyau...* "Thus, hearing about the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma with great pleasure, mother Yaśodā and Rohiṇī, so as not to be separated from Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma even for a moment, caught up with them on one bullock cart. In this situation, they all looked very beautiful." So, one might say that's the conclusion of Dāmodara-līlā, but it's actually not. One thing is very clear from studying the scriptures: this was not the end of Kṛṣṇa’s stealing butter pastimes. In Sanskrit, butter is called *mākhaṇa*. Kṛṣṇa’s fondness for stealing butter persisted; it actually persisted for as long as he was a small child. In his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.10.19, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes: "Kṛṣṇa is very famous amongst His pure devotees as *mākhaṇa-cora*, or the thief who steals butter. He used to steal butter from the houses of neighbors in Vṛndāvana in His early age. Since then," Prabhupāda writes, "He is famous as a thief."

His many ongoing pastimes of stealing butter are described in my research; I found *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* Canto 10, Chapter 8, along with Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s *Sārārtha-darśinī* commentary on that chapter. He describes many of Kṛṣṇa’s butter pastimes. Also, they are described in *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū* Chapter 5, *Gopāla-campū* (*Pūrva-campū*) Chapter 7, and I also found some in *Garga-saṁhitā*, Canto 1, Chapter 17. So, lots of butter pastimes! There is one very nice pastime in those scriptures where Mother Yaśodā actually tricked Kṛṣṇa into admitting he had stolen butter—that’s a good one. Catching child Kṛṣṇa eating butter one time, she said, "So Lālā, you have stolen it, haven't you?" But Kṛṣṇa initially professed his innocence, saying, "It couldn't have been me, Mother, for you sent me to Madhu-vana to herd the cows. I left early this morning and have just now returned in the setting sun. The cows and my friends are my witnesses; I’ve been away in Madhu-vana all day, how can you accuse me like this?" Then Kṛṣṇa started crying and he said, "I return tired and hungry, Māyā, and you call me a thief? How can you be so cruel? Am I no longer your son? If not, I will not live here any longer." So, we’re learning this *rasa* of parental love between mother and son. So, Yaśodā’s heart softened and she said—remember, this is a trick on her part—she said, "Lālā, perhaps I am mistaken; maybe the neighbors saw someone else. Let's see." Then she put her face in her palms like this, you know, to hide her—she put her face in her palms and she cried, "Oh my son, I can see now I was wrong. I am so sorry. You know, the neighbors complained; they swore upon their cows that you spent all day terrorizing their homes by breaking their yogurt pots, eating the contents, and sharing it all with monkeys. But I must have been wrong. How could I believe them? I must believe you." So, seeing his mother crying, Kṛṣṇa’s heart softened, and placing one hand on her arm, he pleaded, "Mother, don't cry, okay? I confess, I stole the butter, but please don't cry." So, at that point, she looked at her son through her fingers and she cried even louder, "Oh son, forgive me! Oh innocent one, I wrongly accused you. It’s as you say, you were in Madhu-vana, you couldn't have done it." So, now Kṛṣṇa is getting really emotionally squeezed, holding his mother’s arm; he’s crying, "You are not to blame, Māyā. I did do it, I did, please stop crying!" She replied, "No, you didn't, Lālā." Kṛṣṇa insisted, "Māyā, yes I did!" "No, you couldn't have done it, you said." I replied, it’s described, barely able to control her laughter, and once again Kṛṣṇa said, "Yes I did!" But now he detected something funny in his mother’s voice, and repeatedly tugging at her hands, he finally uncovered her—it’s described—radiant, smiling face, and he then realized she tricked him. So, then Mother looked at Kṛṣṇa with wide-open eyes and said once more, with a smile, "No, you didn't," and then laughing, she threw her arms around her son. She’s described covering his now-smiling, tear-stained face with kisses. This is really deep. *Vātsalya-rasa*, covering his now-smiling, tear-stained face with kisses. So, Kṛṣṇa, he affectionately stroked his mother’s hair, but still determined—not to be outdone, even after having been exposed as a thief—he kissed Yaśodā’s cheek and whispered in her ear, saying, "Yes, I did."

So now, there is another nice pastime described by Kavi Karṇapūra in *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū*, and I found that it’s also mentioned in verse form by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Padyāvalī*, text 142. And this pastime begins when Kṛṣṇa once reached into an open container full of butter, and while doing so, he saw his own reflection in a shiny marble column nearby. He kind of looked over and saw an own reflection, and now, thinking it to be another boy who had come upon the scene of his naughtiness, he blurted out, "Oh dear brother, if you don't tell my mother, I will share some of this butter with you. We can enjoy it together, but you must be quiet; otherwise, she might catch us." Now, overhearing Kṛṣṇa’s whispers from a nearby hiding place, Mother Yaśodā could barely keep from laughing out loud. Then, as if she were ignorant of what was going on, she innocently came before her son. The *ācāryas* say caught red-handed, Kṛṣṇa’s propensity to lie tried to rescue his propensity to steal. That’s really beautiful: Kṛṣṇa’s propensity to lie tried to conceal his—or try to rescue—his propensity to steal. Pointing to his own reflection, he said, "Mother, you’re just in time! This greedy boy came here to steal your butter, but I forbade him, but he ignored me. When I got angry with him, he also got angry with me." Then, shaking his head in a mischievous way with a sly smile on his lips, Kṛṣṇa went on, "He may be greedy for butter, Māyā, but I’m not greedy for butter, I sleep... last night. He may be—you see him? He’s greedy, but I’m not greedy for butter, so you have to chastise him."

Now, in another *Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū* chapter five, it’s described that when Kṛṣṇa was a little older—still a child, but a little older—Mother was doing some housework, and she hadn't seen or heard of Kṛṣṇa for some time, so she became a little worried. So, she stopped her household duties and she called out, "Lālā, where are you, darling? What are you doing?" Now, in fact, Kṛṣṇa was in the process of stealing some butter, *mākhaṇa*, from her storeroom of milk products. And, afraid that he would very quickly be caught, he just ran out to where Mother Yaśodā was, and raising his right hand with a worried look on his face, he said, "Māyā, my hand was burning from the heat caused by the ruby bangles you placed on my wrist! What an excuse—Māyā, my hand was burning from the heat caused by the ruby bangles you placed on my wrist, so I stuck it in a pot of butter to relieve the burning pain, to relieve that burning pain from the butter. But don't worry, Māyā, the pain’s not so bad now." So, Mother Yaśodā smiled and she said, "Oh dear, that sounds terrible, my dear son. Come sit on my lap at once and show me the burns on your hand." So, Kṛṣṇa came and sat on her lap, and Mother Yaśodā looked at Kṛṣṇa’s wrist, and kissing it, she said, "Oh, just see, yes, your wrist is burned, my poor baby! I will remove those ruby bangles so they will no longer give you any pain." Now, it’s interesting here, you know, we’re analyzing *vātsalya-rasa*, parental love. Generally, when Mother Yaśodā would catch Kṛṣṇa in the act of stealing, she would chastise him—as we know, during this month of Dāmodara, she chased him with a stick and tied him to a mortar—so generally, she would chastise him. But the *ācāryas* say actually not so much for the loss of butter, but rather to fulfill her parental duty of training him to be honest and law-abiding. I thought that was really interesting: not for the loss of butter, but to fulfill her parental duty of training him to be honest and law-abiding. That little thief, *mākhaṇa-cora*. But not wanting to make Kṛṣṇa feel bad that day, she said, "Oh son, our entire stock of butter, ghee, and yogurt are now all for you." So, at that point, Kṛṣṇa opened his eyes really wide and he broke into a broad smile, then he said, "Māyā, it’s all mine?" And Yaśodā replied, "Yes, dear, all of it." So, again, this is a rare instance where you could say Kṛṣṇa escaped the anger of his mother for his constant stealing of his favorite milk product, butter. Favorite milk... lots of milk products amongst the cowherds: yogurt, butter, cheese, but butter was always Kṛṣṇa’s favorite. As written, "May we always hear, speak about, and remember Kṛṣṇa’s stealing. It doesn't cause any distress; it just increases our love because He is so adorable." And that *ācārya* goes on, he writes, "Seeing a pot of butter in the distance, baby Keśava quickly crawled there, anxiously turning his face in all directions out of fear of his mother. I worship these childhood pastimes of the Lord. Hare Kṛṣṇa."

Okay, one last pastime—there are so many, unlimited actually—this is a very sweet one. And an *ācārya* has written that... how did he put it? Just as *ghī* on a fire feeds its flames, Kṛṣṇa’s stealing only intensified his desire for more butter, until he thought that anything that was of a yellow-white color, like the moon for instance, was made of butter. A full moon night, Mother Yaśodā was sitting outside chatting with some elderly Gopis, while Kṛṣṇa was playing nearby. And ever so often, you know, Kṛṣṇa had this propensity—he loved butter—so anything that was yellow-white, he was, like, looking at it. So he was looking at the moon with longing eyes. Now, wanting to make sure Kṛṣṇa was okay, Mother Yaśodā sent two of her servants to look after him. And as the ladies sat down next to him, they said, "Uh, what would you like, dear Kṛṣṇa? Would you like some condensed milk?" So Kṛṣṇa looked at them and he firmly cried, "No." So another Gopi said, "Then Lālā, would you like some nice creamy yogurt?" And again, Kṛṣṇa shook his head; he said, "No." And then the Gopi said, "How about some curd?" And as you can imagine, Kṛṣṇa’s answer was still, "No." So all those Gopis, it’s so sweet, in unison they said, "Then what do you want?" So Kṛṣṇa said emphatically, "I want freshly churned *mākhaṇa*, I want freshly churned butter." So you may remember in a previous lecture we mentioned that although there were always, you know, so many milk products in the home of Nanda and Yaśodā, Kṛṣṇa was interested only in consuming butter. And we explained, butter is described by the *ācāryas* as the *sāra*, the essence of yogurt, because in those days, ladies would churn the yogurt to get the butter. So butter is the *sāra*, essence of yogurt; therefore, in Vaidika cuisine, butter is often referred to as the essence of all taste. Now, Kṛṣṇa is the connoisseur of all *rasas*, so if butter is the essence of all taste, He loves that butter, for He is the king of enjoying. So, at this point, one of the Gopis said, "Then if you want butter, I will go into the house right now and bring you a whole tray of your mother’s most delicious..."

But Kṛṣṇa stopped her with another emphatic "No." So, confused, the Gopi said, "But whose butter do you want, then?" And Kṛṣṇa replied, "No one’s." Pointing to the moon, he added, "I want that butter," because the moon is, you know, yellow-white. So he’s this little child, and if he’s wanting butter, anything that’s yellow-white, he thinks it’s butter. He pointed to the moon, "I want that butter." So, naturally, all the Gopis laughed and they said, "Little boy, this is not churned butter, this is, um, well, this is actually a royal white swan." You know, they kind of trick him. "This is a royal white swan gliding across the lake of the sky." Oh my gosh, every lecture is so much poetry. What is the use of a bowman’s arrow unless it pierces the heart of his enemy? What is the use of poetry unless it pierces the heart and brings out transcendental emotions of *prema*, love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? But they said, "It’s a royal white swan gliding across the lake of the sky." But whatever it was, butter or not, Kṛṣṇa wanted that moon, so he said, "Then give me that royal swan, so I can play with it. Catch it quickly before it swims away!" Then working himself into a frenzy, Kṛṣṇa kicked his feet and shouted, "Get it, get it, now, now!" Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s tantrum—transcendental tantrum—some other Gopis came and they tried to pacify him. They said, "O child, do not cry. Those Gopis have told you a lie; that’s not a royal swan, but the moon in the sky. The moon is called Candra." So, undaunted, Kṛṣṇa replied, "Then give me that Candra so I can play with it! I want it now, right now, get it!" So by now, Kṛṣṇa’s, uh, what’s the word, antics, had become too much for the Gopis to handle, so they brought him to his Mother Yaśodā. And now Kṛṣṇa was crying; he wanted that moon, that Candra, that *mākhaṇa*. So, you know, he’s crying. And holding her crying son on her lap, Mother Yaśodā spoke very sweetly into his ear. She said, "My dear one, what you said at first was correct, that moon is actually freshly churned butter. But I cannot give it to you. The moon may look very tasty," she said, "but actually, it has deadly poisoned spots on it, so therefore, no one can eat it." So Kṛṣṇa calmed down and he said, "Māyā, why are there poison spots on the moon?" So Mother replied, "Lālā, you know there’s an ocean of milk in the universe..." Now, before she finished that sentence, Kṛṣṇa interrupted. She said, "There’s an ocean of milk in the universe," but she didn't finish because Kṛṣṇa interrupted and he said, "Māyā, how many cows does it take to get enough milk for an ocean?" Smart boy! "There’s an ocean of milk... how many cows does it take to make an ocean of milk?" So, Yaśodā just laughed and said, "Uh, Lālā, the milk ocean was not made by cows." So Kṛṣṇa looked into his mother’s eyes and he said, "Māyā, how can that be? How can there be milk without cows?"

So Yaśodā answered, "Lālā, the one who gave cows the ability to transform grass into milk can also make milk without cows." Nice discussion they’re having—"The one who gave cows the ability to transform grass into milk can also make milk without cows." So, at this point, you know, Little Kṛṣṇa seemed satisfied, but he was still curious, so he inquired, "Māyā, who’s that person?" So Yaśodā replied, "I have heard, I have heard, he is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They say he’s all-pervading, he’s invisible to material eyes, and therefore you and I, Lālā, cannot see him." Wow. So Kṛṣṇa again looked at his mother, this time with a slight smile, and he said, "Mother, is everything you’re telling me true?" So, rather than defend herself, it’s described, Mother cited scripture. Listen, she said, "Long, long ago, the demigods and the demons churned the ocean of milk. Mount Mandara was the churning rod, and the king of serpents, Vāsuki, was the churning rope." The demigods and demons pulled on the opposite ends of Vāsuki like a churning rope, and Kṛṣṇa spoke up. He said, he said, "Māyā, did they churn like you and the other ladies do when you’re making me *mākhaṇa*?" So Yaśodā replied, "Oh yes, but their churning, Lālā, produced a deadly poison." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Māyā, this is so interesting, isn’t it, Māyā? How can churning milk produce poison? I thought poison came from snakes." So Yaśodā, she sort of thought for a moment, she said, "Lālā, poison does come from snakes, but it came from milk first. Mahādeva drank the poison to save the universe. When some drops of the poison seeped through his fingers, the snakes drank it; that’s why they are now poisonous." So, at this point, Little Kṛṣṇa, he kind of shook his head in wonder, and Mother Yaśodā continued, "The moon was also born from the churning of the milk ocean, but it too was touched by drops of poison, which we now see as marks on the moon. Can you see them?" So Kṛṣṇa, innocently, he looked up at the moon, he said, "Māyā, I see them, I see them." So Mother Yaśodā concluded, "That is why we cannot eat butter from the moon; it’s poisonous. But, Lālā, we can eat Gokula butter—Gokula-dara—butter churned by me and my maidservants here. That we can eat. Now please, take my freshly churned butter instead of the moon." So Kṛṣṇa nodded in agreement, but he immediately... it had been a long discussion... he immediately started falling asleep. He actually yawned to show that he was very sleepy. So right at that moment, Mother Yaśodā carried Kṛṣṇa into the palace, and even before she could lay him down on the bed in his room, he’d already fallen fast asleep in her arms. And what was he doing? The *ācāryas* say he was dreaming about an ocean of milk. I wish I could dream like that, I know. He should have helped! So, the next morning—we’re going to Vṛndāvana-devī, ours—the next morning, Mother Yaśodā... oh yeah, she woke up Kṛṣṇa with a tray full of butter, yogurt, and other treats, saying, "Lālā, you just take what you like."

He crossed his arms like that and he looked at his mother and he said, "I will not eat anything. Last night I was hungry, but instead of feeding me, you put me to sleep with the story about poison on the moon. I was hungry all night, so why should I eat your food now?" So Mother Yaśodā put the tray down and she replied with a smile, "If you were hungry all night, who stole the butter from the storeroom last night? Who stole the butter from the storeroom last night?" So, understanding that his theft had—I could just say—been discovered, and that his false accusation had been exposed, Kṛṣṇa, he looked away, unable to look at Mother Yaśodā. Then he turned around and he leapt on her, and he threw his arms around her neck. The *ācāryas* say that Kṛṣṇa embraced his mother as she lovingly held his butter-soft body of condensed bliss. Here we go, turning the *bhakti* in the heart: Kṛṣṇa embraced his mother as she lovingly held his butter-soft body of condensed bliss. Someone may ask, "Who is Kṛṣṇa? He’s a butter-soft body of condensed bliss, what?" And she laughed as he whispered in her ear, "Māyā, I never steal butter, especially not yours."

So one devotee has written: "Oh Gopāla, all your pastimes are sweet, but your *mākhaṇa-cora* pastimes are especially relishable due to the buttery fingerprints you leave on them. After stealing your mother’s freshly churned butter, may that Divine form of yours that thrills at the sound of the churning rod and steadily enters Mother Yaśodā’s kitchen to steal a handful of fresh butter protect us all at all times." Prabhus, this is just nectar and Kṛṣṇa’s *bhakti* pastimes, *mākhaṇa-cora* pastimes. Just thank you so much for giving me this opportunity to share these pastimes as we find them in the scriptures I mentioned earlier about our great *ācāryas*. So we’ll finish here, and, um, let’s see, I’ll do some more research if there’s more pastimes connected to Dāmodara. It’s almost over, we’ll see. I’ll see you next Friday. So thank you for watching. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

*Brahma-mātṛ-rādha-bhaktam*, back to Godhead.

All glories to the Vṛndāvana-dhāma.""