"*00408*.*
"Hari Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda. We are continuing with our series on Lord Kṛṣṇa’s rasa dance with the gopīs of Vṛndāvana. As we mentioned several times, it is a deep subject matter to be approached cautiously under the guidance of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas. But we must also remember the words of Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who, while describing the rasa dance in the 10th Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, clearly says that by hearing the transcendental nature of the rāsa-līlā, one can quickly become sober and conquer lust, the disease of the heart.

Such kathā is, therefore, a most valuable possession, like a rare jewel. You could say this kathā is a priceless ornament. The great medieval commentator Śrīdhara Svāmī writes very beautifully, "For expressing good fortune, a chaste lady wears the mark of kuṅkuma on her forehead, indicating that she is happily married. What need is there of any other ornaments? Similarly, the sole ornament of my good fortune is the Lord present in the tilaka on the forehead of my words while reciting His glories. What need is there of any other?"

So beautiful. In our last lecture, we concluded with the final verse of the gopīs' song, the famous *Gopī-gītā*. You may remember that as soon as the gopīs finished singing, Kṛṣṇa could no longer resist their desire to be with Him again, and He came out of hiding. He came out of His hiding place in the forest, down by the banks of the Yamunā at Govinda-ghāṭ, where He had been listening to their most perfect prema-saṅkīrtana. We described that in the last class; the gopīs' singing was the most perfect prema-saṅkīrtana. As He appeared before the gopīs—out of humility, Kṛṣṇa wrapped His golden upper cloth around His neck. The ācāryas say that, "Ashamed for having abandoned those who love Him most, He stood before the gopīs with a bashful look on His face."

Now, the gopī Bhadrā was the first to see Kṛṣṇa coming out of His hiding place, and as she saw Him, she just spontaneously called out, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa!" and then she fell silent. Hearing His name, the other gopīs looked around and they saw Kṛṣṇa standing before them. Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes Him in a very special form—meaning that form who bewilders Cupid. In this way, Kṛṣṇa fully displayed His most enchanting sweetness to make the gopīs forget their sorrow. When the gopīs came forward to welcome Him, there is a description of how each of them individually related to Kṛṣṇa. It is described that Candrāvalī held Kṛṣṇa’s hand; Śyāmā put His arm on her shoulder; Padmā accepted the Lord’s chewed betel nut; Śaibyā placed His feet on her body; and Rādhārāṇī is described as biting her lips in anger, frowning at Him because He had abandoned her—He left her from the rasa dance and then He abandoned her, so she was upset. Lalitā-sakhī drank in His sweetness with her eyes, and Viśākhā-sakhī took the image of Kṛṣṇa into her heart and continuously embraced Him there.

Then Kṛṣṇa took all the gopīs with Him to a place down by the Yamunā River which He thought would be best suited for the rasa dance, and there He indicated that they should all sit down in the soft sand—"You know, we’re going to do the rasa dance again, so just sit down now in the soft sand." At that point, each and every gopī made a seat for Kṛṣṇa with their kuṅkuma-stained veils—it is described from their heads—and Kṛṣṇa, who is the master of all mystic powers, expanded Himself into as many forms as there were seats provided by the gopīs and He sat on all of them at once.

But by His mystic potency, each gopī thought that Kṛṣṇa was only sitting with her. Actually, He sat on every single veil, every single seat, but each gopī thought, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa’s only with me." Now, each of these gopīs worshipped Kṛṣṇa with three things: it’s described they worshipped Kṛṣṇa with their smiles, they worshipped Kṛṣṇa with their glances, and they worshipped Kṛṣṇa with betel nuts. That’s so interesting. But the ācāryas say that while doing so, they harbored a slight anger towards Him for having treated them so unkindly by leaving the rasa dance, and they all wondered if He really loved them. At that point—it’s a famous part of the *Bhāgavatam*—they began questioning Kṛṣṇa about the dealings between lovers. They said, "Kṛṣṇa, please tell us about the following types of lovers: those who reciprocate affection, those who show affection to everyone, and those who do not show affection to anyone."

Kṛṣṇa then replied; He actually analyzes these three categories of lovers, but He concludes that He Himself always, without exception, reciprocates the love of those who love Him. But to explain why He had left the gopīs during the rasa dance, He said—and I will quote here—"But the reason I do not immediately reciprocate the affection of living beings, even when they worship Me, O gopīs, is that I want to intensify their loving devotion. They then become like a poor man who has gained some wealth and then lost it, and who thus becomes anxious about it and can think of nothing else."

Then Kṛṣṇa, to acknowledge their exceptional love for Him, spoke one of the most famous verses found in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava literature. It’s so famous, and I will quote: "My dear gopīs, I am not able to repay My debt for your spotless service, even within a lifetime of Brahmā. Your connection with Me is beyond reproach. You have worshipped Me, cutting off all domestic ties, which are difficult to break. Therefore, please let your own glorious deeds be your compensation." The ācāryas say that hearing these loving words of Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs were satisfied. They were satisfied that yes, He does love them; He loves them more than anyone has ever been loved before. And they also appreciated that by dealing with them in the way He had, He had revealed the unique and special love of His eternal consort, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. When He left the rasa dance, He took her, and when they saw her later abandoned by Him, they could see how deep was her separation from Kṛṣṇa. So through the whole pastime, Kṛṣṇa had revealed the unique and special love that His eternal consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, had for Him.

With this done, this conversation is over in the *Bhāgavatam*. It was time for the rasa dance to continue. Now, the Āgama scriptures—that’s a certain portion of the Vedas—say that there were actually 3 billion gopīs at the rasa dance, and amongst them 16,000 were prominent, and out of them 1,000 were more prominent, and out of them eight were most prominent. And of these eight, Rādhārāṇī and Candrāvalī were the best, and of these two, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is accepted by the scriptures, by the saints, and by the gopīs themselves as the foremost consort of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This particular rasa dance—because we have mentioned before there are different types of rasa dances at different times of the year in different places—was comprised of a large circle of gopīs with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the center.

However, our ācāryas differ as to how Kṛṣṇa later appeared between the gopīs, how He manifested Himself, and in how many forms He did manifest Himself. Those three things the ācāryas differ on; there are different opinions and different visions. Regarding Kṛṣṇa appearing between the gopīs, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself into many forms. So Prabhupāda says, and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes, "One Kṛṣṇa moved rapidly amongst the gopīs." Whatever the case, by Yogamāyā’s influence, each gopī thought Kṛṣṇa was by her side alone. Now regarding how many forms Kṛṣṇa assumed, Śrīla Prabhupāda says that Lord Kṛṣṇa "placed His hands on the shoulders of the gopīs on both sides of Him." Now, if you think about it, this could mean one of two things: number one, that Kṛṣṇa danced with each pair of gopīs, or Kṛṣṇa was alone with each gopī. But again, from the gopīs' point of view, Kṛṣṇa was with each of them.

So, pointing to the vast expanse of beach along the Yamunā River, Kṛṣṇa then said to the 3 billion gopīs, "Although you are many, can you please make a circle upon this beautiful dancing stage?" But the ācāryas say it’s really interesting that the gopīs were afraid that by doing as Kṛṣṇa asked, they would again be separated from Him. So they said, "But Kṛṣṇa, if we stand in a circle, we will be too far from You and we will lose our enthusiasm for this dance festival that You have arranged." Wanting to encourage them, Kṛṣṇa said, "Don't worry, girls. As I stand at the center of the circle with Rādhā, I will also stand beside each of you." Now, those words convinced the gopīs, and joining hands, they formed a circle.

Now, the *Kṛṣṇa* book, which is the first book that actually introduced us to the rasa dance and *rāsa-līlā* very early in the movement, we read that when Kṛṣṇa first called these gopīs into the forest with His veṇu, with His flute, you may remember in their haste many of them came improperly dressed. They just were so eager to come; they just put their clothes on in different, assorted ways. And as the pastime unfolded, as they were dancing and then Kṛṣṇa left and they looked for Him, it’s described their clothes became further disheveled. So at this point, I read: Yogamāyā invisibly dressed and ornamented each gopī with fresh clothes, garlands, and ornaments. I thought that was amazing. Yogamāyā invisibly, she dressed and ornamented each gopī with fresh clothes, garlands, and ornaments. The ācāryas say that when Kṛṣṇa noticed the gopīs' fresh appearance—they had changed so quickly from what He saw before—He couldn't understand what happened. All of a sudden, within a moment, their clothes were changed, they had new ornaments. So Kṛṣṇa was like, "What happened?" The ācāryas conclude, "Such is Yogamāyā’s expertise! Such is Yogamāyā’s expertise." Pourṇamāsī, Yogamāyā—she is arranging all these wonderful pastimes in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

As news of the rasa dance spread throughout the universe, the demigods and their wives crowded the skies over Vṛndāvana in their airplanes to watch the rasa dance. They are hovering above in their flower airplanes to watch the rasa dance. But the śāstra makes a very interesting observation at this point. It says that because the demigods are in the mood of servitorship for the most part, and not above the modes of material nature, their ability to see the rasa dance was limited. What does that mean? It means they could only see Kṛṣṇa dancing. But it goes on to say that the demigods' wives, their mood is a little different than servitorship. The males are thinking of services, which is fine, but they can’t see anything but Kṛṣṇa dancing. But their wives, desiring to serve Kṛṣṇa in an amorous mood, a loving mood, they not only saw His dancing but they also saw His loving exchanges with the gopīs. The ācāryas comment on that, and they conclude that the demigods' wives were more privileged than their husbands—more privileged than their husbands.

At the start of the rasa dance, the gopīs showed that they had indeed accepted Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as their superior. How so? By encouraging her to stand beside Kṛṣṇa at the center of their circle at the beginning of the dance. As this divine dance began, various gopīs began to play musical instruments as well. They were accompanied by Gandharvas and Apsarās from heavenly planets who also joined in with their instruments. Some of the instruments the gopīs played were made by Vṛndā-devī: she made a tambura for Rādhārāṇī, she made a vīṇā for Lalitā, a sarangi for Sudevī, and a santur for Indulekhā. As Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs danced together, the gopīs' earrings swayed, flowers fell from their hair, and their ankle bells chimed. As the tempo increased, I was reading, the gopīs also displayed various hand gestures, let us say *mudrās*, by which they expressed the mood of their hearts. That sounds nice; their different *mudrās* expressed the mood of their hearts.

In his commentaries on this rasa dance, Kavi Karṇapūra lists—he actually lists—12 hand gestures used by the gopīs. For example, hand gestures such as the flag (*patākā*), the swan’s head (*haṁsa-mastaka*), the lotus bud (*padmakośa*), and the half moon (*ardha-candra*), just to name a few. As the dance continued—it’s so fascinating, this Kṛṣṇa is topmost, we have so many details by Prabhupāda’s mercy and by our ācāryas' mercy—as the dance continued, Viśākhā-sakhī impressed Kṛṣṇa with her melodious tunes, or melodious melodies. And I read that when Lalitā repeated the same melodies—Viśākhā’s melodies—but even in a more wonderful way, Kṛṣṇa called out to both of them in appreciation, "Very nice, very nice! You have done well." In these and many other ways, Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs enjoyed each other’s company. As Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs danced, the sound of those tinkling anklets and ornaments were heard by the demigods, who as a result then gave up their habit of drinking heavenly nectar, *somarasa*. Just to hear the tinkling of the ankle bells of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs, they renounced—they were very attached to this heavenly nectar *somarasa*—but in preference to Kṛṣṇa and His pastimes and His service, they gave up drinking that heavenly nectar.

The ācāryas say that the sight of dark-hued Kṛṣṇa moving amongst fair-complexioned gopīs resembled a dark cloud passing through moonlight. Or they say a sapphire bead spinning on a golden loop. The pairs of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs in the one large circle soon formed many concentric circles, and those circles expanded or transformed into many smaller circles that all moved around Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the center. After some time, Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs became tired—actually, it’s described they became exhausted—and the rasa dance came to an end. To cool themselves down, everyone headed towards the refreshing waters of the Yamunā River, and I was reading they were followed by swarms of bees singing Kṛṣṇa’s glories. Can you imagine? Swarms of bees singing Kṛṣṇa’s glories! After they had their *jala-keli*—*keli* means playful, *jala* means water—after Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs had their playful time in the water, they all returned to the shore where everyone changed and dressed into fresh clothes. Then, until the first light of dawn, they strolled through moonlit gardens, they drank honey wine, and they enjoyed a picnic on the Yamunā’s sandy banks. Finally, as the light of dawn became more prevalent, Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs all returned to their respective homes.

By human calculation, this *śāradīya-rāsa-līlā*—this is the specific rasa-līlā we’ve been discussing over the series—by human calculation, this *śāradīya-rāsa-līlā* lasted only one night. However, by the inconceivable power of Kṛṣṇa’s pastime potency, a thousand ages, or a night of Lord Brahmā, had miraculously passed. We read that in the *Kṛṣṇa* book; I remember very well. It actually took place at night; the whole pastime took place during the night of Lord Brahmā. An interesting point also is that this rasa dance, which happened on the full moon night of Kārttika—you remember, I was reading—it actually continued every single night thereafter until Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā. I was just like, "Whoa!" It took place on the full moon night of Kārttika, but ācāryas say that it continued every night thereafter until Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā. And you can imagine, we can get an idea, an appreciation of how much separation the gopīs were feeling as a result when Kṛṣṇa left. One ācārya says that the *śāradīya* rasa dance began at Vaṁśīvaṭa and it ended at Nidhuvana; he says it continues eternally in the hearts of those devotees who covet the treasure of the gopīs' pure service to Kṛṣṇa. It continues eternally in the hearts of those devotees who covet the treasure of the gopīs' pure service, their seva to Kṛṣṇa. Harē Kṛṣṇa!

Now, sometimes it is that unscrupulous persons question Kṛṣṇa’s dancing with young girls at night in the forest in the moonlight. To dispel such doubts, our Śukadeva Gosvāmī in *Bhāgavatam* compares Kṛṣṇa to a child playing with his own reflection. The Sanskrit is for, in reality, the gopīs are all expansions of His own body in the form of His pleasure potency. Like we speak of Rādhārāṇī, the foremost of the gopīs; she is *hlādinī-śakti*, she is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure potency, and all these gopīs are expansions of her. So His interactions with them are, therefore, likened to—the ācāryas say—a boy playing with his own shadow. What’s the harm? And again, as Śukadeva Gosvāmī pointed out, if Kṛṣṇa or His pastimes have any touch of lust, or if they are to be seen as immoral, then how is it that when we hear of them, we become freed from lust?

The great commentator Śrīdhara Svāmī writes in a similar way. I was reading his poetry; he says, "Do you think that by hearing these pastimes you will get contaminated, you will become irreligious? You think so?" Then he says, "You carefully hear what I’m saying, oh doubtful soul. If the Supreme Lord’s activities consist of *adharma*, then how is it that these acts purify the sins of those who listen to them?" Very similar. And furthermore, he challenges those who think that Kṛṣṇa, who we know is transcendental to the world of matter, can in any way become contaminated by matter. He writes as follows: "A fool may ask, 'Does the Ganges River become contaminated by impure water? Do the rays of the moon, who is the king amongst the twice-born, become impure by touching the śūdras? Does agni—fire—become contaminated when burning up rejected foodstuffs? Does the sun absorb foul substances?' He goes on, "A person who asks such foolish questions is free to do so, but when he questions the Lord’s pastimes, it’s understood he’s a great fool and should never raise such doubts." Alright, Kṛṣṇa.

Now, one last point. A question may arise: that if all the gopīs in the rasa dance that we described are expansions of Kṛṣṇa’s own body, as described by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, how then will an aspiring devotee, a *sādhaka* in this world, ever join the rasa dance in the spiritual world? Because we are *jīva-tattvas*. The answer is that the gopīs mentioned are *nitya-siddhas*; they are eternally liberated. They actually belong to the *śakti-tattva* category. But a jīva soul, a jīva who by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His followers, a jīva soul who takes to and perfects it—it’ll take some time, *vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ*—who takes to and perfects Kṛṣṇa consciousness while in this world, such a jīva can also one day join the rasa dance in the spiritual world. And once we get back to Godhead, technically we’re also considered *nitya-siddhas*, eternally liberated—although we came here for whatever reason, when you get back, you’re also considered eternally liberated. It’s interesting.

So, we can join the rasa dance one day, and this is one reason that Kṛṣṇa comes to this world and shows the *rāsa-līlā* to the fallen conditioned souls, to entice us back home, back to the spiritual world. Either by seeing or hearing about this *rāsa-līlā*—as we’ve attempted to do over the last few weeks, and which we should continue to do as time goes on—a conditioned soul can become inspired to take up the process of devotional service. Kṛṣṇa has this transcendental road show, for want of a better word; He brings it here, He shows us, and by seeing it we become inspired. Just like—probably not the best analogy—someone goes to a movie, there’s a particular theme, particular heroes; he comes out thinking, "I want to be like that, I want to do that." So Kṛṣṇa comes and He displays His pastimes in Gokula Vṛndāvana, and we didn’t see them, but hearing is just as good in many ways.

So this is our good fortune. We can hear about this *rāsa-līlā* and become inspired to become serious about the practices of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We may be far from the goal, but that’s okay, at least we’re going in the right way. We may be going slowly in the right direction; someone else is going very fast in the wrong direction towards material enjoyment, but we’re properly situated. As Prabhupāda often said, and Confucius said, the longest journey begins with the first step. So our first steps are to accept the regulative principles of devotional service, to chant the *yuga-dharma*, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra—Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare—and live in the association of devotees and take up some service. Like Prabhupāda wrote to me one time, in one letter, he said that I should always follow in the footsteps of advanced devotees. So if we live in the association of devotees and we practice the simple process as Caitanya Mahāprabhu has introduced it and Śrīla Prabhupāda specifically has given us, we can one day attain that highest goal. Such is the power of hearing and chanting these pastimes, this pastime, the rasa dance. One day we can dance with Kṛṣṇa.

So we’ll finish today with Śrīla Prabhupāda’s words from a lecture that he gave at the Māyāpur festival in 1974. Very beautiful, and I quote His Divine Grace: "Those who come to Vṛndāvana should try to understand Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa exhibits His *līlā* here personally so that you may hear about Him and become attracted. 'Oh, how can I go and play with Kṛṣṇa? How can I go and dance with Kṛṣṇa? How can I develop parental affection for Kṛṣṇa? How can I become a tree or a blade of grass in Vṛndāvana so that Kṛṣṇa may trample over me?' This is called *kṛṣṇa-prema*. Kṛṣṇa demonstrates His activities to give facility to the conditioned soul. This is Kṛṣṇa’s business. 'Why don’t you come back to Me and dance with Me? Why are you rotting in this rotting dance, mundane dance? You want association, you want sporting? Why don’t you come to Me and take part in My sporting with the cowherd boys?' This is the invitation of Kṛṣṇa. So anyone with intelligence will try to enter into the transcendental pastimes of the Lord." All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

It’s only by your grace we can do that. We’re simply running behind you, shouting, "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" Thank you, Prabhupāda, and thank you, devotees. This finishes our series on the rasa dance, and we will find another transcendental subject matter to discuss in the next couple of days and be back with you again through transcendental sound vibration in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Thank you so much for taking all the fallen conditioned souls with this—Jaya Gopināth! Jaya Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa! Thank you.""