"*00529*.*
"Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We are continuing with our mini-series on Dāmodara-līlā, entitled "The Binding Rope of Spotless Love," and this will be part three. This simple process of hearing and chanting, as we are doing in this series, will no doubt one day bring us to the advanced stage of fully surrendering to Kṛṣṇa. Last night, I was listening to a lecture of Śrīla Prabhupāda on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.8.22; he was giving it in Los Angeles on April 14, 1973, and he was speaking on that famous verse. He summarized it in a very nice way; he said, and I quote: "Simply by hearing and chanting, remembrance of Kṛṣṇa will automatically come. Then you will engage in worshiping Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. After that, you will engage in temple worship, and then naturally you offer prayers. Then you engage yourself as a servant, then you will become a friend of Kṛṣṇa, and finally, you will surrender everything to Kṛṣṇa. This is the process." So this is what we are doing here today, and have been for the last three years. We are just hearing and chanting, hoping that one day we will finally surrender everything to Kṛṣṇa.

We concluded our last lecture, part two, with Mother Yaśodā finally catching her son, Dāmodara, who had run away from their home after breaking so many butter pots. You remember, Kṛṣṇa was upset with His mother because she had left Him alone after seeing some milk boiling over on the kitchen stove. Of course, as we have explained many times in this series, no one is capable of capturing, what to speak of binding up, the Supreme Lord. But Kṛṣṇa allowed Himself to be captured and bound by what? By *bhakti*. The love of Mother Yaśodā is so powerful, and that is actually possible for every devotee; we can also capture and bind Kṛṣṇa up with that love that is very deep within our hearts. Kṛṣṇa encourages us in *Bhagavad-gītā*; He says in that famous verse: "For one who always remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain." I am easy to obtain, O son of Pṛthā, because of his constant engagement in devotional service. Now, our Vaiṣṇava commentator in the series says at this point, Kṛṣṇa wanted to make this very clear. He writes, "Kṛṣṇa was thinking: 'If people, especially devotees, do not work for My pleasure and instead become busy simply in acquiring some small material benefit which they will ultimately lose, I run away and stay far away from them. To those, however, who quickly start coming back to Me, I become easily captured by them with every step they take towards Me.'" Thank you, Kṛṣṇa. 

Now, Lord Dāmodara’s reaction upon finally being caught was to cry. He just started crying, and Śrīla Prabhupāda describes this childish phenomenon in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter 9, as follows: he writes, "Kṛṣṇa smeared His hands over His eyes, which were anointed with black eye cosmetics. The child saw His mother's face while she stood over Him, and His eyes became restless from fear. Mother Yaśodā could understand that Kṛṣṇa was unnecessarily afraid, and for His benefit, she wanted to allay His fears. Being the topmost well-wisher of her child, Mother Yaśodā thought, 'If this child is too fearful of Me, I don't know what will happen to Him.'" Mother Yaśodā then threw away her stick because that is what Kṛṣṇa was afraid of. So here, Śrī Hari Sūri gives a very interesting perspective as to why Kṛṣṇa was crying. He writes, "Kṛṣṇa was thinking: 'These two eyes of mine are the sun and the moon. The sun and the moon are the founders of the two prestigious family lineages in which I have appeared; they are My ancestors. However, the reputation is now being tarnished in the form of this *kajal* spreading everywhere around them. How can I tolerate seeing the reputation being tarnished like this?' Thinking in this way, the Supreme Lord rubbed His eyes using His own hands." A very interesting perspective.

So at this point, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, in his *Gopāla-campū*, describes a humorous conversation that took place at this moment between Mother Yaśodā and Dāmodara. He says that Mother Yaśodā asked Kṛṣṇa questions regarding this entire incident—you know, of His breaking the pots and stealing the butter and feeding it to the monkeys—and in this question-and-answer session, he says that although Kṛṣṇa is the Absolute Truth, He wanted to lie to His mother. He respectfully describes these lies as "True Lies." I never heard that before! What is a "True Lie"? Well, because although He is lying, at the same time, what He is going to say is true. Mother Yaśodā asked, "Who broke the pots?" Kṛṣṇa replied, "It was a punishment given directly by the Supreme Lord." Mother Yaśodā asked, "Is that so? And who is feeding the monkeys?" Kṛṣṇa said, "He who has created all the monkeys in the world is also responsible for feeding them all." So all these statements are "true lies." He didn't admit to being naughty; He denied it, so He was lying, but at the same time, what He said was absolute truth. For example, He said, "It was a punishment given directly by the Supreme Lord"—okay, it's true! "And who was feeding the monkeys? He who has created all the monkeys in the world is also responsible for feeding them all"—that is Him! But He didn't admit it directly. So now we have a new concept here. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so wonderful; there are so many aspects we can study and discover. Now we know what is a "True Lie." Śrī Hari Sūri says that naughty Kṛṣṇa often speaks, or spoke, half-truths/half-lies, and then he says nobody should blame Him for doing so. He gives another perspective here: he says *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 7.11.18 states that the livelihood of a *vaṇijya*, meaning a merchant, is described as *satya-anṛta-bhyām*. A combination of *satya* (truth) and *anṛta* (falsities). A merchant's life is full of truth and falsities, because he says no merchant can make a profit if he speaks the honest truth all the time. You go to the store and they say, "I am making a special price for you." Oh, yes, thank you so much! So the *vaiśya* has to lie a little bit to each and every customer so he can make a living. Therefore, speaking half-truths/half-lies is allowed for *vaiśyas*, and Hari Sūri says Kṛṣṇa was born in a *vaiśya* family; therefore, He is not at fault for so expertly personifying the characteristics of *vaiśyas* described in *śāstra*.

Of course, let us remember that all of Kṛṣṇa’s qualities are transcendental; they don't have the inebrieties of qualities in the material world. Thus, His lying is not like lying in this world. Lying in this world only brings grief, but Kṛṣṇa’s naughty *keli*, His playful lying, awakens love for Him in the hearts of His devotees who are in the mood of *vātsalya-rasa*. "Oh, how cute! He's always so cute like this." Everything in the spiritual world, everything in Goloka Vṛndāvana in particular, is an impetus for love for Kṛṣṇa. Love reigns supreme. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes to confirm this; he writes in his purport of *Bhāgavatam* 10.8.35: "Kṛṣṇa presented Himself as an innocent child to increase the transcendental ecstasy of maternal affection." *Tādānubhayām itī uktir vātsalye rasaḥ*—this means that sometimes a small child speaks lies; for example, he may have stolen something, Prabhupāda writes, or eaten something and yet denied that he has done so. We ordinarily see this in the material world, but in relation to Kṛṣṇa, it's different. Such activities were meant to endow the devotee with transcendental ecstasy. Now, a new devotee may have difficulty understanding that, but as one advances in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and better understands the transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa and His Vṛndāvana-līlā, I thought it was understandable; it's relishable.

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī then continues describing in *Gopāla-campū* that the conversation at this point got a little heated. He says, quote: "Mother Yaśodā chastised Kṛṣṇa by saying, 'You indeed are the king of all thieves.'" Śrī Jīva says that Kṛṣṇa’s ego got hurt, so He replied, "Mā, don't call Me a thief! Thieves may have been born in your families, your father's family lineage, but not mine!" So in this way, there is this *vātsalya-rasa*—it is kind of arguing between mom and child. So then Mother Yaśodā said in a very angry tone to Kṛṣṇa, "Ray ray! Vāco-yukti-satama! Hey you and your son, hey you, Mr. Expert in giving false arguments! Mr. Greatest of all thieves! Even though you were born in the family of the greatest soul named Nanda, you have befriended the monkeys and you behave exactly like one. You little monkey!" But Kṛṣṇa was in no mood to back down. According to *Gopāla-campū*, He said, "All right then, Mā, I will run away to the forest and live with the monkeys!" So at this point, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that Mother Yaśodā got really concerned. She thought that maybe her foolish child would really try to run away. She believed that because she had many duties to attend to and she couldn't take the risk of leaving Kṛṣṇa unattended, she decided to tie Him up until He cooled down. Śrīla Prabhupāda describes this as follows in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter 9: "Mother Yaśodā could understand that Kṛṣṇa was unnecessarily afraid, and for His benefit she wanted to allay His fears. Being the topmost well-wisher of her child, she thought, 'If the child is too fearful of Me, I don't know what will happen to Him.' Then her stick was gone. So in order to punish Him, she thought to bind His hands with some ropes."

So at this point, as we all know, it is famous: Mother Yaśodā started binding Kṛṣṇa to a grinding mortar. A grinding mortar means, you know, where the ladies would grind spices. I was reading in our Gosvāmī literature, they say sometimes the question is raised: why did Mother Yaśodā bind Him to a grinding mortar? It's a good question, because we've heard the glories of Nanda-grāma, Nanda Mahārāja’s palace; there were thousands of beautiful pillars in his palace. So there's so many pillars, you know—why tie Him to a mortar, to a grinding stone? So at this point, enters our Divine commentator, Śrī Hari Sūri. He gives a brilliant answer. He says, "This one, Kṛṣṇa, is directly a thief, and this other one, the grinding mortar, is a direct accomplice of the thief. Since it assisted the main thief, Kṛṣṇa, thinking in this way, Mother Yaśodā tied both thieves to each other." Kṛṣṇa is a thief, okay, but the mortar is implicated because it is an accomplice—it is an accomplice because, you know, it is participating in this pastime. So since this grinding mortar assisted the main thief, the two were tied together—two thieves to each other. Interesting perspective. Now as we all know, this famous pastime, the pastime of this month of Kārtika, when Mother Yaśodā tried tying Kṛṣṇa up, there rose a big problem. 

This problem is described in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.9.13: "He has no *antar* (inside) nor *bahir* (outside), no front and no rear; he himself is in front, behind, inside, and outside of everything in the universe. In fact, He is the universe." Pretty hard to tie somebody up like that! This was *Bhāgavatam* 10.9.13. He who has no *antar* inside and no *bahir* outside, no front and no rear; He Himself is in front, behind, inside, and outside of everything in the universe. In fact, He is the universe. One philosophical way of describing Kṛṣṇa. So I found here, he gives a very brilliant commentary. Now it is quite philosophical, so you know, we have to perk up—like Prabhupāda said, "sit properly"—and we are all ears here, because it gets a little philosophical, but it is so nice what Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī says. He says, "An object gets bound when it is surrounded by a rope from all sides. Objects which are limited in size and which have a front and rear can be bound holding a rope on one side of the object and completely circumambulating the rope around the object." And he clarifies that by saying, "An object which is more pervasive can bind an object which is less pervasive. For example, he says, a big vessel is more pervasive than a small cup, and so a big vessel can easily cover and bind the movement of a small cup. However, the opposite is true in the case of Kṛṣṇa. The rope cannot pervade itself around Him because it is He who is pervading the rope from all sides. Kṛṣṇa, if He pervades the rope from all sides, He Himself has bound the rope from all directions. He Himself has bound the rope; He is present everywhere. He has bound the rope from all directions, so how can the rope bind Him?" He says that the rope is nothing but a part of His own, Kṛṣṇa’s, all-pervasive existence. In this way, He is the rope. I told you it is very deep, it is subtle, but it is true! "In this way, He is the rope. Thus, for Him to be bound by the rope would mean that He has to get bound by His own self." And Jīva Gosvāmī says this, in most cases, is impossible. He writes, "Can fire get burnt by its own flame? Certainly not." So he concludes, "How can the Lord get bound by a part of His own existence?" And he said it is for this reason that the binding did not take place so easily. As we know, it is hard for her to bind Him. This is his perspective, his deep perspective. Such a wonderful perspective. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, the original commentator, he concludes thus: "The binding did not take place so easily." So then, how did it take place? Perfect questions, perfect answers! Well, our *ācāryas* say that although all the above is true—everything I mentioned is true—Mother Yaśodā was completely unaware of Kṛṣṇa’s divine majesty. We were describing His really divine majesty, so she was unaware of that because she is in *vātsalya-rasa*. This is the nature of Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa can be very personal with His devotees there because He doesn't appear as the godhead; He appears as a small child, a young boy, and He relates in a very personal way. This motive of the Lord and the Master, "God is very great and I am very small"—that is proper—but it exists in general in the official kingdom of God, Vaikuṇṭha. But there is a special nature to the topmost planet in the spiritual world where Kṛṣṇa allows His devotees to deal with Him in a very pure, loving way because of their pure, loving sentiment within their hearts. So Mother Yaśodā was completely unaware of Kṛṣṇa’s divine majesty, so she simply went ahead and attempted to bind Him. If she wasn't afraid, she didn't have that philosophy; she just had *bhakti*, just love. So she took a rope to bind Him, and because in reality that divine rope was eventually going to have to somehow bind the all-pervasive Lord. 

The prayers which we are now singing every evening: *namas te 'stu dāmne sphurad-dīpti-dhāmne*—obeisances to that divine rope which bound You, obeisances to that divine rope which bound You. So Gosvāmī goes on to describe in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.9.15: when Mother Yaśodā was trying to bind the offending child, she saw that the binding rope was short by a distance the width of two fingers. This is the width of two fingers here. Now, it is very interesting: Śrīla Prabhupāda, in order to help us understand, he translates "two fingers" as "two inches." However, we should know that an inch is, I could just say, a British Imperial unit of measurement which was not present during the time of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, when Prabhupāda says "two inches," it means two finger-lengths of Mother Yaśodā, like you could take it like this or like this, because Vedic calculations are often approximate. This is giving us an idea; the main thing they are trying to reveal is *bhakti*. As many devotees know, initially Mother Yaśodā struggled to tie Kṛṣṇa up with that divine rope; it always fell short by two fingers. 

In attempting to bind Kṛṣṇa, at this point our Hari Sūri gives a brilliant reason why the rope was unable to tie the Lord up. Of course, we are all familiar—I believe all familiar—we will hear it in part four how, you know, one finger's length was Mother Yaśodā’s desire to protect her beloved son, and the other two inches, or fingers, that was missing was Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. But we are not going to discuss that now; that will be the main subject matter of lecture number four. Listen to the brilliant reason that Hari Sūri gives why that rope was unable to bind Kṛṣṇa, regardless of the distance of two fingers missing. Why? Why she couldn't bind Him? It is brilliant, but you have to listen carefully. He says, "When the Supreme Lord gazes upon anyone with His all-merciful glance, that individual no longer experiences any *bandhana* (bondage) in the material world. Therefore, when Mother Yaśodā began tying Kṛṣṇa up, the rope—He glanced upon the rope itself. As soon as He glanced at the rope, the rope itself got liberated. Now, can any liberated person ever bind anyone in this world? Certainly not. Therefore, the rope was unable to perform the function of binding the Lord." So someone would say, "It's a rope," but bear in mind, remember that in the spiritual world everything is personal and has a service to do for enhancing the love of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. So let me recite that again right now: "When the Supreme Lord gazes upon anyone with His all-merciful glance, that individual no longer experiences any *bandhana* or bondage in the material world. Therefore, when Mother Yaśodā began tying Kṛṣṇa up with the rope, He glanced upon the rope itself. As soon as He glanced at the rope, the rope itself was liberated." 

He concludes: "Now, how can a liberated person ever bind anyone in this world? That is not the business of a liberated person; he wants to untie people from the bondages of material existence." So he says, "How can a liberated person ever bind anyone in the world? Certainly not! Therefore," he concludes, "the rope was unable to perform the function of binding Lord Kṛṣṇa." So for now, we will leave Mother Yaśodā and Kṛṣṇa in this struggle for a week until next Friday, and in the meantime, I will leave you to meditate upon this struggle, let us say, between Kṛṣṇa’s majesty and Mother Yaśodā’s love, with the beautiful verse from another commentator on this pastime. His name was Śrī Vamśīdhara: *yaśodayā na stī devatātra kopi bhūtale, hulū-khalena baddho 'pi yasya mukunda-muktidaḥ*. "There is no deity on this Earth equal to Mother Yaśodā. Bound by her to a mortar, even the great giver of liberation, named Mukunda, prays for his own liberation." Hmm. There is no deity on this Earth equal to Mother Yaśodā. Bound by her to a mortar, even the great giver of liberation named Mukunda prays for his own liberation. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you. I really like the different perspectives offered by our *ācāryas* in this regard, and yeah, we will continue next week fully into the month of Kārtika there in Vṛndāvana. Actually, we are going out with a party of 500 devotees—eight buses every day—to different holy places there in Vṛndāvana. It's just so nectarean! I just wish all of you could be here, but we are producing—Ananta Vṛndāvana Prabhu is producing very beautiful videos which are up on my YouTube channel—so if you'd like to follow us, either there or on Facebook, you can follow our wanderings throughout Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma during this auspicious month of Kārtika. So see you next Friday. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Glorious to the Prabhupāda.""