"*00299*.*
"## The Art of War: Bhagavad-gītā 18.58

*Jaya!*

So, can you move this away? This evening, we are reading from *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is*, translation and commentary by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda. We are reading from the 18th chapter of *Bhagavad-gītā*, text number 58:

*om tat sat*
*mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi sannyasyādhyātma-cetasā*
*nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ*

Translation: "If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost."

Purport: "A person in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not unduly anxious about executing the duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this great freedom from all anxiety. For one who acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Lord Kṛṣṇa becomes the most intimate friend. He always looks after His friend’s comfort, and He gives Himself to His friend who so devoutly engages in working twenty-four hours a day to please the Lord. Therefore, no one should be carried away by the false ego of the bodily concept of life. One should not falsely think himself independent of the laws of material nature or free to act."

*Jaya* Kṛṣṇa. So, in this, one of the final verses of *Bhagavad-gītā*, and one of the most famous verses, Kṛṣṇa promises us that if we are conscious of Him, He will help us overcome all the obstacles on the path of pure devotion. That’s very kind of Him, because for the aspiring devotees—and we are all aspiring devotees—there are many obstacles we will face in the neophyte, the intermediate, and to some degree on the advanced stages of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Just like in that sport where the riders jump the horses, the rider and the horse have to jump over many obstacles. The more obstacles, the more difficult the obstacles, the sweeter the victory. If you’ve ever watched that horse racing, they have to jump over wooden gates, over steel barrels, through water holes, over ditches; it’s actually dangerous. So, in the same way, the devotee has to pass over many obstacles which are placed there by Māyādevī. She is the superintendent of the material world. She is a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, but she has this service: just to make sure that those who get back to the spiritual world are genuinely sincere and nobody slips in and causes any problems. You could say she’s the opposition; it’s like every political party has its opposition. So, she’s our opposition, and we should be aware of her tricks.

There was a military commander, I think a thousand years ago in China, his name was Sun Tzu. He wrote one book called *The Art of War*. So, when I was in the military, I used to like to read his book, you know, romanticized about fighting and war, which is really just hell. But you know, when you’re a young soldier, you’re very romantic about these ideas. So, Sun Tzu, in *The Art of War*, he says, "If you know the enemy and yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles." You see, there are several military academies here in St. Petersburg. You see the boys and the men walking around in their uniforms. So, what they learn—the strategy they learn—is to try to figure out what the enemy is going to do so you know what to do. You study their strategies, you send spies in, and they report back the plans, and so you’re prepared. So that you know when they come, yeah, okay, it’s easy, you know what to do, you’ve got a plan to counteract, and you win.

There was a popular song—actually, the girl was a devotee, but she was a pop singer in the 80s—and she wrote one song called "The Trick of the Witch." And it went, "It’s just a trick of the witch, she switched the on and off switch." It was very popular; it reached number four in *Top of the Pops*. "It’s just a trick of the witch, she hit the on and off switch." It’s talking about Māyā. People didn't know it, but she was a devotee trying to introduce our philosophy into society. Anyway, it sounded really good when she sang it; it doesn’t sound so good—I’m not a pop singer.

So, Māyā is the opposition. What are her tricks? We don’t have to speculate; Śāstra reveals them one by one. Therefore, you have to read the books. Actually, a nice example: the obstacles are given in a very beautiful verse glorifying Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, from yesterday’s class. Some of you know, "I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, the source of all power. Oh my Lord, who possesses nails and teeth just like thunderbolts, kindly vanquish our demon-like desires for fruitive activities in the material world. Please appear in our hearts and drive away our ignorance, so that by Your mercy, we may become fearless in the struggle for existence in the material world."

So, *karmāṇi* means the desires for fruitive activity. It’s just a poetic way of saying the desires for sense gratification. These are the main obstacles in the path to pure devotion. In *bhakti-śāstra*, interestingly enough, they’re internal obstacles; they’re not external obstacles. You don’t have to jump over ditches and over barrels and wooden sticks like horses. We’re our own worst enemies.

You see, the path of *bhakti*—it’s very beautiful, it’s lit up. It’s the nine processes of devotional service. It’s very, very blissful to go back home, chanting, dancing, feasting along the road. Just follow the "Yellow Brick Road." I wish I had a heart, had a tin man. There’s no obstacles. One time, Prabhupāda, at New Mayapur, we were sitting with Prabhupāda on darśana out in the garden, and Prabhupāda said, "What is the difficulty?" He could see us—young boys and girls, you know, 19, 20, 21, struggling in Kṛṣṇa consciousness—and he’s a pure devotee, you know, in love with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He said, "What’s the difficulty? It’s just chanting, dancing, some philosophy, and feasting. What is the difficulty? He said, tell me, what is the difficulty?"

The difficulty is that we don’t want to let go of the material desires. We don’t have enough faith that if I let go, Kṛṣṇa will embrace me. We don’t have that faith yet, so we hold on for dear life. There was once a guru who had a disciple who wasn’t very advanced; he was a little nonsense. He said, "You know, these material desires, they just won't let me go. So how can I? It’s not my fault. I’m not Kṛṣṇa conscious; these material desires just hold on to me. They’re so strong, they won't let me go. What can I do, Gurudeva?"

So, the guru looked at him with a real nasty look. "You rascal! You come back here same time tomorrow under this big tree; I’ll discuss with you." Next day, the disciple came back to that same spot, and he saw his guru had his arms around a big tree, hugging the tree, and the guru was screaming at the tree, "Let me go! Let me go, you big tree! Just let me go so I can be free! Let me go, will you?" So the disciple said, "Um, Guru Mahārāja, excuse me, but you know, the tree is not holding you. You’re holding the tree. Just let go."

So the guru just whipped himself around. He pointed to the disciple; he said, "Yes! In the same way, you’re holding on to material desires. They’re not holding you. Let go and take shelter of Kṛṣṇa now." So, our desires to enjoy this world, this is what’s keeping us in the world. So, therefore, I say our worst enemy is ourselves. Therefore, we should never be very quick to point out others' faults. Charity begins at home. So, before we find fault in others, we should rid ourselves of all faults, all material desires, and then we’re in a position to correct others.

I said the other day that we should never condemn a person for what they did in the past. We should never think ill of a person for the bad things they are doing at the moment, but rather we should appreciate a person for the potential he has or she has to become Kṛṣṇa conscious in the future. Just like these little children here, they’re six or seven years old. Oh, they’re just kids! But when I look at them, I think, "The potential they have for the future! I see them as grown-ups engaging in devotional service." Therefore, we give them time; it’s a wise investment. And they sense that, and they sense that we appreciate them and that we love them, so they try to reciprocate as best they can as children to be nice devotees. They dance in the kīrtana, and they sit here. I’ve been speaking for 20 minutes, and these three children have not taken their eyes off me in 20 minutes. This is very unusual. They don’t understand what I’m saying, but they trust me. So, therefore, they’ll do anything I ask them to do in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Jesus said, "You have to be like a child. You have to have that innocence, that faith, that love to enter into the Kingdom of God." So, we have these desires—they’re festering, they’re like an infection. Infections don't get better; infections only get worse. Let me tell you, I had a very bad lung infection recently, and I just didn’t want to go to the hospital. The next day, I was begging the devotees to take me to the hospital because it doesn’t get better on its own; it needs authoritative attention, medical attention. So, these desires that we have in our heart, they’re like a disease. Disease means you suffer. We’re suffering because of them, and as soon as possible, we have to deal with them.

But let’s get more specific. Like, what is Mahārāja talking about? "Material desires"—like, can you be more specific? Like, can we zero in on it? What are we really talking about here? Kṛṣṇa is very kind. He tells us specifically what we should be looking for and dealing with right there in the immortal wisdom of *Bhagavad-gītā*. Wow, we like to read so many things, but we should be going back to basics: *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is*, translation and commentary by Śrīla Prabhupāda. "There are three gates leading to hell: lust, anger, and greed." Kṛṣṇa says, He warns us, He said, "Every sane man should give these up." Why? Kṛṣṇa says because they leave—"Don’t feed the guest."

You know, he gets up in the morning, takes a shower, comes down, "You know, Madam, what’s for breakfast? We don’t have breakfast here." "Oh, okay, I could use a... I could lose a little weight. What time’s lunch? Oh my God. So, what about dinner? I’m not cooking dinner tonight. Well, I’m getting out of here. Oh, that’s too bad, really sorry to hear that." You know, so some paths of yoga, they deny the senses altogether with the hope that it’ll just go away. Right? You starve the senses into submission. Like you starve a wild animal; you just don’t feed it, and even a wild tiger becomes like a pussycat after a while, and you can feed him and make him do anything. You do this, this is how they train animals for the circus. It’s not very nice, actually. Not a very safe process, simply to deny the senses, because by nature we have senses. We have spiritual senses, and unless you awaken the spiritual senses in blissful devotional service to the Lord, at one point, you’re going to have to go back to satisfying those nasty desires, because we’re sentient beings with senses. You can’t deny that.

Okay, so what do I do? I’ve got these strong material desires. Mahārāja says I shouldn’t neglect them, then, like, how do I get rid of them? Well, you take this verse today very seriously. No joke. "If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by—what?—My grace." What does that mean? Kṛṣṇa removes the obstacles by His grace. Does that mean it means that Kṛṣṇa removes the lust, Kṛṣṇa removes the anger, Kṛṣṇa removes the greed out of appreciation for your selfless service and His love for you as His devotee. He’s so powerful; He removes them, *voilà*! Kṛṣṇa can do that because He’s the strength of the strong. This is the secret, the open secret of Kṛṣṇa consciousness: our problems are solved when we take shelter of all-powerful Kṛṣṇa.

If you’re weak, you take shelter of something strong. Like a very practical example: me and Bahari, we were in Baku, Azerbaijan, and we wanted to come here for Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī. So, if we walk, it’ll take us a few months. We’re too weak on our own strength to make it, you know, 5,000 kilometers on our own strength. So, we took shelter in something that was stronger or greater than ourselves; it’s called an airplane. And we sat in the airplane, and it was so strong and powerful, we just slept the whole way. We were so tired; we woke up as a plane landed in Moscow. "Where are we?" "Baku?" "Oh, no, we are in Moscow." Wow.

So, we take shelter of Kṛṣṇa to cross over this vast ocean of material existence. Because even if you’re the best swimmer, you’re going to drown in the vast ocean. What’s that wonderful verse that Prabhupāda used to quote? Wow, I remembered it: "For those who have accepted the boat-like the airplane—of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Murāri, the enemy of the Mura demon, the ocean of the material world becomes like the water contained in a calf’s hoofprint. Their goal is *param padam*, the place where there are no material miseries, not St. Petersburg, where there is danger at every step."

So, like that, it’s very simple. Prabhupāda said, "What is the difficulty?" We don’t even have to take shelter of demigods. Some people, without full knowledge of the Supreme Īśvara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they become impressed with and infatuated with the strength of the powerful devatās. You know, in the West, they don’t know so much, but in India, demigod worship is still popular because people haven’t read enough, they’re not enlightened enough to know. And, you know, Brahmā, Śiva, Gaṇeśa, Sarasvatī, they’re in charge of all these material activities, and they’re very, very powerful. So, people have problems, they take shelter of the devatās. I mean, okay, that’s like a step in the right direction; you’re not thinking you can do anything alone, at least you acknowledge there’s higher authority, said so, okay.

But the thing is—this is the thing, the thing—yes, the demigods, they can award material benedictions, but they can’t award *mukti*, what to speak of *bhakti*. Actually, there’s one demigod who can give *mukti*; that’s Śiva. If you approach him without any material desires, he can award *bhakti*. Of all the Vaiṣṇavas, Śiva is the greatest because he never forgets Kṛṣṇa, despite his austere services to the Lord in this world. He’s in charge of the mode of ignorance. He’s a devotee. Imagine if Kṛṣṇa said, "You’re My pure devotee; what service can I do for you, Lord?" "Be in charge of all the *bhūtas* and the *pretas*, all the witches, the ghosts, the hobgoblins, the zombies. That’s your service—purify them, okay? And destroy the creation at the end, okay? And be in charge of the mode of ignorance, okay?" That’s a real test of a devotee! He’ll do anything for Kṛṣṇa. Great devotee.

But that’s the exception to the rule. Generally, the demigods, they can’t help you become free from suffering in this world. They can’t remove the obstacles—lust, anger, greed. They’re dealing with those obstacles themselves! That’s why they’re demigods. "Demi" means half. It’s not—it’s not a glorification. "Oh, you’re a demigod!" That means half-god. What’s the use of being half something? You want to be the whole thing, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. Prabhupāda put it very simply: if your hands are tied, you can’t untie somebody else’s hands.

The very first verse of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, the very first verse of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, puts the demigods, with all due respect, in their proper place: that they are bewildered by the illusory energy. As water is seen in fire and land is seen on water—a mirage. And the demigods will tell you so, because if they’re honest—and they are—they’ll tell you to take shelter of their Īśvara. Just like, for example, everyone’s afraid of the malefic planet Śani. Śani is Saturn, because generally Śani is associated with extreme sorrow, disease, suffering, death, etc. Just like I’ve been sick twice in the last three or four months, and I looked at my chart, and my chart is overshadowed for a period of time by Śani, by Saturn. So, it all makes sense. When you have a transit of Saturn, then generally people, they go to India; they don’t do any material activities because India is ruled by Śani. India is ruled by Saturn, so that’s where he rules, so he’s a little more merciful there. So, you just go and do austerities in India during the period of Saturn, and you don’t have any troubles because you’re not doing anything material. You’re just doing *bhajana*.

Śani, or Saturn, he actually advises devotees to take shelter of Kṛṣṇa, to take shelter of Nṛsiṁhadeva to avoid his influence. One time, Śani—Saturn—made an agreement with Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva that he would never trouble those who recite prayers to Bhagavān Nṛsiṁhadeva. So Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva said, "Which prayers?" "My pure devotees have composed thousands of prayers about Me." We just quoted one earlier in the class. So Śani, he smiled; he said, "Not those prayers. My prayers in glorifying You. I composed a nice *stuti*, a nice amount of prayers glorifying You, because You’re Bhagavān, I’m just a dasa. So my duty is to glorify You; You’re my worshipable Lord. So I composed beautiful prayers, and if anyone sings the prayers I, Śani, Saturn, have composed about You, Bhagavān Nṛsiṁhadeva, I won’t touch that person." So Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva said, "Let me hear one." So Śani recited one of the prayers:

"By meditating upon He whose form is fearsome, all peace and happiness and prosperity can be obtained. All sins and their reactions are destroyed at the root, and fear arising from evil spirits, high fevers, and unfavorable planetary positions will all be removed. Oh Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, please bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance."

We—there’s a beautiful prayer, a series of *ślokas* sung by the residents of Vṛndāvana. All the young girls in Vṛndāvana, they all know these beautiful prayers, sung by Śiva, asking for the merciful sidelong glance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. But don’t ask for the sidelong glance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī if you’re not cleansed! If your heart is dirty, don’t have her cast her merciful glance upon a dirty heart, because nothing will happen. Just as if you pour ghee into ashes—nothing. Ghee has to be poured onto the sacrificial fire; then there’s a benefit. So, if we want the sidelong glance of Rādhā, we have to first have a clean heart. "Ever have in my heart is full of lust, it’s full of anger, there’s greed." "There’s no hope for me." No! But Kṛṣṇa is offering His help to you in the verse today. "If you become conscious of Me, my dear devotee, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by—what?—by My grace."

So just ask My help, become My devotee, serve Me, and I’ll help you. I promise you. It’s one thing if you say something; it’s another thing if you promise. You have—you’re talking to someone and, "Okay, do you promise?" You really want to get a reaction, you know, a firm conviction that they really mean it. So, "Okay, now you said that, but I want to hear you promise that." "Oh, you promise? Okay, so I take your word for it." So, sometimes Kṛṣṇa makes a promise. He’s not like us; we break our promises sometimes. There’s a song, "Don’t make promises you can’t keep." "Declare it boldly, Arjuna, My devotee will never perish." So, if the Lord promises something, we can have faith in that. We don’t have to put our little toe into the water and then our ankle and then our knee to slowly get into the process. If Kṛṣṇa promises something, just dive in! It means full surrender. We don’t have to wait a lifetime to be fully surrendered. Why not just surrender now? Because Kṛṣṇa promised! But we don’t have the faith, therefore we don’t surrender fully. We are the obstacle; we’re our own worst enemy. Kṛṣṇa is doing everything He can to have us come back to the spiritual world.

What about Lord Rāmacandra’s promise? What are the four verses that is essential to the philosophy of the Śrī-Vaiṣṇavas, the Rāmānuja-sampradāya? They have, I think, it’s three or four verses which are the essential essence of their teachings. Lord Rāmacandra says, "It is My eternal promise that if any living being takes shelter of Me and just says one time, 'Rāma, I am Yours,' I award that person freedom from all fear. This is My vow; this is My promise." Why hesitate? Why not just surrender? Actually, to underline that even more, Rāmacandra says another very essential verse: He offers this even to demons, regardless of what they’ve done. If they say, "Rāma, for so long I have forgotten You, but from this day on I am Yours," He absolves them. He says, "Even if Rāvaṇa were to approach Me and say, 'My Lord, for so long I have forgotten You, but from this day on I am Yours,' I would absolve Rāvaṇa of all sin and accept him as My devotee." This is why these verses are so important to the Śrī-sampradāya. Again, it shows the merciful nature of Kṛṣṇa as demonstrated, as we mentioned yesterday, in the pastime of the deliverance of the Pūtanā witch. This incredible mercy—the all-merciful Lord, that’s our worshipful deity, He’s all-merciful.

Therefore, we hang on every word He says, hope against hope. Rāmacandra said, "I cannot refuse to give shelter to anyone who comes to Me in a friendly spirit. Even if he is a wicked person, I will embrace him and accept him." So, we are on the path, and we’re having a hard time getting rid of these nasty material desires. Kṛṣṇa, please help me free from these obstacles that stand between You and me, that stand between me and service to You, and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Please help me, Kṛṣṇa. You’re a demon-killer. You killed the Ariṣṭāsura demon, You killed the Pūtanā witch, You killed Māyā, You killed so many demons. You can kill the demons in my heart. And someone can say, "But Kṛṣṇa’s so far away!" Prabhupāda says, "Yes, mysteriously He’s very far away, but He’s very close as well." Where is He? Śrīla Swami says, we’re always quoting, "The sound incarnation of Kṛṣṇa’s name is non-different than Kṛṣṇa, and it is the incarnation in this age." And He’s as far away as you’re vibrating your tongue: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

The Holy Name is a demon-killer, but a little bit different than the past ages. He kills the demoniac desires; He doesn’t kill the person. He’s even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu brought that Holy Name; it’s even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa because He doesn’t kill the person, He kills the demoniac desires. Where is that stated? That the Holy Name uproots the material desires in the heart? It’s right there in the *Laghū-bhāgavatāmṛta*. The Holy Name is the only real friend of the living entity. By chanting the Holy Name of Govinda-Kṛṣṇa, one very easily uproots all sinful reactions. It says "very easily," that have accumulated not only in this lifetime but also those of many past lives, and which have yet to mature into *phalatā*. *Hare Kṛṣṇa*.

So, let us take our first steps in devotional service, holding the hand of our father, the Lord, through His instructions to chant His Holy Name and make steady progress in devotional service. But there’s a quality to that chanting, as Prabhupāda mentioned in the very first lectures in the Bowery, that you have to chant like a baby crying for its mother. York Street. Prabhupāda wasn’t addressing advanced *sādhakas* in Vṛndāvana-dhāma; he was addressing beatniks. Beatniks—I don’t know if you know the beat, it’s a pre-hippie—beatniks and hippies and, you know, crazy people. He was telling them, "You have to cry for Kṛṣṇa when you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, like a baby cries for his mother." Means you have to sit down and don’t do anything else while you’re chanting. The best chanting is not while you’re driving, while you’re walking, you know, through the town or on your way—the best chant, you sit in one place, or at least you walk back and forth in place, and you focus, and you cry from the heart: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

A baby doesn’t have many realizations, but it’s the nature of the cry, depending on the mother, still the mother comes. So, we are like babies; we’re infants in spirituality. We don’t have many realizations. It’s not because of our love that Kṛṣṇa’s coming, but it’s the nature of the cry from the heart that we are... we want... we’re babies, but we want to be fully dependent on the Lord. So, it’s not artificial for us, even at this stage, to cry out with some emotion. We’re like babies, but it’s okay. "You’re a baby, we understand, but the baby’s crying out, 'I need your shelter.'" So, we as aspiring devotees, we can also chant, "I need Your shelter. I have no love, but I want Your shelter." So, you can chant with feeling, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. It’s not *sahajiyā*; a baby’s a baby, and the mother knows, and knows nothing, but "it’s crying for me, so I come." We have to chant with some feeling, some appreciation for Kṛṣṇa, turns into affection, turns into love. You have to start somewhere. It’s your time with the Lord. It’s that time of the day when you’ve got a little window open and you’re talking to Kṛṣṇa. I mean, He’s hearing. He’s everywhere, He’s in your heart, He’s hearing. And although they are just baby cries, it’s all being taken into account.

But *ekāgra-citta*, it has to be one-pointed meditation on Kṛṣṇa. It means that when you’re chanting, you should just chant and don’t do anything else. That’s the best. Of course, it’s, you know, we have our jobs and our families and our *saṅkīrtana*, but as you get older, then you want to go back to Godhead more and more, because you realize the temporary, miserable nature of this world and time is short, and you want to go back to Godhead. So, then you focus just on that, that chanting, and you fix your mind on Kṛṣṇa’s name, and you try to chant with some feeling. You just try, and by trying, we progress. Kṛṣṇa blesses us. We all struggle with this; I also struggle with this. But this is our philosophy, and we should know what we should be doing, and in due course of time, do it. Posture, pronunciation, and prayer.

By the mercy of the Holy Name, by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa who removes all obstacles, *dhāraṇā-mātra*, where are they? Sitting in the heart, *ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam*—they’re washed away, the lust, the anger, and the greed, by Kṛṣṇa’s grace, as He says in this verse. Then, when the heart is clean, purified, we can install Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa on the altar of the lotus flower of our heart and worship them to our heart’s content.

As it is.

Now, to facilitate our chanting, we also do *kīrtanam*. We chant with musical instruments, and it helps to focus the mind. And the melodies, which all come from the spiritual world, Prabhupāda said they elicit these spiritual emotions that advanced devotees feel, which is kind of waking up. But it helps to focus on the chanting if we have *kīrtana* with beautiful *bhajana* singers who are expert with musical instruments, like Bahari Prabhu.

So, this is a perfect moment now to chant with *kīrtana*. We’ll have about a half-hour *kīrtana*, and then there’s some book they want to inaugurate, you know, this evening. So, please stay for that. Especially my disciples, please stay; they’re going to inaugurate something, whatever that book. So, it’s an important part of the function; don’t go home yet. Stay for the *kīrtana* and then stay for the launching of the new book.

Okay, Kṛṣṇa.""