"*00517*.*
"# The Doe-Eyed Sakhi: Tuṅgavidyā Sakhī

Hare Kṛṣṇa everyone, and a warm welcome back to our continued series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.*

In our last class, we mentioned how we would continue lecturing on the eight *aṣṭa-sakhīs* of Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s closest maidservants. Today, we will discuss Tuṅgavidyā, and as we have been doing, we will conclude with a popular pastime of hers here in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

In the *Gaura-govinda-arcana-smarana-paddhati* by Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī, it is stated that 5,000 years ago, during Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, Tuṅgavidyā appeared in the village of Dābarārāma, her parents were Puṣkara and Medādevī, and she is 14 years, 2 months, and 22 days old. It also mentions in that scripture that Rādhārāṇī is 14 years, 2 months, and 15 days old, which would mean that Tuṅgavidyā is seven days older than Śrī Rādhā. However, I was also reading *Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā* by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, and he says therein that Tuṅgavidyā is 15 days older than Śrī Rādhā. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Tuṅgavidyā’s complexion is the color of kuṅkuma, and the fragrance of her body is like sandalwood mixed with camphor. Her dress is the color of pāṇḍu-maṇḍana, which means a pale yellow, and she is described as very hot-tempered by nature and expert in resolving arguments. Her husband’s name is Balīśa. It is also described that she is very learned in the 18 branches of Vedic knowledge and expert at arranging meetings with the divine couple. She is also very learned in *rasa-śāstra*, which means the *śāstra* dealing with transcendental mellows. She also knows very well *nīti-śāstra*, or the science of logic, reasoning, and morality, as well as dancing, drama, literature, and actually all other arts and sciences. She is a celebrated music teacher; she is expert at playing the vīṇā, and she sings in a particular style known as *mārga*.

Furthermore, her eight *gopī* messengers are headed by Mañjumedā Devī, and they are all expert at arranging political alliances in the art of what is described as "politics" between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They can make alliances in the politics between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, which are numerous; that is what we have been discussing for many months now. I was also reading that her assistants are the best dancers in Vṛndāvana. They are also musicians expert at playing *mṛdaṅga*, and they can also sing very nicely, particularly, the scripture says, in "recital halls." That is interesting—recital halls.

Again, *Gaura-govinda-arcana-smarana-paddhati* describes that Tuṅgavidyā’s specific kuñja grove out there at Rādhā-kuṇḍa is extremely beautiful, and it is of a crimson color. That kuñja possesses a specific *bhāva* known as *vipralabdha*. This is the mood of a *gopī* who is very distressed at heart because her lover, Kṛṣṇa, has not arrived on time for the secret meeting. The behavior of such a *gopī* is marked by despondency, anxiety, lamentation, weeping, fainting, and sighing—all, of course, on the transcendental platform to increase their love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. An example of this is given in *Nectar of Devotion* that once a certain *gopī* said to her friend, "Oh, dear sakhī, as surely as the moon has risen, have we not been deceived by the Lord of Lakṣmī? In this situation, what shall we do? Please give me some advice; Kṛṣṇa has not come." Saying this, she became depressed.

Now, once more quoting *Gaura-govinda-arcana-smarana-paddhati*, verse 283, there is a beautiful verse which you could say summarizes all these things we have been mentioning about Tuṅgavidyā. I thought to include it because it is so beautiful:

> "I worship the very rasika Tuṅgavidyā, who was adorned with sandalwood paste mixed with camphor. Her beautiful saffron-colored body is decorated with many fine jeweled ornaments. She delights in wearing a lovely red dress, and she has many wonderful qualities. She knows many transcendental songs, and she dances before Śrī Hari to the beat of a ḍamaru drum."

I would also like to mention here before we move on that Tuṅgavidyā-sakhī appeared in this material world during the pastimes of Lord Caitanya, as did the other sakhīs 500 years ago, and she appeared as the illustrious one of our heroes, Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, whom we very often quote and who we know was an associate of Lord Caitanya. Now, in *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā* text 163, Śrīla Kavirāja says:

> "She who was previously known in the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Vraja as Tuṅgavidyā, who is fully conversant with all scriptures, has now become Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī and is engaged in singing the glories of Lord Gaurāṅga."

So there, it is confirmed. Now, as we have discussed before, he left us so many important books like *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, *Rādhā-rasa-sudhānidhi*, and *Saṅgīta-mādhava*. *Caitanya-candrāmṛta* refers to the writings of Śrīla Sarasvatī as follows:

> "The moods and sentiments of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī are quite distinct. He writes; his language is simultaneously filled with sobriety and sweetness. All the devotees who have accepted shelter at the feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu get pleasure beyond measure by reciting regularly Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī."

And isn't it true? So many times we have quoted him in our lectures on Śrī Vṛndāvana. We can also mention a detail that Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī was the guru of Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Where is that stated? That is stated in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, one of our main scriptures, 1.2, and I quote: "Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, a disciple of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda, is a dear associate of Lord Caitanya, and he is compiling the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* to please Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī." Let's recite that again: "Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, a disciple of Śrīla Prabhodhānanda, a dear associate of Lord Caitanya, is compiling the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* to please Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī." And Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī confirms the same fact in his famous book called *Vaiṣṇava-vandanā*. I was reading this the other day in the institute; it is verse number seven. He writes: "I offer my humble obeisances unto the spotless Śrīla Prabhodhānanda Sarasvatī, who joyfully compiled *Caitanya-candrāmṛta* and whose disciple..." Interesting information.

So, as promised, the following is a very beautiful pastime of Tuṅgavidyā-sakhī called *yugal-līlā*, which the Vrajavāsīs recount whenever discussing the glories of Tuṅgavidyā-sakhī. Here it is:

One time, Tuṅgavidyā went to a well in Vṛndāvana to fetch water and was very surprised to find Kṛṣṇa there. He was also taking water from the same well. Now, upon seeing Tuṅgavidyā, Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear Tuṅgavidyā, I'm sorry, but this well belongs to Me, and you cannot take water from it without paying a tax equivalent to the amount of water you take."

Now, Tuṅgavidyā became very upset, and she said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, this is not right! I'm going to make sure that you don't see Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī for a long time as your punishment for dealing with me in this way. I'm going to make sure you don't see Rādhā for a long time!" And she stormed off to Varṣāṇā to complain to her queen, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

So when she came before Śrī Rādhā, she said, "Dearest Rādhārāṇī, we gopīs are fed up with Śyāmasundara’s activities. He asks us for taxes wherever we go. Sometimes he taxes us on the banks of the Yamunā, sometimes on the road to Varṣāṇā, and at other times in the gardens where we go to pick flowers. Now he wants to tax us when we take water from water wells! The day is not far off, Śrī Rādhā, when he will ask us to pay taxes for breathing air or eating food."

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī replied, "My dear Tuṅgavidyā, do not worry. I will talk to Śyāmasundara about this."

So after speaking with Śrī Rādhā, Tuṅgavidyā was making her plan, her scheme—somehow Kṛṣṇa wasn't going to get to come and see Rādhārāṇī—and as she was thinking in this way, she was walking on her way home through the Vṛndāvana forest when suddenly she heard a very beautiful bhajan. Looking around, she saw an effulgent lady ascetic, let us say a young yoginī, sitting in saffron clothes with an ektārā instrument in her hands. An ektārā is a musical instrument that we see here in India which has only one string and somehow they play it and it sounds beautiful. So this yoginī was singing a bhajan in a very sweet voice.

So, curious, Tuṅgavidyā approached the yoginī, and she said, "Dear one, you appear so exalted and charming, and your voice is mesmerizing. Please come with me; I will take you back to the palace of King Vṛṣabhānu and Mother Kīrtidā Sundarī. Surely they will give an ascetic like you a donation in charity."

But the yoginī said very angrily, "I have no desire for charity." But Tuṅgavidyā tried to pacify her by saying, "My dear yoginī, it will bring pleasure to the King and Queen of Varṣāṇā if you offer a little service to them. Kindly come with me." But again the yoginī hesitated, and she replied, "But I am a renunciate, how can I enter a palace?" Then she said something which really touched my heart; it has become one of the statements I think will forever remain within my heart. She said:

> "Having accepted the renounced order of life, my home is this Vṛndāvana forest. My bed is the soft dust of Vṛndāvana, the sky of Vṛndāvana is my blanket, and the flowering creepers of Vṛndāvana are my only belongings. The moon over Vṛndāvana is the lamp of my hopes, and my chanting beads are counting the days until I meet the divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa."

That is like my mission statement now in life. Anyway, with Tuṅgavidyā’s insistence, the yoginī said, "Okay, okay, I will go."

Now when they arrived at Varṣāṇā, Tuṅgavidyā ran into the palace and called out to Mother Kīrtidā Sundarī, "Mother Kīrtidā, a most beautiful, exalted young yoginī has come to your doorstep! Please come and greet her."

So hearing this news, Kīrtidā Sundarī, Rādhārāṇī’s mother, quickly came with countless maidservants to take darśana of this very interesting yoginī. She paid her obeisances to her and then washed her feet with milk and rose water. Such culture we have in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Afterwards, the yoginī said, "Queen Kīrtidā Sundarī, I am pleased with your service and your hospitality. Ask me whatever you want me to do, and I will do my best to give it to you."

But Mother Kīrtidā Sundarī said, "My dear sādhvī—sādhvīs means lady sādhu—my dear sādhvī, I have everything by your mercy. I have filled my home with riches and many items of all good fortune. In every corner of my house, there is unlimited wealth. I only ask for your blessings. I have a daughter in whom all the pleasures of the world reside, but she has been sick for many days. She has a chronic disease which causes me to worry about her; please bless her."

So when the yoginī asked Kīrtidā Sundarī for the name of this particular disease that her daughter Śrī Rādhā was suffering from, Mother Sundarī replied, "Well, I have called upon so many physicians, so many doctors, but not one can understand what particular disease she has. But the symptoms are there; the symptoms are very clear."

The yoginī asked, "What are the symptoms of her disease?"

Kīrtidā Sundarī said, "Well, at night she calls out in her sleep 'Yamunā, Yamunā' as if she is mad. 'Yamunā, Yamunā, Kuñja, Kuñja, Muralī, Muralī'—a very weird behavior for her."

Then the young yoginī smiled and asked Mother Kīrtidā, "Does she sometimes, sometimes call out 'Oh, Śyāma' in her sleep?"

And Mother Kīrtidā Sundarī replied, "Yes, yes, she does! How do you know that?"

So the yoginī replied, "Because I know very much about this disease. I am expert in curing this disease, and I can cure your daughter from this disease. So please call her here."

So Mother Kīrtidā Sundarī ran and she found Rādhārāṇī and brought her there quickly. Rādhārāṇī came with all of her sakhīs, and Kīrtidā Sundarī paid her obeisances to the yoginī again and then had Śrī Rādhā pay obeisances to the yoginī. The yoginī asked Rādhā about her well-being. Then the yoginī said to Mother Kīrtidā, "All right, let us begin here. The treatment is as follows: please ask your daughter to dance with me. I know a few dance movements from the Vedas by which all negative energy and possible black magic can be banished from your daughter, and her disease will be cured."

So when Rādhārāṇī heard this, she kind of hesitated and said, "No, I'm sorry, I will not dance with someone like this ascetic yoginī."

So Mother Kīrtidā asked the yoginī, "Well, if my daughter doesn't want to dance with you, is it possible for me to dance with you on behalf of my daughter, Śrī Rādhā?"

So hearing this, the yoginī became flustered and she got up and she started walking away, but all the sakhīs ran after her and with sweet words they begged her to come back and stay. But the yoginī was adamant; she said to everyone, "If you want me to cure the Queen’s daughter, then only the daughter can dance with me. Then she will be cured, I promise you. I am expert at this."

So once again, Kīrtidā Sundarī begged her daughter, "Actually, please, Śrī Rādhā, dance with the yoginī and become cured of this madness where you are calling out these names at night-time with such passion."

So to please her mother, Kīrtidā Sundarī, Rādhā reluctantly agreed. As she started dancing with this yoginī, she was very close to the yoginī and she asked her a few questions as they were dancing. She said, "My dear ascetic lady, how is it that you are a renunciate, but I see your eyes are dark with collyrium, kājala? How are you a renunciate? You have kājala in your eyes, decorated very nicely."

The yoginī replied, "Well, Śrī Rādhā, one time when I was traveling in the Himalayan mountains, I met a sādhu who told me that if I put kājala in my eyes each day made from almonds and different herbs, I will always be blessed with the association of the Lord’s devotees."

Rādhārāṇī kind of gave this quizzical look, and then she said, "Dearest yoginī, please tell me why you are chewing betel? Renunciates do not chew betel."

So the yoginī explained, "Rādhā, I was on my way to the Yamunā one day when a sādhu came up and gave me some betel prasādam, betel prasādam from Lord Nārāyaṇa. He said if I did not respect it, I would be making an offense to the Lord. That is why I am eating this betel nut."

So Rādhārāṇī is looking a little suspicious here. She continued with her questions to the yoginī as they danced. She said, "My dear sādhvī, where are you from?"

The yoginī replied, "I come from the forest of Prema, Śrī Vṛndāvana."

Then Śrī Rādhā asked, "And which sampradāya are you initiated into?"

The yoginī replied, "I am initiated into the sampradāya of Prema."

Śrī Rādhā was surprised. Then Śrī Rādhā asked, "And who is your guru?"

The yoginī replied, "My guru is Prema-mūrti." Now, when I was reading this, there was one ācārya who commented that the Prema-mūrti is actually Śrī Rādhā herself. So the yoginī replied, "My guru is Prema-mūrti, like you."

Then Śrī Rādhā asked, "My dear sādhvī, why is it that you have taken renunciation at such a young age?"

The yoginī replied, "I have taken renunciation at such a young age to find real love of God."

So Śrī Rādhā moved in closer to the yoginī and asked, "Sādhvī, please tell me something more about yourself."

The yoginī smiled and she said, "I am from another country, but I left everything behind there—my pleasure, my sense gratification, my opulences, my comfort, my relatives, my family—everything. The truth is, I left everything just to achieve the Goddess of Love."

After that, Rādhā asked her, "And what will you do if later on you somehow become attached to the material world again? Because you renounced the world at such a young age, it might happen."

The yoginī said, "Because I have tasted the sweetness of all rasas, I will never fall back into the sour and bitter taste of this material world."

Then Śrī Rādhā paused for a moment and asked her, "And what, dear one, is the true reality of everything?"

The yoginī smiled and said, "Śrī Rādhā, true reality is to sit next to you and appreciate that you have the most beautiful eyes in all the three worlds." That is what the yoginī said. "True reality is to sit next to you and appreciate that you have the most beautiful eyes in all the three worlds."

Then the yoginī became very emotional, and a flood of tears came from her eyes and she started calling out, "Oh, Rādhe! I am yours! Oh, Rādhe, I am yours! I am yours!" And then she fell unconscious. Everyone present, it is written, just stood like statues appreciating this yoginī’s deep love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. When suddenly, as Tuṅgavidyā-sakhī came forward to comfort the yoginī, she saw to her great surprise a flute—a flute sticking out of the small bag that the yoginī had draped over her shoulder. At that moment, Tuṅgavidyā understood Kṛṣṇa had tricked her. She said, "I am not going to let you come together," but Kṛṣṇa had tricked her and all the others. Tuṅgavidyā understood that the yoginī was none other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself disguised as a lady ascetic. And when she realized this, and all the gopīs realized this, they all cheered, as they often do when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are united in their pastimes of love.

All right, Kṛṣṇa, so wonderful. One ācārya writes, and I will conclude:

> "I will worship the disguised Kṛṣṇa who entertained Rādhā and her sakhīs with His playful pastimes. I offer my respectful obeisances again and again to the sakhīs whose ultimate goal is always to reunite the divine couple in the forest of Vṛndāvana, Śrī Śrī Vṛndāvana."

What more can be said? If you are an actor—yes, I will be back again in a couple of days and we will, I think we have two of the aṣṭa-sakhīs to discuss; we have two more lectures on the aṣṭa-sakhīs. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""