"*00462*.*
"Hi Krishna, dear devotees, welcome back once again. *Vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaś ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca patitānāṃ pāvanebhyo vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ.* *Nama oṃ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe...*

So, we are continuing with our series on the glories of Rūpa Gosvāmī and his beloved deity, Govindadeva. In our last class, we discussed how, after Rūpa Gosvāmī's departure, the Rajput kings nicely maintained the *sevā* (service) of Govindajī at the sacred *yoga-pīṭha*. Then, we mentioned how in 1667, the Muslim tyrant Aurangzeb made a black decree—you remember—to destroy all the Hindu schools and temples in his empire. Just yesterday, I discovered another decree he made just for the area of Mathurā. I found it in an old document written by one Ishwar Das Nagar. It’s described that he was a brāhmaṇa from Pākpaṭan who happened to be with Aurangzeb while he was visiting Mathurā, and this person wrote: 

> "When the imperial army was camping at Mathurā, a holy city of the Hindus, the state of affairs with regard to the temples of Mathurā was brought to the attention of His Majesty, Emperor Aurangzeb. Thus, he ordered the *faujdār* of the city, Abdul Nabi Khan, to entirely raze to the ground every temple in the region and construct large mosques over their demolished sites."

So, that was just for the Mathurā area, and it was a few nights later that Aurangzeb took special aim at Govinda’s temple, as we discussed in detail previously, and sent his troops to destroy the Govindajī temple and all the other temples in Vṛndāvana as well. That we described in detail, and we won't repeat.

We did go into detail, of course, on how the head pujari of the Govinda temple at the time—his name was... well, he’s another one of our heroes now—Śivarām Gosvāmī, quickly organized that the deities of Govindajī, Rādhārāṇī, and Vṛndādevī be taken quickly out of the temple and hidden in nearby Govinda-kuṇḍa, the Govinda-kuṇḍa near that Govindadeva temple. Now, what happened next is of great historical significance and utterly fascinating. By hearing these pastimes that we’re going to share with you, we can take a great pride in the Vaiṣṇava heroes that we’re going to hear about.

So, 10 days after the initial attack on the temple—remember that the Mughal warriors, they worked for two months on destroying the temple—but 10 days after the initial attack, the deities of Govindajī, Rādhā, and Vṛndādevī were secretly taken out from the deep waters of Govinda-kuṇḍa by the devotees, you could say, who had survived the slaughter. Now, this was no easy task, for the general in charge of the Mughal army that had actually attacked the temple, he placed a night guard; well, he placed guards everywhere during the day and during the night, hoping to catch any devotees trying to rescue the deities that they had hidden. 

So how did the devotees accomplish getting, you know, so many huge deities? You know, the Vṛndādevī is very big, Rādhārāṇī is big, and of course, if you’ve seen Vṛndādevī, she’s also very big. How did the devotees get them out of Govinda-kuṇḍa in the dead of night with night guards everywhere? Well, Śivarām Gosvāmī, I was reading, came up with an ingenious idea. He put some cow dung patties in a pot and placed sheep wool on top of them, and then he lit the sheep wool on fire. Now, it wasn't uncommon to see people carrying burning cow dung patties in those days because the smoke was a useful way of keeping mosquitoes away, but Śivarām Gosvāmī added something extra to the fire. And what was that? He threw on handfuls of opium powder. Opium powder! Then he covered his mouth and nose with a cloth, and he walked around past the night guards who were standing watch, and the opium smoke immediately put all the guards to sleep. It intoxicated them to the point they fell asleep—all of them.

Then, gathering a few strong men, he went to Govinda-kuṇḍa and somehow managed to take Govindajī, Rādhā, and Vṛndādevī out from the bottom of the *kuṇḍa*. Then the men carefully placed all the deities on a really large bullock cart, which actually—I’ve heard—is now somewhere in Jaipur, put away safely. I’d love to have *darśana* of that bullock cart. But they put all the deities on this large bullock cart, and Śivarām Gosvāmī had also arranged that some devotees retrieve—remember that wooden box with many of the Six Gosvāmīs' scriptures inside that had been hidden in a field of mud when Aurangzeb’s army had attacked Vṛndāvana? He arranged for them to go get that box, and he also placed that on that bullock cart. So then, Gosvāmī covered the deities and the box with a large cloth, and then he put big bunches of dry grass hay over the cloth. And then two devotees posing as farmers got onto the bullock cart—there’s a lot of detail I read in the institute—and a man named Pandey, who would be driving the cart, and his younger brother, who would take care of the deities, they settled into that cart, ready for the journey out to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. That was the first place they took Govindajī and the other deities: to Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Now, one obstacle they faced—and it was a major one—was that Aurangzeb had declared a lockdown—we all know what a lockdown is now—in Mathurā and all the surrounding areas. It meant that all stores and businesses had to close, and no traffic whatsoever was allowed on the roads. Now, why did he do this? He did this to give his soldiers time to search all the houses, the residences, the godowns, the barns, etc., for any deities that had been hidden, as well as to stop devotees from moving those deities to safer locations. And I was reading he was especially interested in finding Govindajī. So our hero Śivarām Gosvāmī's idea was to take Govindajī and the other deities to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Now, why Rādhā-kuṇḍa? You know, we think of Rādhā-kuṇḍa now—it’s, well actually, now it’s like a 40-minute drive from Vṛndāvana—but at that time in history, Rādhā-kuṇḍa was still considered very remote and undeveloped. Of course, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī had previously excavated Rādhā-kuṇḍa, but still, it was a very undeveloped area and there were only a few renounced Gauḍīya *sādhus* living there at that time; they were babajis. Besides that, the area between Vṛndāvana and Rādhā-kuṇḍa was just a really dense forest—really dense forest—and the dirt road between Vṛndāvana and Rādhā-kuṇḍa was practically impassable, I was reading, which was full of these big potholes. 

So, you know, anyone who wanted to follow up some idea that maybe the deities were taken to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, they’d probably give up. Who would go out there? Now, another factor in the mind of Śivarām Gosvāmī was that there were the Jāṭs and the Gūjārs. The Jāṭs and the Gūjārs—they were farmers, but they were also known as very fierce, warrior-like people who Śivarām Gosvāmī knew would immediately come to the aid of the bullock cart if required. If, you know, some of Aurangzeb’s soldiers saw that cart, these Jāṭs and Gūjārs, they would come. So, Śivarām Gosvāmī, he assigned one local villager to ride a horse 100 meters in front of the bullock cart to warn against any thieves who might be waiting on the path or, again, God forbid, if any of Aurangzeb’s soldiers were searching for the deities or trying to, you know, make sure that the lockdown was working—nobody was traveling. So he placed that villager on a horse 100 meters ahead, and he arranged that that villager, should he confront any danger, Śivarām Gosvāmī said, "You whip your horse, too," and the screaming of the horse would signal to Pandey and his brother, 100 meters back, of impending danger. 100 meters back, the horse would neigh, and then Pandey and his brother would, "Oh, there’s some danger coming!" So very carefully, Pandey and his brother, under the cover of darkness, began making their way to Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Now, Vaiṣṇava historians have given further reasons why Śivarām Gosvāmī chose Rādhā-kuṇḍa as the first safe haven for the deities, who he envisioned eventually going to Amer, because the Rajput kings—we discussed how many times, they’re all Kṛṣṇa-*bhaktas* and they were facilitating the worship of the deities in Vṛndāvana. So, in Śivarām Gosvāmī's mind, he made a line from Vṛndāvana to Amer, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa is actually in that direction. So, he saw it as a safe haven for the deities—their first stop—because it took years, actually, for them to go to Amer. And another reason is that he knew that the worship of the deities would continue at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Rādhā-kuṇḍa was considered a place of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, and there were Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas living there, as I mentioned. As we discussed the other day, there were, and there still are, other Vaiṣṇavas in Vṛndāvana besides the Gauḍīyas, besides the followers of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, but Rādhā-kuṇḍa was considered the place of the Gauḍīyas. Just like, for example, the followers of Vallabhācārya, the Puṣṭimārga, they have their certain places in Braja, especially out at Gokula and also near Govardhana Hill. We gave a lecture one time on Candra-sarovara—Candra-sarovara is a favorite place of the Puṣṭimārga, the Vallabhas. So, Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa were seen as a place of the Gauḍīyas first and foremost because Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had discovered Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa while visiting Vṛndāvana, and then later on Jīva Gosvāmī had purchased much of the land there, and of course, our great ācārya Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī spent many decades doing *bhajana* out there. So, Śivarām Gosvāmī knew that the Gauḍīya babajis out at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, they would continue with the worship of the deities. This was on his mind: not only that we move them safely, but the *pūjā* goes on. This is deity worship. 

I was remembering that when I was reading this, that Prabhupāda said one time that once you start the worship of the Śālagrāma-śilā, it should never stop. He was giving some instruction to a devotee who had a Śālagrāma, he said, "Once you begin the worship, it must go on every day, here, regardless." So, Śivarām Gosvāmī was thinking, not only moving the deities but continuing the *pūjā*. This is a pujari, this is a Vaiṣṇava devotee. Ironically also, the worship of the deities out at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, it would be made safer because—well, ironically again—all the deity’s valuable paraphernalia that had been gifted by the Rajput kings, all the gold and silver and jewels, unfortunately, had been stolen by Aurangzeb’s soldiers. So, no jewels meant no extra attention. So, once again, you know, Govindajī would be worshipped in a simple way, like Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī had first worshipped him when he was first discovered at Yoga-pīṭha. You may remember, we described some of the details of how Rūpa Gosvāmī—you know, when he began the *pūjā*, practically the same day he discovered Govindajī, he started the *pūjā*. Sometimes devotees say, they ask me, "You know, what's the most important rule or regulation in deity worship? There's so many rules." I always say the most important rule in deity worship is to always remember the deity’s a person. Always remember the deity’s a person, and then all the other rules and regulations fall in place. 

So here’s Govindajī, and he’s being, you know, secretly moved from Vṛndāvana proper out to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He needs his, you know, he needs to take rest, he needs to wake up in the morning—he’s a person! He’s the Supreme Person. He needs his bath, he needs to be dressed, and he needs to be fed. So, Śivarām Gosvāmī and all the devotees understood this. So of course, the worship was going to be different; it was going to be like Rūpa Gosvāmī started the worship. You remember how we described how Rūpa Gosvāmī would decorate Govindajī with *prākṛta-ṭīkā*... *prākṛta-ṭīkā*, which means *śṛṅgāra* or ornaments made by nature, like creepers and flower dresses and *guñjā-berī* garlands and Vaijayantī flower beads and Tulasī leaf garlands, etc. Remember? And now, Rūpa Gosvāmī would also place a water pot, you know, a simple water pot near Govindajī, as well as a stick from a kadamba tree and a *mukuṭa* or a crown made of Tulasī beads. Simple, but of course offered with pure devotion, the most important element. 

Now, to further ensure the safety and protection of the deities going out to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śivarām Gosvāmī did something which I thought was really amazing. He went out to that area where he already had many admirers and followers in the Jāṭ and Gūjār families, and he gave many of them *dīkṣā* or initiation, because he knew that like the Vaiṣṇavas who had stood up to the soldiers coming to destroy Govindajī’s temple, who as you remember actually sacrificed their lives defending the Lord, defending the deity, these Jāṭ and Gūjār men and women who became his disciples would do the same for Govindajī if required at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He went out there and he gave them *dīkṣā*, gave them initiation, which definitely increases one’s *śraddhā*, one’s faith, one’s *guru-niṣṭhā*—faith in the guru and his mission. So you know, this would make a great movie, wouldn’t it? The real movie, the most important movie of all time. 

So slowly, the cart of Govindajī moved from Vṛndāvana to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Fortunately, without incident. When it arrived at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, it was met by some Jāṭ and Gūjār farmers, weapons in hand. And a lot of details actually given: the cart actually first stopped next to the sacred *bhajana-kuṭīra* and *samādhi-mandira* of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, where the few devotees living at Rādhā-kuṇḍa had already made arrangements for receiving Govindajī. Of course, everything’s, you know, top secret, but the *pūjā* goes on no matter what. And those Gauḍīyas—they were babajis, they were renunciates—they took these deities, big deities, out of the cart and they placed them under a large banyan tree. Previously, Govindajī and Rādhā and Vṛndādevī had this magnificent temple, golden utensils, and opulent worship, and now they’re standing under a banyan tree. 

And those Gauḍīya babajis, they first offered the deities a preparation called *śrama-bhoga*. *Śrama-bhoga*. Now, the term *śrama-bhoga* refers to a specific *bhoga* offering which the older Gopis would offer to Kṛṣṇa at Nandagrāma when he came back from herding cows in Vṛndāvana in the late afternoon. Now, in *śāstra*, I found—actually, I found it in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, which is turning out to be a big blessing for all of us—I found there in the institute, it’s written: "'Śrama' means hard work, and 'bhoga' means food offering, so *śrama-bhoga* means an offering of cooling food particles that release the stress of the Lord which is caused by his intense efforts during his pastimes." So, the devotees at Rādhā-kuṇḍa offered *śrama-bhoga* to Govindajī and Śrī Rādhā and Vṛndādevī, thinking that they must have felt stressed from the difficult journey from Vṛndāvana to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. How personal! The same preparation that was offered 5,000 years ago to Kṛṣṇa when he came back from the fields, a little tired.

So we should bear in mind again that this was the first time in almost 79 years that there was no gold plates, gold paraphernalia for the offering. All the paraphernalia that they used that day, I was reading, was made from clay, lovingly made by the babajis. While the deities made their perilous journey, that night word got out, they immediately went to work, and they took the mud of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and they fashioned plates and cups and all types of paraphernalia for the worship of the deities. And from that day on, throughout the many years it took the deities to reach their ultimate destination, which was Jaipur, the *pūjā* was done as it had been since the time of Rūpa Gosvāmī, of course without all the gold, but the same worship, the rituals went on. 

So how was that possible to keep such dedicated worship? It was possible because all those many devotees loved Govindajī. You could say that is the fruit of deity worship; it’s the purpose of deity worship, like any other activity we do in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to awaken one’s love for Kṛṣṇa. I came across a beautiful letter in that regard that Prabhupāda wrote to my godbrother, Vāsudeva dāsa, on March 6, 1970, and I quote: 

> "My beloved spiritual master, I am also very pleased to learn that the deities are now receiving proper service and you are developing a great love for them. Please continue your sincere service with even greater vigor, and your love will grow increasingly more. Actually, when this dormant love for Kṛṣṇa is aroused in the heart of the devotee, there are for him no more problems in life. So continue to chant regularly, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and be happy. Your nice service attitude is most encouraging to me." 

So there it is. By worshiping the deity, the *arca*-form of the Lord, because Kṛṣṇa is present in that form—he’s not different than the deity, "My dear Lord, you are not a statue," the young brāhmaṇa said, "You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda." So one’s love will develop. So all these devotees who—we can’t even describe or know how many devotees served Govindajī through the centuries—their love was expressed in their dedicated, regular service to the deity. So despite the catastrophic situation in Vṛndāvana at that time, the worship of Rādhā-Govinda and Vṛndādevī went on as always, but for the time being with clay plates. I’m just so impressed by all those devotees. I offer them my obeisances thousands and thousands of times. It encourages me in my deity worship, and I’m sure it also encourages all of you. Deity worship is a unique gift that Śrīla Prabhupāda gave to the Western world. 

Of course, at that time only a very few devotees carried on that worship in secret. No bells were heard ringing from the *sevā* of Govindajī, no big *kīrtanas* were there in front of him; his worship was done in absolute secrecy, secrecy and strict confidence. I actually read that even the residents of the nearby villages around Rādhā-kuṇḍa, they never knew that Govindajī was being worshipped in Rādhā-kuṇḍa—that’s how, you know, tight the secret was. And that says something, you know? There were devotees who knew this was going on, obviously—those devotees who hid the deities, those devotees who rescued, took the deities out of the *kuṇḍa*, who helped arrange for the bullock cart, and the *sādhus* at Rādhā-kuṇḍa—a number of devotees, but the secret was kept because of their devotion. There’s that common saying in the material world: "If three people share a secret, that secret can only remain if two of them are dead." Can we keep that secret if two of them are dead? But here we see the Vaiṣṇavas, mum’s the word, tight-lipped, forgiving. So that being the case, only a few devotees kept this secret. 

We can hardly imagine the feelings of separation that the Vrajabāsīs in the greater Vaiṣṇava community were feeling in the absence of Govindajī. They didn’t know where he was, if he’d even been rescued, or that he was on his way to Jaipur to the kingdom of Jai Singh II—another one of our heroes, we’ll hear more about him later—he actually had a dream, I was reading, that Govindajī was on his way, and he was cooperating with Śivarām Gosvāmī to take the deities on that journey. I’d love to be part of that pastime. So, what were the general devotees feeling when Govindajī had left? He was their life and soul. Actually, historians have noted that Govindajī’s leaving Vṛndāvana, beginning with the move to Rādhā-kuṇḍa and then many other villages along the way, which we’ll describe in further lectures on the way to Jaipur, his leaving Vṛndāvana had the same effect on the people of Vṛndāvana at that time as it did on the Vrajabāsīs when Akrūra took Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma out of Vṛndāvana on a chariot bound for Mathurā 5,000 years ago. Had the same effect. When Govindajī left, it had the same effect on the Vrajabāsīs as did the Vrajabāsīs feeling Kṛṣṇa’s separation when Akrūra took him to Mathurā. For the Vrajabāsīs living in Vṛndāvana in 1667, Govindajī was the be-all and end-all of their existence, and his magnificent temple always stood for them as a testament to the love and devotion that their beloved Rūpa Gosvāmī had for Govindadeva. And all of a sudden, it was torn away from them. You can imagine. 

How they cried oceans of tears. Actually, how to understand the feelings of the people of Vṛndāvana during those fateful days in 1667? Well, I thought we could study the hearts of the Vrajabāsīs who lost Kṛṣṇa 5,000 years ago in Vṛndāvana. The feelings, the sentiments of both parties were the same. There’s that axiom: "Two things equal to one thing are equal to each other." Two things equal to one thing are equal to each other. So, the feelings of the Vrajabāsīs 5,000 years ago when Kṛṣṇa left and the feelings of the Vrajabāsīs when Kṛṣṇa left as Govindajī in 1667, they’re the same. 

So let’s take a moment to try and understand the feelings of the residents of Vṛndāvana when Kṛṣṇa left, in order to get a better understanding of the feelings of the Vrajabāsīs when Govinda left. And how to do that? Well, an old friend of mine, a genuine Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava saint—he was a close friend of mine, his name was Your Mohan Prabhu; he passed away a few years ago—whenever I would meet him, he would sing a very beautiful Oḍiyā *bhajana* because he was from Orissa. He would sing a very beautiful Oḍiyā *bhajana* composed by a Vaiṣṇava poet in medieval times. The devotee’s name was Bhakta Charan Das, and the poem is called *Mathurā Maṅgala*. It’s actually hundreds and hundreds of verses, but I thought today we could conclude with a few of those verses so we understand what is separation from Kṛṣṇa. 

So I’m going to recite these verses for you as a conclusion to our class. We can think of those devotees in 1667 and just, you know, we can feel their hearts, we can feel their separation, and pray that one day we can also have the same sentiments for Govindajī, for Kṛṣṇa. So here’s the poem of Bhakta Charan Das, his *Mathurā Maṅgala*: 

"Staring at Govinda’s lotus face, the Gopis said, 'O Mohan, now that you are leaving for Mathurā, who in your absence will look after us? Your departure will mean our death. Do we need to live any longer now that our only support, Mohan, is leaving for Kaṁsapura? Better kill us by poison and live in peace there. Your absence for a moment bears heavily on us, let alone two or four days. When you went to the Vṛndāvana forest, leading the cattle along in the company of your cowherd friends, we used to wait anxiously for your return. Seeing you coming back, we regained our lives. As lilies bloom cheerfully when the moon shines, we would be filled with joy as is a lotus at the sight of the sun, or a blind man getting back his eyesight, or a poor man upon finding a gem. Perturbed to see Kṛṣṇa departing, the fish-eyed Gopis, oblivious of the presence of respectable elders, cried out, "O Kṛṣṇa, what provokes you to kill us so mercilessly? We are not Pūtanās of Gokula with none to protect us, so Kṛṣṇa, you will see with your own eyes how by taking poison we will kill ourselves. Let the fourteen worlds know we lost our lives as Kṛṣṇa deserted us. He did not kill us himself, but his departure from Gokula caused our death. O Kṛṣṇa, you will be guilty of killing the ones you have sheltered! Have you forgotten how many times you saved us from peril? On the eve of your departure, you are taking those lives you have saved. O Kṛṣṇa, it’s not fair. You are not the same Govinda, as benevolent as before.'" 

So, these were the feelings of both the Vrajabāsīs 5,000 years ago and in 1667 when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana. So, we’ll continue the journey along with Govindajī in a couple of days. We’ll explain a little bit more about his pastimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and then his next journey to Kāmīvana. So please be patient for a couple more days. Thank you, Prabhu, so much; this is just pure nectar. O, glory to the *māya*...""