"*00481*.*
"### The Untold Pastimes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī - Kartik Parikrama 2024

Harish, let’s first thank you for such a wonderful kīrtana, capturing the mood of Braja where we are today. So, welcome to Rāval, which is the maternal home of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Actually, today we are sitting at the base of the hill at the village of Citrā Devī; she is one of Rādhārāṇī’s eight sakhīs or very close girlfriends. As we later proceed up the hill, you will often be greeted by devotees who say, "We all honor and worship and give our lives to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī because she is Lord Kṛṣṇa’s favorite gopī, His eternal consort, who has the purest and deepest love for Kṛṣṇa." Therefore, she is the topmost devotee. This is made very clear by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda in his book which we call *Nectar of Instruction*, verse number 10: 

> "Clearly, the gopīs are dearer to the Lord than Kṛṣṇa’s other devotees, and dearer still are those who place devotion above the goal of liberation. But better yet are those who have achieved prema, and best among them are the lotus-eyed cowherd girls of Vraja. Dearer to Kṛṣṇa than all of them is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and Her sacred pond, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, is just as dear to the Lord. So, what pious person would not take shelter there?"

So, Śrīla Prabhupāda is revealing to us that Rādhā actually stands supreme amongst all of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees. And those devotees who are aspiring, like us, to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, we take shelter of her, following in the footsteps of our Ācāryas, in particular our own beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. In a room conversation on August 21st, 1976, Prabhupāda said—it's a famous quote—"My father was a great devotee because he was a pure Vaiṣṇava, and he wanted me to become like this. He was praying to Rādhārāṇī. Any saintly person who would come, he would simply say, 'Give blessings to my son that he may become Rādhārāṇī’s servant.' This was my father’s prayer. He never prayed, 'May my son become a rich man.'" So, Prabhupāda said, "He prayed like that for me." 

So, we are ultimately praying; we are worshiping the Divine Couple who have appeared in the age of Kali. We are Gauḍīyas, but we are only here because of the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda. He is taking us from ignorance to knowledge, from darkness to light, from the material world to the spiritual world, and in the spiritual world, to the topmost planet, Goloka Vṛndāvana, where we will serve the Divine Couple. So, Prabhupāda has made it very clear that his father prayed to the sādhu to bless his son to become a devotee of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Actually, there is no more glorious position than to become Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s servant, and Śrīla Prabhupāda puts this very wonderfully in his famous *Bhakti-mahimā-śataka*, verse 34. It makes it very, very clear who we are and where we are going. It is a long verse, but every word is relishable:

> "Glorious are those persons who desire to climb out of the well of material existence and attain liberation. Even more glorious are those who have dedicated themselves to the service of Lord Kṛṣṇa. More elevated again are those who have become attached to Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. Those who love the husband of the queen Rukmiṇī are even superior to such devotees. Well, still more praiseworthy are those who are dear to the son of Yaśodā. More glorious again are those who have made friends with Subala’s comrade, and superior to those in the mood of friendship are those who worship the Lord as the lover of the gopīs. However, standing at the head of all devotees in the creation are those who have been carried away by the flood of pure, unadulterated love emanating from the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and worship Her above all."

Isn’t that beautiful? So that personality, that Divine personality Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she resides eternally in the blissful abode of Goloka, the topmost planet in the spiritual world. But by her causeless mercy, she came to this material world, specifically to Gokula. We explained the other day there is Goloka and Gokula. In the spiritual world, she is known as Goloka-Rāṇī—Rāṇī means Queen—and when Goloka comes to this place where we are now, she becomes Gokula-Rāṇī. She must be very compassionate to come to this nasty material world. The spiritual world is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. Is this world eternal? No. Full of knowledge? It’s mostly ignorance. And is there bliss? Very, very little. But she came. 

We learn in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*—we all know how 5,000 years ago the world was in a very distressed state of being. In *Kṛṣṇa Book*, Prabhupāda summarizes the state of the world at that time; almost, you could say, poetically. Everyone knows the introduction: once the world was overburdened by the unnecessary defense forces of different kings who were actually demons but were posing themselves as the royal order. So the *Bhāgavatam* goes on to describe, as you know, how Bhūmi, the predominating deity of this Earth, went and complained to Lord Brahmā. If you have a complaint, you go to the manager, and you present your complaint to the manager. So, Bhūmi went to Brahmā, and then Brahmā, he went to the shore, as we know, of the milk ocean, and he spoke to Lord Viṣṇu, to Lord Kṛṣṇa, and convinced Him to come to the Earth planet to set things right. So Kṛṣṇa eventually agreed. 

So this we hear in *Kṛṣṇa Book*, but there is much more detail in a śāstra called *Garga-saṁhitā*. Actually, *Garga-saṁhitā* is worthy of quotation. As we learned from Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his commentary on *Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta* 1.1, verses 22 and 23, he writes there: "The confidential science of pure devotional service is taught explicitly only in a few Vedic scriptures, little known to the public. Amongst these rare texts are the texts as follows: *Gopāla-tāpanī*, *Nārada-pañcarātra*, *Garga-saṁhitā*, the *Viṣṇu Purāṇa*, the *Harivaṁśa*, *Upapurāṇa*, the *Uttara-kāṇḍa* of the *Padma Purāṇa*, and the *Bhāgavata Mahāpurāṇa*." 

What we are trying to do here is to establish the authority of *Garga-saṁhitā* so we can share a pastime therein with all of you. How many times have I said that, you know, when speaking in learned circles—because you are all learned devotees—the speaker has to confirm what he is saying by referring to śāstra. Śrīla Prabhupāda also refers to *Garga-saṁhitā* in his *Nārada-bhakti-mahātmya*, wherein he quotes the *Garga-saṁhitā* 21 times. Again, I’m trying to establish the authority of *Garga-saṁhitā* because many times when I give lectures, trying to go deeper, people say, "Where’d you get that? Where’s that quote? Where does it say that?" Sometimes people do question *Garga-saṁhitā*. So, he quotes it 21 times. For example, in chapter 3, text 19, he writes as follows: *Māyā, māyā, kṛṣṇa-māyā*—it is the Lord’s yoga-māyā potency. It is filled with ever-increasing bliss. In the *Garga-saṁhitā*, it is described as the destroyer of all sins. 

So, in *Garga-saṁhitā*, it says that Kṛṣṇa was preparing to descend to the Earth towards the end of Dvāpara-yuga, as per the request of the demigods. But while doing so, He went to His beloved consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and asked if she could please accompany Him here to the Earth. It’s only natural, because one of the names of Rādhārāṇī is *Anapāyinī*, meaning she is never separated from Kṛṣṇa. So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Can you come with me?" She thought for a moment, and then she agreed on the following condition. Now, some of you know these conditions, but you may not have known where it’s quoted, where this pastime was quoted. Now you know: *Garga-saṁhitā*. 

She said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Śyāmasundara, wherever You go, I must also be there. But how can I be happy where there is no Vṛndāvana forest, no Yamunā River, no Govardhana Hill? Kṛṣṇa, if You want me to come with You to the earthly planet, then we must bring all of Vṛndāvana with us, especially the Vṛndāvana forest, the Yamunā River, and Govardhana." So of course, Kṛṣṇa agreed. And therefore, shortly afterwards, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī made her appearance in Rāval. It is a small village in Braja. Of course, Kṛṣṇa appeared in the jail house of Kaṁsa in Mathurā, or we say in Gokula, but she appeared in a little village called Rāval. And the śāstras say that just as Kṛṣṇa enjoyed His childhood in Gokula and His youth in Nandagrām, so Rādhā enjoyed her childhood in Rāval, and then she moved to here, Bārsaṇā, as a young girl. And if you see on a map of Vraja, you see there is Nandagrām where Kṛṣṇa lived, and Bārsaṇā, not too big a distance, but a lot went on between these two mountains. 

Now, by his deep spiritual vision, Rūpa Gosvāmī has a very beautiful description of Rādhārāṇī, actually being very poetic. He doesn’t refer directly to Rāval; he calls it *Māvali*. He says she appeared in *Māvali*, which means "chief of all the other towns in Vraja." I read that, and I think, "Well, I’d like to know more about Māvali." So he gives us more information in his illustrious *Bhakti-ratnākara*, text 90. He writes as follows: 

> "In the city—he calls it a city—in the city of Māvali, the precious jewel known as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī took birth in the mind of Kīrtidā, Kīrtidā’s womb, which is glorified by jubilant demigods, sages, and human beings." And then he continues, "I pray that when I enter King Vṛṣabhānu’s capital city of Māvali, populated by many gopas, gopīs, and surabhi cows, I may drown in a great flood of transcendental bliss and love." 

So essentially, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī appeared in Rāval. Now, there are three different versions given in *Garga-saṁhitā*—the authoritative *Garga-saṁhitā*—of how Rādhārāṇī made her appearance in this world. Three different versions. First one is that she made her Divine appearance from the ground. The second version is she made her appearance on the top of a lotus flower. The third is that she appeared in the womb of her mother. This is all factual information. Just facts. You know, as you go through life, you have to deal with a lot of facts, little facts, but these are the facts we want to absorb ourselves in. 

As far as the ground version is concerned, in a *Rāsa-līlā* lecture given by Prabhupāda in Montreal on August 30th, 1968, he refers to Rādhārāṇī appearing from the ground. And this is 1968; Prabhupāda is giving some very deep spiritual history. So he describes that once, King Vṛṣabhānu was plowing his fields with a golden plow when he found baby Rādhā within the Earth, and he picked her up and brought her to his palace and gave her to his Queen. 

In my mind’s eye, I was just trying to imagine the king is plowing the ground with a golden plow. So many things come up from the ground when you’re a farmer; you’ll know a lot of things come up from the ground when you’re plowing. Just like you see the cows or the buffalo; they’re all grazing. There are always those little white birds that accompany them because when the cows are eating the grass, the Earth comes up and the little worms are there. So those little white birds, they eat the worms. And it’s real teamwork, you know. For the birds to go and get the worms out of the ground, that’s difficult. But the cows eating the grass and the worms are coming naturally, so you always see these birds. Sometimes they sit on the back of the buffalo or the cows; they just wait for lunch. So King Vṛṣabhānu is plowing the field, a little baby girl appears. And I was thinking how similar that is to a pastime where the father of Sītā-devī, Janaka Mahārāja, finds Sītā in the ground when he was plowing the field as well. 

So, first version. Second version is that Rādhā makes her appearance on a lotus flower. She appeared on a lotus flower in the Yamunā. That pastime is revealed or spoken about from my Godbrother Bhakti Puruṣottama Swami’s book, *Glories and Pastimes of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī*, on page 57. He writes there, or he’s quoting from some scripture because I couldn't get the book in time, that Rādhārāṇī’s father, King Vṛṣabhānu, was bathing in the Yamunā River one day. He’s taking his bath and suddenly looks up, and he sees a thousand-petal lotus flower floating down the river towards him. You know, when you’re in the river, you see many things like pieces of bark and leaves; he saw a thousand-petal lotus flower—just in your mind, a thousand petals—and in the center of that lotus flower is sitting a very fulgent baby girl. So as the lotus flower is passing by, King Vṛṣabhānu, he lifted the smiling baby out of the lotus and embraced her. And when he did, the ācāryas say he felt waves of transcendental ecstasy move throughout his body. 

I remember when I was a young boy, there was a storm in my town, and the trees had fallen down, the telephone poles had fallen down. So our neighbor was out cleaning things up; he happened to grab the wire of the electrical company. You could see the energy all passing through his body, then he fell unconscious. So Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu, he’s embracing little Rādhā and he’s feeling this surge of transcendental ecstasy because she is *hlādinī-śakti*; she is the pleasure, the manifestation of the pleasure potency of Kṛṣṇa. So you can just imagine what’s going through his body. 

The third version—see, one, two, three—the third version is from the *Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa*, *Kṛṣṇa-janma-khaṇḍa*, chapter 6, verse 6, and chapter 28, verse 186. Double authority. There, Rādhā appeared in the womb of her mother Kīrtidā without having been impregnated by her husband. And that is the version that we follow in our celebration of when Rādhārāṇī appears. It’s very beautifully described: how as clouds floated very peacefully—you see a thunderstorm, here’s some clouds floating very peacefully in the sky—Rādhārāṇī made her appearance at noon on the eighth day of the bright fortnight of the moon of the month of Bhādra, which is generally like August and September. So, this means to think about or to remember, to dwell. It brings Kṛṣṇa by these little facts we’re giving you today. And by these different versions of Rādhārāṇī’s appearance, you have substance, matter for *smaraṇam*, for remembering. 

With all due respect, in Western countries, if you ask someone to describe God, they’ll go, "Ah, He lives up there. What’s His name? His name is God." I’m not being disrespectful; I’m just saying it’s the truth, it’s absolute truth, but it’s simplistic. It’s like kindergarten. You can go from kindergarten to grade school to college, university; you can get a master's, you can get a PhD. So *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* is the PhD in the science of self-realization or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One time, Prabhupāda joked, "We know so much about Kṛṣṇa. We know His telephone number: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." 

I often say, "How can you love someone you know nothing about?" In Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it’s very easy to fall out of love with the material world and into love with the spiritual world, specifically the Divine Couple, because we have so much information. We even know that God wears shark-shaped earrings, like little sharks. His lotus eyes go almost to His ears. His lips are red like *bimba* fruit. His nose is like a beautiful sesame flower. He has three lines on His neck. And when He’s playing His flute, He stands in a *tribhanga* pose, bent in three different places. Long black hair, etc., etc. Add infinitum. 

So which of those versions are you going to remember? Any of them. Because it’s all real, because they happen in different millenniums, sometimes, well, when the Lord comes, sometimes there is a little variety of change in the pastime because variety is the spice of life. I like the one where King Vṛṣabhānu is in the river and a thousand-petal lotus passes by; he grabs the baby and embraces it and feels transcendental ecstasy. 

Now, after that, there’s not a lot of information about Rādhārāṇī’s childhood like there is about Kṛṣṇa’s childhood. You know, Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes are recorded by Śukadeva Gosvāmī and in the *Bhāgavatam*, and our Ācāryas, they have revealed many of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes as well. But not so much about Rādhā. She’s Veda-gūḍha; she’s hidden in the Vedas because no one was qualified to really reveal her except Kṛṣṇa, her Divine lover. When He came as Mahāprabhu, her pastimes are kind of hidden because people may misunderstand her Divine personality, which was very clearly given to us by Mahāprabhu and our six Gosvāmīs. 

Many of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s pastimes are oral tradition. If you walk around Vraja and you talk to the residents, they’ll say, "Oh, my father told me, my grandfather told me, his grandfather..." Like these stories or pastimes are passed down through oral tradition like in poetry or songs. A couple years ago, we were doing Govardhana parikrama; you know, there’s this old sādhu kind of walking slowly, and we caught up to him and walked past him. He was singing such beautiful bhajans in Brajabhāṣā. So I told the devotees, "Does anyone ever record? Let’s record him." We were on parikrama. I said, "This is why we come to Braja, to meet the Brajavāsīs. They can help us understand what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Record him." So I said, "Bābā, can we record you?" He just kept on singing, 14 different songs. We recorded, very beautiful. Then I had a devotee who spoke Bhāṣā translate those songs for me later on. All beautiful about, you know, this was the month of Kārttika, he was singing about Dāmodara and singing about Rādhārāṇī and the cowherd boys. Where else would you get it? It’s just oral tradition, but perfectly authentic information about Kṛṣṇa and His transcendental abode. If you want, I can share those recordings with you. 

So generally, it’s accepted if it’s not contrary to tattva or established truths about Kṛṣṇa from śāstra. Another name for oral tradition—like "my mommy told me," "my grandpa told me," you know, like that—it’s called "traditional wisdom." And actually, in Vedic culture, it’s accepted as a type of evidence. There’s that famous verse from the four types of evidence: Vedic knowledge, direct experience, traditional wisdom, and logical induction. One can understand the temporary, insubstantial situation of the material world and thus become detached from the duality of this world. But as regards Rādhārāṇī’s life, we won’t quote any oral tradition here; I can share those bhajans with you of course, they’re very sweet—but we can go again back to śāstra. And there, there is a beautiful līlā in *Garga-saṁhitā*—how Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa first met when they were very tiny and very little. No, there is some information. 

So there we go back to *Garga-saṁhitā*: how they first met. It all begins with Nārada Muni. Nārada Muni, actually, you know, in his travels and wanderings throughout the material and spiritual world, he often gets things going. And yeah, you’ll hear he’s involved a lot in orchestrating Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. So *Garga-saṁhitā* describes, not long after Kṛṣṇa appeared, when Nārada Muni came to Gokula to have darśana of baby Kṛṣṇa. Oh, the Lord has appeared! He wants to have darśana because although it’s a baby Kṛṣṇa, in His babyhood, He retains His godhood. He’s still the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the asuras, they learned that very quickly. So when he came to Gokula, he’s having darśana of baby Kṛṣṇa, and it’s described in *Garga-saṁhitā* that as he was gazing at baby Kṛṣṇa, in his heart he felt some type of message that the Lord’s *hlādinī-śakti*, His pleasure potency, Śrī Rādhā, had taken birth nearby as well. 

So there’s Kṛṣṇa and there’s Rādhā, the Divine Couple. I met Kṛṣṇa. In my heart, I realized that Śrī Rādhā has taken birth somewhere. So he started going from village to village about Braja, inquiring, "Has one beautiful baby girl taken birth here?" And he’s inquiring like that. And where did he end up? Rāval. When he came into Rāval, who was the first person to greet him? King Vṛṣabhānu. So the King said, "Great Sage, it’s wonderful that you’ve appeared in my home. Is there any particular reason you’ve come here?" 

So Nārada said, "Yes, I have a question. Has a girl recently taken birth within your home?" So a big smile came on the face of King Vṛṣabhānu. He said, "Yes, by the grace of the Lord, I have been blessed with a daughter who is divinely effulgent. She’s glowing like the sun." But then King Vṛṣabhānu, he became a little despondent, he became sad. He looked down and he said, "But unfortunately, this child has not yet opened her eyes." And Nārada Muni was like, "What? This beautiful girl not opened her eyes?" And King Vṛṣabhānu said, "No." He said, "Yes, therefore we do not know whether she is blind or if she is a celestial being who is unwilling to look at the imperfections of this world." 

I love that. Remember we were walking with Śrīla Prabhupāda in part of... in Paris somewhere, and there were a lot of historical buildings and you know, museums and things like this, and Prabhupāda was walking along, but I noticed he wasn’t looking at all of these historical things and these beautiful paintings. He was just walking, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." Not interested in the imperfections, because everything’s imperfect here because it’s temporary, full of ignorance. So he wasn’t interested; he was interested in Kṛṣṇa. 

So the King said, "I don’t know, we don’t know if she’s blind or perhaps she was some celestial being from higher planets, from Svargaloka, who’s come to this Earth planet, is not interested in seeing the imperfections of this world." We should become like that as well: disinterested in material life and fully absorbed in spiritual life. As Jesus said, "To be in this world but not of this world." 

So Nārada said, "Can I see her?" He knows... he thought... Veda, he knows everything. So, "Can I see her?" So King Vṛṣabhānu, he sent his servants to bring the baby girl before them. And because of his very deep spiritual insight, Nārada Muni was able to perceive, "This is not an ordinary baby. This is Lord Kṛṣṇa’s eternal consort." And only out of great difficulty, upon seeing Rādhārāṇī, was he able to restrain his ecstatic emotions. So when he was having darśana of little baby Rādhā, he turned to the King, he said, "My dear King, Providence has surely blessed you. Quickly bring me the items so that we can perform a purificatory ceremony. I will perform such a ceremony to ensure that in time this child will bless the world with the glance of her dove-like eyes." I’ve heard of lotus eyes, but I like this: "dove-like eyes." While Rādhārāṇī has dove-like eyes—doves are very beautiful birds. Nārada’s come, he’s going to do a ceremony to welcome my daughter into this world. But it was all an excuse! Nārada just wanted an excuse so the King could go away, so Nārada could have a private darśana with Śrī Rādhā. 

So while the King was getting... left to get all the pūjā paraphernalia together, at that time, Nārada Muni, he knelt down behind, next to Śrī Rādhārāṇī, and revealed his heart to her through prayer. *Vandanam*—prayer is a way of revealing our heart to God. And so, as devotees, we may not be so qualified or deep enough to know what to pray to God, so we can repeat the prayers of liberated souls. Same thing. So, would you like to hear the prayer? First, he had the first darśana. Okay, so it’s found in *Garga-saṁhitā* 18.12. It’s one of my all-time favorite verses, although I haven’t memorized it. Listen to this: 

> "I wander over this Earth meditating on her who is a moon shining in the rāsa dance arena, who is a host of bright lamps in Vṛṣabhānu’s palace, and who is the central jewel in the necklace of Goloka." 

I wander over this Earth meditating on her who is a moon shining in the rāsa dance arena, who is a host of bright lamps in Vṛṣabhānu’s palace, and who is the central jewel in the necklace of Goloka. And as Nārada said this prayer, the little baby girl, she started wiggling her hands like this. She was excited to hear the prayer because love is reciprocal; as we love God, God loves us. But the *Garga-saṁhitā*—authorized *Garga-saṁhitā*—says, knowing that her devotee Nārada was actually eager to behold her original form, Rādhārāṇī appeared before him as a fresh youth, around seven or eight years old, young girl. Not only that, but either side of Rādhā was Lalitā and Viśākhā. So you can imagine, at that point, śāstra says, Nārada Muni, who’s always preaching, preaching, preaching, he became silent. He had no words. He was just stunned. And then suddenly, from around the corner comes the King, King Vṛṣabhānu, with all the pūjā paraphernalia. So immediately, she became a baby again. 

So at this time, with great difficulty, Nārada Muni contained his ecstasies as he went through the ritual ceremony of purification. Jesus said, "My cup runneth over with love." Sometimes these great devotees, they can’t contain their spiritual ecstasies, and they just come forward. Like on several occasions, we saw Prabhupāda go into ecstasy, but he didn’t place much importance on it. He’d always say, "All right, now..." 

Because of that special darśana that Nārada had with Rādhārāṇī, he was left with a very deep and intense desire for more of her association, what’s more, more savor for her service. So he went to a place in Vṛndāvana near Govardhana Hill called Nārada-kuṇḍa, and he performed severe austerities there under the direction of Vṛndā Devī for a long time. It’s another pastime, another class. He was eventually able to enter into Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in the form of a gopī. He took the form of a gopī, a Nārada-gopī. It’s another... we’ll tell it sometime. During that, so some ācāryas say that he simultaneously continues his travels as you know, Nārada, the universe; others say that he left that service as a gopī to continue his service of anyway. 

Now, Rādhārāṇī, she didn’t open her eyes immediately because the whole ceremony was that she’d open her eyes. Come on, look! But King Vṛṣabhānu had great faith that whatever the sage had said previously—that you know, by her vision everything would be put correct in this world—he had faith that by the blessings of Nārada, it would come true, that she would open her eyes. 

So now, a lot of people are coming to take darśana; the word’s out, so whole... everyone’s coming to take darśana. So who was the next to come and take darśana? Next to come and take darśana was Paurṇamāsī, accompanied by Vṛndā. So when Paurṇamāsī—you know, Yoga-māyā, the one who arranges all the pastimes here in Vraja—first saw Rādhārāṇī, some very beautiful words came from her lotus mouth, recorded in scripture. So Paurṇamāsī, Yoga-māyā, turned to King Vṛṣabhānu and Queen Kīrtidā, and she said the following: "This girl is not ordinary. Great personalities like Brahmā, Śiva, and Nārada worship her, knowing that she can fulfill all their desires, material and spiritual." Material and spiritual! "So please take good care of her." No problem. So the King and Queen, they were ecstatic, but at the same time they were concerned. So they expressed their concern to Paurṇamāsī, "She hasn’t opened her eyes yet. Oh, revered Paurṇamāsī, look, her eyes are closed. We don’t know what’s going on. Why are her eyes closed? Why doesn’t she open her eyes? Is she blind?" 

Elegance is truth spoken concisely. Paurṇamāsī just smiled and said, "Don’t worry, it’s just she, Rādhārāṇī’s pastime." 

So, of course, recently Yaśodā had given birth to baby Kṛṣṇa, so the next day, you know, she came along with Nanda Mahārāja with her baby to visit their close friends. They were close friends: Vṛṣabhānu, Kīrtidā, and Yaśodā, Nanda. So, you know, babies are born, let’s... you know, "I’m going to show you my baby, you show me your baby, you know. I’ve seen it, look at my baby, well look at my baby. My baby’s Rādhā, my baby’s Kṛṣṇa... you’re both winners for Kṛṣṇa." So they brought baby Kṛṣṇa, but when they arrived, little Rādhārāṇī was still... she was still sleeping in her bedroom. And you know, Nanda-Yaśodā were met at the door by Kīrtidā and Vṛṣabhānu, and they were taken to like a reception room, and they started chatting, you know, the two couples. And Yaśodā just put little baby... you know, Kṛṣṇa down like that. He was a little older, he could, I think he could walk, could crawl, could crawl. So he put her down, and they’re talking, talking, and Kṛṣṇa crawls away. Where did he crawl? He crawled to the room where Rādhā was sleeping. It’s so cute, make a great movie. He’s crawling, and he gets to the crib, and he puts his hands up, and you know, you can stand and see her Divine form in the crib. And he realized, "This is my eternal Divine consort." And he reached and he touched her eyes. And śāstras describe that moment, what an historic moment, very nicely: that as soon as Rādhārāṇī felt the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s hands on her eyes, quote: "She became aware that the person for whom her eyes were created was sitting beside her." 

She became aware that the person for whom her eyes were created was sitting beside her. So at that moment, her eyes opened, and you could... Kṛṣṇa could see her cloud-blue eyes as she smiled—big smile in her cloud-blue eyes. He was the first one to have darśana of her eyes. So, meanwhile, you know, the couples realized, you know, Kṛṣṇa’s crawled away somewhere—you know babies are, they put everything in their mouth—so they’re looking, and they come into the room with this... Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and they see they’re playing together in the crib, and they said, "Oh look, she finally opened her eyes! How beautiful she is!" Like that. 

And when Rādhārāṇī turned six or seven months old, Mother Kīrtidā decided it was time to celebrate her daughter’s *annaprāśana*—the grain-giving ceremony. It’s a big thing. Except for householders, like when I travel, you know, many times, "Go, my baby’s six months old, will you do the grain-giving ceremony?" "Yes." And another one in the afternoon, another one in the evening. It’s like babies are falling from the sky. So King Vṛṣabhānu and Kīrtidā, the Queen, they made announcements everywhere that their daughter Rādhā was going to take her first grains. The day arrived, and there were many respected guests, like Nārada—he’s always, he’s always, you know, where things are happening, he was there. Yaśodā was there with baby Kṛṣṇa; everyone’s around the sacred fire. The brāhmaṇas had made a big yajña-śālā, and they were chanting various mantras, while Kīrtidā was sitting near the fire with Rādhā on her lap. They, Kīrtidā and Yaśodā, are very close, so they sat down next to each other for the ceremony. 

Now, it just so happened that Mother Yaśodā had brought a little bowl of sweet rice to keep Kṛṣṇa occupied. Kṛṣṇa was a little older than Rādhā, so He’d already had His grain ceremony, so just to keep Him occupied, she brought a little, you know, some sweet rice. So the brāhmaṇas were chanting mantras, and it was time for the brāhmaṇas to give some sweet rice to the child. But what happened? What happened was that to everyone’s shock, little Rādhārāṇī smiled and quickly reached over into the lap of Mā Yaśodā and took some grains from Kṛṣṇa’s bowl. That was her first *prasāda*, her first grains were from Kṛṣṇa’s bowl. The brāhmaṇas had a golden bowl of some grains they were going to give, but she just reached over and took Kṛṣṇa’s grains and ate, like that. So her first grains were Kṛṣṇa *prasādam*. And when the brāhmaṇas saw that, they canceled the whole ceremony. Finished. "This is not how it’s supposed to be." "Sir, this is exactly how it’s supposed to be!" And the ācāryas comment that because Rādhārāṇī’s first grains were Kṛṣṇa’s *prasādam*, this spontaneous event strengthened the two mothers, Yaśodā and Kīrtidā’s, conviction that Divine Providence had chosen their children for each other, hoping they’ll get married. 

Of course, as we know, as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa grew up, their love for each other matured, and it deepened. And as it continues to expand, even to this day, the spiritual love is, at infinitum, it’s just always increasing. So they’re getting a little older, and then the pastimes get deeper. Actually, Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa—it’s especially interesting, it’s a whole another class. In *Dāna-keli-kaumudī*, Rūpa Gosvāmī gives us a glimpse of Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa: "All glories to Rādhā’s love for Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of the demon Murā. Although it is all-pervading, it tends to increase at every moment. Although it is important, it is devoid of pride, and although it is pure, it always is beset with duplicity." It’s very deep, but that’s the description of Rādhā’s love. 

In fact, so great is that love that she controls Kṛṣṇa with that love. He’s the Supreme Controller, by definition, but her love is so pure, she controls Kṛṣṇa by her love. This has been the discussion amongst Gauḍīyas since time immemorial. In fact, in an unpublished manuscript by a devotee named Kṛṣṇadāsa, it is written as follows: "That Hari, from whom unlimited words and vocabulary arise, that same Hari only utters one word, 'Okay,' when Rādhā instructs Him." Wow. That Hari, from whom unlimited words and a vocabulary arise—because we can speak so many languages—that same Hari only utters the word "Okay" when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī instructs Him, "Yes, Ma'am." 

So of course, these are only some of the very sweet pastimes of Rādhārāṇī’s childhood, both in Rāval and here in Bārsaṇā. Much we could go on for years, actually—pastimes which many devotees may or may not know. But seeking, you shall find in the *Bhāgavatam* and this very sacred place at the base of the hill of Bārsaṇā in Citrā’s village, surrounded by birds singing, peacocks, and bells, you know, chanting the glories of the Lord. I hope that these pastimes have inspired you with more devotion for Kṛṣṇa’s favorite gopī. For maybe one day, some of you will become supremely inspired to become one of her maidservants, *rādhā-dāsī*. I mean, it’s way far ahead, but you know, we can also look ahead and hope against hope, that would be wonderful. Prabhupāda writes in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* about becoming specifically a follower of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī:

> "Some, headed by Uddhava, attained the mood of service. Others achieved the praiseworthy position like that of Śrīdāmā, the cowherd boy. Still others attained the mood of the lotus-eyed damsels of Braja. Others, most fortunate of all, came to drink the sweet lotus of Rādhā-rasa. What wealth did the world not attain through Mahāprabhu’s mercy?" 

Because this is all His mercy, us. Let’s recite it again: 

> "As the supreme goal, some, headed by Uddhava, attained the mood of service. Others achieved the praiseworthy position like that of Śrīdāmā, the cowherd boy. Still others attained the mood of the lotus-eyed damsels of Braja. Others, most fortunate of all, came to drink the sweet lotus of Rādhā-rasa. What wealth did the world not attain through Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mercy?" 

And finally, we’ve come to the end of the lecture. I wish it was just the beginning. We’ve come to the end of the lecture, so we can conclude with an appropriate verse in this mood, given to us by Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. It is another one of my favorites; it’s found in the *Śrī-nikuñja-keli-virudāvalī*, text number 67. Listen closely so this arouses some deeper sentiments in your hearts. After all, the longest journey begins with the first step. 

> "Oh, all-auspicious Kṛṣṇa, may You be victorious. You perform all kinds of sweet pastimes. Let my name also be there when You count Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s associates. This is my prayer. Although I am covered by material consciousness, I can still aspire for this. Oh Lord, let my prayer be fulfilled." 

Congregational prayer, group prayer is more potent. Kṛṣṇa, when the congregation comes together and says a prayer, it has more effect than, at least at our stage, sitting in the bedroom chanting japa, that’s sadhana. So, let’s finish today. You can repeat after me:

"Oh auspicious Kṛṣṇa, may You be victorious. You perform all kinds of sweet pastimes. Let my name also be there when You count Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s associates. This is my prayer. Although I am covered by material consciousness, I can still aspire for this. Oh Lord, let my prayer be fulfilled."

Kṛṣṇa, Jai Kṛṣṇa! Thank you.""