"*00432*.*
"Hi, everyone. Welcome back once again to our ongoing lectures on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. So, we are back in Vṛndāvana-dhāma once again, wandering through the 12 forests of that transcendental abode. Though we’ve covered a lot of ground in the last 12 months about Vṛndāvana, there are certainly more places to visit. I was reading just the other night in the *Ādi-varāha Purāṇa* a beautiful verse: "I have indicated 660 billion holy places in Mathurā-maṇḍala." Wow. And in the *Skanda Purāṇa*, the *Mathurā-khaṇḍa* section, it is stated: "O King, in the course of time it may be possible to count the particles of dust on the earth, but the number of holy places in the transcendental Vṛndāvana cannot be counted." 

Okay, so today I would like to begin by discussing a pastime that took place at one of the many *kuṇḍas*, or one of the many lakes that surround the sacred abode of Varṣāṇā, where our beloved Vṛndāvana is.

Lived as a young girl, many months ago we discussed the glories of Varṣāṇā, but we can take a moment to refresh our memory about that special place. You may remember that at the end of Satya-yuga, Lord Brahmā performed austerities with the desire to become a hill in Vṛndāvana when Kṛṣṇa would appear in Dvāpara-yuga. That would allow him not only to witness the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and His devotees, but more importantly, in his mind, it would give him the opportunity to receive "the touch of the soft, pink lotus feet of Rādhārāṇī and the Gopīs upon his head." So, pleased with Brahmā’s austerities, Kṛṣṇa fulfilled his desire, and Brahmā appeared as a hill in Vṛndāvana in Dvāpara-yuga when Kṛṣṇa appeared on the earth. And we know that King Vṛṣabhānu settled his family in a palace atop that hill, and some time later, Śrī Rādhā was born to King Vṛṣabhānu and his wife, Kīrtidā Sundarī. And the ācāryas say that because Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī causes a downpour—*varṣā* can mean downpour—because Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī causes a downpour of bliss, She is called Varṣāṇā.

And for this reason, the place of Her childhood residence was named Varṣāṇā after Her. The ācāryas further say that the lakes, the gardens, the groves, even the stones of Varṣāṇā are "saturated with the unparalleled sweetness radiating from Śrī Rādhā’s form, qualities, pastimes, and entourage." Now, we also discussed in a lecture some months ago that the great Durvāsā Muni once visited King Vṛṣabhānu’s palace at Varṣāṇā, where he was very nicely served by Śrī Rādhā. We’re just summarizing here because we mentioned it before. Then, in return for Her service, Durvāsā Muni famously blessed Her, saying, "O child, you have served Me with devotion and given Me a taste of Your unmatched culinary skills." Meaning cooking skills. "Therefore, I want to reward You with a blessing." And at that point, I remember Rādhārāṇī joined Her little palms together like this in respect, standing before this big muni, and Durvāsā Muni’s eyes clouded with tears as he gave Her this blessing: "I now share with you half of what my austerities through many years have brought me. Dear Rādhā, I declare that from this day on, whatever You cook will taste like nectar. In addition, whoever tastes Your preparations will never see disease, defeat from enemies, or bad fortune. O Rādhā, for as long as this world turns, You will be famous as the Empress of Cooks. And because everything You touch will turn to nectar, You will be known by names like Amṛtapāṇī." That’s how we ended up with that special blessing.

Now, moving on: when Mother Yaśodā heard of Rādhā’s newly acquired powers, she naturally desired that her son Kṛṣṇa benefit from these special potencies of Rādhārāṇī’s cooking. So she spoke with Rādhā’s mother, Kīrtidā Sundarī, and arranged that every morning Rādhā would come from Varṣāṇā to Nandagrāma and cook breakfast for Kṛṣṇa. So, one morning, after Śrī Rādhā had prepared a nice breakfast for Kṛṣṇa and She’d served their breakfast as well, and She was preparing to go back to Varṣāṇā, Mother Yaśodā approached Her. And taking young Rādhā’s hand, she said, "Rādhā, You are now of a marriageable age. I know no one more suited for You than my son Kṛṣṇa. Our families should meet to discuss this idea." At that point, I was reading that Mother Yaśodā brought Rādhārāṇī a little bit closer, and as she was doing so, she was thinking, "Is this girl the Goddess of Fortune? Is She a devī descended from heaven? By Her mere touch, I feel transported to Vaikuṇṭha." And then she observed auspicious signs on Rādhārāṇī’s palms. Mother Yaśodā reached for a tray of turmeric, and with a little bit of water mixed in, she gently washed Rādhārāṇī’s palms with that substance—the turmeric—until Her palms were bright yellow. Then she said, "Rādhā, do you know what this means?" And looking puzzled, Rādhārāṇī said, "No, Mother. Why did You put haldī—it means turmeric—on My hands?" And Yaśodā Devī replied, "Priyā, when a young girl’s palms are painted with haldī, it means she is engaged. What do you think of that?" So Rādhārāṇī was surprised. She said, "I don’t know what My mother will say, but I like to wander here and there at will. If I’m engaged, I’ll lose My freedom."

Mother Yaśodā said, "Rādhā, You are blossoming in the sunlight of youth. You must therefore accept the responsibilities that accompany womanhood. You cannot play in the dust of Vṛndāvana forever." At that point, I was reading, Rādhārāṇī shyly looked at Mother Yaśodā, and She agreed. So then Mother Yaśodā said, "Now You should go home and talk to Your mother and father and see if they give their blessings for this engagement." So Śrī Rādhā left, accompanied by Lalitā, Viśākhā, and many of Her girlfriends. And as She was leaving—it’s so nice—as She was leaving, Mother Yaśodā thought, "When this girl matures, the demigods will be amazed. At the sight of Her in wonder, they will fall from the heavens like rain."

And as the girls walked along, out of shyness, Rādhārāṇī was covering Her hands in such a way that Her friends couldn’t see they were smeared with turmeric. So suddenly, Lalitā spoke up: "Rādhā, what are You doing? Why are You holding Your hands like that?" And then she grabbed Rādhā’s hands and she turned them, and she saw they were covered in yellow turmeric. So she said, "Rādhā, what is this? Who are You engaged to?" And at that point, all the other Gopīs stopped walking, and they turned and they looked incredulously at Rādhārāṇī’s yellow-stained palms. So She brought Her hands up and said very quickly, "Lalitā, I’m not engaged. Mother Yaśodā did this." So then, Viśākhā-sakhī spoke up; she said, "Śrī Rādhā, You’re too young to be married. You’ll lose Your freedom. You won’t be able to walk through our beautiful Vṛndāvana—you know, go to Puṣpavana where we get our flowers—and You won’t be able to join us when we sell our milk products. We have to do something about this." Lalitā, she was there listening, and she spoke up after a film—she said, "Actually, this is not so serious. It’s just turmeric. It’s not a permanent dye. There’s a solution to this problem, girls. Don’t worry." And she continued, "There’s a beautiful lake near here, and I’ve seen the older Gopīs; they wash and dye their clothes there. It’s the perfect place to wash that yellow turmeric off Your hands, Rādhā." So they all proceeded towards—Lalitā led them, and they all proceeded towards that particular lake. And as they were coming to that lake and they saw that lake, they all smiled, because within that lake were many beautiful lotus flowers decorating it, and the entire area, it’s described, resounded with the sounds of birds and the humming of bees. And numerous trees around that lake, their branches were weighed down with ripe fruit. We often hear that in Vṛndāvana the trees are bending over as if offering—well, they are offering the fruit to Kṛṣṇa.

But what’s most important, the ācāryas point out, was that that lake, that particular spot, was a favorite place for Kṛṣṇa to take His cows where they could enjoy drinking the sweet waters of that particular *puṣkariṇī*, or that particular lake. So, a śāstra gives a very nice description of what happened next, and I’ll quote: "Resembling the princess of swans, Śrī Rādhā strolled to the shore and, raising Her skirt, She stepped ankle-deep into the lake." And at that point, Lalitā spoke up: "Rādhā, be careful! Don’t slip." And then Tulasī-devī—she laughed, she said, "Yes, then we’ll really have a story to tell our parents!" So at that point, Rādhikā cast a glance at all of Her friends as their "giggling echoed back and forth across the lake." I thought that was sweet, their giggling echoed back and forth across the lake.

Now, when Śrī Rādhā leaned forward to wash Her hands in the lake, She suddenly saw Her reflection in the water, and amazed by Her own beauty, She paused for a moment, stunned by that reflection, and She thought, "Wouldn’t it be nice to always be in Kṛṣṇa’s company? Then They would never have to be separated from Him." This thought came to Her mind. And then, as She rubbed Her hands together with the water, the turmeric dissolved into the water and then spread out in golden, circular waves. But bewildered by remembering Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā didn’t notice Her hands had become clean. So finally, Tulasī-devī, she giggled: "Rādhā, look what You’ve done! The waters are now yellow. Your ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa has permeated this entire lake! Let’s go quickly before somebody notices." So Rādhārāṇī stepped out of the water and She rejoined Her friends. And then Viśvanātha, he writes so wonderfully: "Placing Rādhikā in front, the young Gopīs hurried towards Varṣāṇā. They appeared like a group of colorful clouds, their golden complexions like flashing lightning, their uncontrolled giggling like the playful rumble of distant thunder, and their love for Kṛṣṇa like an imminent monsoon shower." Oh, please allow me to recite that again. "Placing Rādhikā in front, the young Gopīs hurried towards Varṣāṇā. They appeared like a group of colorful clouds, their golden complexions like flashing lightning, their uncontrolled giggling like the playful rumble of distant thunder, and their love for Kṛṣṇa like an imminent monsoon shower."

Now the plot thickens. Not long after the Gopīs had left that particular lake, lo and behold, Kṛṣṇa shows up at the same place. What was He doing? It’s described He was searching for a stray calf. Sometimes it happens, the calf strayed. So Kṛṣṇa, He uses that as an excuse to leave the boys and go search for the Gopīs. So He was looking for a stray calf. And He passed by this spot, He knew it very well, and He looked at the lake and He thought, "What’s this odd color of the lake? It’s different today. It appears as if the water’s been dyed a golden color. What’s going on here?" So He looked—it’s described He looked at the animals and the birds and the trees for a clue, but everyone was silent. So He thought, "Well, I’m going to stop looking for the stray calf now and I’m going to investigate this." So He walked towards the water, and at that point, He was thinking, "Maybe this is the work of a demon, or perhaps the demigods are playing tricks again." So He approached the water very cautiously, and He gets to the water’s edge, and He looks in this yellow-goldish pond, and suddenly He saw His reflection upon its golden surface. And the ācāryas write very nicely: "There He was, possessed of the same turban, the same peacock feather, the same flute, the same cowherd dress, but there was a difference. His bluish-black complexion now took on a golden hue." He’s looking there in the lake, and He sees that His bodily hue is no longer bluish-black like a monsoon cloud, but it’s a beautiful golden color.

So He said to Himself, "I look like a golden Kṛṣṇa. How strange!" Then, with the birds and the deer and the trees and the flowers all watching, Kṛṣṇa reached out and touched His own reflection on the water, and suddenly He felt a surge of ecstatic *prema* (love) run through His body. And we’ve heard of electrical currents going through the body, right? You touch a wire. He felt a surge of ecstatic *prema* run through His body as if a bolt of lightning had struck Him. And He drew back and He cried—it’s interesting—"Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu! What is that?" And He thought, "What is this mystical yellow substance in the lake where I water My cows? The love I’m feeling now is something new and remarkable. Usually, I feel intense love for the Vrajavāsīs, but when I touch this lake, I feel love for Myself. This is extraordinary!" Then He goes on thinking, "Only the Gopīs possess this sort of intense, extraordinary love I’m feeling, and amongst the Gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s love is like the love I am now feeling." Then He goes on, "The golden color of this lake is the complexion of Her body, and the electrifying touch of its water is the mood of Her love. It can only be that Rādhikā has empowered this lake with Her *prema*. What other explanation could there be?" Thought Kṛṣṇa. The ācāryas, they say at this point, "Kṛṣṇa’s appetite for tasting Rādhā’s love was now fully awoken."

So what did He do? He slowly entered the water up to His ankles and His calves and His knees, then His waist, and finally He was standing in that mystical lake, the water up to His neck. And then, casting a blissful glance at the trees and the birds and the animals, etc., He dropped below the surface of the water. He dunked Himself in all the way under the water, and it’s written: "The golden waters happily embraced His transcendental form." So while this was all going on, the flowers and the birds and trees, bees, they’re all holding their breath in suspense. And just as they were about to lose consciousness, Kṛṣṇa, He came up out of the water. He reappeared from that yellow golden water but in a very unusual state. Still dressed as a cowherd boy, Kṛṣṇa’s bluish luster had disappeared, and His actual complexion was now completely golden. And it’s written that if one were to melt gold a thousand times, it might resemble the lustrous brilliance that emanated from Kṛṣṇa’s body. But the change in Kṛṣṇa was not merely external, as described; there was also a change in His internal disposition. And coming up out of the water onto dry land, that was shown by the fact that He started looking around as if He were searching for someone, and lo and behold, He started calling out His own names: "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa!" Looking left and looking right, our golden-colored Kṛṣṇa, He was absorbed in the mood and the happiness and the—it’s described—the ecstasy of Śrī Rādhā. And therefore, He called out: "Where is Śrī Kṛṣṇa whose form is curved in three places? Where is the sweet song of the flute? And where is the dancing, singing, and laughing of the *rāsa* dance as Rādhā would say?" Then He cried out, "O My Lord, O friend of the helpless, You are the ocean of mercy! Because I have not met You, My inauspicious days and nights have become unbearable. I do not know how I shall pass the time."

So then, our golden Kṛṣṇa, thinking Kṛṣṇa might be hiding in the nearby gardens and along the lakeside or in the forest, He started moving about, singing His own names, and it’s described in the sweetest of voices. And then He would go into the forest, the surrounding forest, and He’d go to a forest grove, and sometimes He’d look for Kṛṣṇa behind a tree, sometimes He’d inquire from a forest creature, "Have you seen Kṛṣṇa?" The forest creature was like... "What?" Within His heart, golden Kṛṣṇa, you could say, had forgotten His identity and He was thinking of Himself as none other than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So again, He called out in the mood of Rādhā: "O Kṛṣṇa, O player of the flute! In these three worlds, nothing excels the sweetness of Your early age. You know My unsteadiness, and I know Yours. No one else knows about this. O My beloved, I want to see Your beautiful, attractive face somewhere in a solitary place, but how can this be accomplished?" So, you see what’s happened here.

Actually, one ācārya, he summarizes it very nicely: "Bathing in the water stained yellow by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s hands, Kṛṣṇa became bewildered by Her *prema* and displayed the form of golden Kṛṣṇa. Roaming through the forest, He sang His own names, yearned to hear His own flute, and cried in hopes of seeing His own form." Then he goes on to say, "As a mystical potion gradually loses its influence, so slowly golden Kṛṣṇa remembered who He was, and He resumed His blackish form as Śyāmasundara, and again took up the search for His lost calf." Voila! So, even today, the respective Vrajavāsīs call that famous lake next to Varṣāṇā *Pīlī-pokhar*, the yellow pond. So certainly, next time—hopefully not too far in the future—when we do our *kārtik-parikramā*, we will go to Pīlī-pokhar, and we will take our bath there, one of the many bodies of water that we will bathe in when we’re all back together in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

So, that’s a short talk today. I hope it was sweet; they say short and sweet. And I’d like to finish with a rarely quoted verse actually that I found in the mystical *Bṛhad-Gautamīya-tantra*. It’s part of a discussion between Nārada and Kṛṣṇa where Nārada Muni begins: "O Master of the people, I desire to hear about the 12 vanas, the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana. If I’m qualified, please tell me." So Kṛṣṇa smiled—He likes to talk about His abode—and He said to Nārada: "Pleasant Vṛndāvana is My favorite abode. There, all cows, animals, birds, insects, and humans are immortal. Those who live under My mercy come to My abode upon achieving liberation from the material world. The daughters of the cowherd men, they live in that abode; completely giving up all connections, they serve Me continuously. That special place, Vṛndāvana, measures five yojanas, and it is non-different from My very body. The sacred Yamunā, flowing with the sweetest nectar, is the—the central nerve of My body. There, all the devotees and the elements exist there in a spiritual form. I, the embodiment of all the *is*, do not leave that transcendental forest of Vṛndāvana even for a moment. Although I appear and disappear in this world age after age, that radiant forest full of pleasure is invisible to the material eye." What a wonderful verse.

So, thank you, everyone, once again. At this point, I have a request of all of you. I’d like to take your permission to take a break from the classes for a couple of weeks, so that—well, to begin with—I can prepare myself for Gaura-pūrṇimā, which is coming up actually in a few days, the sacred Gaura-pūrṇimā festival. And a little time after that, because I’d like to spend a lot of time chanting on my *japa-mālā*. I’ve been chanting all this time, but I guess maybe the result of all this *śravaṇam-kīrtanam-kṛṣṇa-smaraṇam* was that it purifies the heart, and we have our desire for the activities of devotional service increase. And I have a strong desire to, instead of studying all day and preparing my lecture, I just like to sit and chant like, you know, for an extended period of time and come back more purified and able to present these wonderful *līlās* hopefully better. We’ve been going one year and three days today—well actually, one year, yeah, one year and three days—and I’ve given with this class 136 classes, and I’ve enjoyed every minute of it. So please give me just a little break—just, you know, one year is a long time—just so I can chant my heart out day and half the night, and I’ll be back. I’ll come back on the—if you want, you can mark it in your calendars—I’ll come back with the next lecture on April 9th. That’s 14 days from today, it’s a Friday. I’ll come back on April 9th, and we’ll just continue—what is it, Tuesday, Friday, Tuesday, Friday, Tuesday, Friday, Tuesday, Friday—and do remember that we’ll soon be, by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we’ll soon be entering into Gaura-līlā, and maybe I’ll use a little of this time also to get ready for Gaura-līlā as well. So with your permission only, thank you very much, and I’ll be back, I’ll be back, and we’ll continue with this *śravaṇam-kīrtanam-kṛṣṇa-smaraṇam-gaurāṅga-smaraṇam* very soon. So please, everyone, keep well. Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""