"*00536*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees! A very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Vṛndāvana-dhāma in this very auspicious month of Kārttika. *Oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale...*

During this auspicious month of Kārttika, we are continuing our wanderings through Vraja through transcendental sound vibration, and we are discovering that Vṛndāvana is so special. One of my favorite and often-quoted quotes, which I feel summarizes Vraja, is found in the *Brahma-saṁhitā*. It is as follows:

"This transcendental land of Vṛndāvana is populated by goddesses of fortune who manifest as milkmaids and love Kṛṣṇa above everything. The trees here fulfill all desires, and the waters of immortality flow through the land made of philosopher's stone. Here, all speech is song, all walking is dancing, and the flute is the Lord's constant companion. Cows flood the land with abundant milk, and everything is self-luminous like the sun. Since every moment in Vṛndāvana is spent in loving service to Kṛṣṇa, there is no past, present, or future."

All right, Kṛṣṇa! So today, we'll discuss a very special, sacred place called Śītalā-kuṇḍa. Of course, *kuṇḍa* means lake, so Śītalā-kuṇḍa. In Sanskrit, *śītalā* means cooling, and we can appreciate that name and its meaning with the following pastime that took place there 5,000 years ago. Actually, this place is not far from our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple; it's about a 45-minute drive.

One morning in Nandagrāma, Yaśodā-māyī was trying to wake up Kṛṣṇa, but He was sleeping very deeply. As she softly nudged Him, she said, "My dear son Kṛṣṇa, please wake up. Just look, your father brought a new flute for you from Mathurā, so please get up. I know you're very tired because all day long you herd cows and play with your friends, but rise, my child, and play this beautiful flute. Just see, the sun has already risen." So, finally, at the insistence of His mother, Kṛṣṇa opened His eyes—His lotus eyes—and the first thing He said was, "Māyā, I'm so hungry. I want to eat some butter now."

Yaśodā-māyī sort of said, with tears in her eyes, "Oh, my beloved son Kṛṣṇa, I know how much you love *makkhan*—you love butter—and we have plenty of butter in our house. So why do you have to always steal butter from other gopīs' homes? After all, we have 900,000 cows, and they provide more butter than you can eat. But all the gopīs, the elderly gopīs, are coming to me to complain about you every day. So please, my dear son, give up this habit of stealing. These naughty activities of yours are defaming your father's reputation in the whole of Vraja. But before I feed you *makkhan*, you have to do a little studying as your father instructed you."

So Kṛṣṇa yawned, and then He asked His mother, "Māyā, what should I study?" And she answered, "Study the scriptures." And Kṛṣṇa said, "What will I benefit from studying the scriptures?" Yaśodā sort of replied, "You'll get *jñāna*—you'll get knowledge." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Māyā, what is the use of knowledge?" So Mother Yaśodā said, "You will attain Brahman, the Absolute Truth." So Kṛṣṇa asked, "What is the use of achieving Brahman?" So Mother Yaśodā said, "Oh, you will achieve *mukti*, or liberation." Then Kṛṣṇa smiled, and He said, "Māyā, if I achieve *mukti*, will you meet me there?"

"If I achieve *mukti*, will you meet me there?" So Yaśodā sort of replied, "No, Lālā." And Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh, okay. But my father, Nanda Mahārāja, he will meet me there, right?" So Yaśodā sort of replied, "No, Lālā, *mukti* means liberation from all kinds of attachments." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Okay, but what about my cowherd friends and cows? They will be there on *muktiv-loka*, right? They will be there on *mukti-loka*, right?" Yaśodā said, "No, my Lālā, no one will meet you there." Then Kṛṣṇa said very softly, "But what about my Śrī Rādhā? Will she meet me there or not?" So Yaśodā repeated again, "No one will meet you there when you attain *mukti*."

At that point, it's so cute, Kṛṣṇa frowned and He said, "Māyā, then I reject this type of *mukti* which will take me away from my beloved ones. I do not want liberation or *mukti*, Māyā; I only want *makkhan*—sweet *makkhan*, butter." All right, Kṛṣṇa! A nice pastime to share with the impersonalist.

So, the ācāryas say after Kṛṣṇa had been bathed and dressed and had eaten some butter with His breakfast, He went to the forest for herding cows—that's what He does most of the day. Actually, the cows and the cowherd boys were very fortunate. A few hours later, one elderly gopī came to Nandagrāma and said to Mother Yaśodā, "Yaśodā, I'm so tired!" And when Mother Yaśodā asked the reason why she was so tired, that gopī said, "Yaśodā, today again I caught Kṛṣṇa stealing butter in my house. What's more, He was sharing the butter with all His cowherd friends on the way to the forest and the monkeys—the monkeys that were waiting outside my home. And when I tried to bind Him up, I became bewildered looking into His beautiful, magical eyes." I like that part; I became bewildered looking into His beautiful, magical eyes.

"So your son said to me, 'Oh, foolish elderly gopī, you don't even know how to bind my hands; I will teach you.' So then He bound my hands and ate all the butter I had hidden in secret places. He found all the butter I had hidden in secret places; He ate it all. And when He was finished, He left the house. And when my mother-in-law caught Him going out the gate of our home, she asked Him why His hands were covered in butter. So your little Kṛṣṇa said to my mother-in-law, 'My mother, Yaśodā, gave me new golden bangles yesterday. I was wearing them while herding my cows; when the sunlight reflected on them, my hands became too warm, so I placed my hands in a pot of butter to cool them.'"

"So then my mother-in-law, she was very suspicious—she was thinking Kṛṣṇa was in that house stealing butter, that's a... I think He's telling a lie. So then she said, 'Okay, Kṛṣṇa, then why is there butter on your lips?' Kṛṣṇa answered, 'Because a mosquito was biting my lips, so while removing him with my hands, some of the butter on my hands got stuck on my lips.'"

So hearing all this—Kṛṣṇa telling little lies—Mother Yaśodā became very angry, and she said to that gopī, "Okay, enough's enough, I will take care of this matter, do not worry." So, holding a stick, Mother went out into the forest to find Kṛṣṇa. Now, of course, this is very similar to one of the main pastimes we hear this month where she chases after Kṛṣṇa for breaking the pot of yogurt or butter, as it may be, and catches Him and binds Him to a mortar. But many of these pastimes are repeated in a variety of ways throughout Vṛndāvana-dhāma, and they're always fresh.

So she said, "I will take care of this matter, don't worry." So holding a stick, Mother Yaśodā went into the forest to find Kṛṣṇa, which is actually unusual because she generally stays in Nandagrāma; she doesn't go with the boys to the forest because in the forest there's another *rasa*—*sakhya-rasa*—and in general the *rasas* are not mixed. That's called *rasābhāsa*. The *rasas* are not mixed in Vṛndāvana; each *rasa* has a particular place where it's performed. So she doesn't generally go to the forest. In fact, one time she tried to go with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma as they were leaving one morning, and Balarāma turned around and said, "Māyā, you can't come to the forest. You won't understand our pastimes there. For my brother Kṛṣṇa, He runs around the forest in bare feet; you won't be able to tolerate that. You'll be thinking the thorns and the sharp pebbles will hurt His feet. We wrestle with the cowherd boys; sometimes they win, and Kṛṣṇa has to carry them on His shoulders. Sometimes we're so involved in playing, having so much fun, we're late for our lunch; you won't be able to handle that. So Māyā, you can't come." So Yaśodā went back to Nandagrāma.

But this time, this special nature of this *līlā*, she's running through the forest to chastise Kṛṣṇa for stealing the butter. Now, by nature, she's quite heavy-set, so it's described while running from Nandagrāma to this forest, which is some distance away, she became very tired. She slowed down, she became very tired, and she arrived at the place where Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were with the cows and the cowherd boys. But it was evening time, so the boys were getting ready—Kṛṣṇa was getting ready to take the cows back to Nandagrāma. But it was time for Kṛṣṇa's *rāsa-līlā* with the cowherd girls. So Kṛṣṇa made an excuse to the boys; He said, "One of the calves has strayed away, I'm going to find him."

So Mother Yaśodā was watching, and she saw that Kṛṣṇa met His gopīs a little distance away, and they started to perform *rāsa* dance, *rāsa-līlā*. Now, as we can imagine, Mother Yaśodā had never seen *rāsa-līlā*. Being in *vātsalya-rasa*, she never saw that. Here, she's seeing her son—her young son, who she bathes and dresses and chastises and, you know, whatever—dancing in such an artistic way, in a beautiful way, with these beautiful young girls. They're all decorated very nicely, and the *rāsa* dance is going in different circles, and Kṛṣṇa is expanding Himself to be with each gopī, and she was like, "Whoa!" And the mood was new to her, this mood of *mādhurya-bhāva*. So she became, it's described, stunned, and she quickly hid behind a big tree to watch. And when the *rāsa-līlā* ended, she fainted; it's described she fainted in ecstasy. A few minutes later, Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs, they found her fainted, so they revived her. And when Mother Yaśodā became conscious again, she was in ecstasy, calling out, "Rādhe Kṛṣṇa, Rādhe Kṛṣṇa!"

But Kṛṣṇa noticed that she was looking very tired and very exhausted from the journey and from the emotional experience of seeing the special vision of her son in this *mādhurya-rasa*. She was very tired, sitting there catching her breath. So, Lālā loves His mother, Yaśodā, so He manifested a *kuṇḍa*, meaning a lake, just nearby which later became famous as Śītalā-kuṇḍa. Remember, *śītalā* means cooling—the cooling lake. Why? Because Kṛṣṇa asked His mother to go with the other gopīs and bathe in that lake, and she became revived; her tiredness and her fatigue disappeared in the cool waters of Śītalā-kuṇḍa.

So that's the story of how this lake became manifested. So I hope that by hearing this pastime, you'll be encouraged to visit that sacred place, actually with the understanding that that water is liquid *prema*. Just like we've spoken about Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and how those waters are actually liquid *prema*—that one who bathes in Rādhā-kuṇḍa gets the same love that Rādhā has for Śyāmasundara-Kṛṣṇa, and one who bathes in [Śyāma-kuṇḍa] [gets] the same love eventually that Kṛṣṇa has for Rādhā—so, liquid *prema*. So I could take an educated guess that by bathing in Śītalā-kuṇḍa, that water is liquid *prema* in the mood of *vātsalya-rasa*. And 500 years ago, actually, Lord Caitanya also visited that place and He took a bath in Śītalā-kuṇḍa to relieve Himself from the tiredness and fatigue of doing *parikramā*.

Hi Kṛṣṇa! Wonderful pastime for the month of Dāmodara. Now, the ācāryas they say that Kṛṣṇa's fondness for stealing butter persisted for as long as He lived in Vraja. In fact, one time as Kṛṣṇa reached into an open container full of butter, He saw His own reflection in a shiny marble column just next to Him. He saw His reflection, and He thought it to be another boy who had happened upon the scene of His mischief, you could say. And so, startled and shivering in fear, He said to that boy, His reflection, "Dear brother, if you don't tell my mother, I will share some of this butter with you, and we can enjoy it together. But you must be quiet so she doesn't catch us."

Now, overhearing Kṛṣṇa's whispers from a hiding place nearby, Mother Yaśodā could barely keep from laughing out loud. Then, as if she was ignorant of what was going on, she came before her son and confronted Him: "What's happening?" So He said, "I'm not stealing, I'm not stealing butter." And she looked, and there was butter on His hand there, and He pulled it out, and rather, He pointed to His own reflection and He said, "Mother, you're just in time! This greedy boy came here to steal your butter, but I forbade him, but he ignored me. And when I got angry with him, he also got angry back at me"—because obviously He's seeing the reflection—"so I forbade him, but he ignored me and when I got angry at him, he also got angry with me. And fortunately, Māyā, I calmed down and took pity on that greedy thief."

Now, on another occasion, Mother Yaśodā again accused Kṛṣṇa of stealing butter and she said, "You have stolen it!" But Kṛṣṇa said, "Māyā, it couldn't have been me! Remember, you sent me to Madhuvana to herd the cows. I left early this morning and have just now returned in the setting sun. The cows and gopas are my witnesses! I've been away in Madhuvana all day, how can you accuse me like this?" And He started to cry, and He continued, "I've returned tired and hungry, and now, Māyā, you call me a thief! How can you be so cruel? Am I no longer your son? If not, I will not live here any longer!" That's all *rasa*.

So at that point, it's described, Mother Yaśodā's heart softens as she thought, "Perhaps I'm mistaken, maybe the neighbors saw someone else. But let me try this trick now to see what's what." So what did she do? She put her palms over her face like that, and she started sobbing, and she said, "Oh my son, I was wrong! I'm sorry. The neighbors complained, they swore upon their cows that you spent all day terrorizing their homes by breaking yogurt pots, eating the contents, and sharing it with the monkeys." And seeing his mother crying—you know, His mother was crying—Kṛṣṇa's heart softened. I mean, to the point where He said, "Mother, please don't cry! I confess, I did steal the butter." So Yaśodā, you know, looking at her son through her fingers and she's playing, sobbing even louder, she says, "Oh darling, forgive me! Oh innocent one! Actually, I wrongly accused you; it's as you said, you were in Madhuvana, you couldn't have done it!"

Then Kṛṣṇa, you know, His heart melting seeing His mother like that, He squeezed her arm and said, "Māyā, you're not to blame! I did do it! I did!" And then she said, "No, you didn't!" And Kṛṣṇa said, "Yes, I did!" And Yaśodā said, "No, you didn't!"—barely able to control her laughter now. So Kṛṣṇa said, "Yes, I did!" And then suddenly He understood the trick—she, they tricked Him—He was like, "Oh!" And at that point, Mother Yaśodā looked at Kṛṣṇa with wide-open eyes and said, "No, you didn't!" And then, laughing, she threw her arms around her son, covering His now-smiling, tear-stained face with kisses. The Kṛṣṇa was determined not to be outdone, so He came closer and He kissed His mother's cheek and He whispered in her ear, "Yes, I did! Yes, I did! I did steal the butter!" This is all *rasa*.

Well, thank you. So nice to repeat these pastimes, especially in this month. In the material world, if someone lies and steals, it causes everyone stress. But in the transcendental world, in the spiritual world, when Kṛṣṇa does these mischievous activities, they cause everyone's love for Him to increase—something transcendental.

So I'd like to finish today with a very beautiful prayer by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī found in his illustrious *Padyāvalī*. I'll finish with this:

"Awakened at dawn by the sound of yogurt churning, Kṛṣṇa stealthily entered a gopī's home, blew out the lamps, and stole a handful of butter. I pray that child Kṛṣṇa may always protect me."

Thank you so much, prabhu. We'll be back in a couple of days with more nectarean pastimes in this very auspicious month of Kārttika.

*Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Vṛndāvanēśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!*

Kṛṣṇa!""