
"Hi, Kṛṣṇa-dear devotees! A very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prabhu-nityānanda-śrī-advaita-gadādhara-śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda. In my readings, I have several times come across how Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of playing dice are together. You may remember that we mentioned how Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa played dice almost daily at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. We touched on that in a previous lecture; we told how the specific game of dice they play is called *pāśā-khelā*, which the ācāryas say requires as much skill as luck to win—that’s how they put it. However, Kṛṣṇa is not very skilled at this game; in fact, he loses more often than he wins. Once, on the advice of Mādhava-maṅgala, Kṛṣṇa challenged Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to play *pāśā-khelā* in a specific grove at Rādhā-kuṇḍa called Vidagdha-grove. Why? Because the specific Vāstu configuration favored Kṛṣṇa over Rādhā. But the ācāryas say that Mādhava-maṅgala did not consider the fact that Śrīmatī is transcendental to all planetary configurations, and what’s more, she is *Jaya-śrī*, the goddess of victory. And so, once again, she defeated Kṛṣṇa in the game of dice.

I am kind of retelling that pastime because the art of playing transcendental dice should be of interest to us. How so? Because it is one of the many arts of devotional service that we may assist Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in when we finally get back home, back to Godhead, to Goloka Vṛndāvana. But when and how will we be trained in that specific service and other services to the Divine Couple? We have to be trained in those services. Well, we should be interested in that; how are we going to get trained? We should know that the answer to that question is just like a serious student in this world is always thinking how to get a good education in high school in order to go on to college and university so as to have a career in life. So, we should know the finer arts of devotional service in order to graduate from this material world altogether to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa eternally in the spiritual world. So again, where do we get that finer education, or the finest education? Well, that is described by Śrīla Viśvanātha.

In the final part of his epic *Rāgavartma-candrikā*, he answers that question. Basically, he says that when one achieves *prema*, pure love of God, one doesn't immediately go back to Godhead upon leaving his or her body; rather, one goes to that planet in one of the universes in the material world where Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are taking place. There, the devotee takes birth in a family of Brajavasis where one is trained in the 64 arts of devotional service—that’s where we get the training. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī speaks in terms of a gopī’s service specifically to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa because it’s generally understood that the followers of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu aspire for that *sevā* in the spiritual world. And here are Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s actual words on this subject; he writes that the very gopī-form, by the sway of yogamāyā, emerges from the womb of a gopī in the manifest world where Kṛṣṇa descends with his eternal associates. There will not be the slightest delay in this because the manifest pastimes (*prakaṭa-līlā*) continue to take place without any interruption in one or another of the enumerable universes in the material world. Thus, the devotees endowed with *prema* take birth from the womb of a gopī in that universe in which the Vṛndāvana pastimes are being enacted.

Then he goes on to say, "When a sādhaka who has attained the full maturity of his practices leaves his body and experiences the manifestation of *prema*, Kṛṣṇa always appears before that devotee accompanied by his associates." Therefore, oh greatly eager, *anurāgī* devotees, do not fear; rest assured, all auspiciousness is waiting for you. It’s very deep, but we need to know the goal. I always interpret such a description of our future in Kṛṣṇa consciousness as very bright, and even now, as aspiring devotees, we can prepare ourselves for such training if only by familiarizing ourselves with these 64 arts of devotional service. At least we should be aware of what they are. There are a number of śāstras where they are described, including *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 10th Canto, Chapter 45, verses 35 to 36; *Brahma-saṁhitā* in the 37th ṭīkā; *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 2.1.84; *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* 11.69, 13.4; *Govinda-līlāmṛta* 13th chapter and Part 19.

So, in those śāstras, it’s mentioned that Rādhārāṇī herself will personally teach such new gopīs—new gopīs in the sense that we are not yet back in the spiritual world, but you could say we are in the spiritual world because we are in Bhauma-Vṛndāvana, Vṛndāvana on this earth or some other planet in the universe. So, Rādhārāṇī herself, she’s so kind, she personally teaches these new pure devotees in the arts of devotional service so we can serve her and Kṛṣṇa eternally in the spiritual world. Specifically, Rādhārāṇī teaches new gopīs drama and playwriting, poetry, riddles, and vīṇā. And I was reading, Viśākhā will teach us the art of telling clever, tasteful, and funny jokes; Campakalatā will teach us how to cook amazing feasts; Citrā-sakhī will teach painting pictures on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental bodies; Tuṅgavidyā will teach us 18 different kinds of knowledge and science; Raṅgadevī will teach us how to dance in the rāsa-līlā. All this is waiting for us if we’re really serious about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Prabhupāda said, "Work now, samādhi later." And Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī writes in *Stavāvalī*, Sakhī-stuti verses 2 to 11, that Sudevī-sakhī, she will teach the art of playing dice and advising Rādhā how to defeat Kṛṣṇa. Now, in another passage that I was reading, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī reveals how one day in Varṣāṇa, Śrī Rādhā will hold an *anugopī's* hand and take her alone into a cave in Govardhana to personally teach her a love poem which she has composed for Kṛṣṇa, and later, on Rādhārāṇī's signal, that gopī will recite Rādhā’s poem for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa. Lots of nectarian details here.

Now, remember again, this training is going on in Bhauma-Vṛndāvana in the material world where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have appeared. Prabhupāda had said on many occasions that Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are happening continuously in the material world somewhere at any time, and he gave the analogy: just like the sun is rising sometime anywhere in this world—like right now it may be midnight where you are, but somewhere the sun is rising—so, in the same way, somewhere at any time within this material world in some universe, Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are taking place. And this is where we go for our training before we go back home, back to Goloka Vṛndāvana. Of course, again, we must remember that these things take place at an advanced stage of devotional service. Right now, in preparation for that later stage, our business is cleansing our hearts of lust, anger, and greed, which are obstacles to our service, pure devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. This lust, anger, and greed—Kṛṣṇa mentions them or states them very boldly in *Bhagavad-gītā*; he describes them as the three gates leading to hell. So, *cetodarpaṇa-mārjanam*, specifically by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. Specifically, this is the yuga-dharma. These impurities and others are washed from the heart, which then reveals the *bhakti-latā-bīja*, the seed of devotional service, which we continue to water by chanting the holy names. This brings us to the advanced stages of devotional service. But knowing the 64 arts of devotional service can be an impetus for looking upwards, not downwards. These are very advanced subject matters, but rather than lust, anger, and greed pulling us down, we can look upwards to these opportunities which await us.

There’s that famous verse in the Rig Veda, one of my favorite verses: "Just as the sun’s rays in the sky are extended to the mundane vision, so in the same way the wise and learned devotees always see the supreme abode of Lord Viṣṇu." Because those highly praiseworthy and spiritually awake brāhmaṇas are able to see the spiritual world, they are also able to reveal the supreme abode of Lord Viṣṇu. So, we should look up. At least we should know the goal; we should aspire to reach that goal. So, in that regard, it might be helpful today to actually list what are the 64 arts of devotional service that are spoken about in those scriptures that I mentioned earlier. It’s a long list of course, but very nectarian. In our impure, conditioned state, we can sit for two hours and watch a mundane movie, so why not sit and listen and try to imbibe and pray for being able to perform these particular arts for the pleasure of the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, here in Braja, in Vṛndāvana? So I’ll go slowly through them and you can listen. Here they are, the 64 arts of devotional service we hanker to learn one day on our way back to Goloka Vṛndāvana. And all these arts are, of course, in relationship to serving and pleasing Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa:

1. How to make pleasing residences for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
2. How to debate in favor of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
3. How to make their bed covers and pillows.
4. How to train birds to engage in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.
5. How to address Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in *śṛṅgāra* or ornaments.
6. How to make cakes, breads, and salads for their pleasure.
7. How to do carpentry for them.
8. Learning children’s games so they can play together when they are young.
9. How to dress the Divine Couple in special clothing.
10. How to engage in conversation with the Divine Couple.
11. How to store the Divine Couple’s costumes.
12. How to cross-breed plants and trees for their pleasure.
13. How to help them solve crossword puzzles.
14. How to learn the art of dancing with them.
15. How to decorate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s residences by hanging beautiful pictures there or paintings.
16. How to speak different dialects for them.
17. How to use a dictionary in their service.
18. Learning all about disguises that they may use in their pastimes.
19. To learn all about dramas for them.
20. How to make red-colored drinks for their pleasure.
21. How to dye cloth for them.
22. How to make them flower and leaf earrings.
23. How to do embroidery for them.
24. How to paint their bodies in attractive ways.
25. How to make flower *āsanas* and beds for them.
26. How to dye gemstones different colors for their pleasure.
27. How to care for and dress their hair.
28. The art of sleight of hand and magic tricks for their pleasure.
29. The art of hypnosis to be employed in their *sevā*.
30. Testing jewels for them.
31. Telling jokes for their pleasure.
32. How to use jugglery in their *sevā*.
33. Making special coverages for them.
34. Using marionettes or like puppets to please them.
35. Using metallurgy in their service.
36. Using mineralogy in their service.
37. Making miniature carts for their pleasure.
38. Using mystical charms to please them.
39. Respecting and glorifying others who are engaged in their *sevā*.
40. The art of painting and drawing for their pleasure.
41. Training parrots to speak and pass messages for them.
42. Covering pathways with flowers before they walk somewhere.
43. Making and applying perfumes on their bodies.
44. Playing musical instruments for their pleasure.
45. Acting in dramas or plays for their pleasure.
46. Composing poetry for them.
47. Making *raṅgolī* for them—means designs on the ground with powdered dyes.
48. Reciting books for their pleasure.
49. Making and solving riddles for them.
50. Performing various rituals and rites for them.
51. Using sign language in their *sevā*.
52. Singing for them.
53. Taking care of their skin.
54. The science of splashing water in *Jalahari* pastimes, water pastimes with them.
55. Stringing necklaces and flowers for them.
56. Using tongue twisters for them.
57. How to use thread on the spinning wheel in their *sevā*.
58. How to make turbans, topknots, and crowns for them.
59. How to attain victory in all cases for the Divine Couple.
60. How to play vīṇās and drums for them.
61. How to bargain and wager for them.
62. How to make music with water for them.
63. How to use weapons and make bows and arrows and big sticks for fighting and fun pastimes for them.
64. Finally, how to make *yantras* for the Divine Couple.

Actually, we’ll finish here today. I have to catch a flight overseas to get a new visa to stay in India, so please excuse me. I think we’ve given you a lot to meditate on today. Just pray to Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas that we may cleanse our hearts of all impurities to one day develop *prema*, love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and all the residents of Vṛndāvana, and go to that place when we leave these mortal frames to be trained by the Brajavasis in pure devotional service and then finally attain the goal of eternal residence in Śrī Goloka Vṛndāvana.

So we’ll finish today as we often do with some advice from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*. He writes: "The greatest of poets in millions of poems cannot describe even one ray from the gems of qualities in Vṛndāvana. Oh friend, controlling the senses and fixing the mind, go to that mine of incomparable *rasa*, where do people effortlessly attain pure love for Kṛṣṇa? Where is Lord Kṛṣṇa’s most amazing form meant for pastimes manifest? In what place is the highest level of great bliss from worshiping Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet manifest? Well, brother, I will tell you a secret, please listen: all this is manifest in Śrī Vṛndāvana."

All right Kṛṣṇa, thank you. We’ll be back in a few days. Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the holy dhāmas! See you soon, thank you.""