Merry Christmas. Hare Krishna, we've just arrived in Kathmandu, Nepal, after finishing our Rishikesh kirtan festival.

We just took a break of about 10 hours, and we're on the road again. That is the adventure. So, the real adventure is spreading Krishna Consciousness.

That's the real adventure. It's the most exciting thing. So, we haven't come to Kathmandu as tourists. We've come here to associate with many, many wonderful devotees in the Kathmandu Temple, and there are other centers as well we'll be visiting.

I came with 21 devotees, half of our crew that was in Rishikesh, and we'll be doing it right now. So, what do we do?

This is what we do. We're going to do harinam, we're going to do a few public programs, we're going to be in the temple with the devotees, and giving classes. This is our life, actually. It's the life of any devotee anywhere in the world, sharing Krishna Consciousness.

And of course, we have some special affection for Nepal, especially when you go a little bit higher up to the Tibetan Plateau. It's called near Jump song, and then there's Cogbenny. They are very ancient towns in Nepal. I've been there, I think, four times already over the last 40 years.

Originally, I went there to obtain some Shaligram shilas, but afterwards, higher in the mountains, as many nice sadhus are living there, etc. Because for us, this is important because this is the place where Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Goswami came. He was ordered by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in a dream to go to Nepal and find Śrī Hari. Śrī Hari means the Shaligram shila, because the Shaligram shila is a self-manifest form of the Lord.

Generally, when we carve deities and the mission of the ācārya, we will install those deities. All of them are shilas, self-manifested forms of the Lord. So, he came to the Kali Gandaki River and obtained 12. The whole pastime is that he obtained 12 Shaligrams.

He brought them back to Vṛndāvana.

And of course, all devotees know the famous history of Rādhāramaṇa. That Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Goswami was praying that, you know, one of his shilas would manifest as a bigger deity so he could dress that deity and give it shringar and jewelry and clothes and makuta and everything.

So, he prayed like that. So, the next morning, after his prayer, his finger, [Devotee's name], Rādhāramaṇa manifested. So, this is how we think. When we come here, we are following in the footsteps of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Goswami, to obtain Śrī Hari.

We will not take any shelter, we are going to take the mercy of Śrī Hari so that we can come back to our respective countries and share the bliss of Krishna Consciousness.

We come here to get surcharged. That's why these holy places exist. So, we're here in Kathmandu, over 20 devotees, just woke up, packed up, you know, cleaned up our festival program, jumped in the buses, went to the airport, and it took us all day to come here.

Another adventure in the service of Śrīla Prabhupāda and the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Stay with us. Ananta will be doing, we will be doing some videos. Write it up online.