
"Hare Kṛṣṇa. Today we are blessed. Our parikramā party has come to the town of Daujī here in Śrī Vṛndāvana, a little further than Go-kula. It took us about an hour and a half to come here by bus. The town of Daujī is named after the deity, Daujī, the predominant deity in this town—I think the only main deity in this town. It is a very beautiful deity of Balarāma that was established by Vajranābha, the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, after Kṛṣṇa left this world. He established many deities to appease the feelings of separation of the Vrajavāsīs when the Lord left this world. Daujī means the older brother, the older brother of Kṛṣṇa, and the worship of Balarāma is actually very prominent here in Śrī Vṛndāvana. We generally think of going to the temples of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but the worship of Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma is also very prominent, as we know in ISKCON, because when our beloved spiritual master established his temple, our temple here in Vṛndāvana in the 1970s, it was named the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, because Prabhupāda established the worship of Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma in the center altar. There are three altars: there’s Gaura-Nitāi, there’s Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and there’s Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda established the worship of Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma prominently in our center because our center is in Ramaṇa-reṇu, and Prabhupāda would often refer to the soft sands of Ramaṇa-reṇu. This is where the land that was donated to our society was, so we built our temple there. When you travel around Vṛndāvana, you often see different deities of Lord Balarāma or Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. There is a very prominent temple on the parikramā-mārga around Govardhana Hill, but we like to bring our devotees to this town specifically because everyone is a devotee of Daujī here.

They don’t say so much here, "Jaya Rādhe" or "Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa." They say, "Daujī kī jaya, Kṛṣṇa Kanhāiyā." When you greet someone, you say, "Daujī kī jaya," and the person you’re greeting will say, "Kṛṣṇa Kanhāiyā." Literally, this means "Daujī’s brother is Kṛṣṇa who always plays the flute." I bring devotees here regularly on parikramā because the mood here in the town of Daujī is very much like it was in Vṛndāvana proper many, many years ago. It’s a very simple rural atmosphere. People are not so rushed here; there’s not so much commerce going on here. These are villagers, farmers, who come every morning to see Daujī, Kṛṣṇa’s elder brother. In the evening, they come back and they see Daujī before they go back to their village to go to sleep. So the worship of Daujī is very prominent. 

Balarāma is Lord Kṛṣṇa’s elder brother. Of course, in the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, in the First Canto, we read in one verse that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma are addressed together as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in their incarnation in this world. At the same time, we learn from our ācāryas that Balarāma is the first expansion of Kṛṣṇa. That being said, Śrīla Prabhupāda has told us that essentially there’s no difference between Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; they are both the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The only difference is that Balarāma is whitish like an autumn cloud and Kṛṣṇa is darkish like a monsoon cloud. But because Balarāma is the first expansion of Kṛṣṇa, our ācāryas say he is subservient to Kṛṣṇa, and he plays two roles in this relationship to Kṛṣṇa here in Vṛndāvana. Number one, he’s the older brother; he’s in a mood of protecting Kṛṣṇa because many demons are coming here to Vṛndāvana to kill Kṛṣṇa. And secondly, he considers himself a servant of Kṛṣṇa, and in that mood of service, he expands himself as the dhāma; he expands himself as the paraphernalia of Kṛṣṇa, the ornaments of Kṛṣṇa; he expands himself as the cāmara fan to fan Kṛṣṇa; he expands himself as the āsana for Kṛṣṇa. Very deep, very esoteric.

We know that he is very protective of Kṛṣṇa. He killed certain demons like Pralambāsura; he helped kill Dhenukāsura; he killed Dvivida-gorilla. Like this, this is the mood of Balarāma protecting his younger brother. So many wonderful pastimes like that; he’s always there, and the pastimes with Kṛṣṇa going to the fields to herd the cows during the day, etc. But he also has another deep relationship with Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Just as Kṛṣṇa has his Gopīs, Balarāma also has his Gopīs. So like this, there are so many wonderful pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma here in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. When we come to this town of Daujī, and we come before the very beautiful deity of Daujī, we relate these pastimes, we discuss them in great detail from the explanation of the ācāryas, and we have lots of kīrtana. This is the mood here in Vṛndāvana: when we go to the holy places, we have kathā, we have prasādam, and we dance in ecstasy, and we take Kṛṣṇa-prasādam. 

The magic of this process is that it somehow awakens our deeper love for Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, Rādhā-Śyāma. In this environment, it’s very important to come whenever possible, come to Vṛndāvana for parikramā, especially during the month of Kārttika. We hear Prabhupāda has said that any devotional service done here during this auspicious month, the result is magnified a thousand times. So we’re praying for the mercy here in the town of Daujī, to the deity of Daujī, to purify our hearts, inspire us, and bring forth this loving devotion, which we hope to take back to our different countries and spread the glories of Vṛndāvana and the glories of Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, the glories of Rādhā-Śyāma in the Western countries. Hopefully, many millions of people will come one day to take the benefit of this auspicious place. Daujī kī jaya! Kṛṣṇa Kanhāiyā! Hare Kṛṣṇa.""