Hare Krishna.

Dear devotees, welcome back again to our Chaitanya curriculum 2022, in the transcendental land of Śrī Vrindavan. We have many choices, as I've mentioned earlier, of places to go in Vrindavan, billions of choices. But today, we've chosen a place which is very, very, very dear to my heart, and I'm sure it will be very dear to your hearts as well.

This is a beautiful forested region, it's called Kadambakandi. In Sanskrit, 'khandi' means a multitude, and of course, 'kadamba' refers to kadamba trees. So, this is a forest, it's a multitude of kadamba trees. And of course, there are kadamba trees all over Braja, just like there are tamal trees all over Braja.

And there are special trees, lots of trees, in Vrindavan, but these two species are very important because we know from reading our literature that when Rādhāranī sees a dark tamal tree, she remembers Kṛṣṇa, she experiences transcendental ecstasy. And when Kṛṣṇa sees a kadamba tree, which is light in color, and I've seen when the sun shines on the kadamba tree, it's golden, like Śrīmatī Rādhārani, Kṛṣṇa remembers about Rādhārani and He becomes ecstatic.

One of the wonders of Vrindavan. So, trees are everywhere in Vrindavan, especially when Kṛṣṇa was here five thousand years ago. And Kṛṣṇa lived in this environment of the forest. He makes that very clear, actually, in a beautiful verse in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 10.24.24.

He's speaking to His father. Kṛṣṇa says: "My dear father, our home is not in the cities, or towns, or villages. Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills." Kṛṣṇa's preferred environment. Just like there's that famous saying that, "Man created the cities, but God created the country." And we also, many, most people like to live in the country, or when they have an opportunity to live, leave the cities, they go to the countryside, especially devotees because it's in many ways easier to remember Kṛṣṇa, such a peaceful environment.

So, this is Vrindavan. 'Van' means forest, and Vrindavan literally means, um, the forest that Vṛndā Devī gave to Śrīmatī Rādhārani. Vrindavan. So, within Vrindavan, as I've mentioned many times, there are many sub-forests. So, here's one sub-forest, Kadambakandi. And it's very, very significant because this is the place, or one of the places, that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī did his bhajana.

We call that a bhajana sthali. Our Six Goswāmīs came to Vrindavan 500 years ago, and they had various instructions from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. One was to, um, establish temples of Kṛṣṇa in Vrindavan, and they did that by, um, finding their beloved deities and then establishing temples for them.

They had the instruction to write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and to rediscover the lost places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. So, as the Goswāmīs, you know, traversed this beautiful land of Vrindavan by foot, by their transcendental vision, they would discover a place where Kṛṣṇa had a pastime, a lila, here, there, and everywhere.

And some of those places became very dear to their hearts, so they would spend more time there in a particular place. So, therefore, we see all throughout Vrindavan, the Six Goswāmīs have different places where they did their bhajana, where they would sit and chant on their mala, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hari Rama, Hari Rama, Rama Rama, Hari Hari.

There, they would, under a tree, they would write their transcendental literatures, they would sleep under that tree, as we hear in the Goswāmī Ashtakam, glorifying the Six Goswāmīs. So, this forest here, this forest of kadamba trees, this is one of the favorite places for Jīva Goswāmī.

And how did he arrive at this particular forest?

Well, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who was his spiritual master, Rūpa Gosvāmī only had one disciple, of Rūpa Gosvāmī, um, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. One of his favorite places for doing bhajana was Tārakadamba. And that's quite some distance from here. But when he went there one time to do his bhajana, Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote the illustrious Upadeśāmṛta, probably translated it and commented on it, called it the Nectar of Instruction.

So, there he was writing, um, Upadeśāmṛta. There's a whole pastime behind that, I won't share that now, but it took some time to write that transcendental literature. And he'd like to spend time at Tārakadamba. And naturally, his disciple, Jīva Goswāmī, wanted to come and render service to his spiritual master.

So, when Rūpa Goswāmī first got there, he was setting up. Jīva came and said, "You know, I'd like to come and spend time with you and assist you here." But Rūpa Goswāmī was in a particular mood, "I just want to be here and focus on my writing.

So, you can stay elsewhere, and you can come here once a day. Okay, clean up this forested area, you can cook for me, wash the clothes, clean up like some menial services like that." So, Rūpa Goswāmī said, "But you can stay some other place.

You pick another part of the Vrindavan forest, and you stay there. But you come every day to hear in this forest of kadamba trees." This is where Jīva Goswāmī stayed during that particular period, which must have been quite some time.

He stayed in this beautiful forest of, of kadamba trees, and he also wrote his transcendental literatures, he did his bhajana here. But every day he'd walk quite some distance to Tārakadamba. It's quite some distance from there. He would walk there, no problem.

So, sadhus like to walk in Braja barefoot, because what are they walking on?

Which translates as 'Braja Raj', or the dust of Vrindavan. So, here he lived, and then he'd walk to Tārakadamba, do some service, and come back. So, this is a special forest. Every forest in Vrindavan is special, there are lilas in every place, but this is extra special because Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī, of the Six Goswāmīs, stayed here.

And therefore, the sadhus in this area, they say that every tree here in Kadambakandi, this multitude of kadamba trees, is a desire tree. So, when sadhus come here, it's part of the tradition, they pick a tree. You can see this beautiful tree behind me, and they embrace that tree and they express their spiritual desires.

It's a wonderful opportunity for devotees, you know, because in due course of time, it's assured that one's spiritual desires will be fulfilled if one sticks to the straight and narrow path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Our material desires, you know, based on our destiny, our karma, they may or may not be fulfilled, there's no guarantee.

But spiritual desires, if we pray very sincerely, those desires will be fulfilled in due course of time. That's the nature of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, we also will be embracing these kadamba trees, these kadamba trees today, and praying for eternal service, first of all, to Śrīla Prabhupāda, because he's our connection to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

And through Śrīla Prabhupāda, one day, He will engage us in devotional service in the spiritual world, in Goloka Vrindavan, to the lotus feet of, um, of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

This is why we come to Vrindavan, because there are these golden opportunities to see, special opportunities to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is said that any devotional service that's done here, the result is magnified a thousand times. So, if you chant sixteen rounds, the result is like chanting sixteen thousand rounds.

And there's no exaggeration to think that the glories of the Holy Name are an exaggeration, it is actually offensive. So, therefore, Śrīla Prabhupāda is always recommending it.

It is so. We're fortunate to be here, and we also feel fortunate to share our good fortune with all of you, to share these wonderful lilas, these wonderful pastimes with all of you here in Vrindavan. It's a great forest, and today, Kadamba Khandi.

As I look out, I can see many acres and many hectares of farmland, agricultural land. But previously, it was all like that, it was all just a forested area. In fact, one of Śrīla Prabhupāda's close friends in the 1970s, Viśvambhar Prabhu, we called him Bhaga Ji, a very close friend of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we used to go to him sometimes and ask him to tell us stories what Vrindavan was like when he first came to Vrindavan.

He came to Vrindavan in, I think, 1932. And he told us, he was a sadhu, so he came to Vrindavan in 1932. And he, he said that everywhere was forest. In fact, he told us when he used to walk from the town of Vrindavan, the present town of Vrindavan, to Govardhan Hill, which, you know, it's quite a drive, it's an hour's drive, he would walk it and then do Govardhan, walk back.

So, he said that from Vrindavan town to Govardhan Hill, he said it was such a thick forest that the whole way, you couldn't see one ray of light from the sun, the sun's rays didn't penetrate the forest because it was so thick.

That was Vrindavan in the 1930s. And he told us a cute little, well, an amazing little story. He said when he came, there were tigers in Raman Reti, where we have our Kṛṣṇa Balaram Mandir now. There were tigers there, and sometimes the tigers would come at night and eat the sadhus.

So, I said, "How did you survive?" He said, "Well, we learned the trick." He said, "Before we'd sleep in our grass huts in Raman Reti, he said, we would take a big pot, and we would boil milk.

Put the milk in the pot, add a little 'guda', which is natural sugar. It would be steaming like that. Then we'd go to sleep very peacefully." Because when the tigers came looking for something to eat, perhaps a sadhu, they would smell that warm, sugary milk.

He said, "They would lap up the milk, get full, and go away." One of the tricks of living in the Vrindavan forest. We feel a little uncomfortable, you know, like in our apartments in Vrindavan these days if there's no hot water.

That was Braja in the old days. So, my point was that it used to be a great forest. Much of it has been cut down. So, we really appreciate coming to Kadambakundi and getting an idea what Braja was like 500 years ago, with the speaker, 5,000 years ago.

Taking special relish and being here where Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī did his bhajana and wrote the scriptures that we are reading of his as well. And we're feeling so blessed to be here. So, it's a shaded area. It's, it's a bit hot out still here in Vrindavan, but we're feeling very comfortable physically and spiritually in this transcendental atmosphere.

And again, so happy to share the glories of Kadambakandi, Jīva Goswāmī, and Śrī Vrindavan with all of you.