"*00470*.*
"Hi, Krishna, dear devotees. Welcome back once again. Namaste. *Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prabhu-nityānanda-śrī-advaita-gadādhara-śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda*. So, we are continuing with our series on Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *iṣṭadeva*. I believe this is the 10th lecture in the series. 

In our last lecture, we discussed in detail how the great Rāj Jai Singh II made elaborate arrangements for Rādhā-Govinda in his newly created city of Jaipur in the mid-1700s. We concluded by describing how popular Rādhā-Govinda were, evidenced by the fact that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas flocked in huge numbers from Māyāpura, Jagannātha Purī, and Vṛndāvana to take their *darśana*. We also mentioned that as a result, Jaipur became for some time the main seat of learning for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. 

But history has shown that there was a significant problem as a result of this: certain other spiritual movements, who at that time were even more prominent in Jaipur, became jealous of the attention that Rāj Jai Singh was giving to the Gauḍīyas. This was particularly true of the Rāmānandī sect, who at that time were very much involved in deity worship in Jaipur. 

The Rāmānandīs were an offshoot of the Śrī-sampradāya in South India—an authorized offshoot. At one point in history, Śrī Rāmānujācārya, the founder of the Śrī-sampradāya, had been very successful in establishing his sampradāya when they worshiped Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa in South India. But he wanted to expand his movement to North India, so he instructed a senior disciple, whose name was Rāmānanda, to take up this task. And Rāmānanda and his followers—or his men, you could say—they went north and they settled in Ayodhyā. And after some time, they began worshiping Sītā-Rāma because Ayodhyā was the capital of Rāmacandra’s kingdom. So, they began worshiping Sītā-Rāma, and as time went by, they became known as Rāmānandīs. 

By the time Jai Singh came to power in Amber and then Jaipur in Rājasthān, the Rāmānandīs were quite powerful. They spread all over North India, and again, they became a little jealous of the Gauḍīyas, who were not that popular or prominent yet in Jaipur. The Rāmānandīs felt that Jai Singh was giving the Gauḍīyas too much attention and too much facility. So, they made an official, very strong objection to the King. They challenged that the Gauḍīyas were not actually a bona fide recognized sampradāya, specifically because they had no commentary on the *Vedānta-sūtra*. 

Each of the four accepted sampradāyas—the Śrī-sampradāya which comes from Lakṣmī-devī, the Madhva-sampradāya which comes from Lord Brahmā, the Viṣṇu-svāmī-sampradāya which comes from Lord Śiva, and the Nimbārka-sampradāya from the four Kumāras—they all have commentaries on *Vedānta-sūtra*. The *Vedānta-sūtra*, you could say, is a summary of all the Vedic literatures, the four Vedas in particular, in code form. Like we often quote the first aphorism of *Vedānta-sūtra* in our public lectures: "Now that you have come to the human form of life, now is the time for spiritual inquiry for spiritual realization." So, it has always been customary for an Ācārya to establish his sampradāya on the basis of a *Vedānta-sūtra* commentary. 

But the followers of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we accept the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* as the natural commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*, and our sampradāya never felt a need to compile another. That was sufficient: *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. 

Now, another thing is that the Rāmānandīs objected to the worship of Vṛndāvanesvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. They didn’t like that Rādhārāṇī was on the altar, and their reasoning was, "Well, she is not mentioned in Vedic scriptures; who is she?" Which actually is somewhat true in the sense that one of her names—as we’ve discussed before, maybe last year—one of Rādhārāṇī’s names is *Veda-gopya*. *Veda-gopya* meaning she is hidden in the Vedas. It was actually Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as the Yuga-avatāra, who revealed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to the world. So, the Rāmānandīs demanded that Jai Singh II remove Rādhārāṇī from the altar from the new temple that had been constructed for Rādhā-Govinda as part of the town planning of Jaipur. 

So, all this became a huge problem for Jai Singh II. Why? Because as King, he had to keep the peace between all the different spiritual groups in Jaipur. He may have been a Gauḍīya at heart—and he was—but as King, he needed to defuse any friction between the different spiritual camps. Diplomacy. Kings have to engage in diplomacy. So, until things were resolved, he had Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī taken off the altar in that new temple and placed back in his own palace. And he told the Gauḍīyas that they had to prove beyond any doubt that they were in fact a bona fide sampradāya. 

So, he declared that there would be a debate between the Rāmānandīs and the Gauḍīyas at a place called Galitā, or Galtā—both terms are used—at a certain time just outside Jaipur. And at that debate, the Gauḍīyas had to prove in whatever way that they were bona fide, foremost by providing a commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*. And this created a big commotion in the Vaiṣṇava community, in the Gauḍīya community. First of all, because I was reading, the devotees struggled to understand: "How could Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī have been separated from Govindajī? How could it be that Rādhā was separated from her beloved Govindajī, Rādhā-Govinda?" 

But Baladeva, a very prominent student of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura—both of whom were living at that time—wrote to the devotees in Jaipur not to be alarmed. Because he said, "Rādhārāṇī is simply exhibiting her *māna*, her transcendental anger, as a result of something Kṛṣṇa may have said to her, and she left the altar to sulk somewhere." 

All right. As for proving that the Gauḍīyas were bona fide, Rāj Jai Singh II himself, our hero, he wrote to Viśvanātha Cakravartī, who was the leading Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavācārya or scholar at the time, asking him to come and debate with the Rāmānandīs at Galtā. Viśvanātha and Jai Singh often exchanged letters. I found out, I read in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, that only a few months before, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura had written to Jai Singh complaining that large numbers of *dacoits*—dacoits was the word used—or thieves had been robbing pilgrims on the road between Vṛndāvana and Jaipur, and he requested Jai Singh to do something about it. "Now, you’re the King, send some of your army there and stop these dacoits." I saw the letter; it was like nectar. 

When Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura received the letter from Jai Singh the King to come and debate, he had to refuse because he was just too old and fragile to travel. So, he requested his student, Baladeva, to go and debate with the Rāmānandīs. Now, he stressed to Baladeva that it was a very significant moment in the history of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, for if Baladeva lost the debate, the Gauḍīyas’ reputation in India would be greatly diminished, and the relevance of Kṛṣṇa’s dear-most beloved, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, would be in question. 

So, our hero—we have a lot of heroes, by the way, as you know—later to become Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa. He was born near the famous town of Rāyaguṇā in Oḍiśā, Eastern India. And after his initial schooling in Sanskrit, rhetoric, and logic, he left home as a young man to travel to holy places and hear from the saints who lived in those holy places. Now, at one point in his travels, he studied and he mastered the teachings of Śrīla Madhvācārya. Then, armed with those teachings, he accepted the renounced order of *sannyāsa*, and he traveled and preached all over India. And eventually, he came to Jagannātha Purī, where he met a disciple of the famous Rādhīkānanda Prabhu, and that disciple’s name was Paṇḍita Rādhā-Dāmodara, who you could say infused Baladeva with the glories and teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And actually, he ended up taking *dīkṣā*, or formal initiation, from this Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava paṇḍita. 

And he spent a number of years studying Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s *Ṣaṭ-sandarbha* with his initiating guru, and it’s written that he mastered "all of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism’s philosophical conclusions." That’s how I read it. So, after he’d mastered all of that, you could see how erudite he was, the paṇḍita—his guru told Baladeva to go to Vṛndāvana and study *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*—*grantha-bhāgavatam*, the King of all scriptures—under Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. So, it is this Baladeva sent on his behalf to Jaipur. Watch out, Rāmānandīs! 

So, in time, Baladeva arrived at Jai Singh’s court, and he entered into what was described as a very animated debate with the Rāmānandī scholars, none of whom could stand up to his impressive scholarship and very keen intellect. But the Rāmānandīs’ key argument, again, was that without a commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*, the Gauḍīyas had no, you could say, systematic philosophy and no authority. Baladeva did use the Gauḍīya argument that, you know, Lord Caitanya accepted *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* as the natural commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*. Nevertheless, these scholars insisted that the Gauḍīyas must have their own written commentary. In fact, they insisted that Baladeva or somebody produce a commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*, the Upaniṣads, and *Bhagavad-gītā* within three months. 

Now, of course, Baladeva was competent to write these commentaries, but you could say the deadline that these scholars were giving was unreasonable, like 12 weeks, and it was unlikely he would finish in time. So, what did our hero do? What did Baladeva do? He did what every sincere devotee of Kṛṣṇa does when things look hopeless: he took shelter of Kṛṣṇa. And he went to the *Sūrya-mahal*—that’s the official term for the temple, that new temple of Rādhā-Govinda—and he went, he took shelter of the Deity. And I was reading that he was initially shocked to see that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was not there. But he knew she would be reinstated beside her beloved Govindajī if he could provide a proper commentary on the scriptures requested by the Rāmānandīs. Because if the Gauḍīyas were recognized, whatever actions they took would have to be accepted, and they would bring Rādhārāṇī right back as fast as they could to stand beside Govindajī. It’s a very exciting drama, real-life drama. 

But Baladeva felt his only recourse was the Lord himself. And coming before Govindajī, he spoke to the Deity, he related all that had happened, and he prayed very sincerely for the Lord’s intervention. And so that night, Govindajī appeared to Baladeva in a dream. And smiling, Govindajī said, "Quote, my dear Baladeva, do not worry. Just write the commentary. I will guide you. I will guide you by my blessings. The work will not only be completed in time, but it will also be faultless." This is the dream. 

So the next morning, Baladeva woke up excited and empowered, and he requested writing material and reference books from the King, from Jai Singh. And first, he took up the commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*, then the Upaniṣads, and then finally *Bhagavad-gītā*. And to make a long story short, at the conclusion of three months, Baladeva placed his books before, you could say, an incredulous audience of his adversaries at Galtā, who I was reading could do nothing but praise him after reviewing everything that he had done—in particular, his illustrious commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*. That was the main thing. His commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*, which he called *Govinda-bhāṣya*, because that, you know, Govinda had empowered him what to write, he called it that, was especially appreciated. 

And I read afterwards, actually, some of those Rāmānandīs, they switched camps. They actually took shelter of Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa. And scholars say that Baladeva had proven that the Gauḍīyas’ philosophical conclusion, *acintya-bhedābheda*, was the synthesis of all the other sampradāyas’ views, thus establishing Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism as a sampradāya in its own right—not actually, let’s clarify, not actually a sampradāya in its own right, but more like a branch of the Madhva-sampradāya. Although we are a *śākhā*, we are a branch of the Madhva-sampradāya, we’re not fully aligned with them. Thus, we required our own commentary on the scriptures, on *Vedānta-sūtra*, which Baladeva produced. 

His commentary, the Rāmānandīs actually had no choice but to accept that we are connected to the Madhva-sampradāya but that we have our own flavor. I know I’ve been to South India, and I’ve been to Uḍupī, and you know where Uḍupī Kṛṣṇa is, that’s the seat of the Madhvas, and there’s a little tension there. When you come in as a Gauḍīya, they don’t fully appreciate us because there’s some differences, and we acknowledge those differences, such as, you know, Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes with the Gopīs. That’s the contribution of, you know, Kṛṣṇa’s very loving *madhura-līlā* pastimes with the Gopīs. So they don’t accept that so much. So you know, where can we consider ourselves a branch? A branch is connected to the trunk, yet a branch is also significantly different from the trunk. Thus, we conclude with all due respect that a branch has leaves and fruits which the trunk doesn’t have. Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

So we are known as the Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava-sampradāya. Many of our philosophical conclusions are very much as they are in the Madhva-sampradāya. So many truths are there; that’s why we’re considered a branch of the Madhvas, because we agree on so many things, just some little differences like that. So we’re a branch: the Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava-sampradāya. 

So all glories to Baladeva! And as a result of Baladeva’s victory over the Rāmānandīs, Jai Singh granted the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas exclusive rights to the *sevā* of Govindajī. Previously, it was shared by the Rāmānandīs. So Jai Singh, you know, in his heart he’s a Gauḍīya, so he granted the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas exclusive rights to the service of Govindajī. And what can we say? Rādhārāṇī gave up her *māna*, she gave up her anger, and was taken back to the temple and put on the altar next to her beloved Govindadeva, where they continued to be worshiped to the present day. And also, it’s important to mention that the King was so impressed by Baladeva’s achievement that he gave him the honorific title, Vidyābhūṣaṇa. So that’s how we refer to him, actually. 

And Jai Singh—if I was reading this—is interesting: Jai Singh was able to appreciate himself the scholarly nature of Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa because he was a scholar as well. He was not only a *rājarṣi*, a saintly person sitting on the throne, but he was also a scholar. I read that he had written a number of deep philosophical, spiritual books, including *Bhāidika-Vaiṣṇava-sārārtha-grantha*, that was one book; *Prabhu-vaidika-pūjā-paddhati*, another book; and *Satyānanda-ātma-padārtha-bhānu-candrikā*, another of his books; and *Maitīkya-prakāśikā*. These are very deep philosophical books exploring different spiritual subject matters, and they were and they are all generally accepted by the teachers of all the sampradāyas. This is our hero, Jai Singh. We’ve heard about him on the battlefield, we’ve heard him engaging diplomacy within his own kingdom, we’ve heard how when he goes to Vṛndāvana he takes off his shoes and throws away the umbrella, no security, he walks around the twelve forests—oh, what a... if only we had rulers like that today. 

So now with this great victory, Jai Singh himself was free to give his very heart and soul to the worship of Govindajī. In fact, I was reading that he redesigned his royal insignia and his official stamp, kings had an official stamp, both of which read, "The lotus feet of Śrī Govinda are, for Jai Singh, his refuge." And they also found the famous Śrī Veṅkaṭācārya of the Rāmānuja-sampradāya; he acknowledged Jai Singh also. He later wrote about him—I just stumbled across this quote the other day—quote: "That wise King, Jai Singh, accomplished the destruction of the opposition just as the Man-Lion, Narasiṁha, previously managed to ally the hostility of his opposition, Hiraṇyakaśipu." 

So after everything had been concluded, this is really nice: Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa received a hero’s welcome upon his return to Vṛndāvana. Wow, the hero’s welcome. Everyone came out; they were so impressed. He defended Rādhā-Govinda, he defended Rādhārāṇī, he defended the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. We were there; we were in now because of this one devotee, of course, empowered by his previous Ācāryas, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, protected by Lord Narasiṁhadeva, came back to Vṛndāvana a veritable hero. And when he came back to Vṛndāvana, he installed a Deity that he named Vijaya-Govinda. *Vijaya* means victorious. Govinda, always victorious Govinda. And he gave that name to that Deity based on a verse that he had written in his *Govinda-bhāṣya*. 

He was establishing that we were a modified sampradāya, part of the Madhvas, our commentary on *Vedānta-sūtra*, *Govinda-bhāṣya*. And therein, he wrote a verse, and I found the verse, which we will happily share with all of you, written by Baladeva, quote: "Bestowing upon me an ornament in the form of knowledge, He who is most lofty led me to fame. May that Śrī Govinda, whose commentary appeared to me in a dream—that companion of Śrī Rādhā, He whose limbs are pleasantly bent—be ever victorious." There, it shows that Govinda appeared to him in a dream. Some other—you know, sometimes it’s mentioned that the Deity actually spoke to him when he was sitting there, but this is the authorized version. He himself explains: "Whose commentary appeared to me in a dream, that companion of Śrī Rādhā, He whose limbs are pleasantly bent, be ever victorious." Vijaya-Govinda. 

So in Vṛndāvana, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was awarded the *sevā* of taking care of the Rādhā-Govinda temple, a service actually that he performed until his last breath, and his sacred *samādhi* lies in a secluded part of Rādhā-Dāmodara’s temple compound. I’ve been there many times, and for whatever reason, I never knew that. So, I’m going to go, maybe tomorrow, pay my respects after hearing everything that he’s done for us. Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, all these devotees, these Ācāryas, you know, these kings and even unknown devotees, they did so much to establish the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

And we, our humble selves, are carrying on that tradition. What a responsibility we have upon our shoulders to continue it as the illustrious, glorious International Society for Krishna Consciousness, established by our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda. We know how Prabhupāda struggled, and now we’re hearing how so many other devotees struggled. We were reading the other day how, you know, Prabhupāda said, "Preaching is not easy. Not easy to establish a spiritual movement in the material world." So these devotees made so many sacrifices. Just always remember that. Keep our mind fixed on the mission, contributing. Don’t get deviated, don’t become frivolous, don’t become lazy. We’ve inherited this movement; we need to do the best that we can in our humble ways to not only maintain it but to continue it, continue it on in various ways to the next ten thousand years. 

So our hero, Jai Singh II, left this world on September 21st, 1743, at the young age of 54. And his court poet, Kṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭa, says—I was reading—when Jai Singh II left his body, he gave up his body in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, uttering the names. He left, he was a King, he wasn’t a *bābājī*, you know, at *pradakṣiṇa*, and he wasn’t a Gosvāmī in Vṛndāvana, he wasn’t an erudite scholar here or there, but he was a Vaiṣṇava, one who protects *dharma*, and he left in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I wish there was a time machine, we could go back and help him. Of course, we have similar challenges now. Every generation of Vaiṣṇavas has a certain set of challenges, and we take those on with full conviction. That’s the success of our lives, how much we can assist Śrīla Prabhupāda in establishing the International Society for Krishna Consciousness in this world, which is the perfect formula for continuing this great legacy of Śrī Caitanya. How blessed we are, how fortunate we are. We always have to take a moment and just stop and just remember our good fortune. This is who we are, and this is the purpose of our lives. 

To make sure that Prabhupāda’s mission is as successful as we can make it, then hand the baton. The relay race, there’s four persons who run around in that relay race, and they give the baton to the next and to the next and to the next. So my generation has to hand the baton to the next generation, and they run with it, and they give it to the next generation. Like this, somehow we’re part of this great movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

So recently I found out, I have information, where is the grave of Jai Singh the Second? I found out in Rājasthān. So I’m also planning to go see Rādhā-Govinda—I mean, that’s the natural consequence of this series of lectures, isn’t it? I’m sure you’re all hankering to come to Vṛndāvana and visit many of the holy places we’ve been discussing for the last year. And I’m sure you’ll be inspired at some point to, you know, take that three-hour drive to Jaipur and go to the temple and see Govindajī, see Govindajī. I’m going to go there. I’m also going to go to where Jai Singh is entombed, where he’s buried, his *ḍherī*, and offer my deepest respect and gratitude for everything he did for Rādhā-Govinda and the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Hare Kṛṣṇa. 

So, I’d like to finish today with Śrīla Prabhupāda’s dedication in his *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is*. It’s a perfect way to finish the class today to acknowledge Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, and it’s a perfect way to acknowledge his contribution because Prabhupāda chose him as the person to dedicate his translation of *Bhagavad-gītā* to the world, *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is*. And you’ve heard this many times, but I think this is a proper way to finish. Prabhupāda writes, at the beginning of his translation of *Bhagavad-gītā As It Is*, he writes famously, "To Śrīla Baladeva, who presented so nicely the *Govinda-bhāṣya* commentary on Vedānta philosophy." Hare Kṛṣṇa. All glories, thank you. 

I think I have like one or two more lectures on Govindajī and Jaipur, and some of the kings that came after Jai Singh and the incredible things that they did to preserve and continue the worship of Rādhā-Govinda. We’ll be back in a couple of days. *Śrī-śrī-gaura-nitāi kī jaya! Śrī-śrī-kṛṣṇa-balarāma kī jaya! International Society for Krishna Consciousness, back home, back to Godhead kī jaya! Take all the fallen conditioned souls we can, back home, back to Godhead kī jaya! Gaurā-premanande haribol! Hare Kṛṣṇa.*""