"*00236*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls, and those of you who are joining our congregation this evening. Welcome to this very auspicious function of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Janmāṣṭamī—welcoming, honoring, and glorifying the appearance day of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa in this world 50 centuries ago, 5,000 years ago. There are many auspicious days in the Hindu calendar; practically almost every day we could celebrate something transcendental or spiritual. But for many Hindus, this is the most important day because in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, in Kṛṣṇa’s own words 5,000 years ago, He declares quite openly that He is the seed-giving father of all living entities. 

Even in this world, we are generally very attached to our mother and father who give us life, give us this particular body, raise us to be good children, and contribute to society, a country, etc. We have some attachment for our mother and our father. How much more attachment, ultimately, should we have for the Supreme Father, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is giving us the very air we breathe, the very earth that we walk on, the food that we taste, the water that we drink? We often take these things for granted, isn't it? Familiarity breeds contempt. We just think it’s all here, but everything has a cause, and the Supreme cause of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, we honor Kṛṣṇa on this day for being our provider, for being our well-wishing friend, and ultimately for being our divine lover.

Beyond this temporary world, which is characterized by birth, disease, old age, and death, there is an eternal abode which is full of knowledge and bliss, and that is our real home. Because we have forgotten that—essentially, we have forgotten that abode—the Lord is very kind and He comes to remind us. He states in the *Bhagavad-gītā*... you die, you die here. Even the *gurukula* children, they know this verse; they were singing earlier. All Hindus know that repetition of the fact is necessary to properly understand. Kṛṣṇa says whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice—which is the practice of all civilized nations—there are many authorized, bona fide spiritual traditions in the world. We honor our Christian brothers and sisters, our Muslim brothers and sisters, our Jewish brothers and sisters, our Buddhist brothers and sisters, because they, too, to a greater degree, are transcendentalists. They understand that the goal of life is to go back home, back to Godhead. We honor them. 

So Kṛṣṇa says whenever and wherever there is a decline in civilized life—and civilized life doesn't just mean a suit and tie, a nice gown, a glass of wine, some fancy words, or some politics. Religious life means dedicating ourselves wholly and solely to our Supreme Father, the Supreme Lord, so that one day we can join Him again in that world of love and bliss. So whenever that religion which elevates people becomes *adharma*, which degrades people, out of His compassion the Lord comes. Religion elevates us; it brings about all good qualities: cleanliness, truthfulness, mercy, austerity. Irreligious life degrades us. What is irreligious life? Meat-eating, intoxication, illicit sex, and gambling. These are the norms of today; it is enshrined in various countries' constitutions. Meat-eating, intoxication, illicit sex, and gambling. In our Hindu culture, our Vedic culture, these things were practically non-existent. People lived by higher principles: cleanliness, truthfulness, mercy, austerity. These are in decline, and *adharma* is on the rise. 

A very nice example: as I was recently in London, in the UK, in England, and I was walking around appreciating the beauty of the city, I noticed that most of the churches were closed. These churches were built very beautifully by the British people 100, 200, 300, even more years ago, and people would flock to the church, the house of God. Now they are closed, they are locked up, and to my dismay, I saw that some of them had been purchased and turned into discos, turned into pubs—you know, the British like to drink—they are pubs. The churches are pubs. So for me, that’s a sign that *dharma* is in decline and *adharma* is becoming manifest. So whenever that happens, the Lord appears.

We may forget God, Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa, we may forget Him, but He never forgets us. He is always waiting for the opportunity to enlighten us about the purpose of life. He is always there, ready to enlighten us about the purpose of life; He is waiting for us. Actually, He is seated in the heart of every living entity. The Lord has three primary features: Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead in the spiritual world; He is all-pervading by His Brahman effulgence; and He is present in the heart of every living entity, guiding us as we wander through this material creation. What is His real purpose in being there? The real purpose of the Lord being in the heart is to capture that moment that we realize the futility of material existence, and we become gradually interested in spiritual life. The *Upaniṣads* describe two birds sitting in a tree—it’s a classic example used by all the *paṇḍitas* in *Bhāgavatam* when they lecture. Two birds sitting in a tree: one bird is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other bird is a silent witness; He’s just watching this bird eat the fruit. You know, it’s like a cherry tree—in Europe we have lots of cherry trees, lots of cherries—so one bird’s eating the cherry, and when he becomes sick, because if you eat too much fruit you can become ill, then he turns to the other bird for guidance, for help.

It’s a nice analogy. Try as we may to enjoy in this world, that enjoyment is temporary at best; it doesn't satisfy the hankering of the soul for eternal happiness. So at some point in one's existence, there will be a spiritual awakening; everyone has their own pace. At that moment, the Lord in the heart, He sees that interest, and what does He do? He guides you to a bona fide spiritual organization. There are many different spiritual organizations because there are different kinds of people. He’ll guide you to a movement like ISKCON, and when you’re in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness trying to awaken your dormant love for God, the Lord will inspire you to take shelter of His representative. Just as a government exists in Europe—France, for example—but in this good country of Mauritius there is a French Embassy with an ambassador representing the country of France. So in the absence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who generally just stays in the spiritual world enjoying loving pastimes with His devotees, His ambassador is in this world. The ambassador is the guru, the spiritual master.

And Kṛṣṇa encourages us to seek out His ambassador, His representative. Just to talk, just try to learn these truths by approaching a bona fide spiritual master: inquire from him submissively and render service to him. The self-realized souls can give you knowledge because they’ve seen the truth; meaning they’ve heard the truth, they’re practicing the truth, they’re qualified to share it with you and train you. So like that, Kṛṣṇa’s in the heart; He sees when we’re ready for spiritual life, so He guides us to the bona fide spiritual master. One time my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, said every lady and gentleman should have a bona fide spiritual master. Should seek that. But what does the spiritual master represent? As the ambassador, he represents the Lord Himself. A spiritual master isn't someone with long hair and a twinkle in his eye and an ability to speak very nicely and move—no. He’s the humble servant of the Lord, simply repeating what the Lord has given in books like *Bhagavad-gītā* and setting the example. So the example has to be there, the *śāstra* has to be there. The spiritual master is one who repeats the *śāstra* with realization; he doesn't fabricate something new. So the *śāstra* has to be there. The words of the Lord are infallible, they’re perfect. They are the perfect guidebook out of the darkness of ignorance to the light of the spiritual world. So therefore, Kṛṣṇa comes from time to time.

He comes from time to time to establish what is *dharma* by speaking *Bhagavad-gītā*. Actually, the Lord comes for three reasons. This Vedic knowledge is very detailed. Many people believe in God, which is again good, it’s civilization, it’s a path to transcendence. But if you ask them who is God, they don’t really know what to say. They believe in God, but "tell me something about God." "Well, He’s up there." "Okay, anything else?" "He’s good." "Okay, anything else?" The purpose of religion is ultimately to awaken your dormant love for God. That’s the purpose of religion: to develop your love, your dormant love for God. That’s the visa back to the spiritual world. How can you love someone you know nothing about? Many of you are seeing me for the first time. You know, you can make a judgment if you like me or you don’t, but you can’t know if you like me or you don’t like me unless I’m present before you; then you can make your judgment. How can you love someone you know nothing about? Why did you marry that man sitting next to you? Why did you marry that woman sitting next to you? Because of the specific personality: their characteristics, their traits, their likes, their dislikes. "She dresses this way, she talks this way, she likes this type of work, she likes this type of recreation—hey, I like those things too," you know, and then the relationship develops. So in order to love God, we need the information that’s there in the Vedic scriptures. With all due respect to other spiritual traditions—we’re not criticizing them—we’re just giving you a PhD understanding of *dharma* or religion. It’s God’s mercy that He comes to this world so we can see Him and hear from Him, observe Him. And because Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive, anyone who ultimately comes in contact with Kṛṣṇa, they’re going to fall back in love with Kṛṣṇa; they’re going to fall out of love with the material world and into love with God. So we herald this day as something very significant: that the Lord comes in His original transcendental form 5,000 years ago in India.

It’s one of the most important moments in the history of the human race. God comes and we can see Him, *tattvataḥ*—as He is. He says in the fourth chapter of the *Bhagavad-gītā*: "To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants as well as to re-establish the principles of religion, I Myself appear, millennium after millennium." He comes once in a day of Brahmā with this message about *Bhagavad-gītā*. *Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja*—it’s on the tip of every Hindu’s tongue, isn’t it? Kṛṣṇa says: "Just abandon all various ways of life which you think are so important and surrender unto Me; I will protect you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." He comes to give this message once in a day of Brahmā. Now, that day of Brahmā is very long; by human calculations it’s millions and millions and millions and millions and millions of years. But in cosmic time, it’s not such a long period. Time is generally calculated according to the time of the *devatās* in the heavenly planets. When Vedic scholars speak about time, they speak about time in a more general way. They’ll speak about cosmic time, you know, the different *yugas*, the different *kalpas*, you know, because *purāṇas*—our scriptures, *purāṇa* means the old history of the universe—*Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, *Śiva Purāṇa*, talking about things that happened billions of years ago. So time is seen in a different way. So if they’re talking... one of the demigods' time is more important than our time. Like, who cares about the ant’s time? As an ant, what’s day and night for the ant? We’re more important than the ants. So who’s more important than us? The *devatās*, Svargaloka; they’re running the whole show. Everything that happens in this world, this material world, is controlled by a *devatā*: the sun, the light, the heat, the water, the wind, Vāyu—it’s all controlled. They’re much more important than us. So when we say that Kṛṣṇa comes once in a day of Brahmā, that’s very significant. If someone comes to your house every day and knocks on your door with a message... "You open the door, 'Hey, you were here yesterday with the same message.' 'Yes, but it’s very important.' And you close the door. Next day he comes back again, 'Oh, it’s you again, what is it?'" The person: "Now that you’ve arrived at the human form of life, sir, what is your business?" "Oh, well, I’m getting an education, a career, I’m going to get married, I’m going to grow old, I’m going to die." That’s okay, that we can’t ignore, we have to take care of that. But now that you’ve arrived at the human form of life, your business is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, your business is realizing me: *ahaṁ brahmāsmi*, I’m not the body—that’s the purpose of life. It doesn’t matter if you’re born in India or Mauritius or America or Canada or North Korea, as a human being that’s your real business. Success of life is measured—measured not by name and fame and prosperity, but by how much you know who you are, who is Bhagavān, and what is your intimate relationship with Him in Vaikuṇṭha, furthermore in Goloka. That’s progress. If you don’t realize that by the time you die, you’ve failed the course of human life, I’m sorry to say.

So Kṛṣṇa comes and He has to speak; He says here, to re-establish the principles of *dharma*, because the nature of this material world is that everything deteriorates. We become forgetful, or we become enamored by the false promises of material enjoyment, and we forget. Instead of verses like *sarva-dharmān parityajya*, we have other mantras: "Money is the honey, money is the honey, it’s so sweet, it can’t be beat, money is the honey." It’s humorous, but we’re laughing at ourselves. Money is important, the body is important, our responsibilities in this world are important. But what’s of the utmost importance, where no other species of life can do it? Reawaken that dormant love of God. That’s just there in the heart, covered by *avidyā*, by ignorance. So with *vidyā*, with knowledge, we can remember, "Oh yeah, oh yeah." Let me go to the local ISKCON temple and practice spiritual life and become Kṛṣṇa conscious. 

So that’s one reason. The other reason Kṛṣṇa comes is to annihilate the miscreants. Because the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* describes it: in this world there are two types of created beings—the divine and the demoniac—and they’re always at odds with each other. Good and evil are always at odds with each other. This divine and this demoniac... whereas the divine people, the pious people of this world, are always thinking of the welfare of others—if you have a lot of something good then you should share it with others, don’t be a miser, share—so a pious person is engaged in charity work, helping others, thinking well—at least thinking well—of others. Whereas the *asura* is always thinking how to exploit others, how to get as much from others, you know, come hell or high water, "I’ll get that from that person, if that means I have to go to war, I’ll kill him, I’ll take his land, I’ll take his money." Unfortunately, there are two types of created beings. And where the pious take pleasure in living a civilized life—simple living with high thinking—and doing good for others, the demons, the *asuras*, their pleasure comes from giving pain to others. We have so many personalities in history like Stalin or Hitler or... you know what I mean? So when these personalities become so powerful, Hiranyakashipu, he conquered the 14 worlds, the *devatās* were his foot-servants, Nārada Muni was a foot-servant of Hiranyakashipu, he had the blessings of Brahmā, almost immortality. Look at Rāvaṇa; what is the definition of Rāvaṇa’s name? *Rāvaṇa* means in Sanskrit: "He who makes... he who terrorizes the universe." Rāvaṇa. He tried to build a staircase to heaven so he could terrorize the *devatās*. He who terrorizes the universe. So what to do with these people? Even the demigods cannot control these *asuras*. Even the *devatās*... so Kṛṣṇa comes, *paritrāṇāya sādhūnām*, and He annihilates them; He kills them. "Oh, but I thought you Hindus were non-violent?" No one complains when the doctor goes into your body with surgery to take out the cancer virus. Cancer is a living entity, those cells are living, they’re reproducing, they’re eating your body, wasting it. No one complains, "Oh, the poor cancer, the doctor went in and took it out and killed it." No. So no one complains when Kṛṣṇa comes and He annihilates Hiranyakashipu, Hiraṇyākṣa, Kumbhakarṇa, Rāvaṇa, Śiśupāla—no one complains. There’s no one on the streets: "Oh, the Lord appeared as Nṛsiṁhadeva and killed Hiranyakashipu, poor Hiranyakashipu." No. 

But the difference is that when someone kills someone in this world, takes someone’s life, that’s not allowed. When the Lord does it, what happens? That personality who the Lord kills, that personality gets *mokṣa*. That’s the difference between, you know, our killing and the Lord’s killing; that personality gets liberation by the touch of the Lord’s nails. There’s a beautiful verse describing Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva who, as you know, took the *asura* Hiranyakashipu on His lap and dug into his abdomen and pulled out his entrails and made them as a garland and threw his heart to the other side of the assembly hall. You’ve seen the picture of Nṛsiṁhadeva? Yes, every Hindu has seen the picture. When I first became a devotee in 1969, I took my mother to the temple—she wanted to know what was my religion—and as we walked into the temple there was one big painting of Nṛsiṁhadeva with Hiranyakashipu on His lap, tearing out his intestines, with Prahlāda Mahārāja standing there offering obeisances. So my mother said, "What’s that? Who’s that little boy?" I said, "That little boy is five years old, that’s his father in the lap of God, and God’s pulling out his entrails." My mother said, "My Lord, what kind of God are you worshiping?" I said, "Mom, it’s a long story, you know, you sit down and I’ll tell you." 

But we know, today... I haven’t said the verse in a long time: "O my Lord, Your transcendental lion, I offer my obeisances to You, along with Mother Lakṣmī. Sometimes flying in the sky, sometimes moving on foot, Your mane hairs glow with a wonderful brilliance. Your glance and the touch of Your nails are both the source of auspiciousness." O Rāma, O Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, if They just look at you, auspiciousness... just if God looks at you, He glances upon you, so much auspiciousness comes your way. He’s the source of all auspiciousness. The definition of auspiciousness is that which brings us closer to God. The definition of inauspiciousness is something that takes us further from God. So if God, who’s all-auspicious, looks at you, it’s *kṛpā*, mercy. And that’s why we come to the temple on Janmāṣṭamī.

We don’t just come to the temple to see God, we come to the temple so God can see us. Because love is a two-way street. So we’re trying to love God, and God already loves us. So when His children come in front of Him, even though they’ve been naughty, He likes to see, "Oh, you’ve become... you’re coming back, my son, my daughter, you’re interested in coming home, very nice, mercy." Therefore, an intelligent devotee, he doesn’t just come in front of the Lord, for the deity, the *śrī-mūrti*, for a few moments, "Oh, looks nice, here’s my donation in the donation box, see you later, oh it’s a nice outfit, bye." He stands there with open arms, with open heart, "Please, I’m drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence. O You who give shelter to those who have no shelter, please, just this one time, won’t You extend Your hand to save me? My Lord, I’m drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence. O You who give shelter to those who have no shelter, please, just this one time, Śrīmad-Gauranitāi, Giridhārī, just give me some mercy." You stay there as long as you can, just like if you’re freezing and you come in front of a heater, you stay for some time. So if you want *kṛpā*, if you want mercy, if you want *mokṣa*, if you want deliverance from *saṁsāra*, from the repetition of birth and death, if you want *bhakti*, if you want *prema*, spend some time in front of the deity. Don’t come and go, "I have to go to work." You can work 365 days a year, spend some time in front of the deity. He’s come here, He’s the *arca-vigraha*. My spiritual ambassador gave the definition of *arca-vigraha* as the most merciful incarnation of God, the deity. Yes, yes, because Rāma comes, Rāma goes; Kṛṣṇa comes, Kṛṣṇa goes; but His deity form, He stays on this planet. I’ve seen deities in Bhārat, I’ve seen deities in India that were self-manifest in Satya-yuga. How far back is that? You can’t even calculate with your brain, even your computer. Deities that manifested in Satya-yuga, they’re still here. In Māyāpur we have Nṛsiṁhapālī, there’s a deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva from Satya-yuga. He’s so kind, the Lord is so kind. So we embrace this day; this is the day that Kṛṣṇa comes to save us. We don’t even want to be saved. We have a little bit of interest in spiritual life, "Okay, I’m gonna go meet my friends, play cards, play bingo." They do that in the West after church—I’m not criticizing, I’m just saying we have to have this burning desire in the heart to get back home where we belong. We are strangers in a strange land, we’re not these material bodies. I met one doctor, he told me the body is 76% water. Is that you? The body is 76% water, is that you? No, you’re something more profound, you’re the spiritual force within the body, you’re just... you’re the spark of life within the body, you’re the *ātman*, you’re the soul in the body. This is your chance for realizing that; you can’t do it when you’re a dog or a bird or a fish. We’ve been there, we’ve done that. Now’s the chance, now’s the golden opportunity. So we embrace this day. Kṛṣṇa has come like this, He’s come with this message. I’ve come for you, fully. So we should fully embrace Kṛṣṇa on this day. What does it mean? We should jump on the altar and embrace Him? No, no, no, only *pūjārīs* can do that, but *brāhmaṇas* can do, but we can embrace this message. And what is this message? What is Kṛṣṇa’s message in this age? Kṛṣṇa came with Yuga-avatāra at the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, but that’s all gone now. This is... this is the darkest of all, this is Kali-yuga, the age of quarrel, hypocrisy, dark... darkness, anger, war. I don’t have to just read the newspaper, go on the internet. 

That opportunity when Kṛṣṇa was here, that’s no longer viable except for a few fortunate souls. But the goal of life remains the same, and Kṛṣṇa’s also here with open arms: "Come back home." But in this age, He doesn’t come in His original bluish-black color. Kṛṣṇa—in the 11th Canto of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, *Bhāgavatam*—Kṛṣṇa comes, but like *Channa-avatāra*, *Channa* means like disguised. He doesn’t come as God because people would just imitate Him and want to become God—*māyāvī*. He comes as a devotee to teach us the process of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious, self-realized, how to take proper advantage of this age. And what is His message in this age? It’s very simple, because we’re simple-minded people. We think we’re so smart, we have such an advanced civilization. If we’re so smart and our civilization is so advanced, why are we still suffering? Who’s not suffering? Everyone has their story, everyone has a tear to cry—a lost family member, an accident, money was stolen, taxes, weather—everyone has their story. If we’re so smart, what are we doing in a place like this? Just like you may meet, you know, the Prime Minister or the President of some country, you know, in a really bad part of town; you say, "What’s a person like you doing in a place like this?" 

So what are we, as spirit souls? Prabhupāda said in London, I heard, the spirit soul is more brilliant than ten thousand suns rising simultaneously. The soul is *nitya*—eternally—youthful, sweet 16 forever. What are we doing in these old, decrepit bodies in a world which is full of birth, disease, old age, and death? If we’re so smart, we’re not smart. So the Lord has to give us a very simple process. We’re not like our ancestors who could memorize the *Bhagavad-gītā* in one week, memorize 18 *ślokas* of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, *Bhāgavatam*, in 10 days. I met people like that in India. I have... I have *sādhu* friends, they know all the *ślokas*, eighteen thousand. I’ll say, "Seventh Canto, the third chapter, verse 42," boom, they give it. No, most of us are not like that, including me. We’re simple people. But the goal of life is still the same, about going back to Godhead. So what does this verse mean? "If I can..." In the age of *Kali*, in the age of quarrel and hypocrisy, the easiest and most sublime means for becoming Kṛṣṇa-conscious, of becoming God-conscious, for awakening our *bhakti* in the heart, which is the key to the spiritual world, is the *chanting*: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. 

And that’s the best way to observe Janmāṣṭamī. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, one of our great saints, one of our great *ācāryas*, spiritual masters, he said in one of his songs, "Holy days like Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī are the mothers of devotion." Like your mother nourished you with her breast milk, holy days like Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī are mothers of devotion for devotees who properly observe them. So how do we properly observe Janmāṣṭamī? Mainly *śravaṇam kīrtanam*. Kṛṣṇa—the food will be there, that’s an important part of the process, but on Janmāṣṭamī we want to give as much time as possible for what we’re doing right now: *kīrtanam*, hearing and chanting about Bhagavān. We give very little time for that, our interest is fluctuating. To force ourselves on Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī—more *japa*, more *kīrtan*, more *kathā*—what will the result be? Immeasurable. All the obstacles on the path of devotion to God like lust, anger, greed, envy, avarice—they wash away. So Janmāṣṭamī is a day for cleansing the heart. Sitting here, not being restless, "When is *ārati* going to finish? When is the feast at midnight?" No. So that when we go home, we’re a changed person. *Dharma* means when you go to the church, when you go to the temple, when you go to the synagogue, when you go to the mosque, you go into the house of God, but you come out a different person. You don’t... you come out the dirt that’s there in your heart when you go in, it’s cleansed away. You’re a little bit closer back, going back to Godhead. And Janmāṣṭamī is for making a quantum leap on the path to Vraja, on the path back to the spiritual world where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma are waiting for us to live an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. So take full advantage of this evening. It’s only 9:30. We have till 12 o’clock. There’ll be more *kīrtan*, there’ll be more, I think more classes, there’ll be more plays, there’ll be everything that’s good for us, absolute good. 

Stick around, stay as long as you can, stay awake. Don’t listen to your hungry tummies, listen to the *kīrtan* and make a quantum leap on the path back to Godhead on this very auspicious day of Janmāṣṭamī. I thank you. I’m just a guest here. Thank you very much, I love your country. I’ve been here three times and I get more attached every time. It’s a beautiful country with beautiful people. I hope to spend more time here in association with so many wonderful devotees as yourselves. Thank you.""