"*00296*.*
"Very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Today we are continuing with our mini-series on "The Binding Rope of Spotless Love," and this will be part five. While preparing these lectures, which emphasize devotion to the Supreme Lord, I was wondering how I will ever obtain that devotion because we so often hear that pure devotion to Kṛṣṇa is rarely obtained. My thoughts were confirmed when I read "Inductive Devotion" in chapter one. The following, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes:

> Kṛṣṇa does not agree to award devotional service to merely anyone. Kṛṣṇa can easily offer a person material happiness or even liberation, but he does not agree very easily to award a person engagement in His devotional service. 

The rarity of devotional service is also confirmed in the *Tantra-śāstra*, where Lord Śiva says to his wife: "My dear wife, if one is a very fine philosopher analyzing the different processes of knowledge, he can achieve liberation from material entanglement. By performance of the ritualistic sacrifices recommended in the Vedas, one can be elevated to the platform of pious activities and thereby enjoy material comforts of life to the fullest extent. But all such endeavors can hardly offer anyone devotional service to the Lord, not even if one tries for it by such processes for many, many thousands of births."

So, I was losing hope on that page, but then Prabhupāda mercifully concludes that devotional service can in fact be attained only through the mercy of a pure devotee. In the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā* 19.151, Prabhupāda quotes: "It is said by the mercy of the spiritual master who is a pure devotee and by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, one can achieve the platform of devotional service; there is no other way." So at that point, I could breathe a sigh of relief that by my spiritual master’s mercy, if I conduct myself properly as his disciple, it will be possible to achieve that exalted stage. I was even more relieved when I later came across the following quote in *Padma Purāṇa*, as cited in *Bhakti-sandarbha* 237.13. This really touched my heart:

> Devotion to my spiritual master is more important than devotion to Hari, for if I am devoted to my spiritual master, then Lord Hari will personally reveal Himself to me.

So we ended part four of this series with Kṛṣṇa pulling the mortar, to which He was tied by Mother Yaśodā, through the twin Arjuna trees, which caused them to fall down, thus liberating Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva from that terrible curse of Nārada Muni. Now, with the loud sound of the trees falling, you remember Nanda Mahārāja came running to the scene and he untied Kṛṣṇa. So, at this point, I would just like to backtrack a little bit and discuss this monumental moment. You could say that Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva were freed from the curse of Nārada Muni; but is freedom from that curse—living as trees for hundreds of thousands of years—the end of their story? Did they just get free from the curse, or did they gain something more? The answer is that they gained more—much more. In fact, it is quite amazing; they achieved life's highest goal, as described by Śrīla Prabhupāda in *Kṛṣṇa* book, quoting Kṛṣṇa Himself:

> Your lives have now become successful because you have developed ecstatic love for Me. You have developed ecstatic love for Me. This is your last birth within material existence.

Now, personally, I found this very interesting that Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva achieved perfection. There is nothing higher than developing ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa, *amalā-bhakti*, pure devotion; there is nothing higher than that. It is very interesting they achieved the highest perfection without having performed any significant devotional service. I was thinking, they didn't do any devotional service to achieve that ecstatic state of love of God; they just stood as trees for some millions of years. We know Kṛṣṇa makes it very clear in *Bhagavad-gītā* that He can only be achieved by devotional service. He says:

> One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.

So it is by devotional service, which awakens devotion or love, which culminates in ecstatic symptoms of love for Kṛṣṇa. So, how did these two wayward demigods achieve this highest goal of life and go back home, back to Godhead, without doing any significant devotional service? The answer is found in *Bhāgavatam* 10.10.26, and this is Kṛṣṇa speaking. Kṛṣṇa personally answers this question: how these two persons achieved the highest goal of life. Kṛṣṇa says:

> In a past life, these two trees were the demigods Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, who were cursed by Nārada to become trees in Vṛndāvana. Although normally I would have nothing to do with such materialists, I must fulfill Nārada’s promise to deliver them.

So it is very clear: although they had no qualifications and millions of disqualifications, they attained perfection because Nārada Muni desired it. Being compelled by Nārada Muni's love for Him, Kṛṣṇa, you could say, was obliged to liberate Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva because His devotee desired it. You could say that Nārada Muni took responsibility for the deliverance of Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva. And I was thinking that wasn't the only time that Nārada took responsibility for a fallen soul's deliverance. Someone who wasn't qualified became delivered by the mercy of Nārada Muni, which we find in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 24.255, where we hear Nārada Muni say to Mṛgāri the hunter: "If you listen to my instructions, I shall find the way you can be liberated."

In the purport, Śrīla Prabhupāda refers to a song by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, wherein he mentions the devotees of Lord Caitanya. Prabhupāda writes: "The meaning of this song is that the devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu are very powerful, and each and every one of them can deliver the whole world." A pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa can make the same demands that Nārada Muni is making; he says, "If you follow my instructions, I shall take responsibility for your liberation."

So we too can take solace that despite a lack of qualifications on our part, if we follow Śrīla Prabhupāda's instructions and serve them to the best of our ability, we, just like Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, can attain the highest stage of perfection. He also touched on this point; I was reading in *The Harmonist* some weeks ago that in an initiation ceremony in 1932, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura said in the initiation lecture: "I see no reason why all my disciples cannot go back to Godhead in one lifetime." Śrīla Prabhupāda repeatedly reassured us that by chanting 16 rounds and following the regulated principles, Kṛṣṇa would accept us and take us home. That is very clear in Śrīla Prabhupāda's famous letter to Yaśodānandana dāsa (who later became his Holiness Bhakti-tirtha Swami) on February 16, 1973. This letter is very dear to my heart:

> Now you must agree to very rigidly follow the rules and regulations, chanting 16 rounds of beads daily, rising early and attending *maṅgala-ārati*, observing the four principles, attending classes, eating only *bhāgavata-prasādam*, as well as working under the instruction of my representatives such as your GBC representative and temple president. If you follow this procedure very strictly, then your life will be glorious and you will go back home, back to Godhead. This I can guarantee.

That's the line: "Then your life will be glorious and you will go back home, back to Godhead. This I can guarantee." Prabhupāda is making a guarantee here. I was reading an article by my godbrother, His Holiness Bhakti-puruṣottama Swami Mahārāja, when he writes that there are some Vaiṣṇavas who doubt that members of ISKCON can actually go back to Godhead in one lifetime. He says they argue that the deep conditioning of Westerners, the compromised *sādhana* of 16 rounds (it used to be 64, you know, for Vaiṣṇavas in previous ages), a lack of training in Vaiṣṇava culture, and perhaps a lack of understanding of esoteric teachings—it's all too much of a handicap. But that was not the example of Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva. Their good fortune, their supreme fortune, was meeting Nārada Muni, and Kṛṣṇa Himself acknowledged that; for He says to them in the *Bhāgavatam*: *yathā sūryā-darśanam*.

This is Kṛṣṇa speaking: "When one is face to face with the sun, there is no longer darkness for one's eyes. Similarly, when one is face to face with a *sādhu*, a devotee—one who is fully determined and surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead—one will no longer be subject to material bondage." Wow, so that's our good fortune in taking shelter of Śrīla Prabhupāda. One time, a disciple asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, "Who are you in the spiritual world?" Śrīla Prabhupāda just smiled and he replied, "If I told you, you would faint."

So we have the same good fortune as did Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva if we take proper advantage of our relationship with Prabhupāda and do our part as well. We must, with all sincerity, relinquish our material desires and, with one-pointed attention, desire to go back home, back to Godhead. We must nourish that desire to go back to Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world by hearing and chanting all the wonderful pastimes of the Lord. That will help to awaken our attraction and love for Kṛṣṇa. And each of us, in our own specific way, big or small, must help Prabhupāda spread the Saṅkīrtana movement all over the world, and based on our sincere effort, we will be rewarded with Kṛṣṇa's mercy at the conclusion of our efforts as promised by His Divine Grace. "I guarantee," he said, "I guarantee."

Now, a question may be raised here based on Kṛṣṇa's statement: "When one is face to face with a *sādhu*, a devotee who is fully determined and surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one will no longer be subject to material bondage." So if we are face to face with such an exalted personality, we will no longer be subjected to material bondage. The question is, after seeing a pure devotee like Śrīla Prabhupāda, why aren't all devotees who have seen him immediately liberated? And "seeing" doesn't just mean being in his physical presence; seeing can mean we see him through his books—he promised that if you want to know me, read my books—and we see Prabhupāda's videos, and we are following Prabhupāda's instructions. So anyone in ISKCON is awakening or is developing a very real relationship with Śrīla Prabhupāda. So the question is: after seeing a pure devotee like Prabhupāda, why aren't all devotees who see him immediately liberated? Well, Prabhupāda has written:

> Persons who are too much offensive, who commit *vaiṣṇava-aparādhas* or offenses to a *sādhu*, will have to take some time before being rectified.

There's still a possibility, but it's going to take some time if we make offenses. He gives another reason why the effects of *sādhu-saṅga* may be delayed—in other words, coming in contact with a pure devotee or any devotee for that matter. He says that, "As long as one commits offenses to the holy name, he or she cannot be liberated even by seeing Nārada Muni." There's another perspective there. So the privilege—it's really a privilege, a rare privilege—of directly seeing great souls like Nārada Muni or Śrīla Prabhupāda will only liberate us from material bondage when we no longer act offensively towards such souls or the Lord's holy name. And if we just avoid the offenses, it's a smooth path back home, back to Godhead. A joyful path.

So during the period in which we, in our neophyte stage, commit offenses in our devotional lives, our hope for progress lies in our efforts to rectify any misconduct and purify ourselves through constant *nāma-saṅkīrtana*. So altogether, we can take solace in the fact that it is kindly said he'll take responsibility for our deliverance if we conduct ourselves as his proper followers. Once again, this reminds us of the outstanding theme in this month of Kārttika, or Dāmodara. What is that? Well, it was revealed by—remember that devotee I mentioned, Śrīnātha Cakravartī, the guru of Kavikarṇapūra, in his commentary on *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. It was called *Caitanya-mata-mañjūṣā*—it was a bouquet of the philosophical positions taken by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So in his commentary on *Bhāgavatam*, you remember he says, "Success in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is achieved by the effort of the devotee and the Lord's mercy." And I said that's a central theme for this month, because that's how Mother Yaśodā was finally able to tie her son Kṛṣṇa to the grinding mortar, and that's how we'll be successful in our efforts to get back home, back to Godhead. We must make the effort, but we have Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Kṛṣṇa's mercy comes before us in the personality of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous *ācāryas*. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Now, another question—perfect questions, perfect answers. Another question is: how do we know for certain, 100 percent, that Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva made it back home, back to Godhead? Well, it's revealed by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in his *Gopāla-campū*. He relates a pastime that took place much later on in Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world. In other words, the Dāmodara-līlā took place in Gokula here in Vṛndāvana on this planet, but he's referring to a time much later on where Nanda Mahārāja is in an assembly with his ministers and various personalities in his palace. And Jīva Gosvāmī writes that Nārada Muni—he's inquiring from two personalities; their names are Snigdha-kaṇṭha and Madhukaṇṭha. They are very beautiful poets, pure devotees of the Lord, pure devotees with the ability to quote very beautiful poetry for the pleasure of King Nanda Mahārāja. 

So he's inquiring from these two personalities. Nanda Mahārāja asks what happened to Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva after the Dāmodara-līlā took place in Gokula down on the earth planet. He just brings it up in some conversation to these two personalities; he's like, "What happened to them? They came out of the trees, the curse was over, but what happened to them?" He asks Snigdha-kaṇṭha (beginning in *Gopāla-campū*, verse 3, chapter 9). He says, "Please tell their story. Where are they now?" 

So verse 4 is as follows: "Bowing his lotus face, Snigdha-kaṇṭha remained silent and glanced at Madhukaṇṭha." 

Verse 5: Nanda Mahārāja said, "Why are you reluctant to speak?" 

Verse 6: They said with respect, "What can we say? You will come to know all of this by yourself." 

So verse 7: "With a smile, Nanda Mahārāja said, 'Anyway, you can make us happy by speaking it yourself.'" 

So verse 8: They said, "Listen to this. Actually, myself and Madhukaṇṭha are the two to whom Nārada gave good results and knowledge by his mercy." 

Wow. In other words, by Nārada Muni's mercy, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva were elevated to Goloka Vṛndāvana and became Snigdha-kaṇṭha and Madhukaṇṭha. It's right there in *Gopāla-campū*. He identifies themselves as previously Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva. All right, Kṛṣṇa. So this was all revealed by the mercy of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and his *samādhi*. Wow, just like Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he revealed so many other interesting details in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. 

My friend, through the mouths of these two poets, Jīva Gosvāmī shares with us what happened after Nanda Mahārāja untied Kṛṣṇa in the Dāmodara-līlā on the earth. Because basically, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* concludes Dāmodara-līlā in verse 10—excuse me, Canto 10, chapter 11, verse 6 of the *Bhāgavatam*—that's the very last verse relating to Dāmodara-līlā. And what is that verse? The verse is as follows: "Seeing his own son bound with ropes to the wooden mortar and dragging it, he smiled and released Kṛṣṇa from His bonds." That's all that's said. So after this verse, there's no more further information of Dāmodara-līlā. But fortunately, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī continues to enlighten us with more nectar about this pastime in *Gopāla-campū*. It's such an important book, *Gopāla-campū*, and Vṛndāvana Mahārāja says—very nicely translated for ISKCON devotees—in other words, he takes off from where the *Bhāgavatam* leaves off. 

So in *Gopāla-campū*, chapter 8, verse 54, after untying Kṛṣṇa, Nanda Mahārāja—here we go—Nanda Mahārāja asked Kṛṣṇa—there we are back on the earth now in Gokula, Kṛṣṇa's untied—it's like, what happens next? So at that point, just after untying Kṛṣṇa, Nanda Mahārāja says to Him, "My dear son, who is the rascal who has tied You to this mortar?" So Kṛṣṇa kind of stretches up and whispers in his father's ear—a whisper—"Oh father, Mother did this." 

Hearing that, Nanda Mahārāja was silent, and he decided to take Kṛṣṇa down to the Yamunā, where they both bathed. And after that, Nanda Mahārāja requested brāhmaṇas to chant protective mantras and perform rituals to remove any lingering negative influences on his son. Then Nanda Bābā and Kṛṣṇa returned to the palace, accompanied, as described by Jīva Gosvāmī, by sounds of drums, cymbals, and singing. Then Mahārāja sat with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and told them stories for an hour. Meanwhile, Jīva Gosvāmī says—it's difficult to hear—Mother Yaśodā sat locked in her own room, in self-imposed exile, ashamed for having bound Kṛṣṇa and devastated at having put His life in danger. So Jīva Gosvāmī writes that Mother Yaśodā would neither leave her room nor talk to any of the other women in the palace. She just stayed by herself and cried and cried and cried and cried. This, the *sā-vatsalya*—you know, returning the nectar of the ocean of devotion, coming up with all these different emotions according to one's relationship with Kṛṣṇa. So this is *vātsalya-rasa*, the parental mood, and these things are going on just to increase, ultimately, one's love for Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's love for His devotees. It's just part of the *līlā*, the pastime. So she cried and she cried and she cried. 

Now, after having served Nanda Mahārāja's dinner, Rohiṇī Devī went to console Yaśodā with sweet words and convince her to eat something. But Yaśodā, her eyes red from crying, she just refused and was concerned whether Kṛṣṇa had sufficient milk. Aware that Mother Yaśodā was not nursing Him, Nanda Mahārāja went and he brought fresh milk from the barn; he mixed it with sugar and he gave it to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. And as Nanda Mahārāja sat and watched Kṛṣṇa drink, Mother Rohiṇī with some of the senior women in the palace came to Nanda Mahārāja and they pleaded, "O King, your wife has not eaten all day, neither will she speak to anyone." Nanda Mahārāja replied, "What can I do? She is undergoing the proper atonement for one needlessly overcome by anger. For such mistakes one should show remorse." It's just the plot, to increase the *bhāva*, to get the end result: love for Kṛṣṇa, *ad infinitum*. So Rohiṇī was shocked; she said, "Your soft-hearted wife will be devastated by such words." 

So at this point I was reading slowly because it was just so much nectar; the first time I heard it, I was just relishing like you were relishing a feast. Nanda Mahārāja looked at Kṛṣṇa, who was playing nearby with Balarāma, and he said, "Kṛṣṇa, will you go to your mother?" And Kṛṣṇa just shook His head forcefully and said, "No, I'll stay with you." So disappointed, one of the maidservants said, "Dear child, then whose milk would you drink when you become hungry?" So Kṛṣṇa responded quite defiantly, "I would drink cow's milk mixed with sugar." And they said, "And then who will you play with?" Kṛṣṇa answered, "With my father and my brother Balarāma, that's all." 

So Rohiṇī said softly, "My son, why are you being so merciless? Your mother is suffering." So this caused some tears to come to Kṛṣṇa's eyes, but He just looked at His father and tried—He didn't want to talk about it anymore. I just started crying, but then He looked at His father. Now, at a signal from Rohiṇī, Balarāma went to take Kṛṣṇa's hand in order to go with Him to see Mother Yaśodā, but Kṛṣṇa pulled away from His brother and then He climbed up on His father's lap with tear-filled eyes. Now, looking for a way, looking for a way to invoke Kṛṣṇa's eternal love for His mother, Mahārāja did something unusual, but there was a purpose behind it. He raised his fist and he said, "Son, if you agree, then I will go to your mother right now and beat her. I'll beat her for her misdeeds." So hearing this, Kṛṣṇa—once, He grabbed His father's fist; it was just a ploy—He grabbed His father's fist and with tears rolling down His cheeks, He said, "Please, father, no." He said, "Son, you are right; I don't need to punish her now, for she is dying of sorrow anyway." 

Hearing that His mother was dying, you know, He's a child, Kṛṣṇa cried out piteously, "Where is my mother? I must see her right now! Mā, Mā, Mā—where are you, mother?" So Kṛṣṇa ran to Rohiṇī who embraced Him and carried Him—this is a great movie, an eternal movie in the spiritual world—and carried Him into Mother Yaśodā's room. He ran to His mother who was lying in bed and crying in happiness. He jumped into the bed and He hugged her and He kissed her, and as she held Kṛṣṇa in her arms, Mother Yaśodā's aching heart just melted. And I was reading her sobbing could be heard throughout the palace, the sound of which made her husband and everyone in the palace also cry in ecstasy. Jīva Gosvāmī writes that by Kṛṣṇa's magical touch, Mother Yaśodā regained her natural effulgence and beauty. She assured her friends that she was all right, happily breast-fed her son, and it's said again, tasted transcendental bliss. 

So I was reading that Kṛṣṇa and His mother were happily reunited on the evening of Dīvālī—the same day that Kṛṣṇa was bound—but for the next two days, out of fear, Mother Yaśodā wouldn't come out of her room into the presence of her husband; she was too afraid. So in the evening, what was it, the third day, Nanda Mahārāja asked Kṛṣṇa to find His mother. So following Nanda Mahārāja's order, Kṛṣṇa enticed His mother to come before Nanda Mahārāja by pulling on the edge of her *sārī*. What *vātsalya-rasa*! And with that, the pastime of binding Kṛṣṇa came to an end—a pastime in which Kṛṣṇa showed extraordinary mercy to Mother Yaśodā that not only demigods but also the goddess of fortune were amazed by. And this is confirmed in a very famous verse by Śukadeva Gosvāmī in the *Bhāgavatam*, a very famous quote: "Neither Lord Brahmā nor Lord Śiva nor even the goddess of fortune, who is always the better half of the Supreme Lord, can obtain from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the deliverer from this material world, such mercy as received by Mother Yaśodā." 

Kṛṣṇa, I was reading that afterwards, the veranda of Mahārāja Nanda's palace where Mother Yaśodā first churned yogurt, and where Kṛṣṇa, very angry, broke the butter churn—it has become immortalized as *Dadhi-mathana*. So I'm going to conclude here. I don't know if we'll have another lecture in this series—let me just kind of look—maybe backtrack and hear some prayers. I know we'll see; I'll think about it, I've got a week. But I wanted to conclude that the next day, Mother Yaśodā and Mother Rohiṇī sat listening to the pastimes of their sons. And it's just—it's a simple *līlā*, but very deep. Any *līlā* in Vṛndāvana, there's a beautiful verse in the *Bhāgavatam* (10.11.34) which describes, you know, kind of after it's all over, everybody's sitting together and talking, you know, Kṛṣṇa-kathā. This is a perfect verse to end today. It's 10.11.34: *tadā yaśodā-rohiṇyau...* 

"Thus hearing about the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma with great pleasure, Mother Yaśodā and Rohiṇī, so as not to be separated from Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma for even a moment, got up with them on one bullock cart. In this situation, they all looked very beautiful." 

I'll restart it one more time for you and for me: 

> Thus hearing about the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma with great pleasure, Mother Yaśodā and Rohiṇī, so as not to be separated from Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma for even a moment, got up with them on one bullock cart. In this situation, they all looked very beautiful. 

Kārttika month 2022, *kī jaya!* Dāmodara-līlā *kī jaya!* All the cowherd men and women of Vṛndāvana *kī jaya!* Such a wonderful pastime. So we'll leave you there, and yeah, we'll be back in one week with some more nectar from Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma during this very, very auspicious month of Kārttika. I hope that all of you are following us with the videos that we're producing. Ananta-vṛndāvana, again working hard day and night to capture all the places that we go and the lectures we give and the *kīrtanas* that Baraharī and Mādhava and Govinda Mahārāja are leading—we're just having such a wonderful, ecstatic time here. It's all on my YouTube channel. So please keep up with us with the videos as well. All glorious! Śyāmā-kunda, *kī jaya!*""