Five hundred years ago, Lord Caitanya, who is the avatar that appeared in West Bengal, predicted that the dharma of the age, the chanting of the holy names of Kṛṣṇa, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, would actually go to every town and village of the world.

Who could imagine at that time, five hundred years ago, what that actually meant beyond the borders of India, to the four corners of the world?

That prophecy, that benediction, you could say, is coming through now. Down the road from when our spiritual master, Founder-Ācārya of our movement, His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, brought the teachings of Lord Caitanya, including this wonderful chanting and dancing, to the Western world, he further instructed that his disciples carry this message to every town and village, every city in the world.

So every place is meant to be included. And here on our Polish festival tour, we've been chanting and dancing on the beaches of the Baltic Sea coast for a little over two months now. Every day, these devotees, these troopers, they come out here in the hot sun, or sometimes it's windy and rainy, and we come onto the beach because this is where the people are, and this is where they are ready and willing to hear the message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

They're kind of laid-back, just to say, you know, they're laid-back and they're relaxed and don't have much to do. So when the saṅkīrtana party of Caitanya Mahāprabhu comes by with all these blissful devotees, pure devotees, singing and dancing and smiling and waving with their flags and their instruments, who couldn't be attracted?

Only the most hard-hearted person, their heart could not be melted by this wonderful saṅkīrtana party. And we actually experienced that in Poland in the early days. We had some scoffers, but now, after twenty-eight years of coming onto the beaches and putting on our festival programs in the evening, people come to know about the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, so they actually look forward to the saṅkīrtana party.

This is not just chanting; this is Kṛṣṇa. You can see in this video how spontaneously they come forward and they chant and they dance. This is all the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu that He introduced the process, which is simply, simply joyful, the process of devotional service, which means in this age, chanting.

I believe it gives us the highest—nothing in this world can compare with it, and the effect is almost immediate. This is the amazing thing about saṅkīrtana. Of course, the impious turn away and go somewhere else, but we find even sometimes they get involved in the chanting and dancing.

This is incredible mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So we come out and we do our duty, just like Śrīla Prabhupāda instructed.

We do our duty to Lord Caitanya's servants, and here we're feeling the utmost satisfaction. Our hearts are full of satisfaction, and that's nothing in this world that actually appears attractive to these devotees because they are attending day in and day out, depending on the day, on the beach, and the streets, and the village in the evening, they're chanting at the festival.

So much purification is there. Some impurities come, some bad qualities come. The result of being on a program like this for several months is that the heart is purified, and one gets a higher attraction for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we feel very privileged, actually, to be able to serve Lord Caitanya in this original way.

This is the way the saṅkīrtana movement started. It's going on in many different ways, but this is a very wonderful way that should never be given up. The International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness is going on and getting bigger and bigger because the personal touch is there.

I wish we could see the shining faces and their happiness and their bliss, and they conceive nothing artificial; it's all very natural. So we're very grateful to Prabhupāda.

We've inherited this service of going out in saṅkīrtana, and we're grateful to the people for allowing us to see the effect of this chanting in their lives. Whoever they are, whatever they're doing, to see that immediate response, to see the purification, the little affection that comes for the devotees, to see that this increases our śraddhā, our faith in the Holy Name.

So we actually love these people. You can say that truly, we really love to come out here and be with these people and introduce them to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For us, because the process is introducing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it's an age of spiritual realization.

These people are everything for us, and we enjoy coming out every summer and just seeing that little spark come into their eyes when they see the saṅkīrtana party, and they jump up and they dance. You've seen in this video how they're dancing with it, how they're chanting with it.

You see in the festival, they dance, and they dance. So this is a universal process. It can be introduced all over the world, and this is the wonder of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And it's meant to go on for ten thousand years, and we have such a taste.

All of us, even if we had to take birth after birth after birth to serve our beloved spiritual master, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He plants the seed in this way, delivering this wonderful saṅkīrtana movement is a joyful process for the people of this country and all countries all over the world.

So thank you for giving us this opportunity. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu Nityānanda Śrī Advaita Gadādhara Śrīvāsa Adi Gaura Bhakta-vṛnda. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.