"*00553*.*
"# The Binding Rope of Spotless Love - Part 1

Very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. Today, on the eve of the auspicious month of Kārttika just around the corner, I would like to begin a new series on Dāmodara-līlā—very appropriate for the upcoming month—the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa as the beloved child of Mother Yaśodā. In doing this new series, I hope to explore new angles of the līlā and carefully examine the philosophy encapsulated in this wonderful pastime. I want to mention that I am not alone in this endeavor, but I have taken help from a dear friend, Hari Pārṣada Prabhu of the GBC Śāstric Advisory Committee. So, to begin with, I decided to call this new series "The Binding Rope of Spotless Love."

Realistically, we all understand that there is no rope that can bind the Supreme Lord; He is the all-powerful Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller. But at the same time, as devotees, we know that historically Kṛṣṇa was bound by the ropes of Mother Yaśodā. So, the question is: how did that happen? Well, I found a very beautiful Sanskrit verse in a scripture that explains it very beautifully:

$$Bandhanāni \ khalu \ santi \ bahūni \ prema-pāśa-sada-rūpa-bhavanti \ pañca-pāśa$$

There are certainly various binding forces in this world, but the binding force of *prema* is indeed a very strong one. Due to this bond of *prema* (love), a bumblebee, capable of piercing layers of wood, agrees to become happily trapped inside a soft, closed lotus flower. In other words, such a bumblebee can easily free himself from a lotus flower, but when he tastes—it’s described as affection, love, and *rasa* (literally, nectarian honey)—from a lotus flower, the same bumblebee happily agrees to take shelter of that soft, closed lotus; he doesn't break out. Our ācāryas say that Kṛṣṇa is such a bumblebee, for when He tastes the loving affection of His devotees, He chooses to be captivated by them rather than remaining free. So beautiful. This is the reason why He agrees to be bound up by the ropes of Mother Yaśodā.

Śrīla Prabhupāda begins his description of this pastime of Kṛṣṇa being bound by the ropes of Mother Yaśodā’s love in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter nine, and he uses a very interesting phrase, usually attributed to fairy tales, but in fact, what he writes is absolute truth, for he begins: "Once upon a time..." We heard that when we were young, right? Fairy tales. Prabhupāda is the same; it’s so cute. "Once upon a time," he writes, "seeing that her maidservant was engaged in different household duties, Mother Yaśodā personally took charge of churning butter, and while she churned butter, she sang the childhood pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and enjoyed thinking of her son." 

Now, Jīva Gosvāmī writes in *Gopāla-campū*, in the Pūrva-campū section, chapter 8, and he reveals the song she was singing—oh glorious, we get so many insights from our ācāryas. He writes the song she was singing is very famous. She was singing *āśīha-racitā*. It means: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are the tilaka decoration in the family of Gokula’s King for bringing great happiness to the pious people of Vraja by delighting their eyes with a soothing vision of Your divine form." It is so famous. I will recite it again: Mother Yaśodā is singing, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are the tilaka decoration in the family of Gokula’s King for bringing great happiness to the pious people of Vraja by delighting their eyes with a soothing vision of Your divine form." So, in this way, she is singing while churning butter. Now, while this was going on, it was early morning and Kṛṣṇa was blissfully asleep in His home in His bed, but when He heard His mother singing so beautifully about His own glories, He woke up and He came outside.

Now, the famous poet, scholar, and commentator Harisūri, whom we will quote a few times in this lecture because he says so many insightful things, writes: "A devotee of the Lord may be involved in the churning process of material activities in this world, but if he constantly sings Lord Kṛṣṇa’s names, qualities, and pastimes with love, then the Lord gives up all other activities and rushes towards that devotee, for the Lord eagerly desires to drink *hṛdaya-amṛta*." Now, I looked into the matter more. There are two meanings of this *hṛdaya-amṛta*: one, it can be taken as the nectarian milk flowing from the breast, or it can be taken as nectarian *rasa* flowing from the heart, or both—nectarian *rasa* flowing from the heart. So, in this verse, Harisūri takes it that the Lord relishes the *hṛdaya-amṛta*, meaning the sweet *rasa*, the sweet love flowing from the heart of His devotee. Therefore, the Lord rushes to His devotee because He is attracted by that devotion. Just as we try to run to Kṛṣṇa to love Him, He runs towards His devotee to love him because love is reciprocal. Such a beautiful analogy.

Harisūri goes on to say that when Kṛṣṇa saw Mother Yaśodā churning butter with a churning rod, He boldly used His hand to stop the churning rod. Let me get some more insight: Kṛṣṇa wakes up, He runs out, He sees His mother churning butter with the churning rod, and He stops her. Obviously, we know it is because He wants to drink her breast milk, but Harisūri writes that Kṛṣṇa was also indicating something very special by this action. What is that? He wanted to drink Mother Yaśodā’s milk, but he writes Kṛṣṇa also wanted to convey that, "If a devotee has love for Me, then I will personally stop the churning of his material activities with My own hands. Such a devotee will never have to worry about engaging in material activities; I’ll stop him with My own hands." 

He shouldn't have to worry that Yamarāja will punish him with the *daṇḍa*, a big stick, for not having performed his material duties. For My devotees, I am personally holding the *daṇḍa*, the churning rod; so, what will Yamarāja’s feeble *daṇḍa* do in front of Me? Śrīla Prabhupāda describes again in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter nine, how at this point Mother Yaśodā then took her son on her lap and pushed the nipple of her breast into His mouth, and while Kṛṣṇa was sucking the milk and smiling, she was enjoying the beauty of her child’s face. I see many paintings, I’m sure you have also, where she is feeding Kṛṣṇa and smiling, looking at His lotus face. This one pastime with Mother Yaśodā caressing Kṛṣṇa and feeding Him, I found Rūpa Gosvāmī has described it very nicely in *Padyāvalī*, one of our favorite books—you remember *Padyāvalī*? In verse 31, he describes the pastime so sweetly. Listen to this; he writes: 

"Kṛṣṇa’s eyes were half-open as He was drinking Yaśodā’s breast milk. Although milk from one breast was sufficient for Him, He suddenly saw that some milk was dripping from the other breast as well. He tried to save this precious milk by rubbing it off the other breast by using His hands. Not understanding this, Mother Yaśodā thought He was caressing her. She responded back by caressing His chin. Kṛṣṇa, half-asleep, smiled, and the entire universe was able to see His two teeth as shiny as Viṣṇu’s milk ocean." 

Then Rūpa Gosvāmī concludes, "May those two teeth protect you all." Wow! "May those two teeth protect you all." So, the question may come up: how come the Lord’s two little teeth protect us? He is just a baby, and the teeth are starting to come out, so how are those two teeth going to protect us? Well, I was thinking that on many occasions we hear verses which say similar things: "May His arms protect you," "May His eyes protect you," "May His face protect you." So, how do all these transcendental bodily parts of Kṛṣṇa protect the devotees? The ācāryas give the answer that if one remembers just any one of them at the moment of death, they will protect him from the greatest danger of repeated birth and death, because by remembering Kṛṣṇa at the moment of death, you go back home, back to Godhead. You know, we are being taught to remember Kṛṣṇa’s holy names at the moment of death by constantly repeating, "Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma..." but everything about Kṛṣṇa is supremely transcendental. So, if you can just remember those two teeth, you can make it back home. That’s the answer. There is that verse in *Bhagavad-gītā* (8.6), "Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits this body, O son of Kuntī, that state he will attain without fail." So, just the two teeth is enough.

Now, coming back to Kṛṣṇa, the pastime could have ended here on a happy note—I mean, Kṛṣṇa could have drunk Yaśodā’s milk and then just gone back to sleep. But what actually happened? As often does in Vraja-līlā, the plot thickens. The plot thickened, to use a familiar expression, and the revealer of the Dhāma very kindly reveals the plot in *Kṛṣṇa* book again in chapter 9, for he writes: "Suddenly, the milk which was on the stove began to boil over. Just to stop the milk from spilling, Mother Yaśodā at once put Kṛṣṇa aside and went to the stove." We have heard that many times. Now our poet, scholar, and commentator Harisūri describes the event in a very interesting way. There are many angles of vision, as I said in the very beginning. So, he writes—it’s really interesting—he writes, "The milk tried to commit suicide." What? Why? Because the milk was thinking, "Kṛṣṇa is the Lord whose very name drives away the heat of material existence, yet here I am, shamelessly burning in the personal presence of Kṛṣṇa." Thus, the milk decided to end its life by committing suicide by boiling over in the fire. Remember, everything in the spiritual world is personal, even the milk. But Kṛṣṇa wanted to protect His devotee, the milk, and so He arranged for Mother Yaśodā to see the boiling milk and protect it from boiling over and perishing in the fire. It is giving us so much insight! 

So, Harisūri gives another reason now for the milk boiling over. He writes—it’s also very interesting—"Kṛṣṇa was drinking breast milk, and thus the milk in the pot became jealous and started burning, for it is commonly seen that one godbrother sometimes may become jealous of the higher position attained by a godbrother. Both milks, the breast milk and the pot milk, are godbrothers," he writes, "since they belong to the same milk family. Thus, one milk started burning in jealousy, seeing the progress of the other milk." Bear in mind, it is jealousy; it is not envy. We hear that all the emotions we have here in the material world are also there in the spiritual world except envy, and all those emotions facilitate one’s pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, there is some competition going on here; sometimes competition is healthy. So, yeah, that is Harisūri’s another explanation of why the milk boiled over. 

So, seeing the milk boiling over, Mother Yaśodā, as we know, she left baby Kṛṣṇa to attend to it. So, Prabhupāda writes in *Kṛṣṇa* book again in chapter nine, he writes: "Left in that state by His mother, Kṛṣṇa became very angry, very frustrated. He pressed His teeth and lips and, taking up a piece of stone, He immediately broke the butter pot." So here, for the first time actually, the ācāryas say we see Kṛṣṇa becoming frustrated. Now, a question is raised by some scholars at this point: how can God ever be frustrated? I was reading in *Bhāgavatam* the other day (10.37.12) where Kṛṣṇa is described as *satya-saṅkalpa*, He who fulfills His desires simply by His will. So, how can such a person become frustrated? He is also known in *Bhāgavatam* (1.11.4) as *pūrṇa-kāma*. *Pūrṇa-kāma* means He is fulfilled in all desires. So, where is this frustration? With the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, we understand that we go deeper; it’s a very personal, transcendental way. The simple answer is that He became frustrated because His mother, whom He loves very much and who loves Him very much, she left Him. He was breastfeeding and Mother Yaśodā left, and He became frustrated; He wanted her love in the form of her milk. Now, Harisūri makes a very interesting comment here, it’s quite an interesting angle. He says that anyone who becomes devoid of *yaśodā*—meaning two things: *yaśa* (fame) and *dā* (mercy)—behaves in a similarly frustrated, angry way in this world. So, that’s just not surprising to see this behavior in the Lord with Mother Yaśodā, but in a completely transcendental way. Emotions are there, but in a transcendental way.

So, in His transcendental anger, His frustration, what did Kṛṣṇa do? Famously, He started destroying all the household property. It is a little bit... He has a stick and He is going and breaking everything around the house, destroying. And Śrīla Prabhupāda very kindly describes this destruction in *Kṛṣṇa* book again, chapter nine; he writes: "Immediately, Kṛṣṇa broke the butter pot, took butter out of it, and with false tears in His eyes, He ran away like a thief to eat the butter in a secluded place." Oh, He’s a thief! So, the interesting thing is that I was thinking that although there’s destruction going on here, it is nevertheless very appealing to us. It’s very sweet because it’s connected to Kṛṣṇa, it’s connected to the spiritual world. Everything that Kṛṣṇa does is good because it increases the love of His devotees for Him. He’s so cute as a naughty boy; He’s good as a good boy, He’s good as a naughty boy. It forces us to focus our attention on the all-auspicious Personality of Godhead, and thus our *bhakti-latā* grows. However, I was thinking that when such destruction takes place not connected to Kṛṣṇa, like in this world, it’s—I guess we want to remember—the word is "ghastly." Recently, there was a report I read that a 12-year-old boy in America, his mother wouldn't give him a mobile phone, so he took a stick and he literally destroyed everything in the house, you know, the kitchen, and he went to the bedrooms and living room and just broke everything just because his mom wouldn't give him a mobile phone. But Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes never resulted in such ghastliness. I read recently in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* where Rūpa Gosvāmī says that devotees experience the *rasa* of ghastliness only in connection with the material world, but never in connection with Kṛṣṇa. We may see these things because we’re here with residents for now in the material world, we may see ghastliness, but we never see it in connection with Kṛṣṇa. Ghastliness, of course, Kṛṣṇa has a ghastly relationship with some special devotees like Bhīṣma, etc., but we’re aspiring to be Vrajabāsīs; we see His ghastliness as very sweet, like breaking the butter pot and eventually crying with Mother Yaśodā, like that.

So, coming back to our pastime, Śrīla Prabhupāda continues. He writes: "In the meantime, Mother returned to the churning place after setting the overflowing milk pan in order. Right, she saw the broken pot in which the churning yogurt had been kept. Since she could not find her boy," Prabhupāda writes, "she concluded that the broken pot was His work, and then what? Thus being amazed, she smiled." She smiled! So, I was thinking, why does she smile? So, Harisūri, he asks this question: why did she smile? And he explains in a very nice way. He explains that she was thinking, "I was under the impression that I would save a pot of milk, but in the process I ended up losing entire pots of milk products. I have lost much more than what I thought I would save." Thus, being amazed, he writes, at the strange ways of destiny, she smiled. She smiled! Now, this reminds me of a rare *nyāya*—*nyāya* means like a maxim—from the *nyāya-śāstra*, which I was reading a couple weeks ago. This maxim is called *vadhū-māṣa-māpana-nyāya*. It’s a tongue twister. Translated, it means the maxim of the young daughter-in-law measuring the beans. Like, what? Hello? The maxim of the young daughter-in-law measuring the beans. 

Let me explain this maxim; I discovered it comes from a story that once upon a time, long ago in Ujjain, there was a brāhmaṇa who took a vow that he would personally distribute one fistful of *māṣa*, which means beans, every dvādaśī—the day after Ekādaśī—to any beggar who came to his door. It’s a nice sentiment, some compassion from a brāhmaṇa. So, the first dvādaśī was a great success; from his own hand, his own fist, he fed beans to many beggars. However, word quickly spread and a few dvādaśīs later there was this huge queue of beggars outside his home, and he became alarmed because it meant he had to get more beans. He’d taken a vow: whoever comes, he has to get more beans. So, his expenses increased by giving beans to so many beggars. So, the story goes that he started to think of ways to reduce the amount of beans to give to each person so that, in theory, he could feed everyone who came without increasing his expenses. So, one day, he had this idea; he thought, "My beautiful young daughter-in-law, she has a very small fist compared to mine, so if she gives a fistful of beans to the beggars who come, it will only be half the current quantity that I am giving through my fist. So, I will have her distribute the beans the next dvādaśī. In that way, I don’t have to buy more beans, I don’t have to spend more money." 

So, on the next dvādaśī, his daughter-in-law, under his instruction, began to give out much smaller fistfuls of beans. But the word soon spread that a beautiful young girl was giving out free fistfuls of beans on this dvādaśī to anyone who asked for them! So, this time, the queue became ten times longer than any previous dvādaśī, and the brāhmaṇa ended up... he had to go out and spend more and give out more. He ended up losing much more than what he hoped to save. Therefore, the maxim: "The young daughter-in-law measuring the beans." Let me explain further: this maxim is used in Vedic culture to indicate situations where a person puts in effort to save a resource but ends up losing much more of the same resource. And voila, that’s exactly what happened with Mother Yaśodā in a transcendental way, and that’s why she smiled at her fate. Remember how she was thinking, "I was under the impression that I would save a pot of milk, but in the process I ended up losing entire pots of milk products. I lost much more than I thought I would save." Thus, being amazed at the strange ways of destiny, Harisūri writes, she smiled. A nice analysis of why she smiled. All glory to our ācāryas, such a nectar. This is the real amṛta that we all look for.

So, dear devotees, our lecture has reached an interesting point. Mother Yaśodā has lost lots of milk products, and little Kṛṣṇa, the little thief, He has run away. So, everyone wants to hear what happened next. Although we’ve heard it a thousand times, because it’s transcendental and nectarian, because it’s connected to the Lord, we never tire of hearing these beautiful pastimes, especially in this month of Kārttika, of Dāmodara. But we’ll stop here and we’ll allow you to digest all this nectar we shared until next week. Hopefully, we can give four, five, six—I don’t know, seven—different lectures on Dāmodara-līlā, the perfect topic for this month. But as we always do, we’ll end with a beautiful verse. This verse was connected to Kṛṣṇa’s bāla-līlā, His childhood pastimes; I found it in the *Nanda-vṛndāvana-campū* (7.30). It’s just super cute; it’s where the Gopīs are teasing Kṛṣṇa. When He first started to play His flute, He picked up a flute for the first time and He started playing it, and all the Gopīs were teasing Him. Listen to this: 

"Oh Kṛṣṇa, that lower lip of Yours was incapable of even properly suckling upon the breast nipple of Your mother. Please tell us, which guru did You approach recently to quickly attain expertise in melodious flute play using that same lower lip?" 

My Kṛṣṇa, thank you Prabhu again for this opportunity. There is just some special nectar. As we know, Kārttika, the month of Dāmodara, is a very, very special month. So, to facilitate your Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I will be very happy every Friday to continue these lectures on Dāmodara-līlā. 

Okay, Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""