"*00407*.*
"# The Day The Universe Celebrated - Māyāpur 2023

Hey Kṛṣṇa, so we're continuing with our little series here on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, up until His birthday in a couple of days. We've covered Nṛsiṁhadeva Himself, His nature, and His appearance. We've discussed Hiraṇyakaśipu. We've discussed Prahlāda Mahārāja. For an interesting historical angle, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana: what is... I'll give two lectures about on Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day. They've asked me to speak in the main temple in Bengali, now translated into Bengali, and I'll speak about Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Māyāpur. This pastime happened in the Kingdom of Indra, but actually, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva—and this is why we're going to discuss it—is very much present in Vṛndāvana in a special way. Like if you go to Nandagrām, which is the Nanda-grāma, we say Vraja is... this is where Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā, and baby Kṛṣṇa live. And if you've been there and you've gone around and seen everything, you'll know that they had a household deity, Nanda Mahārāja, that household deity that they worshiped to protect baby Kṛṣṇa—that was the deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva.

Spontaneous and very intimate there, but just as the kind of structure for Vraja, as the Gosvāmīs described, they all worshiped Lord Viṣṇu. I mean, they were just head over heels about Kṛṣṇa, but just as part of the social structure, they worshiped Viṣṇu, and Viṣṇu's expansion is Nṛsiṁhadeva. So they had a deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva, and they were very devout. That same deity is there, and there's a chamber where there's the deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva. Yes, if that's not enough, our Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda Rasa-rājā Ācārya, he tells a little short tale about Nṛsiṁhadeva in his famous compilation of the ślokas that he liked, and it's verse 152. Yes. One night, when Mother Yaśodā was putting Lālā Bāla Kṛṣṇa to sleep, she said to little Kṛṣṇa, "O my Rising Dark Moon, my child, you're not sleeping yet." I love that, "my Rising Dark Moon," "my Rising Dark Moon, you're not asleep yet." So baby Kṛṣṇa, you can barely talk, said, "No, Māmā, sleep has not come to me yet." I would have said, "Mom, I'm not... I'm not asleep yet," but it's so perfect, "No, Māmā, sleep has not come to me." Yes, so she said, "Listen, my son, and I will tell you a bedtime story that will make you fall asleep."

It’s like, you know, baby voice, he said, "Māmā, what is this story? I have never heard of it. Please tell it." She started to tell this pastime, and when she came to the sentence when Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared from the pillar, he was very eager to rip the demons to shreds, a smile suddenly arose on child Kṛṣṇa’s lips. He was remembering His pastimes. So there is a presence of Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vraja. How many of you have done Govardhana? You know, when you come to the southern tip of Girirāja, off to the left, there's Pañcārī. We pass by a big hill; there's an ancient Nṛsiṁha temple on top of the hill. So we stop our parikramā, and we go to the left, 50 meters, walk up that little hill, and we pray to this very ancient, indeed, black deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva to protect us and make sure that we finish our parikramā safely, right there at Govardhana. Where, you know, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī wants eternal residence at the foot of Govardhana Hill.

There's a very famous deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva behind the Rādhā-vallabha Temple. The Rādhā-vallabha Temple is the Nimbārka-sampradāya, who we discussed a little bit yesterday. The head of the Nimbārka-sampradāya is the Four Kumāras. So behind that temple, if you come out of the back, there is a big deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva. And of course, we all know that on Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day, way back 500 years ago, Mādhavendra Purī prayed to Nṛsiṁhadeva. He actually went to a Nṛsiṁha temple—there's another Nṛsiṁha temple—he went to that temple and he prayed, "My Lord, I have You in the form of a śālagrāma, but I can't dress You, I can't put śṛṅgāra ornaments on You. Do something, I want to worship You in a larger form." He prayed like that, and the next morning, the day after Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day, Rādhā-ramaṇa appeared. He brought Rādhā-ramaṇa, intimately connected to this līlā of Nṛsiṁhadeva.

All the other Gosvāmīs had big deities, but he said, "Put His hair nicely, put candana, a little śālagrāma, can You get bigger please?" He prayed to an Nṛsiṁhadeva deity, "You know, You're the Lord, can You become manifest to me?" He woke up the next morning, he went to do pūjā, and that śālagrāma, Rādhā-ramaṇa... this is self-manifested, nobody carved Him; He's self-manifested. Tell me, on the back of Rādhā-ramaṇa, you can see a piece of the śālagrāma-śilā kind of sticking out a little bit, where it came from. So you see, Nṛsiṁhadeva later also... in some curriculums, as I've taken devotees to a village called Prahlādapura, where every year the inhabitants have a big festival. They celebrate Prahlāda Mahārāja’s victory over his demoniac father's attempt to kill him. They celebrate this village, they have a big śobhā-yātrā, and the Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance, it's a huge festival. This whole village just celebrates the appearance of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva and how Nṛsiṁhadeva killed Hiraṇyakaśipu, the demoniac father of Prahlāda. It's a whole day. It's a good day, wow, this Nṛsiṁhadeva.

The whole village... they just think... everyone calls it Prahlādapura, the village of Prahlāda. It's nice, someone celebrated when Hiraṇyakaśipu was killed, but actually, when Hiraṇyakaśipu was killed, not just one village celebrated; the whole universe, the whole universe, all 33 million demigods, the 33 koti—there’s a verse like that—is exactly like a fever of meningitis in the head of the three worlds. 

> Thus, when the wives of the demigods in the heavenly planets saw that the great demon had been killed by the personal hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, their faces blossomed in joy. The wives of the demigods again and again showered flowers from heaven upon Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva like rain. 

Everyone was happy because everyone had been affected by the terror reign of Hiraṇyakaśipu. Everybody—he conquered a village or a region, even the planet; he conquered the whole universe. Everyone was under his subjugation and he was very mean. Pain to others. Whereas devotees, they like to create bliss or happiness to others. It's interesting that Prahlāda’s name, Prahlāda—the translation, Prahlāda’s name means "one who gives happiness," "the one who gives bliss." By the fact that his father was killed, and in this regard, there's a beautiful verse composed by a devotee scholar named Hari Parshad. Very beautiful verse he composed some years ago, so you have to listen carefully. He's a Sanskrit scholar and they know how to just go very deep into every, you know, component of a verse and bring out some special meaning.

So this is, this is Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva speaking: "If this king of all demons stays alive, then Prahlāda, My devotee, will certainly manifest only at one location within this universe. However, if this demon is killed, then, meaning immense happiness will manifest everywhere in the universe." The Personality of Bliss in the happiness on the entire universe killed Hiraṇyakaśipu using His nails. So beautiful, I don't know if you followed. Immense happiness is using two ways: the Prahlāda is this; one is, "If this king of demons stays alive, then Prahlāda, My devotee, will certainly manifest only at one location within this universe. However, if the demon is killed, then Prahlāda... immense happiness will manifest everywhere in the universe." With this thought in his mind, Śrī Narahari, the Personality, eager to bestow Prahlāda immense happiness on the entire universe, killed Hiraṇyakaśipu with His nails.

Do you understand? Even these intelligent boys are still good now. The Vrajavāsīs say that Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared at a time of the year which had never existed before. What? Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared at a time of the year that had never existed before? He's really, you know, making you think tonight. He appeared at a time of the year that—what time of the year never existed? There's 12 months, 365 days, like what? Seven days a week, 24 hours, 60 minutes, 60 seconds in a minute, like what time never existed before? I was like, what is... how to explain this? One of the boons Hiraṇyakaśipu requested from Lord Brahmā was that he not die during the day or during the night, inside any residence or outside of any residence, during the daytime or at night. "Grant me that my death not be brought about by any being created by someone other than You, nor by any weapon, nor by any human being, nor by any animal." Yes, not during day, not during night. That covers everything, the whole year, all of time. You know, time, the calculation of time, there's day, there's night, there's day, there's night, there's day... "I don't want to be killed in the day or the night." There's no—there's just no time to kill me. This is... 

So for our practical purposes, he was protected during all 365 days and nights of the calendar year. Therefore, Nṛsiṁhadeva created an extra day in the year, and we call that—when that happens—a leap year, when there's 366 days, you know, in the year. The Lord created this extra day so that He could kill him. But our Nṛsiṁhadeva... His name is... I don't know what the scientists or the astronomers say about this, you know, this extra day in the year that we call leap year, but as far as we understand, it was created by Nṛsiṁhadeva so that He could circumvent this Lord Brahmā's boon, namely, enabling Him to kill him. And on that day, the Lord killed him, as we know, the day usually comes in the month of May. It is very hot in May, isn't it? We're down in a cave here because it's cooler below ground, and above ground, May in India is very hot.

And you know why it's so hot? Why is the month of May so hot? Well, one of our Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, he put it in a very poetic way: it's very hot because when in the month of May, there was a blazing fire that came from His mane, and thus it becomes one of the hottest months of the year. The death of death is the full translation. "I bow down to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, who is ferocious, ferocious, and heroic like Lord Viṣṇu. He is burning from every side. He is terrific, auspicious, and the death of death personified." So when He appeared, the month of May became blazing hot, and it's still hot, as you know. I have three people fanning me here.

Verse two: there's a very graphic description of this fire coming from Nṛsiṁhadeva. There's a description, great details. This fire is analyzed in a beautiful verse, which is, "May the fire borne out of the friction of the teeth of Hari’s saw-like arm against the chest of the demon purify you. On the demon's skin, this fire made the noise. His flowing blood created the noise. The fire burning his fat made a loud sound, while the fire burning his bones created a loud cracking sound." Whoa, I want to be like... is anyone else who can translate? He's got a little fire in him. Did you eat today? It’s said that He was so angry with the sins of Hiraṇyakaśipu that the fire, the fire coming from the mouth of Nṛsiṁhadeva, evaporated all the perspiration on His body. You know, when you're very active and you're down, you perspire, but the hot breath, the fire of the Nṛsiṁhadeva from His mouth, had evaporated all the perspiration. Therefore, you never see perspiration on a painting of Nṛsiṁhadeva fighting; He's very cool about it. Wow, not me, though. 

Now, we know that after Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva killed Hiraṇyakaśipu, He was still angry. He was nice, He killed him, He's still roaring, His anger... ah, like this. He is very angry, so angry that even the demigods couldn't come forward and appease Him. Why was He angry? What did the ācāryas say? One reason that Nṛsiṁhadeva remains so angry is that when Prahlāda Mahārāja was being harassed, when he was, you know, when his father was trying to kill him, the demigods didn't come to help. They're very powerful personalities. They control the wind, the air, they control the seas, the water, they control the sun, the light. Everything in this world has a demigod who is controlling it. They didn't come to help this five-year-old boy. They should have sacrificed their lives for this Vaiṣṇava, this very dear devotee. Understanding, nobody came forward. Therefore, Nṛsiṁhadeva’s angry at these demigods. They're coming, but, you know, Sūrya comes...

He was so angry that they didn't come forward to help, even the wife, Lakṣmī, she couldn't come forward. He was in anger. "You should have said something to the demigods. You're a powerful woman. You're a Lakṣmī-devī, the source of longevity, the source of so much charisma, the source of money. You should have said something." I forget everything again. 

Devotee of the Lord, the Lord is more pleased when we serve His devotee than we serve Himself. Here's the devotee in danger, because they were too afraid. They didn't have that sense of bhakti, of devotion, that the Lord can protect, so therefore I should go and rescue Prahlāda. They didn't have that bhakti. Their bhakti is mixed. They're better devotees than us, I could say, you know? They are in charge of the universe, but their devotion is mixed with some material desires. They didn't come forward, and He was very disturbed. You know, "Why, why aren't you pure devotees come forth in full faith? What's wrong with you?" 

Like my father used to say, "Boy, when are you going to grow up?" You know, I tell my father as a child, right? But as I grew older, I'm still childish. "Brian, when are you going to grow up?" "Pop, I'm grown up." "Because you're My devotees, demigods, when are you going to get free of those material desires and come back to Vaikuṇṭha? What, what are you procrastinating? Become Kṛṣṇa conscious." Prabhupāda was visiting a temple and, you know, he would get up very late in the night to do his translating. So, he was in the middle of translating, like 1:30 in the morning, and he walked into his servant's room. His servant was sleeping, because the servant works really hard, so he was sound asleep, the servant, but Prabhupāda was in a particular mood. Yeah, so it's 1:30 in the morning, his servant sleeping, and Prabhupāda kicks him in the morning. "Why, why are you sleeping? Why aren't you awake?" But Prabhupāda, not a pure devotee? Prabhupāda kicked him again. "Why aren't you a pure devotee?" 

You know, sometimes the parents, the kid's not eating, he's five, or four, or five, and the parents thinking, "Is he going to grow up?" "What about these terrible twos, you know? When they're two, they're like really terrible, not terrible, but naughty." "I wish it was 16." Yeah, wait until he's 16. It's boys going places. He's totally fixed on the class, well, this thing, you know, he's all ears. We say in English, "You're totally focused on what I'm saying." What's your name and how old are you? Eight. Give him a big round of applause, come on. Thank you. Prabhupāda said, "Why aren't you purifying?" So yeah, He's angry with the demigods. "Why are you holding on to these desires? Why don't you have faith? Go for it! Why didn't you save my boy?" 

So, Brahmā was afraid that the whole universe would be consumed by this fire, this anger of Nṛsiṁhadeva, so he looked around, who can go? He said, "Prahlāda, Prahlāda, you go, and you can appease Him." He has no material desires. We mentioned whatever may have—whatever contamination may have been there—it went away when the Lord put His paw on Prahlāda's head. Bhāgavatam says at that point, all his heart was completely cleansed, and I said maybe the heart was not so pure because he had been associating with so many, you know, demon boys. Or Prabhupāda mentioned that in the purport, that Prahlāda was born in a demoniac family, so he had demoniac blood running through his veins, so just, you know, just some incy-wincy. So, because of his selfless devotion to the Lord, the Lord loved him. And when Prahlāda came and said, "Please, Lord, calm down," you know, like the cat—like kitty cats. Remember I told you I had a Siamese cat when I was young? He'd curl up next—the only way I'd go to sleep. He became śānta, He became peaceful, because of the love of His devotee. What is love? Love controls Kṛṣṇa. 

So the pastime, like, you know, came to a certain conclusion. The demon was dead, Prahlāda was saved, and this meningitis—fever meningitis is a type of fever—the fever in the universe because of the fear of Hiraṇyakaśipu was all gone away, and it was a big celebration. The Wicked Witch of the North—remember? West, I think, the North now is... oh, she's... well, there's the whole part there, you know, that the witch is killed and, you know, the little girl Dorothy or something, she's chanting, "The Wicked Witch of the North is dead, the Wicked Witch of the West is dead." There's a big... I remember my parents used to read, you know, I go, "Yeah, she's dead, the witch. I don't have to be afraid, I can go to sleep now. The Wicked Witch is dead." Whoa, so I can relate somewhat. Who... you know, the whole world, the whole universe celebrating that this great demon who everyone was affected by, dead, yesterday is... 

On the cosmic scale, we can see that one person can cause distress to the whole universe. We don't, you know, we just think in terms of our little planet now, but there are cases in cosmic history where one person can cause distress to everyone from Pātāla-loka up to Svargaloka. That's a big problem. That's politics. That's a political—how do we, how do we solve that one today? Please come. One person can cause so much trouble. We may see that, history may see that one day. Relationship to that, how one person can be so... could affect the three worlds. Prabhupāda at one time, "Lord Brahmā can create a universe, but a pure devotee can deliver an entire universe." Brahmā can create, but a pure devotee, his power is he can liberate a universe. One person. One person. I'm just speaking about how influential a person can be. 

This is so, as soon as Prahlāda was delivered from danger, Nṛsiṁhadeva, as we discussed in the... at Nṛsiṁha-pālī the other day, right? Back home. However, I found a very interesting quote from Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta, where it gives a little, a slightly different version, almost an opposite version of why Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared. 7.20, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that Hiraṇyakaśipu... actually, Swami addresses, Prahlāda addresses his father as the best of the asuras. But Śukadeva Gosvāmī, when speaking of Hiraṇyakaśipu in that verse, it says, "Śrī Hiraṇyakaśipu." What? He was the main cause of the appearance of Nṛsiṁhadeva, not Prahlāda? But I was doing fine, but when Hiraṇyakaśipu got involved, then there was a necessity for Nṛsiṁhadeva to come. So this is what is an interesting angle, that it was because of him—he was the main cause of the appearance of Nṛsiṁhadeva. So he's, he's something amazing. Śrī Hiraṇyakaśipu appeared. 

He was already aware of the Lord's presence everywhere. Yeah, he knew the Lord's everywhere. Thus, the main reason for the Lord's appearance was to convince Hiraṇyakaśipu of His, Viṣṇu's, existence as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. "You think there's no God? Why, here I am, death personified!" He wasn't an atheist anymore. There's no atheists in the foxholes, they say in military. They used to say there's no atheist in the foxholes, and Kṛṣṇa... so one can take it either way, that yes, the Lord appeared for Prahlāda Mahārāja, but more, He appeared for him. It's not either-or. It's like, how do you like it? Everybody wants a black and white. Yes, either-or, you take it. He said, "Making that fateful day a celebration for the appearance of, the disappearance of Hiraṇyakaśipu, you can celebrate it." "Oh, wow, in two days we're going to have the disappearance of Hiraṇyakaśipu." You can't talk like that, Mahārāja said. So in the lecture is, and I say it with authority, there's two verses: 7.9.13 and 7.9.14. In the first verse, Prahlāda praises the appearance of the Lord, and in the other verse, Prahlāda praises the disappearance of Hiraṇyakaśipu. 

> O sincere servants of Your Lordship, who are situated in a transitional position, therefore they're not like us, Prahlāda and his father, the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. Your appearance in this fierce form is Your pastime for Your own pleasure. Such an incarnation is always meant for the protection and improvement of the universe. 

And the next verse he praises the disappearance of Hiraṇyakaśipu: 

> Listen to this, therefore cease Your anger now that my father, the great demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, has been killed. Since even saintly persons take pleasure in the killing of a scorpion or a snake, all the worlds have achieved great satisfaction because of the death of this demon. He's praising the death of his Hiraṇyakaśipu now. They are confident of their happiness and they will always remember Your auspicious incarnation of the Nṛsiṁhadeva in order to be freed from fear. 

Put it more simply: because of the devotion, the greatest person appeared, and the most demoniac person disappeared. Nṛsiṁha means the best amongst male individuals, Hiraṇyakaśipu means the lowest of men. So because of the devotion, the greatest person appeared and the most demoniac person... I don't know... so therefore, the ācāryas say that because of Prahlāda's presence, that He appeared and the demon disappeared. Because of Prahlāda, the ācāryas say that Nṛsiṁhadeva showed His love for His servant Prahlāda in a most unusual way. How do you express love? You know, some sweet words, some, "Honorary," hold their hand, or you embrace them. We've seen pictures, speaking words of gratitude to His devotee, you know, everyone should follow your example. To show His love to Prahlāda, the Lord performed an abhiṣeka of His devotee. Is abhiṣeka, you know what abhiṣeka is, right? We did an abhiṣeka on Prahlāda like a bath, because...

He started licking him with His long tongue, as lions do to their young, and as a result, he became all wet. That's how lions... you've seen lions, you know, animals, they lick their young. So out of affection, the Nṛsiṁhadeva licked Mahārāja. I saw a beautiful painting of that yesterday. I'll put it up on Facebook. One of the original commentators on Bhāgavatam, he puts it very nicely, how the Lord deals with the demons and how He deals with the devotees. Yeah, which is, "Although very ferocious, the lioness is very kind to her cubs. Similarly, although very ferocious to non-devotees like Hiraṇyakaśipu, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is very, very soft and kind to devotees like Prahlāda Mahārāja." 

Now, one ācārya comments, it has a very interesting—I was going to say twist, but it's not a twist—or very interesting angle on this phenomenon. Yeah, there's an ācārya comments that when a devotee requests the Lord to manifest in His deity form, the devotee performs an abhiṣeka of the deity. [...] What is the nature of love in the spiritual world? It's just so amazing. You bathe the Lord, the Lord bathes you. Is that not equal love? You can become, you know, equal, quote-unquote, Kṛṣṇa will allow you; He'll be subservient to your love. Rādhā doesn't do what Kṛṣṇa says; Kṛṣṇa does what Rādhā says. That's the power of supreme love. Kṛṣṇa... When Kṛṣṇa wrestles with the cowherd boys, they win. He's so powerful, but love is more powerful than the supreme powerful. Now, this is getting more nectarean. We're talking about peeling the onion and coming, you know, peel the skin. So, there's so many ways to analyze a verse, so we're going to analyze it in a more rustic way. We're going quite deep here. That's the direction we like to go. Yes, we want to go to Vaikuṇṭha, but we want to go to Goloka. 

Actually, [the author] spent most of his life in Vṛndāvana, and he wrote something very nice in Braja-bhāṣā about this abhiṣeka the Lord did for Prahlāda by advice. It is the language of the Vrajavāsīs; it means that he's saying that the Nṛsiṁhadeva kisses and licks Prahlāda because the rain of the Lord's saliva squelches the fire of separation in Prahlāda Mahārāja's heart. Wow, it is, the devotee is suffering in separation, like your mouth becomes very dry and you want water, yeah? So, when a devotee is separated from Kṛṣṇa, every moment seems like a million years. So, here's Prahlāda, you know, in a boiling pot of oil, or you know, in a bed of snakes, or that—that's bad enough, but really, he's suffering from what? Separation from his Lord. That's what he's really feeling. He's not feeling all this torture going on. He's beyond the bodily concept, very deep, rustic devotee. He's feeling separation: "Where's my, where's my Viṣṇu? Viṣṇu, where are You? Come, please, I want to be with You. I really want to know You, I really want to be with You." You know, George Harrison, with the...

Videos, he's not suffering from the fire of the boiling oil; he's suffering from the fire of separation. He is permanent. He says that when the Nṛsiṁhadeva kisses and licks Prahlāda, because the rain of the Lord's saliva, it squelches the fire of separation in Prahlāda Mahārāja's heart. That's, that, you know, that's his being... the saliva is going like this. Which the saliva is probably one-time prasādam, is the saliva of the Lord. So don't think of it in a bad way. The Lord's saliva is squelching the fire of separation in Prahlāda Mahārāja's heart. Ah, home again. Saints, they say that the nature of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, it's just like sandalwood. Like what? How's the Nṛsiṁhadeva like sandalwood? How do you compare Nṛsiṁhadeva? It's like sandalwood. Excuse me. But it's a very nice comparison, because just sandalwood itself, it has two mysterious features: sandalwood ash can make you warm in the winter, and sandalwood paste can make you cool in the summer. 

We usually think that, you know, sandalwood paste, it's very cooling. We had candana-yātrā, it's hot in May, so we're putting candana, cool sandalwood paste on our deities the last week. But if you take a block of sandalwood and you burn it, it becomes ash. If you're cold in the winter, you can put the ash and you stay warm. Sandalwood can make you cool or it can make you warm. Just one of the mysteries of nature. I heard Prabhupāda say one time in Rome, this whole material manifestation, Māyā-devī has said, it's all mystical, how it's all happening. It's all mystical, okay? I first learned about this when I was in Nepal. It was going to a very high mountain in the Himalayas called Muktināth. You go from Pokhara through the mountains—it's dangerous, but you get the jump... you walk along the river, the Kālī Gaṇḍakī... and from you walk... it's a long walk up to the top of Muktināth, the place of liberation. 

Who's... you know, he's passed away, he's in Goloka... I think we went in, like, December or something, it's like really cold, you know? I had my down jacket on and my my woolen cap and, you know, my long underwear for warmth and boots, and we're walking in up to Muktināth. Down comes this yogi with only a gamchā on, but his body was all ash in color. And I said, "I'm gonna freeze to death." I said, "Mahārāja, no, he's wearing the sandalwood ash." It keeps you warm in the winter. I said, "Really?" He was perspiring, you know? I had this down jacket, I'm still cold. He just had sandalwood ash, he was warm. Kṛṣṇa's material creation is mysterious. Yogis, they keep warm even up in Badrīnāth, Gaṅgotrī, Kedārnāth, Yamunotrī. How do they stay warm? Put the ashes into it. That's a lot less expensive than a jacket you buy in a camping store! I don't think it'll ever become popular in the West, because when you put it over your body, you look scary. "That lady looks like a witch," "That man looks like a ghost," "What happened?" "Well, they went to the camping store and they got, you know, sandalwood ash." I'm not going to do that. 

It's said in the icy climate of the Himalayan mountains, sandalwood ash feels as warm as a hundred quilts. That's how the yogis put it. They don't have jackets; they have quilts. So sandalwood ash feels as warm as a hundred quilts, and as we all know here in America, when you... it's ground with water, it becomes candana or sandalwood paste and has the completely opposite effect. We put it on our deity, Mādhava, to keep Him cool in the hot summer, and we also put it sometimes on our face. I'm going to start a visit to your home as an etiquette, you just, you know, just keep them cool. After a long journey, you put some sandalwood paste on His forehead. This is etiquette.

It’s like sandalwood, because for the asuras, He's like the ashes of sandalwood that burns them with heat, but for a devotee, He's like—devotees—He's like cooling sandalwood paste where He removes all their distress and protects them from the blazing fire of material existence. Now, here's something very sweet and very beautiful. Once, Kṛṣṇa compared His ten incarnations to the beauty of Śrī Rādhā. How did Kṛṣṇa compare ten incarnations to the beauty of His beloved eternal consort? But this pastime is described by this statement, is described by Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Vidagdha-mādhava*, chapter 4, verse 41. It's so nectarean. Kṛṣṇa can compare His ten incarnations to Rādhārāṇī! Only the Lord could do this. What would you say? How do you compare the ten incarnations to Śrī Rādhā-śakti, the pleasure potency of the Lord? I'll recite the verse for you, yeah. So, properly put your arms in the air, take a deep breath and hold it. Don't cheat, okay? And raise your arms again and say, "Śānti." Listen... 

> Dearest Rādhā, I am not alone in being Your surrendered servant; My ten incarnations are also Your servants. My Fish incarnation, Matsya, serves the restless fish of Your eyes. My Turtle incarnation, Kūrma, serves the two beautiful turtles of Your breasts. My Boar incarnation serves the lines of hair between Your breasts. [...] serves Your delightful lips with robes. [...] serves Your waist which is with the folds skin known as trivali. [...] populations is subdued by the beauty of Your face, which also defeats the splendor of all beautiful girls. [...] serves the crooked anger that You harbor for Me in Your heart. 

So, in this way, Kṛṣṇa describes Śrī Rādhā according to His ten incarnations. Incarnation, it says, "Delights who delights, serves, here, delightful lips." The cause of increasing Prahlāda great joy in Kṛṣṇa, just as Nṛsiṁhadeva is the cause of protection of Prahlāda, the devotee named.

So, I think we've gone deep enough here, a little bit beyond our boundaries here. Nevertheless, it's always relishable to hear from such wonderful devotees as Rūpa Gosvāmī. We've heard a lot of tad-bhāva, we've heard a little bit of rasa as well, just to give us a glimpse of where we're going. We're all works in progress, to get from where we're at right now. We don't understand—guys, I was saying in another lecture, our business right now is to cleanse our hearts of all impurities that we cannot do alone, that we need the mercy of Nṛsiṁhadeva. But it's good to get a glimpse of where we're going so we can keep going. I want to go there. 

So the theme of this lecture was "Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana." To finish here for today, and tomorrow we'll discuss ten very famous deities of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in Vṛndāvana, how they appeared and their pastimes with their devotees, and many more treasures. But I wanted to mention that in Vṛndāvana, actually, in traditional Vṛndāvana, in old Vṛndāvana, which we very much hanker for—how they lived such simple life with high thinking—in old Vṛndāvana, you know, going back even to the 1930s, 1920s, they used to celebrate the Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day as a five-day festival. Five-day festival. And I was told, actually, I read in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I read that there was a very popular song that everyone in Vṛndāvana would sing during these five days coming up to the actual appearance of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. All the Vrajavāsīs took great pleasure in singing this following song. A good way to finish: 

> All glories to You! The sound of Your roaring aborts the pregnancies of the wives of the demons. Your heavy steps destroy the residences of the asuras—I'm not singing it anymore. Your beautiful feet blossom the flower of the heart of Lakṣmī. Blood falling from Your sharp-pointed nails on Earth makes Mother Earth light from the sins of the asuras. And Your soft hands are giving blessings to the devotees. This is the final line: I pray to You to always reside at the gate of my house and protect me from all evil. I pray, I pray to You to always reside at the gate of my house and protect me from all evil. 

Thank you very much.""