"*00453*.*
"### The Strength of the Strong – Māyāpur 2023

Good evening, everyone. Good evening. We are leading up to the appearance day of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. The first devotee to worship Nṛsiṁhadeva in our International Society was our devotee at that time named Gurukṛpā Svāmī. This was maybe 1974, and he was traveling with another sannyāsī named Yaśodānandana Mahārāja. They were sent to South India to preach because then, as now, there are many—well, I speak emphatically—I don't know where I was. Oh my God. At that time, Prabhupāda had sent them to South India to preach to the Māyāvādīs and the various scholars, because this is Drāviḍa-deśa, a place of high learning.

Many of the great ācāryas have come from South India. The Ālvārs were the originals who spoke on the science of bhakti thousands of years ago, and even Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs' family came from Karnataka; they moved with their family eventually to Bengal. There are many elevated personalities who have come from what Prabhupāda sometimes describes as a "drāviḍa-deśa," meaning South India. Today, even today, many intelligent men and women are born there. Unfortunately, they are going to Silicon Valley in America to do I.T. work. It takes a brain to do that, so instead of transcendental work, they are doing Hare Kṛṣṇa works. Even today, South India is, you could say, more together in Vedic culture than North India. They were traveling in this circle of people, and they were preaching the message of Lord Caitanya. One of the principal deities has always been Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva in South India; He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and songs and bhajans are sung to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. I am not exactly sure how, but in their travels, Gurukṛpā was given a small deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁhadeva—an old deity, an ancient deity.

We didn't have deities of Nṛsiṁhadeva in those days; in fact, there weren't many deities. The first Nṛsiṁhadeva deity in ISKCON—I didn't know if we had permission because we were all Kṛṣṇa devotees and Caitanya Mahāprabhu devotees, and although we sang the Nṛsiṁha-pranāmas every morning, nobody really thought of worshiping a deity of Nṛsiṁhadeva. He was very nervous; he said, "Can we worship this deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁhadeva?" It is like the many devotees who have deities of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁhadeva nowadays. So, this is the first: "Can we worship Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha?" Prabhupāda hesitated. He thought for a moment and said, "Yes, but you have to be very, very careful, because Nṛsiṁhadeva is very angry. He is always angry, He is never pacified, and if you make an offense, it can be a very serious reaction for you." He answers sometimes, "I physically hold houses; they have Lakṣmī, look how cute He is, it's like a little lion, and look at the prabhu, I just love them." They have to be very careful; He is angry. When someone is angry, you are very careful how you approach them. 

Of course, He is angry not at us, He is angry with the non-devotees, but if you make an offense in your deity worship—and *Nectar of Devotion* has a chapter on offenses to be avoided—and if you make one of those offenses, He gets angry with you. Therefore, you can worship Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha only if you worship them along with Gaur-Nitāi, because They don't accept any offenses; They only accept service. So, it is important to at least have a picture of the Pañca-tattva or Gaur-Nitāi if you have deities of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha. 

So, we are discussing these things because we are working our way up to May 4th, which is the actual appearance day. And what did we speak about yesterday? We heard how, despite the boons of Lord Brahmā—a very powerful person, actually the head of our sampradāya—despite those boons that Brahmā had given Hiraṇyakaśipu, still, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, who is the ultimate giver of boons, He killed the great demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. We heard how He protected Prahlāda, and with the idea that He would protect other devotees as well. 

Said by doing one thing, the Lord accomplishes many other things. You hear Him roaring in the background? That’s not thunder; that’s Nṛsiṁhadeva roaring. He likes to hear His glories. But a young devotee, he may think, "Well, this happened in such a yuga, this is like way..." Even with our brain, even the computer, it’s hard to compute how far back is such a yuga. This happened in Satya-yuga. "So what hope do I have now to receive such protection? This is a pastime that happened a long time ago. Does it really relate to Kali-yuga? Will He still protect us in Kali-yuga, where no one has any qualifications to even approach the Lord?" 

"Protect me, please. I am like at the bottom of the list." But actually, protection is always there for all of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees—the big guys, the medium guys, and the little guys. They are all dear to the Lord, just like you have a 12-year-old, an eight-year-old, and a two-year-old; they are all dear to you. That is the nature of motherly love. Actually, Kṛṣṇa in *Bhagavad-gītā*—He states at least nine times, I didn't have so much time this evening to go, but at least nine times in *Bhagavad-gītā*—Kṛṣṇa says He protects His devotees. Nine times! That's three times three, right? If you say something three times, it gives it very strong emphasis: "Do this, do this, do this." So here's three, three, and three; nine times Kṛṣṇa says, "I will protect My devotees." And it's not just speaking to, you know, the mahā-bhāgavatas; He is speaking to those who are just contemplating, "Should I join the temple or should I not?" He is also offering protection to them. That’s a bold statement. A person is not even a devotee; he is thinking, "Hmm, maybe I should go to college, or maybe I should join the temple. Hmm." Kṛṣṇa is ready to protect that person as well.

Now, when you make a statement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if you are addressing an audience, you always have to back it up with śāstric evidence. Prabhupāda was the best example. You listen to his lectures; so many verses, they just come like the flowing of the Ganges, you know? We don't even notice; hardly. Prabhupāda would always back up what he said with śāstra. That’s what makes it authentic, and his example, of course. So, where is there a verse where Kṛṣṇa says He is ready to protect the person who is thinking about becoming a devotee? *Sarva-dharmān parityajya*. I'm just checking up on him because he's supposed to study six hours a day, so, "Sara, I also study six hours a day." Kṛṣṇa says, "Just surrender unto Me." He is actually speaking, you could say, to the non-devotees: "Just surrender unto Me, I will protect you. Give up all dharma, all other duties. Just surrender unto Me. In doing so, I will protect you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear." He is talking to people who have performed sins and they are afraid now. So, He said, "No, don't be afraid. If you surrender to Me—you're thinking about joining the temple or going to college—if you surrender to Me, I will protect you. Do not fear." You understand? He loves all His devotees. You just have a little inclination. Yes. 

This is the Lord; He is so kind. It is *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 6.3.19. I haven't memorized this verse, so we’ll see how it goes. 

> "Who are worshiped even by the demigods, possess wonderful bodily features exactly like those of Viṣṇu, and are very rarely seen, the Viṣṇu-dūtas protect the devotees of the Lord from the hands of enemies, from envious persons, and even from my jurisdiction, as well as from natural disturbances." 

Yamarāja is speaking. You see, this is everywhere: "Kṛṣṇa will protect My devotees." His devotees are protecting His devotees—the Viṣṇu-dūtas of the Lord—from the hands of enemies, from envious persons, and even from my jurisdiction as well as from natural disasters. The day we were in my apartment, actually—a disciple’s apartment—and the gas was on the stove. There was a pot on the stove with the gas, and we thought we turned it off, but somehow it was still on. Somehow, it accumulated; there was a spark. We were standing—very good—the whole apartment lit up with this flash, and you could smell the gas. I looked around; everyone was okay because we were this far away from the danger. The light came, the flash came like this, somebody's eyelashes were singed. Viṣṇu saved us, five devotees. Had we been nearer, kaputski. 

We were driving down the road from Vṛndāvana to Delhi, you know, the Yamuna Expressway, this fast, cars going. All of a sudden, we are going like this, a car that was going on the other side jumped the boundary, flipped over, and was coming at us at 100 kilometers an hour. It happens so fast. Our driver just went [gesture], and it missed us by this much, this much. So naturally, at those times, one thinks of Nṛsiṁhadeva. Yesterday, there was a storm here in Māyāpur. Remember that big storm? And we were near the window. I was like, "Boom!" I thought an airplane had hit the apartment building. It was a flash of lightning, and the tree that far away was hit—where the camera is—was hit by a bolt of lightning. It cracked in half, caught on fire, and fell on the ground. I went, "Do I just drink a day?" Especially for both ways, "I believe in You." 

There is danger at every step. So, two reminders: of the fragile nature of this world and to take shelter of the Lord. It is a very dangerous place, and you could say that in His incarnation as Nṛsiṁhadeva, it is Nṛsiṁhadeva's responsibility to actually protect His devotees. Yes, Kṛṣṇa protects His devotees, but for the main part, it's Nṛsiṁhadeva, His expansion. Kṛṣṇa is dancing with the gopīs in the spiritual world; we don't want to disturb Him, so we ask Him to come as Nṛsiṁhadeva. We keep dancing and come at the same time. Yes. And if we have any doubt, then we can hear Prabhupāda's words, because some things may seem too esoteric, but if He appeared within our lifetimes, if Prabhupāda says it, we accept it. "Jesus loves me, this I know, because the Bible tells me so." You know, we have our authority: guru, śāstra, and sādhu. So, it is, you know, what Prabhupāda said for us is actually axiomatic, complete, absolute truth. Prabhupāda says in Los Angeles, August 2nd, 1970, Prabhupāda was departing for India and he was giving darśana to the devotees. He concluded by saying, "Nṛsiṁhadeva will give you protection in my absence." And that is demonstrated in so many ways. Like we say in English, we have... what do you say? There is a theory, and the example. We have example, we have precept. Precept means we have a theory, but the theory is proven in a particular person. Like we talk about pure devotional service; we have Prabhupāda as the example of a pure devotee. We have the theory and we have the person. We have the *Bhāgavatam* and the person in *Bhāgavatam*. All the theory, pure devotional service. Okay, I got it. No, you don't. Look at Prabhupāda. Now you understand. We have the theory and we have the person to demonstrate the theory is true. 

Like the theory: "The Lord will protect." So, what's the example? Perfect theory, perfect example. If we have perfect questions, perfect answers, we have a perfect theory: "Kṛṣṇa says I will protect you." What's the example for Prahlāda? The biggest demon in the world has ever seen, a five-year-old boy. The demon was finished. Prahlāda lived on; how? You know, the Lord will protect any devotee. Of course, Prahlāda was not just any devotee; he was, as he said, he was in a very special category of pure devotee. He is one who is fully, fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda was like that, fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. He is our example. If you want full protection, surrender fully. *Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante*, "As they surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly." If you surrender this much, Kṛṣṇa goes one inch to you. Two inches, Kṛṣṇa comes to you. You want full protection? Then surrender fully. 

We thank our physical strength because we are in the gym. "I'm in a better position than others now. I'm strong, I have a big bank balance, I have bodyguards, I live in a, you know, relatively peaceful country, I'm okay." Operations? No. Only the Lord's protection is absolute. Accidents are before us. You know, we think, "What about Nṛsiṁhadeva?" But really, as I said many times in this series, the real protection we are asking for is to be protected from illusion. Because if you fall away from Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there's a good chance—I mean, it's practically certain—if you leave Kṛṣṇa consciousness and go back to material activity, you'll forget Kṛṣṇa, you'll take birth again. You want to be in the womb nine months and grow up and have childhood illnesses, go to school, and be bullied, and a teenager? No, we don't want to fall into illusion. "Please protect me from illusion." This is the real protection. He, "Never let me forget You." 

Surrender means: "I have no interest in this world. I've given—I've turned my back on this world. It's just You, Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa likes that; that feeling, you know? You're not holding on to something, maybe, maybe, maybe that, but not surrender. It's like Draupadī; they were trying to tear her sārī off. She held one hand up, trying to hold the one hand up, but the other hand, she is trying to hold the sārī. No, she let go of both hands, and then Kṛṣṇa protected her. Kṛṣṇa incarnated as her sārī—what an incarnation that is! Oh my God, Kṛṣṇa in the form of a sārī, a silk sārī. He is so amazing. Like this, you have to surrender like that. Don't hold on to anything in this world. "Kṛṣṇa, I am Yours. Kṛṣṇa, I am Yours." Then the relationship is very sweet. 

Do you know what? If you say, "Kṛṣṇa, I am Yours," you know what Kṛṣṇa says? "You are Mine." That is nature, that is love. Kṛṣṇa, "I am Yours," Kṛṣṇa says, "You are Mine." What else in this world can give that peace, satisfaction, and bliss? "You are Mine." Kṛṣṇa has a verse that states that—that's pretty heavy, you know. "Kṛṣṇa, I am Yours," "Well, you're Mine." Like, whoa. Is there something that confirms that? Yeah. 

> *sādhavo hṛdayaṁ mahyaṁ sādhūnāṁ hṛdayaṁ tv aham* 
> *mad-anyat te na jānanti nāhaṁ tebhyo manag api*

"The sādhus are always within the core of My heart, and I am always in the heart of the pure devotee. My devotees do not know anything else but Me, and I do not know anyone else but them." What a verse! Another tattoo. "The sādhus are always within the core of My heart," Kṛṣṇa says, "and I am always in the heart of the pure devotee. My devotees do not know anything else but Me, and I do not know anyone else but them." Wow. That's the essence of bhakti. That's love. Love is reciprocal; love is a two-way street. And Kṛṣṇa is proclaiming His love for those who are fully surrendered. "Kṛṣṇa, I am Yours," and "You are Mine." The echo comes, the echo, right? You see the echo, and you get the same thing back. But if you call out to Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual, "I am Yours," and "You are Mine," and the thunder goes [sound]. Thank you. 

Hearing such a verse, again, we've also touched on this—a devotee might get discouraged because Kṛṣṇa is speaking about His relationship with a high-level, pure, surrendered devotee. "What does that leave us as aspiring devotees?" Yes, "I'm so far from that stage. I'm so far from that goal. I've only got, you know, 40 years left, or 30 years left, or 10 years left, or five, you know, I'll probably never make it." But no, the pastime of how Prahlāda Mahārāja himself became a devotee, a pure devotee of the Lord, is very interesting and instructive and encouraging for all of us. And that's what I'd really like to share with you tonight. Of course, we don't generally think of him "becoming" a devotee; we know he's a nitya-siddha, he's an eternally liberated devotee. He is one of the 12 mahājanas on the authority of the science of devotional service. Like, "became a devotee"—it's always a devotee, as are all the other 11 mahājanas or authorities on Kṛṣṇa consciousness: the four Kumāras, Janaka, Balī, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and Yamarāja. But Prahlāda’s example in—quote-unquote—"becoming a devotee," coming from a fallen position, so to say, is much like Arjuna: a pure devotee and eternal friend of Kṛṣṇa, but he was purposefully put into illusion by the Lord. We discussed this, right? So that the Lord could speak the *Bhagavad-gītā*. He didn't just take a demon from somewhere from Pātāla—no, he put his devotee—he wants to be with his devotees, so he put Arjuna into illusion so that he could speak the *Bhagavad-gītā* for us. So, we don't think of Arjuna, you know, that he was in illusion, but yes, it was a pastime. So the same with Prahlāda. Prahlāda is an eternally liberated devotee, but for pastime's sake, for example, at one time he was very fallen—quote-unquote—and how he became a devotee is an amazing story. 

Where is that in scripture? This was one of the more important books in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, with various rules, regulations, etc. There's something like 12 volumes, 250 verses in each book; it's a lot. *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* gave great importance to this work. In his purport to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Adi-līlā, one verse, 35, he writes as follows: "The subject matter of the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* by Sanātana Gosvāmī was collected by Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī and is known as a Vaiṣṇava-smṛti." So this evening, I'd like to relate the deliverance, the deliverance of [one] as described in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, and hopefully, this pastime will give great hope and great faith for all of us who are on the path of—to put it poetically—the path of imperfection to perfection. But anyway, we're on the path of imperfection to perfection, or some modern terminology, we are works in progress. 

I'm going to use the Sanskrit verses from *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* just to give it, you know, make it go a little slow so we can digest it and give it authority. It is divided into different vilāsas; what is actions? So, we're going to study tonight the last, the 14th, the last... beginning with the verses from around 4.18 and 4.19. Begins by inquiring from Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, the Supreme Lord: "O Viṣṇu, I bow down to You, Nṛsiṁhadeva. I offer my obeisances to You. I am Your devotee. O Lord of lords, I now express to You my heartfelt inquiry. I want to inquire from You. O Lord, how did I develop such intense devotion for You? O my Lord, kindly tell me how did I become Your exalted devotee." "O greatly learned one, O my son, listen carefully as I explain to you. The reason for your devotion to Me that has made you very dear to Me is..." So, the Lord went on to say, "In the ancient times, you were born as a brāhmaṇa, but you did not study any of the scriptures. Your name was Vāsudeva, and unfortunately, later in life, you became attached to a prostitute." So many heart attacks, strokes—what He went through to deliver us. "So later in life you became attached to a prostitute," He says. "As a result, you became addicted to drinking wine and other sinful activities. Results: you spent most of your time at the house of the prostitute. One day, however, you and her quarreled." Boys, I'll just give you a little jump ahead a little bit: that was on Nṛsiṁhadeva's appearance day. They hadn't—they didn't know anything about it, but many devotees were celebrating Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva's appearance day. So, they quarreled on that day. 

"Appears again and again and again in this world." So, they're referring to some previous appearance of the Lord. So the Lord continued, "Because of that quarrel, you missed your meal that day, and as a result, you unknowingly fasted on a sacred day. You also didn't sleep the entire night. It is—the prostitute also didn't eat anything nor did she sleep that night in your association. And because of fasting and not sleeping on that day that others were celebrating My appearance, both of you became purified and accumulated heaps of pious merit." *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*. 

At least till He appears, at... dusk. So fast till dusk. You don't know what to do with all the heaps. And if you're not sure you want to do it, listen to this: "Yes, you should know, my dear Prahlāda, that on the strength of observing a vow on My appearance day, the demigods are able to enjoy their lives in the heavenly planets. Okay. Actually, in order to acquire the power to create, Brahmā observed fasting and not sleeping on this day. Being empowered due to observing this vow in relation to Me, Brahmā was able to create all moving and non-moving living entities." Whoa. What a fast. Who’s going to fast? We're not finished yet. "Mahādeva also observed this vow so that he could kill the great demon Tripurāsura. He fasted on Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day, got the power, Śiva, to kill Tripurāsura. Mahādeva, targets many other demigods, ancient sages, and learned and pious kings had previously followed this great vow in relationship to Me, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. By the influence of this vow, all of them attained the perfection of life, and thereafter it's right, great happiness within the three worlds. That is, my dear child, it is for this reason that this vow in relation to Me is celebrated throughout the three worlds." 

What does that mean? It means the appearance day is celebrated throughout the three worlds: the higher, middle, and lower planetary systems. That's how we understand it—not just here, you know, in Māyāpur and ISKCON temples; higher planets, lower planets, such a big celebration. Okay. He said, "This vow came into existence just to deliver fools and rascals." This vow came into existence just to deliver fools and rascals. You know, we consider ourselves fallen; we don't consider ourselves very advanced, so, you know, we consider ourselves a fool. Actually, Prabhupāda has that famous statement that, you know, "My spiritual master considered me a great fool," so we consider a fool, so good, because this vow can deliver a fool—and even worse than a fool is a rascal. 

Like this word "rascal." It is not so common in English anymore. The President of America, President Biden, is an elderly gentleman, so he kind of uses words from his youth, like in the, I don't know, the 30s or 40s. He says sometimes, "That's just malarkey." People go like, "What's malarkey?" I mean, silly. He says this word, "This is malarkey." Like, "Hello, Mr. President. Malarkey." Oh God. And "rascals," like that too. I think it was two years ago that I was in California, and my son was getting me a hotel near the temple because the temple was full. We called in and made a reservation, and when we got to the hotel, the guy said, "There's no room." Yeah, my son—when he went to gurukula when he was young in New Māyāpur, France—so they have these certain words in gurukula. He said, "You're just a rascal! All of you are rascals! You're just rascals!" And instead of getting angry, the man just started laughing. "What you call me a rascal? Like, we are... you like from the 1920s or something, kid? A rascal?" Nobody... who's... ah, they just laughed and just... that was it. Good luck. 

I'd like to work this slower, so that's how this—someone translated like this—"This vow of fasting on My appearance day came into existence to deliver fools and rascals." Yeah. "This is by the strength of that vow you started to render devotional service to Me. In her next life, the prostitute was born in heaven as an apsarā, and after enjoying life there immensely, she entered My supreme abode. It's because she fasted on the Nṛsiṁhadeva appearance day. She was an apsarā for one lifetime and then back home to..." Think the glories of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa are an exaggeration—is an offense. "Open, Prahlāda, you will also return to My abode and enter into intimate communion with Me." Please, we have an interruption here, looking for attention. Pneumonia, everyone knows that dog. She comes begging at every door in the Māyāpur community. That's why she's so fat. So the Lord said, "Those who observe the supreme vow in relation to Me will never return to this material existence, even in hundreds and millions of kalpas." California. So, such vows, rewarded with a specific vow on the appearance day of the Nṛsiṁhadeva, one might want to consider executing that vow. 

It means he wasn't conscious that he was following a vow. You want this? What's up? You're doing some devotional service, but you don't know you're doing it. Like we have our restaurants around the world, Govinda’s. People come, you know, because Hare Kṛṣṇa food tastes good. They don't know it's offered to the deities, and by taking it, they're taking prasāda, but they get the benefit. Just like if you're a layman, you don't know anything about medicine, you go to a doctor, he gives you medicine, you take it without knowing how it's working, but it's working. You know? Then he's so upset he couldn't sleep, and he said he couldn't eat—nothing to do with, you know, something transcendental, but because it was that day, and that day is so auspicious. It's such an auspicious day, and whatever you do, especially in the Dhāma, it's magnified a thousand times. Who is going to fast on Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day? 

So, this answered the questions: "How did I become Your devotee?" Explains. 

"Please display compassion towards me. Today I will observe this vow of Yours in full, and so kindly help me to complete it without any impediment." Take note here, the Prahlāda is saying, "You help me, because this is a difficult vow, so You help me to complete this vow. I can't do it on my own." This is the benefit of bhakti-yoga. The yogīs and the jñānīs, they practice their techniques, but very difficult to overcome this material nature, so they're on their own. But devotees, they have to help with Supreme strength, Kṛṣṇa Himself. But you have to ask for help. If they asked for it, like, "Hello, can You help me? Okay, thanks." This is... 

So, what did the Lord say? It's like singing, "My dear Prahlāda, on this auspicious day, one should rise early in the morning, brush his teeth, and then make a resolution to observe the vow strictly according to the prescribed rules and regulations while constantly remembering Me." How do we consider to remember the Lord? 

Details how to follow that day. Nuance. "Of these vows strictly according to all the rules and regulations and all day long remember Me." And then He goes on—would you like to hear more? Who'd like to hear more? Later, you should take... well, He says, "Later, a devotee should take his noon bath either in a river or at home." It means at noon you also have to bathe, or in a sacred [river] or a lake filled with lotus flowers. Now, we are writing this down, everyone. If you don't have a good memory, you should have a notebook. "Next, while taking his bath, the devotee should rub his body either with cow dung, clay, āmalakī fruit, sesame, or sesame seeds, which in and of themselves take away all sins." Is... 

So, who is going to rub their body on Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day with cow dung, sesame paste? Okay, that one takes away all sins. "Carry on with his daily rituals. Then, what? Should smear cow dung on the altar for worship and prepare a drawing of a lotus flower with eight petals on the top of the altar. In the middle of the lotus, one should install a copper pitcher decorated with jewels and place a container filled with rice paddy on top of that." Sanātana Gosvāmī is... "On top of that container, one should establish the deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁhadeva made of pure gold." Who is going to do that? Is... "Should then be bathed with five substances. Then one should first offer worship to you, Prahlāda, before worshiping Me. One should offer 16 ingredients for worship while chanting My holy names. And then what? One should offer pūjā to the deity of Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha while reciting the following prayers: 'O Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord [Nṛsiṁha], for Your satisfaction I now offer You divine, cool sandalwood paste mixed with camphor.'" 

Is... "I worship You along with Lakṣmī-Devī with offerings of flowers that bloom in spring and tulasī leaves. My humble obeisances are unto You. O Mahā-Viṣṇu, just to fulfill all My desires, I will worship You with an offering of black aguru, which is rarely available even for the devatās." 

"Destroys the darkness of ignorance as well as all sinful reactions. What obtains special power. Therefore, I offer this ghee lamp to You, O beloved Lord of Lakṣmī. I place before You these offerings with food; may You be pleased with the suffering and kindly remove all my sins." Agree here. "Then one should remain awake throughout the entire night while dancing, singing, playing musical instruments, reciting the Purāṇas, and listening to discussions of My transcendental glories." There's a challenge, is... "O Lord, Who lies on the bed of Ananta, O Lord of the universe, O Nṛsiṁhadeva, O husband of Lakṣmī, O destroyer of the devotees' fear, I am suffering from great distress due to drowning in the ocean of sinful activities and disease, so kindly lend me Your fearless hand and give me protection by mudrā." 

Is... "Wow. After worshiping the Lord and offering prayers to him in this way, I want you to immerse the deity into the water of the Ganges and then feed the ācārya sumptuously." It doesn't mean to throw away the deity, but you bathe the deity in Gaṅgā-jala. That's certainly possible here in my apartment, is... 

Svāmī... relate this pastime, interesting pastime of Prahlāda. Again, never think of him—he’s nitya-siddha—but to teach us, he accepted this. Why did you relate this pastime? Because as he was so-called fallen, we are fallen, and by performing the, taking the advice given in this scripture, we can become elevated. If you want, you have to want to be delivered. There's nothing left in this world; I want to go home, I'm out of here. Is... And again, don't think that, "Oh, these pastimes of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva that I'm sharing with you, they took place billions of years ago. How do they relate to modern times? Come on, this is something in the past, you know, this is modern day. How do these, how does this relate now?" 

Well, listen to what Prabhupāda says at that same lecture I quoted earlier in the class. Where Prabhupāda said, "In my absence, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva will protect you," he also said the following in that lecture, how we can relate to Nṛsiṁhadeva in modern times: "Both ways, Kṛṣṇa is protecting Viṣṇu. You can see He's got four hands, He's carrying śaṅkha and cakra. He has two businesses: to give protection to the devotees and to kill the demons. But the result is one: He does good to the demons by killing them, and He does good to the devotees by giving them protection." So, Prabhupāda was speaking in present tense, not past tense. Svāmīs, my dear Godbrother, the Guru Svāmī's new book about how the Juhu project, the Temple of Rādhā-Rāsabihārī, was established by Prabhupāda—really, um, he spent several years writing this book about how Prabhupāda had established a temple in Bombay at the time in Juhu Beach. The person who owned the land, his name was Mr. Nair. At... so he was a bit of a rascal, "rascal," not a malarkey—and he sold the land but did it in such a way that he still owned the land, you know? The deed was not signed properly. So as soon as he got the money, he claimed the land back. 

And as the devotees were trying to establish some, you know, structure for Rādhā-Rāsabihārī—we already Prabhupāda had already gotten beautiful deities of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—he said, "I'll build you a temple." So he started some simple construction, but this Mr. Nair had big connections, and he sent the goondas, and they destroyed the structure and tried to destroy the deities and beat up the devotees. Is a big girl, long beautiful hair, she stood in the front of the deities when all these men came with wooden sticks and iron rods to beat her and to break the deity. She stood like this to give her life. And then he grabbed her and they dragged her off the altar—improvised altar—they dragged her off their altar by her hair. She's a big girl; they dragged her by her hair out into the dust. Ian is... and some life member at that time who was on our side, he had called the police, and they arrived just in time that they didn't break the deities and devotees were hurt, but nothing seriously, because, you know, writing so many unfavorable newspaper articles, you know, in the newspapers, and some people were forced, some people were against us, and went into the courts, the big battles, so much money... 

[He] was right at the helm of the fight; he was right out in front trying to protect, you know, us and the temple, and it was a big fight. Is... so one year Prabhupāda—I think he was in New York, I think, in his room with one of his servants—whoever was on the other line was calling from from Bombay. "Set up into Prabhupāda, him." Prabhupāda went, "Hmm." Put the phone down, and he turned to his servant; he said, "Mr. Nair has died of a heart attack." And then under his breath, you know, that servant could hear Prabhupāda said, "I pray to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to take care of him, to deal with him in such a way." It's... it's flourishing. I was there the other day, thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of millions of people have come there. Prabhupāda had this vision. So, he prayed to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, and Prabhupāda—Mr. Nair got some benefit, just like Hiraṇyakaśipu did, because whatever the Lord and His pure devotee do, ultimately, it's ultimately for our benefit. 

So all these pastimes we related today—the ancient and the and and the modern and all the śāstric references—put our our minds at ease that if we fully surrender, even if we can't fully surrender, if we give it our best, even as aspiring devotees, protection will be there, because this movement has to go on. Vegetarian—even though all of you and all the members of this International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness are very dear to the Lord, because to spread the sankīrtana movement, He came and left, and you're His representatives in modern times; you're carrying on His mission. So that mission is very dear to the heart of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, very dear to the heart of Prabhupāda. And if whatever sacrifice you make on their behalf, in many ways—to be a cook, to be a temple manager, to be a pūjārī, to be a saṅkīrtana devotee, to render to to raise children—this is all, "many hands make small work," this is all facility. The work is going on, the preaching is going on; you're very dear to the Lord. Therefore, you qualify for protection. 

Um, I know some mishap happens, and you think, "Oh, the Lord is just trying to teach me a lesson, to be detached, detached from this material world, that's all." Yes. But again, our prayer is that we never forget the lotus feet of our spiritual master, we never forget the lotus feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the Vaiṣṇavas, our ācāryas, our beloved deities; we... this is foremost in our mind. And if that's the case, you never know when death will come; death is always unexpected, but if we're in that mood, then Kṛṣṇa will bless us, take us to our next destination as per His desire. A good example of a devotee who was always under the protection of the Lord, but as time comes, we have to leave, but for—he gave his life to the service of this mission, of Mahārāja, and therefore when he was leaving his body, according to His Holiness, his last word was, "Mission." I'm so proud of him. "Mission." Yes. So, we'll speak again tomorrow on the glories of um Nṛsiṁhadeva and His um pure devotee, Prahlāda Mahārāja, and maybe something more on Hiraṇyakaśipu; it's all connected, day.""