"*00281*.*
"### The Power of Sound

Many audiences, even those who profess something in the presence of our political movements, often show gracious stage laughter. I hope that is not due to my being a little late. Lady Beryl likes that, and what goes into an extra little late? I was saying to the devotees that we will be late now, so I should probably just give a really short class, and we can get ready for kīrtana. I was thinking, I remembered a very personal, short contact by one of my god-brothers, perhaps, and also in Śrīdhāma Māyāpur—a very good creature, Henderson. So, the lecture is 45 minutes, while remaining in Krishna consciousness or knowledge. I remember that, in one temple, we have our annual life members festival over here. Guru-kṛpā he was asked to be the leader; he really pleased them. Now, heba subrosa—don’t remember that, it wasn't a really good report—so then he’s out there for a few months. The cost, as I said in my class, she will evoke a complete clearance, and we did these fourteen words: the only reality is chanting "Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, hare hare."

Thank you. And actually, he stood up and he’ll be at the office and get this job done, and sat down with the Provost. I can’t even take a bath, but I wanted to. I tell them really short bursts; remember they have to suit up, and I’ll speak briefly, and then we’ll continue to have kīrtana time, because we have in our temple one of our most famous, really, the competition of the morning right here. Come, because well, you know, how did you hear that I was the advance—it’s not a sūtra, a delicate lexicon. They have to suit, but many of the ślokas are not enough to suit or appropriate. A sūtra, as many of you know, is like a summary of a philosophical point or summarizing the flow of other parts of the Vedic scriptures. It summarizes the vast literature of the Vedas. To actually study all the individual, I lived on one side one time; we’d take three lifetimes. So, we have the first algorithm, the Vedānta-sūtra; he knows, *athāto brahma jijñāsā*. They often quote the pilgrim and announce, especially to the new devotees, "Now then, you will come to the human form of life." Now, the time of realization is that this is really quite a commitment—addressing a new audience, taking advantage of life, self-realized, accommodated, and unalloyed devotional service. It comes from the Fourth Canto, fourth chapter, 22nd śloka of the Vedānta-sūtra, and be prepared—it is very short because it is a sowing form, *avado*.

Sometimes you get verses from the Fifth Canto that you can minister, recite: *oṁ tat sat*. And *atman* means one who does that, or one who is free, or it could be further said by transcendental sound. We have interacted, and conversely, by mundane sounds, by all those sounds which are almost unlimited, we become conditioned. This is our situation. One time in the city—you see, I’m probably, many of my disciples have heard this, but it is recommended—this verse is taking initiative. We were at the Hyderabad farm in 1974, initiating that program openly, the farming community outside of Hyderabad. We were there, I think, for two and a half days. In those days, Prabhupāda didn't encourage us to take airplanes; it was very cruel. And the distance was meant to go there by bus. So, we took the train for a couple of days, and I was exhausted. It was coming close to the time; by the time we got there, we were all tired and sick from eating samosas on platforms. So, Prabhupāda had the morning program, and he walked out to the field and sat under a banyan tree. The local villagers came, so Prabhupāda took the opportunity to speak to them, and not to us. They were in Krishna consciousness; he was always looking for the opportunity to spread Krishna consciousness. So, he began speaking in Hindi, and it was very warm, and I was tired and cold in Hindi, so gradually I fell asleep during the darsana. As I was sleeping, I think I started to snore. Prabhupāda spoke to me, "Why are you sleeping when the spiritual master is speaking?" And from the depths of my illusion... I won’t go on. Prabhupāda was staring straight at me and repeated the questioning: "A disciple should not sleep when the spiritual master is speaking, *divya-jñāna*, transcendental knowledge." I think I began to shake. I said to Prabhupāda, "I am so sorry," and I searched for an excuse, which I shouldn't do; I should just accept the chastisement as mercy. And I said, "Prabhupāda, the problem is I don’t speak Hindi, I speak English." He said, "That is not an excuse. He said, 'This is *divya-jñāna*, it is transcendental sound. Even though you don’t speak Hindi, it will help you stay awake, young man.' Those sounds—this transcendental sound has the effect of awakening the fallen conditioned soul because it is very powerful. It can’t be equated with a material sound."

Just understanding its origin, to explore to see, potentially, something to live. Just an idea what they are like—you don’t mind the kind of student—you don’t understand who they are, really, from anything, English or Hindi or "I’m from India," "I’m from Australia." Then you kind of get an understanding what a person could be like. You can understand something to some degree, right? So, what is the origin of transcendental sound? That we get an idea from a beautiful poem or a song by an ardent Vaishnava, who, along with the Sankirtana, would add to the disappearance of the popular category. He wrote deep transcendental knowledge in simple ways for the common people, Kṛṣṇa-dāsa. And he said one time, "Where has this Sankirtana movement, which means the chanting of mantras, specifically the transcendental sound, come from?" It has to come from somewhere. Is it in this material creation? Maybe we’ll give it some credence that it comes from the higher planets or pious living entities, as well? We are like halfway on the scale, if the higher planets, the middle planetary systems, and the lower planets. So, you are situated in one of these planetary systems. If you are a pious and the highest, so the most pious living entities, they take birth not on the heavenly ones, but extraordinary, so to come from there? All that is still within the material realm. The Devas are elevated, but they still maintain some material desires. So, it has to come from Vaikuṇṭha, specifically Goloka, the highest planet in the spiritual world, with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in his original form. It is Goloka, Lord engages in five types of rāsa, exchanges of love with his pure devotees. The highest source, the highest goal that any of the jīvas here comes from, it doesn't come from below. It comes from above, to this world, to here. That is the origin.

So, just from that, we can understand the nature of *śabda-brahma*, transcendental sound. From a material point of view, sound has great potency. We don’t think about it very much; we are very busy with our affairs and also philosophical and political, but the sages, the guru, the śāstras, they enlighten us that sound is critical. For example, if you are listening to the radio and turning the dial, and you have just gotten up in the morning, and you go, "Okay, here comes another day," kind of in a neutral mode, not so much affected by anything. And then there’s a sad song—the song is a song about the people whose hearts are broken. You know, there’s some of these songs, it’s a standard scenario about meeting or loving or losing her, most of the songs are about that misery. And then you listen to that; the blues music moves certain chords, like minor chords. Those musicians, D minor, A minor, you know, they use these different chords for shades of mood—lamentation. Usually, misery loves company, you know; you are nearing the end, you are thinking, "Well, she left me, or he left me, or this tragedy happened." You know, this is life, *padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ*. There are problems at every step of life; it is just a reality. Prabhupāda points out to us to take the spiritual. So, you hear that song, you sit down, and you are off the world; you are taking your computer, they are taking your coffee, and there is a sad song, just lamenting. Why? Because the sound changed your consciousness. And then they begin the song, they turn the dial, and there’s an upbeat song. And it was John Lennon who said, "Take a sad song and make it better." That changes the song and makes it better.

Your government took a sad song, "Make it better." So, the different sound comes up, a different topic: "Here Comes the Sun." "Here comes the sun... it’s alright." You know, Travis, who recently wrote a book about George Harrison and the history of the Krishna consciousness movement, and George Harrison’s dedication—also here in England, how that song was actually written by George Harrison in glorification of Śrīla Prabhupāda. George told him he wrote a song, "Here Comes the Sun," saying it directly to those who know him. So, then, by sound, your whole consciousness changes. So powerful is sound. Then you turn the dial a little bit further and you come to the political drama here in England right now, with Mrs. Thatcher, the political situation, and then you hear there is something going on here. I don't know that I agree with it, but it is by the sound, material sound. In the material sound, there are three categories: ignorance, passion, and mundane goodness. Goodness in this world is a stepping stone towards transcendence, but it also has its conditioning, and often those who are in knowledge or even humanitarians, or, you know, good people, they are attached to that. They identify with some that they may become proud of, this community. But then, there is something beyond mundane goodness; there is the pure goodness which we are meant to live in, which has no instability. Well, our full attention is as students of the words given to the beautiful Deities and the spiritual master—selflessness, our original constitutional position—that is transcendental. So, sound has a potency. And even material sound, spiritual sound is more powerful than matter. We have our bodies, which are made of dense material: earth, air, fire, water, and everything, the dense materials, subtle matter. They are heavy, especially as you go older, and changes into separate ones, we are heavy. But they are the active principles. The *ātmā* itself, the *ātmā* or the soul, is the tiny spark of spirit or soul that moves this mass of material energy, not to speak of like a hippopotamus or an elephant. They are big, but the *ātmā* is very tiny, hardly, you know, one ten-thousandth of the tip of a hair. It is the soul of it.

So, spirit analytically is more powerful. So, material civilization can be solved, but consciousness is, day in and day out, twirling us between modes of ignorance, modes of passion, mundane goodness, and goodness and passion and ignorance. We are being, we are being actually just thrown, you know, their bodies, different modes of nature and perceptions and ideals and goals. It’s all done by sound. It conditions us to think we are the body, to think, "This is my family, this is my country, this is my society," as everyone else is. The goal of my life, the stratification, "get ahead, be successful." It’s all done by sound; it conditions us. So, in the same way, to the same, even transcendental sound has the opposite effect. It detaches you from those false concepts. In other ways, it is like a magnet. A magnet has two potencies; listen to that—a big magnet. It can, it could attract another metallic object. When I was a kid, it was one of the first games, like, you know, we have five or six in your school, and then you study the, you know, the beginning of these things—promising to the magnet, "Wow."

If you turn the magnet around, what happens? It repels a metallic object, to the same degree, the force of attraction and the force of repulsion, and people depending on the size of the magnet—big, middle, or small. So, in the same way, material sound conditions us, and that is causing us to take birth after birth in this world, which means birth, disease, old age, and death. And the spiritual sound has the opposite effect, equally in mercy to turn it, even more, to catch this one, like the *śrī-guru*—to remind us we really are humble servants of the Lord. So, you have to make a choice. There are two paths that you can follow in this world: *pravṛtti-mārga* and *nivṛtti-mārga*. *Pravṛtti-mārga* means the path of material attachment, and the *nivṛtti-mārga* is the path of renunciation—negating any attachment, service of the lotus feet. And you can analyze both; you take the high road, I’ll take the low road—you’ll go to heaven, and I’ll go to hell. There are two paths: one of sense gratification, which leads to frustration, and one of renunciation, which is really having ultimate happiness, devotional service. So, we have the choice. Therefore, you see that those, and notice I said "mantra," transcendental sound—they try to hear those mantras, that chant is disturbing; they try to hear those mantras as much as they can on a daily basis. That’s why Śrīla Prabhupāda, he asked us to chant sixteen rounds, because we are very polluted, so we need to be purified of all these misconceptions, all these sounds we hear as we are going up—nursery rhymes—it’s just a cute way of getting attached to the soul. Then we become teenagers, and you have our bands, you know—I would sound really old, quoting the bands that I listen to, let’s go, whatever, you know—but you listen to, and all the songs without attachment, mundane, separation, politics, and this subtly contaminates. And then old age, yes, we are just surrounded; the conditioning is very deep, very, very deep. So, to purify, it is the essence of transcendental sounds, the Mahā-mantra. Mantra—every mantra has a particular potency; it unleashes a certain energy or power of realization in the heart. The chanter, we just... how deep is that? We know the science of the mantra, so many mantras that do help us in so many ways. But Mahā-mantra means "the great chant for deliverance." You don't need really to chant any of the other mantras because this mantra contains the benefits of all the others, plain and simple. This is the mercy of the yuga-avatāra, Caitanya, knowing our laziness in this life, knowing our determination is weak, knowing we sometimes listen to those old songs to hype us. Yes, as I travel, sometimes to different parts of the world, nowadays everything at the airport is also very much listening to the way going on. Sometimes I would walk around the temple or the place, and I decided, "You are working on a tape; I’ll put it in my ear." You rascal! I really like the Beatles, and I do.

Although I would know so differently, because old habits die, but we have to understand: what is drinking poison willingly? It’s not out of the old interest; it was the interest of the old self which at one time to realize and now it’s not what we want it to be. We want it to be the devotee that we hear about in good conferences, when we meet in the association of Vaishnavas, when you are wanting for our presence amongst us. So, we have made this conviction, "Yes, I have to be like that." But old habits die hard; they are real moments. Therefore, we put the headphones on when I know, gratification and secrecy, cheating. But Prabhupāda understood our weaknesses, and he was always encouraging us to keep trying. I met one Muslim priest friend of mine in Mumbai. We were discussing our societies and he said, "Swamiji, in your movement, does it do—sometimes people break the principles?" "Oh, yeah," I said. He laughed; he said, "Yes?" I said, "Really?" He said, "Yes." I said, "What do you do?" He said, "We tell them, 'If you fall down eight times, pick yourself up nine times,' but never stay down." So, Prabhupāda made it a little more strict. He said, "Krishna can forgive it once or twice," but he said, "Three times, again, you are not being sincere, this serious." So, one of our weaknesses is this sound—the memories of the past, or the enchantment of a film, a movie, you know, these are all the ghosts of the past, and they have to be disciplined. We have to be determined. We had an American, some years ago, there was a government campaign to stop drug addiction amongst the youth. He says it’s an epidemic, it still is. So, the government began the campaigns to try to encourage the users to give it up. So, you know, they said, when you are approached by someone to sell you the drugs, the model of the campaign was, "Just say no." You know, the temptation may be there, and you just say no. But sometimes, how you say no because you are weak? Krishna gives a hint in the Gītā; he says, "Prabhupāda, the principle is ultimately, if you have the higher taste, you can gradually improve over time to come to be settled in the *tattva-jñāna*." You can only give up something if you get something better. And we, dear devotees, in such an unalloyed society, we have the best of the best. We have the best philosophy, we get the best food, the best association, we have the best God, so cool and awesome and lovable. We have the best places to go on vacation, and in our daily... we have the best, but the essence of the essence, the dust of the dust, the chanting of Krishna’s names, that is all there in the chanting of the Lord’s holy names, *additional, additional*.

So you will see they also have utilized that. What am I going to realize? That our faithful to the guru, faithful to their vows—don't make promises you cannot complete. Those other faiths, they may not have the realization, they are still struggling, but they have something to cling to. I asked the operation, the song, my good friend, whose department I asked him, I said, "What is the most important quality of—because I eventually got to do some initiation, so I was at—he was inexperienced, so looking at a disciple, or not judging, but considering a disciple—for example, the second initiation, I said, "What is the most important quality?" Cleanliness, true faithfulness. So, the most important quality is that; it is goodness, faithfulness.

The one who has full faith and fairness in the path that will perform and acknowledge the revealed truth.

So, even if we have temptation, which we do because we have to be honest—or our American expertise—we can overcome those temptations by our faith in our spiritual master, my preceptor. For the disciple, the spiritual master is the dust on the books of the Amarites. This is why you choose someone as your spiritual master, because he is the one who inspires you to practice the teachings, and by his example to follow in the best amongst the devotees. I mean, there are many wonderful devotees, but by Krishna’s arrangement, we have this hierarchy: the preceptor takes charge of this in God-consciousness, for the state, and inspires his life. It is for a true devotee because his interest is that we become pure devotees and go back to Godhead. He is taking the time in your nature to aspire, simple evidence. We must remain faithful and therefore we can... I know how that chanting is working. How can we know? We are still infants in spiritual life. But every Prabhupāda works—Krishna says so, guru says so, śāstra says so, *sādhu* says so—they must work. One time, my god-sister, she has her... "Prabhupāda, please don’t be offended, but is it really true that God, the supreme controller, creator, maintainer, destroyer, everything—in the form of a cowherd boy, yogurt in his hand, playing and gluing, dancing with the gopīs, wrestling in the sand—that is really what was called *vedānta*? Because now, this head office in Bombay, do you think I would believe you? Do you think I would believe you?" No, sir-ee bob! So, guru, śāstra, and sādhu—all glorification behind—and remove all the sinful reactions that have accumulated in the hearts of millions of lives. It uproots those formative desires which caused those actions with bad karmic results, and eventually, it makes the *ātmā* clean. What person would not take up the process of the Holy Name? Right mind, compact—well, they are not in their own mind because they are in the wrong direction. But who would not sincerely take up their processes and surround themselves as much as possible by that divine mantra? In our lineage, for example, the *śikṣāṣṭakam* is in an unalloyed—they were so realizing the glories of the Holy Name, so attached to their chanting, and having experienced the highest realization of God through tears—tears were flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain—I am feeling a separation, all the bhāva in the world. In your office, expression of divine love; that is basically all they wanted to do. But they had to maintain the service, and whatever they had to write, consulted. But they were chanting very often, 22 hours a day. That, in itself, says something. What sound vibration can you chant for more than one day? Can you chant for more than one hour? Or do you take... not you, but the public takes their favorite song, just reads now, coming out, you know, new CDs or albums, and traveling on a daily basis, back and, everyone—I just say, you take your favorite song, you sing it for two hours, six hours, for eight hours, three days, for three months, for three years—you’re cuckoo! As much as you love that, it will become your enemy because it is mundane. But you take this: "Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna," it is the opposite. It is the totally opposite. It is truly, his spiritual life is the opposite, that is really the spiritual life is temporary for billions and suffer, and spiritual life is eternal, knowledge and bliss. It is as simple as just turning the channel. What is my name to be? To a channel, the episode which is the... I’ve actually had thought his... the devotee is still—like that—they had a serious interest, one below. He chants not in the temple, he is going to separate, to enliven later. He is a little... I heard about him and I just wanted his association. Under the services, supported by the association of a great soul, one can make big strides on the path of self-realization. So he, at Govardhan, I heard he was chanting all day and night, 22 hours. So I decided to go meet him. I had to go to the Braja, he came to this little hut. There he was, big... people, you know, I hate thinking this, but he greeted me, but he was, you know, he was fixed on his goal—to go back to Godhead by chanting mantra. And it got to be the evening. So, I said, "Baba, can I speak to you?" "Bring it on." I guess that’s the way he was speaking to me—"Higher on chant." The party came time to eat something, and some of the villagers... these sādhus, their only business is spiritual life, and the local people appreciate that, appreciate that example, the identity to them. So they bring food regularly. The sādhus don’t even do *madhukarī*; they don't even bother to go to four or three or four houses during the day. Whatever food you are given in charity, that’s all you will be; they don’t even do that. They are so fixed in their... the people come to them and give them something to eat, they take a little, continues. So, while he was eating, for twenty minutes: "Can I speak to you? It is my business, Baba, I have some questions." I had attended—"Guess you can ask, but do it quickly." I said, "How do you do it?" He said, "How do we get, you know, some...?" I said, "There are problems in your life." He said, "Only if you want them." Really, what he said, "Is that true?" He said, "Yes." I said, "Very often." What? "A big cobra is coming, a king cobra, and he is disgusting. Every time he comes, he slides over, he goes into the kitchen, he comes in, and he slinks out." He’s telling me, "My taking shelter of Krishna, so when he comes, I chant Hare Krishna, not because..." And I could see that this, his chanting was, you know, he was so absorbed—it was every syllable, there are thirty-two syllables, and he chanted them slowly. He wasn’t trying to finish his mala; this was all he did. And I thought I’d like to be like that, too. But in a sense, Prabhupāda’s directions: we are—because we are neither chanting the holy names or serving the holy names—my spiritual heroes, book distributors, festival-goers, raising children, when they take off where we leave off, or businessmen revealing donations, publishing books, all sankirtana. It is all part of Lord Caitanya’s process, the infrastructure to spread the cause. So, I was thinking, I would like to be like him, but by Prabhupāda’s grace, we have the same opportunity. Our lives revolve around the chanting: "Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare."

That was palpable. Krishna, barring to self, Krishna chanting comics, Krishna and I, and the tomato salad. There are a few great souls who live in isolation and do like that; that would be great, if, although not practical for us. So, therefore, Prabhupāda was given the congregation. And, as you could say, the congregational is even more potent, more perfect, and most perfect in the sense that we all come together and we are influenced by each other’s transcendental mood. You might feel a little weak that day, when you get caught up and enthusiastic here, some of others, and you are also chanting from your life. A stick may be weak, but you put it together with many sticks and it becomes strong. So, this is the principle of coming together as a congregation, and we must do that. As Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, whenever I hear the sound of the mṛdaṅga, the drum, with the tinkling of the karatalas, and the kīrtana begins, he says, "The joy in my heart knows no bounds. Ah, if your time, the chanting, the glorification, the divine couple Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, lords of my life—this is my life, as servant, let me run to that kīrtana and chant with you." Where did you go? We should take the opportunity, especially for the congregation—it is more powerful. Probably... probably not—one of my drivers is giving exactly. So, just like if you have some grievance with the local town council, and you go out, calling a meeting in the building and you go out and say, "Hey, you guys, since you are not giving us permission for dancing here..." "So, yes, and who’s going to listen to you? It is close to the reference, calling police..." But if you organize a civil disobedience movement, like Caitanya Mahāprabhu did 500 years ago, the Kazi said, "Stop this sankirtana movement." He organized thousands and thousands—you read in the śāstra, they even say millions—with torches, and they are all going with one voice, "No, we don’t accept!" "Yes, let us see." Okay, because it started shaking, "Okay, he came down." Oh, we are relatives, realize something, "You can go, understand." So, the same way, we are trying—chanting means what? "My dear Lord, my dear beloved Lord, I feel like, please pick me up in this world and attach me as an atom at your lotus feet." It politically means re-engage me. That, so, I was lost in billions in the goodness of Lexus, I am so happy in this world, just so much mercy of your lotus feet, please, the mercy, mercy, mercy! So, you say that, but when we are neophytes, sometimes it is not sincere. We get this... we come together with one voice, and Krishna can hear, because this is the... you come all together, saying, "Hey!"

And this is the purport to this śloka of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, that by transcendental sound, we don’t have to search for sounds or go to the Vedas and choose a mantra which we think is... but this process of Krishna consciousness is authorized. It’s been brought by the Lord. So, chanting japa, serious topic. One time, my god-brother, acoustic Krishna, he was Prabhupāda’s secretary, he was chanting with Prabhupāda, japa in the room, and he was saying, "Krishna... efficiency... are you on it? All, all, this is what you’re doing." "Attending on, no, you are not, you are not repeating all the syllables, they are the duty to your chanting, thirty, whatever, twenty-eight, what you mean? Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Hare Rama..." The detailed instruction, attention to detail—Prabhupāda’s time is the sign of love. When you are worshiping the Deity, then you want to express—if you are worshiping the Deity and you want to make sure that every little flower is in the right place, the jewel is there, and the offering is the right amount of sugar, and, you know, color combination is perfect—because this is love. If you love someone, you want your love to be expressed in the detail, that your relationship with your service. And the same is true in Krishna consciousness. We need transcendental love, and what is my name to that which is trying to control? Attention to detail means we are doing the most important activity—chanting. The most important instruction of the spiritual master, again, in the end, 16 rounds—we want to make sure if we’re going to do anything right, that’s what we should do. If we are going to do something, my father’s estate, we are going to do something, you’ll do it right—you know, boiling water, painting, yeah—if you can do it, then do it right. That is an absolute construction of Krishna consciousness, because we are doing something for the pleasure of Krishna, to express the purpose of awakening. It all begins, the culmination comes in this transcendental sound, and it is today.

What, four hours like, rather long? So I am going to turn the show over now—sideshow—I am going to share a nectar of your association class, because I spoke for 22 to 25 minutes. So, I am going to ask the... to lead us in kīrtana. And let me tell you, I’ve been traveling together for almost five years, and every time we leave, it’s like heaven on earth. "Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven." That’s the Bible, I think, by the time... Yes, some, just, it’s just magic. Jamuna devi, she will speak about the magic of those magic moments of Krishna consciousness. Every time that I leave, it’s kind of... it’s 10, they always pick... so fast... electrons... 10 million. I regard, and now I will allow my kīrtana leader to do the same, to that, with your best, and lead in kīrtana, Krishna. Thank you so much.""