"*00284*.*
"All right, Kṛṣṇa, everyone. A very, very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of the twelve forests of Śrī Vṛndāvana, and let us begin: *viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale...* So, we are continuing with our grand tour around the 60 billion holy places in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Hopefully, in the long run, we will discover who we are as eternal spirit souls, what our very intimate loving relationship is with Kṛṣṇa, and someday, how we fit into the Vṛndāvana pastimes by the sheer power of His grace. Of course, for now, we are content just to know that in principle, we are simply servants of the Lord. There is that very famous verse from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 20, verse 108: *jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya—kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’*. It is the living entity's constitutional position to be an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa because he is the marginal energy of Kṛṣṇa and a manifestation simultaneously one with and different from the Lord. So, after millions of lives of forgetfulness—that’s a lot to comprehend—we can take great satisfaction in knowing and realizing that we are servants of the Lord.

I was reading the other day that after Hanumān had been captured while on his secret mission to find Sītādevī in Laṅkā, he was brought before Rāvaṇa and a large assembly of his very demoniac ministers. As Hanumān, bound by ropes and chains, was forcibly brought into that assembly hall, everyone—all the demons—were stunned to see that he was no ordinary monkey. "This is not some ordinary monkey," they were thinking, because they could see: although monkeys are quite *cañcala* (restless), it’s described this monkey, Hanumān, was quite sober. And although monkeys are generally quite dirty and impure, Hanumān was *param*, and *param* means extremely pure and very clean. And although monkeys are quite foolish, Hanumān was—it means foremost amongst *jñānīs*, foremost amongst knowledgeable persons. Now everyone was taken aback, but the person who was most astonished was Rāvaṇa, the ten-headed demon. So he said to Hanumān, "Who are you, oh monkey?" 

Now, it’s really interesting: when questioned like this, Hanumān became puzzled. How is that? Well, it’s written because he is not used to thinking about himself; he only thinks of Lord Rāma. There’s that famous verse: to always remember the Lord and never forget the Lord. So that’s Hanumān; he always remembers Rāma and never forgets Rāma. He said to Rāvaṇa, "Sir, you’re asking who I am? I think it’s better if you ask me who is Lord Rāma. Like that, I can speak for nine days straight. I think it’s better you ask me who is Lord Rāma; like that, I’ll speak for nine days straight." 

Rāvaṇa was not happy with that answer, so I was reading he roared—Rāvaṇa roared—"You foolish furry beast, tell me who are you! If you cannot answer this question, I will have you killed immediately." So Hanumān, he thought for a moment, but again, because he never thinks of himself—he only thinks about Lord Rāma—he didn’t know what to reply. But scriptures say because his life depended on it, and in his mind even more importantly, rescuing Sītā also depended on it, Lord Rāma came to his rescue. There’s that famous verse in the Rāmāyaṇa, my Lord Rāma speaking: "It is My vow that if one only once seriously surrenders unto Me, saying, 'My dear Lord, from this day on I am Yours,' and prays to Me for courage, I shall immediately award courage to that person, and he will always remain safe from that time on." *Jaya Śrī Rām!*

So, Lord Rāmacandra, in Hanumān's heart, inspired Hanumān to look down at his hand where he was holding the jewel which Lord Rāma had given him to give to Sītā. The idea being that if Hanumān, a big monkey, came before Sītā, she would be afraid, but Rāma said, "Show her this jewel which belongs to Me, and she’ll understand that you’re My servant coming to rescue her." So he’s holding this jewel. 

So at that very moment, he’s looking at the jewel in his hand; inspired by Lord Rāma, Sītādevī appeared in that jewel. Sītādevī appeared in the jewel, and she spoke to Hanumān and told him how to reply to Rāvaṇa's question. So, Hanumān, smiling broadly and raising both arms in the air, he loudly proclaimed to Rāvaṇa and his hordes of rākṣasas and demons, he said, "Yes, I know who I am! I know who I am!" Then he said, *dāso ’ham*—famous—"I am the servant of Rāma, who is the Lord of Kośala." Kośala is actually the name of the entire kingdom of Lord Rāmacandra—Kośala—and Ayodhyā is the capital city. So, "I am the servant of Rāma, who is the Lord of Kośala." 

Hearing that, Rāvaṇa—the word used is he became disgusted—and he said, "What? You’re a servant? You’re a slave? Seeing you, I assumed you would be the king of some place, the master of many, but you’re nothing more than a mere servant!" So it’s so nice, at that point Hanumān started laughing very loudly, and he said to Rāvaṇa, "Sir, please look at yourself and try to realize you are also a servant. You’re a servant of *kāma* (lusty desires), you’re a servant of anger, you’re a servant of greed. In fact, you are the ignoble servant of merciless masters, and I, Hanumān, I am the humble servant of a most glorious master." *Jaya Śrī Rām! Jaya Sītā Rām!* 

And because he successfully answered Rāvaṇa's question, "Who are you?", Rāvaṇa couldn’t carry out his challenge to kill Hanumān. All he could do was order his rākṣasas to light Hanumān's tail on fire, which ironically led to his entire kingdom being burnt to the ground. That’s a wonderful pastime in the Rāmāyaṇa.

So, as Hanumān took great satisfaction in realizing who he was and glorified Lord Rāma with his words, we also take great satisfaction in the words of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* that we are all eternal servants of Lord Kṛṣṇa. And so we will take great pleasure in recounting more of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes with His devotees today in our lecture—pastimes that take place in our beloved Vṛndāvana. *Śrī Vṛndāvana kī jaya!* 

So, I would like to share with all of you a very, very beautiful pastime that took place just after the coronation of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as Queen of Vṛndāvana. I wasn’t planning this; I just was reading last night and I came across this pastime, and I said, "This is very appropriate to give as the next lecture." So this pastime took place in an enchanting forest called Karṇavana, Karṇavana, where Kṛṣṇa and His friends disguised themselves so that they could personally witness the workings of the new Queen Rādhārāṇī's government administration in this particular forest, Karṇavana.

In his *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa*, which we haven't quoted for a while, our beloved Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī gives a *praṇāma-mantra* for this particular forest. I found it in Chapter 11, verse 20: *karṇāya yaśa-kīrti-svarūpiṇe namaḥ*. He says, "Obeisances to the personification of good fame, obeisances to Karṇavana, which bestows piety and benedictions." Good place to visit. And as he so often does, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī then recommends the best time to visit this auspicious forest. He says, *bhādra-śukla-tṛtīyāyāṁ gatvā karṇavanaṁ śubham*. He actually quotes the Skanda Purāṇa; he says the Skanda Purāṇa says that one should visit Karṇavana on the third day of the bright fortnight of the month of Bhādra.

Now our ācāryas describe this particular forest, Karṇavana, in a very beautiful way. They say that it is, and I quote, "a complex of perpetually flowering groves." In other words, this forest is made of many groves of flowers; a complex of perpetually flowering groves, it means they’re growing during all the six seasons in Śrī Vṛndāvana. And here’s the ācāryas' detailed analysis—a little technical, but it’s really nice—about Karṇavana: "Karṇavana has an outer ring of 16 flower groves that encompass an inner ring of eight flower groves. A towering, majestic flower palace stands at the center—a palace of flowers. The entire enclosure is encircled by a thick hedge of flowering trees and bushes, with only one opening, an archway of multicolored creepers." So in effect, they’re saying that one ācārya says Karṇavana is literally a flower fortress. We hear of fortresses, you know, big stone fortresses and wooden fortresses, steel fortresses—this is a flower fortress.

So the day after her coronation as Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Queen of Vṛndāvana, Rādhā and her new administration of gopīs took shelter from the midday sun in these immense flower groves of Karṇavana. And Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was still in her royal dress: wearing a flowing cape, golden slippers, a regal crown, and decorated with strands of necklaces and brilliant rings, and she also carried her scepter. Like royalty does, the king or the queen, and it’s described that her ministers, attendants, bodyguards, and gatekeepers were also dressed appropriately for their roles. 

Soon after Śrī Rādhā and her retinue had arrived in Karṇavana, Kṛṣṇa's favorite parrot flew over this royal assembly, and then he quickly turned around and flew some distance away to where Kṛṣṇa was also resting with His friends from the midday sun. That parrot landed on Kṛṣṇa's shoulder and he whispered something in His ear—actually, he told Kṛṣṇa where Rādhārāṇī was and this particular forest and what they were doing, etc. So hearing that Śrī Rādhā was nearby in Karṇavana in her new role as Queen of Vṛndāvana along with her administration, Kṛṣṇa became very, very curious. Very curious. He wanted to see firsthand the workings of this new government, and in particular their Queen, but He realized He probably couldn’t get up very close as a cowherd boy. 

So what He did is, Kṛṣṇa convinced a few of His close friends like Subala and Madhumaṅgala and others to accompany Him to Karṇavana, masquerading as cowherd girls. Here we go again! So all His friends, "Yeah, let’s do it, let’s go!" So they all dressed as gopīs. They disguised themselves as gopīs, and then they all set out for Karṇavana. And one ācārya writes that along the way, he says, "This *mohinī* of Vraja"—what a beautiful statement—"Kṛṣṇa and His friends drew very perplexed stares from people, cows, and forest creatures alike." They’re all looking at quite an unusual group of gopīs.

So when this group of gopīs reached what śāstra says was the flowery gateway to Karṇavana, stick-wielding gopī guards stopped the procession and asked the boys dressed as gopīs, "Why have you girls come to the fortified capital of Vraja's Queen?" So Subala, he tried his best to answer in a feminine voice. He said, "We have come to speak with the Queen. We have come to speak with the Queen." So nodding in recognition, that head guard inquired further, "And what do you wish to say to Her Majesty? What is it you wish to say to Her Majesty?" So, unfortunately, Subala had not memorized his lines very well, so he stammered, "Um, well, uh, let me see, um..." But Madhumaṅgala, he saved the day by cutting in. He said, "We want to ask Her Majesty how she’s faring."

So it’s described that these gopī guards had been temporarily distracted by a dark-complexioned girl at the center of this group—obviously Kṛṣṇa—but when they heard Madhumaṅgala’s unconvincing answer, as described, they immediately blocked the flowery gateway to Karṇavana with their sticks. And then the gopī guard said, "I will first consult with the prime minister, Lalitā-sakhī." So then she entered the compound, it’s described, leaving the suspicious visitors smiling sheepishly at the other guards. So poetic! 

So at this point, Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys, they huddled together for a quick conference. And Madhumaṅgala whispered, "The sticks those guards are carrying are really big." And Subala-sakhā, he added nervously, "And they are very protective of their Queen." But Kṛṣṇa tried to reassure them by saying, "Let’s just wait and see what the prime minister has to say." So then Śrīdāmā, who, as you remember, is the brother of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, he spoke up. He said, "If I weren't wearing this sarī, I could defeat these guards all at once." But Kṛṣṇa cut him off—Rādhārāṇī's brother—Kṛṣṇa cut him off, saying, "Friend, it would not become you to fight with your sister’s bodyguards." 

While the boys were talking, this head guard informed Lalitā that some very suspicious-looking cowherd girls were at the gate asking to see Queen Rādhā. So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who was nearby, she overheard this and she inquired, "Who exactly are these visitors?" So the guard kind of looked down and replied in an embarrassed voice, "Um, I’m sorry, I didn’t ask their names." So at that point, Lalitā spoke up and she said very firmly, "Then go now and ask them to provide not only their names, but what villages they’re from and who are their families." 

So this gopī guard quickly returned to the gate and, clearing her voice, she addressed the disguised boys: "Ladies, the prime minister requests that you state your names, villages, and families." The boys weren't prepared for this; they didn’t know. They didn’t have gopī names or they didn’t know what gopī village they came from, or like that. So hearing this, a Subala-sakhā—is really cute—he quickly drew his veil over his face so as not to be noticed, you know. Madhumaṅgala looked up at a bird that was flying by. But Subala-sakhā, he spoke up, and he said, "In this glorious kingdom, we, like all Vrajavāsīs, wish only to be known as servants of the Queen." Which is so true! So these words were, you know, nice, but that answer made the gopī guard even more suspicious. She thought, "Something just isn't right about this band of unfamiliar gopīs."

So then the plot thickens. Sensing that these gopī guards were becoming more and more uneasy and suspicious, Subala-sakhā herded, or took all the disguised boys a little bit down the road—get away from all that, he was thinking—and as he was taking all the boys away, he looked back and he sarcastically said, "If being a lowly servant is not enough, what can be done?" So as this, it’s described, this unusual band of gopīs disappeared from sight, the gopī gatekeepers, they looked at each other incredulously, like, "Something... what’s going on here?" And then the guard who had spoken to Lalitā and Śrī Rādhā again went back into the compound to report her suspicions. 

But this is really nice: it’s described that Śrī Rādhā already had suspicions of her own. And how could that be? Well, because from the moment Kṛṣṇa in His disguise had arrived at the gateway of Karṇavana, she had felt a surge of loving emotions, possible only when her beloved Kṛṣṇa was nearby. That’s so sweet. So Rādhārāṇī, she was wondering, "Could this be Kṛṣṇa and His friends in disguise?" And the gopī guards' report about the eccentric nature of these visitors only increased their suspicions that perhaps Kṛṣṇa and His friends were playing some sort of prank. She thought, "Like that, maybe Kṛṣṇa and His friends are playing some sort of prank." But one ācārya writes, "A prank Śrī Rādhā would secretly welcome." 

So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī instructed this main guard, "If those gopīs come back," she said, "ask them again to identify themselves, and again, what is the purpose of their mission, and afterwards, bring them all here under full escort." So meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa and His friends, you know, they walked away a little bit; they continued with their discussions—what to do? A few of the gopas wanted to return to tending cows and playing games, but most were determined to complete their mission. So Kṛṣṇa said, "Let’s return to that fortress grove without fear. I’ll gain access to the court by giving a false identity, then we’ll finally be able to observe how the Queen conducts her affairs of state." Now at this point, Madhumaṅgala, he looked back up the road at these, you know, gopīs with their big sticks, and he shook his head, "Oh boy!" But it’s written, driven by his love for Kṛṣṇa, he took a deep breath and he said, "All right, let’s go, my brahminical power will protect us." 

So the boys adjusted their gopī dresses, touched up one another’s makeup, fixed each other’s hair, and set out again for Karṇavana, back up the road. And it’s described that this is really beautiful: their path was illuminated by Kṛṣṇa's sapphire effulgence—just keep that in your minds—their path was illuminated by Kṛṣṇa's sapphire effulgence. So once again, as the boys, you know, disguised in their gopī dresses approached the gopī gatekeepers, the head guard stepped forward and inquired from Kṛṣṇa, as she had been instructed by Śrī Rādhā. She said, "Ladies, please state again: who are you, and why have all of you come here?" 

So Kṛṣṇa, He said in a very sweet voice, He said, "Dear lady, I am Śyāma-gopī of Nandagrāma, Śyāma-gopī of Nandagrāma, and these girls are my friends. We have come simply to offer our respects to the Queen and to witness how she presides over her subjects. Please take us to her." So, as Śrī Rādhā had requested, this guard opened the flowery gate to take them to see Śrī Rādhā. And as the cowherd boys entered the—what was it?—complex of perpetually flowering groves, this forest, they all looked around and marveled at the beauty of Karṇavana. Their jaws dropped when they saw slabs of precious gems that paved the ground, golden seats with soft cushions placed here, there, and everywhere, lotus swings that hung from tree branches, jeweled archways that lined the pathways, colorful flags strung together in festoons that flew everywhere, and garlands of beautiful flowers that were visible wherever everyone looked. 

They also saw gorgeously dressed, fair-faced gopīs, some sitting, some moving about performing a variety of services as they sang beautiful songs about Śrī Rādhā and her love for Śyāmasundara. So when these boys were finally ushered into the actual court of Queen Rādhā, these disguised boys saw that everything was bathed in, quote, "soft, comforting golden radiance that emanated from who sat gracefully upon a jeweled throne"—soft, comforting golden radiance that emanated from Śrī Rādhā, who sat gracefully upon a jeweled throne. So seeing all this, the boys were speechless, and along with Kṛṣṇa, they all bowed down to Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. 

Then Kṛṣṇa, He kind of adjusted His gopī disguise and He stepped forward; He was very nervous and He said, quote, "Our respects to you, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Princess of Varṣāṇā and Queen of Vṛndāvana. We, your servants, have come to inquire about your welfare and to request a seat amongst your attendants so that we may observe how this court grants audience to its subjects and visitors." So Śrī Rādhā replied, "We thank you for your kind wishes. Until such times as confidential matters come before the court, you are all welcome to sit amongst the peers and observe the general matters of state." 

So Kṛṣṇa bowed again to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and then He and His friends were escorted to a group of nearby seats. But I was reading that at such close quarters, it started becoming clear to some gopīs that these new gopīs might not be gopīs, but cowherd boys. So then the affairs of the court began, and Śrī Rādhā, she welcomed guests; it’s described like Śyāmala-sakhī conversed with ministers like Viśākhā and gave guidance on events such as arrangements on upcoming festivals. Meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa was riveted to His seat. He was transfixed by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's radiant presence, organizational skills, absolute wisdom, fair judgment, all-pervasive kindness, and affectionate dealings. He was just transfixed—watching her govern her kingdom, and he’s just transfixed by her radiant presence, her organizational skills, her absolute wisdom, her fair judgment, her all-pervasive kindness, and affectionate dealings.

So finally, finally, just as Madhumaṅgala let Kṛṣṇa know that he was getting weak from hunger, Śrī Rādhā turned to Kṛṣṇa and she said, "My dearest Śyāma-gopī, now that you have seen the affairs of state, do you have any other requests?" So at that point, Kṛṣṇa slowly rose to His feet and, palms joined, His eyes brimming with tears, He said, "O Queen, I see that your dominion over your subjects is complete. You reign over their hearts as well as their bodies. Please know that your perfect dealings have purchased Me forever. Now that I belong to you heart and soul, I request that I, too, may reside at your lotus feet like your other maidservants." 

Hearing this, Śrī Rādhā went silent, then she extended her right arm in a very dramatic way and kept it like that for a moment. Suddenly, Kṛṣṇa's pet parrot appeared; he landed on Rādhā's finger and pressed his beak—his beak—like a kiss against her hand. Then Śrī Rādhā's parrot landed on Lalitā-sakhī's shoulder and whispered something in her ear, on His parrot, and as that parrot did so, Lalitā's eyes opened very wide and she said angrily, "To manage the affairs of state, a queen must have spies to inform her of the activities of the citizens as well as the movements of bordering kings, especially ill-motivated ones." Then, glancing at the parrot, she continued, "And our spy," she said, "this gracious parrot has confirmed as we suspected that all of you are not gopīs, but cowherd boys in disguise!" Everybody went, "Whoa!" 

Then pointing to Madhumaṅgala, she added, "And this is not a pregnant girl, but a greedy brāhmaṇa!" Oh! So as many gopīs present let out, like, loud gasps and quickly became angry, Madhumaṅgala tugged on Kṛṣṇa's arm to signal that it's time we leave. But Kṛṣṇa, still mesmerized by Śrī Rādhā's beauty, restrained him. So Madhumaṅgala, looking at the angry cowherd girls, he whispered to Subala, "Subala, your adventurous friend Kṛṣṇa has gotten us into this predicament. We’ll be lucky if we escape with our lives." And as more and more angry gopīs, armed with sticks, crowded into the court, it’s really nice: the boys huddled protectively around Kṛṣṇa, who was still spellbound by Queen Rādhā's beauty, composure, and regal bearing—her beauty, her composure, and a regal bearing.

And at that moment, Śrī Rādhā gracefully raised her left hand to silence the court, and then she spoke, quote, "Although these guests have entered this court under false pretenses, they have not been privy to state secrets. Furthermore, since Śyāma-gopī is actually a prince in a friendly province, he and his entourage should be given the reception befitting royalty, regardless of how they managed to enter our midst." She’s still referring to Kṛṣṇa as Śyāma-gopī; she said, "He’s actually a prince from a friendly province." She goes on, "We should offer a seat of honor to Prince Govinda, and a feast to His intimate friends. In this way, we will have properly greeted our guests and significantly strengthened our political alliances." 

Now, when the cowherd boys heard that—you know, "A feast! A feast! We should offer Prince Govinda and His intimate friends a feast"—they were just in total bliss, total bliss. So they immediately left with the minister of foreign affairs to a beautiful grove adjoining the kitchen, and there they very quickly took off their disguises, washed their feet, hands, and mouths, and sat down at small tables. And to their great delight, Campakalata-sakhī and her friends, and all these other gopīs we’ve been discussing today, they all came around and they served the cowherd boys a huge feast. After which, the boys slept soundly under a very large *bakula* tree. 

Now, meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa had also discarded His gopī identity, and the same maidservants who addressed Śrī Rādhā dressed Kṛṣṇa in a way befitting a prince of Vṛndāvana, the Prince of Vṛndāvana with the royal crown and everything. Then it’s very nicely described: Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the King and Queen of divine love, went on an extended walk, just the two of them, through the very beautiful endless gardens of flowers in the beautiful forest of Karṇavana, finally enjoying and relishing each other’s association. Hare Kṛṣṇa! That’s the end of the pastime. What a pastime! Oh Kṛṣṇa, I hope all of you enjoyed that, and I’m sure that it definitely purified the heart, and maybe there’s some rumblings in your hearts of, you know, awakening of some real appreciation, affection, or love for Vṛndāvana and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys and Govardhana Hill and the river Yamunā and Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa and on and on. Our real home, that’s where we belong.

So today, I would like to end with the priceless words of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his prayer, *Utkalikā-vallarī*. I mentioned that’s one of my favorites, and I’m sure many of you as well. *Utkalikā-vallarī*, we will recite 17 of the 70 verses; otherwise it would take a couple hours. But these verses are very relevant to the pastime today, where we end up hearing that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are the King and Queen of divine love in Śrī Vṛndāvana. And Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī prays to them in a most wonderful way. So please allow me:

"Overcome with yearnings and crying in the middle of Vṛndāvana forest, I shall now reveal the deep mark burning tears have made in my heart. O Vṛndāvana forest, who among your devoted servants has not already attained the path of supreme transcendental bliss? I humbly beg you, please reveal in my heart the best way to attain my King and Queen. Please be kind to me, O Queen Vṛndā. Both Śruti and Smṛti proclaim that Lord Murāri eternally enjoys pastimes with His beloved in your forest. Knowing this, I bow down before your feet. Please be merciful to me. Please make the tree of my desires bear fruit. O virtuous Queen Vṛndā, this person begs your permission to present his appeal before your King and Queen, whose feet he has long yearned in his heart to attain.

"Please, please cast your merciful glance upon me. Please be kind, O King, whose transcendental form is more splendid than the blossoming blue lotus flower! O Queen, whose splendid beauty has stolen the glory of gold! O King dressed in silk garments as splendid as lightning! O Queen dressed in beautiful garments as splendid as musk! O King whose splendid sweetness surpasses Lord Nārāyaṇa! O Queen who fills both the Goddess of Fortune and the sweet, beautiful girls of Vraja with wonder! O King who is an expanding mountain of the jewels of eternal virtues unattainable by outsiders! O Queen who possesses a treasure of transcendental virtues that stun with wonder the hearts of all virtuous girls! O King who is the regal sapphire crown of the peerless youths of Vraja! O Queen who is the jasmine crown of the splendid girls of Gokula in this world! O King whose heart is an ocean with a *makara* fish of Śrī Rādhā swims! O Queen whose heart is a moon that contains the deer of Lord Kṛṣṇa! O King whose mind is maddened by the fragrance of your beloved! O Queen whose senses are captured by the fragrance of your beloved! O King whose flute is very eager to sing the glories of Śrī Rādhā, the deity of pure love! O Queen whose tongue tastes the sweetness of chanting the glories of Lord Mukunda, the joy of the world! O King, the sweetness of whose lotus eyes traps the swan of the heart of she who is the crown of Vraja’s girls! O Queen, the nectar of whose sidelong glance expertly catches the regal fish of the prince of Vraja’s heart! O King whose flute music is a cup for drinking the ocean of the eternal patience of the daughter of the gopa-king’s friend! O Queen whose very graceful songs enchant the deer of the heart of He who enchants the entire world! O King who, when You hear the name Rādhikā, forgets all playful arts! O Queen who, when you hear the two syllables Kṛṣṇa, becomes stunned and motionless! O Son of the King of the gopas! O Daughter of the best man in Gokula! Bowing down and placing folded hands above his head, this unfortunate person begs you for a certain gift. O King and Queen, the lakes of whose hearts are filled by the swiftly flowing nectar mountain streams of your great mercy, please be kind to this wicked person! Please show him the luster of the transcendental happiness that is the guarantee of being able to see you in the future."

"O King dark with a splendid complexion! O Queen dark with youthful beauty! O King golden with transcendental fame! O Queen golden with a splendidly beautiful complexion! O King and Queen who are the handsome crowns of everyone, please eternally display your sweetness within my heart."

Oh Kṛṣṇa, isn’t that wonderful? And that’s only 17 verses. All glories to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī! All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dawn! I have nothing more to say—what can I say after the words of Rūpa Gosvāmī? Only to assure you that I’ll be back in a couple days again; I’ll go through the treasure chest of the 60 billion holy places and all the pastimes in Vṛndāvana and pick out a few and share them with all of you, wonderful devotees. So thank you so much, see you in a couple days.

*Śrī Vṛndāvana kī jaya!* Thank you, organized Vṛndāvana.""