"*00509*.*
"Very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our continuation on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. As you know, we just finished our mini-series on Lord Caitanya’s journey from Purī to Vṛndāvana, so we will go back to our mini-series on the six seasons of Vṛndāvana, meaning summer, spring, winter, autumn, dewy season, and the monsoon season. So far, we’ve actually done summer, spring, autumn, and winter, so that leaves us monsoon and the dewy season. So today, we’ll start with the monsoon season.

*Viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe...*

So, the monsoon season brings many things to mind. Actually, I was thinking this morning, for myself, it brings to mind the beautiful color of our beloved Kṛṣṇa’s bodily form. For example, *Brahma-saṃhitā*, Chapter 5, Text 30 reads: "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is adept in playing His flute, with blooming eyes like lotus petals, with head bedecked with peacock feathers, with the figure of beauty tinged with the hue of blue clouds, and His unique loveliness charming millions of Cupids." Now, although Kṛṣṇa is sometimes depicted as blackish, His color is not exactly blackish like nighttime; it’s more bluish-black. Śrīla Prabhupāda compares Kṛṣṇa’s color to that of the atasi flower. Of course, most of you don’t know what an atasi flower is, but I see them sometimes here in India. It’s a bluish-black, very beautiful flower. And Kṛṣṇa’s bodily color is described in most of the Vedic reference books as *megha-varṇam*. *Megha-varṇam* is translated as the color of dark rain clouds that are filled with water, or clouds that are ready to shower rain. We’ve all seen that anywhere in the world. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa’s color is compared to a bluish-blackish rain cloud in the monsoon season. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda, in one room conversation, he once said, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is bluish like the sky. When you see the clear bluish sky, aren't you happy? Oh, today is a very nice day, blue sky. That is Kṛṣṇa’s color." Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, in his epic book *Jaiva-dharma*, Chapter 34, he writes: "Kṛṣṇa, whose complexion resembles the luminous dark hue of fresh monsoon clouds, is the sole proprietor of my heart. Beside Him is the darling daughter of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is my ladyship, eternally enthroned within my heart." She is my ladyship, he writes, eternally enthroned within my heart. So, there also Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura refers to the beautiful hue of Kṛṣṇa’s form. 

So, this monsoon season appears just after the summer season, which here in India means usually July-August. And I’ve been through several summers now in Vṛndāvana. This monsoon season is very much welcomed in Vṛndāvana. In fact, Prabhupāda writes in *Kṛṣṇa* book, Chapter 20, and I quote: "In India, after the scorching heat of the summer, the rainy season is very welcome. The clouds accumulating in the sky, covering the sun and the moon, become very pleasing to the people as they expect rainfall at every moment. After summer, the advent of the rainy season is considered to be a life-giving source for everyone. The thunder and occasional lightning are also very pleasurable to the people." And I have practical experience; again, it’s so true.

Now, in my research in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I came across several of our ācāryas who described in their writings that it is actually Śrīmatī Vṛndā Devī, the assistant of Paurṇamāsī, who calls upon the monsoon season to appear. It’s her mercy. She calls upon the monsoon season to appear, you know, seeing how the blazing sun and the harsh summer air has made Vṛndāvana very hot and dry. Vṛndā Devī calls her cousin sister, whose name is Barkhā (B-A-R-K-H-A), Barkhā which literally means "the rain," to descend upon Braja and give relief to all the Brajabāsīs. This Barkhā, this demigoddess—she’s not even a demigoddess, she’s an inhabitant of Vṛndāvana—she plays a very intimate role in Vṛndāvana, in Braja-līlā. She’s the cousin sister of Vṛndā Devī, and she asks her, "Please come, give relief to the Vrajabāsīs." 

Now, it’s described that Barkhā Devī, the monsoon season personified, she wears pink-colored garments with a long black braid coming down to her feet. She creates and walks in windy and moist air. I thought that was so beautiful: Barkhā, she creates and walks in windy and moist air. And her eyes are the most beautiful amongst all the seasonal cousin sisters of Vṛndā Devī. Her eyes are the most beautiful amongst all the seasonal cousin sisters of Vṛndā Devī. And appreciating her timely service, we’ve used that word now, the Brajabāsīs, they pray to her as follows: "I offer my respects to Barkhā, which season, I offer my respects to Barkhā who enters Braja by the order of Vṛndā Devī and who accepts service for pleasing the Divine Couple." That’s how they pray, the Brajabāsīs. 

Now, our ācāryas explain just how Barkhā Devī pleases the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They say she does so by cooling the burning desires of the Divine Couple to be together—not just the heat, but she cools the burning desires of the Divine Couple to be together by restricting people's movements during that season because of the heavy monsoon rains, which give Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa more opportunity to meet in secret places. So much rain, they don’t want to go out in the rain, but in Vṛndāvana, they find their ways and they’re able to meet. So, it’s a very nice season for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Their pangs of separation are mitigated. It’s like the rains of the monsoon season; they also facilitate the meetings in the sense that they make the kuñjas and the forest—meaning the groves and the forest—very dense. When it rains, everything grows; it becomes very lush and very, very green. It makes the kuñjas and forest very dense, which help to hide Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa from their in-laws. 

In this regard, I came across such a beautiful prayer by our Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, which in that season, monsoon season, she offers to the creepers, vines, and flowers of Vṛndāvana’s forest. She says, "O my true friends, all my true friends, the creepers and vines of this forest who hide me from my in-laws, and oh, you golden kadamba flowers who disguise me and keep my in-laws from seeing me, and oh, my best friend, this forest of Vṛndāvana, I offer my gratitude to all of you." Such a nice sentiment from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to all these personalities who allow her to have her association undetected with Kṛṣṇa in the Vṛndāvana forest. 

Now, I also came across a similar prayer offered by Kṛṣṇa to the Vṛndāvana forest. Kṛṣṇa says, "O forest of Vṛndāvana, I am eternally indebted to you, who always give me a chance to enter into the beautiful and secluded association of the most beautiful Śrī Rādhā, and who give me a chance to serve her beauty. O forest of Vṛndāvana, all glories to your vines and to your flowers." The Divine Couple, appreciating the service of the Vṛndāvana forest in its variegated ways to facilitate the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they have to hide from the in-laws. Now, the most beautiful, with her eyes, and merciful Barkhā Devī—the deity, we could say, the personified deity of the monsoon season—she can be identified by the fact that she holds a bird called the Cātaka bird in her left hand, just as Vṛndā Devī holds a parrot in her left hand as well. If you’re looking for Barkhā in the monsoon season, she’ll be holding a Cātaka bird in her left hand. That’s so sweet. 

Now, in Kavi-karṇapūra’s illustrious works, there’s a very beautiful description of the moment, the very moment that Kṛṣṇa first sees Barkhā at the beginning of the monsoon season. Other times she’s hidden, unmanifest, but she is the monsoon season, so as soon as it starts, she’s there. And Kavi-karṇapūra writes the moment that Kṛṣṇa sees her. He writes that Kṛṣṇa is amazed to see her walking through moist and windy air, as we described earlier, pervaded by a sweet fragrance from a garland of fresh kadamba flowers. He goes on to write in a very, you could say, poetic way—actually, I’ll quote him here—he writes: "The swarms of bumblebees darting through the air are her provocative glances cast at Kṛṣṇa." And that also, he says, "She wears effulgent, attractive blue garments in the form of freshly formed, glistening rain clouds." This is how Kṛṣṇa’s perceiving her. "And the gentle rumbling of rain clouds filled the forest with the sweet sound of her elegant voice. She has an elegant voice." "She offers newly sprouted barley grass as a bed for Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure, and this colorful, green bed of fresh grass defeats the beauty of a collection of the brightest green emeralds." Wow, he’s so poetic! 

Then Kavi-karṇapūra goes on to write that "the millions of indragopas," which are like tiny red insects crawling over the ground, "color the delicate feet of this goddess with an effulgent red lac." This is how Kṛṣṇa is seeing her. "A row of splendid, restless cranes adorn her throat like a pearl necklace, and fanned tails of dancing peacocks comprise her beautiful hair. The frequent air blowing by the arjuna trees, laden with sweet flowers, form her pleasant breath. Her gentle, enchanting face is moistened with tears of tiny raindrops, and petals of bright yellow kadamba flowers form her hairs that stand on end due to a rarely perceived ecstasy." She’s a very special person. This is how Kṛṣṇa sees her—maybe the first day of the monsoon season, he sees her like this. 

And he goes on to say, "She eagerly awaits to offer Kṛṣṇa a fragrant garland made from very tiny mālatī flowers. Her restless eyes are lowered out of respect and shyness while she offers her services to her beloved Kṛṣṇa." Everyone in Vṛndāvana loves Kṛṣṇa; they may have different ways of serving and expressing that love, but it’s very nice to hear how the monsoon season personified, her loving relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Now, Kavi-karṇapūra concludes this amazing description by writing that as an expert maidservant, she makes wonderful garlands to decorate the whole of the forest of Vṛndāvana with an abundance of fragrant flowers and, overflowing with love and affection for Kṛṣṇa, she always desires to serve him in various ways during her turn as one of the six seasons. They’ll have to wait; they don’t serve, of course. As we’ve mentioned many times, these six seasons are existing also simultaneously in Vṛndāvana. In different parts of Vṛndāvana, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can walk into any one of these six seasons, but also they come one after another. Inconceivable, but transcendentally true. 

So, other ācāryas also give amazing details about the monsoon season in Vṛndāvana. In fact, we’ll probably have two or three more classes about the monsoon season. They write that the monsoon season in Vṛndāvana is characterized by all the 12 main forests in Vṛndāvana becoming very lush green, very lush green. It almost happens overnight. Again, I’ve been in Vṛndāvana for several years now, so there’s the summer, and when the rain comes, the monsoon comes, it’s mystical. Within a few days, everything’s lush and green. Vṛndāvana is a very mystical place; it becomes very lush green. And as a result, one of the special beauties of the rainy season is that it brings all kinds of blossoming flowers to Vṛndāvana. I heard Prabhupāda say recently on a tape that flowers are the only opulence left in Kali-yuga, flowers. So, many flowers come, and the mañjarīs and the sakhīs, they take great pleasure in preparing outfits and ornaments—śṛṅgāra. We had a class on that, how the gopīs make flower earrings and flower braids; they braid Rādhārāṇī’s hair with flowers, and so many different types, bracelets, etc. The sakhīs and the mañjarīs, they take great pleasure in preparing outfits and ornaments for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa out of different types of flowers and leaves. And our pujārīs in Vṛndāvana, they know how wonderful that service is. 

For example, on Janmāṣṭamī, it’s traditional in our movement that we offer the Divine Couple a flower outfit. So, this is sādhana-bhakti, devotional service in practice, but we’re practicing what the Vrajabāsīs do spontaneously and with full love when they make the flower outfit. But practice makes perfect, so we can get to that point by following Śrīla Prabhupāda. It’s written that these sakhīs and these mañjarīs, they stitch these flower outfits—get this—with the thread of virgin banana tree trunks. Virgin, brand-new banana tree trunks; they strip them and they use it like a thread, and they do it with the needles of *karīr*. *Karīr* is a type of thorn that we have experience of here in Vṛndāvana; sometimes those thorns, they fall to the ground and they get in your feet. But the Vrajabāsīs are so expert, they use this thorn along with this virgin banana tree trunk, you could say like thread, to make very beautiful, fragrant flower outfits that, I was reading, never fade or become wilted. They never fade or become wilted; they can make them and put them aside, theoretically, for whatever time, they always remain fresh. 

And I was also reading that they’re traditionally offered to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa after they’ve taken their separate baths in rainwater. Which means that the monsoon rains—they’ll bathe in the monsoon rains, and after that, the sakhīs and the cowherd boys respectively dry Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with towels, and then dress in these beautiful flower outfits with the śṛṅgāra or the different paraphernalia also made out of flowers. Śrī-śrī-rādhe-kṛṣṇa-vṛndāvana. And this is what we aspire for. Nothing in this world compares to this. One of my godbrothers took sannyāsa, and I remember Prabhupāda told him, "Never look back and think you’ve left anything valuable behind, and never envy the position of the materialistic sense-enjoyers. Just look forward to the positive alternative." Kṛṣṇa consciousness is this, and this is all very real, as Śrīla Prabhupāda explained. 

Now, I was also reading that during the monsoon season, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa sometimes hold bows and arrows made of flowers, and they playfully—*kelī*—they playfully fight with each other in a specific kuñja called *Kandarpa-kuñja*. Kandarpa-kuñja. And as I was researching, I found that; I put that also. I always keep a list of names so I can give prospective disciples on the day of their initiation, "Oh, this is a good one, Kandarpa-kuñja devī-dāsī." So that’s where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, only during the monsoon season, with these bows and arrows fashioned from flowers, they have their little battle there. Kandarpa-kuñja means "a flower grove of Cupid." Then, even more details, I found that it’s the sakhīs, meaning the aṣṭa-sakhīs, the eight girlfriends of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, they prepare those arrows. And specifically, they prepare the tips of those arrows—you know, that’s what goes on the tip, when you’re fighting it’s typically, has to be very strong and very dangerous—but they make the tips of those arrows with rosebuds, which it’s described, when hitting the bodies of the Divine Couple, make them feel like the most fortunate lovers in the universe. That’s how one ācārya said: when you get hit with that tip of the arrow, which is a rosebud, it makes Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa feel like the most fortunate lovers in the universe. 

So now, *Ananda-vṛndāvana-campū* also reveals to us the effects the beginning of the monsoon season has on Vṛndāvana itself. Because this is the first of this little series on the monsoon season, it will take two or three lectures, I’m not sure. So the beginning, *Ananda-vṛndāvana-campū* reveals the effects the beginning of the monsoon season has on Braja, and there it is described that as the rains begin to fall in the monsoon season, it appears that the entire city of Vṛndāvana is bathed in this first shower of the rainy season. That’s how we’re subscribed. And after that first rainfall, which is so much welcomed by the people of Braja, proud peacocks, famous for their dancing ability, they start strutting about the rooftops of every home with their long, thick green tail feathers fanned out, as described, to dry in the sun. And as the sun sets over the town of Vṛndāvana, its reddish rays—redder than *bimba* fruit, it’s described, it’s a very red fruit—those rays spread across the clear western sky, and those red sun rays look like the line of *sindūra* on a woman’s hair part. 

Anyway, we’ll save the rest for the next few lectures. I think that’s a lot to think about and to meditate on and to relish. This is how we should engage our minds more; there’s more to be said about this, I would say, one of the favorite seasons of Vṛndāvana. And we’ll continue in Part 2 about the monsoon season in a few days. 

So, I’d like to finish today with yet another way we are reminded of the monsoon season. At the beginning of this lecture, we mentioned how the color of Kṛṣṇa’s body reminds us of the monsoon season, and vice-versa. And Śrīla Prabhupāda gives us another comparison of the heavy rains of the monsoon. He gives us a comparison of the heavy rains of the monsoon, and this I found in a letter he wrote to my dear godbrother, Abhirām Prabhu, in the 1970s. Prabhupāda wrote, "Yes, you are feeling an increase in strength with an increase in service, and I am not the actual bestower of mercy; rather, I’m just a messenger for Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So just work hard for Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and His mercy will fall upon you like torrents of rain in the monsoon season." Torrents of rain in the monsoon season. 

So may we all, as Śrīla Prabhupāda’s followers, always work hard helping Lord Caitanya spread the Saṅkīrtana movement, so that Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy, Mahāprabhu’s mercy, and Prabhupāda’s mercy will always fall on us like torrents of rain in the monsoon season. Another way to think of the monsoon season; we want a monsoon rain of Mahāprabhu’s and Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mercy. Hare Kṛṣṇa! Thank you, Prabhus, so much. We’re back in a couple of days with more about this favorite season. 

*Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!*

Take all the fallen souls with us, as Śrīla Prabhupāda desired. *Jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya!* All glories to you!""