"*00423*.*
"# The Genuine Sadhu - Mayapur 2023

Kṛṣṇa, so here in the blessed dhāma of Māyāpur, we are continuing with our small series building up to the appearance day of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. In just two or three days, this is an especially wonderful time to have kathā because this is the holy day of ekādaśī. We fast from grains; some devotees fast from food, some devotees fast from water, so that we have more time for hearing and chanting. As time goes on and you get more purified, you will find that you really want to spend as much time as possible just associating with Kṛṣṇa in His most accessible form, and that is His Holy Name. He is present in the form of sound. There is a verse in our scriptures which says that one is conditioned by sound, but conversely, one is liberated by sound. Yes, we have to be careful with what enters the ear because, by nature's arrangement, it goes to the heart. One wishes he had millions and millions of years so that he could hear the Holy Name constantly and it would go to his heart; it would create a jubilant festival.

I love festivals because they have a spiritual nature; they are centered around Kṛṣṇa, and in the spiritual world, there is actually a festival every day. So, by observing these festive days like ekādaśī, we are preparing ourselves for the eternal festival in the spiritual sky with the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava. Like some devotees, I know if we had that taste, if we had that taste for the Holy Name, we would spend all day and all night doing japa. That is what they do. Yes, one godbrother whom I liked very much, his name was Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. He was a real relisher of the Holy Name, no material desires, his only desire was to chant. When we were young men, like 19 or 20, he was in his 80s, and sometimes he would visit our temples. Better than any kīrtanīyās right now in ISKCON, he would just go on for kīrtana for hours and just be totally absorbed. One time, my godbrother Bībhū Govinda Mahārāja went to visit him on an ekādaśī. So, Bābājī invited Mahārāja to stay up all night with him and chant japa. 

So it was a bit of a challenge to stay up all night, but he said Bābājī was totally focused, relishing the holy names. Some of my godbrothers actually made recordings of Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Bābājī’s bhajans; if you go online and type in "Kṛṣṇa Dāsa Bābājī bhajans/kīrtans," you can listen to his kīrtanas. They used to be really popular; I still listen to them, but you might relish them because the chanting of the Holy Name is particularly beneficial if we hear it from the lips of a pure devotee. It is like the original Nanda Bābā, when it became called that later; it's at the base of an underground—his samādhi mandir is there. So from saints like that, we know how to properly observe a day like ekādaśī. And just to underline the importance, not far from here, he said in one of his poems, holy days like ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī are the mothers of devotion for devotees who properly honor them. So that is what we are doing; you are in the right place at the right time doing the right thing.

We are taking advantage of this auspicious day to build up our faith in Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva so that on the night before Nṛsiṁha-deva’s appearance, we can’t sleep, we’re so excited: "Tomorrow is Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva’s appearance day!" That’s what it will be like. However, today we are going to speak from Third Canto, Chapter 15, text number 34. It is actually a verse spoken by the four Kumāras at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha, where they had been refused entrance into Vaikuṇṭha by the gatekeepers of Vaikuṇṭha, Jaya and Vijaya. Because they were refused entrance into Vaikuṇṭha, the four Kumāras were considering what would be an appropriate punishment for Jaya and Vijaya, who wouldn't let them in the spiritual world: "Therefore, let us consider how these two contaminated persons should be punished. The punishment should be apt, for thus benefit can eventually be bestowed upon them. Since they find duality in the existence of Vaikuṇṭha life, they are contaminated and should be removed from this place to the material world where the living entities have three kinds of enemies."

Actually, these four sages are very, very elevated; they are pure devotees of the Lord. They have their own saṁpradāya, like we have Brahmā; he is the head of ours. These little boys, they are the head of that saṁpradāya. Naturally, you can imagine, one day these four Kumāras wanted to visit their iṣṭa-deva. Who is their iṣṭa-deva? Viṣṇu. Kṛṣṇa is just like every morning you have the desire to visit the temple and see your iṣṭa-deva, see your deities, or to wake up in the morning and wake up your deities. This is the immediate thought of a devotee when he wakes up—not, "How am I going to have a cup of coffee and drive in the car and go to work?" We are immediately thinking, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa."

They are preaching in the material world, but from time to time they want to go to Vaikuṇṭha and get refreshed. So once upon a time, they approached the gates. It’s just not, you know, you just can't walk in there; there’s a gate. You have to pass the gate, you have to pass inspection, you have to be pure. Like when I was a boy, I had some friends, we were like eight or nine, we built a treehouse, put a big sign up there: "No girls allowed." Okay? When the four Kumāras came, the guards were there; they were guarding the spiritual world. They were looking into the hearts of those who approached to see if they had the qualification, which is prema, pure love for Kṛṣṇa—that is the visa to enter into the spiritual world. Nothing less than that is described. They would look into the eyes of everyone who came to approach the gate because, as Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, the eyes are the light of the soul, the life of the person. You look into the eyes, you can see the light of the soul. Like Prabhupāda, I can tell you his eyes were always brimming with tears, just about to flood over, because of his prema.

It's kind of like set aside; you know, we have general society, but then for the criminal people we have a jail. It’s a small place compared to the big place. So the material world is compared to one-quarter of God’s creation, and three-quarters of God’s creation is the spiritual world. It is full of unlimited devotees. Even the biggest computer, even AI, artificial intelligence, will never be able to calculate how many souls there are serving Kṛṣṇa in various capacities in the spiritual world. The number of conditioned souls who fall from the spiritual world—and unfortunately, that’s you and me—the spiritual world is off-limits to conditioned souls up until the point they become purified and their love for Kṛṣṇa is fully awoken. Then, "Come on in!" They’ll send a flower airplane for you. You don’t even have to go yourself; they’ll send a flower airplane. VIP—you’re a VIP, Very Important Person. "Come home!"

If you are having a program and there’s some special guest, you don’t expect the guest to arrive on his own; you send a car to pick up the guest and bring the guest to the program. That is etiquette. When he comes to your home, you greet him at the entrance to your property, you bring him in, and when it’s time to leave, you follow him to the entrance of your property and you see him off. It’s so nice. Our Vedic culture is a culture based on love. So you often hear that when someone is ready to go back to Godhead, Kṛṣṇa sends or Viṣṇu sends a flower airplane with Viṣṇu-dūtas. They’re very beautiful; they look like Kṛṣṇa. The only difference is they don’t have that curl of hair here on the chest that Kṛṣṇa has; they look just like Kṛṣṇa. They get off the flower airplane and they bring you and they put you in.

Because you have the qualification, bhakti. Nevertheless, unqualified persons try to crash the party. Qualifications—like sometimes you hear there’s a party and some dacoits or some bad guys, they crash the party and beat everybody up and take their money. You can’t crash the party in the spiritual sky; there’s no way. Rāvaṇa tried to build a wooden staircase to get to the spiritual world—higher, higher, he tried to build a wooden staircase to get to Vaikuṇṭha. He didn’t get anywhere near it. And many others have tried as well. After all, if you read about Vaikuṇṭha in the Vedic literature, it’s very attractive. It’s more attractive than the highest planet in the material world, Brahmaloka. Yes, in the spiritual world, if a step is a dance, if your word is a song, there’s a festival every day. Who wouldn’t want to go there? It’s just like one time I asked my grandfather, he was 90 something, you know, he was sitting at his desk, he was quite wealthy, he was drinking some liquor. "Grandpa, does God exist?" "Oh yes, my boy, God does exist. He lives in heaven." "Grandpa, what’s heaven like?" "Beautiful girls, my boy." "Like Mommy?" "No, not like Mommy, you’ll understand one day." He said, "In the spiritual world, there’s unlimited liquor, boy. This is whiskey, this is 20-year-old whiskey, there’s a hundred-million-year-old whiskey, and you can drink it as long as you want." "Tell me more about heaven, Grandpa." He took out this box with cigars—his whole life he smoked cigars—used to be almost 100 years old. I don’t know how—picked up this big cigar—"Oh, and you don’t have to pay for them in the spiritual world, boy!" 

"Uh, Grandpa, that’s not what it is, or was, or is, or wherever it would be—it’s the opposite of that!" But people hear about it in different ways, so they want to go. Rāvaṇa wanted to go. Sometimes Māyāvādīs, out of curiosity, they also try to enter into the spiritual realm. But watch out! It’s said that Lord Śiva is protecting the spiritual world, especially from Māyāvādīs. When these Māyāvādīs, these impersonalists, try to approach the spiritual world, you know, he has that trident; he throws the trident at the Māyāvādīs, and when it hits them, they turn into dazzling gems and they fall back down to the Earth, where they glow with a wonderful effulgence and think, "I am Brahman, I am Brahman, I am Brahman, I am wonderful."

Śiva’s trident—but of course, again, the four Kumāras were perfectly qualified to enter. But Jaya and Vijaya stopped them. How can you stop the four Kumāras? It’s like, you know, a pure devotee, he has the visa to go anywhere in creation, anywhere in the spiritual world he wants to go. I never leave... Jesus is a friend of every living entity, you can't stop them. What's the campaign? What's their heartbeat? "Boom, boom, boom, boom." Mission, mission—this is what Prabhupāda said. My spiritual master came to this world, he preached, and when he left this world, he went somewhere else to do the same thing. So, in analyzing this pastime, like, how is it that Jaya and Vijaya, who themselves are nitya-siddhas, how did they make the mistake of stopping these heads of the Nimbārka-saṁpradāya, the four Kumāras? Like, what is in the pastime? They said that primarily because of the boys' appearance. After all, they didn’t look like wise, old sages, purified perhaps by thousands of years of penance and austerity. No, they appeared like little boys, five-year-old boys. You know, a child can go anywhere practically; they want nobody stops them. They let them alone, you know? Kids can go anywhere. Parents may get stopped, but the kids...

Five or four of them, they approached and they stopped them. They didn’t look like sages; they were just kids. Why would a sage, a pure person, want to be like a kid? Well, Prabhupāda explains in the purport to this particular pastime that by their mystic powers, they changed themselves from wise old sages into young, five-year-old boys because young five-year-old boys don’t have sex desire. It is one of the main obstacles in the path of any transcendentalist. So they didn’t want to deal with that, of course, they didn’t have to, but they’re setting an example here. They made themselves into five-year-old boys. Bhagavad-gītā, Chapter 3, verse 37: "The Blessed Lord said, 'It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of contact with the material modes of passion and later transformed into wrath, and which is the all-devouring sinful enemy of this world.'" So they don't want to deal with it. "Hi Mommy, hi everybody." They have no attraction like this. They could just fix their mind, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, You are mine and I am Yours."

So at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha, some discussion went on: "Hey boys, like, what are you doing here?" But as I spoke very eloquently, the four Kumāras, because they’re heads of a saṁpradāya, and the head of the saṁpradāya like our Brahmā, has to have complete grasp of the absolute truth, including the temporary nature of this world and the eternal nature of the spiritual world. But they were very realized, they spoke so nicely. Nevertheless, they considered them kids. They said, "Okay, enough, enough talk! You’re not qualified. Get out! Go home to Mommy!" What have you said to us? "Go home to your mommy, become a tree for 10,000 years! And when you go in your Māyāpur, one big storm will come, bang, bang, you’ll fall over!" I saw it. "Oh, the poor tree." I know that's good, the tree’s liberated now! The poor tree fell over, it’s liberated. Yes. I said, "Go home to Mommy!" So then Jaya and Vijaya—whether the four Kumāras—they turned around and said, "Okay, you, Jaya and Vijaya, you go to the material world for this offense. You go to the material world."

The sādhus are like fire; they can purify, they can destroy. You know, I’m always very respectful of any sādhu. I mean, it doesn't matter what particular path he’s following; he’s a transcendentalist of sorts, but at least he’s turned his back on material existence, unlike seven billion people on this planet. He may be a Rāja-yogī, a jñāna-yogī, or even an impersonalist. In one sense, they’ve turned their back, they’ve realized the illusion of matter, like they’re trying for transcendence. They deserve my respect, at least. You know, like the kids here, they come, they don't have time to bow down, they’re playing, okay. But wait a minute! They have a very important service. They’re the guardians of the spiritual world, and actually, they’re nitya-siddhas, eternally liberated. How can such a person be cursed to go to the material world? Well, just like yesterday we discussed, remember Arjuna and Prahlāda Mahārāja? They are placed in an awkward situation; you know, Arjuna was placed in illusion and Prahlāda was placed in a dangerous situation to teach us a lesson. 

Don’t think of them in a fallen way. They’re very kindly accepting the inconvenience for us, just like Prabhupāda accepted to come to this world of birth and death and go through so many hardships in his life for us. So, there are many lessons in this particular pastime of Nṛsiṁhadeva. We’re going right back to the beginning, the very beginning, and we’re learning some lessons in the very beginning: don’t offend devotees. You could say that Jaya and Vijaya made this offense—of course, again, it’s a pastime, but it shows what happened. Don’t offend not only pure devotees but don’t offend any devotee of the Lord because that is hātī-mātā—it’s a mad elephant offense. It can create havoc in your spiritual life. So, what does it mean, "mad elephant" offense? I’ll tell you why. We were doing harināma in 1974 in Hyderabad. Prabhupāda, we went with Prabhupāda to Hyderabad to install the Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities, very big deities. He personally installed them. Not the perfect example because elephants also do this, but two bulls started to fight in the marketplace—was that a female bull? I said, "Whatever, it’s too hot here." And these two bulls started to fight for a cow, and it was terrifying. They were fighting, and all the shopkeepers left, and we ran away. They destroyed the whole market; they were hitting horns and tumbling. Well, they destroyed the whole market. So sometimes, elephants also come to marketplaces, and they may be in rut or something, these male elephants, and they just destroy everything. So, like that, if we make offenses to devotees, we destroy—we can destroy our spiritual lives. You have to be so careful.

So, of course, they looked like little boys, the four Kumāras, but Jaya and Vijaya should have been able to see who they were, because only a sādhu can see a sādhu. To really appreciate a sādhu, you have to be a sādhu. I love that: only a sādhu can see a sādhu! Because sometimes sādhus, you wouldn’t know; they’re so humble, they’re not advertising themselves, they’re sitting in the back and they’re doing some menial service. And you don’t know their hearts; you have to have the sādhu—only a sādhu can see a sādhu. So unfortunately, they didn’t see this sādhu-like nature of the four Kumāras.

They say they should have seen the quality of the four Kumāras because they spoke so nicely. One time in Geneva, Prabhupāda said that one can understand the character or the level of advancement of the Vaiṣṇava, not by the way they appear or they dress or they look, but how they speak. Somehow or other, the other day, I was searching for something, and a video clip came out of Sai Baba. You remember Sai Baba? Sai Baba is... and you know, he’d look, you know, saffron on and big hair and sitting on an āsana. But he started to speak, and it was all nonsense. He said, "There’s no God. Kṛṣṇa and Rāma are an illusion. You are God; all together we are God." What, you know? He revealed himself by the way he was talking. I don’t like to criticize anyone, but sometimes we have to make these points so we protect ourselves. Like when I was young and I was searching for a guru, I was like 18 or 19, I went to so many programs, and then eventually when I heard Śrīla Prabhupāda speak, it was a no-brainer. He’s my guru. He was authoritative; he backed everything up with śāstra and just his persona, his way he backed up his statements by his life’s example. I finally found my spiritual master.

So they should have known just by the eloquent words and the authoritative words that the four Kumāras had spoken. It may not be easy to find the genuine sādhu because his crest, or his topmost quality, is his humility. That’s his humility. Of all the qualities of devotees, their humility—and why that’s a sign they’re realized is just like when you’re walking towards a mountain, you know, it looks very small. But when you get close to the mountain, you feel very humble, you feel very small because the mountain is so great. You become humble. So one sign of an advanced transcendentalist—he’s so far in the path, he’s so close to God—he realizes how great God is and how small he is. So he’s naturally humble.

The epitome of the false ego is to think, "I am God." If you’re in front of God, you realize how small you are and how great God is, so you’re humble. It’s not fake; you’re not faking. It’s like, "I am so fallen." Rūpa Gosvāmī and Caitanya, he says he’s lower than the worms in stool. He’s not just saying that; he’s exactly thinking that because he’s a self-realized soul. He realized who he is, who God is, and his position as a servant of God. Humility is... In this regard, we can think about Jaḍa Bharata, which is a museum of emotional support. Most of you probably know the pastime in the Bhāgavatam. A self-realized, great, saintly person, but so as not to become entangled in material life, he wandered around like a mendicant. He did torn clothing, no paraphernalia, just walking barefoot everywhere. In his heart, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, but externally he looked like a beggar. He didn’t want people to disturb him in his meditation on God. He appeared as a fool so no one could disturb him; he could just do his bhajana.

But one time he was caught by the king. The king of that era, the king’s servants, they were looking for someone to carry the palanquin of the king, because the king goes around in the big palanquin. So they’re just looking for some foolish big guy or something who can carry the palanquin, and they came across him and they said, "You, come with us. You’re going to carry the king’s palanquin." And then they came across an area where there were many ants crossing the road. Upon it, he sees all living entities equal; he doesn’t judge by the body, he sees the soul. So it’s all these little souls, that’s how he saw it. He’s trying to go but not step on any ants. So the king’s like, banging his head, and it almost tips over! He’s trying to avoid the ants, and the king is thinking he’s just a dumb imbecile who doesn’t know how to walk properly. So the king said, "Stop the palanquin! You fat fool, look at me. You rascal, what are you doing? Are you dead, despite the life within your body? Don’t you know that I’m your master? You were disregarding me and not carrying out my order properly. For this disobedience, I shall now punish you, just as Yamarāja, the superintendent of death, punishes sinful people. I shall give you proper treatment so that you will come to your senses and do the correct thing." So that’s one of my favorite parts of the Bhāgavatam, I just love it. You know, the self-realized, pure, just in rags and looking like just some kind of mendicant. Jaḍa Bharata turned around and with a look of compassion, he said to the king...

Described as well-chosen words, nicely articulated, and pregnant with wisdom, revealed the great devotee that he was: "My dear King, you have unnecessarily accused me of being dead although alive. In this regard, I can only say that this is the case everywhere, because everything material has its beginning and its end." The king is like, "Whoa, who is this talking?" "As far as you’re thinking that you are the king and master and are trying to order me, this is also incorrect because these positions are temporary. Today you are the king and I am your servant, but tomorrow the position may be changed and you may be my servant and I your master." These are temporary circumstances created by Providence. The king jumped off the palanquin and bowed down to Jaḍa Bharata, begging for his shelter. Words of the four Kumāras—he couldn’t recognize him because of their authoritative and sweet and convincing talking. They curse those who offend Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇava, and they bless the humble and the meek who are desiring spiritual advancement. Better remain very humble and meek and respect all living entities rather than offending anyone.

In the Bible, it’s in Matthew 5:5, Jesus says, "Blessed are the meek and humble, for they shall inherit the earth."

Criticizing the girls in the temple for whatever reason, and Prabhupāda said, "No, they are also valiant saṅkīrtana soldiers." They’re like—how do you put it—they’re like lambs at home but lions on the chase. You know, a lion goes after the kill. So the girls are very humble and sweet, saṅkīrtana. "Please take this book." "You’re a nonsense, you don’t take this book? Come on, give a donation, it’s for some good cause!" Don’t put the book in the stomach, okay, okay. For the higher purpose: a lamb at home and a lion on the chase. Prabhupāda said the girls are doing as much as the boys. So Jaya and Vijaya received a heavy curse, a most heavy curse: "Go to the material world." Like, "Whoa, whoa!" Is it the most heavy curse because to go from a world that is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss, to a world that is temporary, full of ignorance and suffering? Like, "What, you’ve got to be kidding me!" There’s so much to be done, so much to relish and savor—Rādha and Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma in the spiritual world—and so much to become depressed about in this world. There’s more ways we suffer than we enjoy. Look at the hands; how many ways can the hand enjoy? It takes the food and gives it to the mouth and writes a letter. But how many ways can the hand suffer? You can burn it, you can pull out the fingernails—like when they torture in some places—you can chop it, you can... I won’t go ahead. You ask, there’s so many ways they can suffer! How many ways can it enjoy? So just think about how many ways can you really enjoy here, how many ways do we suffer? It’s a no-brainer. What are we doing here? Let’s get out of here!

Therefore, how amazing is it that someone would leave there to come here for us? Not because he had to take birth, no, because he came out of compassion. Śrīla Prabhupāda—it’s just amazing. He left there to come here for us, for the whole world, for the whole Kali-yuga, really. Therefore, that poem by my dear godbrother, Peti Pavan: "Of the nectar lake, did you your home love forsake? Leaving His fresh and fragrant lotus breath to come to this world of birth and death. And is this a helping hand you lend, while in this world of matter you transcend? I am perplexed, please let it be known, did you come to take me home?"

Consciousness, because it’s so amazing, it’s almost mystical. It is mystical. There’s many ways to understand something. Just like an onion, okay? You’re going to glorify an onion, but not that we eat them, but an onion has many skins, right? You may remember, you peel the onion, you know, many skins, you get to the core. So there’s many meanings to be understood in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and this is what we do with our brain. The brain is meant to think like this, not TV and internet and frivolous talk. A brāhmaṇa’s brain, this is how it’s always thinking, analyzing, because by analyzing these truths, we see they’re real and our faith increases. Our faith increases by hearing philosophy, and our love increases by hearing līlā.

My Kṛṣṇa consciousness philosophy, the Bhagavad-gītā, the Bhāgavatam, the Caitanya-caritāmṛta—we fall out of love with the material world and into love with the spiritual world. So it’s getting a little late, but let’s discuss one more thing in the onion, that there’s actually a deeper meaning that we haven’t discussed yet about this pastime of Jaya and Vijaya being cursed by the four Kumāras. It may come as a surprise. Surprises are nice; we all like surprises. It’s like the other day, it was Manjula’s birthday and she thought we didn’t know. So we, the devotees, her girlfriends, they organized a surprise party. But she’s a smart girl, so we did—we wanted to do it in such a way she didn’t figure it out. So I told Ananta to tell her that the file from one of my classes had gone corrupt and she had a copy, so we needed to upload it very quickly, so "get over here right now."

They have a very interesting relationship, working on all these videos and lectures, you know, they’re both perfectionists. But she came into the apartment: "Happy birthday to you!" Like, all the devotees there, there were balloons, oh, big cakes. Like, "Wow, that’s a nice surprise, right?" We like surprises. Please find this a bit surprising: a deeper, deeper underlying theme to this pastime is that the whole pastime was orchestrated by the will of the Lord so that He could satisfy His desire to fight. What... absolute truth means everything comes from God, absolutely. So all the emotions that we have in this world, they’re originally there in the spiritual world in their purified forms. So many emotions we have, different types, from A to Z, all those are in the spiritual world except envy. That doesn’t exist there. Envy is there—it’s a cardinal sin, as they say, our Christian brothers and sisters. It’s the cardinal sin. It’s the sin that brought us to the material world; we became envious of Kṛṣṇa: "That you’re enjoying? What about me?"

New York, Sydney, you take your birth: "Happy birthday!" What do you mean "Happy birthday"? It’s just a sign of your nonsense. I’m not speaking of you, Manjula, like all of us, right? What do we have to be proud of? Therefore, in Vedic culture, on your birthday, in Vedic culture, a boy or girl would do austerities, and they give things away, not accept things, just to keep it, you know, correct. But I’m not saying we shouldn’t have birthdays. I actually read somewhere in Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s writings, he said we should honor the Vaiṣṇavas on their birthday, not just the guru, but all Vaiṣṇavas. We should honor them on their birthday because they’re utilizing their human form of life in the proper way.

And whenever he gets a message, just this little thing he does, he clicks it so it’s two speeds faster, so he’s hearing the message. What are you doing? Who’s talking? He said, "Nobody, I put on fast speed." That’s how he translates. What? Thank you. Like kind of a fighting, wrestling, boxing sport; it’s there in the spiritual world, but in loving devotion. As we know, in the soft sands of Ramaṇa-reti, where we now have our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma mandir, Kṛṣṇa wrestles the cowherd boys, and sometimes to please His friend, He loses. It’s the intimacy of vraja-bhakti; Kṛṣṇa becomes subservient to the love of His devotees. The official kingdom of God, the loka, is the topmost planet. It’s very special. The mood of... is one of master and servant. They’re very happy being the servant of a glorious master. We can relate to that; I’m happy being the servant, the dog of my glorious spiritual master. I have no problem like that. So that mood reigns supreme in Vaikuṇṭha. Kṛṣṇa’s master, they’re all servants. You don’t fight with your servant, you... excuse me, you don’t fight with your master! So it’s a problem. Kṛṣṇa likes to fight, who’s going to fight with Him? 

Kṛṣṇa, and then He’s Viṣṇu, so who’s gonna, who’s gonna fight with Viṣṇu? "Come fight me!" "No, master!" "No, no, wait!" "Come fight!" "No, no, no!"

There’s no way He can fight. So it’s like, "I want to fight!" So He created this pastime. Kṛṣṇa created this pastime just like—Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu created this pastime, just like Kṛṣṇa created the scene for speaking Bhagavad-gītā by overwhelming, temporarily overwhelming Arjuna so He could speak to him. So, therefore, He made... Viṣṇu made Jaya and Vijaya cover them; they didn’t see these great saintly persons. They wouldn’t let them into the spiritual world. So, of course, "You go to the material world!" Jaya and Vijaya, and Viṣṇu smiling: "I’m going to come to Vaikuṇṭha, I’m going to come as Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu." 

It goes for the minute... I’m going to the material world to fight with Jaya and Vijaya in the form of... This is the deeper, the deeper onion of this pastime. The clue book is actually when the four Kumāras were cursing Jaya and Vijaya because of their offense, they gave them a proposition: "You can go to the material world seven times as devotees or three times as demons. What would you like?" We’re cursing you, but, you know, with all the good work you’ve done, all this eternity, you can have it, you know: seven births as devotees or three births as asuras. They didn’t even blink! They didn’t take a moment to think; they said, "Three times as demons!" And the first time I heard that, I was like, "Wow! Come on, you guys, take the seven births as devotees, you’re gonna get on with it!" What? "Three births as demons?" But then I was listening to a tape of my master, my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and he said the reason they chose to take birth three times as demons is so they could get back to their service at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha, so as not to put the Lord to inconvenience the Lord in any way. Because who’s going to manage when they’re gone? So as not to create any disturbance for their master: "We’ll get back quicker." So that Viṣṇu will be pleased. This is devotional service. You can imagine, accepting the birth of a demon. Oh my God, that’s how far a devotee will go to please his master! How much inconvenience did Prabhupāda undergo for us, again, because it is love of the Lord! He wants us all back home.

We want to get back to our service to Viṣṇu as quickly as possible. Three births as demons will satisfy the Lord’s itching. "Come on, come on!" Wow, oh my God, they really surrendered! Don’t think of Jaya and Vijaya as anything other than pure devotees. So, what were the three births? 

Amazing that we know the histories of all that. We think of them as all those powerful demons, but it’s all līlā, it’s all play, it’s all Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. It’s hard to imagine fighting like that with Kṛṣṇa, but it’s līlā that devotees enjoy with the Lord. There’s a servant, and you can become the friend of the Lord, you can become the parent of the Lord, you can become the lover of the Lord, but there’s subcategories as well of rasas, relationships with Kṛṣṇa, because at some point you’ll consider which rasa you want; it’ll come out naturally, yes. So here’s the 12 rasas: anger, *raudra*, *adbhuta* (wonderful), *hāsya* (millennium)... a comic relationship with Kṛṣṇa means chivalrous relationship with Kṛṣṇa, *vīra*, a merciful relationship.

So then also there’s *vatsalya* means like, and *śānta* means a neutral relationship, like trees... means parental, like that, yeah. So they’re in the Bhāgavatam, are about to enter the *bhayānaka*, the most ghastly relationship you can imagine with the Lord by the Lord’s desire, because "I want to fight!" Who’s going to come? "I’ll ask, whatever you want Kṛṣṇa, I’ll do whatever pleases You." I’ll do... is the lecture on that note. Tomorrow, we’ll be discussing something very ghastly, mainly what happened when Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva came out of the pillar—ghastly, to get ready for ghastly, *bhayānaka*. I’m going to go to Mahārāja’s lecture; it’s all about *bhayānaka*—has actually, it’s... "I want to go to this *bhayānaka*, really, what’s it all about?" Come, learn... here, ghastly! Do you like scary stories or funny stories? The kids always say, "Scary!" All right, we’ll see you tomorrow, yeah... and ultimately, global way.""