"*00412*.*
"Namo oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.

We are continuing with our description of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s deity of Govindajī, or Govindadeva, and His journey from Vṛndāvana to the eventual safety of the famous city of Jaipur in present-day Rajasthan. In our last lecture, we heard how the great Mughal tyrant Emperor Aurangzeb died in the year 1707 and how, soon afterwards, Govindajī was moved to the relative safety of the town of Rupnagar, which was a good distance—actually, it is still a good distance—from Amer, and we mentioned how that town was later renamed Govindapur. 

When Govindajī finally arrived there, He was met by Rājā Jai Singh II, a great devotee king who presented the Lord with a large quantity of gold coins. In our last lecture, we described in different ways how this particular king, the devotee king Rājārṣi Jai Singh II, was actually a very serious practitioner of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I even read yesterday in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute that he took initiation into the Nimbārka-sampradāya, although it was more of a formality in his youth. Essentially, I think we can say he was a very dedicated Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava follower of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. After having darśana of Govindajī, a very strong desire arose in Jai Singh’s heart to bring Govindajī from Govindapur closer to his capital. His kingdom’s capital was Amer; it had been the capital for many centuries for those Rājapūta kings. At that time, Jai Singh was actually planning to move his capital from Amer by building an entire city nearby. Historians say that, being part of a great dynasty of kings who had all in their own ways accomplished great things, Jai Singh II felt that by building a new capital it would be a fitting accomplishment on his part. So, he was thinking in this way to move from Amer and build a city not too far away—a big, glorious city. 

Upon returning to Amer from Govindapur, he began to look around that entire region. He would go out and look at different parts of his kingdom and think, "Where can I put this new city, this new glorious city?" One day, while he was searching like that, he came across a particularly beautiful area with an abundance of kadamba trees and blossoming flowers, and there was a lake full of lotuses. This scenario very much reminded him of Vṛndāvana. You can remember in our last class how we discussed or described how he had visited Vṛndāvana and Mathurā on a number of occasions. Actually, I even read yesterday in the research institute that during one visit to Vṛndāvana, he ordered a palace to be constructed for him to live in when he came to Vṛndāvana. It was actually near Keśī-ghāṭa on the banks of the Yamunā. He and his family would stay there, and it still exists. It is a small palace and it is known as Siṅh-gadh, and I believe now it is in the custody of Śrīvatsa Gosvāmī of the Rādhāramaṇa temple. But actually, whenever Jai Singh would visit Vṛndāvana, I was reading that he would wander around like an ordinary pilgrim. Before he entered into Vṛndāvana, he would take off his shoes, enter barefoot, and he would do away with his royal umbrella and his crowns. I read that he didn't even take any security; he looked like an ordinary pilgrim. He had the right mood for entering Vṛndāvana, and most of the time when he was wandering around Vṛndāvana, he spent that time associating with sādhu-s.

Anyway, while walking in that particular beautiful forested area that he came across while searching for an area to build his big city, he thought that that little forest would be the perfect place to bring Govindajī and establish His worship there—to take Rādhā-Govinda from Govindapur and bring Him to that little gardened area. So, upon returning to Amer, he ordered his ministers to develop that area, making it look as much as possible like Śrī Vṛndāvana. It is interesting that he specifically asked them to study the descriptions of Vṛndāvana as given by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his writings; he was familiar with those writings.

Thousands of men were engaged in developing that area, which was already beautiful, into an even more beautiful space with gardens and a small but very magnificent temple. Because that area had, or still has, a certain glow to it, Jai Singh named it appropriately Kanaka Vṛndāvana—Golden Vṛndāvana. While the work was going on at Kanaka Vṛndāvana, Jai Singh brought Govindajī and Rādhā-Govinda all the way from Govindapur to his capital in Amer in 1713. He first installed Him in a temple near the palace in Amer. That little temple is called the Mansarovar temple. It is interesting to note here that as soon as Govindajī left Govindapur, the famous deities of Madana-mohana and Gopīnātha—Rādhā-Madana-mohana and Rādhā-Gopīnātha—arrived, and they stayed there in Govindapur. Madana-mohana, of course, was the first deity discovered in Vṛndāvana by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī 500 years ago, and the great saint Madhu Paṇḍita discovered Gopīnātha at Vaṁśīvaṭa in Vṛndāvana a few years later. Various devotees had been taking those two sets of deities on separate journeys from Vṛndāvana for nearly 50 years as well. They were also moved when Aurangzeb attacked Braj; they also gradually made their way down to Jaipur. 

Govindajī was taken to the Mansarovar temple, which is next to a big lake called Man-sāgara; it is just below the big palace in Amer. Some of you may have been to that large palace; it is a magnificent palace, like out of a fairy tale, very beautiful. So that is where the kings lived for many centuries, and that is where Rādhā-Govinda were taken—finally, into the home of the Rājapūta kings. I was reading that when Govindajī arrived in Amer and was put into that particular temple, there was a huge celebration acknowledging that He had safely avoided Aurangzeb’s determined efforts to find Him and destroy Him for decades. You can imagine—it took 50 years, but finally, He was safe and secure in the Rājapūta fort, Amer palace. Of course, Aurangzeb had died several years earlier, as we mentioned, but it was well known how he had pursued Govindajī for much of his life. This was a big celebration. In honor of that occasion of Govindajī arriving in Amer, Jai Singh ordered a huge pillar, a very large pillar, to be made and installed in that temple. It is called the Kīrti-stambha, or the Pillar of Glory. It is still there; you can go and see it, though all the tourists don't know what they are looking at. So, Govindajī was worshipped in that temple along with Śrī Rādhā and Gor-Govinda—the deity of Gaṇeśvara, that came from Jagannātha Purī—for two years while the construction of Kanaka Vṛndāvana took place.

During that two-year period, Jai Singh, who was studying the teachings of Rūpa Gosvāmī, learned that an eternal companion of Śrī Rādhā is Lalitā-sakhī, who has many services, but one of her services is to prepare tāmbūla, or betel nut, for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Inspired by that information—how Lalitā-sakhī is so much a part of Vṛndāvana-līlā and a part of Rādhārāṇī's service—he ordered his artists to carve a very beautiful deity of Lalitā-devī, or to prepare a very beautiful deity of Lalitā-devī made from a combination of eight precious metals, called aṣṭa-dhātu. When that deity of Lalitā-sakhī was made from those metals, he then had her covered in gold. When this incredible deity of Lalitā-devī was finished, Jai Singh had her installed along with Rādhā and Govinda in that Mansarovar temple in Amer. 

Then, in 1715, in the month of Kārttika, Govindajī, Śrī Rādhā, and the deity of Gor-Govinda were finally moved into their beautiful new temple at Kanaka Vṛndāvana. I found a court document written by one of Jai Singh’s famous court poets—I think we have quoted him before—whose name is Ātmārām. Therein, the poets are meant to glorify the king and everything they do, so this Ātmārām describes Kanaka Vṛndāvana, actually comparing it with Vṛndāvana in present-day Uttar Pradesh, where I am now. Listen to the description; it was a big thing, and by studying the writings of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the artists and the workmen got the idea how to create it very nicely. We do go there on our Jaipur parikramās with the devotees; today it is still very beautiful. He wrote after its completion:

> "There is a grove of kadamba covered with kuñja-berī vines, where there are mallikā-śrī trees blooming with sweet flowers and endless creepers. There, Govinda wanders about alone with a woolen blanket under His arm, singing blissful songs. The righteous and honorable Jai Singh, out of his ardent love for Govinda, has permanently installed Him in a jeweled residence there. It appears that this Vṛndāvana, Kanaka Vṛndāvana, is even sweeter than the Vṛndāvana north of here."

So, Jai Singh, this Rājapūta king, used to come to Kanaka Vṛndāvana every ekādaśī to have darśana of Rādhā-Govinda.

It was in that same year, 1715, after taking the blessings of Rādhā-Govinda, that Jai Singh ordered work to begin on his new city, the new city he envisioned which he wanted to call Jaipur, the City of Victory. Actually, it is 11 kilometers from Amer—it wasn't so far—and in between is Kanaka Vṛndāvana, or a little bit closer to Jaipur than Kanaka Vṛndāvana; so you get a picture of where everything is. It is described as India’s first planned city, and it was designed by a very famous architect, a very learned devotee. The city was based on the principles of Vāstu-śāstra and Śilpa-śāstra; everything was done according to the śāstras. That city would be completed in the year 1727, but in 1720, during construction, Govindajī appeared to Jai Singh in a dream one night. This is so interesting. Govindajī appeared because he invested so much service into this deity; he actually took on the protection of the deity after our famous Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Rām Singh the First. Everyone had a part to play in serving this deity. Govindajī said to the king in the dream:

> "O King, you are building such a large city including a palace for yourself; cannot you include a small space for Me there as well?"

So, the next day, Jai Singh wrote a letter to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura—they were all working together in the same saṅkīrtana movement—asking for permission to build and install Govindajī permanently in a temple in Jaipur. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura wrote back: "Yes, you can establish Govindajī in your own mahal." Now, it is very significant that Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura used this word *mahal*, because *mahal* literally means one's own place, but more specifically, one's own room, indicating that whatever is inside your room belongs to you; it is your property. Now, this letter would later play a key role in a very fierce debate about whether Govindajī and the other deities should return to Vṛndāvana some years later. We will discuss this in a few minutes. 

Anyway, Jai Singh called for his architect, Vidyādhara Bhaṭṭācārya, and requested him, "As you have laid out the city according to Vāstu-śāstra, please include a very beautiful temple for Rādhā-Govinda and the other deities for my upcoming city of Jaipur." So, inspired, Jai Singh then ordered that Rādhā-Govinda be moved from Kanaka Vṛndāvana closer to where he was—well, closer to Jaipur, actually. The Jaipur construction was going on, and some buildings and residences had already been constructed. So, Jai Singh ordered that Rādhā-Govinda be moved from Kanaka Vṛndāvana to what is called Nakar-khana, or the drum house, a beautiful residence that had already been built. Rādhā-Govinda and the other deities were worshiped there; they were moved, you could say literally, into Jaipur as it was being constructed, and they stayed there in that "drum house" for seven years.

From 1720 to 1725—I had to do a lot of research in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, going through all these old manuscripts—they stayed there. Then in 1725, the deities were shifted briefly for a couple of days to other residences because of a lot of construction noise and moving things around. One place that they were moved to was a large tower called Govinda-burja, which still exists. Then they moved for a few days to a place called Govinda-berī, now called Govinda-berī, near a famous water well. Their temple wasn't completely ready yet, but Jai Singh’s palace, his particular residence, was ready, and the construction of Rādhā-Govinda’s temple was being done right in front of his palace, as per his desire. 

Then Jai Singh did something really, really amazing. While their temple was being finished, Jai Singh arranged that Rādhā-Govinda, Lalitā, and Gor-Govinda were moved into his own newly constructed palace. He moved them into his own residence. And not only that, but he also had Madana-mohana and Rādhā-Gopīnātha brought down all the way from Govindapur—remember, they were established in Govindapur after Govindajī left, which is quite some distance away. He brought them as well into his private residence, his new palace. All those deities, those three sets of deities, were there for two years, from 1725 to 1727. I was reading in the institute that every day was like a festival for the Lordships in Jai Singh’s home. Can you imagine? Those famous deities; he had them all moved into his palace.

Then, in late 1727, Rādhā-Govinda’s temple, named Sūrya Mahal, was completed, and Rādhā-Govinda, Lalitā, and Gor-Govinda were moved into that permanent residence where they still reside today. That is where we see them when we go on parikramā. Rādhā-Madana-mohana and Rādhā-Gopīnātha shifted to new temples, their own new temples, as well. Of course, their history is a little bit different, but we will discuss that in another lecture. As I mentioned, Jai Singh had Rādhā-Govinda’s temple built directly in front of his palace so that when he walked out onto his veranda in the morning, the very first thing he saw were the deities.

The city was complete—of course, it was always expanding—in the same year, 1727. Then, Jai Singh moved the entire population of Amer—remember, that is the original kingdom, the palace, but also the people living there—to this new city of Jaipur. Everybody. Nobody was left in Amer; it was left for the tourists in future decades, so future generations could come and see that palace. In time, all these three sets of deities had their followers coming to their temples in Jaipur, and this guaranteed the safety of all these deities—Rādhā-Govinda, Rādhā-Madana-mohana, and Rādhā-Gopīnātha—because although Aurangzeb was no longer living, the Mughal Empire still existed, of course in a weaker form, but there was still fighting and wars going on. So, finally, all these Vṛndāvana deities were protected. It was such a historic moment in the history of our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. 

Ironically, after several decades, these three sets of deities being in Jaipur caused some controversy. How could that be? Well, now that the threat of Aurangzeb was more or less over, the devotees in Vṛndāvana naturally wanted the deities to come back to Braj. They thought, "They survived, thank you to everyone, and thank you to Jaipur for taking such good care of them, but they are our deities; they should come back to Vṛndāvana." This desire also included the Vṛndāvana deities of Rādhā-Dāmodara and Rādhā-Vinoda, the deities of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Lokanātha Gosvāmī respectively, who were also taken to Jaipur for protection. So, the Vrajabāsīs in Vṛndāvana wanted them back. We are jumping ahead here a little bit: when the great-grandson of Jai Singh II later came into power, this issue came to a head with the Vrajabāsīs. "We want our deities back!" But the great-grandson of Jai Singh replied in a letter to the Vrajabāsīs, "No." He was speaking specifically about Govindajī; he said, "Govindajī is situated in our *mahal*—remember *mahal*—our Sūrya Mahal, our palace, our home. This means He is our personal property. We have protected Him; we will keep Him." Of course, that law included the other sets of deities as well. History has shown that all these Vṛndāvana deities have stayed in Jaipur. 

Thus, in time, many devotees from Vṛndāvana and Bengal started visiting Jaipur and spending a lot of time there. They came from Vṛndāvana, from Orissa, from Purī, from Navadvīpa and Māyāpura in Bengal—these are Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava deities, so there were these big pilgrimages. In principle, Jaipur became a big place of pilgrimage. I was reading that one day, some disciples of Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the disciple of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura who lived in Vṛndāvana, said to Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, "We won't go to Jaipur. Why should we leave Vṛndāvana and go to Jaipur? Even if Govindajī is there, we can establish some new deities in Vṛndāvana and serve Kṛṣṇa here." On that particular occasion, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa replied in a very interesting way. He quoted Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura:

> "Śrī-govinda-gopīnātha, śrī-madana-mohana..."

"Wherever these three deities are situated, that is the real Vṛndāvana." I found this quote in a yet unpublished śāstra entitled *Padāvalī*, not *Padyāvalī*. This is when we are doing our research now, working in cooperation with the Vṛndāvana Research Institute; there are so many scriptures—I mentioned 30,000 to 32,000 scriptures—many of them are Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scriptures. There, we are finding many manuscripts, many scriptures written by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura that are yet unpublished or perhaps unknown. This is one authorized scripture that we found. When we determined it was an original scripture—well, there are various ways you can do that, by the handwriting and so forth—called *Padāvalī* by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, we are hopefully going to find many more to share with all of you. It is an exciting project. 

In *Padāvalī*, we found "Śrī-govinda-gopīnātha... jayaśrī-bana-vṛndāvanam." Narottama writes, "Wherever we find the three Lords—Śrī Govinda, Śrī Gopīnātha, and Śrī Madana-mohana—that place is truly Vṛndāvana." So, Baladeva quoted that. Then he concluded to his students, his disciples, "You should all go to Jaipur for darśana; you can come back, but you go for darśana." How do we understand these words, that Jaipur is the real Vṛndāvana? Well, in the sense that Jaipur is *Gupta-Vṛndāvana*. *Gupta* means hidden, so it is a hidden Vṛndāvana because of the presence of those three original, principal deities of Braj. In that sense, it is real Vṛndāvana. As that understanding grew amongst the Vaiṣṇava communities everywhere, more and more devotees crowded into Jaipur. Actually, at one point, I was reading that practically the whole community of Vṛndāvana shifted to Jaipur for some years. Historians have stated that for some time—this is also interesting, I didn't know this—Jaipur became the main *pīṭha*, or the main place, the main school of learning for all these Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, because many Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava saints went there to teach. So, it was a seat of learning; everyone wanted to be with Govindajī, Rādhā-Govinda, Rādhā-Madana-mohana, Rādhā-Gopīnātha, Dāmodara, and Rādhā-Vinoda. 

All this bubbled in history, you could say; it took place over 50 or 60 years. Of course, a number of devotees did remain in Braj, in the original Vṛndāvana, and they gradually, it is described, established *pratibhū* deities in Vṛndāvana. The focus eventually shifted back to Vṛndāvana itself, or you could say back and forth—like today, right? We come to India and we go to Māyāpura, we go to Jagannātha Purī, we come to Vṛndāvana, and we take a side trip down to Jaipur. It is only nowadays with the highway; it is only three and a half hours, the new highway they established. Because all these *pratibhū*—*pratibhū* means a deity like the original, it is considered to be non-different, that the form of the deity is carved in the same way, it is installed, and it is to be understood there is no difference between the original deity and the *pratibhū* deity—for all the deities, Govindajī, Madana-mohana, all these deities that had left Vṛndāvana, their *pratibhū* forms were installed in Braj. So, devotees started moving back. Let us remember that Rādhāramaṇa, a beloved, marvelous deity of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, never left. They remained in Vṛndāvana all that time, and Vṛndāvana remained very popular because of Him, as it is popular today because of His worship.

We will stop there. That is a lot for you to transcendentally digest. This is history—this was taking place in the 1700s, a modern-day līlā. It is very interesting, and there is so much more to discover. I feel it is a great blessing that somehow or other Kṛṣṇa has arranged for us to have access to this Vṛndāvana Research Institute. It is really a lifetime, or many lifetimes, of sevā there to preserve all these ancient scriptures, to scan them, digitize them, and publish them for all of you. The world needs this knowledge; Kali-yuga needs this knowledge of how to solve the problems, and these very deep writings by all our ācāryas are present there. You want to save them—some of them are crumbling in my hands as I am holding them, putting them from one place to another. So, it is an urgency. I have a team of devotees we are working with now, scholars and just people helping with renovating the building, which is also deteriorating very quickly—putting in new copper wire, getting AC and climate control. This is a lot of work, and I need a lot of help; many hands make light work. So, some of you can please come forward and help us in this, serving the previous ācāryas and Prabhupāda’s desire that these books become available to the world. 

There is more coming; I have some more lectures about Jaipur as well. So, we will finish today with, I feel, very appropriate prayers. We all know these prayers, but addressing these particular three sets of deities we have been discussing today:

> "Glory to the all-merciful Rādhā and Madana-mohana! I am lame and ill-advised, yet They are my directors, and Their lotus feet are everything to me." 
> 
> "In a temple of jewels in Vṛndāvana, underneath the desire tree, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, served by Their most confidential associates, sit upon an effulgent throne. I offer my most humble obeisances unto Them." 
> 
> "Śrīla Gopīnātha, who originated the transcendental mellow of the rāsa dance, stands on the shore of Vaṁśīvaṭa and attracts the attention of the cowherd damsels with the sound of His celebrated flute. May They all confer upon us Their benedictions."

Thank you so much, Prabhus. We will be back in a couple of days with more, more transcendental pastimes in Jaipur. 

Kṛṣṇa.""