In fact, my whole life talking to you, but my dear full Frantsevich, are you glad to conduct lectures on his biography throughout?

I know that everyone about the ceiling lived, six Goswamis ask him. The very fact that they are going to ruin their classmate, I remember how once we specially summarized the hall and when I entered the altar, did something not in general instead of singing?

But next to her, she sang a hat with you that according to prayers and then there was still you can light on and much, you won't go to each head with him, funny functions. Because without the deities from the screens that installed these six Goswamis, this movement would not exist, and where the pioneers once, how perfect the question is?

Any question, no matter insignificant manga or some important question about, can be noted. This beauty, and in this its beauty and embodiment, mother, his understanding is shavasana. For on to enjoy it, let's go, fights on the file with Ukrainian his information.

Jaspers, you really wife played on, heym part of the hair on control, when he was still quite the little one. Was equipped with a temple, his husband owed him debts, and he couldn't even dream of a better gift. We're talking about a because it meant writing from everyone, it was his dream.

So when he woke up, he went downstairs and there his family heard an iron beer advertisement in an advertisement. A few hours later, they heard a knock on the door. Elephants and you, but this must be done with you.

He went to open the incriminating evidence that he gave him to polish, and here it is. Eva, Eva, with you, he got tired of dealing with the government, and then he simply read and, of course, didn't like it at all.

And show, I adjust yachts, I treated him, dogs, they themselves came to help from the viewing site, but themselves. And here for the stock strip on Mrs. Coulter's garden, they were, they were instructions to write books and Sanatana Goswami, written by Goswami.

This was both Rupa and Sanatana Goswami, a description of many books, the very first one, and it is claimed that all other books are simply a commentary on. Polaris or beat and published this book and grass, and he also helped us understand the commentary because, yes, and the comments to it, and each of the first pages, the last method, namely, the 7th teaching.

And if you are familiar with this chapter, you know that Prahlada Maharaj gives verses and how some knowledge, like vision and some knowledge, that is, he so dog, which means the restoration of the site, Sineglazka, will start from 600 rubles, and you When he preached, "Become Cherry the Bride of." He loved to read a chapter somewhere, a combination that gives the question of leaving Sanatana Goswami, and therefore he did that Sanatana Goswami's teachings help us establish our losses, our several, and this is the first step, because we have moved away from Krishna very, very far to the south.

The same thing applies to guys, and in my opinion, it. Says that we cannot remember when this moment happened, how many lives ago, a husband of a summer man, since time immemorial, how we wasted time. From that moment on, the spiritual world, we simply, in what way, a living being with the other hand, went through eight, died, through thousands, to the state of the Spitz teeth.

If you imagine how much yours exists and manages to do, then you have also gone through each and every one, and not once or twice, the infinite universe from one kind of life to another, how we wasted Christ and a weekend dress from Ford, and we were so covered by our material desires or our activities that you could continue to continue.

This trouble, but by the grace of pure devotees of great souls, such is the nature of them, they are very compassionate, asi ke pasa, from this stove itself, and we receive the mercy of scouts and pure devotees or Ingur, because we may not even ask them for it, but they come and interfere with our lives, and the Microsoft website, and I have a speech about the French boarding school, and otherwise they interfered with our lives, awakened us and reminded us that we don't need to waste our time, we need to engage in nine-percent service, and everyone has their own path, their hearts, people.

Look at the world, and one way or another, you start your life with a clean slate, met some devotees or received Prabhupada's books, and with him, a tsunami arsenal, you all know the Saka word, glass, ideally, with stones, the main terrorist on you, wipe it for your favorite team, public doctors owe this to certain individuals who we are with us, because if not for them.

We should be extremely grateful to these individuals. In fact, it is said that a person cannot pay the debt he owes to his guru, and this is like saying that when we are just starting with national Krishna, the first steps were not there for the feeling of liberation from material things from such.

Marauders. He is still about 40 years old, and he himself left from 1 to 100. Medley spring and axis and consulting high prices, then how do we feel this liberation from the time of material existence?

Because there were material sinful activities, it is like a person more than illness is not a natural condition, and because of it suffered. And when we begin with a healthy lifestyle, we feel much better, but it causes like as we saw, half requires monkeys, and they are like and just hanging wires, and if you touch us, you will get an electric shock, and you will suffer.

How can you collect from this country?

You do not need to just let go. From the beginning of Krishna consciousness, and because you refuse what with an adult, and so even spiritual teachers inspire us, although at first we have no particular desire.

This matter of accepting the four regulative principles, no writing me, no illegal sex, gambling, and intercity ends, and and this relieves us from suffering, and what gives us happiness, for this they give for the second part of the process, this chanting of the Hare Krishna maha-mantra, as they say to talk to you, I do not know how much is contained in these two.

Krishna and.

After when he begins to follow the four principles and chant your circles, after some time, we will stop initiated for sabado drunks to restore their relationship with Krishna.

Microphone, this new address, think over strip and mother loves, put there, but the herd is equal to the son of everyone, and brain, and beaten will kill half the army, and if we want to know who we really are, what our relationship with God is, you must be sincere and disciplined, and because nothing in this world can be achieved without discipline, and not that this knowledge is intended for some specific group of people.

In fact, we can all get and deserve this qualification. Pencil holder, your staff, such a glorious porridge, question forests, public bil-bil made of bricks, and then the head together Kurasov soul and funk Addison. Minimum until you don't care, he, you still I eat chat diva Masha.

It used to be believed that only high-born with the layout of Brahman or from can achieve perfection, but Sanatana Goswami, very liberal or compassionate, is important, did not consider so. He comes to an analogy that just like cold, we can be transformed into gold through a chemical process.

Similarly, a fallen conditioned soul can become a pure devotee of the Vaishnavas through chanting. The Lord had to deal with abundance. The cyst with Igor files. Play with radiation. You need to save after the masses of essences. You speak of interbreeding and keeping you with the first one.

He kills for centuries. Pan himself, and this must be so, because Botva 2 ti Krishna says that he is the father who gives the village to all living beings.

That is, every living being is the son or daughter of the Lord, and he wants to return every living being back to himself. Khasha should.