Hare Krishna,

Our vivo cultura traveling festival program here in America is coming to a close now. We've done about 38 universities, as well as other smaller programs here and there, much to our satisfaction, because we've had rave reviews and many people have been personally touched.

They've been inspired, actually, to take up the process of Krishna consciousness and visit local temples and join nama-hatta, etc.

This is the success of our presenting the Performing Arts of ancient India. See, time, Sita. In the beginning of the movement, Śrīla Prabhupāda had actually encouraged the performing arts of ancient India, specifically Krishna consciousness, as a way to engage people in devotional service.

This is the age of Kali. People are lazy in their taking up spiritual life, so we have to make it attractive. And the performing arts are attractive. You could say that's the best of any country's or civilization's presentation of who they are—their performing arts.

And Prabhupāda himself was engaged to a certain degree in the performing arts when he was a young man in college.

He and his friends put together a play about Lord Caitanya, and they practiced for many, many months, from what I've heard. But when the day of the performance came, they, they backed off because they felt in their hearts they weren't pure enough yet to present the pastimes of Lord Caitanya in such a way that they would touch the hearts of the people.

So they went on to practice the more important; they focused on their sadhana, their chanting, their reading of the Vedic scriptures, Bhagavad Gītā, and then Bhāgavata Purāṇa, Caitanya-caritāmṛta, etc., until they felt they were capable of bringing forth a spiritual emotion from the audience.

And they performed for the college, and Prabhupāda related how many people were crying in the audience. "Mother, I won't..." "I love you.

There may have been things that I've done to make you down, but don't you be down. No, Mother, I want you. Father, I want you to know that I love you. Father, I want you to... I love you. There may have been things that I've done to make you down, but don't you be down.

Father, I want you to know." "This show is absolutely incredible. I've been crying ever since it ended. I feel like I've just finished crying, and the cast is very sweet to come and hug me and make me feel better.

But it really was, it was, it was incredibly moving. And even only having gotten, like, that small preview of what the story was because I was unfamiliar with it, just all the emotion and beauty of the show came right through, and it was incredible.

And I would tell anybody I've ever met in my life to come see the show." "Children, I want you to know that I love you. Children, I want you... love you. But may have any things that I've done to make you down, but don't you be down.

No, children, aren't you..." "My darling, I want you to know that I love... my darling, I want you... that I love you. I love you. There may have been things that I've done to make you down, but don't you be down, darling.

I want you to know." "I like this show because it was so graceful. The dancers were so sweet, and they really touched you. They showed some emotions, and also, like, I liked when they came out and they sort of played with the audience, and they acted like the audience was part of the show, and that was really nice.

That's one reason why I liked it. It really showed some good emotion and good thought to think about. So, I really liked it." Caesar, jail, fever. See. This is the purpose of the performing arts, not just to entertain people.

There's so much performing arts around the world which bring forth so many emotions, but most of those emotions are material. But the performing arts that we're doing, presenting Krishna consciousness in this medium, is meant to bring forth a sense of love and devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

So, a few times during our performances of Rāma-līlā in particular, which you could say is the original love story, divine love, the love between the divine couple Radha and Krishna and their devotees, I saw people in the audience crying.

And for me personally, that made all the austerities that we've undergone here in America, traveling with our festival group of, you know, over fifty, fifty devotees from 14 different countries. It's not easy to be on the road like this.

We are sleeping in a different bed every night. We're never exactly sure where the paraphernalia is going to come from. There's delays, there's storms, there's all types of austerities, bedbugs are things we have to go through. But when I see the people getting that first glimpse of Krishna consciousness, that spark of devotion, the bhakti, that which was there in everyone's heart, when I see that from our humble attempts to present Krishna consciousness in this way, when I see people smile or wave, they do a standing ovation.

You got several standing ovations. The show has been very professional, it's very artistic. Our devotees are very, very talented. When I see that reaction amongst the people, it brings great satisfaction to my heart and all our performers. So, although we're a little tired at the end of seven weeks of traveling, we're feeling very satisfied that we were able to assist our Spiritual Master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, in this way of presenting Krishna consciousness in his cultural medium.

As we've said before, Prabhupāda did say, "We will take the world over by culture." So this is one arm of the same sankīrtana movement.

There are many ways to present sankīrtana, of course, book distribution, Hari Nāma, nāma-hatta festivals. We found this particular avenue of the performing arts, it works really well, and we were fortunate that our devotees were are well-trained. Many of our performers are in themselves teachers of ballet, they teach poetry reading, and all these different aspects of culture.

They're very good at it, but they're dedicating it in the service of the Lord. And we're accomplishing our mission to touch the hearts of the people of this great country of America with Krishna consciousness.

After all, this was where Prabhupāda started, he started here in America, and we're very happy that we can continue his mission here in this country.

Look forward to coming back again next year. Hari Krishna.

All the glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Absolutely wonderful presentation. The music, the dance is just absolutely incredible. And I certainly think you should all come out to see whenever you get the chance. Rāma, I want you to know. Lord, I want you. I love you. Take it down.

Don't shut down. Lord, I want you.