So, we've come to a very beautiful palace complex in the village called Dig. This temple complex, palace, and temple complex was built by one of the kings of Bharatpur, which is not far from Vrndavana. And actually, this is part of Vrndavana itself.

It's a place I think most ISKCON devotees don't know about. They don't come here because it's not one of the seven temples of Vrndavana or Radhaland, etc. But it's part of the history of the lore of Vrndavana. Because much of what we see in Vrndavana proper, the palaces, the temples, etc., they were built by Krishna conscious kings in previous centuries.

When you walk around Vrndavana, you see many beautiful palaces, many beautiful temples, but the sadhus didn't build them because the sadhus were renounced. So, Krishna conscious kings would build that.

That's part of their service to Sri Krishna.

And they would also build temples and palaces for their families. So, this is one such temple and palace complex. It's quite vast, actually. It'll take us a couple of hours to walk around. Only an hour and 20 minutes drive from Vrndavana.

So, I brought devotees here just to get a feeling for the history of Vrndavana, which includes these Krishna conscious kings, these rajarsishis.

So, we're walking around. The king actually had a famous deity carved of Hanuman out of pure jade, big, big deity, eight, nine feet tall, carved out of pure jade of Hanuman. And the deity, Lakshman and Ram are sitting on his shoulders.

So, I think that deity must be worth millions and millions and millions of dollars. It's like they have a security guard there, actually. But like this, you discover many wonderful things in the greater Vrndavana. Vrndavana's more than just the market or even just our beloved Radhaland.

It extends for many, many kilometers. And as one goes around Vrndavana, there are many wonderful things that you can discover. Such as, for the historical aspect, we brought our devotees here. And I told them that today they can just wander in the palace grounds and just, you know, imagine what it was like three or four hundred years ago.

And, um, but it's nice. It's being maintained. The government is maintaining this, and people come here, they have festivals here, they have tours here, etc. And, um, Indians, they can come in for 20 rupees, and foreigners it costs 300 rupees.

But when we arrived, we said, we're not foreigners, you know, we're sadhus. And sadhus who please give us the Indian price. They did. In appreciation because devotees are all dressed. And so we're wandering around here and you can see in the video of Hanuman and you can see the beautiful architecture and the large grounds.

This is how the kings lived. It's very nice how they used space. Not everything was construction like we see in Kali Yuga. There's construction, but there's lots of space. Something like we might hear about in Dwarka when Krishna ruled Dwarka as Dwarkadhish, as the king, that Dwarka was constructed in such a way that the citizens could, you know, wander through gardens and forests and flower gardens and just, you know, get a little relief from the stress of material life.

Of course, I don't think there was any suggestion to work. I'm just making a point, you know, to use space in such a way that the mind is peaceful. So, one can think of Krishna.

Merry Christmas. So, we were speaking earlier about this beautiful palace complex, very extensive, beautiful buildings for various purposes. And over here is a beautiful lake as well. And beyond that, we see the old fort. The old fort, it's, it's a massive fort.

I don't know how anyone could penetrate that fort. But the kings, they had this duty. Kshatriya means one who protects. So, in times of war, when the kingdom was attacked, very often the citizens, the king and his entourage, his family, they would go into the fort.

And the citizens would also come and be protected there. And there would be, you know, fighting from that fort. So, this Dig fort's very, very famous. They're very famous, as is this particular complex. And one might think that, you know, the people who are living such a simple life and, you know, one family, the king has all this opulence.

But the kings were Kshatriyas, you know, they were fighters. They went out and they, you know, took on the opposition. And they had their pride. Actually, it's described that just like sometimes people beautify themselves with makeup and hairstyles, the king's pride was with the scars that they would get in battle fighting the opposition.

So, this is kind of their mood. So, they live in a grand style. But the real kings were rajarsishis. It means they were saintly persons sitting on the throne. And therefore, their mood was that they were ruling the people in order to protect them, protect them from foreign invasions and protect them from the illusion of the material world by promoting temple worship, deity worship.

Many, as I was saying earlier, many of the temples in Vrndavana, they were built by kings, not sadhus. Didn't have money. Kings had money. Yes, the kings would tax the people. But they weren't the rajarsishis weren't greedy. They weren't putting it in their pocket or hiding in a Swiss bank account.

They turned that money and utilized it for the in the service of the people. They would, you know, govern in such a way that there was proper agriculture, economy, etc., etc. So that people had food to eat, they had shelter, a place to live, they were educated, they were schooled.

This was the duty of the king. So, it's not that the people were envious of this opulence. They felt protected by the king. And therefore, they would serve the king. So, this is actually, you could say, perfect politics. One-time prophecy referring to democracy, or demon crazy.

Because the leaders take so much advantage of the people, and the people don't know, not knowing what is the real goal of life and how to achieve it, they elect sudras to govern. But actually, kings had it in their DNA.

They went from dynasty to dynasty, and they ruled as some spiritual leaders. But because practical life is also there, they knew how to satisfy the material needs of the public and the spiritual needs as well. So, when we come here, we don't think all the people were envious of the king.

No, they were grateful to the king. And this is perfect society. If you have a rajarsishi, a Krishna conscious ruler, whether it's democracy or socialism or royalty, the leader has to be Krishna conscious.

So, we're appreciating how the king lived in this way and had his fort to protect his people. So, opulence was there. But opulence was used in the correct way. So, some thoughts on visiting this beautiful palace complex in Dig, which again is just a short drive from Vrndavana.

Devotees should come here and experience the history. History. As India, I'm always interested in the history of India and how different people serve Krishna in their various ways.

It is said, as a matter of fact, Shrila Gurudev quoted this yesterday, 64 million holy places, billion holy places in Vrndavana, as he's mentioned, we know prominently the seven Goswami temples, a few other places around the area. But in reality, all 64 crore square miles of Vrndavana are holy places.

The pastimes that take place, we may or may not have uncovered yet, but they are connected to the places where Krishna had his pastimes.

Therefore, they become worth visiting, worth knowing. Additionally, the example is a lesson to us how to live our life. The shelter, your kings, they were not greedy. As Maharaja says, and I liked his description of their decorations. For the brahmana, his decoration is his knowledge, his humility, his renunciation, and possibly a few choice Tulasi necklaces.

His beauty is his ability to protect. And as Maharaja says, the scars that he brings back from his conquering. For the Vaishya, your beauty is the acquisition of gold, jewelry, lands, cows. And for the Sudra, their beauty is the sweat of their brow.

This is not seen as a demeaning thing. It is a natural order of society. So, in this way, every aspect of society has some particular role to play. This large complex here, and we can't imagine, you know, one family, okay, an extended family, 12, 15, maybe 20 members living.

No, there would be servants, there would be cooks, there would be pujaris, there would be all of these arrangements where everyone was able to take shelter here and be provided for. Because this was the duty of the king. As Maharaja has said, rajarsishi, saintly kings who knew their duty was to protect and provide a Krishna conscious environment for the citizens.

This is the difference between that type of leadership and what we find throughout the world today. Every leader in the world is exploiting the masses for their own private wealth, for their own private acquisition, and not really caring for the public.

Occasionally, you find one rare leader that is doing something for the public. So, this is the example that we find in Krishna consciousness.

This is the example we find in Shrila Prabhupada. Shrila Prabhupada may not have been a great king like this with massive palaces like this, although he did have so many temples. He one time said, I was living in Vrndavana in a very small room, and now I have temples all over the world.

But Shrila Prabhupada has given us this shelter, just as the rajarsishis here gave shelter to the residents. Shrila Prabhupada has given us shelter in this ISKCON society, in this Vedic culture, in the teachings of Bhagavad-gita and Bhagavatam. So, for us to embrace them, for us to be able to guide our lives by them, we can also be very satisfied and happy and peaceful.

And what is the central point of this area?

The deity. Prabhupada said many times that the home becomes purified by the presence of the deity. We know from having visited Jaipur so many times that the king arranged his palace so that he could see Govindaji. That the family members would go to Govindaji.

Prabhupada tells one story of one very wealthy man that had the deity installed in the home, and it was the duty of everyone of the children first thing in the morning to come and offer respects to the deity, take darshan.

If they did not, the priest would give them one uh bill. Sorry, you did not come this morning. You must pay this fine. And Prabhupada was in Los Angeles when he told this story. He said, therefore, I think anyone that does not come to Mangal Arati, they must pay the fine of distributing one Krishna book every day to all the devotees.

Left very heartily. So, this was the center. So, this type of mood, this is how these places were established and lasted long because Krishna was the center.

Yes, in that regard, the kings would use a lot of their opulence that they got from taxes and from conquering other kingdoms. That's what kings did. And a lot of that opulence was used for worship of the deity because these kings were Krishna conscious, and they knew that whatever wealth they had was given to them by the Lord to be used by the Lord.

So, it was understood that if the deity was properly taken care of, then the kingdom would be properly taken care of. And Prabhupada also was teaching us that if the managers of our temples take very nice care of the deities, then everything would become auspicious.

So, this was the situation in Vedic culture. That the kings, they would daily go to the temple, they would watch the arati, and they would participate in the worship in various ways. Feeling that Krishna wants to kill you, no one can save you.

But if Krishna wants to save you, no one can kill you.

This was one of the symptoms of the kings. They were very, very devoted to Krishna in this Braj area and in Rajasthan as well, as we know, very devoted to the deities.

And this was their actual glory. They were just serving Krishna according to their propensity, arranging deity worships with all the citizens could come every day and become purified by that worship as well.

So, all glories to the rajarsishis. I hope that in the future we'll see more rajarsishis to help us spread Krishna consciousness around the world.

Uncle, I used to [unintelligible] Prabhupada.