Hare Krishna, we're continuing our Karthik Vanam here in Śrī Vrndāvana dhāma 2018. Local tradition has it that there are 60 billion holy places in Śrī Vrndāvana dhāma. Through the years, we've been trying to visit as many of them as we possibly can.

And of course, by going there and speaking the glories of that particular place with the līlā that happened there and having kīrtan there with our close associates and disciples and well-wishers, naturally one develops an affection for those places, which brings us back year after year after year for purification, for inspiration, etc.

And this morning, we find ourselves at one of my favorite places in Vrndāvana dhāma. A place perhaps not visited so often byISKCON devotees, but we hope by this video to make this place famous. It's Chandra Sarovara. It's just a stone's throw from Govardhana Hill.

We hear in the śāstras that at one time, Govardhana Hill was surrounded by lakes, unlimited different lakes, where the cowherd boys and Kṛṣṇa, or Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd girls, they would have their pastimes. One such lake is Chandra Sarovara.

At the moment, we're sitting next to the samādhi of a great devotee, Sūradāsa. He's famous for his wonderful poems that he wrote, devotional poems, particularly about the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He was a contemporary of the Six Goswāmīs.

It is said that he was born blind, and he left home at six years old and traveled to different holy places around India, but eventually settled where his heart was, here in Śrī Vrndāvana dhāma. He has many followers, even today.

It is said that when he left this world, just the moment before he left this world, one devotee asked him, "Sūradāsa, what are you thinking about now?" So he composed, this is how poets are, he composed a song immediately in his mind.

He began singing it, and just as he finished singing that song which was on his mind about the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, he gave up his body and left this world. So his samādhi mandir is here. So we come here to pray to such a great Vaiṣṇava that we can have the same attachment that he had for Vrndāvana dhāma, and that we also can attain eternal residence here.

Chandra Sarovara, many pastimes take place here. This is where the Gopis sang their famous ślokas or songs, the Gopa Gīta, in a feeling of separation after Kṛṣṇa left the Rāsa dance. That part of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was sung here because a number of Rāsa līlās, Rāsa dances, take place here.

One in particular, in the springtime, Kṛṣṇa announced to His Gopi girlfriends, they were wandering in this area near Govardhana Hill. He announced the Rāsa līlā, a Rāsa dance. So, as soon as He announced that, all the demigods from the higher planets, they assembled just above this area in their flower airplanes to witness this, you could say the quintessence of all of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, His Rāsa-līlā dance.

And the dance began, and it was very beautiful. Kṛṣṇa was dancing with the various Gopis and so forth and so on. And that Rāsa līlā lasted an entire night of Brahmā. And at the end of that Rāsa līlā, it was noted that the demigods were witnessing this pastime, they were still present.

Actually, so much time had passed, eons had passed, but they were still present there. And the ācāryas explain that this is because of Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Although they were there for eons and eons of time, by His mercy, they still had their same bodies that they had when the Rāsa līlā dance began.

He extended their lives. This is what Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī said. One day, in particular, Chandra, the moon-god, he was particularly fascinated by this pastime. So he was present as a full moon during this entire night of Brahmā to shed light on this transcendental pastime.

And he watching that līlā of Kṛṣṇa, he experienced such ecstasy. The tears flowed from his eyes like torrents of rain and created a beautiful lake, which is here presently now known as Chandra Sarovara, made from the tears of ecstasy from the moon-god who witnessed that night there.

So many pastimes took place here. We don't have time to recount them, but we would encourage devotees to come to this place. It's part of the līlās of Govardhana Hill, which is second only in importance to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, according to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī.

So, come and have darśana, the pastimes of Govardhana Hill. Come here to turn this Sarovara. It's a lot like Vrndāvana was 20 or 30 years ago. It's very peaceful. It's really nicely organized. The samādhis here are really special. It's very clean.

You can take darśana of Sūradāsa. You can bathe in the ecstasy of Chandra's tears, Chandra Sarovara, and just be in this very pleasant atmosphere of Śrī Vrndāvana dhāma for purification, inspiration, and eventually, hopefully, hopefully for Kṛṣṇa-prema. Śrī Śrī Radha Raman ki Jai! Śrī Vrndāvana dhāma ki Jai!

Jaya Jaya Śrī Radhe!

Namāsta.