"*00477*.*
"We would like to take another opportunity to welcome you to our seminar, "100 Questions That Were Asked." For the most part, we know the answers to these questions; nevertheless, in Krishna consciousness, we constantly find a new taste. We never get bored of anything; everything is always fresh and new in Krishna consciousness. Even though we are engaged in the same activity every time, it seems new and attractive. Śrīla Prabhupāda gives a wonderful example of how the names spruce or pine never get old; they are not uncomfortable and do not weep even in winter. 

As it is answered, *sādhu-saṅga*. We never get tired of hearing your nectarine narrations, so I continue to tell. As Śrīla Prabhupāda explains, in spiritual circles, it is very important to discuss the same things many times. For example, we have many times heard the philosophical statement that we are not the body, but nevertheless, we are attached to our material desires. We can complain that everyone gives the same lectures about how we are not the body, the karma, or reincarnation. Why don’t we discuss deeper topics? Right now, material desires pop up in our consciousness even for a moment. This is an indicator that we are still attached to the bodily concept. Therefore, repetition is necessary. We should not just listen to philosophy again, but in order to truly realize it, we must serve the spiritual teacher, and only then will we achieve the result.

It’s simple. How can we move from the level of theoretical understanding that we are not the body—we are the soul—to the level of practical awareness? This happens only through service. We can understand that "I am not the body." How do we reach the level of realized people? We use this term "self-awareness," thanks to which we can reach this level, understand that we are not the body, and understand that we are eternal servants of the Lord who are in a certain relationship with Him. These are those who have realized the truth, who have seen the truth, and such personalities do not need to approach... for example, as gentlemen.

In the beginning, we can hear how the spiritual master tells us that we are servants of Kṛṣṇa and we must implement this knowledge in life to begin devotional service. For example, we listen to *Bhāgavatam* in the morning, then devote the whole day to devotional service, and thanks to this, we realize the truths that are explained in the scriptures. For this, a certain time is necessary because we are very heavily covered by different levels of material energy, as we have existed in this world from time immemorial. When Śrīla Prabhupāda once addressed the devotees in my room—I was there too—he said to one devotee that if he revealed to you all the desires in your heart, you would lose consciousness. If all of you saw how much material attachment you have in your heart, you would faint. Because of that, you need to get rid of... don't worry, just by chanting the Holy Name the sins will be resolved. As it is known to us, the *śāstra* says that devotees must develop patience.

He gives an analogy that can help us understand the philosophical meaning; if we do not understand theoretically, we can understand thanks to analogy. He gives the following analogy of how a devotee must be patient: a young man and a girl get married and the girl naturally wants a child, but despite the strength of the desire, she must get pregnant and then she must wait for nine whole months. After that, a child is born, maybe two or even three. One girl wanted one child, one was born. All desires will be fulfilled; we only need to have faith, be patient, and move from the initial level to the middle level. 

In previous centuries, everything was much simpler. But since we were not very serious about spiritual practice, we remained here; we are the remnants of previous centuries, like some kind of leftovers of the previous *yuga*. It was enough to just hear what the Guru says; the first time a person remembered the knowledge, and the next day, having heard the same thing, he realized it. And on the third day, having heard the same thing, he realized it. These were such exalted personalities of previous centuries that they could remember, realize, and implement knowledge in 72 hours, and their memory was so strong that they remembered everything that they ever heard from a spiritual teacher. And we can even hardly remember about the World Cup! Rādhānātha Mahārāja spoke this morning; what he talked about, if you don't remember, ask someone, or you can ask him—he memorized everything. Unfortunately, not all of us can remember something in our time. Therefore, Śrīla Prabhupāda is an exceptional personality; all that he heard from the age of five, he learned English himself without outside help. At 72, he locked himself in a room... what if I had to learn Russian? I come and so far I have only learned three words: "Thank you very much" and "quickly." Nevertheless, the meaning of life remains the same as in previous centuries. It is said that in human life we must strive for consciousness and this is achieved through repetition. We listen to philosophy again and again. Śrīla Prabhupāda says that water wears away stone; even drops of water can make a hole for 10,000 years. Our hearts are like stone due to daily spiritual practice of hearing the words of a pure devotee and chanting the Holy Name.

So, what next? You answered correctly already. The question is only 96. Perhaps we should make this festival in one month. I said now the questions are getting more complicated. Why do people leave friends? Mahārāja answered: friends are left under the influence of lust and greed. In fact, material friendship is not very deep because it is based on pleasure and happiness, and the satisfaction that brings sense gratification is very superficial. But the happiness and satisfaction that brings friendship in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is actually very deep. It is real friendship. We should talk very honestly about what a friend in the material world is like; one who chops with his words. For example, we are friends with someone in the material world because we like the same music, the same clothes, the same food, the same movies, the same discos, the same young men, the same girls. Unfortunately, this is exactly how people are divided into groups in a material society: by what sensual pleasures are to whom. But this is not real because the nature of sensual pleasure is such that we fall under the influence of... under the influence of uncontrolled feelings. Those who are attached to pleasure gradually slide to hellish living conditions, and neither their own efforts, nor the efforts of others, nor joint efforts can free them. For example, drunks on the street; you can see how they, drunk, hug each other and shout, "Do you respect me? I respect you too." That is, they are friends until death, but what is their friendship based on? On the type of activity that destroys their body, their mind, their reason, and their brains; and above all, they destroy any possibility of spiritual advancement in this life.

In America, there is such a fashion: they stick different mottos on the bumpers of their cars. On one bumper, I read that "real friends do not allow each other to eat meat." That was the motto of vegetarians. That is, the pursuit of goodness is what allows people to rise to the level of *dharma*. For example, if one of your friends is eating meat, you need to stop them and say, "No, I like the taste of meat." "If you eat meat, you will go to a terrible place after death called *atara-uraga*, where you will be fried and boiled alive." "In fact, thank you very much, you saved me. Don't go to McDonald's anymore." This is true friendship. And when we will conduct Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even though people may perceive us as some kind of disturbance that distracts them from sense pleasures, in fact, we act as true friends and therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī described the preaching of Kṛṣṇa consciousness as true charity work. And what is true friendship? Instead of uniting around sense pleasures, we should be friends with those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, who chant the Holy Name, discuss the philosophy of Kṛṣṇa, and love *prasāda*. True friends in Kṛṣṇa consciousness will inspire us to advance on the path to the spiritual world. They will speak to us carefully enough about the Holy Name: "You do not devote enough time to studying the philosophy of the Vaiṣṇavas" or "do not make a request." This is what real friendship is.

Śrīla Prabhupāda said that when three or four *sannyāsīs* meet, they share their understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, helping each other to raise the general level of spiritual consciousness. And we cannot even imagine how deep friendship in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is; it is much deeper than material. Any material gift... was very attached to his loved one. There is life, I am engaged in spiritual practice. Of course, you can give a lecture on this topic. At the end of life, they were engaged in service in Vṛndāvana. By the will of the Lord, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura left his body at that time; he was in that place in Bengal, which is quite far from... and when the news that a close friend of his, a close friend, left his body, he lost consciousness. No one could bring him back to his senses; he was barely breathing. The only means that brought him to his senses was chanting. With that, he attached consciousness, and since he was a poet in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he wrote poetry on this topic. He wrote a song of separation from the Lord, his dear devotees, in *niṣṭhā*, which we usually sing on the days of the disappearance of great *ācāryas*. Many of you know this song that is sung on the days of the disappearance of various Vaiṣṇavas. We can see how deep an experience spiritual friendship brings. Therefore, we can very easily part with all kinds of material friendship if we develop friendly relations with devotees because it penetrates very deep into the heart. You can abandon all these material ones. You can forget about all these relationships. You can turn around and leave. But after you have passed, you can go back and make all your former friends. 

I did something similar in school. He was interested in spiritual life and we all thought he was crazy. He had birds chirping and his name was Greg. We called him Lnu. And he was interested in yoga and karma. One day I saw this Greg. He said, "Hey, I found a Guru." I asked, "Who is a Guru?" He said, "Well, let's talk about this sometime. I met an amazing spiritual person and I think you can easily follow this path." I asked, "You met the Guru in India?" He said, "No, it was in San Francisco. There were some guys. Although they were Americans, but they were dressed in orange clothes and they were pulling a chariot through Golden Gate Park." There were three chariots: on one there was a black doll, on another white, and on the third yellow. Some girl from India was on one of the chariots, and he played small metal cymbals. And after the parade, he gave a short speech. And after that, they handed out a wonderful dish. And he talked about how their spiritual practice is based on songs, dances, a little philosophy, and feasts. "I know that you like to sing, dance, you are into philosophy, and you eat more than anyone else, so this is your Guru." I thought, "What kind of Guru?" I asked what the name of this Guru was. He said, "I think Swami Prabhupāda." "What does Swami mean? What does Prabhupāda mean?" I was only 16 or 17. And after three or four years—in fact, it's a long story—but I met Prabhupāda thanks to the fact that I was inspired by several of Prabhupāda's *sannyāsī* students, including Viṣṇujana Mahārāja, but at that time I didn't connect it with what my crazy friend was talking about. 

A few years later, having already received brahminical initiation, I visited my parents and introduced my mother to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There was no such reaction. "I tried so hard to persuade you to cut your hair, and now I'm going to ask you to grow your hair." Do you know a little about how mothers can react? And she said, "Oh, you're an old friend of yours." I said, "Greg, I'm your old friend." He said, "Let's see which of us is more crazy." And spiritual life isn't that crazy. In fact, everyone in this world is crazy. I asked how you knew this. "I learned about this from your Guru, Swami Prabhupāda," and I remembered everything that had happened. He said, "Remember when you were 16? I told you that I met your Guru. Now you've already had two initiations from him." He said, "I received initiation from Swami Saccidānanda. I practice Aṣṭāṅga Yoga." I said, "Greg, sit down, we will talk about these two spiritual paths." I tried to make him a devotee even... he has his rights and he practices Aṣṭāṅga yoga in parallel. Therefore, you can leave material friends for the sake of devotional service, but show compassion to them and also try to give them Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

The next question is difficult: "What is the best ablution?" The best is *kīrtana*. So the best ablution is that which cleanses the mind of all impurities. I remember once explaining to devotees how we should cleanse our hearts, and he said that of all the types of defilement, the heart is the greatest filth. Can you imagine? He said we don't want to even imagine, but he said this is a bodily concept. And I thought that if he looked into my heart, he would see much more dirt than just a bodily concept. But in reality, all types of defilement are based on the bodily concept—that "I am this body." For example, we heard that we lose friends because of lust, envy, greed, but all this is based on the bodily concept. And until then, until *sattva* is present, we cannot truly purify ourselves. And as I hugged you this morning at the lecture, until we envy others, we cannot be happy, we cannot feel peace, and this is the cause of all kinds of contamination in this world. Therefore, the best ablution is what purifies the mind. 

And we can immediately remember this verse from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, that what purifies our consciousness, our mind, is a wonderful, wonderful method. Before the arrival of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I tried in every possible way to solve problems, studied psychology, different philosophies, but I came to the conclusion that no one can move forward with these methods. The problems that the mind creates are not able to be solved by the mind. And we can practically see how people are trying hard to solve their problems, but they hardly succeed because we cannot achieve any success until our hearts and minds are purified. And chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa purifies our mind and heart, and we can see how practical it is, how it helps us. We see how people around us change. In a few months—we can talk about years—these are completely different people. Of course, in order to completely purify your heart, you need a lot of time, but we can see how this happens. One day Śrīla Prabhupāda talked to the Chicago Police Chief. Chicago is a tough city; better not to go there in any case. In America, there's little good in case you didn't know this yet. This policeman asked, "And what should we do about crime in the city?" and Śrīla Prabhupāda said that crime is because people's hearts are impure, and he said that it is impossible to make people good simply as a result of some elections or propaganda based on some laws. "You can't say to cats and dogs, 'Live peacefully, dear doggie.'" He said, "Therefore, we need to cleanse our hearts." And the police chief said, "Yes, that's a good idea," and he asked how to practically do this. He said, "We need to gather everyone in the hall and we'll sing Hare Kṛṣṇa and treat everyone." Just the police chief said, "And can you do something more practical?" What could you tell him? Of course, he didn't believe that it was possible, but we have experience that if we chant, even not very seriously, it cleanses the heart. And when our minds are cleansed, we feel much happier. Real purification of consciousness—so the best ablution is purification for the mind, and the best water for ablution is... 

I want to repent before all the devotees, wonderful devotees who represent different Russian temples. Bhāgavata and I have been traveling around Russia for the last month and we fell in love with this country and the Russian people, especially the Russian devotees. Vaiṣṇava and Vaiṣṇavī shared with me confidential information that Prabhupāda told his secretary and cook, Govinda Dāsa. Yes, even in the early days, the word "Russia" or "Rāṣṭra" in English comes from the word *Ṛṣi*, because the sages originally came here to this country. Therefore, if you are asked, "Where are you from?" you can say that, "I am from the country of Ṛṣis." And knowing the spiritual potential of this country, Śrīla Prabhupāda put so much effort to come here in the first year, and he initiated only one devotee, and the whole movement since then began to develop steadily. And this is the country where everything is really developing. This is a real explosion of Kṛṣṇa consciousness that does not end, and we also want to teach in it. We are just simple beggars who test the world and try to offer their service. Yesterday I met... I told them that I want to conduct my festival program in Russia. We have been doing this program for 25 years; it takes place not only in Poland but also in America, in Brazil, in Argentina, in Australia, in New Zealand, in Hong Kong. Is it that there are more than two devotees on the festival tour from the country of Ṛṣis? And we discussed that in April we want to conduct a festival tour of the Golden Ring of Russia. 

And what we did: we shortened our program, which was 5-6 hours in Poland; we were able to put it into a small performance called "Ears, Not Hands." In this performance, we put together devotional service to Him, love, war, and various adventures, and we want to present Kṛṣṇa consciousness very professionally, at the level of the Broadway show or the Bolshoi Circus, and we hope that this will be a new story in Russian preaching. Once I heard Prabhupāda say in London that we can conquer the whole world with culture. In each country, there is a culture which includes painting, literature, music, dancing, and Indian culture is very popular all over the world because it is spiritual in nature. I saw how Śrīla Prabhupāda does everything at a very high level, and we have tried for 25 years to perfect a professional approach, and now we see that non-devotees are very impressed. They say that it was wonderful, "This was done by the Krishnaites, we need to know more about consciousness." So we will tell all of you about this. To receive your blessings, we will start from Moscow, St. Petersburg, and go to the very Vladivostok. We want to flood the whole country with chanting, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, dancing, a little philosophy, and gigantic quantities of Kṛṣṇa *prasāda*. Of course, now it seems like the right time to start this festival program in Russia; since we have received the blessings, we are completely confident of success, but we want you to also have the opportunity to help. Naturally, our festival group consists of professionals who need a lot of equipment and costumes and everything else; all this costs money. If you want to give us a little financial support, we will be very grateful. I wanted to tell you about this yesterday and ask you for help. Prabhupāda said it was time to build the Māyāpur temple. I told him, but I have my own festival program, but he yelled at me that this is the desire of Bhaktivinoda, the international capital of Māyāpur, the international capital of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the desire of his vision. I said, "Well done." And I also believe that thanks to the construction of this temple, everything will be as smooth as when the ocean rises, all boats also approach the shore. And I believe that thanks to the fulfillment of Bhaktivinoda's desire, the construction of the temple in Māyāpur, everything will improve. 

And he said that yesterday, thanks to what was said from the stage about the temple, they gave us a lot of donations, they gave everything away. I asked, "Do they have anything left at all?" He said, "I don't know, but I need to ask again." I said to the devotees, "Can I still today? I'll tell you about my festival program." So this beggar will be standing on the corner—I always thought, "Why do I need this?" And if you want to help us flood Russia with a cultural presentation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you can pass by me and drop off some donation. And I have so much enthusiasm that I brought with me four whole ones. I hope I don't want to detain the stage... over there on the side there's a pandal, everything else is there. Please get out of the hall. Get out of the pandal, please. There are cities where you can donate; there are discs left for...""