"*00440*.*
"### The Land of Gaurāṅga – Kārtika Parikrama 2025

Hari Kṛṣṇa, Hari Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hari Hari. My mind longs for the blessed vision of my guru. It cries out like a thirsty cātaka bird. My thirst is not quenched, and I can find no peace without the vision of that blessed person. Morning, Lord and Master. Your face is most beautiful, and the sound of your words imparts deep wisdom. It has been so long since this rainbird has had even a glimpse of water. Blessed is that land where you dwell, my dearest friend and spiritual master. I give myself to you now and forever, oh deliverer of my soul. When I could not be with you just for a moment, the dark age of Kali dawned for me. When will I meet you again? Oh beloved Lord and Leader, I cannot endure the night, and sleep does not come to me without your audience. I will surrender everything to have your darśana once again. It was my extreme good fortune to meet you, oh most saintly of all persons. And I will find you again in the eternal home where I am meant to dwell. There I will serve you forever, and I shall never be separated from you even for a moment. I am forever your eternal servant, my beloved Lord and Master.

Hari Kṛṣṇa, everyone. I’d like to welcome you all to this year’s Kārtika Parikrama in those three places that I mentioned. Like all of you, I was very much looking forward to this specific parikrama because generally we have this Kārtika parikrama in Śrī Vṛndāvana. But it’s also very important to observe the Kārtika month here in Māyāpura, at Prabhupāda’s birthplace, and in Jagannātha Purī, as much as it is in Vṛndāvana. And we will be discussing that this morning.

But just to begin, we are in a very blessed place. We are in Bhārata, or in India. We are in Bengal, the place that Lord Caitanya made His appearance. We are in the district of Nadia, and we are in Navadvīpa-Māyāpura. This Māyāpura is a most blessed place. Actually, you will see very soon...

That is the longest conch blowing I ever heard. But the blowing of the conch is a very auspicious sign. So, for those of you who have just arrived or even for those of you here for the first time, you will soon see in our general Māyāpura community, many devotees have chosen to actually live—not just visit, but live—in this transcendental abode. And that’s not surprising because it’s very much in line with the prediction in the *Garuḍa Purāṇa*, which was, of course, written down millions of years ago: "In the age of Kali, devotees will abandon the service of other holy places and will live either in Vṛndāvana or Navadvīpa."

There’s so much noise here. Okay. Now, that verse mentions Vṛndāvana or Navadvīpa. It mentions that in the age of Kali, Vaiṣṇavas from all over the world will choose to live in either Vṛndāvana or Māyāpura. So, how do we choose? Which one is the best? Actually, we say in English, "either/or." It doesn't matter because, really, there’s no difference between the two. How do we know that? Because Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings as such in his *Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya*: *cintā-maṇi-maya-dhāma-māyāpura, vṛndāvana-sama*—one should know that the Maṇḍala-bhūmi Māyāpura is equal to Vṛndāvana. There is no difference between the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana and those of Māyāpura. So, some devotees choose Vṛndāvana, some devotees choose Māyāpura. We have our vraja-vāsīs and our māyāpura-vāsīs.

So, why have the māyāpura-vāsīs chosen Māyāpura? Well, one could speculate that they’ve read the *Muktī-śāstra-kali-tantra*. How many of you have read the *Kali-tantra*? It doesn’t matter, but it supports those devotees who have chosen to live in Māyāpura. Here is a verse: "In Satya-yuga, Naimiṣāraṇya is the most important holy place. In Tretā-yuga, Lake Puṣkara is the most important place. In Dvāpara-yuga, Kurukṣetra is the most important place. And in Kali-yuga, Navadvīpa is the most important place." 

It’s like someone who is panning for gold. Many times, the gold diggers go to a stream, and they rock the pebbles in the water, and after many hours, they find a beautiful piece of gold. So, finding this verse in the scriptures, hidden away underneath lots and lots of śāstras, the *Muktī-śāstra-kali-tantra*, we found a piece of gold. We are the real gold diggers.

So, if sometime in your life—because this is a lifetime, millennium project; it will go on for hundreds or thousands of years—someone says, "Why did you move here?" you can say, "Have you read the *Muktī-śāstra-kali-tantra*?" Or you can say, "Have you read the *Skanda Purāṇa*?" "Those who in the age of Kali take shelter in Māyāpura and worship Me become free from all sins and attain the supreme destination." The *Purāṇa* also mentions this dhāma of Māyāpura and how, if you take shelter here—take shelter of Gaurāṅga—all sins are washed away just by living here, what to speak of chanting here, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare."

I have seen through many years in Kṛṣṇa consciousness that devotees who are fortunate to do some sevā (service) in these dhāmas, they don’t want to leave. Even though for Westerners there’s some inconvenience, there’s some austerities—you ask the vraja-vāsīs, you ask the māyāpura-vāsīs, "Would you like to go to New York, Chicago, Sydney?" No, sorry. Because of the transcendental nature of these places and especially because of the mercy that’s here in Māyāpura, the thought of leaving such a transcendental abode is too painful for devotees to bear. You’ll see when the parikrama is over, you’re not going to want to go home. You’ll say, "I’m already home."

And these are bona fide, authorized sentiments. Such sentiments were actually expressed by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī when he had to leave Māyāpura for services elsewhere 500 years ago. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura reveals Jīva Gosvāmī’s feelings in *Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya*, Chapter 5, verse 61. We are looking into the heart of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. He says, "I may stay in Māyāpura forever. The miseries of material existence will be completely dispelled." So, we are following in the footsteps of great devotees, mahājanas, which means we want to imbibe their same mood. So, here’s a mood you can imbibe from Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī: "I want to stay in Māyāpura forever; here the miseries of material existence will be completely dispelled."

But he left. Why? That’s the next verse: "The order of the Lord, however, is greater than the desire of His servant, and my heart is palpitating at the thought of leaving my existence." The order of the Lord is greater than the desire that we have. Our Prabhupāda said, "I have a plan, Kṛṣṇa has His plan, you have your plan. What’s the most important? The Lord’s plan." Because we are servants. So, therefore, Jīva Gosvāmī left for Kṛṣṇa.

As much as one is attached to something and loses it, to that degree he feels the separation. When the famous poet, his name was George Eliot, he lost a friend in an accident and he wrote a very famous couplet: "Only in the agony of parting do we look into the depths of love." Very deep. Only in the agony of parting do we look into the depths of love. You have someone, a partner, a spouse, and you love them, but when they’re gone, then you really realize how much you love them in the agony of separation. 

So, during the next two weeks here, while we’re in Māyāpura, we’re going to be doing what you’re supposed to do in Māyāpura: chanting, dancing, kathā, and feasting. And surely, you’re going to develop a strong attachment to this place, and when you leave, it’s going to be very painful. But that’s good. Can pain ever be good? Yes, the pain of separation is good because it makes you even more attached to that place. This is Kṛṣṇa’s trick, His ultimate transcendental trick.

I lost track. I forgot one word. In other words, you can judge your progress on this parikrama 2025 by how much you miss Māyāpura when you leave. How you miss the places of Prabhupāda’s pastimes in Kolkata when we leave, and how much you miss Jagannātha Purī when you leave. That’s how you see if you’ve made some progress. Just like Prabhupāda—when he left Vṛndāvana, what was he feeling? He was feeling much separation. That’s a sign of progress. In his diary aboard the *Jaladuta* on the way to America, September 10, 1965, he wrote: "Today the ship is sailing very smoothly. I feel better today. But I am feeling separation from Vṛndāvana and my Lords Śrī Govinda, Gopīnātha, and Rādhā. The only solace is in which I am tasting the nectarian of Lord Caitanya’s līlās. I have left Vṛndāvana just to execute the order of Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. In pursuance of Lord Caitanya’s order, I have no qualification, but I have taken up the risk just to carry out the order of His Divine Grace. I depend fully on Their mercy." 

So, we like to mark our progress. See how much progress we’ve made. This is one indication—at the end of this month, how much you miss Māyāpura, how much you miss Prabhupāda’s birthplace, and how much you miss Jagannātha Purī. So, in the writings of Rūpa Gosvāmī, he says there’s actually five different kinds of dhāmas. It’s like a scientific study; sometimes we describe Kṛṣṇa consciousness as a science. We have our dhāmas; there’s five different types. The first, of course, is Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual sky, and the second dhāma is when Goloka comes to the earth, and we call it Gokula; that’s called Bhauma-Vṛndāvana. It’s the second type of dhāma. But we shouldn’t think that because it comes to this material world that it is anywhere inferior to the dhāma in the spiritual world. Rūpa Gosvāmī says that although such a dhāma appears in the material world, it is beyond the touch of matter; it’s eternal, it’s uncommon, and it’s always Kṛṣṇa’s abode.

And the third kind of dhāma is called *diśā-māna-dhāma*. It refers to a dhāma on the earth after Kṛṣṇa departs. After Kṛṣṇa departs, the dhāma becomes covered by a thin film of *māyā* (illusion), specifically to keep the māyāvādīs away. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that as long as Kṛṣṇa is present in the dhāma, everything is okay. That’s confirmed in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 12th Canto, 2nd Chapter, verse 30. Sukadeva Gosvāmī says, "As long as Lord Kṛṣṇa, the husband of the goddess of fortune, touched the earth with His lotus feet, Kali was powerless to subdue this planet." But when Kṛṣṇa goes back to the spiritual world, the dhāma becomes covered by *māyā*. In what form? It means unqualified persons come to the dhāma to take advantage of living there. They’re like businessmen trying to make money, or while in the dhāma, they’re committing sinful activities. So the dhāma becomes covered; it doesn’t become affected, but it becomes covered.

And the fourth dhāma is in the heart of great devotees. What, a dhāma in the heart of the devotee? Yes. The example of Vasudeva is given, that the Lord first appeared in the heart of Vasudeva and He was transferred to the heart, or the womb, of Devakī. So they have Kṛṣṇa; wherever there’s Kṛṣṇa, there’s all His associates, the dhāma, everything is present. So that’s an unusual dhāma in the heart of a devotee.

And the fifth dhāma is manifested by pure devotees. Where is the reference for that? I was thinking, Uddhava once addressed his uncle Vidura with the following words, a very famous verse, and we often equate it with our Prabhupāda: "O Lord, devotees like your good self are verily holy places personified because you carry the Personality of Godhead within your heart. You turn all places into places of pilgrimage." It’s like Prabhupāda turned a storefront in downtown New York into Vaikuṇṭha—26 Second Avenue. I went there. It’s a tiny, cramped little place for a small store. But while Prabhupāda was there, it was like Vaikuṇṭha.

So why have I explained these different types of dhāmas—five dhāmas? So that we can understand the special nature of Māyāpura, which actually falls into the first category. It just comes straight from the spiritual world, pure, to this district of Nadia. What’s interesting is it’s described exactly how Navadvīpa-dhāma from the spiritual world came here in the *Ananta-saṃhitā*. Lord Śiva explains how Māyāpura-dhāma was manifested here in this material world in a discussion he’s having with Pārvatī. 

Lord Śiva tells Pārvatī that one time Kṛṣṇa was enjoying in a special kuñja. Kuñja means, in English, like a meadow with trees and flowers and a little stream or something. He was enjoying in a special kuñja with a gopī named Virajā. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa associates with the other gopīs—there’s a reason behind it, but they also get His association—so He was with her. Another gopī happened to walk by carrying her milk products from one place, and she saw Kṛṣṇa with this other gopī. So she quickly ran to tell Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. When Rādhā heard this news from her girlfriend, she started running towards that kuñja to catch Kṛṣṇa with this other gopī, Virajā. But Kṛṣṇa often has scouts, some special cowherd boys; they have some special services. One cowherd boy saw Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī running for this purpose. He ran and told Kṛṣṇa, "Rādhā is coming!" So, just before Rādhārāṇī arrived at the kuñja to find Kṛṣṇa and Virajā together, Kṛṣṇa disappeared, and this gopī, Virajā, became a river which then encircled the entire circumference of Vṛndāvana.

So when Rādhā arrived with some of her friends, there was no Kṛṣṇa, there was no Virajā. So Rādhārāṇī started thinking, "What can I do so that Kṛṣṇa will only be attracted to me? How can I attract Him away from this other beautiful gopī, Virajā?" So she gathered all her gopī friends together, and with her spiritual potency, she created a most beautiful place with lakes and streams and waterfalls and flowering trees and butterflies and bumblebees and all kinds of animals like rabbits and deers and squirrels, and fragrant flowers like jasmine, mallikā and mālati to be precise. 

Then she called for Cupid along with springtime personified, and then she made a proclamation: "For the pleasure of my beloved Kṛṣṇa, I want all of you to reside here eternally." She asked birds in that beautiful area to constantly sing the names of her beloved Kṛṣṇa. And then Rādhārāṇī did something very interesting. She took a flute and started to play it to attract Kṛṣṇa even better than Kṛṣṇa. And sure enough, in a very short time, Kṛṣṇa appeared, took her hand. He said, "Oh lovely Rādhā, you are my very life. There’s no one more dear to me than you. Therefore, I will never leave you. Just see, for me you have created this wonderful abode, this wonderful dhāma. From now on, all My devotees will always glorify this wonderful place that you have created." 

It was entirely newly manifested from the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with specific instructions of what it should look like, how it should be, what the mood would be. Then Kṛṣṇa paused and He said, "Okay, Rādhā, let’s give it a name." What name should we give it? Rādhā, she was smiling. And Kṛṣṇa said, "I know, let’s call it Navadvīpa-Māyāpura." And of course, later, Navadvīpa-Māyāpura became the home of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

So then Kṛṣṇa said, "By My order, all holy places must come and reside here." And He said, "All those persons who come to worship Us here as a Divine Couple will without a doubt attain the same mood, the same love that Our mañjarīs and sakhīs have for You and Me in Vṛndāvana. And I say that if anyone comes to this holy dhāma just once, he or she will receive the benefit of going to all the holy places in creation." 

So I hope by hearing this pastime you have a deeper appreciation for Māyāpura, for now where you are, manifested from the spiritual world. But there’s a special feature to Māyāpura that makes it even different than Vṛndāvana. What’s that? Well, to begin with, in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.24, it’s written: *kṛṣṇa-nāma-kārī-aparādha-bhara-kṛṣṇa-aparādha-nāma-vikāra*—if someone chants Kṛṣṇa’s holy names but at the same time commits the ten offenses, he will not experience a melting of the heart and tears flowing from his eyes. So, we’re in Vṛndāvana, but if we make offenses, it slows our progress down, or if we make serious offenses, our progress will stop, even in Vṛndāvana. Be careful. 

However, Gaurāṅga and Nityānanda do not consider any offense. If someone chants Their names, his heart will melt and tears will flow from his eyes. Thus, Gaura-nāma is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa-nāma. Gaura-dhāma also, for the same reason, is more merciful than Kṛṣṇa-dhāma (Śrī Vṛndāvana). Wow. Māyāpura is the world-class version of Vṛndāvana. That’s not a critique of Vṛndāvana; don’t take it that way. It’s meant to help you understand how merciful is this dhāma while you’re here chanting: "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare." 

So take advantage. Prabhupāda said, if you’ve got time, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. You’re not here for business, you’re not here as tourists, you’re not here for mundane education in school—all the things we do. We’re here for one purpose: *harer nāma, harer nāma, harer nāma*. Chant, chant, chant. That’s what you do here. You chant. Don’t worry, you won’t make any offenses. Even if you do, Mahāprabhu won’t accept them. He just accepts your heartfelt chanting. So much mercy here. 

So just as Vṛndāvana is famous as the playground of God, Māyāpura is famous for the appearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who made His appearance 10 meters from us in this beautiful tree just outside this hall. Now, at this point in history, especially in this part of the world, many people know the *Daśāvatāra*—the 10 incarnations—but very few, even in India, are aware of the *Yuga-avatāra*. Perhaps the people of India don’t know Him so well because He doesn’t appear directly; Kṛṣṇa appears indirectly as a devotee. And He teaches us in the role of a devotee how to worship Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Even when the Lord appeared 500-some-odd years ago here, no one was really aware of His appearance except maybe Haridāsa Ṭhākura and Advaita Ācārya. They were dancing in ecstasy on the banks of the Gaṅgā, knowing that the Lord had appeared. And of course, Kṛṣṇa knew His appearance as Caitanya Mahāprabhu because He stated in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Ādi-līlā): "I shall personally inaugurate the religion of the age—nama-saṅkīrtana, the congregational chanting of the holy name. I shall make the world dance in ecstasy, realizing the four mellows of loving devotional service."

So much can be said about Caitanya Mahāprabhu—what we will be doing in the next two weeks. We can’t cover everything about Him because His pastimes are unlimited. Just like in the Bible, there’s a famous verse in John 21:25: "But there are also many other things which Jesus did, so vast a number indeed, that if they were all described in detail, I suppose that the world itself could not contain the books that would have to be written." That’s just about the servant, what to speak about the Personality of Godhead Himself. But we’ll try our best in the next two weeks, myself and other speakers, to enlighten you more about Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Yes. So we’ll be speaking about those pastimes that happened 500 years ago. But we should also reflect on the fact that these days are also, you could say, the modern-day pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, equally as important, because He Himself said one day His holy names will be chanted in every town and village of the world. So these are the *antya-līlā* for 10,000 years. The pastimes will go on. So we’re inspired by hearing the original so that we can continue them in the present age, because we’re so blessed. We’re part of the *Sankirtana* movement. Just as Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes delivered the whole world at that time—according to *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, the whole earth planet went back to Godhead—nowadays, even though we’re not as potent as Mahāprabhu and His immediate associates, we’re changing the face of the earth by spreading the holy names. Yes, we have a small part to play, but the combination of *saṅkīrtana*—congregational chanting—it’s having a great effect.

Give Him a big round of applause. That’s Kṛṣṇa consciousness; every devotee is making some impression on this earth. There’s a beautiful, beautiful verse in *Padma Purāṇa* quoted by Rūpa Gosvāmī in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*—it’s mentioned by Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura also, I found in *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, two places—that when a devotee engages in kīrtana by singing and dancing ecstatically for the Lord, at that time Mother Earth blesses the devotee by saying, "Thank you very much. Your feet have touched me while you danced, and you have purified me." When a devotee lifts his arms in the sky by doing kīrtana, the sky says, "I have become purified by your actions." And when a devotee glances at the four directions while doing kīrtana, the demigods in the sky bless him by saying, "We have all become purified."

So really, our purpose in coming here is, of course, out of curiosity and to see all these amazing things, but really it’s to become inspired and fulfill the big prediction of Caitanya Mahāprabhu that the chanting will spread here from the dhāma of Māyāpura to every town and village of the world. We come here for inspiration. And in doing so, we humble souls will be able to see a great miracle. That miracle is described by Śrīla Prabhupāda—one of my favorite verses—from the time that Mahāprabhu, the sacred form of love for Kṛṣṇa, gave out His gifts of prema: "The sinner, the aesthetic, the drunkard, the devotee, the rogue, and the thief all became grateful to Him. Completely exhausted, they abandoned all sense enjoyment as if it were deadly poison. And very intoxicated, altogether loudly sang the holy names of Kṛṣṇa as they all sank exhausted in the ocean of Kṛṣṇa-prema." The drunkards, the devotees, the fools—where do you find them? New York, Sydney, Moscow, Kiev, Buenos Aires. You get to go back, and by the potency that you’re invested in here in the dhāma, you’ll see this miracle happen. We’re the most blessed. You had to wait 500 years to see it happen, and we’re seeing it with our own eyes.

But let us not take credit. Let us all remember we’re just the instruments in the hands of our beloved founder-ācārya, Śrīla Prabhupāda. By his desire, it’s all happening. And don’t worry about the rain. I’ve never been in a Kārtika where there’s rain. The rain is supposed to be finished at the end of September, and there are scheduled rainy days for the next two weeks while we’re here. We’re not so powerful as Lord Caitanya—when the clouds came, He would take the kartālas and go, and the clouds would be scared and they’d go away. We don’t have that potency. But we shouldn’t see the rain here in the dhāma as ordinary rain. Nothing’s ordinary here. We should see it as a rain of mercy. 

In closing, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes in his *Madhurya-kādambinī*: "The mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is like a limitless cloud bank of showering sweet nectar. Just as rain revives crops in a field, His mercy nourishes the tender sprouts of devotion in a sādhaka’s heart, dispelling the scorching heat of material desires and flooding the heart with the joy. May that unrestrained raincloud of Mahāprabhu’s mercy bring life to me, a dry tree in the desert of material existence."

So now, ārati—perfect timing—ārati is starting. We can attend the ārati and then we’ll take prasādam.

Śrīla Prabhupāda ki jaya! 2025 Māyāpura, Kolkata, and Jagannātha Purī, ki jaya!""