"*00443*.*
"Everyone, welcome back to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

So, we're continuing with our mini-series on "The Binding Rope of Spotless Love," and this will be part four. I was thinking the other day why we are—all of us—giving so much time and effort to prepare, and from your part, to hear these lectures. The answer is very simple: so that we can remember Kṛṣṇa. By constantly hearing about Kṛṣṇa, we will naturally come to the stage of always remembering Him, and that's the goal. Śrīla Prabhupāda would often say, "Always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him." I found a beautiful letter that Prabhupāda wrote to one of my godbrothers, Pracaṇḍa-dāsa, May 16, 1976. Prabhupāda stresses this importance of remembering. He wrote: "In general, we cannot say that any of the nine processes of devotional service are more important than the others, except that if hearing, chanting, and remembering are there, that is the most vital consideration for the general class of men in this age."

So, in this quote, Prabhupāda stresses hearing, chanting, and remembering. Often, devotees—well, we naturally stress hearing and chanting, not so much the remembrance, which is called *smaraṇa*. But we should know that although *kīrtana* is the main process for this age—it is the *yuga-dharma*—such *kīrtana* is meant to facilitate *smaraṇa*, remembering Kṛṣṇa. In *The Nectar of Instruction*, verse 8, in the purport, Śrīla Prabhupāda actually describes the various stages of progress for a *sādhaka*, meaning a practitioner of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He begins by describing:

Yeah, he says it's the first stage where one hears about Kṛṣṇa, especially chanting Kṛṣṇa's name. This is the process for a new devotee. Then Prabhupāda goes on to describe the second stage, wherein such a devotee accepts Kṛṣṇa as his life and soul, and then he gets initiated and increases the practices of hearing and chanting *kīrtana*. Then Prabhupāda mentions stage three, *smaraṇa-daśā*, the stage where all the hearing and chanting leads to a spontaneous remembrance of Kṛṣṇa. Spending years hearing and chanting—well, for what? So we can always remember Kṛṣṇa in a spontaneous way. So, in this way, all our efforts are meant to reach the platform of *smaraṇa-daśā*, as Prabhupāda explains in that purport. In fact, the name of our society, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, is all centered around—we can't always be conscious of Kṛṣṇa—so we should mold our lives in such a way that we have sufficient time for hearing and chanting with the express purpose of always remembering Kṛṣṇa, never forgetting Him. Thus, this series of lectures that we've been giving the last few weeks has all been organized to help facilitate the *smaraṇa* of what Dāmodara-līlā—this is the famous *līlā* of this particular month of Kārtika—so lots of lectures on Lord Dāmodara, Mother Yaśodā binding the rope, etc. So, you know, after Kārtika, think of these things, remember these things; that's the perfection.

In our last lecture, part three, we left off where Mother Yaśodā was struggling to tie naughty Kṛṣṇa to a grinding mortar so He couldn't engage in any more mischief, so that she could go back to attend to her household duties. Her problem, quite simply, was that the rope she was using to bind Kṛṣṇa was two fingers short. You remember? Or, as Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Kṛṣṇa* book, two inches short. And this was the case actually, even when Mother Yaśodā got extra rope and tied it to the original rope, still the rope was two fingers short. Now, much has been said on this phenomenon, whether it's two fingers or two inches short, but very few devotees know that the very first commentary on the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya was written by a lesser-known author named Śrīla Śrīnātha Cakravartī.

He was the guru of Śrīla Kavi-karṇapūra—we all know Kavi-karṇapūra—and Śrīnātha Cakravartī's commentary is called *Caitanya-mata-mañjūṣā*. *Caitanya-mata-mañjūṣā* translated this means "a bouquet of the philosophical positions taken by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Now, in his commentary, this devotee, he says the following about the two fingers or the two inches. He says these two fingers represent: number one, the effort of the devotee, and number two, the Lord's mercy. In other words, trying to get this rope together will require the effort of a devotee—in this case, Mother Yaśodā—and the Lord's mercy, Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Now, we've heard that before; many of us have heard that before. Finally, you know, by her effort and by Kṛṣṇa's mercy, the task was completed. Any task in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is completed, therefore, by the effort of the devotee and the Lord's mercy.

Now, our devotee commentator, how do you say—he after this, he begins a commentary on the term *guṇa*. Now, the term *guṇa* has several meanings. Actually, in the beginning, he points out two. He says *guṇa* can mean the modes of nature: *sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa,* and *tamo-guṇa*. And number two, he says *guṇa* can also mean—in Sanskrit, it can also mean "rope." So it's very interesting, Śrīla Śrīnātha says that while the great *guṇas*, meaning *rajas* and *tamas*, are unable to even touch the body of the Supreme Lord, but to speak of binding Him up—Kṛṣṇa is transcendental to the modes of nature—so these *guṇas*, because he says, you know, the great *guṇas* *sattva, rajas,* and *tamas* are unable to tie Kṛṣṇa up. So then he says, he plays on the word: how is it possible then that the small *guṇas*, the actual ropes that Mother Yaśodā had, would be able to touch and bind the body of the Lord? It's interesting; therefore, he says it was impossible for these small *guṇas*, these small ropes, to bind the Lord. If the big ropes can't do it, how will the small ropes? Nice play on words. Of course, we all know and we all celebrate that Mother Yaśodā did, in the end, tie the ropes together, tie the two pieces of the rope together, and successfully bind Kṛṣṇa. And Śrīla Prabhupāda states this very nicely in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter nine. He writes: "Then Lord Kṛṣṇa, appreciating the hard labor of His mother and being compassionate upon her, agreed to be bound up by the ropes." There it is: the hard labor of His mother, Yaśodā, and His compassion—two things are required. So with her effort and the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, the task was completed.

Now at this point, it's very interesting, Harisūri explains why Kṛṣṇa agreed to be bound up, because He didn't have to agree. So why did Kṛṣṇa finally agree to be bound up? And at this point, Harisūri, our commentator, he again brings up the word or the term *guṇa*. Now again, *guṇa* can mean the three modes of material nature, it can mean a rope, but *guṇa* can also mean "good qualities." So he's playing again with this word: *guṇa* can also mean good qualities. So Harisūri quotes Kṛṣṇa in this regard. These good qualities—he quotes Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says: "My devotee may be lacking in some *guṇas*, good qualities, but due to his being dear to me, I myself complete his incomplete *guṇas*." Wow, we may be missing, but Kṛṣṇa makes up—He's so kind—He makes up for our lack of good qualities. And that brings to mind for myself, one time Śrīla Prabhupāda in a darśana, he was saying how it takes lifetimes of pious activities to be enabled to come to devotional service; you have to perform many, many pious activities over many lives to qualify yourself to come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So he was speaking in this way, and at the end of the darśana, he asked if there were any questions. One disciple raised his hand; he said, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, you know, you were saying it's by pious activities we qualify ourselves to one day become a devotee, but I'm sitting here in this temple and in your presence, but honestly, Śrīla Prabhupāda, I did not perform one pious activity in my lifetime. It was all sinful activity. So how did I get here?" So Prabhupāda, he kind of sat back and he closed his eyes for a moment, and then he opened them and he smiled. He said, "Yes, I created your pious activities so that you could come and sit here." The same principle. "You had none, but I created your pious activities. I gave you this gift." Like this. That was interesting. So, indicating this fact, the Supreme Lord Himself arranged the completion of Mother Yaśodā's incomplete *guṇas*, meaning, in this case, the ropes. He made up for her lack of rope by Himself agreeing to being tied. Like that.

Now, there's a big secret. There's a secret about this pastime that only a few Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas know about, but I'm going to share it with you now. It's authorized. And what is this big secret about this pastime? Well, I found out the research—I guess "seek and ye shall find"—I found out that the name Dāmodara literally means, of course, "He around whose stomach is a rope." Now, of course, many of us assume that Kṛṣṇa got this name Dāmodara when Mother Yaśodā was successful in binding Him to the mortar. But here's the big secret: it was not the first time that Kṛṣṇa was bound up in that way. So how can I say this from an authorized standpoint? Well, Jīva Gosvāmī says in his *Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-arcana-dīpikā*—it's one śāstra he wrote—that the original pastime of Kṛṣṇa being bound took place long ago in Goloka Vṛndāvana, and he writes in verse 108. Listen to this: he writes, "Once in the spiritual world, it was the day of Dīpāvali. Kṛṣṇa was supposed to meet Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī on that date, but He was late. When He finally arrived, Rādhārāṇī looked at Him with loving anger and then quickly bound Him up using her golden girdle belt." Using her golden girdle belt. So now Kṛṣṇa is tied up. He's bound by her golden girdle belt, Dāmodara. Then Kṛṣṇa, He folded His hands and He said, "Rādhā, please, I'm sorry I'm late, but it's not really My fault. There was a big festival at Nandagrāma, and for that reason, I couldn't leave. I didn't want to be late." So hearing this valid excuse, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī decided to let Him go. So when she did, she untied this golden girdle belt. Kṛṣṇa was very pleased, and from that day forth, He said, "I will take great pride when someone calls Me Dāmodara, the one who has a rope or a string around My belly. From now on, I'll be very—if you call Me Dāmodara, I'll take great pride because Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī tied Me up in that way." And then Kṛṣṇa said He would later manifest the same pastime during His appearance in the material world on the Earth planet, but this time with Mother Yaśodā, with Mother Yaśodā. And Jīva Gosvāmī says—he writes—so that devotees of all *rasas* could relish this pastime. Everyone relishes this pastime; all pastimes of Kṛṣṇa are wonderful. So that the form of the Lord that was bound by this—you could say this love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—has a particular name. The original Dāmodara is known as *Nivī-dāmodara*. *Nivī-dāmodara*, the original past-tamer. Both pastimes are equally wonderful.

So coming back to this Dāmodara pastime on Earth, it continues in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter nine. I recite what Prabhupāda has written. He wrote: "After binding her son, Mother Yaśodā engaged herself in household affairs. At that time, bound to the wooden mortar—sometimes we hear stones, sometimes we hear wood—Kṛṣṇa could see a pair of trees before Him which were known as Arjuna trees." Just in your minds, just imagine: Mother Yaśodā has gone off, Kṛṣṇa is bound, can't be naughty, and He's looking around, you know, like a small child would. What does He see? He sees trees. They're called Arjuna trees. Actually, called the Arjuna trees. Now, it actually mentions He saw a pair of Arjuna trees. Now, this species of tree, this Arjuna tree, it has a peculiar white-colored bark. In fact, one meaning of the term *arjuna* is white. So the Arjuna tree is characterized by its white color. It's just an interesting fact. So Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that there were two Arjuna trees who were known as Yamala-Arjuna trees. The term *yamala* actually means twin. So again, there were two trees, who were—they were two brothers actually, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, who were previously cursed by Nārada Muni to become trees. And in this part of this Dāmodara-līlā is that we'll see how Kṛṣṇa liberates these twin brothers from the curse of Nārada Muni to become trees.

But first, let's discuss how and why these two boys ended up as trees on the property of Nanda Mahārāja. What was the curse? It's an important part of the pastime. Well, historically, before these two personalities became trees, it's described they were very proud, very troublesome sons of Kubera. And who's Kubera? He's the demigod of wealth. And I was reading how they used to wander, because they lived in the heavenly planets obviously, and they're demigods, so they used to wander in a garden attached to Mount Kailāśa, the abode of Śiva. They used to wander and play on a bank, actually, at the Mandākinī River, and there they would drink a kind of liquor called Vāruṇī, and they would bathe naked in the waters of that river with women. It's described, you know, the in śāstra, in the association of such women, they would wander in that garden of flowers on the banks of that river, their eyes always rolling in intoxication.

Now, enter here our commentator, Harisūri. He points out—he gives a very interesting perspective here. He points out that there are many rivers in the heavenly planets for the demigods to enjoy. That's Svargaloka; that, you know, if you're very, very pious, you go there to enjoy, and there's just basically enjoyment. But it's still the material world, and Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā*, "From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places of misery where in repeated birth and death take place." So it's not a perfect place to go; it's not perfect. In fact, śāstra says the main anxiety of Svargaloka—because there's so much pleasure—is that there's a rumor going around, rumors come about that the demons are coming. So that's the anxiety. Otherwise, they enjoy. So they're allowed, you know, this enjoyment until their pious activities run out, the results of their pious activity. So they fall back down to the Earth planet and start all over again. So they were, you know, enjoying. But Harisūri points out that not all the rivers are meant for that type of enjoyment, especially the Mandākinī River. The Mandākinī River is solely meant for spiritual purposes. There's obviously devotees in the heavenly planets; they've woken up and they realize the higher purpose of life is to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, so they engage in spiritual activities. So this Mandākinī River is meant solely for spiritual purposes. Now, he says, if these two boys would have sported in some other rivers in Svargaloka meant for the demigods, Nārada Muni would have never come there. Nārada Muni came to Kailāśa because it's a *tīrtha*, it's a holy place, and because he wanted to bathe in the Mandākinī River, because of the purifying river.

Now, as soon as Nārada Muni arrived at that place, we also hear in *Kṛṣṇa* book, the ladies immediately covered themselves up—at least they had the good sense to cover themselves in front of a *sādhu*. Thus, the ladies were saved from getting cursed. However, these two boys remained naked, and in that naked state, they greeted Nārada Muni in kind of an intoxicated manner, not very respectfully. Now, Nārada Muni recognized, obviously, that these two boys were intoxicated due to drinking Vāruṇī liquor. However, Harisūri points out there was a greater intoxication that Nārada Muni saw. And what is that? He saw that these two boys were affected by *śrī-mada*. *Śrī-mada* translates as "the intoxication of wealth." Harisūri says that this is the worst type of intoxication that one can have in this world. Intoxication is not a good thing; you can make many, many mistakes in an intoxicated state, grave mistakes. But the worst type of intoxication one can have in this world is this *śrī-mada*, this intoxication of wealth, because one is very wealthy, he doesn't see any need for spiritual life. So Harisūri warns us that devotees to the Lord should be very careful of the *śrī-mada*. He says as soon as a little wealth arrives in our lives—I like that term—as soon as a little wealth arrives in our lives, he writes, we should immediately purify it by giving some of it in charity.

It's a nice instruction. We should immediately purify it by giving some of it in charity. Just like Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī; he was a very wealthy man, employed by the government of the Muslims in Rāmakeli. And when it came time for him to escape from there, he gave a lot of that wealth away in charity. He gave some to the brāhmaṇas, he put a little bit aside for emergencies, but most of it he gave away in charity. So there's an example: he kept some for emergencies, but he divided it in different ways. So Harisūri also writes that a devotee should not think that because they're on the path of *bhakti*, this *śrī-mada*, this intoxication of wealth, will not affect them.

And then he goes on to point out how various great personalities—great personalities—lost everything due to this *śrī-mada* of this intoxication of wealth, and he gives four examples in this regard, citing four great people who he says ended up breaking regulative principles due to *śrī-mada*. Now let us first say that these were all great personalities in our scriptures, and we shouldn't think they're in a fallen condition. Very often, great souls, they humbly accept these positions to teach us by example what to do in these situations. So that being said, the first great personality who he describes became affected by *śrī-mada* was King Daśaratha. King Daśaratha was having so much wealth that he would often go on large-scale hunting expeditions and kill many deer, as kṣatriyas sometimes do. And in one such hunting expedition, things went terribly wrong, and he ended up accidentally shooting and killing Śravaṇa Kumāra. He was the only son of his parents, who were blind, and his parents then died out of shock and grief upon hearing that their son had died. So what did they do? They cursed Daśaratha to die in a similar manner, out of separation and grief from his son, who we know is Lord Rāma. Thus, Daśaratha broke the rule of no meat-eating by killing deer, and this all happened because of *śrī-mada*. He just had so much opulence, so much wealth, he'd go on these large-scale hunting expeditions killing many deer, so he broke the rule of no meat-eating, and this all happened because of this great wealth he had. Now, the second person that Harisūri points out is Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. He became so influenced by his newfound kingdom of Indraprastha, he says, and his newfound wealth that he ended up playing a gambling match twice and lost everything, including his kingdom and his wife. Thus, he says, Yudhiṣṭhira broke the rule of no gambling due to his *śrī-mada*, his intoxication of wealth. Watch out. Then the third example he gives is Rāvaṇa. Of course, this is not a personality you want to emulate, but he writes that Rāvaṇa was actually a great scholar, he was a brāhmaṇa, and he was a commentator on the four Vedas, and actually he was a descendant of the sage Pulastya, but he became again so intoxicated due to his wealth that he lustfully—lustfully—kidnapped Sītādevī to try to enjoy with her. In doing so, he broke the rule of no illicit sex, and this happened due to his *śrī-mada*. The fourth example he gives are these two boys, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva. They were intoxicated by their father's wealth—who could have more wealth than Kubera, the demigod of wealth?—and they were so intoxicated by their father's wealth they ended up drinking liquor and losing all good sense in front of Nārada Muni. Thus, they broke the regulative principle of no intoxication, and this too happened because of the *śrī-mada*, intoxication of wealth.

Now, at this point, Harisūri writes: "Nārada Muni knew that there is only one cure for a person whose eyes are infected by *śrī-mada*. The cure is to apply the stinging ointment of poverty on such infected eyes." So he continues, saying, Harisūri, that if these two boys were made to suffer poverty, they would very soon realize how other living entities in the world also suffer. And once they suffer, they will not want others to suffer in the same way. Thus, they would become sober, saintly, and cured of *śrī-mada*. It's actually true; we say sometimes in this world, you know, someone rises up from poverty, they get an education, they, you know, have a successful business, and because they experience poverty, suffering in that way when they were young, they're more inclined to give to people in a fallen condition. It happens like that. So for the benefit of those two intoxicated sons of Kubera, Nārada Muni cursed them to lose all their wealth and become trees. Because trees don't have any wealth in the sense of, you know, jewelry. Of course, maybe at Christmas time people put some ornaments on them, that's so it's all imitation jewel. Now, the thing is that as soon as they were cursed to become trees, they came to their senses and they begged Nārada Muni to forgive them and relieve them of that curse. But it was too late because we stated many times that when a curse is uttered by a *sādhu*, it must take effect. However, you may remember, it can be adjusted. So, out of compassion, Nārada Muni adjusted it and he told the two boys that they would stand as trees for a long, long time, but one day they would have *darśana* with the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, and be relieved of the curse.

So, Harisūri says at this point, what is the result of getting a *sādhu's* blessings? The result is that one gets access to the Supreme Lord and gets His *darśana*. And what is the result of getting a *sādhu's* curse? Well, first of all, it's beneficial because ultimately one is purified. But sometimes, as in the case of Nalakūvara, Maṇigrīva, and other—well, not other, but in the case of some demons—the result is the same: one gets *darśana* of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Some demons were killed by Kṛṣṇa and they went back to the spiritual world to have this eternal *darśana*. Like Pūtanā: when Pūtanā was killed by Kṛṣṇa, she went to Goloka Vṛndāvana, it says in śāstra, and she became a nurse in the house of Nanda and Yaśodā. In other words, she would give her breast milk to Kṛṣṇa on certain occasions. Oh, you know, she was cursed to die, Kṛṣṇa killed her, but she went back to the spiritual world. So, Harisūri concludes that irrespective of whether a *sādhu* was pleased or displeased, the end result in coming in contact with a *sādhu* is almost always beneficial. And Harisūri writes: he says that a *sādhu* is like a sandalwood tree. Even if—even if an ax strikes it with an aim to chop it down, the sandalwood tree leaves its fragrance on the ax. Simile: a *sādhu* gives benefit to everyone. Even if a person is a ruffian, a ruffian comes in contact with a *sādhu*, but the result is that he's left for some benefit, like the ax when it tries to chop down the sandalwood, the aroma of the sandalwood tree remains on the ax. Nice analogy.

Of course, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, they had to wait a long time to obtain any benefit from Nārada Muni's curse. Śāstra said they had to wait millennia to have *darśana* of Kṛṣṇa. But that moment arrived, and Prabhupāda very nicely describes it in *Kṛṣṇa* book. He writes: "After binding her son, Mother Yaśodā engaged herself at household affairs. At that time, bound up to the wooden mortar, Kṛṣṇa could see a pair of trees before Him which were known as Arjuna trees." Recorded that verse before. So Harisūri says that when Kṛṣṇa saw those Arjuna trees, He thought to Himself, "Hey, these two are having the name Arjuna, who's called Pārtha, under the name of Arjuna's Pārtha. These two having the name Arjuna, same as My devotee, but they are *apārtha*. *Apārtha* meaning not the sons of Pṛthā like Arjuna was Pārtha. In fact, they are *apārtha*, *apārtha* meaning devoid of all wealth or deprived of all wealth. I should again make them creatures fortunate." Thus, the Lord decided to liberate them. Nice play on the name Pārtha.

Then Harisūri writes something that I really appreciate, and I'm sure you will too. It really resonates with an ISKCON devotee. He writes, "The Lord is truly merciful. All *sādhus* should learn from Him. Even though He Himself is in bondage at this point, He is thinking of liberating others. This indeed is the nature of a true *sādhu*. The *sādhu* wishes to liberate others even if he himself remains bound in this world." That's speaking for many of us; we're conditioned, but we're being taught by Śrīla Prabhupāda to share our good fortune with others. So even though we're bound up, we're working to unbind others, and that's our qualification to become unbound by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who appreciates such *sevā*. At this point, I've read something really amazing, really special. I came across a verse composed by the guru of the guru of Harisūri. The guru of the guru of Harisūri, he posed the question: "Who is the personality that bestowed the highest benefit on these two Arjuna trees?" He's throwing a question out here: "Who is the personality who bestowed the highest benefit on these two Arjuna trees which were liberated?" Now, some of us may be tempted to say, "Well, Nārada Muni." Others will say, "Obviously Kṛṣṇa." But the answer and the reasoning behind it to this question will take you by surprise. He says, "All right, let someone say that Nārada Muni showed the highest mercy on these two Arjuna trees. Let someone else say that the Supreme Lord showed the highest mercy. However, I confidentially say that the greatest mercy on these two trees was bestowed by Mother Yaśodā." What? How is this? So, what he goes on to explain: it was only because of Mother Yaśodā, it was because of Yaśodā, who managed to put the Supreme Lord in bondage. She put Him in bondage; she tied the rope and put Him in bondage, tied Him to the mortar. And when He was put into bondage by her, it's understood for the first time He knew what bondage actually was. And thus, He no longer wanted to have these, see these two trees suffering their bondage. He was very uncomfortable being tied up by Mother Yaśodā, so when He saw others in bondage, out of compassionate nature, He wanted to free them. Thus, He quickly proceeded to release both trees from the curse of Nārada Muni. So, therefore, the credit goes to Mother Yaśodā because she was the one that bound Him up, so He could come to this conclusion.

So Śrīla Prabhupāda describes in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter 10, how Kṛṣṇa brought down these two trees and ended the curse. He writes: "Although child Kṛṣṇa was bound up to the wooden mortar—sometimes we hear wood, sometimes we hear a stone mortar—but He began to proceed toward the twin trees in order to fulfill the prophecy of His great devotee Nārada. Lord Kṛṣṇa knew that Nārada was His great devotee and that the trees standing before Him as twin Arjuna trees were actually the sons of Kubera, and He thought, 'I must now fulfill the words of My great devotee Nārada.'" So then He proceeded through the passage between the two trees, and although He was able to pass through, Prabhupāda said the large wooden mortar got stuck horizontally between the trees. Taking advantage of this, with great strength, Lord Kṛṣṇa began to pull the rope which was tied to the mortar. As soon as He pulled, the two trees with all their branches and limbs crashed down immediately with a great noise.

So then Harisūri, he asked an important question. He said, "Why did the Lord bring down the trees using the mortar? He could have easily just struck them down with His hands and achieved the same. Why use the mortar? I mean, Kṛṣṇa has killed many demons with His hands even as a child, so why did He use the mortar?" He gives a beautiful reply, Harisūri, an interesting way—you have to pay attention to this one. He writes: "If a guru personally carries out a difficult task, it brings him some reputation. However, however, if an *anuga*, a faithful follower, does the same task on behalf of the guru, it brings greater repute to the guru." Oh, just see, "your follower has done it by your mercy." That he continues: "Now, our Kṛṣṇa is Jagad-guru, spiritual master of the entire universe, and this mortar is His faithful *anuga*," because it was following Kṛṣṇa where He crawled; He's crawling and the mortar is following behind, so he's an *anuga*, he's a follower. So Harisūri said: "Thus Kṛṣṇa ensured that His *anuga*, the mortar, who was following faithfully behind in His footsteps, carried out the task of bringing down the trees. So the mortar gets credit, eternal credit in the eyes of the world." Like that. So instead of, you know, doing it using His hands, they wanted to give credit to His follower who was pulling behind Him. Interesting analogy there.

Now, as soon as the trees came down, there was a loud noise, as I mentioned, and at this point, it reverberated throughout Vṛndāvana. At this point, the Vrajavāsīs, it's described, they felt as if they'd all been struck by a thunderbolt, and as such, Nanda Mahārāja and all the Vrajavāsīs came running to the spot. And Śrīla Prabhupāda describes what happened at the end of this wonderful pastime, because everyone's looking like it, seeing these two trees crash down, two effulgent personalities emerge, and there's a little Kṛṣṇa, you know, with the mortar. It's like, "How did this happen?" So in *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter 11, Prabhupāda writes that some of the cowherd men told Nanda Mahārāja: "Your child is different from all other children; He just might have done it." So smiling to hear about these extraordinary abilities of his son, Nanda Mahārāja came forward and he untied the knot to free his wonderful child. Mother had tied it, and the father untied it.

So I'd like to finish today with a beautiful verse written by a close friend of mine whom I often consult to see if everything I'm saying is authentic. Hṛdaya Caitanya Prabhu of the GBC Śāstric Advisory Committee, he wrote—in Sanskrit, he's a Sanskrit scholar—he wrote a very beautiful verse tying in the, you know, Mother Yaśodā's tying up Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's father untying the knot. It's an interesting verse, listen carefully. He writes in Sanskrit: "O Dāmodara, through this particular pastime that took place in the forest of Vraja, You taught us all an important lesson. The lesson is that even if the mother ties one up, it is the merciful father who rescues and liberates the son. Even if the mother ties one up, it's the merciful father who rescues and liberates the son. Now, Lord, please note that I too am staying in the forest of the material world for many lifetimes. My mother is Māyā-devī, who has created my material body and tied it in this forest using the three ropes of the three modes of nature. But if she is my mother, then who's my father? You're my father, O Dāmodara. Isn't it so? Your father, Nanda Mahārāja, untied You and liberated You. So when will my father come to untie me by giving me the gift of His *prema*?" Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Dāśaratha Śrīla Prabhupāda. So thank you so much. I think we'll get one more lecture out of this pastime. I'll look and see; there's some beautiful prayers that we can analyze—Maṇigrīva and Nalakūvara's prayers—I think that can be another class. But let's see. We're really busy here in Vṛndāvana and we're going out almost every day with 400 devotees and six big buses to different *līlā-sthānas*, and I'm obliged to speak out there as well. It takes a little preparation, so a lot of lectures, lots of preparation, and lots of devotees to see and lots of godbrothers and godsisters to meet and to chant our rounds and everything else. But I love the service and I want to keep all of you connected to Vṛndāvana during this most important month of Kārtika. So we'll find time to prepare and we'll be with you again next Friday. Thank you so much.""