"*00140*.*
"Hi, Krishna, everyone. Once again, we welcome you to Govardhana, especially on this morning where we are very blessed to be sitting at the lotus feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda. I have to share a little secret with you: I have some kidney stones. If you know what that is, in your kidneys, sometimes the uric acid crystallizes; it makes a little stone and comes down the pipe and out of your body. It can be quite painful. I get them every couple of years. They say the pain is equal to a woman giving birth—women, that is one thing; men, that is another—and I haven’t had kidney stones in a couple of years. It started a few days ago, and it is why you haven't seen me all the time, because sometimes it may mean I can't come to Kārtika parikrama. I am going to the doctor today; he is going to tell me if I can go to Kārtika or not. But the pain is not always there; it comes, you know, like once a day or something, so it is starting right now. 

So, it is not so bad, but it may get to the point where I have to ask Prahlad to finish the lecture. I think I'll make it to chant louder; I feel a little better. Anyway, don’t worry; it is a mechanical problem, but it may interrupt a little bit. But let's start off in a positive way: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.* In invoking the name of the Supreme Lord, we also invoke the name of his dear devotees because it is only by the mercy of such devotees that we can understand who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As we know, in Vṛndāvana, there are many deities, and all those deities were established by great devotees as the prāṇa, the Lord of their lives. So, our beloved Govindadeva, whom we've been having ecstatic darśanas with, was discovered in Vṛndāvana by Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī. It is his prāṇa, his beloved deity. So, invoking auspiciousness, let us begin today by glorifying Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī with a very beautiful verse in Sanskrit: "For purification of my physical body, I bathe regularly using water; however, for the complete purification of myself and my existence, I bathe in the nectarian words of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī."

Regarding Govindadeva, of course, we know he is one of, as we mentioned the other day, the three principal deities of Vraja. In *Bhakti-ratnākara* 1.119, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya says: "These three deities of Vṛndāvana—Madan-mohana, Govinda, and Gopīnātha—have absorbed the heart and soul of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. I worship their lotus feet, for they are the Lords of my heart." You have personally seen how Govindadeva and his devotees are the Lords of the hearts of these people of Jaipur, how they call out in such trances of love to the deities—it doesn't just warm your heart; it melts your heart. And that is bhakti; that is devotion. Now, to help us appreciate Govindadeva, there is a very beautiful, famous verse in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. Many of you may know it by heart: "In a forest of desire trees known as Vṛndāvana, there is a golden mansion, and in the midst of it is a jeweled throne at the place called Yoga-pīṭha. Seated thereupon is Śrī Govinda, a veritable Cupid incarnate. He is served there like a king, bedecked with divine clothes, ornaments, and other paraphernalia, served incessantly by thousands and thousands of devotees." 

It is always longed for in Vraja. And also the head of our sampradāya, Lord Brahmā, the creator of this particular universe, he—we know—he glorifies Govindadeva after receiving Vedic knowledge from him. In the fifth part of his *Brahma-saṁhitā*, throughout it, he says: "Govinda, I worship Govinda, the Primal Lord." Now, as far as our deity of Govindadeva, we have heard in previous lectures how this deity was carved by Vajranābha, the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, under the supervision of Uttarā. Actually, because she had actually seen Kṛṣṇa, and Vajranābha was the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, so he didn't actually get to see Kṛṣṇa, but Uttarā, she is a prominent personality in the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, she had seen Kṛṣṇa, so he took advice from her: "What does Kṛṣṇa look like?" So she explained. So these deities were carved, amongst them Govindadeva. So Vajranābha carved this beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa. Actually, I found a verse in *Garga-saṁhitā*. We quoted *Garga-saṁhitā* a few times yesterday in an authoritative way because Prabhupāda authorized it, as he did 20 times in his writings. So there it says: "Then Vajranābha installed Viṣṇu and Kṛṣṇa-deva in Mathurā, Govinda-deva in Vṛndāvana, Harideva in Govardhana, and Balabhadra Balarāma one yojana away from Govardhana." We were there the other day. In this way, Vajranābha installed six deities of Lord Hari. 

So, 5,000 years ago is a long time, and unfortunately, like many of the Vraja deities, Govinda was lost in the progress of time. But it was our beloved Rūpa Goswāmī who eventually rediscovered Govindadeva 500 years ago. Now, we know that 500 years ago, one of Lord Caitanya’s instructions to the Six Goswāmīs was to establish, or you could say reestablish, deity worship in Vṛndāvana when he sent them there. Now, this particular instruction—there were three instructions: install deities, discover the holy places, the lost holy places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, and write books on the science of devotion. We know that because that is a specific instruction that Lord Caitanya gave to Rūpa and Sanātana. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 19.217–219, specifically tells Śrī Rūpa: "Now go to Vṛndāvana, stay there, preach transcendental literature, *rūpa-nāma*, and excavate the lost places, *lupta-tīrtha-uddhāra*, establish the service of Lord Kṛṣṇa, *Kṛṣṇa-sevā*, and preach the mellows of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s devotional service, *rasa-tattva-kathā*." 

Now, it is interesting: in one accepted Gauḍīya śāstra called *Bhakti-ratnākara*, it is Chapter 8, verses 5 and 6, we hear Mahāprabhu give a similar instruction to Rūpa Goswāmī: "Śrī Rūpa, go to Vṛndāvana, reveal the enchanting service of Govinda, by the mere sight and perception of the Lord." Now, "wrapped in the state of silence," meaning he is hidden, he is *gupta*. People and all of the living beings will attain pure love of God. You know, he hadn't found him yet; Govindadeva was buried in the Earth because the invaders came, and the pūjārīs either hid deities in ponds, or dug, put them into the Earth, or hid them in different ways. So Govinda had been hidden. So Mahāprabhu says to Rūpa Goswāmī that he is now "wrapped in the state of silence." What poetry is that, wrapped in—describing someone who is, you know, hidden somewhere, or that person is "wrapped now in a state of silence." 

So, in due course of time, the Goswāmīs were in Vṛndāvana; they were writing books about Kṛṣṇa, they were wandering around Vṛndāvana-dhāma, and by their pure devotional hearts, Kṛṣṇa was revealing to them where particular līlās took place. Those are called *līlā-sthānas*, and the Goswāmīs were finding their deities, or you could even say—because love is reciprocal—the deities found their devotees. The Six Goswāmīs, the deities found them on that level. Just like one of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disciples, Gaṅgā-devī dāsī, in her *vyāsa-pūjā* offering, she wrote one time so nicely to her spiritual master, Guru Mahārāja: "It took you so long to find me; please don't ever kick me away." 

In cases, the Guru would travel and preach and naturally people would come forward, or more commonly, the disciple would search for a Guru, just try to seek out a spiritual master, but she said: "Guru Mahārāja, it took you so long to find me. You found me; please don't ever kick me away." So if you hear the history of how the Goswāmīs found the deities, it's almost as if the deities found them. Like Prabhupāda said: the first time he went to Vṛndāvana, he was walking, he told us, he said: "I was expecting Kṛṣṇa to just jump out from behind any bush." So time went on; the deities found their, the devotees found their deities. And Sanātana Goswāmī was the first; he found Madana-mohana, and Rūpa Goswāmī had this instruction. So, when you get an instruction from your spiritual master, the Supreme Lord, that is your life and soul. You know, by following that instruction, that will take you home, back to Godhead. So Rūpa Goswāmī was always thinking, "Where is my Govinda? The other Goswāmīs have deities; where is my Govinda?" He doesn't come. Actually, this hankering, this *lālalyam*, it is greed for Kṛṣṇa; this is the essence of bhakti. "Where is Kṛṣṇa now?" This is the heart of a devotee. 

So one day, Rūpa Goswāmī was sitting in the Vṛndāvana forest, and in this *bhāva-bhakti*, this mood of separation, and Vṛndāvana lore, oral tradition has it that at one point, a little cowherd boy came up from behind him and tapped him on the shoulder: "Bābā, you look so sad; you appear to be lamenting separation from your—the Lord of your life." So the little boy pointed up to a little hillock—hillock means it's not a big hill, but a small hill—he said: "You look up there. You see, every day I’ve noticed on that hillock, a cow comes and empties her udder out of milk onto a small hole in the ground. You go see for yourself." And the boy disappeared. So Rūpa Goswāmī looked, and sure enough, a beautiful cow came, a white cow came, she stopped at that spot indicated by the boy, and she began pouring her milk into what appeared to be a hole in the ground. So it is said that at that moment, Rūpa Goswāmī envisioned his beloved Lord Govinda, and realizing he may be about to meet him, began singing songs in praise of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Just like before the curtain opens, we follow suit; we sing prayers in praise of Govinda so we’re prepared to meet our divine lover. 

Now, this very important moment in the history of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas is described in a beautiful verse by one devotee, his name was Govardhana Dāsa Goswāmī, in his *Śrī-Rūpa-stotra*. It is, I think, it's verse seven. These things are not recorded by video or by television stations or by, you know, iPhone cameras; they are recorded in the eyes of these great *tattva-darśīs*, these realized devotees like Govardhana Dāsa Goswāmī. And thank the Lord that we have that in scripture and therefore we can see these things happening. That, ah, he sees through his ears, not through his eyes. Govardhana Dāsa Goswāmī writes: "Begging for alms in the houses of devotee brāhmaṇas in Mathurā, Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī, who is more humble than a blade of grass and more tolerant than a tree, sat under a tree, withholding a clay pot and wearing a black wooden chādar on his shoulder. There he envisioned his beloved Govindadeva while crying in happiness and singing beautiful songs about the pastimes of the Lord of Rādhikā." The Lord of Rādhikā, Govinda. Govardhana Dāsa Goswāmī was one of the prominent Goswāmīs in the line of Raghunātha dāsa Goswāmī. He lived during the time of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura; he wrote a comprehensive commentary on which I found, and in the introduction, he writes something really nice. Listen to this: "My greatest good fortune is that Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and I are friends forever." So anyway, immediately, Rūpa Goswāmī made an announcement that all the strong men and able boys in Vṛndāvana should come to that little hillock as the little boy had indicated that something special is going on there. And hearing that announcement, the cows also came, because Govinda means "he who protects the cows." So it is described that as all these cows came running to that spot, and as they ran there, the sounds of their bells, big and small, filled the air all throughout Vraja. *Ding, ding, ding, ding, ding*, like we hear bells, right? These cowbells ringing throughout the whole forest, "all the cows are coming, what's happening?" And arriving there, they all laid down together in a circle around that particular spot. 

So everyone began digging, because this hole appeared to be something extraordinary, with picks and shovels and even their bare hands. And the scribes and the poets at that time, they described that the work progressed very quickly due to the muddy nature of that spot, because there was constantly being milk poured over it for many months or years at a time. So it was very soft; it was like really easy to dig up. We think of mud like with water—what's mud with milk? Anyway, so after some time, they came to a hard part, which was the top-knot of Govinda, like you see Kṛṣṇa sometimes, he has a top-knot there with a little peacock feather sticking out. So they came to the top-knot of the deity, and everyone was in ecstasy. So they realized they'd found—Rūpa Goswāmī realized he had appeared to him. So the news spread throughout Vṛndāvana: "Rūpa Goswāmī has found his prāṇa, his beloved Lord." It spread very quickly. In the material world, because of the nature of people’s hearts, you know, bad news travels quicker than good news. "Did you hear?" "Oh, no, really?" "Wow!" This is the nature of a dirty heart. But in spiritual societies, good news travels quicker than bad news. So this news spread, and all the Vrajavāsīs began running to that particular area. That spot is called *Yoga-pīṭha*. *Yoga* is anywhere or everywhere that the Supreme Lord sits down, stands permanently, or appears there. Wherever the Lord sits down, that’s *Yoga-pīṭha*; wherever he stands as a deity permanently, or where he makes his appearance, this is *Yoga-pīṭha*. 

Now it is written that while this work was going on, Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī was standing the whole time, supporting himself with a stick, like you see me sometimes, in old age we have a stick. So standing with a stick, shivering in ecstasy, tears flowing from his eyes like torrents of rain: "Oh, my Lord is going to appear!" And when this deity was pulled out of the ground, after who knows how long, a long time, he was standing there all muddy, whatever, Rūpa Goswāmī offered him full *daṇḍavats* in the "milky mud." We hesitate to bow on the ground, but you know, maybe the spiritual teacher comes or some senior devotee comes or something, and then it is a little muddy, and then we move away. Out of love, he just fell down on the ground in the mud, in the "milky mud." I don't think anyone's ever coined that phrase, "milky mud." *Daṇḍavat* means to fall down flatly in front of one’s superior as a sign of deep appreciation and respect. So, in the milky mud. So a short while later, Śrīla Sanātana Goswāmī, he came to greet—Rūpa Goswāmī came... where were we? This is the real history of the universe; other history is "chewing the chewed." When I was a young boy in my town, a little town in California outside of San Francisco, we had a newspaper, and the back of the newspaper was the good news. There were five pages with bad news, and then there was one page, and my mom and dad only let me read the back page. Only when I started going to school did I learn about the bad news, you know, especially high school. And actually, if you read newspapers from 50, 100, 200, 250 years ago, so you can find books like that, they just have that print; it's mostly just bad, and it's the same stuff. It's not any different; it's politics, it's crime, it's graft, it's, you know, it's a disease, it's war—it's just "chewing the chewed." It’s the same news all over again. So that type of history, we're not interested in. The "chewed to here"—the history of great saints, siddhas, yogis, mystics, the Lord’s pastimes, that is what we want to hear. That is what our heart craves. 

One time, a newspaper reporter came to see the Guru of our Guru, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī—this is in the 1800s or early 1900s—and he said to him: "I heard you want to start a newspaper about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, spiritual things, and you’re going to print it every day about the spiritual world? How are you going to do that?" So Bhaktisiddhānta, what he said, "Well, you're writing a newspaper about the affairs of this world, and Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā this material world is only one-quarter of his creation; three-fourths of his creation is the spiritual world. So we have much more to write about than you do about your little nonsense material things happening in Kolkata." 

So, history buffs, there's people actually who take get masters and PhDs in history—this is the history they should study, because listening to this history purifies the heart and awakens the *prema*, the inherent love of God that’s there in the heart. So we have to be very careful what we listen to, what we see, what we watch. We have to be very careful; we don't want the heart to be completely contaminated. These are the pastimes that we should hear in *Bhāgavatam*, etc. It’s a verse like that in the Vedas: "By sound we become conditioned, and by sound we become liberated." *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare...* Freedom. 

So soon afterwards, the *catur-veda* brāhmaṇas, they also arrived from Mathurā to chant mantras, auspicious mantras, and then the wives of those brāhmaṇas, their brāhmaṇīs, they came riding in palanquins carrying different types of pūjā paraphernalia to worship the deity. And then Rūpa Goswāmī personally organized and performed an elaborate worship of the Lord—abhiṣeka. They installed the deities, of course he was always there, but because he disappeared for so long, they bathed the deity in very auspicious substances: yogurt, milk, clarified butter, honey, etc. Just a similar procedure, you could say; this procedure is described in Rūpa Goswāmī’s book *Kṛṣṇa-janma-tithi-vidhi*. And it's interesting to note that pūjārīs who have studied that book say that in such an elaborate abhiṣeka ceremony, there is no mention of blowing conch shells. Right, we often blow conch shells, and I suppose that's supported somewhere, especially in South India, they—oh, they blow the conch shells. But in that particular book, it is mentioned: "Don't blow conch shells." Originally, they didn't blow conch shells in Vṛndāvana. So I inquired, and I found out why, and it's really interesting. I read that when Akrūra came to Vṛndāvana to take Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma away from Vṛndāvana to Mathurā on the order of King Kaṁsa, he loudly heralded the occasion; he came blowing a conch shell. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma got into the chariot, he’s blowing the conch shell, and as they drove off, he’s blowing the conch shell. Therefore, in times gone by and even today, in a few temples in Vṛndāvana, they don't blow conch shells because they only serve—it is described as a painful reminder that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma left Vraja. No, no, no, Akrūra blew the conch shell when he took them and he never came back. So, it is to be understood that then and now we have Govindadeva standing before us by the mercy of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī. 

Now, it is written in *Bhakti-ratnākara* in the second wave that upon seeing Govinda for the first time, all the Vrajavāsīs chanted the following: "Śrī Govindadeva appeared in this world through the via medium, the agency of Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī." Right there in *Bhakti-ratnākara*—let's give credit where credit is due—"Śrī Govindadeva appeared in this world through the via medium of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī." So that evening, Rūpa Goswāmī ordered a festival in honor of Govindadeva, and in that ceremony, he personally offered Govindadeva different types of powders. Like now, there's a celebration, Holi. Well, there's always been, because it’s a festival that's eternal, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa throw colors at each other and the gopīs. So they were throwing—doing like a Holi—on that particular day. And why did he offer colorful powders to Govinda specifically? Because Govinda appeared on Vasant-pañcamī, the first day of spring. Everyone’s playing Holi; Goswāmī, he’s playing Holi with Kṛṣṇa. Actually, in his writings, Rūpa Goswāmī writes a beautiful song about Govindadeva: "*Kumāra-vasantā-avatāra*," "Oh handsome son of Nanda, oh Lord who enjoys *vasanta* (springtime) pastimes in the forest of Vṛndāvana, all glories to you, all glories to you, Nanda-nandana, oh handsome son of Nanda." We never hear that God’s an old man with a beard and growing old and reaching out to... don't you know? No, he’s the original person; although he’s timeless or he’s the oldest, he always appears as a fresh youth. 

So in the days that followed, the initial days that followed, Rūpa Goswāmī, he—Goswāmī—he has nothing; he’s a renounced sādhu. He made a very small hut for Govindadeva; that was the first temple. It was made out of leaves, wood, and mud and grass. How can Kṛṣṇa accept something like that? Because he says in Gītā: "If if you offer me with love a fruit, a flower, just a single leaf, if you offer out of devotion, my dear devotee, I’ll accept it." Regardless, if you're a poor person, you offer that leaf with love, I accept. So Rūpa Goswāmī is a pure devotee; he made a hut out of leaves and mud—maybe it was "milky mud," I don't know. 

Oh, by the way, thank you, Lord and Nṛsiṁhadeva, all the pain went away, at least for now. It’s okay, Prahlad, you don't have to take over. So, after bathing the Lord every day, he would ornament the Lord with *śṛṅgāra*. Śṛṅgāra means like, you know, pearls, rubies, sapphires, diamonds; generally, that's what we think of śṛṅgāra, like you see the deities. But Caitanya-caritāmṛta says Rūpa Goswāmī would decorate Govinda with *prakṛti-śṛṅgāra*. It means śṛṅgāra literally made by nature. He didn't have diamonds and rubies and things like that, so he dressed him with creepers, flower dresses, guñjā-mālā type of seeds, vaṅtī flower beads, and toy-leaf garlands, etc. And he would also place a water pot near Govinda as well as a stick from a kadamba tree and a *mukuṭa*, or crown, made of Tulasi beads. And for food offerings, he would offer—described—*amṛta-keli*. I have a disciple, her name's Amṛta-keli; "playful nectar." But it can, it’s also *amṛta-keli* also means sometimes in Goswāmī literature, sweet rice. And he would offer *śikhariṇī* and a—in the summertime, he would offer a very refreshing drink containing camphor, black pepper, and salt. So, salt. But salt brings out the flavor of something. Remember Prabhupāda’s room one time in Geneva, and the pūjārī brought in some fruit, and Prabhupāda asked for salt and he put salt on the fruit. I said to the GBC: "What’s he doing? He thinks it’s sugar?" "No, no, he knows it’s salt, ’cause salt brings out the taste—not a lot—but the taste of fruit." So Prabhupāda knew all these things. He’s *bālakṛṣṇa*, you know, the pastime I told you many times, that one time Prabhupāda cooked samosas for the disciples. And afterwards Tamal Krishna, he took a bite and he said: "Prabhupāda, I have never tasted a samosa like this in my life." Prabhupāda, kind of, you know, humbly, smiley, said: "Yes, this is Mother Yaśodā’s recipe for samosas, Kṛṣṇa’s mother in the spiritual world." So Tamal said, "But how do you know, Prabhupāda?" Then he thought, "That's not—that's offensive; how does he know?" Because he's a resident of the spiritual world who came to this material world to teach us how to go back to that spiritual world and taste Yaśodā’s samosas. 

So sometimes he would cook wheat mixed with sweet water; doesn't sound very good, whatever. A pure devotee touches, becomes wonderful. Just like Bhakti-tīrtha, he said to my god-brother Bhakti-Govinda Mahārāja, "When he sings, it’s like gold; when he cooks, it’s like gold." What was the third one? Huh, "speaks," when he speaks, it’s like gold. So from the very first day that Govinda appeared, all the Vrajavāsīs would come regularly into the forest—it was, you know, little mutt—for darśana. And in the old *Pūjā-vidhis*—*Pūjā-vidhi* means the old books by the Vrajavāsīs written about pūjā, or worship of Govindadeva—mentions that in those times, Rūpa Goswāmī established 38 major festivals, like that: celebrating the coming of spring, the bathing festival, *phūla-dol* (swing festival), *nauka-vihāra* (boat festivals), *jhūlana-yātrā* (swinging Kṛṣṇa on a swing). "What did you do today?" "I swang God on the swing." Appearance day of Lord... And in the beginning, Rūpa Goswāmī presided over all these festivals. In fact, he became so involved in this worship of Govinda that he had no time for anything else. But he’d received three instructions: write books about Kṛṣṇa-kathā, find the holy places. So he was kind of neglecting that. So he wrote a letter to Lord Caitanya in Puri, as incredible as it seems. In those days, there—these devotees on that level, they were exchanging letters from Lord Caitanya, even before Rūpa and Sanātana met Lord Caitanya. They were living in Rāmakeli in North Bengal, they were very busy with the affairs of government; they wrote to him in Puri: "How can we remember you, you know, when we're so busy in our material affairs?" And Lord Caitanya wrote a letter back, a famous letter. 

He wrote an interesting reply: "How can we think of Kṛṣṇa when we’re so busy?" So what did Lord Caitanya reply in a letter? He said: "Just like a woman who has a paramour; she’s a married woman, but she has a lover. She’s going about her affairs with her husband, like life is normal, but in her mind, she’s thinking of her paramour." Interesting analogy! So in the same way, what he meant was, in the same way when we're engaged in our different material school work, house cleaning, shopping, we should train ourselves to—while we're going through those activities—think about the divine, think about God, think about Kṛṣṇa. I should go through those activities, just like, you know, a woman can think of her lover while she's very busy, and a man can think of his. So in the same way, love Kṛṣṇa, but keep him—and when you’re busy, keep him in your thoughts. This is bhakti, not just one kīrtan, not one event, but 24/7. This is bhakti. 

"But Gurudeva, I’m not that advanced, you know, that I have that kind of love that I can think of Kṛṣṇa all the time." Well, practice makes perfect. We slowly awaken that love by mantra, by divine sound: *Hare Hare, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.* Chanting is blissful, but it's serious business. Sometimes we not feel like chanting or don't have time for chanting; we should still chant, because like when the doctor gives you a prescription, "take these antibiotics for nine days." If you stop at six, disease goes a little, but then it comes way back. So there is a prescribed number of rounds; 16 rounds every day will protect you from the negativity of this, will protect you from the influence—all the bad things—so your mind will be peaceful to think of Kṛṣṇa. And by thinking of Kṛṣṇa constantly, the love will come, because he's all-attractive. 

So Rūpa wrote a letter to Caitanya: "My dear Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in the service of Govindadeva, my days and nights are passing like blinking, blinking of the eyes. I am not giving proper attention and time to writing scriptures as you ordered. If you can kindly send someone from Jagannātha Purī who can help me serve Govindadeva, then I can do the other services." Kṛṣṇa, help me, "my dear Lord, I'm drowning in this fathomless whirlpool of material existence; oh, you who give shelter to those who have no shelter, please, just this one time, won't you extend your hand to save me?" Pray from the heart. That’s the mood we have to chant, not mechanically: "I finish my rounds." Chant from the heart. So when Mahāprabhu received that letter, he was very happy, and he requested one of his intimate followers whose name was Kāśīśvara. He said: "You go and help with the pūjā in Vṛndāvana." Now, at that time, Kāśīśvara, he was the head priest in the Puri temple, but what's even more significant is that he was a very intimate associate of Lord Caitanya. So Mahāprabhu saying "Go," he said to Mahāprabhu: "Lord, why do I need to go to Vṛndāvana to see Kṛṣṇa? You are Kṛṣṇa himself in a golden form! I don't need to go see him; you're Kṛṣṇa. I don't want to go." 

You're the most recent incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Through the ages, there's so many incarnations coming from the original form of God, Kṛṣṇa, you know, you were bluish-black like a monsoon cloud in Dvāpara-yuga, now you’re golden in Kali-yuga, you’ve come to distribute the chanting of *Hare Kṛṣṇa*. Why should I go there? You’re here! This very important, I have been worshiping you; have to go help, now go! But understanding Kāśīśvara’s mood, Lord arranged to give him a very old deity of Kṛṣṇa from the Jagannātha temple, saying, "This deity is identical to me." How can a metal form of a deity, wooden form of a deity, be God? God's all-powerful; he can—he can change matter into spirit and spirit into matter if he wants. Just like an electrician; he can take electricity, make the refrigerator cold, he can take the same energy and make the stove hot. It’s up to his discretion; same energy makes something hot, makes something cold. So the Lord is all-powerful; he can take matter, turn it into spirit, or he can take spirit and make it into matter. It’s very simple. We gave the example the other day—in the Holy Bible, the Old Testament, God appeared to Moses as a burning bush and spoke to him. So that’s a matter—was fire. Do we think all these people are foolish? They’re praying in front of the stone? No, Kṛṣṇa is present by his will, by his desire. That deity he gave him is named Gopinātha-Govinda. You imagine, you’re a devotee, and Kṛṣṇa gives you a deity of himself? Like, "Whoa!" So he said: "Okay, thank you, I’m going." Like Prabhupāda told me one time, Prabhupāda, I was—seeing he was sending me off to Europe to preach, and I was, "How am I going to leave you, Prabhupāda?" So, sensing that, he reached into his drawer and he pulled out one of his own cloths, his—it was a dhoti or chādar—and he said: "Take this." It was a simple cloth, but because my Guru gave it to me, it meant the world to me. And then Prabhupāda said, "A gift from a Vaisnava is a very special thing; it’s an extension of their heart, it’s an extension of their love." 

So Kāśīśvara came to Vṛndāvana with that deity, and he always worshiped Govindadeva along with that little deity. And if you look on the altar here—just if you look to the left, on Kṛṣṇa’s right—there’s that deity, Gopīnātha-Govinda. He’s standing there even today. Just if you look closer, right next to Kṛṣṇa’s feet, that you can just see mostly the top of his head, that’s the deity that Mahāprabhu gave Kāśīśvara for—amen. And so the worship, when he got there, then the worship really started going well, because he introduced the type of pūjā that they do in Jagannātha Purī. Now, when we had the opportunity to do research in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, we came across an official document by an official court poet in—in the—court of Rāja Mān Siṅgh, how the pūjā kept increasing over the centuries. So this poet, he wrote a little document—it’s called, just for your curiosity, to see how the pūjā—keep, pūjā should always increase. Prabhupāda said it should never decrease. Whatever standard you are, you can always increase, but you should never decrease the standard of pūjā. 

So Rāja Mān Siṅgh, this is about 200 years ago, he ordered: "From now on, in the month of Mārgaśīrṣa, on the 12th day, Devatā-Govindadeva is to be offered many kinds of condiments or spices in preparations cooked for him. In the month of Pauṣa, Kṛṣṇa-anna—kitchari made out of different types of grain—should be specially prepared. In the summer season, in the festival of Holi, nicely prepare sweets. In the month of Caitra, Govindadeva should be swung on a swing (dolā), and in the month of Vaiśākha, he should be covered in sandalwood paste." Anyway, just to show you how it’s always increased and it’s never decreased. For, let's give a big round of applause! How easy—maybe one of the ladies could hold her umbrella for her? I’m ordering it, you have to focus on the—I take care of the ladies so much service. 

So, sometime later, back to that period of when was established, Mahāprabhu sent Raghunātha dāsa to also—with an instruction to serve Govinda. He said: "My dear Raghunātha, go to Yoga-pīṭha in Vṛndāvana, the place of Govindadeva in Vṛndāvana, and relish the association of Rūpa and Sanātana. Serve Śrī Govindadeva by relating his pastimes as revealed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." So Raghunātha went to Vṛndāvana, and he just followed the instruction. He basically—he studied and spoke. Therefore, Bhāgavatam became his deity; the book *Grantha* became a deity. And sometime later, Lord Caitanya personally gave him a—a copy of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and it is still worshiped in Raghunātha dāsa Goswāmī’s temple to this very day. I was just there the other day. So a little bit later, Lord Caitanya wrote another letter to Raghunātha dāsa Goswāmī requesting him to build a house of gold for Govinda. "Whoa! He’s a Goswāmī, he has no possessions, and he’s saying build a house of gold for Govinda?" I haven't found that in śāstra, but I’m friends with the Goswāmīs, the pūjārīs, the lineage of Goswāmī down from that time—there’s five brothers now at that temple, they’re called the Buta family—and they told me that—I’m just telling you that where it’s coming from—they say that that instruction was given by Mahāprabhu to Raghunātha. So he couldn’t do it because he’s a—he’s a poor person, but later, a disciple of his built a beautiful temple that also wasn’t gold, but the family says it wasn’t gold, but it was a manifestation of Raghunātha dāsa Goswāmī’s heart of gold. Like, when I think of my god-brothers, you know, doing amazing service, I always think their service is an expansion of their heart, their love for Śrīla Prabhupāda. Like Śivarāma Swami, he’s—he’s such an amazing devotee, and he has—he created that New Vraja-dhāma, that beautiful community, farm community, and hungry—whenever I go there, the standard is so high. I’m thinking this project’s a manifestation of Śivarāma Swami’s heart, his love for Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

Well, the work that my god-brother BB Govinda Mahārāja is doing in Muslim countries—he’s preaching in Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and the Muslim people are becoming very favorable. We have tens of thousands of people in those countries who are now shaved-head, tilaka-wearing, dhoti and sari-wearing, and chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa*, and the government is tolerant. So what is that? What does that take? Prabhupāda said one time: "Any devotee, you can preach in a Muslim country, I’ll take the dust of that disciple and put it on my head." Or my god-sister, Mālikā-devī, a French lady, she went into Russia when it was the Iron Curtain—behind the Iron Curtain. Prabhupāda ordered her to marry a Russian boy and spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness in Russia. She did it, then she’s doing it now—manifestation of her love for Prabhupāda. Or, um, wrote the book, the cookbook, yeah, Yamunā-devī dāsī. She’s since departed; she’s with Prabhupāda now in the spiritual world. She did so much service; she wrote the "Eternal Cookbook," her cookbook with all the recipes that we should be following. Big, fat cookbook like that, she did amazing service as well. That cookbook is, in the manifestation of her love for Prabhupāda and Kṛṣṇa. So this temple appeared because of the desire of Raghunātha dāsa Goswāmī. Of course, later on, a magnificent temple—I don't know how many stories I’ve heard, 12, 20, I don't know—beautiful temple manifest in Vṛndāvana, and remnant of—remnant of it is still there. Govindadeva Temple is famous just from the architectural point of view, what to speak of the devotional point of view! Maybe we’ll visit it when we get back to Vṛndāvana, the Govindadeva Temple, would you like to see it where he used to stand? But that’s a whole another lecture. 

So that’s enough for today. Obviously, it’s just a drop in the ocean of the glories of Govindadeva and his pure devotees. But Prabhupāda said by tasting a drop of the ocean, you can appreciate what the whole ocean is like. So we’ll just finish with a couple of verses referring to Rūpa Goswāmī and perhaps that temple, to get you eager to go see it when we get back to Vraja. Śrīnivāsa says: "A person who sees Lord Govinda in Vṛndāvana never goes to the abode of Yamarāja, for he achieves the destination of the most pious people." And Nṛsiṁha says in the Mathurā-khaṇḍa of the *Skanda Purāṇa*: "In the abode of Vṛndāvana is Govindadeva’s most sanctified residence, which is surrounded by his servants. I also reside there, oh King. In this world, that Vṛndāvana is a spiritual abode; servants headed by Govinda are absorbed there in thoughts of Govinda, and they are present there, oh King. Glorious in this world are those fortunate souls who have seen—seen, just seen—the temple of Govinda in Vṛndāvana." And he wrote in his famous *Govindāṣṭaka*, verse four: "Worship Govinda, who is supreme bliss, who is the protector of the world, who has made his advent in the world as Govindadeva through his līlā, who is the protector of the race of Yādavas and cows, who made the cowherds happy by lifting up through his līlā the Govardhana Mountain, where the gopīs used to play, and whose name, Govinda, is uttered clearly by the cows or scriptures, who has many names, and who is beyond the reach of the ignorance, compliance." 

And lastly, like you finish an orchestra, lastly and most importantly, a beautiful verse by Raghunātha dāsa Goswāmī, which he gives at the end of his: "Placing a straw between my teeth, I pray again and again, birth after birth may I be the dust at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī. Placing a straw between my teeth, I pray again and again, birth after birth, may I be the dust at the lotus feet." All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! All glories to Govindadeva and his dear consort! Thank you very much, *Hare Kṛṣṇa*.""