"*00566*.*
"A very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti.* So today's class will be a little short, so please forgive me; I have some important errands to do here in New Delhi. I didn't want to disappoint you, so we are giving this class, and I'd like to continue with our theme of wandering—wandering throughout Vṛndāvana. Of course, it's a responsible wandering because we are all searching after the holy places where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa perform Their transcendental pastimes. It's not, to use a modern term, "footloose and fancy-free." You must have heard that terminology, "footloose and fancy-free." Actually, it's a phrase from the 16th century, but it has a fairly significant meaning. It translates as "having no attachments, especially romantic ones, and thus free to do as one pleases." It's interesting; of course, in our wanderings in Braja, we have a fixed purpose.

And we have the best guides. In fact, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu sent the six Gosvāmīs to Vṛndāvana for this express purpose: to map out the holy *tīrthas* for past, present, and future pilgrims. And for that, they too wandered around Vṛndāvana, and due to their very pure, deep spiritual vision, they discovered so many *līlā-sthānas*. When they did, they would sit down in those sacred places and, as Prabhupāda puts it, write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, for example, wrote three scriptures—*Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* and *Utkalikā-vallarī*—under a tree in the middle of sacred Sevā-kuñja. Sevā-kuñja is where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have many of Their loving pastimes, especially Their *rāsa* dance. It's one of the places where They have the *rāsa* dance, and it's considered a very, very special part of Vṛndāvana where the most cherished loving pastimes take place: Nidhivana, Jamunā. And they take place in the *kadamba-vṛkṣas*. *Kadamba-vṛkṣa* means the trees come together and they bow—they bow over—and they make like little places where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can come in and have Their loving discussions and Their laughter, etc., like *Kuñja-vihārī* we sing before the Bhāgavatam class in the morning. So in these places, in this part of Vṛndāvana, there are very sweet pastimes, but only for the closest of Kṛṣṇa's associates. Now, our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī preferred those places because in the spiritual world, we know that he is Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī, a very intimate servant of Śrī Rādhā. In the *Gandharva-samprārthanāṣṭakam*, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī mentions that in those pastimes during *rāsa-līlā*, Rādhārāṇī's ankle bells ring and that sound has the ability to shake the three worlds, as he describes, and thus attract everyone's attention. But these are, you could say, confidential pastimes; they're not for everyone's attention. So, it is described in that chapter that one of his services in the spiritual world as Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī is that he places the dust of *raja* on Śrī Rādhā's ankle bells to keep them quiet. Of course, those pastimes were also manifest on this earth in Śrī Vṛndāvana. So, this is one of Rūpa Gosvāmī's services in the spiritual world: to put *raja* on the ankle bells so they don't make too much noise and others can come and see their wonderful, very sweet, loving pastimes, *rāsa-līlā*, so that no one disturbs—as you could say—this charming dancing of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. This dancing is done in the evening or into the night where there's very little light or no light, and it's written that only when the eyes of Śrī Rādhā reflect with the Kaustubha-maṇi of Kṛṣṇa—the famous jewel He wears around His neck—does some light reveal Their pleasing dancing. I thought that was really sweet. It's written, only when the eyes of Śrī Rādhikā reflect with the Kaustubha-maṇi of Kṛṣṇa—you know that jewel He wears around His chest—when her eyes reflect in that Kaustubha-maṇi, does some light appear to reveal Their pleasing dancing for those that are participating. So 500 years ago, Rūpa Gosvāmī naturally chose to do his *bhajana* there in Sevā-kuñja. Those pastimes took place 5,000 years ago, of course; they're eternal. But 500 years ago, when he was living in Vṛndāvana, wandering in Vṛndāvana, he very often chose to stay there.

And at that time, it's not like we see it now—it's all kind of built up, and there's a bunch of shops and there's some gardens—but lots of the buildings... it was just the groves of Vṛndāvana. So he would sit under a banyan tree there, and many scholars would come and meet with him to discuss the scriptures. And as we know, our six Gosvāmīs were planning out how to develop Vṛndāvana and, what's more, how to spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement all over the world. This all took place at that time in Sevā-kuñja. And of course, in time, the temple of Rādhā-Dāmodara was constructed close to that spot, the temple of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; he had his temple constructed there, very close to where Rūpa Gosvāmī was doing his *bhajana*. Now, later, when Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī departed, the Vaiṣṇavas built a very simple *samādhi* under the tree that he did *bhajana* in, in Sevā-kuñja. Actually, he was put into *samādhi* under the ground, but there was just a little platform there to mark that particular spot; that's how they did it in those days. It wasn't until about 150 years ago that the present *samādhi* that we see now—it's a very beautiful *samādhi*—it wasn't until 150 years ago that the present *samādhi* we see now was constructed. Now, unfortunately, when they were constructing that *samādhi*—as he so well deserved, and where we go to take shelter at his lotus feet—when they were constructing that *samādhi*, the tree that he did *bhajana* under, which is where the *samādhi* was placed, it was destroyed. You can imagine, that tree was witnessing the writing of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, his ecstasies, his emotions, his *bhāva*, his love; that tree, because everything in Vṛndāvana is personal, everything is enlightened, purely enlightened with Kṛṣṇa-prema—so that tree which witnessed all of his *līlās* there, it was destroyed. But fortunately, at that time, one of the Gosvāmī families serving the deities in that Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, which was present at that time, saved a certain portion of that tree, and today their descendants worship that branch in their ancestral home in old Delhi.

A branch which is 500 years old from that tree. And the other day, I had the good fortune to visit that family—they're called the Mahā-bhāgavata family—and have *darśana* of that branch of the tree. And many, many of you may have seen that I did a photo album of that day, going to that beautiful home with the beautiful Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities. And there's a sacred pot that Rūpa Gosvāmī used, a copper pot which he would offer things to his deities; so I was able to have *darśana* of that, the branch of that tree, and I even got to hold that fragile branch in my hands. And as I did so, I was remembering that in *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*...

...always cried when he wrote down the *śāstras*. When he wrote down his *śāstras*, so Vaiṣṇava historians, they say that that tree under which Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote the scriptures I mentioned earlier absorbed his tears. He was crying under that tree so that the tears were going here and there and everywhere, so that tree absorbed the tears of ecstasy of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. So now, we're thinking like that, I put that branch onto my eyes, I put it close to my eyes, and I prayed to see things as they are, one day to see these wonderful pastimes, all by the mercy of our spiritual master. Śrīla Prabhupāda prayed for mercy. So, we can understand that the all-merciful Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is one of our guides in our wanderings around Braja. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in a purport in *Upadeśāmṛta*: "The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is conducted under the supervision of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī." The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is conducted under the supervision of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. So therefore, I say he is one of our guides in our wanderings around Braja, our real home, because technically we are known, we're fortunate to be known as Rūpānugas, followers in the line of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. And rightfully so, because Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī himself writes in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.100, and I quote him: "The best way to search for the truth is to follow the path that has previously been gone over by saintly persons and devotees, and by which they have attained the supreme goal of life. Such a path is always free from all kinds of obstacles and hindrances to our progress, and by following it one very quickly attains the desired result." And what does that result? All glorious to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. So let's wander. That was the introduction. So let's wander. Yesterday I was reading about a very unique sacred *tīrtha* called Śyāma-ḍāka.

And on the edge of Śyāma-ḍāka is a garden known as Samāi. Now, its name is derived from the word *śyāma*, because Kṛṣṇa came to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī at this place dressed as a gopī by that name. The pastime actually begins at a *rāsa* dance festival at Apsarā-vana, where for some reason Śrī Rādhā became unhappy with the arrangements that Kṛṣṇa had made for the *rāsa* dance, and she left to pout, she left to sulk at this Śyāma-ḍāka. Kṛṣṇa tried His best to appease her, but she didn't want to have anything to do with Kṛṣṇa. So Viśākhā suggested that Kṛṣṇa approach Śrī Rādhā in disguise, and as we well know, it's a means Kṛṣṇa often uses to gain her favor. I think we've discussed four or five times: Kṛṣṇa, He is in a disguise, and He is able to come and ask for her forgiveness. So, dressed as Śyāma-sakhi and camouflaged as a gopī, He was able to approach her there and ask for her forgiveness, and of course, in time, Śrī Rādhā forgave Him. We could say it's *keli*, it's all playful, it's all fun—you could say it's enjoyable—because in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā 14.162, Kavirāja Gosvāmī says: "Because Śrī Rādhā is a left-wing gopī, her womanly anger is always awakening, but Kṛṣṇa derives transcendental bliss from her activities." Because she's a left-wing gopī, her womanly anger is always awakening; it's causing some disturbances, but Kṛṣṇa derives transcendental bliss from her activities. So this is ultimately *keli-līlā*, a playful, loving pastime. Now, a similar exchange took place some distance from Śyāma-ḍāka when Kṛṣṇa appeared before Śrī Rādhā—it's described—on a winding road in the guise of an elderly brāhmaṇī woman. Kṛṣṇa's disguising Himself again.

So some distance from Śyāma-ḍāka, He appeared before Rādhā in the guise, in the disguise, of an elderly brāhmaṇī woman—not, as He often does, as a very beautiful young girl, but this time an elderly brāhmaṇī woman. And this pastime is very nicely described in Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī's *Gopāla-campū*, Pūrva-campū 29.88. Now, when Kṛṣṇa appeared before Rādhā—He is just walking in the disguise down the road—because He appeared as an elderly brāhmaṇī woman, Śrī Rādhā naturally offered this elderly, scholarly woman some respect. And then, this elderly brāhmaṇī woman introduced herself as "master of five things"—brāhmaṇas are very expert in Vedic arts. So this elderly brāhmaṇī woman, she introduced herself, you know, Kṛṣṇa, as very expert in astrology, yoga, rituals, mantras, as well as the benefactor of all the pious young girls of Braja. I really like that part; she's expert in astrology, yoga, rituals, mantra, as well. She said, "I'm a benefactor of all the pious young girls in Braja." So it's written that, eager to know whether the stars could predict if she would be meeting with Kṛṣṇa soon, Rādhārāṇī asked the brāhmaṇī, "My dear brāhmaṇī, oh knower of all things, what is the topmost abode of happiness in all the three worlds?" So this wise old woman very dramatically swept her hand like across the horizon, and she said, "Oh, the cowherd pasture land of Śrī Kṛṣṇa." Oh, knower of all things, what is the topmost abode of happiness in all the three worlds? So the old brāhmaṇa lady, she said, "Oh, the cowherd pasture land of Śrī Kṛṣṇa." So, true and surprised with such an agreeable answer, Śrī Rādhā asked deeper philosophical questions; she saw this as an opportunity, a wise old woman. So Rādhā said, "Dear brāhmaṇī, what is the foundation of a happy life for all living entities within the universe?" So without hesitation, the brāhmaṇī replied, "Singing songs about Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Prince of Vṛndāvana." Then Rādhārāṇī, she paused and she thought, "How is it this old lady is so Kṛṣṇa-conscious?" And now very curious, Rādhā asked, "Dear brāhmaṇī, what eagerness bestows incomparable auspiciousness?" So the old brāhmaṇī woman, she smiled and replied, "Dear girl, you should know that nothing ends in greater auspiciousness than the desire to obtain the company of Kṛṣṇa." What an answer! "Dear girl, you should know that nothing ends in greater auspiciousness than the desire to obtain the company of Kṛṣṇa." So then Śrī Rādhā came a little closer and looked into the brāhmaṇī's face, where she saw what is described as an unusual—an unusual—twinkle in that old lady's eyes, which made Rādhā wonder, "Who is this brāhmaṇī?" A little suspicious. So thinking that no one else was around to hear, Rādhārāṇī softly asked, "Dear brāhmaṇī, what is most enjoyable?" So the old woman sighed with longing, and she said, "Ah, what is most enjoyable? The beauty and sweetness of the transcendental Cupid, Śrī Kṛṣṇa."

Now at this point, Śrī Rādhā doubted that a complete stranger could disclose the confidential secrets of her heart, because remember, she has the *mahā-bhāva*, she alone, Śrī Rādhā, the purest, greatest love for Kṛṣṇa. So she's beginning to doubt, "How could this complete stranger disclose these confidential secrets of my heart?" So then Rādhā was thinking, "Either this brāhmaṇī is truly all-knowing or a friend in disguise." So unable to restrain her curiosity, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī revealed her mind. She said, "Oh noble lady, you truly know everything. Now, what is the goal of all activities for all people in all places at all times?" What a question! In Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we always have perfect questions and perfect answers. This is coming from the mouth, the lotus mouth, of Śrī Rādhā for our benefit as well. "Oh noble lady, you truly know everything. So what is the goal of all activities for all people in all places for all time?" That's the perfect question. So now, it's very sweet: the old woman took a step towards Rādhārāṇī and looked her straight in the eyes as she spoke, this time in Śrī Kṛṣṇa's voice. This time she spoke in Kṛṣṇa's voice, and she said to Śrī Rādhā, answering her question, "The unrestricted attainment of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's company."

Rādhā asked the brāhmaṇī, "Noble lady, you know... you truly know everything. So what is the goal of all activities for all people in all places at all times?" And the old lady answered in Kṛṣṇa's voice, the perfect reply: "The unrestricted attainment of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's company." That, dear prabhus, is the goal of our lives, and we must never take our eye off the goal. Now, for a moment, it's written, neither Rādhā nor Kṛṣṇa could speak; they were stunned. But they looked around to see if anyone else was around, and when they saw there was no one, what did they do? They began to laugh so uncontrollably that only Their embrace could steady Them. Wow! They began to laugh so uncontrollably that only Their embrace could steady Them. And one ācārya concludes: "May Kṛṣṇa's mischief, His prankish answers to Rādhā's cunning questions, protect us from all dangers of frivolous talk and the poison of unnecessary learning." Wow! "Kṛṣṇa's fraudulent mischief, His prankish answers to Rādhā's cunning questions, protect us all from the dangers of frivolous talk and the poison of unnecessary learning." You have to excuse me, prabhus, as I, as I mentioned in the beginning, I have some very important *sevā* to do today here in New Delhi, so I have to keep it a little bit short. But I think you have enough to transcendentally digest and benefit from, just purifying your hearts and awakening your attraction to Śrī Vṛndāvana and ultimately love for the divine couple. So I'll leave you with that, and I'll be back in a couple of days with some more of the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. So thank you. *Śrī śrī...* Rādhā-Śyāma. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""