"*00524*.*
"All right, Kṛṣṇa. Now, very dear devotees, welcome back once again. Śrīmatī Bhaktivedānta, namine namaste, Sahasra-svati devi. So today will be our final lecture on our series about Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s beloved Deity of Govindajī. Next Friday, we’ll discuss Madana-mohana, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Deity, while He was in Jaipur and later moved to Karauli. And after that, in the next lectures, we’ll get back to our wanderings in Vṛndāvana; I’m looking forward to that. So, to conclude this series today, I’d like to focus on several of the servants of Govindajī. Again, certainly that is not any less important than focusing on Govindajī Himself. Gaur Govinda Mahārāja used to chant the following Bengali śloka: *vaishnavira guna-gana, kareele jivana trana, shunayache guru-muke*. It’s a beautiful verse—a quote I’ve heard from the mouth of sādhus and guru—that by glorifying Vaiṣṇavas, one delivers oneself from the material world.

Of course, the main personality we have focused on all along is Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and surely much more could be said about him. Just yesterday, in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I came across several prayers to Rūpa Gosvāmī by a devotee whose name was Govardhana Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He was one of the prominent Gosvāmīs in the line of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s paramparā, and he lived during the time of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. And this Govardhana Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, he wrote a commentary on the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and in the introduction, he writes so sweetly, "My greatest good fortune is that Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and I are friends forever. My greatest good fortune is that Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and I are friends forever." Wow. Now, Govardhana Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī wrote another book called *Govardhana Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī Granthāvalī*. It is divided into three parts, and the third part is called *Śrī Rūpa Sanātana*, in which there are—I think I counted—54 ślokas only glorifying Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. We don’t have time for 52, or we should make time, let us say, but here are two of those verses glorifying, in particular, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī: "Who can achieve the shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā without the association of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī? Hearing his beautiful compositions and by looking at his incomparable pearl-like handwriting, Lord Caitanya happily dances while glorifying and praising him with all the devotees." Next verse: "Today Śrī Rūpa is residing in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Being more humble than a blade of grass and more tolerant than a tree, he is holding a clay pot in one hand and a woolen shawl on his shoulder. He is singing the pastimes of Rādhākānta while sometimes sitting in the shadow of a *kapittha* tree, constantly chanting the names of Kṛṣṇa, and every day he begs from the house of brāhmaṇas."

I was also reading in another author’s book in the institute that whenever Rūpa Gosvāmī or the other Gosvāmīs would receive a new cloth, they would dig a hole on the bank of the Yamunā, put the cloth inside, mix it with Yamunā water—making a really muddy solution—and a few days later they would come and they would take out the cloth and wash it in the flowing Yamunā river. And as a result, the clothes they wore—which wasn’t much; they had a loincloth and a *cādar*, basically—that’s what you could say—but as a result of treating the cloth in that way, their clothes were a light brown color. A light brown color, and this was the color that the six Gosvāmīs would wear; I thought that was interesting. I also read that he preferred to wear a black-colored woolen *cādar* over his left shoulder in the winter time. There’s a detail for you. So now, we’ll discuss some lesser-known but certainly important servants of Govindajī after the departure of Jai Singh II.

So I was reading that before Jai Singh died, he arranged all the ceremonies for worshiping Govindajī. Personally, he oversaw that and made sure that all the prominent festivals of the year would be performed in a grand way. So all the kings that came after him, even down to the present day, they’re still following the same schedule, you could say, that Jai Singh established. Now, after Jai Singh, his eldest son, Ishvar Singh, became the king, and he religiously continued the sevā of Govindajī exactly as his father had done. And after he departed, his son became king, and his name was Madhava Singh I, and it’s written that he was especially devoted to Govindajī. I found a document where his court scribes describe his daily activities—well, this was in this particular part, it’s his morning activities. They wrote, and I quote, "Our king, Madhava Singh, sits in the palanquin, which is carried by servants. Starting from Chandra Palace, the palanquin heads towards Govindadeva’s temple. Some trained dancers welcome King Madhava Singh at the gates of the temple with a beautiful dance performance. The king, arriving at the doors of Govindadeva, donates golden coins to the dancers. Then, the king, who was born in the Kurma lineage, walks inside the temple with utmost humility. There he waits for the bhoga offering and watches the performance of āratī. Then he offers his obeisances and offers gifts of gold coins and ornaments to the lotus feet of Govindadeva. At last, he takes blessings from Govindadeva for the well-being of his kingdom."

Isn't that nice? That's the king's daily routine. Now, after Madhava Singh I, his son, Pratap Singh I, ruled Jaipur, and he was also a great devotee of Govindajī; like father, like son. It is said that every night Govindajī would appear to him in a dream, and that earned him the nickname—people had a nickname for their king—Vraja-nidhi. Vraja means Vṛndāvana and nidhi means treasure. So each night he dreamt of Govindajī, the treasure of Vṛndāvana. And Pratap Singh’s daily life is also described by one of his court poets in a work entitled *Pratāpa Prakāśa*, and I’ll quote part of that *Prakāśa*: "Having bathed and dressed after waking, Pratap Singh’s first act of the day was to go and see Govindadeva. Riding on a palanquin, he went from Chandra Mahal, the Palace of the Moon, to Jayanivas and then soon arrived at Govinda’s temple. He made an offering and had darśana of the Lord, and when the priest performed āratī, Pratap Singh took the water from the conch. Then he would circumambulate Govindajī, and standing before the Lord, recite Sanskrit ślokas that he himself had composed the day before." Wow. The king was fluent in Sanskrit and composed verses for Govindajī, which he would sing each morning before his day began in front of the Lord. And then he would bow down and pay full obeisances to the Lord, and then what? And then, still early morning, he would go to his private quarters in his palace, to his altar room, and from 5:30 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., or noon time, every day he would worship his personal black stone Deity of Kṛṣṇa, whom he also called Govindadeva.

And during that period, he had a rule that if anyone, even his own queen, came and disturbed him, they would be subjected to severe chastisement. He did not want to be disturbed during his pūjā, and that’s a long pūjā, actually. Pratap Singh had taken a strict vow not to leave his quarters between 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon for any reason whatsoever, just to focus on his pūjā to give pleasure to his Govinda Deity. And in case an important matter came up, he had arranged for his chief minister, whose name was Jayachand, to attend to it, no matter how urgent it was. So one day, at 8:00 a.m. in the morning, while Rāja Pratap Singh was—you know, not in the middle, but his pūjā had been going on for some time—Jaipur was suddenly attacked by an infamous Mughal ruler and his large, ferocious army.

And of course, you know, Jaipur has a wall all around the city, so these soldiers were attacking the wall and trying to get in—a surprise attack. So within minutes, Jayachand came running to Pratap Singh’s quarters to inform him, but he stopped short, thinking, "If I disturb the king in his worship, he’ll have my head, literally." So rather than knocking and entering into Rāja Pratap Singh’s quarters, he stood by ringing a bell, hoping to get the king’s attention, but nothing happened because Pratap Singh was so absorbed in his sevā. This is a very famous pastime in Jaipur, even to this day. So during this time, his troops started to rally in the main courtyard of the city, but without their king, without their leader, they were hesitant to go into battle. So this was a very critical situation; many of the citizens were becoming hopeless, having experienced that whatever happened, their king never left his quarters between 5:30 and noon, no matter what. But then, suddenly, to the amazement of both the citizens, the ministers, and the soldiers, Pratap Singh came out of his quarters at 8:30, dressed from head to toe for battle. He had all his weapons.

So it was a tradition amongst Rajput kings that before they went into battle, they would first perform a very elaborate pūjā or worship of their sword. So gathering all these generals and top soldiers and ministers, Pratap Singh worshiped his sword, and it’s described as the enemy soldiers were climbing over the walls surrounding the city, he’s doing pūjā to his sword. After worshiping his sword, his main queen came forward, as per tradition, and cutting her thumb on a sharp edge of the sword, wiped her blood like tilaka on the forehead of her husband, calling out three times very loudly, "Vijaya bhava! Vijaya bhava! Vijaya bhava!" which means, "You will be victorious! You will be victorious! You will be victorious!" This was the tradition before going into battle. He went in with blood tilaka. All right, Kṛṣṇa. So then, mounting his horse, Pratap Singh charged out of the main gate of Jaipur with his army right behind him. But it was really Pratap Singh, it is said, who practically single-handedly cut down Mughal soldiers one after another. He was a large man, and his sword was said to be more than three times the size of any sword at that time. And you can still see some of these swords in the Jaipur palace downtown; in Jaipur, they have a museum there, and you can see all this weaponry. So his sword was three times the size of everybody else’s, and it’s said in that battle he cut over 300 men in half, starting from here, from head down to the toe, down to the toe, like that, with this double-edged sword, which was sharp as a razor. It’s written that his soldiers had never seen him so ferocious in battle; he was like a different person, slaughtering the enemy while showing no mercy and no fatigue. It’s also noted he didn’t seem to get tired; it’s said that just by his roaring he killed enemy soldiers. His roar was enough to kill an opponent; powerful man. However, at one point in the fight, an enemy soldier got close enough to pierce his leg with a lance, a sharp lance, and his blood flowed from that wound, but Singh turned and with one swoop killed the lancer. But it was a big wound. Finally, after four hours, everyone of the invading army, including their king, lay dead on the battlefield. It’s described as a lake of blood. And as Pratap Singh, the victorious king, left the battlefield and entered back into the city, he was received by his citizens with cheers of "Jai ho! Jai ho!", as well as drummers in the Naqqarkhana—remember the Naqqarkhana? It’s the drum house—and there were several hundred drummers in that drum house playing their drums, welcoming him back. There was a great celebration until everyone saw the bloodied bandage. There was a bandage around his thigh; they saw this bloodied bandage on his leg. They were worried now; they heard he’d been pierced by a lance. So then, covered in dust and dirt, his clothes ripped and torn, and hobbling from the wound in his leg, he entered back into his quarters at 12:00 p.m., which was meant to be the time he finished his pūjā.

But here’s the interesting part; here’s the mysterious part, the transcendental part: no sooner had he entered back into his quarters than the door swung open again and he walked out in fresh clothes, bright-faced, and with no bloody bandage on his leg. He was fine. So his generals and his soldiers and his ministers and citizens, they all stood before him in disbelief. Before, he’d actually been in his quarters no less than two seconds. So finally, his chief minister, Jayachand, spoke up. "Your Royal Highness," he said to the king, "how is it that you stand before us in fresh cloth with a smiling face and no wound on your leg? There’s no bloodied bandage on your leg." So the king was confused, like, "What do you mean?" He said, "You know, why should I appear differently? I’ve just come from my morning worship. I have not left my quarters since early morning." "No, Your Royal Highness," Jayachand said, "you left your quarters hours ago, worshiped your sword, rode into battle, and defeated the enemy, and you were wounded. We all saw it." So at that point, both the king, Rāja Pratap Singh, his ministers, and the generals and the people, they all stood there like dumbfounded, unable to understand what’s transpired here. So Pratap Singh was a great devotee—we would say *rāja-ṛṣi*, a saintly person sitting on the throne—he was Kṛṣṇa conscious. So trying to figure out what’s transpired, after a few moments he looked at the sky and he shouted, "O Govinda! O Govinda! O Govinda! It can only be You." Then he turned to his generals and his ministers and he said, "Follow me." So making their way to Sūrya Mahal, the main temple where Rādhā-Govinda reside, they arrived and stood before the closed altar. There was a big curtain there; the altar was closed, big curtain in front, and everyone was wondering why the king had brought them there—like, why did we come here? Then Pratap Singh, with one grand movement of his arm, he ordered the pujārī to open the curtain. And as the pujārī did so, and the people saw the Lord, they gasped, and many of them fainted on the ground. For there, before them, standing with dust all over Him, in torn clothes, with a blood-stained cloth wrapped around His upper leg, was Govindajī with a smile on His face, playing His flute. All right, Kṛṣṇa. Whoa. It was the Lord who had assumed the form of the king and went out to defend Jaipur. So the word spread; hundreds, then thousands, and then tens of thousands of people came running to see Govindajī, offering their prayers and their gratitude, realizing that it was He who had ridden out on that horse looking like Pratap Singh and practically single-handedly, of course without difficulty, defeated the attacking army. And the citizens, they also offered prayers to their king, Pratap Singh, whose devotion to the Lord caused the Lord, out of His love for His devotee, to cover for him in time of need. Hare Kṛṣṇa, what an amazing pastime.

So this pastime, this amazing story, is still recounted by the people of Jaipur to this very day; it’s actually woven into the fabric of the history of Jaipur, the City of Victory. Of course, some may find it all too incredulous. To them, I finish today with a quote from the Holy Bible, from Matthew 14:28-31, and I quote: "One time, the disciples of Jesus saw Him walking on water toward their boat in the middle of the night. The Apostle Peter said, 'Lord Jesus, if that is You, command me to join You by walking on the water, too.' So Jesus said, 'Yes, come.' Then Peter got out of the boat and walked on the water towards Jesus. But when the wind came up, he became afraid, and as he started to sink in the water, he cried out, 'Lord, save me!' Jesus reached out with His hand and caught him but said, 'O you of little faith, why did you doubt? O you of little faith, why did you doubt?'" Hare Kṛṣṇa. So, Prabhu, thank you so much. I’ve so much enjoyed researching this series about Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, about Govindajī, about the kings of Jaipur, and all these wonderful pastimes that we’ve discussed over the last few weeks. A little sad it’s over, but maybe one day more will be revealed to us. But for now, we’ll return—well, we’ll come back, and in the next lecture, as I mentioned, we’ll talk about Madana-mohana and His stay in Jaipur and how He ended up in Karauli nearby. And again, then the next week, we’ll go back to Vṛndāvana and we’ll wander again in the twelve forests. So it’s been so enjoyable, so refreshing, so enlightening. So thank you, and I’ll see you in a couple of days. Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma! All right, Kṛṣṇa, you.""