Hare Krishna, I'm sitting here on the staircase of our cooking pot, a 4000-liter cooking pot which we used for 18 hours a day for five days at the Polish Woodstock Festival.

Poland Rock!

Reminiscing, actually, the great festival that we performed is over now, and I came down here. It looks a lot different. Most of the people have gone, and there are, you know, a lot of things, a lot of structures to take down, all the garbage to pick up, and the general event.

And I'm sitting here just reminiscing on our participation, a *maha maha maha sabha*, without any doubt. I'm feeling a little sad, although we have three more weeks on the Baltic Sea coast to do our normal festivals. It's just, yeah, what I saw was beyond anything that I could ever imagine how big the preaching was.

I'm remembering a verse by one of my favorite verses, actually, by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Madhya-līlā*, chapter 12, verse 140. He writes: "The fortunate town of Navadvipa remains on the earth, the seashore remains, the city of Jagannātha Purī remains, the holy names of Lord Kṛṣṇa remain, but alas, alas, I do not see anywhere the same kind of festival of pure love for Lord Hari.

Oh Lord Caitanya, ocean of mercy, will I ever see Your transcendental glories again?" Of course, this movement has a great future.

It is stated that the *saṅkīrtana* movement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu will go on for 10,000 years, but these are special moments in the evolution of that movement. We've stated many times from the last few days some of the facts and figures: 160,000 plates of *prasādam* were distributed or sold at a nominal price. *Kīrtana* day and night going on in our mantra yoga tent.

Ratha-yātrā, five days up and down the main thoroughfare, hundreds of devotees chanting, so many people joining in the chanting, the loud chanting of Kṛṣṇa's name reverberating here, there, and everywhere. We're left with those memories and very sincere prayers that we can do this again, we can do even bigger.

But it's the essence of this movement. This is really a missionary movement. We're meant to share a good portion with others according to our particular abilities. But when I see so many devotees coming together from so many countries and working in such a cooperative spirit, I mean, really, our devotees, they didn't really participate in the festival; they served the people so the people could get the experience of the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

If you look at the photos and you look at the videos, yes, where are we doing the *kīrtanas* on the Ratha-yātrā?

We're cooking here and there, and we're dancing in the *kīrtanas* in the mantra yoga. But really, our devotees were on the sidelines facilitating the people's experience. For me, this is the highest taste, seeing those devotees working so hard in the kitchens and setting up the festival and maintaining it from the background and doing the accounts and picking up the garbage.

Our field was spotlessly clean. Really, we were here to give the people the experience of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Many times, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in general, we have our festivals, it's to purify our hearts, give us the higher taste of devotional service, give us strength in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in our temples, and even outdoor festivals.

But the experience of inviting so many people into the world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and facilitating their experience in the chanting, their tasting the *Purushottama*, their dancing, and just experiencing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that's what's great. That's Poland Rock. Our devotees were not so visible; the people are visible, and the joy is seen and experienced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So, in that sense, we saw many miracles. A miracle means something that contradicts the laws of nature. And we hear about miracles 2,000 years ago, and in the Christian tradition, and Muslim tradition, and our tradition as well. But if we have the eyes to see, we can see a miraculous transformation of the hearts of the people almost immediately on contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

One of the miracles was the weather. The weather forecast was, you know, thunderstorms and rain for five straight days. Before and after the festival, it only sprinkled a little bit. The sunshine was only sprinkles. So, I took those sprinkles as the appreciation of the demigods for the *maha-yoga*.

They were showering flowers because actually, the demigods are devotees of Kṛṣṇa, and they participate in it. We hear how in the Vedic age, the demigods would come from the higher regions of the universe and they would participate. And the festivals performed for them.

Lord Kṛṣṇa says in *Bhagavad-gītā* that "by the performance of yoga, all desirable things will be bestowed upon you materially and spiritually." So, in previous ages, they knew that transcendental science and material society prospered materially and spiritually because of yoga.

But in Kali Yuga, the fires are not lit, there are no qualified *brāhmaṇas*, and the whole process is more or less forgotten. But human life means to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. So, there has to be a yoga, and as we know, the yoga is the chanting of the holy names.

So, when there's a big yoga, a big *maha maha maha sabha*, I'm convinced in my heart that demigods have come, just like they did in previous ages. Just like people in the mode of ignorance like to go to this party, people in passion like to fight.

So demigods like to go where their Lord is glorified. *Yoga-vīya viṣṇu*. One time, in London, in a *kīrtana* in the temple, very sweet Prabhupada was leading the *kīrtana* for the devotees, and then afterwards, it was really ecstatic *kīrtana*. Prabhupada, did you see them?

Did you see them?

Devotees said, "Like who?" And Prabhupada said, "Lord Brahma and Lord Indra." And they were with what Prabhupada said.

Yes, they were here. The *kīrtana* was going on, the glorification of their Lord. So they came. And when devotees said, "What were they doing?" Prabhupada said, "They were chanting and dancing and kind of laughing." Because you're like Kali Yuga devotees appreciating the attempt of the devotees.

But there is an instance, a verified, authorized incident. The publicist of the demigods came. So when you're doing a *maha-yoga* with 700 devotees, and there's mass chanting of the holy names, mass *prasādam* distribution, questions and answers, many personal relationships going on between the Vaisnavas and the public in a big way, we're not the demigods' friends?

I'm convinced so many of them came. And therefore, the weather was nice. The demigods assisted us. Prabhupada says in a *Purport* in the *Bhagavata Purāṇa*, there's a very close relationship between human society, demigods, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

So, when the Lord is being glorified in a selfless way, just preaching the glories of Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, or of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, I'm convinced today that demigods just came.

And therefore, it was perfect weather. It wasn't too hot, it wasn't too cold, just enough to make people hungry and wanting to chant and dance. So, that for me, that's like a miracle. It contradicts the laws of nature. There are so many thousands of people who would come to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.

It reminds me of another verse by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, volume 1, chapter 6, verse 66. He writes about miracles: "O beautiful, fragrant *tāmal* desire tree blooming in the forest, embraced by the mood of the vine of the goddess ruling this forest!

O tree, the shade of whose glory protects the world from a host of burning sufferings!

What wonderful fruits did the people find at your feet?" So, when we're doing these programs, we're actually creating a Vaikuṇṭha atmosphere.

By going means that place where there's no anxiety. Or more clearly, we're presenting the Lord's kingdom. "Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." Our Christian brothers and sisters have that saying that we can manifest heaven on earth by performing the activities of the liberated souls in the spiritual world.

Yes, so the, yeah, we saw so many miraculous things. So many people taking *prasādam*, long lines for hours and hours on end. And that really, for me, it was the seen the enthusiasm of the people for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We've been going on for 25 years.

We've been there from day one, from the first event. So, a lot of people, many people know us. They come for the *prasādam*, they come for the *kīrtanas*, they come to hear the philosophy, they come to buy books, and they pull the ropes on the Ratha-yātrā festival.

And their taste increases more and more and more as time goes on. It's to be expected. People have their own pace in the spiritual life. But I was speaking with so many people coming up and thanking me and thanking the devotees for giving this facility like an oasis in this big wonderful event, the Woodstock Poland Rock festival.

We are indebted to the organizers. My good friend Jarosław, who's the main organizer here, is a good friend of mine. We are indebted to him for allowing us to be and share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with the people. And finally, I want to thank all the devotees who came here and just on the sidelines, in the background, facilitated the people's experience of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

And all glories to those devotees, their selfless service. And, you know, thank you to the people. What would this event be?

What would our village be without the tens of thousands of people who passed through?

And I'm not exaggerating, tens of thousands. 160,000 plates of *prasādam*, *kīrtana* today, not the address, tens and tens of thousands of people. We thank the people for coming, and we thank them for having faith in us, and for participating in the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

We love those people. We're here to serve them, and we hope that their journey in Kṛṣṇa consciousness will be smooth and will take them back to the spiritual world. So many verses throughout the scriptures, if one just takes the *prasādam* one time, if one just chants the holy names one time, even unconsciously, the seed is planted, and that's an eternal seed.

And by the Lord's arrangement, these people will have the opportunity to experience the wonderful world of Kṛṣṇa consciousness again, either in this life or in a future lifetime. We were so happy to plant that seed on the order of our spiritual master and the desire of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

So, what to do now?

This *maha maha mahotsav* is over, a little painful. But our boys have worked really hard through the night, and they've packed our trucks up, and all our gear. Ukrainian devotees, Russian devotees, Estonians, Italians, they're going back to their services.

But our little band of brothers and sisters are going back up to the Baltic Sea coast. We have three more weeks of festivals, everyday culminating in the great Janmastami festival, and my favorite day of the year, glorifying Śrīla Prabhupāda, thanking him for this opportunity.

So we'll be back with some more videos of our beach festivals. But thank you all for participating and watching and giving us your blessings that we could make this Kṛṣṇa's village at the Woodstock Festival Poland Rock festival a grand success.

Well, all glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu!

Ki jay!

Hare Kṛṣṇa!