"*00264*.*
"# The 110 Questions of Yakṣa: Sādhu-saṅga 2014

Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

So, today on this beautiful, warm day at the end of summer, at the very end of the morning, we want to invite you all to participate in a wonderful seminar. We talked with Gopa-vṛnda yesterday when we met how lucky we are that the weather is good now. Maybe those who participated in the festival last year remember that we had a lot of rainy days that brought some inconvenience. But it seems that the demigods, pleased with your wonderful service throughout the year, have sent us beautiful weather so that everyone can enjoy. *Maha* in Sanskrit—the festival is called *Mahotsava*—and *maha* is not only millet; *maha* means great. *Utsava* is an ancient name of India indicating the great history. Great history, of course, in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement there are no ordinary festivals because they are all meant for glorifying the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. But among all the festivals that take place throughout the year in the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, this one can be called *Mahotsava*, the greatest of all festivals.

All the participants will properly take advantage of this festival. What does it mean to focus on *śravaṇam* and *kīrtanam*—hearing and chanting? As a result, we can achieve *smaraṇam*, remembrance of Kṛṣṇa. In this way, we can achieve the goal of Kṛṣṇa consciousness: to always remember Him and never forget Him.

We often mention Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura who talks about auspicious days in the Vaiṣṇava calendar. He says that such holy days like Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī are the mothers of devotion for those who follow them correctly. A very interesting term is "mother of devotion." What does mother mean? Among other things, mother is the one who gives you nourishment and support in childhood and youth so that you grow up as healthy and holistic individuals. For example, a mother feeds a child with her own breast milk. What is the best nutrition for the newborn? In India, traditionally, children are breastfed so that they grow up healthy and receive the most important food, the most important nutrition. Why? Because breast milk contains the most important nutritional elements. Thus, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that days like Ekādaśī are the mothers of devotion for those who properly observe them because they give spiritual nourishment for our development when we are in infancy in spiritual life, to a greater or lesser extent.

We are all infants in the process of devotional service. If someone reaches adolescence in devotional service, then this is the level of *sādhana*. Several individuals reached this level early. But, most devotees are in infancy and they need proper nutrition in the consciousness of the Lord. And someone can say, "During this festival we do not celebrate any special days." But nevertheless, the process of service itself can turn any place at any time into Vaikuṇṭha. One fine day, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who was an official in the British government, said that, "One fine day I woke up and I saw how my house turned into Vaikuṇṭha." And therefore this tent, which in principle is intended for use in the most unfavorable ways, since it is used to give service to the Lord and His devotees, contains the atmosphere of Vaikuṇṭha.

And we can all greatly advance in spiritual life by taking advantage of the opportunities created for us under these tents over the next six days. Of course, we can do other activities, but the most important thing for us is *śravaṇam* and *kīrtanam*. Of course, we are not against meeting and saying, "I haven't seen you for three whole days," to hug someone, to go shopping, to buy something; this is also normal. But more important for us is to gather together and chant the holy name of the Lord. And especially on a day like today, you make maximum progress because today is a holy day, today is the day of the Lord's appearance. So after this festival, your friends probably won't even recognize how far you have advanced.

Before coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, my disciples looked so disheveled and unkempt. They are very beautifully dressed in *dhotīs* and *sārīs* with *tilakas*, smiling and happy. They look like residents of the spiritual world. In fact, this festival has been celebrated by everyone since time immemorial, thanks to science and technology which can also be applied in a positive way. So many people around the world can watch what is happening at this festival in real time, and especially thanks to the capabilities of Facebook and VKontakte. Even more people can watch this festival. Some of you saw me running with a camera taking photos; maybe someone will be surprised. They will say, "Mahārāja should not take pictures of everyone, he should sit and broadcast the absolute truth." I passed by one devotee and heard surprised remarks: "He has three cameras!" But this is used—this use of technology—in the service of the Lord. According to my photos from yesterday starting at 2:30 in the morning, and when I did this, I saw that several hundred people viewed these photos in a very short time; usually, it takes several days. And this album will also be published today on the website dandavats.com, where it will be seen by many thousands of people. That is, the point is that what is happening at this festival is now very well covered around the world; many people see you. Therefore, if I point a camera lens at you, better smile, because you can become either famous or infamous. Thanks to this photo and the seminar that we will begin today, it is 100 questions that were asked.

And among these questions, the most famous to all of us is the question that I asked: "What is the most amazing in the world?" Of course, I could give different answers because we know that there are seven wonders of the world, and they say that in ancient times there were seven wonders, in our time there are seven other wonders. Some of these 14 are the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, the pyramids of Egypt, and so on. I will not list everything, but this is what people consider amazing. But Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, being a *rājarṣi*, the holy king emperor of the whole world, answered this question in a very interesting way. He answered from a transcendental point of view. He said the most amazing thing is that every moment millions of living beings leave their bodies and go to the kingdom of death, but at the same time, I think that this will not happen to me. That materialists plan to live here forever because they do not plan for what will happen after death. And of all the 100 questions, this question and the answer to it were most often quoted, at least by our founder, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

But there are also 99 other questions and answers that are very important for those practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Of course, we are unlikely to be able to cover all 100 questions in the remaining days. For this, we need a Bhāgavatam of 24 hours without a break. We will try to do everything that is possible. But in the beginning, in order to understand how this happened, we will tell you about the *līlā* that preceded the questions and answers. In the beginning, in order to understand the context of the questions and answers, it is very important to know about the situation in which this discussion was conducted. Śrīla Prabhupāda named the first chapter of Bhagavad-gītā, "Observing the Armies," that is, setting the stage. Before Kurukṣetra, Prabhupāda explained what was happening at this time, that is, what events were told in Mahābhārata. And today we will talk about exactly this: how it all began, in what circumstances Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira asked these questions, and where we get our knowledge, where it was mentioned or told.

*Līlā* Prabhupāda says that if we discuss the holy scriptures, we should be able to give references to where it was said, *citram bhavate*, and so on, where this pastime comes from. It is described in Mahābhārata. From Mahābhārata, we know that the five Pāṇḍava brothers were exiled to the forest for 12 years. Kaurava was the *asura* who banished the Pāṇḍavas to the forest for 12 years in order to deprive them of the right to inherit the kingdom and so that they would not create any problems. And after 12 years of wandering through the forests, they had the right to return back.

But this condition was a burden to live a year. Of course, sometimes we may think that we have some problems in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then we do not like this, it turns out. But compared to the Pāṇḍavas who were driven out to live in the forest for 12 years, our problems seem completely childish. And how they could survive all these trials and maintain their Kṛṣṇa consciousness, this is a very important lesson for all of us. And when years passed, on the first day of the year, they disappeared from sight; no one knew where they went. And in Mahābhārata it is described that they went to one forest; they did not look like *kṣatriyas*, they were disguised so that no one would recognize them. But the forest sages, holy personalities living in the forest, nevertheless, could see who they were because they saw and did not look at clothes. They could penetrate with their gaze into the very heart, into the very soul. And one *brāhmaṇa* came one fine day to complain to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. For example, sometimes devotees dress up in ordinary clothes to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but some people recognize them and say, "You can’t fool me, I see that you are a Kṛṣṇa devotee." Why do people recognize devotees? Because devotees smile naturally because they are happy, unlike materialists, and their smiles are different from the artificial smiles of ordinary people. And therefore their sign is easy to find out.

How, for example, recently, under the influence of circumstances, I was forced to fly to Poland in ordinary Western clothes and there I went through border control. I didn't want the border guards to know that I was a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and so I hid my kaṇṭhī-mālā under my collar. I put on a cap so that the *śikhā* would not be visible, and in a jacket, I hoped that they would not recognize me. And a woman at the border service took my passport and said, "Aha, this is the Guru who arrived at the Indian Hare Kṛṣṇa festival. Welcome." And I was very surprised; I answered her "Hare Kṛṣṇa," and after she put a stamp on my passport, I asked, "How do you know me? Have you been to our festivals?" "Four festivals I have been for several years." And last year when we walked with *harināma* along the coast of the Baltic Sea, it was a very prestigious place, Międzyzdroje, where the rich and *vysokov* relax, and in order to relax there you need to be a fairly rich person. And when we walked along the beach, we saw one family, and because the man wore gold jewelry, a Rolex watch, and other signs, it was clear that these people are not poor. And when we passed, this man said to his friend, "There goes the Guru, I am tracking what he is doing." I was very surprised because this man knows me, but it seems he became friends with me through Facebook. That is, the world in which we live is quite small, and it is very difficult to hide the fact that we are devotees, naturally decorated with beautiful qualities such as patience and humility by the grace of the Lord. One day I was going for a morning walk in London and a policeman ran up to a disciple of Prabhupāda and said, "Look, your teacher shines like the sun."

The Pāṇḍavas lived without recognizing in this forest, and one fine day a *brāhmaṇa* came to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and he said, "Dear King, although I am in exile, I have a problem. Every day, being a *brāhmaṇa*, I make fires for the benefit of the whole society, and in order to make this sacrifice, I need a special tree called *araṇi* tree." Along with tulasī, *araṇi* wood is also considered sacred. This *araṇi* tree could be lit with mantras and not with matches or heating, etc. And the *brāhmaṇa* complained, "When I was about to perform the *yajña*, some wild deer ran up, grabbed my planks, hooked them on his horns, and was gone. And now I can't even perform my duties of performing the *yajña*." This was a very serious event when the *brāhmaṇas* could not perform it. We perform it sometimes, but not very much. We worry if they are not there, but in Vedic culture, the *yajñas* were considered very important for the material and spiritual development of the entire society, and this explains why there are so many problems in modern society because the *yajña* is not performed.

The importance of the *yajña* is emphasized by Kṛṣṇa himself in the Bhagavad-gītā. He says that in the very beginning, I sent a generation of people and demigods and blessed them that by performing this *yajña* they will receive everything. He said that everything we desire will be received. Although we are not a body, but the Lord gave us a body with which we can understand who we are, who is the Lord, and our relationship. We need material things to maintain the body and to serve Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is the one who provides us with everything we need. Therefore, *yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra lokoyaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ*—*yajñas* are not only and not even so much for the satisfaction of the demigods, but ultimately to please the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu. This is one of the ways to say "thank you very much" to Kṛṣṇa. Of course, we are accustomed and think that this goes without saying. Of course, we have pure water and fresh air, earth, and light and heat from the Sun, but nevertheless, we can understand, we must understand that Kṛṣṇa gives us this and completely free of charge. If we do not thank Him for what He has given us, can we expect that He will continue to give us benefit? And *yajña* is a method of expressing our gratitude to the Supreme Lord. And if we perform *yajña* in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we can also count on spiritual blessings from the Lord. Therefore, *yajñas* are important. Does this mean that after today's lecture tomorrow morning everyone should perform fire *yajñas* to satisfy Kṛṣṇa? We don't have to perform this type of Vedic *yajñas* at all because the Lord Caitanya has given us a very simple way to perform the most important *yajña* of chanting the holy name. So every morning you chant attentively, sing *kīrtana* with your devotee friends, and go out and spread this spiritual knowledge; you can be convinced that this is a panacea for all the problems of Kali-yuga. But nevertheless, at that time it was a very serious problem that the *brāhmaṇa* could not perform his *yajñas* for the benefit of the whole society because a deer stole his tablets from him. The king was concerned about fulfilling his main duty of protecting citizens. He said, "Yes, this is a serious matter. If Kṛṣṇa is not worshiped properly, everything will get worse." He said that all five Pāṇḍava brothers will go in search of your tablets. And all five brothers went in search of this mysterious deer, and with great difficulty, they eventually found him. But when they approached this mysterious deer, he disappeared, he appeared in another place, they ran there, he disappeared there, he appeared in another place, and when they ran there he also disappeared and appeared in another place. And Bhīma said that this is an unusual deer, "Dear brothers, this is the tricks of a *rākṣasa*."

And when this happened, they went deeper and deeper into the forest, and by the evening they were completely depressed. And this happened because they were used to winning, *Pāṇḍava-vijaya*, and then some stupid deer defeated them and they were depressed. Several years ago I gave one student the name Pāṇḍava; when he asked what it means, I said that this is the name of the Pāṇḍavas who are always successful, always victorious. Therefore you should also follow in their footsteps, fight for Kṛṣṇa, distribute many books, and from Mahābhārata we know that the Pāṇḍavas eventually conquered the whole world, and then they could not catch one deer. And therefore they were a little upset. And it is said that chasing this deer all day, they were exhausted. And we know that this is not the only *līlā* in which the thirst of devotees appears—interesting events such as under the influence of thirst, Parīkṣit Mahārāja insulted the sage as a result of which he was cursed to death, and in seven days he listened to the Bhāgavatam, and so on. And Yudhiṣṭhira said to the younger brothers, "Nakula, you can climb a tree and see if there is any source of water nearby."

Nakula very quickly climbed to the very top of the tree, and from there he saw a very beautiful, clean lake. Going down the tree, he said, "Yes, there is a beautiful reservoir there." And then we were in charge. But since you are the youngest and the fastest, let's quickly run to this lake, drink some water for us, and bring some. And when Nakula ran to the lake, he thought that I could get water for the brothers but first I myself will drink, and suddenly he heard a voice from the sky. This is also a certain standard element of the Vedic plot, that from a voice from the sky some kind of voice sounds, like, for example, Bhīṣma heard a heavenly voice. And Nakula, when he wanted to drink water, heard this thunderous roar from the sky which said, "I am the master of this lake, and no one can drink water here until they answer the questions to my complete satisfaction." But these Pāṇḍava brothers were powerful and not used to being ruled by the *kṣatriyas*, so they were not used to following anyone's orders except their elders. Nakula said, "This is nonsense. I am a great *kṣatriya*. Why should I listen to your word?" He drank water from the lake and died.

And Yudhiṣṭhira waited a long time for Nakula, but he never waited. Yudhiṣṭhira told his twin brother, Sahadeva, also born from Mādrī, "Most likely, your brother is in a difficult situation. Go to this lake and help him and bring water." When he reached the shore of the lake, he saw his lifeless body and began to grieve over this loss, and he almost lost consciousness of thirst. He wanted to drink some water and immediately heard a voice from the sky: "I am the master of this lake. I will not allow you to drink water from this lake until you answer my questions to complete satisfaction, otherwise you will die like your brother." There is a voice from the sky that you should take into account, don't joke. And he also thought, "I belong to the *kṣatriya* order. This is one of the two highest ways of life in human society of the *brāhmaṇas* and *kṣatriyas*, and therefore I will not carry out the order of some incomprehensible voice from the sky." Even one verse from Bhagavad-gītā is enough to understand the position of the *kṣatriya*. Lord Kṛṣṇa says that "I transmitted this eternal science through the chains of disciplic succession and thus cognized it righteous kings." That is, we can understand that the kings played a very important role in the Vedic culture, not only as leaders of society but also as guardians of spiritual knowledge. The *kṣatriyas* were not just some mountain of muscles that could beat anyone they met on their way, but they, first of all, cared about the protection of the physically weak members of the society, *brāhmaṇas*, children, wives, women, old people, cows, and thus they supported the Vedic culture. At the same time, not all *kṣatriyas* were pure devotees—although the Pāṇḍavas were such—but at the same time, the *kṣatriyas*, unlike the *brāhmaṇas*, fell under the influence of passion, that is, the complex ego, and on the same bait got caught. He said, "Why should I listen to some voice? I'll just drink some water and everything will be fine." And he drank and also died.

Yudhiṣṭhira is affected by a mixture of ignorance and passion. Of course, in Mahābhārata it is said that everyone in Kali-yuga is born a *śūdra*, and it is said that a demon is born in a demonic family—that is, demons are born in society—therefore there are a lot of problems. Of course, devotees do not relate to this division of society; they can serve the Lord in any position because they are transcendental. If a person devotes himself to devotional service, he overcomes the influence of three *guṇas* of nature and is established on the transcendental level. Therefore, even a carpenter can be a devotee of the Lord. On a Polish tour, one devotee said that, "I no longer want to do this *śūdra* activity in the theater, playing musical instruments, playing on stage, performing, because in Vedic culture, the *śūdras* did this." I got very angry with him and said that we can do anything if it is devotional service to the Lord. Kṛṣṇa emphasizes that the most important thing is not the type of activity but the consciousness with which this activity is performed. In the end, Nakula did not wait, he sent Arjuna to search for him. The same thing happened to him. He did not listen, drank water, drank water and died. And ultimately, Mahārāja himself, he approached this place and saw all four brothers dead. We might think that the story ended there, but in Vedic culture, methods of reviving the dead were known. There was a special herb, *sañjīvanī*, thanks to which the dead were brought back to life. They are still trying to find it in the Himalayas in our time.

And Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira thought, "How can I live without my brothers because they sacrificed everything for me and now they are no more." He thought that these are not just my brothers, they are my close friends and wonderful companions, all unalloyed devotees. Lord Yudhiṣṭhira also began to grieve and he felt a strong thirst, wanted to scoop out water. And as soon as he collected some water, he heard a voice: "Not all your brothers died, and you will also die if you do not do what I say. I am the master of this lake and you cannot drink the water here if you do not answer my 100 questions. And if you answer one question incorrectly, your brothers will remain dead." And at that moment, Mahārāja acted very interestingly. He was a very noble man; he poured the water back into the lake. He said that if you are the master of this lake, I have no right to touch it without your permission. This is a very appropriate instruction: everything moving and motionless belongs to the Lord, who controls everything. Therefore, a person should take only the bare necessities. And Śrīla Prabhupāda comments, explains that everything belongs to the Lord and He allocates to everyone his share so that everyone can live satisfied, everyone could prosper, everyone could feel happy. But if someone abuses more, it means that those around them suffer as a result.

And what we see, many people suffer, is the result of many people abusing their opportunities in this world, and the problem with people is that they tend to abuse as a result of their greed. For example, you put a bag of grain in the forest, then birds will take a few grains and a person passing by will take the whole bag. And Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that lust, anger, and greed are the three gates. Therefore, the *śāstra* says that one should look at the property of others as garbage lying on the street. And therefore, Mahārāja, known as *Ajātaśatru*—the one whose enemy was never born—thought that if it belongs to this person, then I have no right to touch it. And so he said, "If this lake belongs to you, I will not touch it without your permission." And he poured the water back. He said, "I want to understand, who could kill my four brothers? Show yourself before me."

And at that moment, a terrifying Yakṣa, very powerful, appeared before the Mahārāja and asked, "If I answer all 100 questions correctly, what will happen?" And said, "I will bring all your brothers back to life." And these were the events preceding these 100 questions, that is, we can understand that this was different even from final exams at school because even there you can make several mistakes and still pass the exams, but here he did not have the right to even a single mistake. And all 100 questions and answers to them that were asked in the Mahābhārata are very important for our progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If we give the answer incorrectly... as Prabhupāda says that if one makes one mistake in philosophy, then the whole philosophy can be thrown out. He gave an example of how clay jugs for water are made. The potter mixes clay with water; it is very important to knead the clay well so that not a single air bubble remains inside. Because if air remains during drying, the jug will crack.

In Vedic times, if two people discussed philosophy and one found a flaw in the other's philosophy, the loser had to accept the winner as his Guru because it meant that his whole philosophy was false, as in the example with a mathematical calculation: one mistake leads to a wrong result, and the more a person calculates, the more he deviates from the truth. And we can accept the trial of Kṛṣṇa consciousness even on the basis that there is no mistake in our philosophy. How is this possible? Because it comes from Acyuta. That is, this philosophy is a culture, the so-called religion comes from Kṛṣṇa himself, who is infallible, and it is intended to achieve the highest goal. We can see in the examples of such exalted personalities as they were and are such good experts in Vedic philosophy, they could refute the arguments of any Māyāvādī correspondent or scientist and convince them of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And as we will learn over the following days, Mahārāja actually did not make a single mistake in his answer to this question, and thanks to this, his brothers returned to life. And before we finish today's lecture, at the last moment at the end, answering all the questions to the last questions, Yudhiṣṭhira at the end said, "I am completely satisfied, and I can understand that there is no one more noble than you, and I can reward you by bringing back the lives of one of your brothers." And Yudhiṣṭhira, bring back the lives of all of them, but I did not say how many I will bring back, only one, bring back to life. And he said, "Well then, bring back to life Nakula." I already had Arjuna; Yudhiṣṭhira was surprised. "Why Nakula? Bhīma and Arjuna are much more powerful than him, and you have a battle ahead of you on the Kurukṣetra." And Yudhiṣṭhira said that my father Pāṇḍu had two wives, Kuntī and Mādrī. Yama and Arjuna were sons of Kuntī, I am a son of Kuntī, I am still alive. Therefore, Kuntī will be satisfied, and since Nakula was not among the sons left alive, this will bring her great suffering, and I want at least one of her sons to return to life. And when Yama, who had not yet revealed his identity, realized how noble and selflessly honored Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was, he was overcome with compassion. He waved his hand and all four brothers returned to life. And when they all drank the water of complete satisfaction and were about to leave, he said, "Who is this that you could so easily bring back to life all four brothers?" And he transformed into the Lord of death, Yama, that in fact I am your father, Mahārāja's true father. Yudhiṣṭhira fell at the feet of the Lord because Yama was not only his father but also one of the 12 *mahājanas* whom he had never seen before. Yudhiṣṭhira was so touched that he said, "Ask me for any blessing. I am a very powerful person, one of the *mahājanas*, I can fulfill any of your desires. Ask for what you want." And since I am an expert in the past, present, and future, I see that you have a serious battle ahead on Kurukṣetra, I can give you a special weapon with which you can easily win. And of course, we can most likely Mahārāja asked for pure devotional service because this is what devotees usually ask for. But Yama's answer is also known to all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, it is also in the context of Bhagavad-gītā. He said that, "I want to win in the most important war, in the battle with six enemies located in the heart: lust, anger, greed, pride, envy, illusion. Because until I will not be victorious over these six enemies in my heart, I will not be able to serve my beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa with pure devotion. But this is the only benediction I have asked for." And Yama's answer was also very famous; he said, "My dear son, you have already conquered these six enemies. You have conquered not only these enemies, you have conquered even the invincible Lord Kṛṣṇa himself by your pure devotion. What benediction can I give you if you possess the most important."

In fact, I can only repeat the words of the Supreme Lord: whoever does good will never be overcome by evil and Kṛṣṇa will always protect you, allowing you to remain focused on His lotus feet. And thanks to this, you will always be successful, and you will achieve victories in any aspect of life. And now we have told the background, and tomorrow we will discuss these, which as Prabhupāda defined, are perfect questions to which perfect answers.

Thank you.""