"*00478*.*
"# The Pastime of the Stolen Ring - Viśākhā Sakhī

Hi Kṛṣṇa everyone. A very warm welcome back to our continued series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* We have been giving our Vṛndāvana lecture series for a little over a year and a half now. We have tried to be consistent with two lectures a week. Why the consistency? That is explained very nicely in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, the king of scriptures, in a verse that is well known to most speakers on the *Bhāgavatam*. It is *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.2.18:

> *naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā |*
> *bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī ||*

"By regular attendance in classes on the *Bhāgavatam* and by rendering service to the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is almost completely destroyed, and loving service unto the Personality of Godhead, who is praised with transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact."

Now, the keyword in that famous verse is *nityam*, meaning regularly or consistency. If we regularly hear Kṛṣṇa-kathā, we will become purified, and in a purified state, we can awaken our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and live with them eternally in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, in Goloka Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Prabhupāda and Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura are always stressing this throughout their books. This is the goal of life; he is just keeping us on track, so to speak.

There are a few pertinent verses like that in his *Prārthanā*, Psalm 27. Just to keep us fixed here, he writes: "O Lord Hari, when will my condition change so that I can abandon everything and go to Vṛndāvana? When will I give up wealth, followers, son, and wife and go to Vṛndāvana? When will I forget all my distress and simply reside in Vṛndāvana? When will I maintain my livelihood by begging like a bee? When will I consider the water of the Yamunā as nectarean and drink it to my full satisfaction? When will I bathe in the waters of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and lie down on the banks of Śyāma-kuṇḍa? When will I travel to the twelve forests where the various pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa took place and their *rāsa-līlā* on the ground? When will I fall at the feet of Vrajavāsīs and inquire about the locations of Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes? When will I see the place where Kṛṣṇa ate with His cowherd boyfriends? When will I visit the forest and sub-forests of Vṛndāvana, hankering in this way? Narottama Dāsa desires the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa."

So, in that very beautiful song, Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura writes, "When will I fall at the feet of the Vrajavāsīs and inquire about the location of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes?" So today, I would like to share a pastime that has come down through thousands of years in Vraja culture and is a favorite of all the Vrajavāsīs who are living here. They often recount it, and it is called *Mudrikā-corī-līlā*. So sweet! *Mudrikā* means a ring, and *corī* you probably can imagine means stolen. An extremely sweet pastime wherein Kṛṣṇa steals Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s ring.

Once in Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was thinking, "In a few days, the auspicious month of Kārttika will begin, and I will once again dance with my beloved Kṛṣṇa in the *rāsa* dance. Therefore, I want to learn a new, beautiful form of dance." Gathering some of her closest maidservants, she said, "Girls, I want to perfect the art of dancing. So, today I am going to see Śyāmasundara and learn to dance."

But her maidservants were shocked. They replied, "But Rādhikā, why go to see Śyāma? He is actually not a very good dancer. We know because we ourselves have had to teach Him dance steps during the *rāsa* dance performances. During the *rāsa-līlā*, we have to teach Him some dance steps; we are, in fact, His gurus. That means we are His dance teachers. If you really want to improve your dancing, Rādhā, then let us call some professional dancers whose families have performed dance for generations."

And Viśākhā-sakhī added, "Rādhā, there is no need to take dance lessons from Śyāmasundara. Why? Because you long ago perfected the art of *nṛtya*—dance. You are the best dancer of all, beloved Rādhā. The Lord of desire-comedy dances on your eyebrows, all the hairs in your body dance like Śiva, your nose dances like a drop on the lotus petal, your body dances like a creeper in the windy season, and your ankle bells dance like the beautiful Apsarā Rambhā—we mentioned her the other day. There is no need for you to go to Śyāmasundara to learn the art of dance. However, if you insist on going, then all of us will go with you, for we do not trust that Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa."

But Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was adamant. She said, "No, I am going alone." But then Viśākhā said, "Rādhā, wouldn't it be better if we just called Śyāmasundara here to teach you if you want to?" To which Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī replied so beautifully, "My beloved Viśākhā, I know that you are my well-wisher, but when has anyone seen a water well go to one who is thirsty? It is a thirsty person who goes to a water well to drink. Therefore, I want to perfect the art of dance by going to see Śyāmasundara." Such a beautiful analogy, oh boy!

So finally, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's maidservants relented and they agreed. So to prepare her for her dance lessons from Śyāmasundara, they dressed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in a very elaborate dance costume, clothes along with four types of ankle bells. Now, when I heard this pastime, I was thinking, "Four types of ankle bells?" And I did some research in the scriptures and I found that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is famous for these four types of ankle bells that she wears during her dancing:

| Name | Sound Produced |
| :--- | :--- |
| *Nūpura* | Sounds of *kartālas* |
| *Kaḍulā* | Sounds of groups of swans |
| *Bichuā* | Sounds of flocks of cuckoo birds |
| *Guṅguru* | Sounds like Sarasvatī’s *vīṇā* |

So then in preparation, her maidservants dress her in appropriate ornaments, *śṛṅgāra*—and we will discuss a little later on those ornaments, there is something special—and finally, as per her desire, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī went down alone to the Yamunā River, where she found her beloved Kṛṣṇa standing on the banks of the Yamunā with folded hands. And what was He doing? Singing Rādhārāṇī’s glories. So there they spent time together, telling stories and joking and laughing, until finally Kṛṣṇa said, "Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, let us dance now. In fact, I will teach you some beautiful new steps that you can use in our next *rāsa* dance in Kārttika."

Needless to say, Rādhārāṇī was overjoyed with Kṛṣṇa’s invitation because that is really why she had come to see Him. So Kṛṣṇa continued, "My dearest Rādhā, as you know very well, there are seven basic principles of dance." And He repeated them: He said the first is called *grīvā*—it involves dancing with neck movements; the second type is called *netra-nṛtya*—it means dancing with the eyes; the third type of dancing is called *madhura-nṛtya*—it means dancing with expressions; the fourth type is *mudrā*—which means employing hands and hand gestures in the dancing; the fifth type of dance is called *pāda-nṛtya*—it means dancing with the feet; the sixth type is called *kaṭi-nṛtya*—it means dancing with the waist; and the seventh and last type is called *sarvāṅga-nṛtya*—dancing with the whole body. Kṛṣṇa spoke like that, and besides this, Śyāmasundara continued, there are three beats and seven notes. "So now, my dear Rādhā, I will show you the finer methods to employ these seven forms of dance. You just watch me."

As the *rasika-śāstras* tell it, as Kṛṣṇa began, you know, very artistic dance moves, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was just totally absorbed in watching Him dancing this way. She watched Him very carefully. So after a while, Kṛṣṇa stopped and He said, "Now you try." And as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī began her dance based on the new subtle movements Kṛṣṇa had shown her, Kṛṣṇa sang and kept the rhythm by clapping His hands—I thought that was really Kṛṣṇa’s thing—and kept the rhythm by clapping His hands, so we could understand. After some time, Rādhārāṇī became tired, so Śrī Kṛṣṇa suggested that they walk around the beautiful nearby forest of Nidhivan. As they did so, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī observed the beauty of the different *kuñjas*, like the pleasure groves. She was absorbed in seeing all these beautiful *kuñjas*.

Now here is where the plot thickens. While she was absorbed in that way, clever Kṛṣṇa secretly stole a most beautiful ring from her hand, from one of her fingers. It was Rādhārāṇī’s mirror ring. This mirror ring was given to her by her mother, Kīrtidā Sundarī, on one of her birthdays. It was one of her most prized possessions. Kṛṣṇa knew it, but she didn’t see Him steal it; He was very clever.

Now later that day, when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī finally returned to Varśānā, her maidservants crowded around her and they asked, "Rādhā, how was your dance class?" So smiling, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī replied, "It was most wonderful." And as the day was going on, her maidservants wanted to change her clothes from the dress clothes to other clothes, and as they were doing so, they were taking off her ornaments—again, that is called *śṛṅgāra*. In some research I did, I found out something really amazing: Every day, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is dressed in exactly 64 ornaments like jewels, and these 64 ornaments are kept in a very special box called *sāja-saṁhāra*. That is the box that keeps the ornaments in, and the person in charge of that box is Viśākhā-sakhī, one of her servants. One of the specific duties of these maidservants is to count all the jewelry before decorating Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with them in the morning and then to count all the ornaments again when taking them off of her in the afternoon or the evening.

So that day, when the Gopīs were counting the ornaments Rādhā had worn to her dance class, they were shocked to find one missing—it never happens. They counted only 63 ornaments, and we know why. So counting again, they discovered that Rādhārāṇī’s mirror ring was missing. So Viśākhā-sakhī quickly understood that the thief could have only been Kṛṣṇa. So she said to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, "Rādhā, Śyāmasundara has stolen your ring!" But Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī would have nothing to do with it; she didn't believe that. She said, "No, Viśākhā, Kṛṣṇa would never even think of stealing any of my jewelry." And to that, Viśākhā said—and it's so wonderful—"O innocent Rādhā, you do not know Him. We know Him. He is the biggest thief in the world. He can steal the *collyrium* from the eyes of a person who walks just next to Him, what to speak about a ring. He is the master of thieves. Just see, He has stolen our butter, our clothes, our hearts, the sins of His devotees, and now the ring of the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu. You believe me; I am your royal advisor, I know Him very well."

So at that point, Viśākhā just stormed out of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s room and went to find Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. Knowing His daily routine at this late afternoon, she found Him herding His cows at nearby Govardhana Hill with His friends. Her anger had not subsided even the slightest. Approaching Kṛṣṇa in a fury, she stood before Him and she commanded, "Kṛṣṇa, give me back Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s ring!"

Kṛṣṇa, though, He said, "How can I possibly know what you are talking about? I am an innocent seven-year-old boy. What do I know about young girls' rings? Is it a finger ring, a toe ring, an earring, a nose ring?" So Viśākhā said, "I caught you! You are saying you don't know anything about girls' rings, but you mentioned four specific rings, you scoundrel! So you come with me. You can state your innocence before Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s friends, and let's see what they decide." Now, Kṛṣṇa was happy with that order. Smiling, He said, "Okay, let's go."

So later, when Viśākhā and Kṛṣṇa arrived at a chosen rendezvous near Varśānā, Rādhārāṇī’s friends immediately surrounded Kṛṣṇa and they began searching through His clothes—those garments—for the missing ring. And finally, after some time, one Gopī found that ring, the mirror ring, in His waist cloth, and she took it. She held it up: "Girls, I found the ring! This Kṛṣṇa is a thief!" So Kṛṣṇa was caught—to use a modern term—red-handed, and He had no excuse to defend Himself, and He stood embarrassed amongst all the Gopīs.

At that moment, Lalitā spoke up and she said, "Just see, Rādhā! He did steal your ring. Now you must punish Him." Although Rādhā agreed, she said, "You are right, Lalitā, and the biggest punishment for an unkind lover is not to talk to them. So I will never talk to Kṛṣṇa again. Never again will I talk to Kṛṣṇa." So Viśākhā liked that. She stepped forward and she proclaimed—because many Vrajavāsīs had gathered because of this commotion—she said, "Dear residents of Vṛndāvana, this case is over now. Rādhā will not speak to Kṛṣṇa ever again." And then Viśākhā turned to Kṛṣṇa and she pointed towards Govardhana. She told Kṛṣṇa, "You leave now. You go back from where you came from." And Kṛṣṇa left, embarrassed.

So a little later, Viśākhā said, "Rādhā, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, this is a good time for you to take revenge on Kṛṣṇa. Let's make a plan to steal from Him as He stole from you." But Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī replied—it's so sweet—"Viśākhā, I don't know how to steal. I don't know how to steal." So Viśākhā—all these sakhīs are very protective of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī—she said, "Then, Rādhā, I will teach you how to steal." Viśākhā taught Rādhārāṇī the art of stealing from her lover for the purpose of enhancing loving pastimes. Wow, not like stealing in this world. Viśākhā taught Rādhārāṇī the art of stealing from her lover for the purpose of enhancing loving pastimes.

So a few days later, Kṛṣṇa was falling asleep alongside His very close friend Madhumaṅgala in the Vṛndāvana forest, again somewhere near Govardhana Hill, after their noon lunch. You know, the cowherd boys, they always take a nap after their noon lunch. And as Madhumaṅgala began dozing off, he saw that Kṛṣṇa was already in a very deep sleep; Kṛṣṇa had gone to sleep before him. So he thought, "Well, if Kṛṣṇa wakes up before me, He may run off to the herd of cows and promise all the fun." So he did something really funny: Madhumaṅgala lay down next to Kṛṣṇa and tied one of his legs to one of Kṛṣṇa’s legs. He was thinking, "In this way, when Kṛṣṇa wakes up, I'll wake up too." And then he fell fast asleep.

Now, an hour later, by the arrangement of Paurṇamāsī, Yogamāyā—who, as we have discussed many times, daily organizes all the blissful pastimes in Vraja—with her assistant Vṛndā Devī, by Paurṇamāsī’s arrangement, who showed up where Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala were deep in sleep? I am sure you can guess: Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her teacher in the art of transcendental theft, Śrīmatī Viśākhā-sakhī. The two of them showed up. So as Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala slept very soundly in their afternoon nap, on Viśākhā’s cue, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī very steadily and slowly approached them and deftly stole—listen to this—Rādhārāṇī stole Kṛṣṇa’s peacock feather, His favorite black *cādar*, His stick for controlling cows, His ankle bells, and His flute. She stole His flute.

And then Viśākhā herself came forward and with some scissors cut Madhumaṅgala’s newly grown mustache unevenly—snip, snip, snip here and there. Now, one might question how one of Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd boyfriends could have a mustache, and I had to do some research because it's part of the *līlā*. Well, the answer is that Madhumaṅgala is much older than Kṛṣṇa. In fact, he's older than all the cowherd boys, for that matter; he is the son of Sāndīpani Muni who came with his grandmother Paurṇamāsī to Vṛndāvana from Ujjain, and Madhumaṅgala is exactly eight years and 56 days older than Kṛṣṇa. Big difference—eight years and 56 days older than Kṛṣṇa. That makes him about 14 and a half, or, you know, say almost 15 years old—old enough to have a mustache! I know when I was 15, I had a mustache—that was the 1960s, the hippie era; I had a mustache. Anyway, so after their exploits, Rādhā and Viśākhā quickly ran away, laughing and giggling all the way back to Varśānā.

Now you can just imagine the shock when Kṛṣṇa woke up and saw Madhumaṅgala’s funny mustache, and what’s more, when Madhumaṅgala saw Kṛṣṇa without His peacock feather, His black *cādar*, His stick, His ankle bells, and His flute. Needless to say, Kṛṣṇa was devastated, but He had an idea who the thief might be, or the thieves might be. He said to Madhumaṅgala, "This must be the Gopīs' revenge from My stealing Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s mirror ring, but it's not an appropriate act of revenge, for I just stole a ring, but the Gopīs stole My peacock feather, My black *cādar*, and My stick, My ankle bells, and My flute." And then Kṛṣṇa said, "Madhumaṅgala, I wouldn't be surprised if Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī herself was part of this conspiracy. Madhumaṅgala, somehow we have to get back My precious paraphernalia as soon as possible."

So Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala, they sat down and they quickly came up with a plan to get everything back. And what was that plan? Now it's really interesting: they dressed up and disguised themselves as old Gopīs. Old Gopīs! You know, we have related a number of pastimes during this last year where, in order to approach Rādhā who is angry with Kṛṣṇa, He is in a mine—you know, in order for Kṛṣṇa to approach her, He disguises Himself as a young Gopī, and then He has access to come and ask for forgiveness. So, lots of, you know, "new Gopī" pastimes. Kṛṣṇa is in as a fresh, beautiful Gopī. Here, Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala, they disguised themselves as old Gopīs and they hobbled their way all the way to Varśānā.

But they sat crying for hours outside of King Vṛṣabhānu’s palace where Rādhā lives. Now, Kṛṣṇa, disguised as an old Gopī, was wailing, was crying very loudly, "Oh Śyāmasundara, where are you? Oh Śyāmasundara, where are you? I am feeling so much separation from You." So eventually, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī heard these old Gopīs' cries, and she is sometimes described as the tenderhearted counterpart of Kṛṣṇa—to me, she's often described like this—she has a lot of compassion. So, feeling compassion for these two old Gopīs who she could hear from her quarters, she came running outside, followed by Lalitā and Viśākhā. She approached the old Gopī who was crying for Śyāmasundara and she said, "Dear one, what is your name?"

But this old Gopī was too immersed in feelings of separation to reply, so Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī asked the second old Gopī, Madhumaṅgala, "Darling, please tell me what is your friend’s name?" But Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala had not discussed in their plan what names they would use in this ruse; they forgot that detail! So Madhumaṅgala, he whispered in the old Gopī’s ear—Kṛṣṇa’s ear—"Brother, we didn't decide what your name was in all of this. How should I answer Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī? She’s asking your name." So Kṛṣṇa took a little break from His wailing as the Gopī, and He whispered back, "Well, tell her that I am Śyāma-premi-sakhī." Such a beautiful name, Śyāma-premi-sakhī. So Madhumaṅgala looked up and he said to Śrī Rādhā, "Well, her name is Śyāma-premi-sakhī."

So then, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who herself was feeling so much distress, you know, for these two old ladies, turned to Viśākhā and said, "My dear Viśākhā, what should we do to pacify these two old Gopīs? They are feeling so much separation from Kṛṣṇa; I fear they are going to die." At this point, Viśākhā was also fooled by what was going on, so she had to take a minute to think how to deal with the situation. These poor old Gopīs! She got an idea and she whispered in Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s ear, "Rādhā, why not disguise yourself as Kṛṣṇa, wearing all the things that we stole from Him today? That will certainly convince these two old girls, these old Gopīs, that you are actually Kṛṣṇa. That will pacify them, pacify their feelings; they will think that Kṛṣṇa is there."

Rādhā smiled, she agreed: "Yes, very nice plan." And she quickly ran back to her quarters. Minutes later, she returned, disguised as Kṛṣṇa. She must have had to put on some bluish cosmetics, and she wore Kṛṣṇa’s clothes, like Kṛṣṇa, but the main thing is she was wearing Kṛṣṇa’s peacock feather, His favorite black *cādar*, she had His stick, she was wearing His ankle bells, and she had His flute which she was playing most expertly.

So hoping to calm the old Gopīs down, she stood before them in a *tribhaṅga*—threefold bending—form, and she said to the Gopīs, "Dear ones, I, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, have come." So moments later, as Rādhā stood there with all of Kṛṣṇa’s stolen apparel, Kṛṣṇa jumped up, He threw off His disguise as Śyāma-premi-sakhī, the old Gopī, and the Vrajavāsīs say in the wink of an eye, in the wink of an eye, He grabbed back all His paraphernalia from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī! He grabbed everything back in the wink of an eye. Now when this happened, everyone present—meaning, you know, Rādhārāṇī and Lalitā and Viśākhā and all the other sakhīs and the Gopīs and many cowherd boys had come because it was a big commotion—everyone burst out laughing and applauded Kṛṣṇa’s tricky ways. Everyone present burst out laughing and applauded Kṛṣṇa’s tricky ways. So nice! This is another one of those playful pastimes, everyone enjoyed what Kṛṣṇa did, how He tricked everybody and got His paraphernalia back.

But oh, there is one more thing: only Madhumaṅgala wasn't laughing, because when he took off his disguise, everyone could see his funny, clipped mustache. So Madhumaṅgala started crying in embarrassment, and taking pity on him, Viśākhā waved her hand and Madhumaṅgala’s young, full mustache appeared again. And then she very kindly gave him a smile and said, "Madhumaṅgala, you will never lose your mustache, don't worry, and even if someone in the future tries to cut it, they will not be able to do so. Even you will not be able to cut your mustache."

So this beautiful pastime, again, it is called *Mudrikā-corī-līlā*. So I hope that this pastime has watered your *bhakti-latā-bīja*, your seed of devotion in your heart for Kṛṣṇa, and it's grown a few inches. So let us conclude today in much the same way that we started, with some prayers by Narottama, meant to increase our desire to come to Vraja and live in Vṛndāvana forever, serving Śrīla Prabhupāda in his service to the Divine Couple, in his service to Kṛṣṇa, and in his servant-to-servant service to all the different residents of Vṛndāvana. Whomever he may be, we will go there and we will serve Prabhupāda in his service—we are servants of the servants of the servants of the servants—that would be most relishable. So Narottama is always encouraging us: "Don't forget Vraja, remember, go back home, back to Godhead."

So let him speak to us, Psalm 29 of *Prārthanā*. He writes: "O Lord Hari, when will I reside in Vṛndāvana and behold the beauty of the Divine Couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? When will I give up the happiness of sleeping on a luxurious bed, and when will I smear my body with the dust of Vraja? When will I give up enjoying the six palatable foodstuffs, and when will I beg *madhukarī* like a bee in Vraja to maintain my body? When will I wander from forest to forest doing *parikramā* and, tired, when will I take rest on the banks of the Yamunā? I will cool myself down beneath the shade of Vaṁśīvaṭa and sit in the *kuñjas* with other Vaiṣṇavas." Narottama Dāsa says, "When will that day come?" Do they actually give up everything and go to Vṛndāvana? Please allow us to follow you. Now, we also want to be your daughter—that's our goal. Thank you so much, this is a very nectarean pastime, and I will study some more and come up with some more pastimes to encourage you on the path back home, back to Godhead. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Thank you so much, we'll see you soon. Bye.""