"*00423*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Namo oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.* We are continuing with our mini-series on Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his sevā to his beloved deity of Govindajī. We discussed in our first talk how Lord Caitanya had asked the Six Gosvāmīs to go to Vṛndāvana to reestablish Kṛṣṇa-bhakti. While there in Jagannātha Purī, Caitanya specifically told Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī before sending him:

> "Now go to Vṛndāvana, stay there, research transcendental literature—*rasa-śāstra kariha nirūpaṇa*—and excavate the lost holy places. Establish the service of Lord Kṛṣṇa—*kṛṣṇa-sevā*—and preach the mellows of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s devotional service—*rasa-bhakti kariha pracāra*." (Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 1.217–219)

Now, in the book *Sādhana-dīpikā*, we hear of two more very special instructions Lord Caitanya gave to Rūpa Gosvāmī in preparing him to go to Vraja, but these are not mentioned in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. Mahāprabhu said, "Punaḥ ayācna: reveal the enchanting service of Govinda. With the mere sight and perception of the Lord, wrapped now in the state of silence, people and all other living beings will attain pure love of God" (*Sādhana-dīpikā*, Chapter 8, verses 5 and 6). And the second instruction He gave him was an instruction to protect the sādhus there: *Akiñcana-bhaktānāṁ pālanaṁ sarvathāpi ca*—"by all means" (*Sādhana-dīpikā*, Chapter 8, verse 7).

We heard the other day that one way Rūpa Gosvāmī did this while he was in Vṛndāvana was by supplying those sādhus milk from his 500 cows. You remember how, one day while in Vṛndāvana, Rūpa Gosvāmī was feeling very intense separation from Lord Caitanya. Actually, his feelings of separation were so deep and so intense that we can only imagine what they were like. He was very attached to Mahāprabhu; Rūpa Gosvāmī had a very close and intimate relationship with Lord Caitanya even before their first meeting. While engaged in the service of the Nawab Hussein Shah, while Rūpa and Sanātana were in Rāmākeli, they wrote a letter to Lord Caitanya asking how they could bear His separation even though they had not yet met Him. They had only heard about Him, yet their love for Him was awakened just by hearing His glorious pastimes from sādhus who were passing by.

Mahāprabhu replied in a letter back to them. He actually quoted verses from a śāstra called *Laghu-yoga-vāsiṣṭha* (Section 5, Chapter 9, verses 59 and 60). Mahāprabhu quoted these verses as a reply to Rūpa and Sanātana, and here is the translation of those verses: 

> "Just as a lady attached to a paramour reminisces the pleasures of her loving escapades with her illicit lover in her heart even when she is fully engaged in her household chores, similarly, a sober person who has attained real realization in relation to the pure Absolute Truth continues to reminisce internally the pleasures of such realization even while acting on the external plane in this world."

So, basically, He is saying to them, "You just go about your duties and remember Me while you are doing your duties to the Nawab Hussein Shah." Eventually, due to Rūpa Gosvāmī’s pure, unadulterated love for Lord Caitanya, their relationship grew even more intimate, which resulted in the Lord revealing everything to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Kavirāja Gosvāmī says in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 18, verse 115: 

> *kṛṣṇa-tattva, bhakti-tattva, rasa-tattva-prānta*
> *saba śikhāila prabhu bhāgavata-koṭi*

Caitanya Mahāprabhu taught the ultimate limit of the truth about Lord Kṛṣṇa, the truth about devotional service, and the truth about transcendental mellows, culminating in conjugal love between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Finally, He told Rūpa Gosvāmī about the ultimate conclusions of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; He taught him everything. To the Vaiṣṇavas of that particular moment, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s super-excellent state of Kṛṣṇa consciousness was very evident. We sometimes use that term *kavi-ācārya*. For example, after reading Rūpa Gosvāmī’s book *Lalita-mādhava*, Śrīla Rāmānanda Rāya said, "This is really beautiful. This is not simply a poetic presentation like *Lalita-mādhava*; it is a continuous shower of nectar. Indeed, it is the essence of all ultimate realizations appearing in the form of plays or theater. Wonderful descriptions of Rūpa Gosvāmī are superb arrangements to express loving affairs; hearing them will plunge the heart and ears of everyone into a whirlpool of transcendental bliss." This is the appreciation of Rūpa Gosvāmī. And then Rāmānanda Rāya spoke one of my favorite verses of all time—I am sure many of you as well—he said: 

> "Yet what is the use of a bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?" (Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 1.195)

It is not surprising, therefore, understanding the exalted nature of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, that the Lord appeared as the beautiful deity of Govindajī while Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī was residing in Vṛndāvana. You could say that Govindajī had been waiting for Rūpa Gosvāmī in Vṛndāvana itself for five thousand years. The *Garga-saṁhitā* says: 

> "Then Vrajanābha installed Dīrgha-viṣṇu and Keśava-deva in Mathurā, Govindajī in Vṛndāvana, Harideva in Girirāja, Gokuleśa in Gokula, and Balarāma one yojana away from Gokula. In this way, Vrajanābha installed six deities of Lord Hari," and it was Rūpa Gosvāmī that found Govindajī.

In our last lecture, we described just how Śrī Rūpa found Govindajī at what we now call the Yoga-pīṭha in Vraja, and how he and the residents of Vṛndāvana at that time received the Lord. There were so many details in that class. Now, in the days that followed the initial abhiṣeka of Govindajī, Rūpa Gosvāmī made a small hut—remember, he is a renunciate living in the forest—so he made a small hut for Govindajī to reside in. I was reading all the details; this hut was made of leaves and wood and mud and grass. There is no mention of marble and teak wood and so forth, but the most important element was his devotion, his bhakti.

After bathing the Lord every day, Rūpa Gosvāmī would decorate Him with śṛṅgāra. Remember, we mentioned the śṛṅgāra, the decorations or the ornaments that one puts on the Lord when he dresses the Lord, our deities, every day. Now, usually that śṛṅgāra consists of pearls and rubies, sapphires and diamonds, and so forth and so on. But Rūpa Gosvāmī, being a renunciate living in the forest, would decorate the Deity with what is called *kṛtika*, which means śṛṅgāra made of nature. Like what? Like creepers, flower dresses, *guñjā-mālā*—those little seeds, the colorful seeds you find in Vṛndā—it is described by jayantī flower beads, tulasī leaf garlands, etc. Then I read that after Govindajī was nicely ornamented this way, Rūpa Gosvāmī would place a water pot next to Govindajī, a stick from a kadamba tree, and a mukuṭa or crown made of tulasī beads.

For food offerings, Rūpa Gosvāmī would daily offer *amṛta-keli*. *Amṛta-keli* means sweet rice, one of the preparations that Śrīla Prabhupāda conquered the world with when he came from India to the West; he introduced us to halavā, sweet rice, gulab-jāmuna, sandeśa, like this. So we call it sweet rice here; in India, we call it *amṛta-keli*—*amṛta* means nectar. Also, he would daily offer *śikharinī*. *Śikharinī* is a special refreshing drink containing camphor, black pepper, and salt. Sometimes he would also offer *śattu*—cooked wheat mixed with sweet water. And in winter, he would offer *kicari* and *śāka*—*śāka* means green vegetables cooked and served with salt—and sometimes he would also offer a little fruit. Nice details.

From the very first day that Govindajī appeared, the whole of Vraja, the whole of Vṛndāvana—whatever, whoever saw—those who were living there would come regularly for darśana of Govindajī. It is described in the old *pūjā-vithis*. *Pūjā-vithis* are books written specifically about the pūjā and worship of Govindajī. The *pūjā-vithis* we have—these are in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, so I got some access to them—there, when I was reading that, in the times of Rūpa Gosvāmī, he would organize 38 major festivals each year. The list included festivals like Vasantotsava, meaning celebrating the coming of spring; Ratha-yātrā, meaning a beautiful bathing festival; Caitra-gulāb, Dhol-kulā, *phul-dol* means swing festivals; and *naukā-vihāra*, he would organize boat festivals, and Jhūlana-yātrā—of course, we know swing festivals—and he also had very elaborate Janmāṣṭamī festivals. Festivals for the appearance of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, and all the Ekādaśīs were also celebrated by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. I was reading that Rūpa Gosvāmī himself presided over all these events; he personally organized them.

In fact, he became so involved in the worship of Govindajī that he had little time for anything else. So one day, Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote a letter to Lord Caitanya, who again was living in Purī, and this was the letter: 

> "My dear Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in service of Śrī Govindajī my days and nights are passing like the blinking of my eyes. I am not giving proper attention and time to the writing of scriptures as You ordered. If You can kindly send someone from Jagannātha Purī who can help me serve my Govindajī, then I can continue my other sevās to You." 

So when Mahāprabhu received that letter, of course, He was overjoyed that Rūpa Gosvāmī had found Govindajī and that he was performing the worship very nicely. He was very pleased. So in reciprocation, He requested one of his most intimate followers in Jagannātha Purī, his name was Kāśīśvara, to go to Vṛndāvana to assist with the worship of Govindajī. But you can imagine Kāśīśvara’s state of mind; he is an associate, he is a servant of Mahāprabhu, and he was being instructed by Mahāprabhu to leave Purī and go to Vṛndāvana. So Kāśīśvara said famously to Mahāprabhu, "Lord, why do I need to go to Vṛndāvana to see Kṛṣṇa when You are Kṛṣṇa Himself?" So, understanding Kāśīśvara’s mood, Mahāprabhu took compassion on him and He arranged to give him a very old deity that had been worshipped for a long time in the temple of Jagannātha. He took that deity out of the temple and he gave it to Kāśīśvara, and He said very famously, "This deity is identical to Me. This deity is identical to Me"—a very important instruction. And that deity’s name was, or is, Gorā Govinda. 

Now, you could just imagine—you are a devotee and the Lord gives you a deity of Himself—so Kāśīśvara was okay now; he was satisfied and he left for Vṛndāvana, where he assisted Rūpa Gosvāmī in the service of Govindajī. It is written that he placed the deity of Gorā Govinda alongside Govindajī, and each day they worshipped them together. Now, when you go to Jaipur where Govindajī is presently situated—who has been there for hundreds of years in that temple—if you see Rādhā-Govinda on our left, on the right side of Govindajī, just at His feet, is that beautiful deity of Gorā Govinda. You can see it with your own eyes. 

Now, Rūpa Gosvāmī had also discovered—I think it is important to mention—not only did he discover Govindajī, but he also discovered a very famous deity of Vṛndādevī, who is now out at Kāmīvana in nearby Brahmakuṇḍa, as well as the beautiful stone deity of Yogamāyā in the Yoga-pīṭha where he had previously found Govindajī. Those are very important deities and they were worshipped along with Govindajī. So now, with the help of Kāśīśvara, the festivals—these big festivals for Govindajī and all these deities—increased more than ever before. I found a beautiful poem in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute written by the official court poet of Rāja Mānasiṅgha, and the poem is called *Śrī-govinda-varṣika-vṛndāṣṭakam*, and verse 11 is very beautiful. It describes just how nicely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and his associates now worshipped the Lord. They gave specific instructions which are recorded in this *Śrī-govinda-vārṣika-vṛndāṣṭakam*, and here is how the worship went on as described:

> "In the best of months, Mārgaśīrṣa, on the 12th day, Dvādaśī, Govindajī is to be offered many kinds of condiments or spices in preparations cooked for Him. In the month of Pauṣa, a kicari made out of different types of grains should be prepared. In Tāpa, they call that the summer season in this particular poem—in Tāpa, the summer season, the festival of Harikā, or we call that Holī, should be observed. In the month of Caitra, Govindajī should be swung on a swing, *ḍola*. In the month of Vaiśākha, He should be covered in sandal paste." 

Just some nectar I found; that court poet had recorded like that. 

Now, some time later, Mahāprabhu sent Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī to Vṛndāvana also with an instruction to serve Govindajī. Mahāprabhu said to him, "Oh my dear Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa, go to Yoga-pīṭha, Vṛndāvana, the place of Govindajī in Vṛndāvana, and serve and relish the association of devotees. Do not write anything; just serve Śrī Govindajī by relating His pastimes as revealed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." 

So, some time later, Lord Caitanya wrote a letter to Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī while he was in Vṛndāvana requesting him—this is what our research revealed—requesting him to build "a house of gold for Govindajī." Those are the exact words which Mahāprabhu wrote: "Create a house of gold for Govindajī," in other words, a temple. So, later, a small temple was built by a disciple very near to Yoga-pīṭha. It wasn't gold, but it was a manifestation of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī's heart of gold, and he gave that instruction to his disciple because he had received the instruction. But these are Gosvāmīs, they are renunciates, and they are very busy with the main services which Mahāprabhu had given to them. And Raghunātha’s service was basically just to give class on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, but he fulfilled the instruction of Mahāprabhu by asking his disciple to build that temple. 

Now, at that point, Govindajī was shifted from the hut of mud and grass to that beautiful stone temple. And Govindajī, I was reading, He was worshipped in that small temple from the years 1535 to 1590, and after that, the big famous temple was built, and that we will be discussing in our next lecture. Now, unfortunately, the land that that smaller stone temple was standing on was purchased by a physician—a doctor—I found out 10 years ago, and he tore down that temple and built a school on the property. Actually, I was reading he took the stone from that temple to make a foundation to build his school. Can you imagine? And for that, he was charged and put into prison; he is still in prison now. 

While in Vṛndāvana, as I was mentioning, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī would speak on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and he would do that every day in front of Govindajī. Every morning, and actually every evening, he would give class where Govindajī was being worshipped. Many devotees would attend those sessions. Even—I was reading—devotees were coming, sādhus were coming from all other parts of India just to hear the Bhāgavatam recital of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. And Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī were often there. Actually, Rūpa Gosvāmī himself, I was reading, he never lectured or gave classes in Vṛndāvana. Why? Because Mahāprabhu had ordered him to research and write books, establish deity worship, find the lost places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The service of actually preaching and giving lectures in Vṛndāvana, that he gave to Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. So, I am reading Rūpa Gosvāmī didn't lecture because he didn't want to interfere with the specific flavor that his dear friend Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī had received. Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa was just supposed to speak; he didn't have a deity like the other Gosvāmīs. His deity was Bhāgavatam, the king of all granthas. You see how Mahāprabhu set everything up? Each of the Six Gosvāmīs had been given an explicit service, working together to form the saṅkīrtana movement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu—means the complete kīrtana, the complete glorification of the Lord. So each Gosvāmī had a specific duty in pioneering the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. So interesting, the vision of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

There is actually a very beautiful pastime: Rūpa Gosvāmī attends a lecture of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, which I would like to share with you, and it is found in a śāstra that we are researching now in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute called *Rūpa-līlā-cintāmaṇi* by Kṛṣṇa Kavi. It describes how once a brāhmaṇa came from South India to Vṛndāvana specifically for Govindajī’s darśana. And while taking darśana of Śrī Govindajī, this brāhmaṇa saw that Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was giving class on the Gopī-gīta, the 31st chapter of the 10th Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And Raghunātha Gosvāmī was seated on the wooden āsana at the feet of Govindajī. Now, that first verse of the Gopī-gīta—just to give us an idea of how nectarean that particular part of the Bhāgavatam is—the first verse is as follows. Many of you know that verse:

> "The Gopīs said: O beloved! Speaking to Kṛṣṇa, Your birth in the land of Vraja has made it exceedingly glorious, and thus Indirā, the Goddess of Fortune, always resides here. It is only for Your sake that we, Your devoted servants, maintain our lives. We have been searching everywhere for You, so please show Yourself to us."

So this was the part of the Bhāgavatam that he was speaking on, and there were many villagers, many Gauḍīya saints, and other Vaiṣṇavas present at this recital of the Bhāgavatam. And they all had their eyes closed, listening to the kathā of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Not only that, but everyone was crying in ecstasy. The impact of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s kathā could also be seen in the cows and the deer and the birds, and even the trees in the surrounding area, because as described, they were all trembling in ecstasy. And it appeared to this brāhmaṇa that even Govindajī was crying in ecstasy; such was the potency of this sevā of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. 

So then the brāhmaṇa noticed a raised āsana a little higher than that of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s, and he was curious. So this brāhmaṇa asked one devotee, he said, "Excuse me, open your eyes—who is this saint that is sitting on the platform higher than Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa?" So that devotee, before going back to listening to kathā and closing his eyes, he said, "Ah, that is Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, the leader of all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas in Vṛndāvana." So the brāhmaṇa, looking at Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, he comes a little closer, and he noticed that while everyone else was crying by hearing the kathā, Rūpa Gosvāmī was sitting with a straight back on his āsana with closed eyes. And it appeared that he was not experiencing the emotion; he was just sitting with closed eyes listening, but there weren't any symptoms of emotion like the others. So the brāhmaṇa thought, perhaps—first of all, he thought, "Oh, maybe this sādhu was sleeping." But when he moved closer, it appeared that Rūpa Gosvāmī wasn't even breathing. 

So concerned, this brāhmaṇa, he took a cotton ball from a nearby tree, a cotton ball from the tree, and he came forward and he put it near the nose of Rūpa Gosvāmī. His idea was that if Rūpa Gosvāmī was in fact breathing—if he were alive, in other words—the cotton ball would move a little bit, and there was nothing to worry about. It is written that he held the cotton ball for one daṇḍa—I remember, a daṇḍa is 24 minutes—next to the nose of Rūpa Gosvāmī, but it didn't waver. It didn't move at all. No breathing was coming in or out. So the brāhmaṇa was stunned; he didn't know what to think. So he just kept that cotton ball next to Rūpa Gosvāmī’s nose, hoping to see some life appear. He was mystified by this sevā. Then suddenly, just when Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī concluded his lecture by saying [Kṛṣṇa's name], as he said that, a deep breath came out from the nose of Rūpa Gosvāmī, and the cotton ball that the brāhmaṇa was holding burst into flames. Burst into flames! 

So, how to explain that? Well, the ācāryas say—because this is a very famous, well-known pastime—the ācāryas say that the cotton ball caught fire because Rūpa Gosvāmī’s heart was burning in separation by hearing the Gopī-gīta from the mouth of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī; burning in separation from Kṛṣṇa. The cotton ball caught fire because Rūpa Gosvāmī’s heart was burning in separation from Kṛṣṇa by hearing the Gopī-gīta from the mouth of Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī.

Śrīla [Rūpa Gosvāmī]. So finish here, and in our next lecture, Part 3, we’ll discuss the pastime of how the main—that main glorious temple which still stands to some degree here in Vṛndāvana—how that temple of Govindajī appeared. It is a most amazing pastime; so many details we’ve discovered. But let us conclude today with the following verses. The *Ādi-varāha Purāṇa* says:

> "A person who sees Lord Govindajī in Vṛndāvana never goes to the abode of Yamarāja, for he achieves the destination of the most pious persons." 

Nārada Muni says in the *Mathurā-khaṇḍa* of the *Skanda Purāṇa*: 

> "In the abode of Vṛndāvana is Govindajī’s most sanctified residence, which is surrounded by His servants. I also reside there, O King. In this world, Vṛndāvana is the spiritual abode of Lord Govinda’s Vaikuṇṭha servants, headed by Vṛndā, who are absorbed in thought of Govinda; all are present there, O King. Glorious in this world are those fortunate souls who have seen the temple of Govinda in Vṛndāvana." 

And the *Skanda Purāṇa* says about Govinda-tīrtha: 

> "In Vṛndāvana, there is a sanctified place called Govindajī, which is very dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva. Lord Acyuta is present there in the form of a deity called Govindajī. Saintly persons who wish to revive their constitutional position take bath there and worship that deity."

Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you so much, Prabhus. We’re going to go back to the Vṛndāvana Research Institute today and go deeper into the scriptures, and with the help of some of my scholarly godbrothers, we’ll prepare a very nice lecture for you so you can go deeper and deeper into our understanding and appreciation. And one day, hopefully, our love for Śrīmatī Vṛndāvana. We’ll be back in a couple days. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

Kṛṣṇa.""