"*00425*.*
"### The Lord Will Embrace You! - Madhu Pandit Goswami

Welcome back to our continued series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. I am very happy to be with you today. *Viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya śrīmate...* In our last few lectures, we covered the pastimes of both Madana-mohana and Govindajī, the two of the three most prominent deities in Vṛndāvana. So, I thought today we would discuss the third deity, Gopīnātha, as well as his loving servant, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī. I found that another name of Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī is Śrī Gopīnātha. Scholars say that *adhikārī* is a formal term meaning "appointed executive," and in devotee terms, that means "an appointed servant." So, Śrī Gopīnātha Adhikārī means one who is an appointed servant of our beloved Gopīnātha.

Now, according to some accounts, it was Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī who discovered the deity of Gopīnātha 500 years ago, after he had been hidden in Vṛndāvana for well, five thousand years, like Madana-mohana and Govindajī. Of course, Gopīnātha was carved on the order of Vajranābha, the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, after the Lord had left this world, but again, he disappeared in time. Now, after Gopīnātha's discovery in Vṛndāvana five hundred years ago, Madhu Paṇḍita accepted him as his *iṣṭadeva* and worshipped him throughout the rest of his life. So, I thought it would be appropriate today to begin by learning more about Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī because, as we all know, we approach the Lord through his devotees. As Kṛṣṇa states in the *Ādi Purāṇa*: *bhakta-janāḥ pārtha na me bhaktāḥ...* "My dear Pārtha, those who say they are my devotees are not my devotees, but those who claim to be the devotees of my devotees are actually my devotees."

So, in my research for this particular lecture, I was very fortunate to actually come across the *praṇāma-mantra* of Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī. I didn't know there was a *praṇāma-mantra* for Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, but I found it in the *śāstra*. It is so beautiful: "I pay obeisances to Śrī Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, the great personality who was attached to *kṛṣṇa-prema*, who was endowed with affection as sweet as honey, and is engaged in meditations upon *rāsa-līlā* and Vṛndāvana." Such a wonderful *praṇāma-mantra*. In Kṛṣṇa-līlā, in the spiritual world, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī is the Gopī-maṇḍalī-sakhī who is part of the group of Campakalata-sakhī. However, when she appeared on this earth planet to participate in Mahāprabhu's pastimes as Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, there is no information about where he took his birth, when he took his birth, or even very much about his childhood. But we do know that he resided for some time in West Bengal—that much I could ascertain—and as a young man, he also spent time in Jagannātha Purī.

It is there that he took initiation from Gadādhara Paṇḍita, famous as a great Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scholar. Under his direction and tutelage, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī also became very learned. It is said that he mastered the eighteen thousand *ślokas* of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and consequently, like his guru, he was awarded the title of "Paṇḍita"—Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī. What is that saying? Like father, like son. When he was in Purī, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī heard about the qualities, the form, and the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Knowing very well that Kṛṣṇa always lives in Vṛndāvana, he asked his guru's permission to go there. Now, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, we hear that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had told Gadādhara Paṇḍita to stay in Purī, so he was never able to go to Vṛndāvana. But when his disciple, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, requested permission to go, he was very happy to give him that permission. With his blessings, he left for Vraja. Actually, he was a young man; I read that he was around 14 years of age when he arrived in Vṛndāvana. So, scholars say that upon arriving in Vṛndāvana, he immediately wandered through the twelve forests of Vraja, and it is described that he was expecting to see Kṛṣṇa at any moment, but "the superior principle of service and separation dictated that he would not." So, essentially what this means is that service and separation is higher than meeting Kṛṣṇa, and we’ve discussed this a number of times over the last few months; basically, that separation makes the heart grow fonder.

Because I was researching a lot, I came across two very beautiful verses that highlight this principle of serving Kṛṣṇa in separation, that it is better. The first verse I found is in *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Antya-līlā*, Text 240. It is a very, very beautiful verse; this is Rādhārāṇī speaking. She says: "Separation from Kṛṣṇa is better than meeting him. When I meet him, there is only one Kṛṣṇa, but when I am separated from him, the three worlds become filled with Kṛṣṇa." And the second verse I found is Kṛṣṇa speaking, and that is in Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's *Ānanda-candrikā* commentary to *Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi* 15.3. Kṛṣṇa is speaking: "If I had to choose between union and separation, I would prefer separation from my beloved, because in union I see her only in one place, whereas in separation, my entire universe is filled with her." So, very similar quotes, one from Rādhā and one from Kṛṣṇa, confirming that separation is higher than meeting. But of course, Kṛṣṇa is very kind to those devotees who want to be with him; no harm. Actually, those devotees who are separated, they also meet Kṛṣṇa, and the separation makes the meeting even nicer, the union. So Kṛṣṇa is very kind to those who desire to be with him. If Kṛṣṇa sees a pure devotee has such a desire, then he will make the arrangements to appear before him.

Of course, if a devotee shows more interest in material life than Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I guess you could say that devotee has to wait to see Kṛṣṇa. *Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti* says that after many, many births of purification, eventually a devotee can see me or be with me, or I am to be understood, *vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ*. Of course, if one is a little sincere, but not yet a pure devotee, we hear that sometimes Kṛṣṇa appears before such a devotee briefly to inspire him on selected occasions, to inspire him to become a pure devotee. Just like the Lord appeared to a very young Nārada Muni. Nārada Muni had left home as a five-year-old boy; he had gone to the forest to find Kṛṣṇa. He wasn't "perfected" (this is *līlā*, of course), but Kṛṣṇa appeared and then disappeared. How is that? That is nicely described in the First Canto of *Bhāgavatam*, Chapter 6, verse 21. Kṛṣṇa has appeared to Nārada, the young boy, and he is starting to disappear. So what does he say to Nārada? "Oh Nārada, I regret that during this lifetime you will not be able to see me anymore. Those who are incomplete in service and who are not completely free from all material taints can hardly see me." He was sincere, but there was something a little lacking. But Kṛṣṇa was very kind; he appeared and gave him *darśana*, but not for very long. But for a pure devotee, the Lord can appear before him at any time. In fact, we can say the Lord is always with every devotee who is wise enough to be chanting Śrī Kṛṣṇa's holy names. We may not be able to see him, but we know he is always with us because *nāma-cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ*—there is no difference between the name of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa. And Prabhupāda said poetically one time, "When you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is dancing on the tip of your tongue." He’s dancing on the tip of your tongue! So that Kṛṣṇa is always with the chanter. That was very nicely stated by the great saint Tukārām, and we should take his words to heart; it's so beautiful what he said. It’s one of my favorite statements in Kṛṣṇa consciousness:

"If you're lying down and chanting, the Lord will come and sit with you. If you're sitting and chanting, the Lord will come and stand next to you. If you're standing and chanting, the Lord will come and dance with you. If you're dancing and chanting, the Lord will embrace you." Wow! *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. Can't see him yet, but I'll keep chanting him; hopefully, one day I will, with purification.

So we are speaking about Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, who is of that caliber of pure devotee, looking everywhere for Kṛṣṇa in the 12 forests of Vṛndāvana, obviously feeling so much intense separation. So finally, Kṛṣṇa came to him. He came to him in the form of Gopīnātha. And there are actually two accounts of how the deity of Gopīnātha came to Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī. In one account, his very, very close friend in Vṛndāvana—his name was Paramānanda Bhaṭṭa or sometimes Paramānanda Gosvāmī—it is described that he found the deity, whereas in another account, we hear how Madhu Paṇḍita found Gopīnātha.

The first account describes Paramānanda Gosvāmī found the deity. So I was really curious, who is Paramānanda Gosvāmī? I had never heard very much about him. And again, so fortunate—seek and ye shall find—I came across his *praṇāma-mantra* as well. Yes, it's also from the same *śāstra*. This time, it's Text 25: *vandai śrī-paramānandaṁ bhaktācāryaṁ...* "I offer my obeisances to Śrī Paramānanda Bhaṭṭācārya, who loves *bhakti-rasa* and who bestows the feet of Rādhā-Govinda, Gaurāṅga, and Gadādhara." He bestows, he delivers, he gives the feet of Rādhā-Govinda. So I was reading that Paramānanda Gosvāmī, he was also a disciple of Gadādhara Paṇḍita—god-brothers—and there is another book I came across, an authorized book called the *Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Abhidhāna*, and therein it says that Śrī Paramānanda Bhaṭṭa resided in Vṛndāvana for a long time. And listen to this: he taught many of the *bhakti-śāstras* to our gurus, to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. What an elevated saint he must have been; he explained the *bhakti-śāstras* to Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī! That is in the scripture *Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Abhidhāna*. So, I was also reading that many scholars say that he commentated on a number of scriptures, and he is well known for a Sanskrit commentary he did on the *Kāvya-prakāśa*. The *Kāvya-prakāśa*—those of you who are scholars, you will know that that is the most celebrated book on Sanskrit poetics.

So, according to historical records, Paramānanda Gosvāmī and Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī—friends, god-brothers—they stayed together most often at Vamśīvaṭa in Vṛndāvana in their deep relationship. Of course, we know Vamśīvaṭa: Vamśīvaṭa is where Kṛṣṇa goes in the nighttime into the forest, and he plays his *veṇu*, he plays his flute, and he calls the Gopīs to come running from their homes late at night, and they have a *rāsa-līlā* dance. So Vamśīvaṭa is a very, very sacred place; that is where they lived. Now, the first version of finding the Gopīnātha deity with Paramānanda Gosvāmī is that one year, during the rainy season, the rain was so intense that the Yamunā River just swelled up and overflowed, and it forcibly uprooted the banyan tree. Because Vamśīvaṭa—*vaṭa* means banyan, actually a banyan tree; *vamśī* means flute—the "tree of the flute," literally translated. So that famous banyan tree under which Kṛṣṇa would play his flute, it became uprooted due to the flooding. So Paramānanda Gosvāmī, he took a branch of that tree—because banyan trees are very unusual, they grow up and then the branches come down and they become roots for the next tree to come up, it's a banyan tree phenomenon—so the tree had fallen over, so he took a branch and then he was going to plant that in the ground so the tree could grow again. And as he was digging the earth, lo and behold, there was Gopīnātha, after five thousand years, at Vamśīvaṭa! So he had that deity excavated, and he gave it, he entrusted the deity and the worship to his friend, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī. We read in *Upadeśāmṛta* that one of the six processes of devotional service is to exchange gifts. So what a gift he gave to his friend, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī! And as I said earlier, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī took that deity as his *iṣṭadeva*. And he eventually inspired a wealthy person to construct a temple just behind Vamśīvaṭa. I’ll tell a little bit about that very soon. So that is the first version.

Now, the second version is that, due to intense love, Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī was wandering around Vraja again, looking for Kṛṣṇa. And one day in his wanderings, he came to Vamśīvaṭa, or he came back to Vamśīvaṭa, let's say. And in his ecstasy of looking for Kṛṣṇa, he fell unconscious there at Vamśīvaṭa. And Kṛṣṇa, seeing his intense desire for *sambandha*, for union with him, for meeting him, Kṛṣṇa personally appeared before Madhu Paṇḍita. There is Kṛṣṇa, moving with his flute, and Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī asked for a benediction from the Lord; he asked that the Lord could remain in his visible form like that, in order that he could see him and be with him constantly. But it's very interesting: the Lord replied, "My dear Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, this constant *darśana* of me is not possible in Kali-yuga." It was possible in Dvāpara-yuga; even for the *asuras*, they also got to see Kṛṣṇa 5,000 years ago. But in Kali-yuga, that type of *darśana* is not possible. But don't worry, we can also have *darśana* of the Lord. *Kalau kalau nāma-rūpa kṛṣṇa-avatāra*—it's stated in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* that the incarnation of the Lord in this age is the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa *mahā-mantra*: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. And of course, the *yuga-avatārī* who gave us this chanting. So the Lord, who is there in his complete form, said to Madhu Paṇḍita, "But I will manifest before you as my *mūrti*, as my deity." And then Kṛṣṇa manifested as the Gopīnātha *mūrti*, the Gopīnātha deity. Now, some scholars say that he manifested, you know, a few meters away in the thickets, and Madhu Paṇḍita looked and then he went there and he moved the thickets, and there he was standing—Kṛṣṇa was standing. As we have seen the painting—there is a beautiful painting in Jaipur at the Gopīnātha temple of Madhu Paṇḍita looking in the forest—there, on their knees, there's Gopīnātha. So that was self-manifested; same deity, but self-manifested to Gosvāmī. What a history we have! And they often say this is the real history, and fortunately, history repeats itself, and by Śrīla Prabhupāda's grace, we are also somehow part of the Lord's modern-day pastimes, the modern-day pastimes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Now, further research: I found out that Gopīnātha's eternal identity is that of a 10-year-old boy. Now, it's very interesting how Gopīnātha got his temple. I mentioned there that the details of how he got his temple and also how Rādhārāṇī joined him—her *mūrti*, how she joined him. So first, we'll discuss how he got the temple. Historically, one of Emperor Akbar's generals—we've been speaking quite a lot about Akbar, we don't have to go into too much detail again—one of Emperor Akbar's generals was again a Rajput king or soldier; his name was Rāya Śīla Śekhāvata (it's a good name for somebody, Rāya Śīla Śekhāvata). And he was also very courageous in battle, and he won a very important battle for Emperor Akbar. So afterwards, Akbar gave him a huge amount of wealth. And he was a devotee, Rāja Śīla Śekhāvata. And on the request of Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, Rāya Śīla Śekhāvata built the first temple of Gopīnātha in Vṛndāvana, just next to Vamśīvaṭa. Now, I was reading some scholars say that Gopīnātha's temple was built before Madana-mohana, Sanātana Gosvāmī's deity, but it is commonly accepted amongst Vrajavāsī authorities that Madana-mohana's temple was the first to be completed in Vraja and then later came Gopīnātha's temple. It's just an interesting point there.

Unfortunately, some years later, as we were discussing earlier in another lecture, the Emperor Aurangzeb came to power and he destroyed the original temple of Gopīnātha. But the present temple that we see now in Vṛndāvana—because it's the tradition in Vṛndāvana amongst the *sādhus*, every morning they visit the seven principal temples in Vṛndāvana; in the evening they go back and visit those seven principal temples—Gopīnātha is one of those principal temples. So the present temple we see in Vṛndāvana was constructed a hundred years later after it was destroyed; it's also very old. And of course, during Aurangzeb's atrocities, Rādhā and Gopīnātha made their way to Jaipur in Rajasthan, where they reside today. I say they made their way because devotees took them, but that was their mercy that we could—or they could—serve them, and serve Rādhā-Gopīnātha in that way. So they are now in Jaipur, and every time we go to Jaipur with the *parikramā* party, we visit Govindajī, then we go to Gopīnātha around 8:00 in the morning, and then we go to Dāmodara, and so many different deities are there.

Now, the next question is when and how did Rādhārāṇī, her *mūrti*, join Gopīnātha in Vṛndāvana before they were moved to Jaipur? Well, it was actually Jāhnavā Mātā, the wife of Lord Nityānanda, who sent a deity of Rādhā to Vṛndāvana specifically for Gopīnātha. But it's interesting that when Jāhnavā Mātā followed that up with her first visit to Vṛndāvana and she took *darśana* of Gopīnātha, she was looking at Rādhā-Gopīnātha and she saw that the deity of Rādhārāṇī was kind of small in proportion to Gopīnātha. In her mind, she was thinking it would have been more appropriate to have sent a bigger deity, she thought, but she didn't say anything to anybody. And she went back to her quarters. That night, Gopīnātha himself appeared to her in a dream, and he agreed with her that Rādhā was too small. He said, "She looks—Rādhārāṇī looks a little, somewhat odd by my side," because he's a big deity—you see him when you go to Jaipur, he's a big deity—so he said, "Yeah, the Rādhārāṇī looks a little small." So, in the dream, Gopīnātha requested Jāhnavā Mātā to arrange for a new deity of Rādhā to be carved and to be sent. He said that that new deity could be placed on his left, where that small deity was, as usual, and the smaller deity, Rādhā, could go to the right side. So, one big Rādhā, one small Rādhā—two Rādhās! So when she woke up, Jāhnavā Mātā was a little perplexed, a little confused; she's thinking, "Two Rādhās?" But the next night, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī appeared to Jāhnavā Mātā in a dream, and she confirmed Gopīnātha's order. She told Jāhnavā Mātā not to hesitate, for it was also her desire to have a second deity installed. So Jāhnavā Mātā woke up, and immediately she began to arrange for a bigger deity of Rādhārāṇī to be made—and actually it was in Bengal—and that deity was eventually sent to Vṛndāvana and installed on Gopīnātha's left side, where Rādhārāṇī always stands. And the little deity, the *pūjārīs* placed that on Gopīnātha's right side, like that. So, in this way, two deities of Śrī Rādhā stood beside Gopīnātha, or stand beside Gopīnātha—you can see in Jaipur now. According to the book *Bhaktimālā*, which we quoted the other day, when Jāhnavā Mātā had the second deity of Rādhārāṇī placed on Kṛṣṇa's left side and the smaller deity of Rādhārāṇī went to the right side, it said that she said that the smaller deity of Rādhārāṇī was actually Anaṅga Mañjarī, Rādhārāṇī's sister in Vṛndāvana pastimes. So she said, "No, that's not Rādhā; that's Anaṅga Mañjarī." And it's interesting, because who is Anaṅga Mañjarī? Well, Jāhnavā Mātā—Jāhnavā Mātā is an incarnation of Anaṅga Mañjarī in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. Yeah, it's interesting. How do we know that Jāhnavā Mātā is Anaṅga Mañjarī in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes? Because it is said so by Kavi Karṇapūra in *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*, verse 66. He writes: "Some say that Śrīmatī Vasudhā Devī, who is the second wife of Lord Nityānanda, is the incarnation of Śrīmatī Anaṅga Mañjarī, and others say that Śrīmatī Jāhnavā Mātā is the incarnation of Anaṅga Mañjarī." Then he goes on to say: "In truth, both opinions are correct; they are both incarnations of Śrīmatī Anaṅga Mañjarī." So yeah, when you go for *darśana*, you can say, "Oh, there's two Rādhās next to Gopīnātha," or we can understand this particular part of *Bhaktimālā* where it says that as we're looking at the deity of Gopīnātha, there's a little deity on our left—on his right—and that's Anaṅga Mañjarī, and on the other side is Śrī Rādhā.

Now, Gopīnātha's name is very revealing: he is the master of the Gopīs. Gopīnātha, of which the zenith of their pastimes is the *rāsa-līlā* dance. Of course, the subject matter of *rāsa-līlā* itself is very deep, and we must approach it with caution. It is recommended to hear the first nine cantos of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, wherein we hear the greatness of the grandeur of God, the transcendental nature of God, before we enter into the Tenth Canto, and especially this part about Kṛṣṇa's pastimes as Gopīnātha with his Gopīs. We're doing that in all our centers around the world; every morning we're going through, meticulously, the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and the result is that all the dirty things in the heart are being purified so that we can properly understand what is *rāsa-līlā*. Of course, it's very interesting that even hearing *rāsa-līlā* itself is a form of purification. Yes, hearing of Kṛṣṇa's pastime of *rāsa-līlā* means that one can conquer over material desire and lust. And that's there in the *Bhāgavatam*, Tenth Canto, Chapter 33, Text 39, and I quote: "Anyone who faithfully hears or describes the Lord's playful affairs with the young Gopīs of Vṛndāvana will attain the Lord's pure devotional service; thus, he will quickly become sober and conquer lust, the disease of the heart." So it's recommended to hear the *rāsa-līlā* in a humble fashion from authoritative sources, because even that *ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam*—it cleanses the heart. So, true to his name, Gopīnātha enjoys pastimes with hundreds and thousands of Lakshmīs or Gopīs here in Vṛndāvana, and we have that famous prayer: *śrīman-rāsa-rasārambhī vamśīvaṭa-taṭa-sthitaḥ...* "Who attracts all the Gopīs with the song of his flutes and who has begun the most melodious *rāsa* dance on the banks of the river Yamunā at Vamśīvaṭa, be merciful upon us." We quote that all the time, and especially in the special ceremonies, initiations, we're doing the fire *yajñas*, marriages. So the ācāryas, they explained that verse—you could say that's almost like the *praṇāma-mantra* for... probably use the *praṇāma-mantra* for Gopīnātha. So the ācāryas have commented on it and they say that on the banks of the Yamunā in Vṛndāvana, there's a *vaṭa*—but it means banyan tree—named Vamśīvaṭa; *vamśī* is one of Kṛṣṇa's flutes, again. So on the night of the Śāradīya-rāsa, the Lord comes under this tree and plays beautiful melodies on his flute, and hearing those sounds, the Gopīs become overwhelmed with love. They are scattered all over Vṛndāvana, and they leave behind their families and run, run to Vamśīvaṭa to be with Gopīnātha. And when they arrive, he teases them; he tests them in various ways: "You know, what are you doing here in the middle of the night? You should go home," teasing them, but then he finally invites them into that epic *rāsa-līlā* dance. So the ācāryas say that since Gopīnātha has bestowed such good fortune on all these Gopīs, may he also bestow the same good fortune on all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas who worship him in the mood of amorous love, *mādhurya-bhāva*.

So we heard therein mentioned of the *rāsa* dance that takes place. Now, this is the *rāsa* dance that takes place on the full moon of the Śarat season, which means autumn. And as such, it's that particular *rāsa* dance is very much glorified, like the Mahārāsa dance. And often, devotees, they think, "Oh, there's just one *rāsa* dance, that is the *rāsa* dance, the *rāsa* dance," but actually there's many *rāsa* dances at different times of the year and different places as well. I went into it a little bit, and I learned that there's the *nitya-rāsa*—that's the *rāsa* dance that takes place every night in Vṛndāvana. There's the *vasantika-rāsa*—that takes place on Vasant Pūrṇimā; that's the spring, spring *rāsa* dance. There's the Kārttika *rāsa* dance that takes place on the full moon of the month of Kārttika. And there's the, again, the Śāradīya-rāsa—that *rāsa* dance that takes place on the full moon in the autumn. Like that, there's lots of *rāsa* dances. And a little more detail: in the spring *rāsa* dance, Rādhā disappears from Kṛṣṇa's vision, and in the autumn *rāsa* dance, Kṛṣṇa disappears from the Gopīs as well as Rādhā's vision. So, some details. So that's the... of course, so much can be said, but I'm not so qualified about *rāsa-līlā*. But there are many such sweet dealings between Gopīnātha and his Gopīs.

So many dealings! I was just reading last night before I took rest, a really very, very sweet pastime which I think it's appropriate and we can share it now. We are kind of coming to the conclusion here, so we can finish with a nice pastime, and that is: once upon a time—because Prabhupāda uses that phrase—Kṛṣṇa went with the Gopīs to a small hill. On top of the hill, there was a spring of water described as mineral water that had medicinal properties. So Kṛṣṇa decided that he would accompany the Gopīs, and they were very happy for him to accompany them to the top of that hill to get water from their water pitchers. And as the Gopīs were getting their pitchers filled with water, Kṛṣṇa said, with a little smile, "Dear girls, you all collect your water; it's taking some time, so I'm going to go for a little walk. I'm going to go for a walk. It's just, you know, you're taking... so there's so many Gopīs to fill their pitchers, but I'll return very soon, and then when you're finished, I'll walk you home." The Gopīs said, "Okay." So they are filling and filling and filling, and then, you know, when Kṛṣṇa had left, and then filling, and then when they'd finished, it took some time, they sat down to rest and just basically waited for Kṛṣṇa to come back.

So time passed, and after a while, it's described, one group—one Gopī—asked another, "Do you see him?" You know, they're looking down the road, "Do you see him? Can you hear him?" So that Gopī said, "No, I don't see anything, I don't hear anything." So they all busied themselves for a while. Then after a while, another Gopī asked her friend, "Is Kṛṣṇa coming?" Her friend looked down the road again, "No." So more time passed, quite a lot of time passed actually, and all the Gopīs started getting restless. Because as we know, a moment away from Kṛṣṇa is like a millennium of time for them. So, in their restlessness, one Gopī, she rose to her feet, it's described. She pointed down the road; she said, "I think I see him coming, I think I see him coming." Another Gopī looked, and she said, "That's just a branch hanging over the road, moving in the wind." They're becoming mad in separation from Kṛṣṇa, transcendental madness. A few minutes later, another Gopī, she rose to her feet, it's described; she pointed down the road, she said, "That's Kṛṣṇa for sure, I see him coming!" But when the other Gopīs looked, they answered, "You silly girl, that's a peacock crossing the road." So time, you know, again and again, it's described that the Gopīs, they thought they saw Kṛṣṇa coming, but they were always disappointed because he wasn't coming. So the *grantha* described, they sank deeper and deeper into sadness; they became desperate, and they were discussing amongst themselves that maybe Kṛṣṇa was not going to come back, maybe he's gone somewhere else to be with some other Gopīs. So the ācāryas write at that time, "Their separation and anticipation to see him reached such a height that it pushed the Gopīs into a state of ecstasy in which they all envisioned Kṛṣṇa." They all envisioned Kṛṣṇa. And it's described that at one point all of them, simultaneously, they had a vision of Kṛṣṇa. It wasn't Kṛṣṇa, but it was in their minds, or whether they actually saw a vision of Kṛṣṇa, but all together at the same time—so interesting. And when they saw Kṛṣṇa standing there before them (not really, because he's on a walk, but they saw the vision), they all turned away from him, from the vision, and they covered their faces with their veils. It's described, a very beautiful scene: they're all standing around, they're in a circle around their "imaginary" Kṛṣṇa, and their backs were turned to him, and their necks were slightly bent, and they were sometimes looking at the vision and making remarks like, "Kṛṣṇa, why did you say you were gonna—you were coming right back? You were gone such a long time!" And they're making all these remarks. And it's also described that to this vision, their eyes were shooting angry arrows for him being so late.

So then, after some time, Kṛṣṇa actually came back; he appeared, you know, a few meters away. But it's described the Gopīs were too absorbed in their ecstatic vision of him to notice that the real Kṛṣṇa was there. So Kṛṣṇa, kind of, took in the scene, and he kind of wanted to, like, "Oh, this is interesting." So he came a little bit closer and he witnessed their ecstasy, just standing a few meters away, listening to one Gopī after another chastising the vision of him for keeping them waiting for so long. And it's described that the Gopīs' every word was as sweet as nectar to Kṛṣṇa's ears. But finally, he had drunk enough of the girls' ecstatic chastisement, so he took his flute and to break their trance, he played his flute—beautiful song on his flute—and it brought them back, brought their attention back to him standing there with his flute, Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of their hearts. And what did they see? How did they see Kṛṣṇa? They saw Kṛṣṇa's Gopīnātha standing under a banyan tree playing his flute, his body bent in three places, garlanded with a *vaijayantī* garland—it means five types of flowers, going all the way down to his knees—surrounded by bumblebees tasting the sweet nectar of that garland, his lips red like *bimbi* fruits, his lotus eyes extending all the way to his ears, his black silky hair curling down with the *vaijayantī* garland and the beautiful jewel on his chest and peacock feather in his hair. They saw him as Gopīnātha at Vamśīvaṭa, and they all stated in unison, "There's the beloved Lord of our lives, our *prāṇa-vallabha*." Like that. So that's the pastime, simple but very, very sweet. This is Vraja. So you know, that's what I found in my research over the last few days about Gopīnātha, about Vamśīvaṭa, about Madhu Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, about Paramānanda Gosvāmī, etc. I'm happy to have shared that with you.

And I think it would be most appropriate today to finish with a beautiful song by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. The song is very popular in our International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness: "Gopīnātha, Gopīnātha..." The first time I heard "Gopīnātha" was from Viṣṇujana Mahārāja in the early days of the movement. I think there's a recording; he sings it with so much devotion. And actually, this song, this prayer by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, is in the mood of a *sādhaka*, an aspiring devotee, aspiring to be one day one of Gopīnātha's Gopīs. We've been hearing about all the *nitya-gopīs* and their dealings with Gopīnātha, but here is a song of a *sādhaka* desiring to eventually come to that stage. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is singing it in that mood, and it's very, very beautiful. So let's purify our hearts by hearing this song from the heart of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura:

"O Gopīnātha, Lord of the Gopīs, please hear my request. I am a wicked materialist, always addicted to worldly desires, and I possess no good qualities. O Gopīnātha, you are my only hope, and therefore I have taken shelter at your lotus feet; I am now your eternal servant. O Gopīnātha, how will you purify me? I do not know what is devotion, and my materialistic mind is always absorbed in fruitive work. I have fallen into this dark and perilous worldly existence. O Gopīnātha, everything here is your illusory energy; I have no strength or transcendental knowledge, and this body of mine is not free from the control of material nature. O Gopīnātha, the sinner who is weeping and weeping begs for an eternal place at your divine feet. Please give him your mercy. O Gopīnātha, you are able to do anything, and therefore you have the power to deliver all sinners, and who is a greater sinner than myself? O Gopīnātha, you are the ocean of mercy; having come into this material world, you expand your divine pastimes for the sake of the fallen, conditioned souls. O Gopīnātha, I am so sinful that although all the demons attained your lotus feet, Bhaktivinoda has remained in worldly existence."

All glories! Thank you, thank you, thank you again for this opportunity. I really enjoyed the research this time, especially finding those two *praṇāma-mantras*; that was like, wow, the highlight of my week. And yes, we'll continue with our discussions; we'll keep going deeper, led by the hand of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the *dhāma*, into Śrī Vṛndāvana-maṇḍala. So I'll see you and be with you in a couple of days from now with another subject. Haven't decided yet; I just have to kind of sit back and think about what we'll discuss, but there's a lot to discuss. *Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya!* Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""