"*00254*.*
"### The Trick of Gopīnātha - Kārtika Parikramā 2025

Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jaya Advaita Candra, Jaya Gaura Bhaktavṛnda. Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jaya Advaita Candra, Jaya Gaura Bhaktavṛnda. Jaya Jaya Śrī Caitanya, Jaya Nityānanda. Jaya Advaita Candra, Jaya Gaura Bhaktavṛnda.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Dear devotees, it is very natural that today we would like to talk about the life and activities of Mādhavendra Purī. This morning, we had a very wonderful opportunity to visit the samādhi of Mādhavendra Purī and meet this transcendental Bābājī there. He was such a man of the orchestra, because he sang, played the mṛdaṅga, karatālas, and bells all at the same time. He performed his own kīrtana, and he really wanted to make Mādhavendra Purī famous. This pujārī has served there for 43 years, and he definitely enjoys being in the company of devotees. He patted us with his transcendental wand and said, "Rādhā, Rādhā." I was very glad to see everyone.

We also had the amazing opportunity to receive darśana of Kṣīracora Gopīnātha. This is one of the deities with whom Mādhavendra Purī had a secret history. Today we will tell the story of these two deities that we saw there. They were very dear to him. Mādhavendra Purī lived about 600 years ago, approximately 100 years before Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He was a disciple of Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha, an authoritative guru from our lineage.

Imagine, Mādhavendra Purī was such a great personality that he initiated Lord Nityānanda and also Advaitācārya while he was traveling. It is also very important that he was the spiritual teacher of Īśvara Purī, and later Īśvara Purī became the spiritual teacher of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu himself. Just imagine how important this personality of Mādhavendra Purī is in our sampradāya. The Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā, in the third verse, describes him as the kalpavṛkṣa tree. This is a wonderful verse which is translated as follows: "Lakṣmīpati’s disciple was Mādhavendra, who preached bhakti. He was the incarnation of the kalpavṛkṣa tree of Vraja. He possessed the fruits of dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and mādhurya-rasa." In his verse, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura also confirms that he was none other than the kalpavṛkṣa, as written in the Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā: "Mādhavendra, in his previous incarnation, was a wish-fulfilling tree in Vṛndāvana for Lord Hari."

These are special places, and they have their own loving atmosphere. You know, it is not easy to enter these places; sometimes people cannot go, but the devotees can. Mādhavendra Purī spoke about Vraja-bhakti even before the Lord appeared in this society. Why? Because it was he who was the kalpavṛkṣa tree that grew in Nidhivana. This is the secret place of the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, where not all sakhīs go, only some mañjarīs. He was a tree there, so he saw everything as it happened.

Don't think of it as a simple tree, because trees in the material world are influenced by the material modes. Everyone in Śrī Vṛndāvanadhāma is full of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Even the land is sacred. In Vṛndāvana, you can pray even to the raja (dust). This is the dust that gives you life in Vṛndāvana, just like those personalities like Yamunā Devī or Gopīśvara Mahādeva, who can bless you. This dust is cintāmaṇi. And what can we say about the dust when the trees also bless? In one verse, we hear about both the ardor of cintāmaṇi and the kalpavṛkṣa, because they can fulfill your sincere desires to serve the Divine Couple. 

Kṛṣṇa consciousness is everything that is related to devotional service. In order to serve Hari, guru, and Vaiṣṇavas, we require certain things. If you want to cook something, you go to the desire tree and say, "My dear desire tree, I need a pot, a pan, a spoon, some carrots, some apples." In the material world, we have to work to gain these things, but in the spiritual world, if we want to serve the Divine Couple, we simply go to the kalpavṛkṣa tree and ask for what is needed. These kalpavṛkṣa trees are everywhere in Vraja.

So that we do not treat Mādhavendra Purī as a simple kalpavṛkṣa tree, we have confirmation of this from the sacred scriptures: "Mādhavendra Purī's body was permeated with divine love, as was the body of all those who followed him. He tasted nothing but the rasa of the taste of love for Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, his body became the place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's pastimes" (Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 9.15). Mādhavendra Purī is a great personality who introduced everyone to amala-bhakti, the selfless love of the cowherd girls of Vraja towards the Lord.

In the material world, love comes down to "what is mine." In the spiritual world, it is selfless, pure love concentrated on Kṛṣṇa. They want everything for Him. A few years ago, I listened to a lecture by Śrīla Prabhupāda on tape where he talked about different levels of devotion. Some devotees want to attain the same form as the Lord; they usually go to Vaikuṇṭha. He was describing all these different levels, and then suddenly he stopped and said that the gopīs don’t need anything from Kṛṣṇa. After that, he started crying. This lecture lasted only six minutes. Vaikuṇṭha is the official abode of the Lord, as Śrīla Prabhupāda described. Everyone there worships the Lord in aiśvarya-bhāva—with respect and awe in His splendor. Kṛṣṇa also likes this, otherwise it would not exist.

Vaikuṇṭha is translated as "a place where there are no worries." But at the top of the spiritual world, there is such a small planet: Vṛndāvana-Goloka. There, the Lord can be your best friend or a child, because these are relationships. Mādhavendra Purī was the one who introduced everyone to this planet, Goloka, because it is there that one can worship the Lord in the form of a child, a friend, or even a lover. Everyone used to worship the Lord only with reverence and awe. 

After this, the Lord of Vṛndāvana came and began to glorify this particular rasa. He said that higher than aiśvarya-rasa is pure devotion to the Lord. Kṛṣṇa accepts the love of the people of Vaikuṇṭha, but He is more attracted to the love of the Vrajabāsīs. It is very important to mention what Mādhavendra preached. He is the same kalpavṛkṣa tree that came here, so merciful that, being present at the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, he came to share this taste with everyone. 

Kṛṣṇa is certainly happiest in Goloka. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, there is a very famous verse where Kṛṣṇa says: "The whole universe is permeated with the consciousness of My greatness, but love weakened by reverent awe of Me does not bring Me satisfaction." In the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, this is stated even more clearly: "Of all the full-fledged devotees of the different avatars, those hearts that are stolen by Govinda are the highest because they are not attracted even by the mercy of the Lord of the Goddess of Fortune, Nārāyaṇa." 

This is a philosophical explanation. I hope you understood something of this. Remember, next time we sing that we are going back to Godhead, that we are going to Goloka, we will fly through Svargaloka, bow down, go to Vaikuṇṭha, fly past, bow down again, and reach Goloka. 

*Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.*

Since you and I are all products of this Kali-yuga, for us the only way to return to Goloka is to chant Harināma-saṅkīrtana. A very important contribution of Mādhavendra Purī is that he discovered the deity of Gopāla. I found that in the Garga-saṁhitā, there is a prediction that the deity of Gopāla would be found in due time. Now He is called Nāthajī, and He is worshipped in Nāthadvāra. The Garga-saṁhitā states:

"O King, after 4,108 years from the beginning of Kali-yuga, in the presence of everyone, Lord Kṛṣṇa will manifest from the cave on Govardhana Hill. He will appear and manifest His transcendental form on the Śṛṅgāra-maṇḍala. O King, the saintly devotees will call this form Lord Śrīnāthajī. He always enjoys pastimes on Govardhana Hill."

One day, Mādhavendra Purī traveled a lot and came to Śrī Vṛndāvanadhāma. While performing parikramā, he became tired and sat down to rest under a tree near Govinda-kuṇḍa, not far from Govardhana. Suddenly, an attractive young man appeared and said, "O Bābā, you seem to be hungry. I live in a village nearby; no one in my village is starving. The women from this village saw you and asked me to bring you milk. Please take this milk. Now it's time for me to go feed the cows, but I will come back to take the jug from you."

Then the boy disappeared. Mādhavendra Purī wondered, "What just happened? What is really going on?" The moment he drank the milk, wonderful transcendental changes occurred in his body. His hair stood on end, his voice trembled, his heart beat rapidly, and he sweated intensely. He fell asleep and had an amazing dream. The shepherd boy came to him, took his hand, and led him into the bushes near Govinda-kuṇḍa. The boy said, "My dear devotee, my name is Gopāla. I am the owner of this whole village. Unfortunately, I am here in these bushes, suffering from the heat, the rain, and the thorny bushes. Please wake up, take me out of here, and build a beautiful temple for me on Govardhana Hill. I was worshipped by Vajranābha, the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa, but when the Muslim invaders came, he hid me in these bushes and ran away. Bābā, take me out. Bathe me with the sacred waters of Govinda-kuṇḍa. I have been watching you for many days, and I will accept your service because you have ecstatic love for me. Thanks to you, all the fallen souls of this world will be liberated."

The moment I first heard this story, I thought of the story that happened in modern times with Śrīla Prabhupāda. When he was a small boy, his father gave him a small deity of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. He played with them, fed them, and worshipped them. When he became a teenager and went to college, he couldn't worship them properly, so he put them in a box and locked them in a closet. One day, he had a dream: his deities came to him and said, "Abhay, why have you locked us in this box? We are looking forward to your loving service." He immediately woke up and began worshipping them, despite his difficult college schedule. 

When Mādhavendra Purī woke up, he gathered the locals, went to the place shown in the dream, and found Śrīnāthajī. Mādhavendra installed the deity with great splendor, massaging the Lord with sandalwood oil and performing abhiṣeka with ghee, yogurt, milk, and honey. When the locals saw the ceremony, it reminded them of the Annakūṭa ceremony held for Kṛṣṇa 5,000 years ago. 

After two years, Gopāla appeared in a dream to Mādhavendra again: "My dear Mādhavendra, I was sitting in the bushes and was so hot until you saved me. Even though you held a magnificent installation, I don't feel completely cooled down. Please go to Jagannātha Purī and bring me cooling, first-class sandalwood."

Mādhavendra Purī set out on his journey to Jagannātha Purī barefoot. It was an example of how a devotee is ready to perform the most difficult service if it pleases the Lord. When he arrived, he learned of an attractive deity named Gopīnātha. This deity was carved by Lord Rāmacandra Himself with an arrow to offer to Sītā. Seeing this deity, Mādhavendra Purī began to dance and chant in ecstasy. He asked the pujārī, "What do you feed Him? How do you worship Him?" He learned that sweet rice (kṣīra) was offered every day—a delicacy known as *amṛta-keli*, the highest nectar.

Mādhavendra Purī thought, "If I could just taste a little bit of this sweet rice, I would understand the recipe and be able to cook it for my Gopāla." Then, he immediately condemned himself: "I am sinful because I wanted to taste what the Lord Himself has not yet tasted." He left the temple, feeling ashamed. 

The pujārī offered the sweet rice to the deity and then took a nap. In a dream, Gopīnātha came to him and said, "I took and hid a pot behind the canopy for my devotee, Mādhavendra. Wake up right now and give it to him." The pujārī woke up, went behind the altar, and found the pot hidden there. Once again, Kṛṣṇa lived up to His name: *Cora* (thief). He is a transcendental thief because He gives pleasure to His devotees. 

The pujārī ran out shouting, "O Mādhavendra Purī, O greatest of all devotees, Gopīnātha stole this sweet rice for you!" Mādhavendra Purī was ashamed, but the whole city learned of his fame. He burst into tears of emotion and ate the rice. After finishing, he washed the pot, crushed it into fine dust, tied the powder in a cloth, and drank a little of it every day while meditating on the story of Kṣīracora Gopīnātha, crying from love.

Mādhavendra Purī continued his journey to Jagannātha Purī to collect sandalwood. Because of his reputation, the king of the place did everything to collect sandalwood and camphor for him. He collected about 82 pounds of sandalwood. As he traveled back with his assistants, he had a third dream. Gopāla told him, "My dear Mādhavendra, it is very difficult to travel with such a heavy load to Vṛndāvana. I and Gopīnātha are the same person. If you offer this sandalwood and camphor to Śrī Kṣīracora Gopīnātha here, I will feel great pleasure in Vṛndāvana."

To this day, they have a festival where Gopīnātha, Madana-mohana, and Govinda smear their bodies with this sandalwood. I am telling you about the confidential pastimes of the devotee and the deity. 

Finally, I want to tell you about the most secret story. Mādhavendra Purī experienced *vipralambha-bhāva*, great separation from the Lord. He felt exactly what the gopīs experienced when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana with Akrūra. One worthless servant/disciple scolded his Guru Mahārāja, saying, "Why are you grieving? You should be serious and focused." He was expelled because he did not understand the difference between spiritual suffering and material suffering. But another disciple, Īśvara Purī, understood his spiritual teacher's state of mind. He took full care of him—cleaning him, feeding him, and singing poems for him. Because Īśvara Purī understood his Guru's mentality, he was blessed, and subsequently, Īśvara Purī received the opportunity to initiate Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu himself. 

As Mādhavendra Purī was leaving his body, he repeated a verse over and over. We find this in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Antya-līlā 4.197). If you want to memorize a verse, I recommend this one. It is said that this poem is the best among all the works of rasika-vaiṣṇavas, just as the Kaustubha stone is the best:

*ayi dīna-dayārdra nātha he*
*mathurā-nātha kadāvalokyase*
*hṛdayaṁ tvad-aloka-kātaraṁ*
*dayita bhramyati kiṁ karavāṇy aham*

"O most merciful Lord, O master of Mathurā, when will I see You again? Because I do not see You, my heart has become restless. O my beloved, what shall I do now?"""