So once again, I have some great mercy. I'm standing at the very spot that our beloved spiritual master, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who was a student at that time in history, he came on the invitation of a friend to hear a sadhu speak.

At that time, Prabhupāda was a little disillusioned with the sadhus, because many times they were acting like beggars and not acting appropriately.

He'd seen that when his father invited a sadhu to come to their home, but he said, "Okay, I'll come if you force me to come." Fortunately, that friend brought him here, and this is the sitting place of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.

He would give lectures here at Ultadanga. Um, his room is over there, his bedroom, so he had to walk from there and sit here and speak. And, uh, Prabhupāda came in with the tradition, you offer obeisances to a sannyasi.

He paid obeisances. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura saw him even before Prabhupāda got up from his obeisances.

He said, "You look like an intelligent young man. Why don't you spread the message of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the Western countries?" And that instruction sat in Prabhupāda's heart for some time.

He, he said that like that, he kept that instruction in his heart. He was later married, he had a family, but he was always meditating on this divine instruction from his spiritual master, and eventually, he acted on that instruction to, uh, spread Krishna Consciousness all over the world.

So that's the history. The history, Prabhupāda waited until it was the opportune time.

And fortunately, many of us were born in that time frame. We had the opportunity to meet Śrīla Prabhupāda, become his disciples, and serve his mission, which was the mission of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, which was the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu all the way back to Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

We are, uh, certainly blessed, and I feel very blessed to be standing here today at this very spot. So I'm going to take the opportunity to offer my obeisances to this spot, to my spiritual master, and to... Hare Krishna.

I'm standing in the museum part of this building called Ultadanga, which is where Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura started his Gauḍīya mission in earnest. Of course, we know he was born in in Puri in Jagannāth Puri, and we know the pastime where his mother took him, uh, onto the street with the Ratha Yātrā cart passed by.

The cart stopped because she was the wife of Mādhavendra Puri, who was a magistrate there, and the garland from Lord Jagannātha fell around the baby's neck, giving indication that he was a divine personality. He lived in, uh, Nadia in Mayapur for some time, but after the departure of his father, he came here to Kolkata, a big city, to preach Krishna Consciousness.

And this building was the first, you could say, established, um, temple or preaching center for Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura here. He, um, actually, he purchased a printing press from America. It came all the way from America. I was surprised to hear that it was the top technology in those days.

Came here, and he started printing, um, his literature, his magazines, etcetera, etcetera. So this is another very emotional experience for us. This is another foundation for, um, the Krishna Conscious movement that eventually spread, uh, throughout the world.

Um, it's been renovated very nicely by our, our ISKCON devotees here in Kolkata. I saw the photos before, it's pretty much of a ramshackle place through the years. It changed hands many times, but, um, they've done a very beautiful, amazing, um, service in renovating.

Everyone who comes to India should come to Kolkata and visit this historic place. The mission stayed here for about 10 or 11 years, and then moved to Bagbazar, another building that was actually, uh, built by a wealthy disciple of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.

He actually oversaw the entire construction. There's another history there. We'll talk about that when we go. But please come here and see all these beautiful photos and related, um, articles etcetera, originally from the preaching in those early days. All glories to all glories to...