"*00513*.*
"Very dear devotees, welcome back to our continued series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Vande ‘haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca...* So today, here in Vṛndāvana, we are celebrating Govardhana-pūjā, so I thought it best to share some Govardhana-līlā with all of you. Of course, as we know, it is a very vast subject matter, some of which we covered in last year's lectures, so I thought today we take a fresh look at a certain portion of Govardhana-līlā, and that is the part of the pastime where Lord Indra, angry at the Vrajabāsīs for worshipping Govardhana Hill on Kṛṣṇa's advice rather than him, sent his Saṁvartaka clouds to devastate Vraja. Prabhupāda describes these Saṁvartaka clouds as the clouds of universal destruction, so we can just imagine how powerful they are; they were meant to destroy the small village of Vṛndāvana.

The scriptures describe that, unable to find shelter when Indra's clouds began to inundate Vṛndāvana, the animals and birds, as well as the trees and creepers on Govardhana Hill, were all seemingly put into great distress. Disturbed by the excessive wind, rain, and hail, animals like deer, tigers, and rabbits all crammed together into the caves of Govardhana Hill, and once inside, they shivered side by side in the cold. The water that was cascading down the slopes of Govardhana Hill soon flooded those caves and forced all the creatures huddled in there, including snakes, to run or slither out into the storm. There, all the animals gathered and took shelter under massive trees.

Upon whose branches, it is written, peacocks and doves were clinging desperately for their lives. But soon, the strong winds created by these clouds uprooted those trees, leaving everyone without shelter. When the birds tried to fly away, they were struck to the ground by the heavy rain. And "lesser" creatures like bees hid in their hives, and butterflies hung onto the underside of leaves; soon they too—the bees and the butterflies—were cast into the merciless elements, their refuges unable to withstand the rage of Indra. Now, to untrained eyes, these animals, insects, birds, etc., appear to perhaps be ignorant creatures, but we know in reality they are all enlightened souls. They are pure devotees of the Lord who appear in those particular forms to please Kṛṣṇa in every way. The various details of Vṛndāvana are also residents of Vraja, and we must remember that they had seen and even participated in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, as He, for example, herded cows on the slopes of Govardhana Hill. They are no ordinary living entities. Naturally, then, in distress, they too thought of Kṛṣṇa, and they prayed to Him in their own ways. Thus, they also took complete shelter of the Lord, as do all devotees when faced with great danger. Although the roar of the wind drowned out these animals', insects', and birds' helpless cries, the ācāryas say that those cries did not go unheard; despite the loud wind, the ācāryas say Kṛṣṇa never forgets the service of even the slightest insects of Vraja. So, He heard them. I was reading that in a letter to Karandhara Dāsa on November 30, 1970, Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote, "Kṛṣṇa never forgets the service rendered to Him by the devotee, and once tasting the nectar of devotional service to the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is not possible for the devotee to forget Him. Love is reciprocal."

Now, the ācāryas also say that the heavy rain and strong winds appeared to cause distress to Govardhana himself, but unlike the Vrajabāsīs taking shelter of him, Girirāja was aware of the higher purpose of this pastime: to bring everyone closer to Kṛṣṇa. And as the devastation continued, Girirāja recalled a prophecy made by Hanumān, who once carried Govardhana on a journey from the Himalayan Mountains in Tretā-yuga. So, Hanumān at that time had told him, "Because you are so desirous of divine service, when the Lord appears in the next age, which would be Dvāpara-yuga, as a cowherd boy in Vraja, you will become an umbrella to protect Him and His associates from Indra's wrath."

Because you are so desirous of divine service, you will get the service. And that prophecy, as we know, held true. Just as Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva quickly came to the rescue of helpless Prahlāda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa soon came to protect Vṛndāvana's inhabitants from the torrents of rain, wind, and thunderbolts sent by Indra by lifting Govardhana Hill. Now, it is written that when Kṛṣṇa first touched Govardhana Hill with His left hand, a current of divine ecstasy surged through the mountain, electrifying all the distressed insects, plants, birds, and animals as well. And that spiritual force made all of Indra's missiles—meaning his thunderbolts—feel like flower petals to Girirāja. We were saying Girirāja appeared in distress, but when Indra threw these thunderbolts, they felt like flower petals bouncing off his body.

And they concluded—I will quote them—"From the very moment Kṛṣṇa raised Govardhana Hill until the very moment Kṛṣṇa put him back in place, Girirāja actually felt not the slightest inconvenience." In fact, neither Govardhana Hill nor those under him, the ācāryas conclude, suffered in the least as they all sat atop Kṛṣṇa's little finger. Under the shelter of Govardhana Hill, no one felt any distress because Girirāja actually had expanded himself to a very large size to protect those under the hill. The ācāryas say a part of him was above the clouds of destruction, and as such, the birds, deer, wild boars, and other animals—some of them climbed to the peaks of Govardhana Hill and felt great satisfaction, basking in the heat of the sun. So, some were on the hill, some were under the hill, but no distress. And besides that, other animals by this time crawled into the now dry caves of Govardhana and they took shelter there. Now, there were a few times, of course, when we hear in *Nectar of Devotion*, when Govardhana wavered a little bit while resting upon Kṛṣṇa's hand, and I was reading that during those times, one could actually see a few animals jump down from Govardhana Hill to join Kṛṣṇa and the Vrajabāsīs on the ground. And there it is written that not only did these animals not feel any distress or fear by jumping off of Girirāja, but by Kṛṣṇa's arrangement, when they hit the ground next to Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, they tasted the highest ecstasy. 

So much nice detail! Now, at one point, Indradeva—who is of course an interlocutor giving all these orders—sent his scouts to assess the damage that he had caused in Vṛndāvana. But when those scouts returned, Indra was shocked to hear that his efforts, the ācāryas say, "had not displaced even a single leaf from the most insignificant creeper." I like that. All that he had done had not displaced even a single leaf from the most insignificant creeper! So, he continued with his efforts to destroy Vṛndāvana with increased determination. We read again and again, day after day—actually for seven consecutive days—each time he was unsuccessful. Now, out of fear for their master Indra, the Saṁvartaka clouds, their winds blew at the speed of the mind. Some of you may have experienced a tornado or a hurricane, but what is a wind that blows at the speed of the mind? So, these Saṁvartaka clouds are servants of Indra; they are doing their best to desperately dislodge Govardhana Hill from Kṛṣṇa's hand, but Girirāja stood firm, and these clouds became more and more fatigued and dispirited by their futile efforts.

So finally, one of the clouds went back to Indra's abode and said to Indra, "Oh King of Devaloka, we mistakenly thought that the cowherd people would perish in our attack, but they have not. We thought they would perish, but they are all there." So, at that point, Indra kind of lost it and he shouted, "Long ago, I cut off the wings of every mountain, but it seems that this Govardhana's wings sprout again and again. Each time he has become so arrogant, but I will teach him! With a flaming thunderbolt, I will destroy him and all the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana." Now, it is described he picked up his main weapon, his invincible thunderbolt.

And he foolishly threw it at Vraja, but again, he was told that his assault had failed. And at this point, you could say his heart boiled with anger, and he picked up one thunderbolt after another and threw it. And after some time, he was confident that he was successful, so he said, "Scouts, go to Vṛndāvana and bring me back a good report." So they went and they came back, and what was their report? Well, I'll recite it to you; it's really interesting. They reported to Indra, "Oh master of the demigods, we watched as your powerful lightning bolts struck Vṛndāvana, but their cumulative effect could not cause one leaf to fall from the ground or give trouble to a single ant on Govardhana Hill. The creatures on the mountainside remain completely undisturbed. As for the people staying beneath Govardhana, we have witnessed them being tossed by the playful, glistening waves of bliss emanating from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Indra, the word 'suffering' means nothing to them."

Now, at that point, unknown to Indradeva, the ācāryas say that Kṛṣṇa let out a laugh that charmed the Vrajabāsīs—a laugh that charmed the Vrajabāsīs—and He decided He had enough of Indra's foolishness. So, that very moment, simply by the power of His will, Kṛṣṇa paralyzed Indra's arm and froze those thunderbolts that he was throwing in midair. At the same time, Indra immobilized those Saṁvartaka clouds and winds that were circling Vṛndāvana. Then Kṛṣṇa caused—this is really nice—then Kṛṣṇa caused Indradeva to go into a trance. And in that dreamlike state, it is described, Indra saw Kṛṣṇa seated upon a thousand-petaled lotus, dressed as a cowherd boy and ornamented with *śṛṅgāra* with various jewels and garlands, and Kṛṣṇa was holding a flute in His hands. Now, that vision of Kṛṣṇa's form destroyed the ignorance in Indra's heart. We need the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas, the guru; we need Kṛṣṇa's mercy to become purified and awaken our love. He plays a very integral role in our evolution in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, seeing that form of Kṛṣṇa, all the ignorance in the heart of Indra was dissipated, and interestingly, he was able to remember a prayer he had received from his spiritual master, the spiritual master of the *devas*. And with his voice shaking, he stood before Kṛṣṇa and recited this prayer. It is actually quite a long prayer. I'd like to recite a few of those parts because they are just so significant, so wonderful. So here we go. Indra, his voice is shaking, he has realized his foolishness, he realized who Kṛṣṇa is, he is repentant, and what comes from his mouth is very significant:

"O my Lord, O indestructible and eternal, O form of pure goodness, always free of the material modes of nature, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You." The opening prayer. "In Satya-yuga, You appear with a white complexion, which stands for purity and truth; in Tretā-yuga, Your complexion is reddish like saffron; and in Kali-yuga, it is golden, the color of love for You. And in this Dvāpara age, Your bluish-black complexion reflects the loving feelings for You that the Gopīs have concealed in their hearts. Thus, I bow to You, my Lord Kṛṣṇa, son of Nanda and Yaśodā."

"With the artistic sound of Your flute's melodies and Your indescribable beauty, You steal away the hearts of the Gopīs and make Yourself dear to Śrī Rādhā, than many millions of our own lives. You are self-satisfied, yet You delight in reciprocating the love of Your devotees by indulging in unique, human-like pastimes in Your original abode of Vṛndāvana, where many white cows reside. In these pastimes, You sometimes comb Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's hair, lacquer her feet, eat the betel leaf already chewed by her, and sometimes You rest with her in a secluded grove. Sometimes You play water sports with Śrī Rādhā, stare at her as she casts sidelong glances Your way, and sometimes You decorate her with flower garlands You yourself have strung. Sometimes You stroll through the gardens of Vṛndāvana with the Gopīs, accept food offered to You by the wives of the brāhmaṇas, and occasionally eat *tāla* fruit with Your cowherd boyfriends. Sometimes You steal the garments of the unmarried cowherd girls, call the cows and cowherd boys on Your flute, and You regularly sing beautiful songs in the company of Your friends. O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O You who engage in these and many other pastimes throughout eternity, I, Your humble servant, offer You my respectful obeisances again and again."

We have to say, *Indradeva kī jaya!* At that point, this beautiful phrase: then, filled with remorse and free of his pride but weighed down by hundreds of sorrows, the ācāryas say Indra boarded a celestial airplane and headed back to his abode. But when he got there, I was reading that he looked around and he said, "Now my home looks like hell." Why? Because, "I wanted to make Vṛndāvana suffer, but I only brought suffering upon myself. I tried to drown Nanda Mahārāja's cows, but now I am drowning in my own sins. I hurled thunderbolts at Govardhana Hill, but I may as well have hurled them at my own head, for whoever troubles Kṛṣṇa's devotees in any way finds his future replete with miseries."

So, as we know, later Indra would return to true Vṛndāvana and ask forgiveness for his sins—that is another episode, it's a whole lecture in itself—but back in Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa told the men of Vraja, "My dear cowherd men, the wind and rain have stopped. You may now return to your homes with your wives, children, and possessions." And the ācāryas say that in order to reinforce the Vrajabāsīs' faith in Girirāja, Kṛṣṇa Himself raised His voice and He said, "All glories to our savior Govardhana Hill! All glories to our savior Govardhana Hill! All glories to our savior Govardhana Hill!" And as the Vrajabāsīs repeatedly replied or shouted, "Girirāja kī jaya! Girirāja kī jaya!" it is described that animals left their shelters and happily frolicked about; bent-over trees righted themselves; rivers began flowing peacefully and the winds blew gently; muddy roads and passages quickly dried; and the air filled with the sounds of those singing birds and those buzzing bees. They made it—the singing birds and the buzzing bees—by Kṛṣṇa's mercy, they made it and they were singing and buzzing. They were safe in their service to Vraja, and all the Vrajabāsīs were relieved to find that Vṛndāvana had been restored to its full and usual beauty. Nothing was destroyed; everything was as it was. *Ananda-buddhi-vardhanam*—we know in Kṛṣṇa consciousness everything is increasingly increasing. The beauty of Vṛndāvana had been restored and it was increasing before their eyes.

And as they left for their homes, the Vrajabāsīs were singing about the glories of Govardhana Hill, and it's written that as Śrī Rādhā and her friends passed by Kṛṣṇa, they glanced at Him and the effulgence of their bodies transformed Kṛṣṇa's blackish complexion into the color of molten gold. The effulgence of their bodies as they passed by transformed Kṛṣṇa's blackish complexion into the color of molten gold. This phenomenon confused all the other Vrajabāsīs, like, "What is going on?" But after the Gopīs had passed by, Kṛṣṇa's dark complexion returned, and the Vrajabāsīs could only conclude that their eyes had played tricks on them. Now, when the cowherd boys passed by Kṛṣṇa, they said, "Dear friend Kṛṣṇa, we feel so distressed that You have been inconvenienced by having to hold up that mountain for so long. Why didn't You let Sudāmā hold it for a while?" So Kṛṣṇa replied, "My dear friends, this whole adventure has not been the slightest inconvenience for me." And then, overcome by ecstasy, the cowherd boy Raktaka grabbed his friend Rāsada's hands and said, "Oh my friend, what can I say? I am overwhelmed by ecstasy because of Kṛṣṇa's lifting Govardhana Hill!"

So the ācāryas reveal that the next morning Kṛṣṇa enjoyed bathing in the Yamunā, and the Gopīs had also gone to bathe at the same time, but they purposefully bathed downstream from Kṛṣṇa. Why? In the hopes that the same water that had washed His body would now flow by and touch theirs. And later I read, when later that day Kṛṣṇa and His friends went to have a feast at Kṛṣṇa's cousin-sister's house in Sāhāru, the Gopīs also went. Why? They hoped to strike up a friendship with Kṛṣṇa's cousins with the sole desire that they could come closer to the love of their life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In these and other ways, life returned to normal in Vṛndāvana, although you could say seers of the truth know that life in Vṛndāvana is vibrant; it's vibrant at every moment as each and every creature yearns for association and service to the Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, or Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, as you will see. *Bhūmi-śrī-vṛndāvana-dhāmam*—life is never normal there; it is always increasing in bliss *ad infinitum*. Please excuse me again; another short lecture. This is Kārtika, and of course again, today is Govardhana-pūjā, and I am going to go be part of the festivities here, so please excuse me. I'd like to finish with a very appropriate verse today—a well-known verse and a much-loved verse by those who love Govardhana Hill or are attempting to love Govardhana Hill. Today, I'm thinking very much of my godbrother Cāru-datta Prabhu, who's a Govardhana-vāsī; he knows this verse by heart, so we'll finish with this verse today. *Namaḥ...*

"I offer my respectful obeisances unto the king of all hills, Govardhana Hill, the source of enjoyment for the senses, land, and cows. He puts an end to unlimited sufferings and bestows the supreme bliss." *Girirāja Govardhana-līlā-maṇḍalī-kī jaya! Govardhana-pūjā kī jaya! Kṛṣṇa-kī jaya!* I'll see you in a couple of days. *Śrī Śrī Gaurāṅga-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Vṛndāvana-sundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvanesvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! Kṛṣṇārpita.*

Thank you.""