"*00368*.*
"# The Hidden Pastimes of Govindajī - Part 4

Welcome back, once again: *viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine namaste sārasvate deve gauravāṇī-pracāriṇe nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.* 

We are continuing with our series on Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his service to his beloved deity of Govindajī. So far, we have covered his discovery of Govindajī in Vṛndāvana, where he then established the worship of Govindajī. We also discussed the amazing pastime of how Emperor Akbar and Rājā Mān Siṃha cooperated to build the architectural wonder of the big temple for Govindajī, and we concluded our last lecture with Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī's *Govinda-mandirāṣṭakam*—that special *aṣṭakam* which he spoke upon seeing the temple completed. We also mentioned that, unfortunately, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī departed a number of years before that temple was completed, and actually, his *tirobhāva-mahotsava*, his disappearance day festival, is the day after tomorrow. So, I thought today we could discuss his departure.

Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Nectar of Devotion*:
> "In the supplementary Vedic literature there is the following list of 32 offenses in the matter of serving the Lord: number one, one should not enter the temple of the deity in a car or palanquin or with shoes on the feet, and number two, one should not fail to observe the various festivals for the pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such as Janmāṣṭamī, Ratha-yātrā, etc."

So, we want to properly observe the disappearance day of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in a couple of days; this is preparation. Actually, if one thinks carefully about it, the glories of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī are twofold, for in the spiritual world he is Rūpa Mañjarī, and in the material world he is Rūpa Gosvāmī. Kavi-karṇapūra states in his *Gaura-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā*: *śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-khyātā yasīd vṛndāvane purā*—who has been famous in Vṛndāvana, appeared as Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. 

So, volumes could be written on either of those identities. In the spiritual world, in Goloka Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s most beloved consort is served by eight maidservants called *sakhīs* who are around 14 years of age. We have discussed this in detail in previous lectures, but there is Lalitā, Citrā, Campakalatā, Tuṅgavidyā, Viśākhā, Raṅgadevī, Sudevī, and Indulekhā. Now, each of those eight principal *sakhīs* are served by younger girls called *mañjarīs*, who are actually around six years of age. Lalitā-sakhī’s group of *mañjarīs* includes, of course, Rūpa Mañjarī, Rasa Mañjarī, Guṇa Mañjarī, Lavaṅga Mañjarī, Vilāsa Mañjarī, Kastūrī Mañjarī, Mañjulālī Mañjarī, and Rati Mañjarī. It is often stated that our Rūpa Mañjarī is 13 years and six months old. Of course, that contradicts our previous statement that the *mañjarīs* are six years of age, but the ācāryas say that the *mañjarīs* are very young while Kṛṣṇa is in Vraja, but by the time He leaves for Mathurā, they are eternally 13 years old. That explains it. 

Just like some months ago, we gave a class about the three stages of Kṛṣṇa’s youth. The first stage of His youth is called *kumāra*, from one to five years of age; His boyhood is called *pogaṇḍa*, from six years to 10 years of age; and His *kaiśora* age lasts from 11 to 15 years of age. But when He reaches the maturity of that *kaiśora* age, He remains forever 16. Prabhupāda said you will never see a picture or a painting of Kṛṣṇa older than 16. He is *nava-yauvana*; He is eternally youthful. 

Now, there are also different stages of Rādhārāṇī’s youth as well, of course, because She is a *gopī*. But I read that when Kṛṣṇa is in Vṛndāvana, the Vrajavāsīs address Her as Rādhā, but when Kṛṣṇa leaves Vṛndāvana to go to Mathurā and Dvārakā, then they address Her as Rādhikā. How is that? The idea being that *adhika* means higher. So, when Kṛṣṇa leaves Vraja, Rādhārāṇī experiences higher separation, and thus She is addressed as Rādhikā. So, Rādhā when She is young, and then when Kṛṣṇa leaves Vraja, her intensity—that separation—is very intense, that *adhika*, so She is addressed as Rādhikā. It is very beautiful. So, Śrī Rādhā’s servant, Rūpa Mañjarī, is described as the color of *gorocana*—it is a bright yellow—and she wears a dress the color of peacock feathers. Like that, we can just begin to appreciate how exalted is Rūpa Gosvāmī as the incarnation of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī. 

We gave a class last year in which we mentioned the scripture *Sādhana-dīpikā*—actually, we have quoted it many times—wherein some of the skills of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī are mentioned. In his mission of serving Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this world, it is stated that he could prepare deities, he could draw expertly, he was a master of astrology and mathematics, he was fluent in Sanskrit, Persian, Bengali, and other languages, and he was also a renowned Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava philosopher and scholar, and well known to many *sampradāyas*; that is actually stated there. 

But actually, I was thinking that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s pastimes were not limited to those of Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s *līlā* 500 years ago; his influence extends even into our modern era. How so? Well, my dear godbrother, His Holiness Śivarāma Swami, writes in his well-researched book called *Nava Vraja Mahimā* that one night Śrīla Prabhupāda had a dream when he was living in the Vamśī Gopāla temple in Vṛndāvana—the first place he stayed when he went to Vṛndāvana before he came to the West—wherein he saw many Vaiṣṇavas in this dream chanting around Rūpa Gosvāmī, who was sitting in the courtyard of his *samādhi* and looking at Śrī Rādhā in a very affectionate way. Śrīla Prabhupāda said that he accepted the dream as a call from Rūpa Gosvāmī and he moved from that first place he was staying to the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, where he spent most of his time in Vṛndāvana. It is interesting; Rūpa Gosvāmī was calling him. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda once said that he would often sit in front of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *samādhi* and pray, "O Rūpa Gosvāmī, please show yourself to me and give me guidance and strength to realize my mission." And one of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s earlier disciples, my dear godbrother Gurudāsa, once narrated a story Prabhupāda had personally told him. Śrīla Prabhupāda said that when he was in Vṛndāvana at the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, he would always meditate upon Rūpa Gosvāmī while taking his meals, because where he took his meals in that particular room, he could see Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s *samādhi* through a small window of his kitchen. And Prabhupāda went on to say that one day Rūpa Gosvāmī appeared to him and told him, "Now you have written some books, take them to the western countries and preach, do not hesitate any longer." The Prabhupāda related this to Gurudāsa. So, we, the modern-day representatives, just see what is our position; we are representatives of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. We can pray for his blessings in this regard, and we do. Everyone knows that prayer: *śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhūtale, svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyam dadāti sva-padāntikam*. "When will Rūpa Gosvāmī, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter unto his lotus feet?" That prayer is very dear to all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas because we are, in essence, *rūpānugas*, followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. 

And in his epic book *Lalita-mādhava*, Rūpa Gosvāmī has left all of us his mercy in the form of a prayer encouraging us, each and every one of the members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. He’s encouraged us in the *yuga-dharma* of chanting the holy names. There is that beautiful prayer he writes in the literature, quoted in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Adi-līlā* 19.9, and it is a favorite of devotees:
> "I do not know how much nectar the two syllables 'Kṛṣṇa' have produced. When the holy name of Kṛṣṇa is chanted, it appears to dance within the mouth. We then desire many, many mouths. When that name enters the holes of the ears, we desire many millions of ears. And when the holy name dances in the courtyard of the heart, it conquers the activities of the mind, and therefore all the senses become inert." 

Thank you, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

So, now we will go into some detail just when and how Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī left this world. To begin with, it was in 1558 that his elder brother, dearest friend, and lifelong companion Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī departed this world. Now, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī left his body at Manasa-gaṅgā at Govardhana Hill, an event I have read the scholars say "was as painful for the Vaiṣṇava community of Vraja as was the departure of Lord Caitanya." So, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī performed the funeral ceremony and he placed the body of Sanātana Gosvāmī in *samādhi* near the Madana-mohana temple, and then he arranged a great feast for devotees, and then he retired to his *bhajana-kuṭīra* at Yogapīṭha. We can just imagine feeling deep and intense separation from Sanātana. We can hardly imagine. 

Two years later, in 1560, Emperor Akbar—that is when he gave permission, land, and money for the construction of the big temple of Govindajī—and that temple construction began in 1560. Now, in my research, I found different dates, but it is always like that; however, that is the date that we have settled on in our research at the Vṛndāvana Research Institute—a wonderful facility for us. So, now, in order to build the temple, that magnificent temple, some of the Vṛndāvana forest at Yogapīṭha where Rūpa Gosvāmī had discovered Govindajī—and Mān Siṃha had decided that was the best place to build this big temple—some of the forest, I was reading, had to be cut down. Obviously, but as happy as the devotees were that a temple was going to be built, it is clearly written they simultaneously lamented the destruction of some of the Vṛndāvana forest. Now, you may remember that this was one of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s concerns; we discussed this in our last lecture. When Mān Siṃha had expressed his initial desire to build this temple for Govindajī, Rūpa Gosvāmī was uncomfortable with the idea because he said that Govindajī is happy in the nature of Vṛndāvana. But he also expressed concern: "You are going to cut down some of these desire trees?" It was a little uncomfortable, but he consented in the long run. 

Just to give you an idea how concerned the devotees present in Vṛndāvana at that time were about keeping and maintaining the natural beauty of Vṛndāvana, I would like to share with you a heartfelt poem that we found just yesterday in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, written by a Vrajavāsī poet who was present at that actual time. You know, when they were discussing, "Okay, we have to clear the forest here, clear it there," like, "Devotees! These are all desire trees! This is the natural beauty of Vṛndāvana!" It had to be done, of course, but devotees were upset. This particular devotee, we found his palm-leaf manuscript in the institute, nearly destroyed by time and insects, etc. This is why we want to work in that institute to preserve these scriptures. We found these palm leaves and we could barely make out that Vaiṣṇava’s name, but we did. His name is Harirām Vyāsa. That was his name, Harirām Vyāsa, and the title of the book or the *śāstra* that he wrote was called *Vyāsavāṇī*. And somehow, we could even make out the verse number, 263. It is very significant just to see—it is so nectarean to see these little details of how the community of devotees felt about this, you know, cutting down part of the forest. 

Harirām Vyāsa wrote in Braja-bhāṣā language—we had to call in a specialist in the Braj-bhāṣā language. Listen to this, quote: 
> "Now Kali-yuga has finally appeared. Mathurā is being dug up, and the forests of Vṛndāvana are being cut down. All the sages are worried and trying to think of a solution. So why have I been given such a long life to bear this pain?" 

Now, I also found a quote by Mīrābāī, you know, the famous lady devotee, very famous. When she came to Vraja, she expressed similar concerns in one of her songs 500 years ago, same time frame. She wrote—it is short but significant: 
> "Now the *kuñjas* of Vṛndāvana are being converted into great and new palaces." 

I think she is speaking about it in a general way; now the *kuñjas*, the forests of Vṛndāvana, are being converted into great and new palaces. Of course, we all know it was the desire of Lord Caitanya that the Six Gosvāmīs reestablish deity worship in Vraja, and for that reason, Rūpa Gosvāmī gave his permission for a temple to be built. But of course, that is different than the unrestricted, ever-expanding construction of factories and apartment buildings and malls, etc., that are taking place now in Vraja at the expense and destruction of historic buildings, monuments, and sacred places in Vṛndāvana. It is a little bit different. Anyway, we are all concerned, aren't we? When you come to Vṛndāvana to see the cosmopolitan expansion, it is like, "Whoa, wait a minute. Can we do it in a more natural way and clean up Vṛndāvana?" So that is still a concern, isn't it? Even more so. 

But, pleased that a wonderful temple was being built for the glorification of his deity, which would attract so many people to Vṛndāvana, but distracted by the construction that was going on, after some time Rūpa Gosvāmī shifted from his *bhajana* at Yogapīṭha to Sevā-kuñja, another part of Vṛndāvana where Rasa-līlā takes place, to focus on his *bhajana*.

Now, it is a little difficult, but four years later, on the day of Pavitra Ekādaśī in the year 1564, Jīva Gosvāmī and a few others took Rūpa Gosvāmī from Sevā-kuñja to Yogapīṭha to have *darśana* of Govindajī in that smaller temple that still exists. Remember that Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s disciple had established a smaller temple for the time being. So they took Rūpa Gosvāmī to that smaller Govinda temple where Govindajī was being worshipped. Now, by this time, Rūpa Gosvāmī was elderly, and you know, it took a number of devotees to assist him in going there. And there, Rūpa Gosvāmī offered various types of colorful silk threads called *pavitras*. It is popular in his *kāṇḍas*, *pavitras*. He offered *pavitras* to Govindajī; these *pavitras* were made of 108 colorful knots. It was a tradition, and he did so with the following mantra, and this mantra is actually used by many Vaiṣṇavas because it is written in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, Vilāsa 15, verses 228 and 229. This is the mantra that Rūpa Gosvāmī offered the *pavitra* to Govindajī: 
> "O Kṛṣṇa, O Kṛṣṇa, O fruit-giver of yearly worship, I offer my obeisances to you. Please accept this *pavitra* for my purification. O Lord, please purify the offenses I made in your service. O Lord, O Govinda, may I be purified by your mercy." 

Now, sadly, that was Rūpa Gosvāmī’s last *darśana* of Govindajī. And after circumambulating his beloved *iṣṭa-deva*, he went back to Sevā-kuñja, and the next day he left this world. Now, needless to say—how to express it in words, actually—needless to say, all of Vṛndāvana was plunged into lamentation. I was reading that when Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī left this world, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who was staying out at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, of course, when Sanātana Gosvāmī left this world, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī gave up eating from that point on and only drank water. And when Rūpa Gosvāmī left, he gave up even drinking water and kept himself alive simply by chanting the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. That is what I read; he kept himself alive simply by chanting the names of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

So Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, of course, we know he was the younger of the Six Gosvāmīs and a great organizer, etc., visionary, he wanted to place Rūpa Gosvāmī in *samādhi* at Yogapīṭha; that was the tradition at that time. When an ācārya left, he would be placed in *samādhi* near to his *iṣṭa-deva* in the *iṣṭa-deva*’s temple. But because, you know, massive construction was still going on—it was really the initial stages of building the Govindajī temple at Yogapīṭha—because of all this construction going on, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī made the decision to place Rūpa Gosvāmī at one of his favorite places of *bhajana* again, at Sevā-kuñja, where eventually Jīva Gosvāmī’s temple, the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, was built. And therefore, when we go to Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, one of our main reasons for going there is to take *darśana* of the *samādhi-mandira* of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Historically, it became a tradition that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas who visited Vṛndāvana would first visit the *samādhi* of Rūpa Gosvāmī at Sevā-kuñja and then go to Yogapīṭha and take *darśana* of Govindajī. Such nice details of history! It makes everything more personal, you could say, hearing about the lives of our heroes. These are our heroes. 

I should also mention that when the news of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s departure reached one of our great heroes, the Rajput king Rājā Mān Siṃha, he was particularly distressed. It is said he closed himself off in a room and just cried for days. Big warrior! He cried for days. But it is written that in the long run, he took shelter in the understanding that the Lord and His intimate associates and their service to the Lord, it is all eternal. It is all eternal. And in my research at the institute, I came across a beautiful verse in that regard, again it is in the Braj-bhāṣā language, it is a very beautiful verse: *candramitī diṅgar-mitī mīṭhī triguṇa*. This is the local language: 
> "One day the moon will come to an end, one day the sun will come to an end, even the three *guṇas*—sattva, rajas, tamas—will end. But the poet Harirām Vyāsa says the pastimes of the Lord will never end and will go on forever and forevermore." 

We are indebted to these poets and these scribes and these devotees who, you know, in the past have given us so much nectar in the form of their writings, which we as modern-day Vaiṣṇavas imbibe, and it gives us enthusiasm to serve our founder-ācārya Śrīla Prabhupāda in the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We feel very close to them, actually. 

So after the disappearance of Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs and other great devotees of their time, such departure days have been celebrated in a big way. You know, we celebrate the appearance day of great ācāryas, devotees, spiritual masters; we also celebrate their disappearance days. And in the Gauḍīya tradition, the disappearance day is often celebrated with more pomp and circumstance—to use an English phrase—than their appearance days. We celebrate the disappearance day even more than the appearance day, at least as part of our tradition. And one might question, why? Why observe the disappearance day of a saintly devotee in a greater fashion than their appearance day? 

The answer is that when such great ācāryas appear in this world, their glories are not yet known, but by the time they depart, who they are and what glorious things they have accomplished are all well known to those who are interested. The example is given of a lotus flower: in the morning, the lotus flower is closed, but by the end of the day, with the influence of the sun’s rays, it is fully open and can be appreciated by everyone. So similarly, when a great devotee is born—when it is a baby, what can you know?—but by the time he leaves, his glories are known. So in that sense, in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, the tradition has been that the disappearance days are observed in an even bigger way than the appearance days. 

So in our next class, we will discuss the atrocities of the Muslim tyrant Aurangzeb and how he attacked Govinda’s temple and how Govinda was saved, and many deities were saved and, of course, as we know, taken to Jaipur. That is a whole class or maybe two classes. But today, let us finish on a sweet note, remembering the glories of Rūpa Gosvāmī, whose disappearance day festival is coming the day after tomorrow. And we will finish on a sweet note from Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, another one of our heroes, his *prārthanā*, psalm 17, very appropriate:
> "I have heard from the mouths of pure devotees that by the mercy of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, one can attain the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. O my Lord Sanātana Gosvāmī and the associates of Gaurāṅga, all of you kindly fulfill my deepest desires. Let the mercy of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī be upon me, for whoever has taken shelter of him is my master. When will my Lord Lokanātha Gosvāmī take me with him and place me at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa? When will it ever happen to me that the dearest *sakhīs* will chastise their servant?"

Thank you, Prabhu. I will finish there. We will be back with part five of our series on the glories of Rūpa Gosvāmī and his *iṣṭa-deva* Govindajī. We still have a few more lectures to go. All glories to Jai, Rādhe! Thank you.""