"*00457*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees. Welcome back once again. *Vāñchā-kalpatarubhyaś ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ. Namo oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.* 

So, as many of you know, Bhādra-pūrṇimā was just two days ago, meaning the full moon day in the month of Bhādra, and it has ushered in a very special period of 15 days here in Vṛndāvana—and around the world, for that matter—that I wanted to share with all of you. Most of you are familiar with this Bhādra-pūrṇimā because from the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 12.13.13, it is stated: *Bhāgavataṁ śāyāti paramā gatim*. Quote: "If on the full moon day of the month of Bhādra one places *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* on a golden throne and gives it as a gift, he will attain the supreme transcendental destination." Unquote. 

Now you may know, you should know, that under the skillful direction of my dear Godbrother Vaiśeṣika Prabhu, devotees around the world just distributed over 35,000 sets of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* in the month of Bhādra, which concluded again on the full moon, on Bhādra-pūrṇimā, a few days ago. So now, for 15 days after the pūrṇimā, just as the rainy season is finishing here in India, people all over India observe what is called Pitṛ-pakṣa. Pitṛ-pakṣa: *pakṣa* means a period of 15 days, and *pitṛ* means ancestors. So, during these 15 days, people perform offerings, meaning they offer the Lord’s prasādam to any of their ancestors who did not achieve liberation in their lifetime and are wandering somewhere in the material creation. Actually, by such a ritual—I was reading—by such a sacrifice, their ancestors can be promoted to either Brahmaloka, Vaikuṇṭhaloka, or Goloka. 

However, these 15 days are not actually considered as auspicious because they are dedicated to ancestors who did not achieve liberation. So, during these 15 days, generally people here in India only make essential purchases; they don't buy anything really expensive, or whatever. They don't celebrate any birthdays, they don't hold weddings, or they don't make any important business transactions. But that is not the case here in Braja, in Vṛndāvana, because as we’ve heard many times, in Vṛndāvana it doesn't matter what time of the year it is, there's a festival every day. That we know very well from *Brahma-saṁhitā*, where it is written: 

Quote: "In the spiritual world, Lord Kṛṣṇa is the only lover; every tree is a wish-fulfilling tree; every pebble is a gem; all water is nectar; every word is a song; every step is a dance; the flute is the favorite instrument; and there's a festival every day." 

The same holds true for the home of Vṛndāvana—Vṛndāvana as we know it here on the earth—because for those who have the eyes to see, there's no difference between Goloka Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world and Gokula Vṛndāvana here in the material world. Enlisting 10 offenses to be avoided in the dhāma, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes: It is an offense to think that the holy dhāma is something temporary. He also says to think that the holy dhāma belongs to a mundane country or province such as Bengal, to think that the Lord’s dhāma is equal to a place connected to some demigod, or to attempt to measure the area of the holy dhāma; these are offenses. So, there's no difference between Goloka and Gokula for all practical reasons. But while all of India is cautious during the 15 inauspicious days of Pitṛ-pakṣa, traditionally Brajavāsīs, the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they celebrate a festival—a special festival—every evening called Sañjī.

And what specifically is that festival of Sañjī, and what is its origins? That we will share with you today in order to increase your appreciation and love more and more for Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Actually, that has been the purpose all along for our lecture series on Vṛndāvana for almost two years now. Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, in his *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, Śataka 1, verse 35, he says about Vṛndāvana: Quote, "Despite composing millions of poems, the best of poets could not even begin to describe the illumination of only one of the unlimited jewel-like qualities of Vṛndāvana. Oh friends, control the urges of your senses, and with a fixed mind, proceed to the land of Vṛndāvana, which is a reservoir of unlimited transcendental mellows." So, we want to fall in love with Vṛndāvana, and that we can do by *śabda-brahma*, hearing all the glories of the Lord and the inhabitants who live here.

The celebration of Pitṛ-pakṣa in Vṛndāvana actually originated 5,000 years ago during Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes on this earth. Once upon a time, one day in Yāvaṭ, Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā, the mother-in-law and the sister-in-law of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, said to her: "Worship of the fallen ancestors has just begun, and because it is not an auspicious time, we are saying that you cannot leave home for 15 days. It’s not auspicious for a newly married gopī to leave home during Pitṛ-pakṣa. In fact, we are saying you could not even leave your room. If we find that you've come out of your room, you will be punished." It’s a palace, but Rādhārāṇī sees it like a prison. Of course, this news was unbearable for her, for Śrī Rādhā, whose only desire in life is to be with her lover, Kṛṣṇa. It’s said in the Bhāṣā language: 

It means that when Śrī Rādhā, when she closes just one eyelid or blinks with one eye, she experiences that moment of not seeing Kṛṣṇa—that separation—to be like four yugas of time. Just one blink not seeing Kṛṣṇa, because of the mood of *vipralambha*, or separation, for her it’s like four yugas have gone by. She hasn't seen Kṛṣṇa for four yugas! So, with Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā’s orders, how could she survive being separated from Kṛṣṇa for 15 days? So then, when Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā left, Rādhārāṇī just sat in the corner of her room crying, and as she did so, it just came to her mind, her beloved sakhī, Lalitā Devī. And as soon as she remembered Lalitā Devī, Lalitā-sakhī appeared before her. And I was reading that this is the intimate nature of their relationship: Rādhārāṇī never needs to call for Śrī Lalitā. She never calls out, "Lalitā, come here!" She just meditates on Lalitā while thinking, "Oh Lalitā, I am missing you," and then only two tears call for her. She thinks, "Lalitā, I'm missing you," and Lalitā appears. This is the extraordinary nature of their relationship. 

So, when Lalitā appeared and saw that Śrī Rādhā was crying, and she also started crying, and she said, "Śrī Rādhā, what is wrong?" So Rādhārāṇī replied, "Lalitā, Jaṭilā told me that I could not leave my room during Pitṛ-pakṣa. But how will I survive 15 days separate from my beloved Śyāmasundara?" 

So, Lalitā-sakhī sat there for a little while thinking very deeply, and eventually, out of her love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Lalitā came up with a plan how to unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa during this period of 15 days. Now, it is said amongst the Brajavāsīs that Lalitā is the only one out of 16,108 gopīs who can separate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to increase their love for each other, and she is the only one out of 16,108 gopīs who can arrange meetings for the divine couple to appease their feelings of separation. I was reading, it is said that Lalitā can pierce the clouds; in other words, she can do the impossible. I also read that she can float a boat in the desert; it means that she can do the impossible. So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī asked, "My dear Lalitā-sakhī, what's the plan?" 

So, Lalitā said, "Well, we will worship Sañjī Devī." Sañjī Devī? She said, "Since ancient times, in the brāhmaṇa community, priests worship Sañjī Devī, the wife of the sun god, with a special... or with special Gāyatrī mantras." And this is actually a fact. The other day in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, I saw in Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s book *Gāyatrī* that therein it goes into great detail how brāhmaṇas worship Sañjī Devī with Gāyatrī mantras. I saw it with my own eyes! But Lalitā said, "We women, we don't chant Gāyatrī mantras, but we will worship Sañjī Devī by making various beautiful maṇḍalas, beautiful colorful designs on the floor, which we will call Sañjī." Lalitā’s idea was that in order to make these Sañjī designs—you may have seen them in India—Śrī Rādhā would have to leave her quarters at Yāvaṭ to pick flowers around Vṛndāvana, dry them, and make powder from them with which you can make these special designs, Sañjī. And while doing so, being away from Yāvaṭ, she just might meet up with Kṛṣṇa. Lalitā-sakhī’s plan. 

Now, I'd like to clarify that these designs for worshiping Sañjī Devī are different from the art of *raṅgolī*. *Raṅgolī*, where here in India in the morning you see people, they come outside their home and they also make very colorful designs with this powder, different colored powder, as an auspicious design in front of their home. But Sañjī is a little different; it’s considered a very deep spiritual art, again as an excuse, so to say, to unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who faced never seeing each other for 15 days. This was Lalitā-sakhī’s plan. So, it holds a different significance beyond just being auspicious; this art of Sañjī is meant to bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together—*saṁbhoga*. 

So, Lalitā said to Śrī Rādhā, "You start thinking of various designs to please Sañjī Devī, and I will go and inform Paurṇamāsī of our plan and get her blessings." Because this had never been done before, so because it's not mentioned in śāstra that one can worship Sañjī Devī with floral designs, with powdered floral designs on the ground... she's worshiped, but she's worshiped by the brāhmaṇas, the men, with Gāyatrī mantra. So again, it's just to get Rādhā out of the house. So, Lalitā had to get it confirmed with Paurṇamāsī. Why Paurṇamāsī? Because she's very learned and she's considered a *purohitāṇī*, a female *purohita* (priest), by the Brajavāsīs, the people of Vṛndāvana. And whenever there's a question about worship, the residents of Vṛndāvana, especially the gopīs, they go to see Paurṇamāsī, who we know of course as an expansion of Yogamāyā. So, Lalitā wanted to get it confirmed by Paurṇamāsī so that Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā would agree to let Rādhārāṇī leave home to collect flowers to make Sañjī, to worship the wife of the sun god, like all the other gopīs would be doing under Lalitā’s direction during Pitṛ-pakṣa; all the girls were going to do it.

So, after Lalitā revealed her plan to Paurṇamāsī, Paurṇamāsī, who always favors Rādhā, not Kṛṣṇa—this is how the gopīs are, many of the gopīs—Paurṇamāsī smiled broadly and said, "That's a very nice plan, Lalitā! And when Jaṭilā comes to me, I'll just say that it's described in the Vedas." And that's exactly what happened. When Jaṭilā heard rumors that Lalitā wanted Śrī Rādhā to go out and pick flowers with other gopīs in Vṛndāvana to make Sañjī for Sañjī Devī, she said—Jaṭilā said—"I've never heard of such an injunction in the Vedas," and she stormed off to see Mother Paurṇamāsī. 

Who then said to Jaṭilā, "My dear Jaṭilā, actually there is an injunction hidden in a very esoteric section of the scriptures that allows for this." So, Jaṭilā had no other choice but to let Śrī Rādhā go out. And she went back to Yāvaṭ and said to Rādhārāṇī, "Okay, Śrī Rādhā, you can go with the other girls, but beware: do not see any men in your wanderings around Vṛndāvana for the flowers. If you see any men in the forest, then something inauspicious will happen to my son and your husband, Abhimanyu." 

So, Śrī Rādhā left Yāvaṭ. Lalitā took her... Lalitā took her to Govardhana Hill. In particular, she took her to several groves near Govinda-kuṇḍa at Govardhana Hill, where, because of the rainy season—I remember I was saying rainy season is just finishing here now in Vṛndāvana—there were many different types of colorful flowers like campā, jāmālī, kadamba, jūhī, pārijāta. And just nearby was Kṛṣṇa; he didn't know they were coming, but he was there fast asleep in a beautiful grove while his cows were eating the soft grasses at Govardhana Hill. 

Now, as we mentioned before, Lalitā is very intelligent in making up these separations and these rendezvous. Actually, I was reading Lalitā-sakhī has a net of gopīs all around Braja who send her updates where Kṛṣṇa is at any time of the day or night. So, Lalitā knows, you know, where Kṛṣṇa will be or is at 9:00 a.m. in the morning, 2:00 o'clock in the afternoon, 6:00 o'clock in the evening. She has her spies out there. She knows what time Kṛṣṇa will pass this or that kadamba tree, what time he'll cross over Govardhana Hill on his way to Varṣāṇā; she knows everything about Kṛṣṇa, where he is at any time in Braja. So, Lalitā knew that Kṛṣṇa was sleeping hidden, you know, on the ground by some creepers and some flowers there at Govardhana Hill.

So, taking Śrī Rādhā’s hand, Lalitā said, "O beloved Rādhā, please follow me, just over there; there are some very beautiful bluish-black flowers." Actually, there were no bluish-black flowers. Lalitā was just teasing Śrī Rādhā, suggesting that Kṛṣṇa was nearby, because these type of terms, you know—Kṛṣṇa’s bluish-black like a monsoon cloud—even if Rādhā sees a monsoon cloud in the sky, so much reminds her of Kṛṣṇa she may faint. So, just to hear there's something bluish-black nearby, she got excited. She was just teasing her: "There's some bluish-black flowers nearby." So, then she very carefully took Rādhā by the hand and brought her to that place where Kṛṣṇa had just woken up, and he stood up. Rādhārāṇī was surprised: "Oh, my Kṛṣṇa!" But she's a very shy girl; she's shyness personified. So, Rādhārāṇī couldn't look directly at Kṛṣṇa; rather, she was looking downward towards her feet. But as her love for Kṛṣṇa swelled up in her heart, tears began flowing from her eyes, and when one of those tears fell on her feet, this is amazing: Kṛṣṇa’s reflection appeared in that tear. 

Kṛṣṇa’s reflection appeared in that tear because he's standing there, and it's written that through that tear, Kṛṣṇa revealed all his beauty to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in the tear. She brought the Vṛndāvana. Then Lalitā said, teasing her again, "O Rādhā, look, there's so many black crows here! They are spoiling the beauty of this forest." You know how crows are. But actually, there were no crows; Lalitā was just teasing Rādhā again, that Kṛṣṇa—who can sometimes be insensitive to Rādhā—was there spoiling the beauty of the forest, that rascal. 

But then, as often is the case in these *kelī* pastimes—*kelī* means these very playful pastimes—then it was time for Kṛṣṇa to tease, so he said, "Oh, you gopīs! Who are you, and where are you coming from? This is my forest. Why have you come here to pick flowers without my permission?" So, you know, we've spoken a lot about Lalitā in the past years; she's really the protector of Śrī Rādhā. She gets angry with Kṛṣṇa when Kṛṣṇa mistreats Śrī Rādhā. So, Lalitā shot back, "I have never heard this is your forest! How could it be? You are just a simple cowherd boy; how could you own a forest? And by the way, do you not know who we are?"

So, Kṛṣṇa replied in the playful pastime, "No, I don't know who you are." 

So, Lalitā replied—it's such a wonderful way, some of my favorite parts of the talk today—Lalitā said, "We are the gopīs, the jewels of Braja." So true that. But Kṛṣṇa just laughed; he just started laughing, and he said, "No, I know of only one jewel, and that jewel is in Varṣāṇā, Vṛndāvana." So then, Lalitā is still in her protective mood; she said to Kṛṣṇa, "You know nothing, Kṛṣṇa. You're just like a black crow, and even your words are painful to my ears, like crows trying to sing and defeat cuckoo birds. Cuckoos sing very beautifully; when crows try to sing, it's just noise and painful to the ears. I don't speak anymore." Anyway, Lalitā concluded, "We're in a hurry, we have to worship Sañjī."

Kṛṣṇa said, "No, no, no, hold on, hold on! Don't be so stubborn, girls! Please, tell me, who are you? And especially, who is this gopī who's not even looking at me?" Remember, Rādhārāṇī is looking down at the tear, the reflection of Kṛṣṇa in the tear. 

So, Lalitā answered, "You don't know her? She is the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, who is the king of all kings in Braja." Now, it's interesting that Śrī Rādhā did not respond to Kṛṣṇa’s question—like "Who are you, girls?"—Lalitā did. And there's a reason for this, because in royal families in India in the past, and to some degree in the present, the culture was that when a person asks someone from a royal family to introduce themselves, it's the servants of that royal family who introduce that person. 

The royals don't introduce themselves: "I am... servant does that, this is Prince, or this is Princess." Like that. Very nice culture. There's so much culture here; it's being lost, but we want to revive it and actually spread it all over the world. One time Prabhupāda said, "We will conquer the world with culture." So, here's a cultural item: the royals don't reply, but the servants, out of respect, "This is such and such." So, similarly, when Kṛṣṇa asked, "Who is this beautiful gopī not looking at him?" Lalitā answered, "You don't know her? She's the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, who is the king of all kings in Braja." 

So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Whatever the case, whatever the case, this is my forest, and you must all leave now." 

So, what happened? Lalitā and Rādhārāṇī, and by this time they were accompanied by some other gopīs—the news spread, so we wanted to witness the pastime—Lalitā, Rādhārāṇī, and other gopīs who had assembled, not one of them left. They just started, they just continued walking around the area picking flowers for Sañjī. In fact, this is very significant, because when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī pressed forward against the instructions of Kṛṣṇa to start picking flowers, Lalitā said to Kṛṣṇa, "Please step aside and let her pass." And what did Kṛṣṇa do? Looking at Lalitā, obeying Lalitā’s command, subdued by Śrī Rādhā’s... her love for him by which he's controlled, Kṛṣṇa stepped aside and let Śrī Rādhā pass by. I found a very beautiful verse in that mood, and it helps us understand even better: It is said that *jñānīs* can be defeated by an *ācārya*, and an *ācārya* can be defeated by a *mahājana*; a *mahājana* can be defeated by Lord Brahmā, who himself can be defeated by Śiva; Śiva can be defeated by Garuḍa, who himself can be defeated by Viṣṇu in a scholarly debate; and Viṣṇu can be defeated in a scholarly debate by Lakṣmī, who herself can be defeated by Sarasvatī; and Sarasvatī can be defeated in a scholarly debate with Kṛṣṇa. But there's only one person who can defeat Kṛṣṇa in a war of words, it's said, and that is Lalitā-sakhī. 

Sakhī said, "Step aside," and Kṛṣṇa did. *Śrī Vṛndāvana-bhūmi*. So now, as Śrī Rādhā moved here and there picking flowers, Kṛṣṇa was of course watching her, and he became enchanted. Walking, you know, she walked along deftly plucking flowers and putting them in her basket; he became mesmerized by her beauty. So, after some time, Kṛṣṇa very humbly approached her, and they exchanged sweet words for some time. So, in this way, Lalitā-sakhī arranged for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s meetings during the 15-day period of Pitṛ-pakṣa. Wow! Who wants to hear anything else than this? 

Now, that evening, when the time came to make the Sañjīs—because this is when the Sañjīs are, you know... the *raṅgolī* they do that in the morning, the ladies, the different designs in front of the house—but this Sañjī, this offering to the wife of the sun god, Lalitā arranged that to happen in the evening, because, you know, everybody, all the gopīs are out there, they're collecting these flowers, they're taking the colors and making them into powders, and you know, so that the Sañjīs are going to be made. And the gopīs would make them on the floors of their homes in the evening. And the designs they made and the artistic ability they had and the beauty is just incomparable to anything in this world. When I was reading, it just went on and on how beautiful these designs were. 

It's described that even Sarasvatī, who along with being the goddess of learning, you may be surprised, is also the goddess of art. Sarasvatī is the goddess of learning, yes, we like her to be on the tip of our tongue when we're speaking about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but she's also the goddess of art, and she was humbled when she saw these special designs made especially by the artistic hands of Śrī Rādhā. She's the goddess of art, but of course Rādhārāṇī is—well, she's the source of all these artistic qualities. And all the ladies within the, you could say, the spiritual world and the material world... in the *Śrī Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-stotra*, Lord Śiva says: *pārvatī-bhava-candrānī*—it is referring to Pārvatī, the daughter of the king of the Himalayas; *pulomajā*—means Lakṣmī, who is sitting on a lotus flower; and *vidhi-sajñā*—means Sarasvatī, who is the goddess of all knowledge and arts. So, even to these three goddesses, Lord Śiva says in that beautiful prayer he composed—Pārvatī, Lakṣmī, and Sarasvatī—*rādha-pāde*, Rādhā gives mercy to them, their qualities come by her, her mercy. Lord Śiva says Rādhā gives mercy to them in the *Śrī Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-stotra*. 

So, that evening, after all these beautiful designs had been made to please the wife of the sun god, Kṛṣṇa came back from the forest with his cows and he saw the Sañjī that was done by Śrī Rādhā, and he couldn't pass, couldn't walk by; he just stood staring at them, even without blinking, they were so beautiful—beautiful art personified. So, he asked Śrī Rādhā, "For whom have you made all these beautiful designs, and how did you make them?" So anyway, they started talking, and once again, during this inauspicious period where they were not allowed to meet each other, they were again exchanging loving words. It was all part of the plan of Lalitā-sakhī. So, this making of these designs, Sañjī—the worship of Sañjī Devī in the evening time for 15 days after Bhādra-pūrṇimā—this festive event for the purpose of uniting Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, it's been going on for 5,000 years here in Vṛndāvana. Even today, this evening I will walk out and go to the temples and I'll see this Sañjī. 

I've actually seen in the past—I remember in the temples of Rādhā-ramaṇa, Rādhā-śyāmasundara, and Rādhā-dāmodara in particular—how in the evenings the Gosvāmīs and their helpers, they make very beautiful Sañjīs in front of the deities. This is Braja; this is part of the culture of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, which we're hoping to one day develop a deep, very deep attachment for and desire to reside here forever and forevermore. Vṛndāvana is such an amazing and beautiful place. 

We will close today with the beautiful prayer by Śrīla Prabhupāda in his epic *Śrī Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, 1, verse 57. He says, "This land of Vṛndāvana is so wonderful. Oh, the two sweet personalities whose bodily complexions are golden and bluish and who are known as Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are even more wonderful. Pure love for the lotus feet is also wonderful. Wonderful is that person who comes to the supreme abode of Vṛndāvana and becomes attached to it. The rare great soul who knows the glories of Vṛndāvana in truth is also wonderful." Unquote. 

Thank you, Prabhujīs. I hope you enjoyed this lecture. I hope that your attachment to Braja has increased even more and will help you water that beautiful seed of bhakti by coming back in a couple days with more wonderful pastimes as we wander with a name through the 12 forests of Braja-bhūmi. All glories to the revealer of the dhāma, our beloved Kṛṣṇa. Thank you. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""