Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees! Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Vṛndāvana during this very auspicious month of Kārttika. Welcome, Viṣṇupādāya Kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya Śrīmate Bhaktivedānta Svāmin iti nāmine.

So, during this month of Kārttika, on our parikramās, we have discovered a number of new places, and today I wanted to share one of them with all of you. I had never been there before; it is a very beautiful place, actually, just outside Vṛndāvana town. It is a temple complex called Tarasa Mandir, and the Kṛṣṇa deity there is named Rādhā-Vinoda. This deity is famous for many pastimes. Actually, here in Braja, he was discovered several centuries ago in the Padma River in East Bengal, which of course is now Bangladesh, by a famous king. Technically, he was not actually a king in the usual sense of the word, but he was a landlord, and he was called "king" because he owned a very large, attractive tract of land in a place called Tarasa; it is in the Padma district of Bangladesh. He was treated as a king by the local populace because he had so much land, he had so many cows, etc.

So, one night, this king had a dream in which he heard a voice say, "Sir, I am a deity; please rescue me from the waters of the Padma River and take me home." So, the next morning, the king went with his family priest—his name was Vāñcārāma—and they started searching in the Padma River for this deity. As Vāñcārāma was looking around, he suddenly felt a hand tugging on his leg. So, he reached down, and grabbing that hand, he pulled the deity of Rādhā-Vinoda from the river. Then, as requested by the Lord in his dream, the king took the deity home, where, along with Vāñcārāma, he and his wife began to serve Rādhā-Vinoda with great love and devotion. Of course, the peculiarity of Rādhā-Vinoda was that he was very demanding. Whenever he wanted something, he would appear to the king or Vāñcārāma in their dreams and make requests.

So, on one occasion, Rādhā-Vinoda appeared in the king's dream, and interestingly, he asked him for a hookah—a hookah in which he wanted to smoke dried shavings of aguru wood. Aguru wood, of course, is not an intoxicant; it is a very sweet-smelling wood, and the deity wanted to taste that sweetness and smell that sweetness of the aguru wood. So, the king bought a very expensive silver hookah for Rādhā-Vinoda, and Vāñcārāma, the priest, started offering the hookah to Rādhā-Vinoda every day after the deity's meals.

Now, I must say that in one version of this pastime, it is stated that the Lord smoked tobacco in the hookah, and if that was the case, we should know that even though the Lord may smoke tobacco in a hookah, a devotee should never imitate his activities. Tobacco is an intoxicant; we must always follow the four regulative principles that we vow at the moment of initiation. In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 10.33.30, it is said, and I quote: "One who is not a great controller should never imitate the behavior of ruling personalities, even mentally. If out of foolishness an ordinary person does imitate such behavior, he will simply destroy himself, just as a person who is not Rudra (meaning Śiva) would destroy himself if he tried to drink an ocean of poison." Unquote.

Very important instruction. What to speak of a hookah smoking tobacco, even eating pān or betel nut leaves, as we see a lot of people do here in India, it is not allowed for sādhakas, practicing devotees. I was reading in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā 15.16, quoting again: "One day, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu ate betel nuts offered to the deity, but they acted as an intoxicant and he fell down on the ground unconscious." And in the purport to that verse, Prabhupāda writes—and I will recite this, it is very important; Prabhupāda's instructions—Prabhupāda writes: "Betel nuts are an intoxicant and therefore the regulative principles prohibit eating them. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's pastime of fainting after eating betel nuts is a solid instruction to all of us that one should not touch betel nuts, even those offered to Viṣṇu, just as one should not touch grains on an Ekādaśī day. Of course, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu's fainting had a particular purpose; as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he can do whatever he likes and eat whatever he wants, but we should not imitate his pastimes." Unquote.

So, I was reading that in many cases in the past in Bengal, householders had habits such as hookah or pān—you know, smoking hookah or eating betel nut—but Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī strictly forbade those activities for his disciples, especially for the householders. Anyway, continuing with Rādhā-Vinoda's pastimes: on another occasion, some guests came to the king's home during the night while he and his wife were sleeping. Not wanting to disturb their sleep, Rādhā-Vinoda took the form of a little boy, opened the door, let the guests in, and began to entertain them. He told the guests, "My father is sleeping now, but I can wake him up if you want," but the guests replied, "No, no, please don't disturb him; we will cook for ourselves." So, Rādhā-Vinoda, again in the form of a little boy, went to the market to buy groceries for the guests, but he didn't have any money. So, the shopkeeper was reluctant to give the little boy groceries on credit. Rādhā-Vinoda gave him his golden bangles—the little boy was wearing golden bangles—as collateral, saying, "Hold on to these until my father pays you tomorrow."

So, the next day, when the king woke up, he was a little surprised: "My guests are here!" He greeted them and asked, "Oh, when did you come? I was expecting you during the day, and who let you in?" So, they replied, "We're sorry we were a little late last night, but your son let us in. He's such a good boy; he even made arrangements for our dinner." Now, as the king didn't have a son, he was speechless, and due to the previous pastime with Rādhā-Vinoda, he suspected that Rādhā-Vinoda had manifested as his son and welcomed the guests. And his suspicions were confirmed when that shopkeeper came to his house that day with Rādhā-Vinoda's bangles, asking for the payment for the groceries. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So now, concerning the king's wife: she was troubled by the fact that she had no offspring, her and her husband, and as such, in her dealings with Rādhā-Vinoda, she was often praying to him for a child. And by the Lord's mercy, after a few years, she was blessed with a very beautiful baby girl, whom she and her husband the king named Rādhā-Vinodinī. Rādhā-Vinodinī. Now, the ācāryas, on commenting on this pastime, they write that Rādhā-Vinodinī was actually a partial expansion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Rādhārāṇī expands herself in many forms for Kṛṣṇa's pleasure. In *Kṛṣṇa* book, chapter 47, I was reading the other day, Prabhupāda writes, quote: "As Kṛṣṇa has numerous expansions of Viṣṇu-mūrtis, so his pleasure potency, Rādhārāṇī, also has innumerable expansions of goddesses of fortune. Rādhārāṇī expands herself into various śakti-tattva by her internal potency as multi-forms of the goddess of fortune."

So, to describe that: when Rādhā-Vinodinī was seven years old, while taking darśana of Rādhā-Vinoda, she spontaneously felt immense love and attraction for him. Naturally, we can understand. It's also written that the deity Rādhā-Vinoda became deeply attached to her, as we can understand. So the next day, this little girl told her parents she wanted to marry Rādhā-Vinoda. The parents were very confused; they had already arranged for a very handsome, rich zamindar—I mean, again, a landlord—boy to marry Rādhā-Vinodinī. However, girls were married early in those days. However, Rādhā-Vinodinī insisted that now she would only marry Rādhā-Vinoda. So, the king thought that she must be having some, you know, childish dream or something, so in a joking way, he said to her, "My dear daughter, I have arranged your marriage with another boy, but if Rādhā-Vinoda comes to the marriage hall on the day of your marriage and sits next to you with the sacred fire, certainly you can marry him." And everybody present, they kind of smiled and laughed a little bit. Then, himself laughing, the king said, "This means Rādhā-Vinoda will become my son-in-law."

So that evening, Rādhā-Vinodinī, the little girl, she went before the deity Rādhā-Vinoda and she formally requested him to become her husband. So Rādhā-Vinoda spoke up and he accepted her proposal, and he told her to go ahead with the marriage arrangements that her father had made for the boy her father had chosen for her, and he promised Rādhā-Vinodinī that he, the deity, would come on the marriage day and sit down in front of the fire before the boy came with his marriage party. So it is written that on that fateful day of the wedding, when Rādhā-Vinodinī was sitting next to the sacred fire in the marriage hall, Kṛṣṇa came in, sat next to her.

And not recognizing him, the king was surprised and said, "Who are you anyway? How dare you sit here?" So the Lord, who we can imagine was slightly disguised, replied, "Sir, I am that same person you rescued from the river. I am that same person you rescued from the river, Rādhā-Vinoda." And hearing this, the king almost fell over in ecstasy, but he wanted to check Rādhā-Vinoda's determination to marry his daughter. So when—in those days, zamindars or landlords as fathers-in-law would smoke a hookah with their jāmai, their sons-in-law, to show that they were both serious about this proposal. So the king asked Kṛṣṇa, or Rādhā-Vinoda, "Will you smoke the hookah with me?" The deity smiled, because he already had a silver hookah: "Yes, of course I will, sir." So that day, Rādhā-Vinodinī and Rādhā-Vinoda were married. I don't know, it doesn't mention what happened to the boy she was supposed to marry, but that's not so important. That day, Rādhā-Vinodinī and Rādhā-Vinoda were married.

Now, as the pastime unfolds: a few days later, the girl Rādhā-Vinodinī became very ill, and that night, the deity Rādhā-Vinoda appeared in her mother's dream and said, quote: "Rādhā-Vinodinī will not remain in this world much longer. Soon I will take her home as my bride." Unquote. So the Lord said, "Please make me a deity of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, from the dried-up devadāru tree in your courtyard, and upon the departure, upon the death of your daughter, she will merge into that deity of Rādhārāṇī and thus attain me." Remember, she's an expansion of Rādhārāṇī, that little girl.

So when Rādhā-Vinodinī's mother woke up, she told the king about the dream, and they both wept, but their tears were a mixture of joy and sorrow because they understood that their daughter would soon attain Rādhā-Vinoda's lotus feet, and that both of them—meaning their daughter as Rādhā and the deity Rādhā-Vinoda—would live in their house as a married couple in the form of deities and they could serve them. They would serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the form of a married couple. Of course, in our sampradāya, Gaudiya Vaiṣṇava-sampradāya, we don't worship Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as married; we worship Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the mood of unwedded; it makes the pastimes more exciting, we've discussed that many times. So, that day, the king took the wood of the devadāru tree that the Lord mentioned that was in his courtyard, and he fashioned a very beautiful deity of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And as soon as that mūrti was ready, it is said the king's daughter, Rādhā-Vinodinī, she left her body and entered into that deity, mystically entered into that deity. So they worshipped—that king and the queen—they worshipped the deity of Rādhā-Vinoda with Rādhārāṇī in their home.

So, some years later, when the king died, his son—his name was Vanamālī Rāi—became king, but unlike his father, he was materialistic and not very serious about maintaining the high standard his father had established for the deities. But one day, he was traveling on the back of an elephant surrounded by royal guards when suddenly a great devotee named Jagadbandhu came passing by with a huge kīrtana party. Hundreds of devotees were singing with him with mṛdaṅgas and karatālas while the saintly person, Jagadbandhu, was dancing at the head of the procession. Now, it is written that Vanamālī Rāi could not tear his ears and eyes away from that kīrtana party and the sounds of the Holy Name, and it mentions specifically the saint dancing; he just couldn't take his eyes off that whole scenario. And becoming overwhelmed by this sight, he jumped down from his elephant, the king, it is said, kicked off his royal slippers, and started dancing in the midst of the kīrtana. And afterwards, he bowed down before Jagadbandhu Bābā and requested him to visit his home there in East Bengal.

So Jagadbandhu accepted the invitation and visited Vanamālī Rāi, actually stayed in his home for a number of days, explaining to him the science of bhakti-yoga and, it is written, instilling in him love for the Divine Couple, love for the Divine Couple. So after that, Vanamālī Rāi became very enthusiastic and very serious in the sevā to Rādhā and Rādhā-Vinoda in his temple, but it is mentioned he stopped the hookah offering, thinking it wasn't a proper traditional practice in pūjā—maybe, like, became really serious. But Rādhā-Vinoda made his own arrangements to keep the hookah. One night, he came in the dream of the head pujārī tending to those deities and said, "Please give me back my hookah." And when the pujārī woke up and informed the king, Vanamālī Rāi, about the dream, Vanamālī made arrangements for the hookah sevā to be restored.

So, centuries later, when East Bengal, now Bangladesh, was overrun by Muslim rulers, Rādhā-Vinoda, the deity, and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī were shifted here to Vṛndāvana, and the temple is still known as Tarasa Mandir to, I guess, denote the original location of where it was in Bangladesh. And one can visit that temple and see Rādhā-Vinoda and that very special Rādhārāṇī deity, and the silver hookah as well. I was mentioning we took our Kārttika parikramā party there the other day, and there's two hookahs on the altar, but the older one, you can see it's very old, it's silver, and it's right next to Rādhā-Vinoda.

Yeah, so this is the pastime of that special deity and his consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I hope that you enjoyed that and I hope that you can take the opportunity to visit Tarasa Mandir next time you come to Śrī Vṛndāvanadhāma. Still have two weeks left of Kārttika here, so we'll do some more research, go out and find some more special places and share the pastimes with all of you. I hope you're having a wonderful Kārttika. Oh, glorious, Jaya Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi!