"*00227*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa and welcome to the second day of our 2017 Vraja-maṇḍala parikrama. This second day finds us at the most wonderful village of Daujī. Daujī is actually the deity of Lord Balarāma; He is over seven feet tall and was established by Rājā Nābha, the grandson of Kṛṣṇa, 5,000 years ago. When the invasion took place here in Vṛndāvana, the local pujārīs were quite concerned for the safety of Daujī, and they placed Him in a local kuṇḍa. Over the course of many hundreds of years, the identity and location of the Daujī deity was forgotten. Then, sometime in past history, He was discovered in the kuṇḍa. All the local villagers gathered together and brought Him out. They established Him here in this beautiful temple, where He is very happily and proudly worshipped, to the point that the village itself is actually called Daujī. Everyone very happily comes daily to the maṅgala-ārati of Daujī. You don't see devotees walking; like in Jaipur, you see them running, very enthusiastic.

So, here at the Daujī temple, one of the most interesting aspects of it for myself, at any rate, is the Daujī temple vegetable market. Just through these doors behind me opens up onto a wonderful veranda, where early this morning there were twenty or thirty different vegetable vendors, all of them calling out their wares in a mood very reminiscent of the early days of Vṛndāvana. The Daujī village is very much like that, surrounded by agricultural fields, and the city and town itself is very small, very nicely orchestrated, just like the old days of Vṛndāvana. It is a pleasure to come here, and surprisingly enough, not many devotees make the journey out here. I think with the release of this video, it will now become a known secret that visiting Daujī is a wonderful experience that every devotee should take part in. So, for those back in the West or in Europe or wherever that aren't able to join us here each day as we go to our parikrama places, we'll record what's going on and give all of you an opportunity to visit with us throughout the next 30 days of this 2017 Kārttika parikrama. Thank you very much, from the heart. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Kārttika-māsa kī jaya!""