"*00345*.*
"Hi Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees, welcome back again to our ever-ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta svāmin iti nāmine.* So, yesterday I found a very beautiful quote by Śrīla Prabhupāda, which underlines the importance of hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa as we are doing in these lectures each week. He wrote in a letter to a disciple on March 3rd, 1970, as follows: "Always remember Kṛṣṇa, who is your dear-most friend, and always serve Him just to please Him, and He will give you all intelligence how to become a first-class devotee. Just try to learn all about Kṛṣṇa, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and you will become a great preacher in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement." So, Prabhupāda wrote, "Just try to learn all about Kṛṣṇa," so through these lecture series, we are trying our best to learn all about Kṛṣṇa.

So today, we will continue with our discussions on the monsoon season, and this will be part three and our final talk on the monsoon season, which will also conclude our greater series on the six seasons of Vṛndāvana. Yes, there is one outstanding season, the dewy season, or sometimes referred to as the foggy season, but I was reading it is very much tied into the winter season, which I feel we covered extensively before. So, this will conclude our series on the six seasons in Braja. In Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the monsoon season lasts for two or three months, but one month in particular is very much appreciated in the temples in Vṛndāvana, and it is known as the month of Śrāvaṇa.

And this year, that falls between—at least here in India—July 23rd and August 20th. Now, in the month of Śrāvaṇa, every evening in the temples in Vṛndāvana, devotees sing bhajanas in melodies corresponding to the monsoon climate. These melodies, as many of you know, are called rāgas, and in the monsoon season, the prominent rāgas are Megha-malhāra rāga and Malhāra rāga. Those of you who are music students, you will know very clearly what that means. A number of the prominent bhajanas that are sung in these melodies in the temples were actually composed by a famous singer in Emperor Akbar’s court in the mid-1500s; his name was Tansen. We spoke about him quite extensively a couple of months ago, and Tansen was not a Muslim; he was a Vaiṣṇava, and he was a disciple of Śrī Haridāsa, a great spiritual master who lived in Nidhīvana in Vṛndāvana and who historically established the deity of Baṅke Bihārī. So, our Tansen wrote a beautiful song or poem in the Megha-malhāra rāga, which translated means, "This melody, the melody of the reigning cloud." It makes sense because it is the melody of a reigning cloud. So, his song briefly describes the lifting of Govardhana Hill and how the mighty Indra-deva ordered his clouds to pour torrents of rain on Vṛndāvana and how Kṛṣṇa held up Govardhana Hill. He writes, "[He] protected all Braja’s residents, including insects, worms, animals, and birds from the gigantic raindrops." He says, "the gigantic raindrops," and Tansen concludes, "Oh Lord, so wonderful are Your ways." I summarized this song because it is very popular during the month of Śrāvaṇa; in different temples, they sing it. 

Now, in the Rādhā Ramaṇa temple, during the daily ārati each day in the monsoon season, devotees sing a song which describes a particular beautiful pastime in which Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī becomes angry with Ramaṇajī. They sing that as a result—like we have kīrtana, we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa during the āratis—but they sing this song during the daily ārati every day, and they sing that Rādhārāṇī is angry with Rādhā Ramaṇajī, and that as a result of Śrīmatī’s displeasure, the ghaṇṭā, or the big bell in the Rādhā Ramaṇa temple, sounds like thundering clouds, the smoke of the incense makes the room dark like monsoon clouds, and the light of the ghee lamp seems to blaze like lightning in monsoon clouds. They continue singing and creating this monsoon atmosphere; they sing that Ramaṇa-jī becomes like a peacock and he dances in front of Śrīmatī to appease her mind or her anger. Now, at the completion of this ārati ceremony in the Ramaṇa temple, when they blow the conch, all the devotees go, "Jaya ho! Jaya ho!" which indicates that Rādhā Ramaṇa was successful in pacifying Śrīmatī and they are together again, so everyone is happy.

So, all this happens in the temple during the monsoon season; particular songs for different seasons. Now, in Vṛndāvana, amongst the Brajabāsīs, it is well known that Kṛṣṇa really loves this monsoon season; it is one of His favorites. One reason is because the monsoon season is the season of *vams*—*vams* of Vraja—which literally means the time when the peacocks increase their families, but it is noted without any sexual contact. In this regard, śāstra says there are two things that are very dear to the Lord because of their brahmacārī nature: one is the banana plant and the other is the peacock, because they are both brahmacārī; they do not indulge in sexual activities to increase their family. So, how is this? The banana tree is unique in the world of plants in that it produces no seeds, and there is no pollination process with its flowers for reproduction like in other plants. The only way a banana tree can be reproduced is that the farmer takes a part of the banana tree, usually not the roots but the bottom of the stalk, he breaks a little bit off, he literally puts it in the soil, waters it, and it starts to grow. So, in that sense, the banana tree is brahmacārī; it does not require a partner to reproduce. It is all very interesting. 

Now, the peacock, the *mayūra* (peacock), he is also brahmacārī, but in a different sense. Śāstra says that when the *mayūra* peacock sees the dark clouds of the monsoon season and hears the thundering of those clouds, he becomes excited and he starts dancing in happiness; he opens his feathers like that—we see sometimes here in Braja—and when this male peacock sees his reflection in a body of water like a lake or a pond, he becomes intoxicated with his beauty. But when he looks down and sees his ugly feet, śāstra says a teardrop falls from his eyes, and at that time, the peahen, meaning the female peacock, she comes and drinks that tear and becomes pregnant. This is śāstra; she drinks that tear and she becomes pregnant. So, in that sense, the peacocks are brahmacārī; no sexual contact. So Kṛṣṇa appreciates these two brahmacārīs, the banana tree and the peacock, or any brahmacārī for that matter. I mean, we know that verse from Bhagavad-gītā: *praśāntātmā vigata-bhīr brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ*. "One should hold one's body, neck, and head erect in a straight line and stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated, subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one should meditate upon Me within the heart and make Me the ultimate goal of life." Brahmacārī! Anyway, appreciating the peacock’s many contributions to the beauty and the culture of Vṛndāvana, especially during the monsoon season when there are so many new peacocks, it is one of the main reasons śāstra says that Kṛṣṇa wears a peacock feather in His hair, on His head. On some special days in the month of Śrāvaṇa, in the monsoon season, on very special days also, Vṛndāvana’s deities are dressed in outfits made entirely out of peacock feathers. That, we can’t do in the West; we can follow in the footsteps of the Brajabāsīs—you know, on special days like Janmāṣṭamī we can give our deities flower outfits—but we can’t find enough peacock feathers to make a whole outfit. So, that’s something special about Braja; you have to come and see in the month of Śrāvaṇa. Beautiful, the deity is—just the whole outfit is peacock feathers. So Kṛṣṇa loves the peacocks; that’s special in Braja.

But perhaps the main event in the month of Śrāvaṇa during the monsoon season is, without a doubt, Jhūlana-yātrā. Jhūlana-yātrā means the swing festival, very popular in ISKCON as well. And in this daily festival, it happens every day in the month of Śrāvaṇa. All the temples in Vṛndāvana, they place a big silver or wooden swing in their temples and they swing their deities; generally in the evening, they swing the deities. Sometimes the big deities, but very often the *utsava-vigrahas* (the festival deities), the smaller deities, they swing every day. And during this time, I know—because I have been three years now in Vṛndāvana—you often hear the Brajabāsīs singing these two famous ślokas, I guess you could say: "Jhūla jhūlata hama-dāra, Vṛndāvana meṅ kāīśī" (You are swinging on the swing in Vṛndāvana, oh friend, how very green the kuñja is). Monsoon, that’s short, but very sweet; you hear that everywhere. They also sing: "Āo jhūlano mātero chuke bhora-rāja, huka bādhara" (Go and sit on the swing, low rain clouds have come and filled the sky), all related to monsoon. They sing these verses during the month of Śrāvaṇa. Now, I read a detailed description of these swings, which are so much part of the month, in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, and how on different days these swings are decorated with nature’s gifts, different gifts of nature. For example, on some days the swings in the various temples are decorated with just the leaves and vines of trees, whereas on another day they are decorated just with fruits, and some days I saw also they are decorated just with corn, on other days with flowers, or various vegetables like that. It’s a detail, but it’s very interesting; a lot of variety every day you walk around Vṛndāvana in the month of Śrāvaṇa, you see in the temples and it’s really interesting. 

One Vaiṣṇava poet, Paramānanda—Paramānanda-dāsa, I quoted him a few days ago—he describes in his writings how the two ropes of these swings represent two aspects of life: *sukha* and *duḥkha*, meaning happiness and distress. And the seat, the main seat of the swing, represents our heart, where hopefully the Divine Couple sit if we invite Them. And he says when we push the swing and it goes forward, the Divine Couple take the problems of life from us; the Divine Couple take the problems of life away from us. And when the swing comes back towards us, the Divine Couple give us Their love; when it comes back, they give us Their love. So sweet! So, this is the mood in swinging Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa during Jhūlana-yātrā. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Now, the swing festival in the Rādhā-vallabha temple is very famous because every evening, when Rādhā-vallabha come out to swing on the swing, the pujārīs—you know, there is a big crowd, and they are all chanting—and the pujārīs spray the entire crowd with these big instruments that spray out scented water, so much so that it gives the impression it is raining, like the monsoon season. And everyone becomes happily wet, because previously it was the hot season, so no one minds getting all wet. Monsoon! And in Rādhā-ramaṇa’s temple, in their swing festival daily, it is very interesting; they give Rādhā-ramaṇa a drink every day with black peppers in it. The black peppers are mixed in, and it is called *pānā*. *Pānā*—and the pilgrims like to get that *mahā-prasāda*.

Also, I read that throughout Vṛndāvana, in the month of Śrāvaṇa, all the deities wear clothes or outfits, let us say, that are different shades of green, like dark green and light green and something in between or a combination. And their jewelry is made of *jalajātā*, the "son of the ocean," and who was the son of the ocean? Pearls. So, the jewelry is made of *jalajātā* (the son of the ocean)—pearls. And also, the priests in the temples, they also wear green silk dhotīs. It’s described for the pleasure of their Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa deities in accordance with the mood, in the sense that because of the rain, there is lush vegetation all around Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana was dry during the summer, and now the rains have come and everything is green, and there are flowers blossoming, etc. So, kind of in that mood, as the deities are wearing different shades of green to celebrate, so are the pujārīs. Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī!

And I also discovered that during the month of Śrāvaṇa, Govindadeva—big Govindadeva, a deity in Jaipur—He actually sits for a few days on a big antique swing made entirely out of gold and silver. And there are guards there, obviously—He is a big deity—but somehow they get Him on a swing made, it’s an old antique piece, made of gold and silver. So, actually, the whole of Vṛndāvana enjoys this Jhūlana-yātrā festival, the swing festival, with great pleasure for an entire month. And we, as we’ve been discussing Vṛndāvana for several years now, just—isn’t it? It’s one festival after another, one festival after another, all centered around Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and the residents of Vṛndāvana. And that way we can understand the Brahma-saṁhitā statement that in Vṛndāvana, walking is dancing, talking is singing, and there’s a festival every day, but a variety of festivals. So, Jhūlana-yātrā; so everyone’s celebrating and they are all happy; there’s a certain happiness there in the month of Śrāvaṇa. However, I did read in the writings of one poet about a gopī in Kṛṣṇa-līlā who, because her in-laws would not let her go and swing with Kṛṣṇa—because Kṛṣṇa swings with the other gopīs as well, at least they get to also push Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa on the swing—but her in-laws wouldn't let her go, so she was feeling intense separation from Kṛṣṇa. So much so that whenever a small drop of the monsoon rains touched her body—although that would be generally welcome because it's the hot summer just finishing—for her, she felt the raindrops were piercing her body. Why is that? Because it is said in Vṛndāvana, in Brajabāsī language, she is thinking, "The raindrops now feel like a dagger in the absence of my beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The raindrops now feel like a dagger in the absence of my beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa." Deep.

So, during the month of Śrāvaṇa, also I was reading, the temple pujārīs, they offer their deities specific sweets: *kheer*, *guñjiyā* sweets, sesame *laḍḍūs*, *barfī*, and some other sweets. And also, they offer a very sweet dish called *pheṇī*. *Pheṇī*, which means a type of sweet; *pheṇī*, it is offered in the temples—they offer a lot to the deities and it is widely distributed to the pilgrims and visitors who come to see them. So, dear prabhu, these are some of the glories—there’s Vṛndāvana’s full of unlimited glories—these are some of the glories of the month of Śrāvaṇa in this very beautiful favorite season of Kṛṣṇa’s, the monsoon season in Vṛndāvana. And again, it concludes our entire series on the six seasons of Vṛndāvana; kind of sad, but of course in Kṛṣṇa consciousness it only gets better. So, we have many more lectures on Vṛndāvana and eventually Māyāpura and Lord Caitanya, etc., so we’ll just keep going. But we’ll finish the series with two short quotes from Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s *Vraja-riti-cintāmaṇi*. They are short, but they are very relevant to our series. He writes:

> "The six seasons, with their various qualities, occur at different times in Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa enjoys pastimes in all the seasons every day in Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa enjoys pastimes in all the seasons every day, and all the seasons render constant service to Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. In all these seasons, the gopīs serve Kṛṣṇa by making ornaments from the flowers available in each and every season."

Thank you, Śrīla Viśvanātha. So, we’ll conclude there and you know, we’ll just dive into the treasure house of the literature of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas and find another series to talk about. And I have to decide what it’s going to be; I don’t know yet. It’s often difficult to make a decision—it’s like at the Sunday feast, you have so many sweets on your plate, different kinds, you know, I don’t know which one to eat first—but we’ll find something appropriate. Prabhu, thank you so much for the privilege of doing this research and sharing all this information with you. Oh, glorious.

Śrī Śrī.

Thank you.""