"*00461*.*
"Hi Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Svāmī Prabhupāda. So, as I posted on my Facebook page recently, I am seeking everyone's blessings to give a series of lectures on Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s relationship with his iṣṭadeva, his beloved deity of Govinda-deva. This little mini-series should take us up to his disappearance day, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s disappearance day, on August 19th. There will be a lot of new nectar—I mean, I’ve spoken on Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and his beloved deity Govindajī a number of times, but there’s going to be a lot of new nectar, and I wanted to stress that it’s all modified, much of it coming from our new opportunity in being able to research in the prestigious Vṛndāvana Research Institute, which I spoke about the other day, which has a library of 32,000 scriptures, and many of them are by our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas. On top of that, whatever pastimes, verses, and details we will share with you, we’ve fact-checked and received approval from a member of the GBC Śāstric Advisory Committee, my good friend, namely Hari-pārṣada Dāsa, who is very expert in Sanskrit, history, etc. And of course, we’re very much depending on the blessings of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, invoking auspiciousness, let us first properly glorify Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī: *sujata-mama-dehasya jala-śaucam*—for purification of my physical body, I bathe regularly using water. However, for the complete purification of myself and my existence, I bathe in the nectar words of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. That beautiful verse was composed by Hari-pārṣada Prabhu. And regarding Govinda-deva, in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* (Ādi 1.19), we hear from Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī; he writes, *ete śrī-rādhikā-devyaḥ*. He writes: "These three deities of Vṛndāvana, Madana-mohana, Govinda, and Gopīnātha, have absorbed the heart and soul of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. I worship their lotus feet, for they are the lords of my heart." And in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, we hear from Rūpa Gosvāmī a very beautiful description of Govinda-deva, or as is often known as Govindajī—a very affectionate name, Govindajī. There, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī writes about his iṣṭadeva: "In a forest of desire trees known as Vṛndāvana is a golden mansion, and in its midst is a jeweled throne at the place called Yogapīṭha. Seated thereupon is Śrī Govinda-deva, a veritable Cupid incarnate. He is served there as King, bedecked with divine clothes, ornaments, and other paraphernalia, served incessantly by thousands of devotees." So beautiful, from the heart of Rūpa Gosvāmī. We also know Lord Brahmā glorified Govinda-deva at the very beginning of creation; in his [Brahma-saṁhitā], after receiving Vedic knowledge from Govinda, he said famously, *govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi*.

Now, as we’ve heard in previous lectures, Govindajī was carved 5,000 years ago under the direction of Vajranābha, who was the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa. That was done also under the direction, or you could say the supervision, of Uttarā, the mother of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. But like many of the original Vṛndāvana deities, Govindajī was lost with the progress of time. It was our beloved Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī who eventually discovered Govindajī in Vṛndāvana 500 years ago. And that particular pastime—how he discovered Govinda-deva—I’d like to share with you today with lots of nectar details. And the pastime actually begins in Mathurā, which of course is very close to Vṛndāvana, according to local Vrajavāsī narrations. Around 500 years ago, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī used to beg prasādam from the houses of seven brāhmaṇa families. And after begging, Rūpa Gosvāmī’s habit was that he would go on Vṛndāvana-parikramā; he’d walk to Vṛndāvana, he’d go on Vṛndāvana-parikramā. And it’s stated that one reason he would do that was that he was always hankering for, always hoping to find his worshipable deity, Govindajī. We know that one of Lord Caitanya’s instructions to the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana was to establish deity worship here in Vṛndāvana. And earlier on, of course, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī had found his worshipable deity, Madana-mohana; that was the first deity found in Vṛndāvana. And Rūpa Gosvāmī was always wondering, you know, when the Lord of his heart, Govinda-deva, would make his appearance. 

So one day, as he was doing Vṛndāvana-parikramā, he suddenly experienced great separation from Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, with whom he’d had so much association and received specific instructions. He just suddenly became overwhelmed with feelings of separation from Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He thought to himself, "For many years now I have not seen Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; I have not even received any letters from him." That’s what he was thinking. So the ācāryas say that at that time in history, there was a constant flow of letters back and forth from Jagannātha Purī and Vṛndāvana. I thought that was really interesting—even then, you know, the Gosvāmīs are just, Vṛndāvana’s a jungle, and they’re coming and they’re following the instructions of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, studying the revealed scriptures, establishing deity worship, finding the lost places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, but even then there was, according to the ācārya scholars, a constant flow of letters back and forth from Jagannātha Purī, where Mahāprabhu was living, and Vṛndāvana. So on that particular day, Rūpa Gosvāmī, as he was feeling intense separation from Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he stopped walking, and sitting underneath a big tree, he wrote the famous *Prārthana Caitanyāṣṭakam*, the famous writing of a poem, you could say. 

Which we actually find in his book *Stavamālā*. It’s eight verses—aṣṭakam. He wrote it right then and there as he was feeling separation from Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Eight verses—my favorite, because we can all have favorites—my favorite of the eight verses of this poem is the following: "Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra in a loud voice, the holy name dancing on his tongue as he counts the number of recitations on a beautiful knotted string held in his effulgent hand. His eyes are large and his long arms bend down to his knees as he performs his pastimes. Will he ever again become visible before the path of my eyes?" That last line is very relevant; it goes: "Ever again become visible before the path of my eyes."

So, as Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī sat there feeling intense separation from Mahāprabhu, a cowherd man named Govinda Dāsa, who took care of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s 500 cows, came to see him and was very sad to see that Rūpa Gosvāmī was literally crying in separation. Now, it may come as a surprise to all of you that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī had 500 cows. We always hear how renounced he was, you know, even sleeping under a different tree every night, and that’s all very true. But I read that in my research in the institute here, Lord Caitanya had instructed him in a letter that while he was in Vṛndāvana, he should be prepared to take care of the many renounced sages that lived there. Another instruction of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in a letter that when Rūpa Gosvāmī was in Braj, he should take care of the many renounced sages that lived there. Therefore, he used some of the wealth that he had amassed previously in Rām keli in the service of that Muslim ruler, Hussein Shah. We all know that pastime in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*; he had a boatload of gold coins, and he used them in different ways. He left some for Sanātana Gosvāmī so he could bribe the guards in the jail to escape, and the different ways he used the money, but apparently he kept a number of those gold coins, brought them to Vṛndāvana, and using them provided—I was reading—a constant supply of milk to those sādhu. That’s why he had the cows. Of course, he had other people taking care of the cows, but everyone considered those to be Rūpa Gosvāmī’s cows, with which he served the Vaiṣṇavas, using everything in Kṛṣṇa’s service. 

At that time in history, there was a Muslim emperor named Humayun, whose palace was in what we consider modern-day Delhi. And this particular emperor—actually, his son later was Akbar; he’s the father of Akbar—so this particular emperor, he was very inspired hearing of the glories of [Rūpa] Gosvāmī because Delhi is not far from Vṛndāvana. And as such, he granted him permission that Rūpa Gosvāmī’s cows could graze anywhere and everywhere around Braj, and he didn’t have to pay any tax for that. Interesting note, because you know, you’d have your cows at a certain portion of land which you use, but this emperor said, "Rūpa Gosvāmī has 500 cows, they can go anywhere and everywhere, and he doesn’t have to pay tax." This is the benefit of spending time in the research institute; we can find these letters and these particular facts which is so much nectar, and I’m so happy to share with you.

So anyway, when Govinda Dāsa, this cowherd man, saw Rūpa Gosvāmī literally crying in a deep state of meditation and separation from Lord Caitanya, he brought him out of his meditation by sharing with him what he felt might be some good news. So he said, "Gosvāmījī, one of your *go*—meaning cows—one of your *go*, one of your cows, because *go* means cow, one of your *go* cows daily pours all of its milk on top of a nearby hill and continuously cries there for hours. I’ve seen this so many times." So hearing this, it’s described Rūpa Gosvāmī’s meditation broke, and he became ecstatic, suddenly realizing that Govinda-deva was about to appear to him. And how did he conclude this? It’s very interesting. The ācāryas say because in the Vrajabāsī language, *go* means cow, like it does in the Sanskrit language, but particularly we’re speaking Vrajabāsī language here, *go* means cow, and then by hearing that word, his *vinda*—meaning his meditation—on Caitanya was broken. So he concluded that very soon he would have darśana of Govinda, his worshipable deity. Like that, he heard *go*, the word *go* (cow), and that broke his *vinda*, his meditation on Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So he put those two words together: "Govinda." He took it to mean that I’m going to have darśana of my iṣṭadeva, Govinda, very soon. Very interesting. 

So he was very blissful. Now, I found a beautiful verse describing that very moment that he realized, in that unusual way, that he was going to have darśana of his Lord. It’s a beautiful verse, and it comes from a Vaiṣṇava scholar of several hundred years ago, a very respected devotee; his name was Govardhana Gosvāmī. He wrote a book called *Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana-stotra*, unpublished as yet. This is one of my desires: that there’s so many books in that institute which are written by the Gosvāmīs or Śrīla Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, that for whatever reason have never been published; they’re sitting there in their original handwriting. So I’m hoping to serve the Prabhupāda disciples, to serve all of you, by getting the original copies, getting them verified, and scanning them, of course, for the future, but actually publishing them. Can you imagine? They’re there. So I read—or I heard—that some of the books have not been opened in 500 years. What is that to our ācāryas and to all of you? So Govardhana Gosvāmī, where he glorifies Rūpa and Sanātana, in particular, verse 17 is pertinent here, where he describes the moment that Rūpa Gosvāmī, sitting there, realized he’s going to have darśana, somehow or other, with Govinda-deva. And this is the verse: "Begging for alms in the houses of devotee brāhmaṇas in Mathurā, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who was more humble than a blade of grass and more tolerant than a tree, sat under a tree, holding a clay pot and wearing a black woolen *cādar* on his shoulder. There, he envisioned his beloved Govinda-deva while crying in happiness and singing beautiful songs about the pastimes of the Lord of Rādhikā." Wow. So that was the moment, and it’s recorded by that wonderful devotee.

So immediately, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī made an announcement that all strong men and able boys of Vṛndāvana come to that particular hill that Govinda Dāsa had indicated. And as soon as everyone arrived, they began digging with picks and shovels and bare hands. And bear in mind, there’s a lot of boys, a lot of men there on top of that hill, in a little hole that had been made by that cow pouring milk on that spot for who knows how long. Actually, it’s written for years. Now, I remember, for years. And I was reading that the work progressed very quickly due to the muddy nature of the earth; for so many years the milk’s coming, the milk’s coming, the milk is coming, so you can imagine it seeping down. So it wasn’t a hard dirt or rock or anything like that; it was very soft way, way down because of the milk. And in fact, in three śāstric references, I found that the villagers dug down five stories. You think of a building, right, going up? Think of the building going down. Five stories down, they came to the topknot of Govinda-deva. I’ve been telling that pastime for years, and I was always thinking, "You know, they’re digging a little bit, there’s the topknot." Three śāstric references: Govinda-deva was five stories down. It said *tala*—it means a floor or a story—down, situated in the earth, was Govinda. Wow. 

And with the news that Govindajī had been found, every Vrajabāsī in Vṛndāvana living at that time came running to what we call Yogapīṭha. A Yogapīṭha is anywhere where the Supreme Lord sits down or stands permanently; that’s the actual definition of Yogapīṭha. Anywhere where the Supreme Lord sits down or stands permanently, that’s the proper Sanskrit definition of Yogapīṭha. And it’s also described that as soon as he was taken out, all the cows in Vṛndāvana also came running to where the Yogapīṭha was. And as they—I was reading—as they ran there, the sounds of their bells, big and small, filled the air of Braja. And upon arriving at that sacred spot, they all laid down together and cuddled in the soft dust of Vṛndāvana. Now bear in mind, I’m having devotees help me with the Sanskrit and the Bengali, so these are the translations of devotee scholars who are helping so that this is how it was translated: "They all laid down together and cuddled in the soft dust of Śrī Vṛndāvana." 

So now, it’s described that when Govinda-deva emerged from the five stories underground, he was completely brownish with the dust that had stuck on his body for so many centuries. And I even read that some stone particles were stuck to the lines in his hands and his feet; you know, he has the lines there in his hands, there were some small particles of stone. And it’s written that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī was standing by the whole time, supporting himself with a stick, because he was shivering in great ecstasy as his eyes flooded with tears and caused a large puddle to appear on the ground. And when Govinda-deva was finally completely out of that large hole, Rūpa Gosvāmī was the first one to offer full daṇḍavats, prostrating himself on the ground. And then I read, "three daṇḍas later"—now again, I’ve done this; it’s equal to 24 minutes—so meaning three daṇḍas later, meaning one hour and 20 minutes later, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī arrived to greet Govinda-deva. And very soon other great souls came, like Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī came, and Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī came, and they all came to take darśana of Govinda-deva, but to offer their congratulations to Rūpa Gosvāmī—he had been reunited with his Lord. And that’s what we’re all so aspiring to do; the whole process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is to be reunited with our beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

So then, very quickly, brāhmaṇa women arrived from Mathurā carrying different types of pūjā articles, and then soon after, Caturvedī brāhmaṇas, Caturvedīs, also arrived from Mathurā to chant mantras. This is how we glorify the Lord: we chant mantras, we chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare* to reconnect. So these Caturvedī brāhmaṇas, they came, they’re chanting their mantras, and it’s written that Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī had brought pots filled with water from the river Yamunā. Then, combining that sacred water with the milk of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s 500 cows, they—and all the Vrajabāsīs, certain Vrajabāsīs—held a very elaborate, four-hour-long abhiṣeka of Govindajī. That was new to me; I knew there was an abhiṣeka, but four hours, exactly four hours long, abhiṣeka of Govindajī. And actually, those of you who are pūjārīs, you’ll be interested to know that the whole procedure as it was performed is described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his book *Kṛṣṇa-janma-tithi*. I’m hoping to publish that book as well, *Kṛṣṇa-janma-tithi*, the whole process of how they did that abhiṣeka. And it should be noted that some pūjārīs who have studied this book say that during this abhiṣeka ceremony, there’s no mention of the blowing of conch shells. I thought that’s interesting, they didn’t blow any conch shells. And then I really went back to the institute and questioned and looked, and I found out that the reason was that when Akrūra left Vṛndāvana with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma on the chariot 5,000 years ago, he very loudly heralded the occasion by blowing a conch shell—"Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma are leaving Vṛndāvana for Mathurā to fight with the wrestlers." So in many of the Vṛndāvana temples, even today, there are no conch shells blown, for they only serve as a painful reminder that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma left for Mathurā and never came back. Of course, in our ISKCON temples we do, and I believe in the Gauḍīya Maṭha temples as well, but if you visit the principal temples in Vṛndāvana, you won’t hear the conch. What does it mean to the people of Braja? Kṛṣṇa never came back. They don’t blow conch shells. Interesting note. 

I also read that on that occasion, when everyone asked Rūpa Gosvāmī, "So can you reveal to us the name of your deity?" He replied as follows. This is so important, so nice. He said, "As the Lord appeared near to a cow and it was indicated (*vinda*) by a cow (*go*), and I was meditating on Gopāla-gāyatrī while I was facing the sun, therefore he shall be known as Govinda, the Lord of Rūpa." So again, we hear the word *vinda*, which we took previously to mean meditation—the meditation on Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s broken *vinda*—but here we find a second meaning of *vinda*: it means indicated. The Sanskrit translation means... previously we had the Vrajabāsī language version of *vinda*, now we have the Sanskrit translation meaning "indicated." So let’s read that again, recite that again: "As the Lord appeared near to a cow," Rūpa says, "and it was indicated (*vinda*) by a cow (*go*), and I was meditating on Gopāla-gāyatrī while I was facing the sun, therefore he shall be known as Govinda, the Lord of Rūpa." Referring back again to that moment that he realized, "I’m going to have darśana of my Govindajī." A little technical, but really, really interesting. 

And it’s also written in *Bhakti-ratnākara*, second wave, that all the saints and the Vrajabāsīs, on seeing Govindajī for the first time, they all chanted together. This was very important, they’re all there, you know, and they’re having darśana for the first time. Govinda-deva, Rūpa Gosvāmī is there in ecstasy, he’s given the name of his deity and explained why. Everyone spontaneously they chanted: "Appeared in this world through the via medium, agency of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī." *Śrī Govinda prakāṭa haila*—appeared in this world through the via medium, the agency of Rūpa Gosvāmī. This is nectar. That evening, I was reading, Rūpa Gosvāmī offered Govindajī tilaka in a grand ceremony, then he offered him different types of colored powders, and then decorated his face with various kinds of *makara-cihna*. What’s *makara-cihna*? *Makara-cihna* are designs of fishes—fish—that we paint on our deities. Or we, now we know to paint on our deities, little fish on their faces, on their hands, and arms, and feet. This is *makara-cihna*. And just why did Rūpa Gosvāmī offer colorful powders to Śrī Govindajī on that specific day? This is so interesting because Govindajī appeared on Vasant-pañcamī, the first day of spring, when all the Vrajabāsīs started playing Holi. So Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī also composed a beautiful song for Vasant-pañcamī, he composed a beautiful song, and we find that song in his book *Stavamālā*. And it begins like this: *jaya jaya sundara nanda-kumāra, saurabha saṅkaṭa vṛndāvana-vihita vasanta-vihāra*. Translation: "O handsome son of Nanda! O Lord who enjoys Vasant (springtime) pastimes in the fragrant forest of Vṛndāvana, all glorious to you! Oh, glorious to you!" 

And then further in that song, glorifying springtime, wherein he—you know, the first day he found his beloved deity—further along in that song, he writes very nicely: "O Lord whose curling hair is splendid with many new flower buds! O Lord anointed by loving friends with kuṅkuma and powdered camphor! O Lord, the very gentle smile shining on whose lips is gazed by your friends! O Lord whose restless sidelong glances arouse the amorous desires of Śrī Rādhā! O Lord whose jewel necklace moves with your graceful dancing and that enchants the entire world! O friend of the devotees! O Lord whose incarnations enjoy pastimes in Sanātana Gosvāmī’s heart! O handsome son of Nanda! O Lord who enjoys springtime pastimes in the fragrant forest of Vṛndāvana, all glorious to you! All glorious to you, O Kṛṣṇa." So that, dear Prabhupāda disciples, is a sacred pastime of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī finding Govinda-deva, known affectionately as Govindajī, at that special place now known as Yogapīṭha in Vṛndāvana. And Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī writes in *Bhakti-ratnākara* again, the second wave: *śrī-vigraha-śrī-govinda-vrajānanda-kumāra-sad-yogapīṭha-sthitam*. He writes in the scriptures it’s mentioned that the deity of the son of Nanda Mahārāja, Śrī Govinda, is eternally situated at Yogapīṭha. Wow.

So we’ll finish with two verses today. The first is by Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya—interesting, Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya, in his very famous *Govinda-aṣṭakam*—we have lots of aṣṭakams, so this is his *Govinda-aṣṭakam*, and it’s verse 4—and it was utilized by Rūpa Gosvāmī, actually; he would quote this verse sometimes, I read, because it’s a very beautiful description of his deity. So in the *Govinda-aṣṭakam* we find verse number four: "Worship Govinda, who is supreme bliss, who is the protector of the world, who made his advent in the world as Gopāla through his līlā, who is the protector of the race of Yādavas and cows, who made the cowherd people happy by lifting up through his līlā the Govardhana mountain where the Gopīs used to play, whose name Govinda is uttered clearly by the cows—or scriptures, or cows and scriptures—who has many names, and who is beyond the reach of ignorance." And the second verse that we’ll finish today is by Śrīla Raghunātha Dāsa. He writes at the end of his illustrious *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*, he writes: "Placing a straw between my teeth, I pray again and again, birth after birth may I be the dust at the lotus feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī." 

So with those words, we will finish today. Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, we’ve heard so much nectar; I’m very happy to have the service, I’m researching. I don’t know how I got that service; they just opened up everything to us, and I’m going to try to facilitate them and help them develop that project as well. So if any of you have any ideas how to do that, how to preserve these scriptures—it’s all new to me—I’m going to have to look into it, maybe contact some museums and find out how they preserve this paper and protect it. I know that sometimes you can put them in certain glass boxes with the humidity controlled, the temperatures controlled; whatever, we’ll research that and just help them, because nothing much has happened there in a lot of years. So this is a very special opportunity; let’s do it together. So thank you everyone, and we have more classes now, as I mentioned this is a series on Rūpa Gosvāmī and his service and relationship with his beloved Dev. So see you in a couple of days with Part Two in the series. All glorious to Śrīla Prabhupāda, he was actually revealing all of this to us and giving us all these wonderful services. All right, Kṛṣṇa. Back home, back to Godhead, and share these teachings with the whole world. Inspire people to take up the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness as Śrīla Prabhupāda has taught it to us, and take them all back, going back to Godhead. All right, Kṛṣṇa.""