"*00282*.*
"Dear Krishna, very dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī and his beloved deity, Śrī Govindadeva. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale.* 

Recently, we discussed how Govindajī’s temple was attacked in the late 1600s by the emperor Aurangzeb, and how, after ten days of being hidden in Govinda-kuṇḍa, Govindajī, Śrī Rādhā, and Vṛndā-devī—as well as the books of the six Goswāmīs and, I read today, Kāśīśvara’s deity of Gaura-Govinda—were all secretly taken out to Rādhā-kuṇḍa in a bullock cart for safekeeping. We discussed how they were nicely received and worshipped by the few renounced Gauḍīya sādhus living out there. Now, when I read all of this the other day, I began wondering what happened to the other prominent deities in Vṛndāvana at that time. I took a few hours to research, and I found out that, well, first of all, during the initial attack on Vṛndāvana by Aurangzeb’s forces, the beloved self-manifested deity of Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was unharmed. This was primarily because, as you know, He is quite small, so the pujārīs very quickly took Him and hid Him in a secret place. He was also unharmed because the Goswāmīs of the Rādhā Ramaṇa temple had discussed years earlier the possibility that one day Aurangzeb might attack the Vṛndāvana temples; they never built a formal temple for Ramaṇa, but rather, quite intelligently, they built a structure that looked in every way like a normal house. Of course, if you are inside, it is a beautiful temple, but they made it appear like a normal house. So, Rādhā Ramaṇa’s residence went unnoticed by the marauding Mughal soldiers on that fateful day that Vṛndāvana was attacked.

What is more, I read—and this is really interesting—that when the Mughal soldiers came down the street where Rādhā Ramaṇa was housed (where his temple is today), outside they saw a crescent moon sign on the memorial where Rādhā Ramaṇa had actually appeared from the śālagrāma-śilā. Those of you who have been to the Rādhā Ramaṇa temple and to Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s samādhi-mandira know that between the two there is a shrine; it is the actual place where Ramaṇa appeared. So, on that memorial, they saw a crescent sign, like the crescent moon. They assumed that this was an Islamic house or center, because Islam is represented by the sign of the crescent moon. But in fact, that crescent moon was there because it was the sign of Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s family lineage; for they were all descendants of the Candravaṁśa—candra means the moon—so in their family, they also use the crescent moon as a sign of their lineage. What happened was, the soldiers, when they saw that, just paid their respects to the sign and moved on.

When I read that, I remembered a verse from the Bible, Isaiah 45:15: "Truly you are a God who hides himself, O God of Israel, the Savior." Remember that? "Truly you are a God who hides himself, O God of Israel, the Savior." 

I also found information about the famous deity of Gopīnātha. Those of you who have been to Jaipur know that, of course, Gopīnātha resides there now; for several hundred years, it has been a favorite place for all of us to go on parikramā. I found information about Gopīnātha, and we know that Gopīnātha was originally discovered by Madhu Paṇḍita 500 years ago at Vaṁśīvaṭa in Vṛndāvana. We gave a lecture about that pastime last year. So, when the Mughal army attacked Vṛndāvana, Gopīnātha didn't initially fare as well as Govindajī did, for the simple reason that He didn't have the patronage of the Rajput kings in Amber and Rajasthan—which was their capital, Amber—like Govindajī did. When news of the impending attack on Vṛndāvana came, many devotees, under the direction of Śivarāma Gosvāmī and his royal contacts, were able to quickly hide Govindajī and, within ten days, transport Him to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, where His worship continued unabated. Gopīnātha, however, was being worshipped by a few very poor, simple, renounced sādhus in Vṛndāvana. Of course, the worship was very nice because they were worshipping with pure devotion, but they didn't have the facilities and the patronage like the Govindajī temple had. So, when they heard the big bell ring that day—remember that Śivarāma Gosvāmī rang the bell, alerting everyone that the army was coming—when they were informed of the danger, all they could do was very quickly dig a large hole in the big garden of the Gopīnātha Mandira and place Gopīnātha—who is actually the biggest deity of the Gauḍīyas in Vṛndāvana, Gopīnātha is very tall—Rādhārāṇī, and a very beautiful deity of Anaṅga Mañjarī in the ground, in the muddy grounds. Whereas Govindajī’s temple at that time was situated on the edge of Vṛndāvana town, kind of out of sight of everything, the temple of Rādhā-Gopīnātha was situated right in the very marketplace of Vṛndāvana—you could say almost in the center of Vṛndāvana town, right near the marketplace. Thus, any attempt to move Gopīnātha and the deities that accompanied Him would be easily noticed. If someone tried to dig up the earth and take them out of that hole, it could be easily noticed because they were practically in the center of town. So, I was very sad to read that Gopīnātha and any other deities with Him remained in that muddy hole for five years. After five years, those renounced sādhus were somehow able to safely dig Him, Rādhā, and Anaṅga Mañjarī out and secretly move them to Rādhā-kuṇḍa as well.

Now, as for Dāmodara—you know Dāmodara is the very small, beloved deity of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī who was carved by the hands of Rūpa Gosvāmī and given to Jīva Gosvāmī as a present—as far as Dāmodara, myself and my team couldn't find any historical records of what happened to Him during that attack and immediately after in Vṛndāvana. But we checked with a Gosvāmī family now serving in the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, and they say that Dāmodara actually traveled with Govindajī to Rādhā-kuṇḍa on the bullock cart and eventually, with all the stops that we will be reading about, made it to present-day Jaipur. They gave evidence for that; they said that at that time, the Rajput kings of Rajasthan were giving grants and charity to both deities together in one document, to Govindajī and to Dāmodara. For whatever reason, their grants and their charity were given to those two deities at the same time, and there is a document to that effect which they told me is in Jaipur and is being kept safely there. So that is Dāmodara.

Now, regarding Rādhā-Madana-mohana: as we know, Madana-mohana was the first deity discovered in Vṛndāvana by the Gosvāmīs, by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. The Mughals attacked the Rādhā-Madana-mohana temple, and they were very busy destroying part of that temple. What we see today is actually the remnants; it doesn't look like the Govindajī temple, where you can see how it was attacked, but it was attacked and partially destroyed. Those pujārīs were somehow able to move Madana-mohana and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who had come by that time, secretly out to Rādhā-kuṇḍa as well, and from there they eventually made their way to Rajasthan. 

I also looked into the deities of Śyāmasundara—Rādhā-Śyāmasundara—who at that time were being worshipped by a few sādhus in their bhajan-kuṭīras in the middle of the Seva-kuñja forest. They didn't have a temple at that time, so they went unnoticed by the marauding invaders.

And then there is the famous deity of Rādhā-Vallabha. Some of you may have seen Rādhā-Vallabha; He is a very beautiful deity. I have always been attracted to Him. He has a temple, well, it is difficult to describe where it is, but a very beautiful and popular temple. He has some very beautiful dark blackish eyes; I believe they are actually jewels. He is one of the most exquisitely dressed deities every day in Vṛndāvana. I recommend you try to find this temple, Rādhā-Vallabha. His history—well, briefly, it is very interesting. I was reading in the institute that once a Śiva-bhakta named Ātmadeva went to Mount Kailāśa for doing tapasya, and at one point Lord Śiva appeared to him and asked him what he desired. But this Ātmadeva had nothing to request from Śiva; he was described as *ātmārāma*, meaning he was self-satisfied. But it is described that Lord Śiva, of course, in some respects we see Him as a devatā—now in Sanskrit one meaning of deva is "one who gives"—so Śiva said, "In this particular instance, I am Mahādeva, the giver of everything, so you cannot go away empty-handed. You must ask something from me." So the devotee, this humble Śiva-bhakta, said, "Well then, Lord Śiva, please give to me what is most dear to you." So Lord Śiva said, "Well, most dear to me is Pārvatī." Then he paused and said, "But even more dear to me is Rādhā-Vallabha. So how can I give you Rādhā-Vallabha? I will give you Pārvatī." Ātmadeva said, "But what shall I do with Pārvatī? She is your wife. I think it is better I take Rādhā-Vallabha." Then he said, "Who is Rādhā-Vallabha?" Lord Śiva said, "Just like the waves and the ocean can never be separated, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can never be separated. You will understand this mood in the future when someone comes to take this deity from you." So, essentially, he agreed to give this deity. But first, Lord Śiva went to Pārvatī and told her he was going to give this deity, Rādhā-Vallabha, to this nice devotee. Pārvatī became very upset; she started crying and crying. Seeing this, Lord Śiva said to his wife, Pārvatī, "Wherever the deity of Rādhā-Vallabha goes, both of us, meaning Śiva and Pārvatī, we will be guarding the door to their temple." That pacified her somewhat. So then Lord Śiva gave this deity, Rādhā-Vallabha—and it is described that He is actually a wooden deity, I didn't know that, a very beautiful wooden deity—that was, I was reading, carved by Viśvakarmā in Satya-yuga, to that devotee. As a result, Ātmadeva became a Vaiṣṇava; he became a worshipper of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Because of his service to Rādhā-Vallabha—and it is of course a long story—Rādhā-Vallabha was worshipped in his family lineage for many ages. Over time, Rādhā-Vallabha ended up in Kali-yuga being worshipped by the devotees in the Nimbārka-sampradāya. You can go and take darśana now. You know more of the history of Rādhā-Vallabha; you could just—He is already so beautiful—gaze upon His beauty. Rādhārāṇī is there in the form, just like at the Ramaṇa temple, of her crown. So it is the same thing in the Rādhā-Vallabha temple in Vṛndāvana.

I read that, like Govindajī’s temple, the temple of Rādhā-Vallabha was built by Man Singh—our hero Man Singh—during the reign of the pious Mughal emperor Akbar. But when Aurangzeb’s forces attacked Vṛndāvana, that temple was completely destroyed—well, not completely, but mostly destroyed. But before the temple was attacked, Rādhā-Vallabha’s pujārīs quickly hid—this is really interesting—Rādhā-Vallabha in a large cave under the temple. They hid Him in a secret, big cave where the worship went on secretly for three years. Now, as a note of interest, I learned that in Vṛndāvana village—the circumference of Vṛndāvana as we know it—there are three main principal caves. Number one, there is a cave at Yogapīṭha; of course, that is where the Govinda temple is situated, and there is a cave deep down under there, and that is where Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī discovered the deity of Yogamāyā, who is still being worshipped there. And there is another cave at the Rādhā-Śyāmasundara temple, where many of you have gone, where Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita did bhajan. I have had the great good fortune to visit that cave; the pujārī opened the door and I went down with a torch and spent a few hours chanting japa there; it is a very large, natural cave. And again, the third big cave is underneath the Rādhā-Vallabha temple. That is where He was hidden, and Rādhā-Vallabha was secretly worshipped in that cave for 12 years. Then they were moved to Kāmyavana, where they stayed for 25 years. And then in 1707, when the tyrant Aurangzeb died, they were taken back to Vṛndāvana proper; He didn't go to Jaipur, He came back to Vṛndāvana proper. So much nectar we are discovering in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, a great blessing for ISKCON that we have this opportunity to get all this authorized knowledge. There are other deities as well, but time is short. One might wonder how none of these deities I have mentioned were ever discovered by Aurangzeb. Now, of course, that is the Lord's desire, but historians say that this is primarily because Aurangzeb was just concentrated on finding Govindajī. We touched on this in a previous class, actually: that Aurangzeb was infuriated, number one, that his ancestor Akbar had built a Hindu temple at great expense, and number two, that Govindajī was so popular. It just infuriated him, so much time and energy he put into finding Govindajī.

Now, previously we described in some detail how Rādhā-Govinda were nicely received—and Vṛndā-devī, and of course Kāśīśvara’s deity, Gaura-Govinda—when they arrived at Rādhā-kuṇḍa by a few renounced sādhus. This went on for two years, from 1669 to 1671, when suddenly, rumors started circulating that Govindajī was hidden in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. In an earlier class, I quoted the year 1667 that Aurangzeb attacked Vṛndāvana, but I was reading that many scholars say it was 1669, and I think we will settle on that year. So, let us say in 1671, two years later, knowing that these rumors were starting to circulate and it would get to the ears of Aurangzeb, our hero Śivarāma Gosvāmī wrote a letter to the reigning Rajput king in Rajasthan, his name was Ram Singh I, who was ruling in Amber. The city of Jaipur was actually created later, when Govindajī and Gopīnātha and these other deities made their way into Rajasthan. At that time—we will tell that story later—there was no Jaipur. So Ram Singh I was ruling in Amber, and when you go down to visit Jaipur, we often pass by this fantastic palace on the mountains outside of Jaipur. That was the palace of these former kings, built in such a way that it would be very difficult to attack. One thing I noticed when we drove there, it is on top of a hilly area, a mountain, with many valleys; it would be hard for an army to attack there. So that is where they were ruling. This particular king, Ram Singh I, was ruling in Amber, and Śivarāma Gosvāmī wrote him a letter. In that letter, he asked Ram Singh to please give shelter to Govindajī. What if you received a letter like that, you were in power, and you were a devotee? Yes. I found the letter; I found the letter that Śivarāma Gosvāmī wrote to Ram Singh. It is incredible that it survived all these years. But anyway, here is the letter: "My dear Ram Singh," Śivarāma Gosvāmī writes, "Like your father, who was always devoted to the lotus feet of Govindadeva, and your forefathers, who were also the servants of Govindadeva, a small community of Vaiṣṇavas residing on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa expect the same from you. Govindajī and His servants are in danger from all sides. Please give us shelter so that the service of Govindadeva will go smoothly in your kingdom." 

So, you know, these are Rajput kings; they are Kṛṣṇa-bhaktas. So Ram Singh contacted his nephew, whose name was Uday Singh, who was ruling in the famous town of Kāmyavana, where we go on parikramā. There is so much Kṛṣṇa-conscious history at Kāmyavana—I think we gave three lectures on Kāmyavana last year. This Uday Singh, that was his area; he was ruling there and was situated in Kāmyavana. So he said to his nephew, "Give shelter to Govindajī." Why Kāmyavana? Well, one reason—the most important reason—is that Kāmyavana was actually part of Ram Singh’s kingdom. His kingdom extended from Amber, Rajasthan, right up to the border of Vṛndāvana. Even today, the states are separated like that; there is U.P. and then there is Rajasthan. So Kāmyavana sits right on the border there; at that time, it was part of his kingdom. You know, when we go to Kāmyavana from here, from Vṛndāvana, it takes us about two and a half hours to drive out there, so it is at the far reaches of Vṛndāvana. This Uday Singh, he is also a Rajput king; he very happily agreed, "Send Govindajī, we will protect Him with our lives." So Govindajī and the others made plans to move to Kāmyavana, and actually, this Rajput king Uday Singh had several residences in Kāmyavana, and he gave one of his nice residences for the deities. I was reading, it is so interesting that Govindajī, Śrī Rādhā, Vṛndā-devī, and Gaura-Govinda moved there secretly, of course, but when they moved there, several days later the town celebrated Janmāṣṭamī in a grand way, all centered around Govindajī. It was the first time in years that Govindajī was worshipped with such opulence. Now, one might wonder, the rumors are there in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, so let us move the deities, but there is a big festival, so what is going on? Wasn't it dangerous? It is going to attract the attention of Aurangzeb. The answer is yes, but again, let us remember that the Rajput kings and the Mughal rulers made alliances which were favorable to both of them. In some ways, they made alliances, a system that instead of fighting each other, they could somehow cooperate with each other, not destroy each other. An alliance—the dictionary definition of an alliance is "a formal agreement or treaty between two or more nations to cooperate for specific purposes, a merging of efforts or interests by persons, families, states, or organizations." Because of this alliance between the powerful Rajput kings and the emperor Aurangzeb, Aurangzeb didn't attack Kāmyavana, because this would have infuriated Ram Singh, and who knows what would have happened. They had an alliance. So Aurangzeb was just fuming; he heard Govindajī is there, but he couldn't do anything because of the alliance. That means going into the territory of Ram Singh, the Rajput warrior. This was all—I was reading—the brilliant strategy of our hero Śivarāma Gosvāmī. He is a sādhu, a devotee, he has his sādhana, his pūjā in his heart; he is awakening his love—or has awakened his love fully—for the Lord. But he is a strategist, an organizer, a go-getter. He reminds me of Jīva Gosvāmī, you know, who out of all the six Gosvāmīs was organizing everything in such a way that the works of the other Gosvāmīs could one day go to all parts of the world. So this was the strategy of Śivarāma Gosvāmī. 

For some time, you could say there existed a peaceful standoff. But then after four years—four years, yes—a serious problem arose. What was that? Well, it began when the very fierce and independent Jāṭs—remember the Jāṭs? We talked about them earlier. The Jāṭs, they were farmers, but they were fiercely independent and they were also warriors. Now, when the fierce and independent Jāṭs of Kāmyavana and the surrounding areas, for whatever reason, began attacking Mughal patrols and nearby encampments—you know, they didn't feel bound by the alliance; they were fiercely independent and they really didn't like the Mughals for many reasons—all of a sudden, this whole campaign arose where Jāṭs were attacking the Mughals and their little encampments here and there, like guerrilla warfare. Seeing this and hearing of this, Śivarāma Gosvāmī became fearful of reprisals from the Mughal army. In particular, he felt that Aurangzeb might take advantage of these attacks as an excuse to attack Kāmyavana and capture Govindajī. Śivarāma Gosvāmī wrote another letter to Ram Singh I, very clearly outlining the situation, and he asked him for permission to shift Govindajī to a safer location in Ram Singh’s kingdom. Of course, Ram Singh, you know, any service you can get, isn't it for Kṛṣṇa? You are going to take that service. Ram Singh ordered his minister to reply to Śivarāma Gosvāmī’s request. I found that letter again. I found that letter in my research; it is written, of course, by the minister, but dictated, you could say, by Ram Singh. Here is the letter: "Gosvāmī Śivarāma, worshipper of the Lord's image of Govinda, having expectations for our compassion and attention: to take the respected Lord Govinda away from Kāmyavana, may take the Lord to remain in the village of Baṭhārā, a far distance away, where all arrangements will be made for His protection. In this arrangement, Govindadeva must proceed with great caution." Let me recite that again: "Gosvāmī Śivarāma, worshipper of the Lord's image of Govinda, having expectations for our compassion and attention: to take the respected Lord Govinda away from Kāmyavana, may take the Lord to remain in the village of Baṭhārā, a far distance away, where all arrangements will be made for His protection—for Govinda’s protection. In this arrangement, Govindadeva must proceed with great caution."

After receiving this official letter from the minister of Ram Singh, Śivarāma Gosvāmī and his helpers packed all of Govindajī’s ornaments, pūjā paraphernalia, and dresses that He had received by living there in Kāmyavana—He became a little more opulent again—and then he called for the big bullock cart of Govindadeva, which I want to have darśana of in Jaipur again—I told you it is there somewhere being kept in Jaipur, trying to get a photo for all of you. So he called for that bullock cart, then Śivarāma Gosvāmī and his helpers placed Govindadeva, Rādhārāṇī, and Gaura-Govinda on that cart. Then Śivarāma Gosvāmī called for another cart, where several men struggled to put the big deity of Vṛndā-devī, the beloved deity of Rūpa Gosvāmī, on that second cart. The first cart with Govinda and the other deities left for that next destination, but as many of you know, when it came time for Vṛndā-devī’s cart to leave, something incredibly unusual, mystical happened: her cart would not move. No matter how hard the devotees tried—they brought in horses; I heard they even brought in some elephants—she wouldn't move. Vṛndā-devī refused to go outside of Braja. Actually, it is written, it is recorded, that the night before leaving Kāmyavana—because Śivarāma Gosvāmī was going to accompany all these deities—the night before leaving Kāmyavana, Śivarāma Gosvāmī had a dream in which Vṛndā-devī appeared to him. She said, "It is written, it is recorded, it is in the annals, 'O my servant Śivarāma, tomorrow I will stay back in my forest of Braja, and my master, Śrī Govinda, will go on further in the princely states. I desire to remain forever in the pastime places of Lord Govinda along with my eternal companions, the parrots. I give you blessings to continue with your service to Govinda.'" Let's recite it again: "O my servant Śivarāma, tomorrow I will stay back in my forest of Braja, and my master, Śrī Govinda, will go on further in the princely states. I desire to remain forever in the pastime places of Lord Govinda along with my eternal companions, the parrots. I give you blessings to continue with your service to Govinda."

That was his dream. Of course, we know these are not dreams like we have dreams; rather, in the minds of pure devotees, these are visions. This is Kṛṣṇa personally appearing, Vṛndā-devī personally appearing. So you could say vision, but we will call it a dream because that is how it is described in the records. But when Śivarāma Gosvāmī saw this dream coming true the next day—he is standing there and Vṛndā-devī is not leaving in the bullock cart, his dream was coming true—he turned to his younger son, whose name was Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa. He said, "Son, you stay back in Kāmyavana and serve Vṛndā-devī in the same mood that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī used to." Now, when his son heard that, it meant that Govindajī is going, he is going to miss Govindajī, Rādhā, Gaura-Govinda, and his father; when that became clear to him, he fainted unconscious. But of course, he stayed; that was the order, and he very nicely served Vṛndā-devī for a long time, for the rest of his life, actually. So at last, in the year 1675, as the devotees—I was reading his heart—just as the devotees of Kāmyavana cried rivers of tears, Govindajī secretly crossed the boundaries of Braja, leaving His beloved Vṛndā-devī behind, and His devotees as well, and proceeded on His way, which we will describe in the next few lectures.

I would like to close now. I was reading that when remembering this momentous moment, this historic occasion, local Braja-vāsīs here in Vṛndāvana—I have been told—when they remember how Govindajī left Vṛndāvana and never came back, this causes them to sing from their hearts a particular poem remembering the specific occasion it crossed out of Vṛndāvana, out of Kāmyavana, into Rajasthan. The local Braja-vāsīs sing a particular poem by the poet Sūradāsa, and I will finish with that great devotee's poem sung by the Braja-vāsīs. It is in Braja-bhāṣā... 

Here is the poem: "Our beloved left all of us. Whenever He comes in our memory, our hearts start painting. He is dark with beautiful eyes and He is more handsome than Cupid. He left Vṛndāvana, the sacred tree of Vaṁśīvaṭa, and the banks of the Yamunā. Forgetting the love of His Braja-gopīs, He became discourteous." The poet Sūradāsa quotes Lalitā-sakhi, "Why are you lamenting? After all, He was only a cowherd boy, Kṛṣṇa."

Śrī Dev-kiśora, all the residents in Vṛndāvana, past, present, and future. Okay, thank you. I will be back in a couple of days and we will continue our journey along with Govindajī and the other deities as they proceed to Amber and eventually to the great city of Jaipur, the city of victory. All glories. 

Kṛṣṇa.""