"*00159*.*
"This is a friend of Śrī Gurudev. I come to see you very happy. There is a rule in public speaking that you need to start with something very favorable, and not with something rude and bad. But today I have to start with something not entirely pleasant. I would like to apologize to all the devotees for living in such austere conditions. My room is about this size. And in fact, when we travel to India, we must understand that during pilgrimage, sometimes the living conditions and also the travel can be very ascetic. Naturally, when we are at home, everything is very convenient for us; we have made everything to suit ourselves, and we are comfortable. But when we come to someone else’s house, naturally we may feel uncomfortable. It is clear that we have now arrived in India, and the hotels here are according to Indian standards. In Māyāpur, it has already become the case that there is an influence of Western culture. And in Vṛndāvana, too, there has been a long history, so Western influence is also present in the hotels there. But here, it is truly full-blooded India.

We also have a certain budget, and many of you are not rich enough to afford anything else. So, we did everything we could. But please, don't let accommodation in Jagannātha Purī be the main thing you think about during the entire parikramā. And I really hope that when you leave Jagannātha Purī, you will not think of it only as a small and shabby room. You will understand that the Jagannātha of Purī is none other than Lord Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā. You will remember our kathā and our kīrtanas. And despite the cyclone that they promise us, we might even visit some holy places. Mahāprabhu inspired us to be patient. Remember this important verse for all of us, and remember that Lord Caitanya taught us patience. Look at the Gosvāmīs: sometimes they sleep somewhere under a tree, sometimes they sleep in a huge, beautiful palace. Think about me; for example, I have been traveling for 54 years, and almost every night I find myself sleeping in a different bed. I finally realized that maybe this is not the worst thing, because what I do at night is I just sleep there, and in the morning I definitely leave, and I am not there anymore.

Let us be very merciful to the organizers who are trying to accommodate 350 Western devotees in Jagannātha Purī with our small budget. It is very difficult. Despite the fact that a cyclone is looming here and despite all the austerities that we have experienced, the main thing is to remember that we are in Jagannātha Purī. Let us hear a little about Jagannātha Purī so that it will be easier for us to concentrate on the fact that we are in the Dhāma. In fact, we could sit here and talk about Jagannātha Purī for hours, for days. Before I begin, I would like to share something very sweet with you. Actually, I didn't find it in the scriptures; this is an oral tradition that is passed down in our paramparā. It is said that the Supreme Personality bathes in Badrīnātha, dresses in Dvārakā, eats in Purī, and sleeps in Rāmeśvaram. What does it mean that the Lord eats in Purī? Just imagine: our Kṛṣṇa Jagannātha does not eat in the morning, at lunch, and in the evening—he eats here in Jagannātha Purī 52 times.

It is said that Lakṣmīdevī herself prepares the bhoga for him. There is no shortage of mahā-prasāda here. We will probably all be fed with Jagannātha mahā-prasāda as well; it is very tasty. You must have noticed that Jagannātha Purī is a place that attracts a large number of transcendentalists. This is even mentioned in the Skanda Purāṇa. Whoever sees Lord Jagannātha when he holds the conch shell and the cakra, by his mercy, that person automatically attains liberation. Knowing this quotation from the Skanda Purāṇa, pilgrims come here for darśana because they want to see the Lord. I have already explained to you that when you see the Lord, in fact, he is looking at you, and with his merciful glance, he cleanses you of everything unfavorable. Why?

Just as the little boy brāhmaṇa, addressing Sākṣi-gopāla after returning to Vṛndāvana, said, "O my dear Lord, you are not just this statue; you are yourself the son of Mahārāja Nanda." Of course, many of us cannot enter the temple ourselves. But for us, there is a form of Patita-pāvana at the entrance to the Jagannātha temple. He is merciful to all. So you can approach the temple and have darśana of Patita-pāvana. He will also look at you. When I was young and came here for the first time, I was very upset because I couldn’t enter the temple. I turned to a sādhu and told him what was in my heart, how upset I was. This is the same sādhu who just came on stage and offered me mahā-prasāda. He just happens to be in charge of a temple nearby. He said, "Don't be upset if you cannot go inside and see Lord Jagannatha, because it is considered that if you sleep in Jagannātha Purī, even in your small, dirty room with insects, then it is considered as if you are offering obeisances to the Lord for the whole six hours."

This Dhāma is so powerful that whatever you say here is accepted by the Lord as a prayer, because you have come here, you are talking, he hears you, and he feels that you are praying. When you sing here, it is considered as hymns of glorification in relation to the Lord. Wherever you go in this place, your walking will be counted as parikramā. In Vṛndāvana, for example, to go through parikramā, we have to go on a certain road around Vṛndāvana. But here, wherever you go, if you just walk, then it is already parikramā. Every breath—and how many breaths we take here—is equivalent to performing an aśvamedha-yajña. The aśvamedha-yajña was the main yajña in Satya-yuga. Imagine, every breath you take while in the Dhāma is equivalent to an aśvamedha-yajña! You can count it this way: "I have already performed 10 aśvamedha-yajñas." This place is so sublime that Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura writes about it. Jīva Gosvāmī quotes the Brahma Purāṇa: "The 80 square miles of the Puruṣottama-kṣetra are majestic."

The demigods from the heavenly planets, when they look at the inhabitants of Jagannātha Purī—no matter who they are, people or animals—they always see that they have a four-armed form, like the inhabitants of Vaikuṇṭha. We know that the demigods often watch Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. When something happens in Kṛṣṇa-līlā, Brahmā and Śiva hang out on their flower ships (vimānas) and watch what is happening. When 33 million demigods come and look at the Jagannātha Purī Dhāma, they look at all the people in Jagannātha Purī, at all animals and even at insects, and they see that they have four-armed forms. You too, because you came here. We will try to get the hearts to rise so we can look at his four hands. Even if the potential is not realized now, it is there. Whenever we come to Vṛndāvana, Māyāpur, or Jagannātha Purī, we make a very big breakthrough in our devotional service. Jagannātha Purī is the most important for us, the members of ISKCON, because our grandfather, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, was born here. The spiritual master of our Śrīla Prabhupāda, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, was born here on the big main road that comes from the temple in the family of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

Prabhupāda captured for centuries this moment of the birth of his spiritual teacher by writing an offering to him, the *Viraha-aṣṭaka* (prayers). He wrote this in 1936: "Glory, glory to you, O great day. You are more blessed than heaven and sweeter than Māyā. That day when you appeared in the holy Purī, my teacher and master of divine mercy. O my lord, divine angel, grant us light and kindle the divine light. The life of humanity is very difficult, and the only hope was you, divine mercy. O my lord, divine angel, grant us light and kindle the divine light. Human life is very complex, and you are the only hope." Jagannātha-svāmī is the first deity I saw. I came to the temple for the first time in Detroit. The devotees welcomed me very well. They asked me the question, "Would you like to meet face-to-face with the Lord?" I said, "Well, yeah, of course." They took me into the altar room. On the altar were Baladeva, Jagannātha, and Subhadrā. They pointed to Lord Jagannātha and said, "Here he is, the Lord." I thought, "Wow, he's so handsome."

I didn't care that he was so unusual. I actually felt such an attraction to him that he was the real Lord. Then they clarified, "And here is another sister of the Lord, and here is another brother." I was very surprised, because I had never thought at all that the Lord had relatives. Then the devotees became more serious and said that Jagannātha means "Lord of the universe." "O Lord Jagannātha, you are the Lord of the entire universe. Please be merciful to me and let me see you." Because this place itself is of a transcendental nature, and because of the greatness of the Lord, a large number of spiritual seekers come here. Jagannātha is worshipped by a huge number of people for various reasons. I recently read the Rāmāyaṇa; in the *Uttara-kāṇḍa*, it says that when Lord Rāmacandra killed Rāvaṇa, he addressed his brother Vibhīṣaṇa and recommended him to worship Lord Jagannātha. There is a verse: "O Vibhīṣaṇa, you control all the demons. I advise you: worship Lord Jagannātha." He is the Lord of the Ikṣvāku dynasty.

Imagine that Rāmacandra asked Vibhīṣaṇa to worship Jagannātha. In fact, the history of Jagannātha Purī begins from time immemorial. I’ll tell you a little bit—perhaps not so briefly—but I think it will take an hour. Rasikā wanted us to taste the prasāda first, but I said that we have been waiting for millions of births to come to Jagannātha Purī, so we will definitely be able to live until breakfast and listen to kathā. Ready? Once upon a time, there lived a famous king. His name was Indradyumna Mahārāja. He was indeed a great devotee of Viṣṇu. Like all devotees of the Lord, he was very eager to meet Him face-to-face. One day, while he was ruling his state, one of the devotees arrived at his palace and began to tell him that there is an incarnation of the Lord called Nīla Mādhava. Just as when you return to France or some other country and start telling people that you were in India and saw Jagannātha or Rādhā-Ramaṇa, this devotee spoke about the existence of Nīla Mādhava.

He described this deity and spoke of his beauty. He said that he is so attractive, holding a flute and standing in the *tribhaṅga-sundara* form. He said that this deity is worshipped deep in the jungle. You remember that Indradyumna Mahārāja had a very strong desire to meet Kṛṣṇa face-to-face. He gathered a huge group of his servants and said, "I really want to go and see face-to-face this beautiful form of Nīla Mādhava." The devotees went in different directions to find him. One of the king's servants, his name was Vidyāpati, went along impassable roads. He crossed various mountains and rivers. Somewhere deep in the jungle, he found this Nīla Mādhava deity who was being worshipped at that moment. Seeing him, at that moment when he saw Nīla Mādhava, he began to dance before him, began to offer prayers, to glorify him, because his beauty was exactly what this old sādhu spoke of. He immediately thought that he would like to stay here forever.

After he received darśana, Vidyāpati noticed something else surprising. He decided to rest a little, sat down, and suddenly looked at a tree nearby. On one of the branches sat a crow. It croaked and croaked and fell asleep. Since it fell asleep, it could not control its body and fell into the kuṇḍa that was under her. It seemed that it had already drowned in this pond, but at the same time, it suddenly emerged from this pond with a four-armed form, in the form in which it was in Vaikuṇṭha, and went straight to Vaikuṇṭha. So there are easy ways to go back home to Godhead.

It was probably some kind of liquid prema. Vidyāpati, seeing such a transformation, said, "I also want to give it to the Lord so quickly." Do you know what he did? He climbed this tree and sat on the same branch, ready to jump into this mystical lake. He wanted to follow the example of the freed crow who managed to return back to God. He started to get ready, practically jumping once or twice. Suddenly a voice was heard in the sky. It happens in various līlās that they suddenly hear a voice from heaven: "O brāhmaṇa, stop, don’t jump. Since you were the one who was able to see the form of Nīla Mādhava, now you need to return to King Indradyumna and tell about this. You are the servant of your king, and this is your main service. So go back to him and tell him where you saw Nīla Mādhava." Vidyāpati was, of course, upset, because liberation was already so close and possible, but duty obliged him. So he immediately climbed down from this tree and went to meet his king in order to tell him everything.

As soon as he returned to the kingdom, he went to the king, and the king said: "Well, what, did you see him?" He said: “Well, yes, I saw it”—because at that moment he was already thinking more about that lost opportunity to return back to God—“Yes, I saw it, I received darśana.” Then King Indradyumna drew a map. The very next day, King Indradyumna set out on a campaign with his close followers in order to find Nīla Mādhava and bring him back to his kingdom. Finally, they came to the exact place on the map where they overcame rivers, mountains, and jungles, and they reached the very place that was indicated. Here is the tree, here is the pond where the crow fell, and here is the place where Nīla Mādhava was—but he was no longer there. Imagine the emotions he experienced, because it was the meaning of his life to meet the Lord face-to-face. He was none other than a *rājarṣi*. A *rājarṣi* is a saint who sits on the throne and rules the state. The only thing he wanted was to meet him, but he wasn't there. The king began to cry. These are real tears when you cry for Kṛṣṇa.

At that very moment, as he stood there upset, suddenly he heard a voice from the sky: "O King, you must build a temple in your kingdom. Then I will appear there in a wooden form, and I will be the absolute truth, non-different from Nīla Mādhava." Who was that voice? It was none other than the Lord. He gave an instruction to his devotee. He said that if you want to see me, build me a temple. And then, by my own will, I will want to appear there in a wooden form. It will be non-different from Nīla Mādhava, because actually, in whatever form the Lord comes, it is the same person.

Now, the king got this chance to meet face-to-face with the Lord. So he practically ran back to his kingdom. Where was his kingdom? It was here. It was the kingdom of King Indradyumna. Now it is known as Jagannātha Purī. Now you know where you are sitting. We see this magnificent temple, which can be seen even from afar. Of course, we cannot go in, but at the entrance, a darśana of Patita-pāvana awaits us. The Lord himself appeared in this temple in a wooden form. It was Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā. Of course, the first thing that happened was that the temple was built. Then he turned to the architect of the demigods, Viśvakarmā, and asked him to carve a mūrti of the Lord. He asked Viśvakarmā to carve a mūrti of the Nīla Mādhava he had seen, who plays the fifth note on the flute. He was very attractive, with lotus eyes, a nose like a sesame seed, three lines on his neck, and he was also adorned with a garland of five flowers.

He asked Viśvakarmā, "How long will your work take?" Viśvakarmā thought and said: “Well, 21 days.” King Indradyumna was indignant; he said: “Why is it taking so long?” Viśvakarmā said: “Well, that’s how long it actually takes to create an attractive deity, who is the most beautiful of all.” King Indradyumna made sure that Viśvakarmā was given a separate building where he would do all this. But Viśvakarmā said, "Firstly, I have a few conditions. I would like to do everything alone. And secondly, if someone disturbs my meditation—yes, that is, you cannot come in and look during this time—the door must be closed." From behind the door came only the sounds of Viśvakarmā working. Viśvakarmā set a condition that no one should enter until the work was finished. But 14 days had already passed, and King Indradyumna was very much looking forward to meeting his Lord; he was impatient. So on the fourteenth day, he finally opened the door. What happened? Viśvakarmā immediately disappeared. Before the king appeared the form of Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā in an unfinished state. We cannot say it is "unfinished" because the Lord wanted to appear for you and me, for worship, in this very form. As Śrīla Prabhupāda often said: "I have my plan, you have your plan, and the Lord has his plan. Therefore, everything happens as the Lord wants."

He fulfilled the wish of his king. We know from this story that Jagannātha Purī is an ancient place that was created many kalpas ago. Throughout all these times, a large number of different traditions came here to Jagannātha Purī and claimed that Jagannātha belongs to them. Until the 19th century, Buddhism was very developed in this area of Purī. The Buddhists, being impersonalists, claimed that this form of Jagannātha is their Lord. Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya, who was also an impersonalist, opened a huge matha nearby, which still exists. He said that this is their deity, and that Jagannātha is their impersonal Lord. Different things have happened here over the centuries. It’s difficult to talk about this, but in fact, Jagannātha Purī was captured 18 times. In 1692, Aurangzeb captured the place and ordered the Jagannātha Purī temple to be closed. He was a Muslim emperor. The temple was closed for 15 years. You and I are experiencing some kind of anxiety or discomfort; think of the suffering that the devotees of Jagannātha went through when the temple was closed for 15 years. It opened the very moment when Aurangzeb died.

Let us remember that it was King Indradyumna who installed this deity. He wanted to meet him, to see him, to worship him. The greatest Vaiṣṇava, Gaur Govinda Swami—the one who is the initiating guru for Madhavananda Prabhu and also a great example for me—describes Jagannātha Purī as *vipralambha-dhāma*. This is love in separation. The Dhāma which is specifically about love in separation is the highest state of love. We can see that great love in separation of *vipralambha* that the Lord felt when he came here to Purī; he made a great contribution to the development of this place.

We know that Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared in this world for two main reasons. He came as the Yuga-avatāra to distribute the holy names. This mission was fulfilled by Lord Caitanya. He began to introduce the holy names to the whole world. Kṛṣṇa also had his own personal reasons to come, because he was very interested in what kind of love Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī felt for him—what kind of intense feelings were these, because he was the object of Rādhārāṇī's love. He wanted to feel what she was going through. You remember that little Nimāi was born in Navadvīpa. He then took sannyāsa when he was 24 years old. He traveled and distributed the holy name, chanting Harināma. This was one of his main reasons for coming: to give the holy name to everyone. But he also had internal reasons. To realize that internal cause, he came to Purī. It was here that he wanted to experience those feelings that the best of all devotees experience—Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. This is a very intense feeling that he experienced while being here, especially when he was in the Gambhīrā.

He dedicated one-third of his life to this very goal. He devoted 24 years to experiencing the feelings that Rādhārāṇī experienced for Kṛṣṇa. This is confirmed in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. For the remaining 24 years of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's life after he took sannyāsa, he remained in Jagannātha Purī, surrounded by his dear devotees. All the millions and millions of people—it is interesting that it was this place that became the quintessence of the purpose of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's arrival. He accomplished two purposes at once, because here he also spread the holy names. Ratha-yātrā is held here every year, where millions of people could hear the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. He danced and sang. Here in the Gambhīrā, when he was surrounded by his closest associates like Svarūpa Dāmodara, they would constantly read scriptures like the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or other scriptures that described the love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Therefore, it was here that the Lord was able to experience this.

Ratha-yātrā is a very important event in which Lord Caitanya spreads the holy names. On the other hand, he becomes immersed in the love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī for Kṛṣṇa at the moment when he dances before Lord Jagannātha. We know that this love of Rādhārāṇī is *rādhā-bhāva*. It is accessible only to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Lord Caitanya, and Mādhavendra Purī. All we can do is worship this love from afar. One day, it was the day of Ratha-yātrā, and Lord Caitanya danced in ecstasy before Lord Jagannātha. Simultaneously with his dance, he began to recite a verse from the Sanskrit book *Sāhitya-darpaṇa*. It contained one very ordinary love song. Everyone was very surprised, because suddenly, regardless of what was happening, he interrupted the kīrtana and started singing this romantic song. There were a large number of people around him, but what he was experiencing was very intimate. Śrīla Prabhupāda also reminded us that we invite someone to listen to lectures on the *Bhagavad-gītā*, but *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* is intended more for those devotees who understand what it is about. Just imagine, just at the moment of kīrtana, he suddenly begins to say the following: "The same person who stole my heart in my youth is my master again. And now there are the same moonlit nights, the month of Caitra, and the same aroma of mālatī flowers. The same sweet breeze blows from the kadamba forest. In our relationship I am the same lover, but my mind is unhappy. I am ready to return back to the banks of the Reva River under the shade of the vetasa trees. This is my wish." This describes the feeling of a young man and a girl towards each other at the moment of meeting.

There was a sannyāsī among them. Suddenly, during the Ratha-yātrā, he started singing a romantic song. But his mood was understood by Rūpa Gosvāmī, because Rūpa Gosvāmī is none other than Rūpa Mañjarī. Rūpa Mañjarī serves Lalitā, who worships Rādhārāṇī. He understood perfectly well the real meaning of this song, because at that moment the Lord was trying to understand Rādhārāṇī's love for Kṛṣṇa. Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote down the song in a transcendental way, knowing the heart of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He rephrased the same song to describe the feelings of Rādhārāṇī towards Kṛṣṇa. Rādhārāṇī says here: "My dear friend, now I have met my old and dear friend Kṛṣṇa on this field of Kurukṣetra. And I am the same Rādhārāṇī. And now we are together again. I would like to go to the bank of the Yamunā beneath the trees of the forest there. I wish to hear the vibration of the sweet flute, the fifth note, in the forests of Vṛndāvana."

She says that it is very pleasant, but she would still like to go back to the bank of the Yamunā River, under the canopy of those beautiful trees. She would like to hear the sound of his sweet flute as he plays the fifth note in the forests of Vṛndāvana. We owe a lot to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. How would we have known about all this if he had not written these huge volumes of spiritual literature for us? One devotee wrote: "To cleanse my physical body, I regularly wash myself using water. But in order to completely purify myself and my existence, I bathe in the nectar of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī's words." Lord Caitanya felt the love of the Ratha-yātrā and was completely immersed, but he was also responsible for organizing it. Before Ratha-yātrā began, Mahāprabhu personally chose who would play the mṛdaṅga, who would play the karatālas, sing, or dance. He organized seven groups of devotees. In each group there was someone who sings, someone who plays the mṛdaṅga and the karatāla, and someone who dances. They were all professionals in what they did, but in fact, the main thing they had was their *bhāva*, their love for the Lord. What did Lord Caitanya himself do? During Ratha-yātrā, he was the main dancer, and he danced in each of these seven groups. Each group thought that he danced only in their group. Such a phenomenon happened even in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, when devotees thought that Kṛṣṇa was only with me. This happened at the moment of *rāsa-līlā*, because each gopī felt and knew for sure that Kṛṣṇa was only with her.

One of the devotees came to me recently and said, "Guru Mahārāja, I don't understand Kārtika. We are not in Vṛndāvana. In Vṛndāvana there is Kṛṣṇa, in Māyāpur we have Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We are not in Vṛndāvana, not in Māyāpur, but in Jagannātha Purī. Who is Jagannātha? What's the point of going there?" I said, "My dear disciple, actually Jagannātha is none other than Kṛṣṇa of Vṛndāvana." The Ratha-yātrā has such a secret transcendental meaning. She reminds us that during Ratha-yātrā we take Kṛṣṇa with us to Vṛndāvana, just as in Kurukṣetra, when the inhabitants of Vraja came to meet Kṛṣṇa, they took him, Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, and Subhadrā, and asked them to return back to Vṛndāvana. First Kṛṣṇa leaves Vṛndāvana, and then they take him with them. This is the inner meaning of Ratha-yātrā. Where do we hear the story that Jagannātha is none other than Kṛṣṇa of Vṛndāvana? This is stated in the *Jagannāthāṣṭakam*, in the first verse.

"Sometimes in great happiness Lord Jagannātha plays on his flute with his beloved, and they hide in the kuñjas on the banks of the Yamunā. Like a bumblebee tasting the nectar of the lotus, he enjoys the beauty of the lotus-like faces of the cowherd girls of Vraja. His feet are worshipped by Lakṣmī, Śiva, Brahmā, Indra, Gaṇeśa, and other great demigods. Let this Śrī Jagannātha reveal himself to my sight. From the corners of his eyes, he glances upon the ladies; in his left hand, he holds a flute, a peacock feather in his hair. He wears a robe of yellow silk. He looks lovingly at his close associates out of the corner of his eye. He became forever famous as the one who performs wonderful pastimes in the divine abode of Śrī Vṛndāvana. Let this Śrī Jagannātha reveal himself to my sight."

Jagannātha is none other than Kṛṣṇa of Vṛndāvana. I would like to share with you this wonderful story. I already feel that Rasikā Mātājī will be upset that I am continuing for so long, but what I'm telling you is also nutrition. This is food for your soul. Now we have a choice: two options. You want to nourish yourself with rice, dal, and chapati, or you want to nourish yourself with Kṛṣṇa-kathā? Kṛṣṇa-kathā. Who chooses the chapati? Raise your hand. Who wants breakfast, raise your hand? Of course. There was such a Vaiṣṇava, his name was Haridāsa, and he lived in Vṛndāvana. One day Lord Jagannātha appeared in a dream to Haridāsa, who was in Vṛndāvana, and told him that he would like to live in Vṛndāvana. Haridāsa became thoughtful, because he could not understand: he was in Vṛndāvana, and Jagannātha was in Jagannātha Purī. How will the Lord live in Vṛndāvana? Lord Jagannātha explained to him in a dream how to help him. "My dear devotee, next month the time will come for *nava-kalevara*. *Nava-kalevara* is the procedure when the old body of Jagannātha is placed in samādhi and a new body is acquired. Since Jagannātha is made of wood, and wood sometimes gets destroyed, his body is periodically changed. The pūjārīs take the old body of Jagannātha and place it in samādhi, in a certain place, and begin the process of finding a new body for Jagannātha. This ceremony will begin soon, so please come to Jagannātha Purī, when they change my body, take my old body, and bring me to Vṛndāvana."

Haridāsa woke up from this vision. He thought, "Oh, what a *svapna*, what a vision! Now I have to take this service of Jagannātha from Purī and bring it to Vṛndāvana." He came to the temple in Jagannātha Purī and addressed the priests, saying that he had such a dream and he wanted to take Jagannātha. They replied, "Get out of here, who the hell are you?" Since all the decisions here are made by the king himself, he was sent straight to him. The king said, "No, we certainly won’t change our ancient tradition because of someone who came from Vṛndāvana and saw some kind of dream." But the Lord had given the order to this devotee. He thought that only Lord Jagannātha could solve this dilemma. He went and sat there on the beach; he fasted and prayed. "Lord, this is your desire, this is how you wanted it. So please make sure that everything happens." That night, Lord Jagannātha came to the king in a dream: "You are a rascal because my devotee Haridāsa has come on my order to help me. You do not obey my instructions, my orders. Therefore, immediately go to that devotee Haridāsa and arrange for him to take me and transport me to Vṛndāvana, because I am none other than Kṛṣṇa from Vṛndāvana. I want to go to Vṛndāvana."

The king woke up and said, "Oh my God, what a dream!" He immediately started looking for Haridāsa. They answered him that Haridāsa had been meditating on the beach for seven days already. The time came for this procedure. Haridāsa came there, the king was there, and the king gave this body of Jagannātha to Haridāsa. Instead of placing the body of Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā in samādhi, they were given a luxurious golden chariot drawn by horses. This chariot was even accompanied by guards—the king's soldiers—and they were given all the paraphernalia necessary for worship. This whole procession reached Vṛndāvana. These deities were installed on the banks of the Yamunā. This place is still known as Jagannātha Ghāṭa. These deities are still there. Next year, if we have a parikramā in Vṛndāvana, you will be able to go there to that temple to see Lord Jagannātha, because for sure you will miss him. You will miss Purī, although you will definitely not miss the rooms in Purī.

Lord Jagannātha missed Vṛndāvana so much; he really wanted to find himself again in its atmosphere—the atmosphere of Vṛndāvana with the Yamunā and the sweet breeze. Prop-hupāda found this. Śrīla Prabhupāda got all this from his father. He wanted the Jagannātha Ratha-yātrā to spread all over the world. From whom did he absorb this desire? In *The Source of Eternal Pleasure*, Prabhupāda writes: "Actually, he dedicates this book to his father. It is written there that the book is dedicated to my father, Gour Mohon De (1849-1930), a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, who raised me in Kṛṣṇa consciousness from an early age. When I was a boy, he taught me how to play the mṛdaṅga. He gave me the Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa vigraha for me to worship. And he also gave me the Jagannātha Ratha so that every year I could perform such festivals, while I was still very small. He was very kind to me. Everything that I know, I absorbed from him, and then I received a deeper understanding from my spiritual master." Prabhupāda performed Ratha-yātrā when he was still a five-year-old boy. Turning to his godbrother, he said: "Sometimes he would wake up in the middle of the night, look at this toy Ratha-yātrā, and dream of when he grows up, he will take Lord Jagannātha and conduct Ratha-yātrā all over the world." Prabhupāda really wanted to conduct this Ratha-yātrā all over the world. He blessed his disciple Jayananda Prabhu so that he could do this.

When Śrīla Prabhupāda gave instructions, Jayananda absorbed them in his heart and was ready to fulfill them from the very beginning. Because he did so, he satisfied Śrīla Prabhupāda and went back to Godhead. This is how dear Ratha-yātrā is to Śrīla Prabhupāda and this is how devoted this disciple of his, Jayananda Prabhu, was. He is the first saint in ISKCON. This is the letter that Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote to Jayananda after Ratha-yātrā was held in New York in 1976. "My dear Jayananda, please accept my blessings. For a long time, I have wanted to see a Ratha-yātrā in New York. And finally, you have fulfilled my cherished desire. These Ratha-yātrās were very powerful and attractive. I thank you and all your assistants for working so hard to prepare these chariots. May Kṛṣṇa bless you for your sincere service. May you progress more and more in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I hope this finds you in good health. Your eternal well-wisher, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami."""