Hare Krishna, dear devotees.

Welcome back, once again, to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Now, during the auspicious month of Kārttika, Viṣṇupādaya Kṛṣṇa bhūtalay, Śrīmatī Bhaktivedanta Svāmī Prabhupāda.

So, officially, we are ten days into the auspicious month of Kārttika, and in my readings for the day, I came across a very beautiful verse describing the benefits of observing this month of Kārttika with various vratas, etc. Hari bhakti Vilāsa, 1643, says, it's a beautiful verse, and I quote: "The human birth is rare amongst all species of life, and it can be snatched away at any moment.

Even rarer is the opportunity to observe the month of Kārttika. By offering a lamp in this month, Śrī Hari becomes extremely pleased." Unquote. Wow. And as we all know, there are several very special days that we observe during this auspicious month of Kārttika.

And one in particular is coming in a few days' time, and that is the festival of Diwali, or as we know it, the Festival of Light, or lights, as we all know. Um, Diwali commemorates actually the return of Lord Rāmacandra to Ayodhyā.

Historically, Lord Rāmacandra was banished from his kingdom into the forest. In the forest, Rāvaṇa kidnapped Sītā and took her to Laṅkā. Then Rama and Lakṣmaṇa searched for Sītā, and while doing so, they made alliances with many monkey and bear warriors, and eventually, they all came to the southern tip of India.

There, Rāma and his army of monkeys and bears built a bridge across to Laṅkā, and eventually, Rāma killed Rāvaṇa. Then Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, and Sītā, accompanied by their associates, returned to the kingdom of Ayodhyā. So, the residents of Ayodhyā, to prepare and honor the Lord's arrival, because they, well, they've been separated from the Lord for a long time, so they were experiencing vipralambha, so much separation.

They placed brilliant lamps on the rooftops and balconies and the temples, everywhere. And in this way, they celebrated Rama's return. And when he came into, into Ayodhyā, they installed him on the throne of the kingdom. So, following that tradition, we do the same in the sense that we also light lamps in our homes and our temples and wherever.

And this simple ritual, of course, accompanied with the chanting of the Holy Names, purifies our hearts. And when our hearts are pure, like the citizens of Ayodhyā, we too can welcome Lord Rama, we can welcome Lord Kṛṣṇa, and install them on the thrones of our hearts.

So, it's an, it's an important festival in our, in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. And now, you may find it very interesting, I did, because I didn't know the following before. I found it in the, uh, Vrindavan Research Institute. But traditionally, Diwali, sometimes it's called Dīpāvalī, is celebrated as a five-day festival.

It's a five-day event. And it begins on the 13th, Trayodaśī, which is the lunar day of, or the, the dark fortnight in this month of Kārttika. Now, the first day of Diwali celebrates the appearance of both Lakṣmī and Dhanvantari from the churning of the milk ocean.

These two, it's described, these two personalities brought the wealth, the, we say, the wealth of opulence and medical science respectively, to the world. Therefore, the first day of Diwali is known as Dhana Trayodaśī, or in Hindi, they say Dhanteras.

Now, the second day, traditionally, the second day of Diwali is the day on which Kṛṣṇa defeated and killed Naraka. Naraka was a big demon. And so, it's called Naraka Caturdaśī. And the third day, the, you could say the actual day of Diwali, is celebrated by lighting *aṣṭāvalī*, we say in Sanskrit, *āvalī* of lamps.

Therefore, the name Dīpāvalī, or Diwali. The fourth day of the festival is called, it's derived from the word Padavā, which stands for the, the first day of the bright phase of the moon, which we call Pratipad. And this day celebrates the marital bond between husband and wife, but more importantly, it is the day of Govardhana Pūjā, Jai Girirāja.

And finally, the fifth day of Diwali is called Bhaū-Dīj, Bhaū-Dīj. And it commemorates the bond between sister and brother, which was initially displayed between Yamarāja and, uh, Yamunā, the river Yamunā. And we told that pastime in detail last year.

Now, of course, another well-known tradition on Diwali is the giving of sweets, you know, to one's family members, to friends, to associates, to fellow workers, whatever. There's just lots of sweets bought and sold on the day of Diwali. So, I thought today it would be appropriate to share with you a very sweet Vrindavan pastime about sweets.

So here it is. One day before the actual day of Diwali, Gargācārya, Gargācārya, who we know is the spiritual master of Nanda Mahārāja and his family, came to Nanda Baba's palace, where he found Nanda Mahārāja playing with his two sons, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.

And upon seeing Gargācārya, Nanda Mahārāja welcomed him and inquired about the reason for his visit. "Oh, have you come?" So, after offering under Mahārāja's blessings, he said, "Quote, My dear Nanda Mahārāja, you were the king of Vraja, but since having these boys, you were passing your days and nights simply playing with them, while neglecting many of your other duties.

Day and night, you are absorbed in the beauty and unparalleled qualities of these two boys. But the time has come for you to perform Indra Deva's seva, Indra Deva's seva. The demigod Indra. As of now, I can see no preparations have been made.

Dear Nanda Mahārāja, please start preparing for this Indra Pūjā. After all, our only hope is Indra. Our only hope is Indra. He is the one who provides us with rain, which helps us to grow our crops." So, Nanda Mahārāja replied, "I understand.

Please forgive my ignorance. The beauty of these two boys is controlling my mind and soul. Actually, these boys are my life and soul." Then Nanda Mahārāja clapped his hands three times, which was a sign for all his servants to come.

So, then he ordered them. First, he said, um, to the servants, "Tell mother Yaśodā to start, to start making a hundred and eight types of sweets for the Indra Pūjā, which is coming soon. Tell mother Yaśodā to start making a hundred and eight types of sweets because Indra Pūjā is just around the corner." Then, "Tell Jayanta Gopa, Jayanta Gopa, to decorate the whole of Vraja like a royal bride.

You can imagine, especially Indian weddings, you know, how the bride is decorated. So, tell Jayanta Gopa to decorate the whole of Vraja like a royal bride." Then, "Tell Mahābhṛṅga Gopa, Mahābhṛṅga Gopa, to take elephants and with their trunks, sprinkle fragrant rose water on all of Vraja's grounds." Then, "Call the gandharvas and tell them to prepare different beautiful melodies to sing during the Indra Pūjā." Then, "Tell Vijay to announce to the whole of Vraja the schedule of the Indra Pūjā by beating the Brihat Mṛdaṅga drums on every street." Then, "Call Vasudeva to sow new beautiful clothes for me and my boys.

This will be the biggest Indra Pūjā ever." We know that history. So, as preparations for the yajña began, Kṛṣṇa, it's described, he played in the courtyard of the palace with all his cowherd boyfriends. But at one point, he became very hungry, and he went over to mother Yaśodā's kitchen, where she was preparing this 108 offerings of sweets along with her servants.

So, seeing Kṛṣṇa, she said, "Oh, the delight of my eyes, please do not come inside the kitchen now." Kṛṣṇa was a little offended. He said, "And why not, my dear mother?" So, mother Yaśodā replied, "We are preparing this feast for Lord Indra.

If you see these sweets while we are making them, then they will not taste as good as they should." So, Kṛṣṇa was confused. He's a little boy, and he said, "And why is that, mother?" So, mother Yaśodā replied, something I found really amazing, she said, "Quote, Because, Lālā, we have a saying here in Vraja that one should never see a lady giving birth to her children, or a woman making sweets." But none of this made any sense to little Kṛṣṇa.

So, he started taking some lotus, you know, she was cooking amongst the sweets there were lotus, little hands, he's taking the laddoos to eat. And at that point, mother Yaśodā gave a very angry stare to Kṛṣṇa, and then Kṛṣṇa became afraid and he said, "Māyā, I was just checking whether the laddoos were soft enough so that after the pūjā, all the old grandpas who do not have teeth anymore will be able to eat them." So, hearing this, mother Yaśodā and all the other Gopis they laughed at Kṛṣṇa's naughty words and his actions.

And as he left, Kṛṣṇa said to mother Yaśodā, "Māyā, as you ordered, I will leave for now, but promise me that you will invite me back to see all the preparations when they are done." And as mother Yaśodā promised, so Kṛṣṇa left the kitchen with his friends.

So, on the day of Diwali, which is, of course, a few days before the Indra Pūjā was to begin, Kṛṣṇa woke up early in the morning. I was reading, he touched the feet of his elders, he was dressed in new clothes and adorned with different types of pearl jewelry.

Then he worshipped the famous deity of his family, Nārāyaṇa Śālagrāma, and he played all day. And that evening, mother Yaśodā said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear son, let us go to light lamps on the banks of the Yamunā. Let us go to light lamps on the banks of the Yamunā." So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Māyā, mother, why are we going to light lamps?" So, mother Yaśodā answered, "Quote, My dear son, to remove the darkness of the ignorance of this world, one should light a lamp on Diwali.

It is a very auspicious ritual." Then, that's so cute. Then, holding the little finger of his mother, Kṛṣṇa walked with her to light lamps on the banks of the Yamunā. And after coming back to the palace, as they were entering the palace, um, Kṛṣṇa saw all these, you know, large varieties of sweets, 108 sweets, set up everywhere in the temple room for the pleasure of the, the deity.

And while gazing at them, he became very excited and said to his father, who had come into the temple room, "Father, I'm going to sell all those sweets tomorrow morning. What is the use of so many sweets in the pūjā unless we can distribute them to the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana?" So, Nanda Mahārāja, hearing Kṛṣṇa's little voice, and Nanda Mahārāja, he laughed.

It's described affectionately. And that night, he quickly constructed a sweet shop, a sweet shop for Kṛṣṇa to perform this playful pastime. So, the next morning, Kṛṣṇa dressed up as a sweet seller. It's written, he was wearing a beautiful turban like a shopkeeper, and placing a weighing scale on one side of a table, and a money collecting box on the other side of the table, he loudly called everyone to come and buy sweets. "Come, buy the sweets that have been offered to our Śālagrāma." So, not surprisingly, Madhumaṅgala was the first to come forward.

And when he inquired from Kṛṣṇa about the price of laddoos, Kṛṣṇa gave a heart-melting answer, heart-melting answer. And I quote: "Kṛṣṇa said, the cost of these laddoos is your faith, Madhu. Give me your faith, and I will give you the laddoos of my love.

The cost of these laddoos is your faith, Madhu. Give me your faith, and I will give you the laddoos of my love." I think that's an instruction for all of us. If we give our faith to Kṛṣṇa, He will give us the laddoos of His love, the sweetness of His love.

So, Madhumaṅgala eagerly bought all the laddoos. But don't worry, there's 107 more types of sweets. So, then Śrīdhāma Gopa, he came and, um, he, he happily bought all the rasagullas. And there's a description, you know, like so many boys came forward, and more eager boys came, and they, they bought sweets.

Finally, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with her girlfriends arrived to, to buy some sweets from the sweet seller in his sweet shop, Kṛṣṇa. So, approaching the sweet shop, she, Rādhā said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, I and my friends would like to purchase a candrakalā sweet from you.

We would like to purchase a candrakalā sweet from you." So, I had to look up, you know, what is candrakalā. So, a candrakalā sweet is known as the moon-like sweet, the moon-like sweet. And actually, it's a soft puri with sugar inside.

So, she said, "Kṛṣṇa, how much does that candrakalā sweet cost?" So, Kṛṣṇa smiled and he said to Śrī Rādhā, "Quote, Welcome to my shop, Śrī Rādhā.

I am witnessing for the first time that one candrakalā, or moon-like sweet, is buying another candrakalā." Play on words there. "Welcome to my shop, Śrī Rādhā. I am witnessing for the first time that one candrakalā, or moon-like sweet, is buying another candrakalā." So, at that point, Lalitā spoke up and she said, "Kṛṣṇa, don't you waste our time.

Simply tell us, what is the price of a candrakalā sweet?" So, then Kṛṣṇa looked directly at Śrī Rādhā and he said, "Dear Śrī Rādhā, I will sell you many, I will sell you many candrakalā sweets simply for the price of your eyes filled with anurāga, affection, for me.

That's the price, Śrī Rādhā. I will sell you many candrakalā sweets simply for the price of your eyes filled with affection for me." So, Lalitā would have nothing of this. She'd never trust Kṛṣṇa. So, she objected and she said, "No, Kṛṣṇa, don't play tricks on us.

We all know your tricks very well. Simply tell us what is the normal price, and we will buy the sweets in a proper manner. With one hand, give us the sweets, and with the other, take the payment from us." So, now Kṛṣṇa turned to Lalitā and he said, "Hola, Lalitā.

Hola, Lalitā. You are here to buy sweets, but you are talking to me like you're in a spice shop. That's so wonderful. You're talking to me like you're in a spice shop. Today is Diwali, the festival of sweets. So, speak sweetly, buy sweets, and eat sweets.

Speak sweetly, buy sweets, and eat sweets." So, hearing Kṛṣṇa speak in such a sweet manner, affectionately glanced at Kṛṣṇa with tears in her eyes. That's what Kṛṣṇa wanted, remember, that's the price. She affectionately glanced at Kṛṣṇa with tears in her eyes.

And seeing this, Kṛṣṇa said, "Quote, Oh, Śrī Rādhā, you are so kind. What to speak of all the candrakalās in my shop, I am now selling myself to you as well, for the price of your affection, as witnessed by the love in your eyes for me." Hearing this pastime, and this is the conclusion of this short class, again, it's Kārttika.

I have to take out a *pārthya* every day. This is the conclusion. After hearing this pastime, one poet has written, it's so nice. "Quote, I worship the Divine Couple who are sweeter than the sweetest, who are situated in the shop of love in Vṛndāvana, and who are selling these sweet talks of love to the residents of Vṛndāvana.

I will work tirelessly with my youth, middle age, and old age to purchase the priceless love talks of the sweet Divine Couple of Vṛndāvana." I have nothing more to add.

Thank you very much, Prabhus. I hope you're benefiting from embellishing this wonderful month of Kārttika, and I'm really happy to share some of these sweet pastimes with all of you. Be back in a couple of days. All glories to Prabhupāda. Śrī Guru.

Krishna.