"*00422*.*
"# The Transcendental Twins: Kartik Parikrama 2023

So, today we find ourselves in a very beautiful forested area which actually goes up, up, up different levels to a high hill here in Yāvaṭ. Specifically, this is Raṅgadevī’s forest. Raṅgadevī has a twin sister named Sudevī, and as we mentioned the other day at the forest of Campakalatā, they are two of the Aṣṭa-sakhīs: Viśākhā, Citrā, Indulekhā, Raṅgadevī, and Sudevī. I thought today we could begin with some of the details about these twin sakhīs. There are lots of details, but love is in the details, as they say. So, you can listen very carefully; although many details will be there, just absorb that all and try to understand these divine twins. 

When I first heard that these two girls were twins, I thought, "Kṛṣṇa consciousness has everything, even twins!" Like we have twins here today. Let's ask the twins to stand up. Go on, stand up, twins! I should have named them Raṅgadevī and Sudevī. I still can't tell which one is which. So, Raṅgadevī and Sudevī’s mother’s name is Suṇṭhanā, and their father’s name is Dharmabānu. They live here in this village because in this forest there’s a village, and the village is called Sun-grāma. If you look, you can see this slope is gradually going up. 

It’s a nice walk; actually, close to the top, there’s this beautiful big lawn. I thought we’d have the program on the lawn, but there’s no shade there. The name of this hill upon which the village is situated is called Suvarṇagiri, and maybe you can take a few pebbles home with you because it means the "Hill of Gold." If we had spiritual eyes, if we had the proper eyes to see, we would see this is actually a hill of gold. Raṅgadevī, in particular, is in charge of this particular forest. Actually, I was reading that all the eight Aṣṭa-sakhīs have their own forests where, from time to time, they receive Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. You know that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa also wander through these different forests, enjoying their different transcendental pastimes. It’s also very nice because the different seasons of the year are present in individual forests; if they want to be in winter, they can walk into winter; they can walk into spring; they can walk into autumn. Vṛndāvana is very mystical. 

Each one of the Aṣṭa-sakhīs, the eight confidential girlfriends of Rādhārāṇī, has their own forest. And I was reading they also have their own lakes and gardens. Where are those lakes and gardens? They are out at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, where we were yesterday, but for the same purpose—for service to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It’s also described in *śāstra* their age, but understand that this age stays the same; they never grow older than this age. It’s like time is different there, just like you hear Prabhupāda say sometimes, Kṛṣṇa never ages beyond 16 years of age because He has a spiritual body made of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. It doesn't age like material things do and then deteriorate; He is eternally a 16-year-old youth. 

So when we speak about twins, they’re the same age. Like our twins, how old are you now? Our twins both said at the same time, "20." I’m surprised they don’t dress the same, but I heard they wear the same clothes, but they only have a few sarees. So one will wear one saree one day and the other will wear the same saree the next day; they only have a few sarees, they just switch every day. So that’s why I can’t understand who is who. So, Raṅgadevī and Sudevī are eternally 14 years, 2 months, and 8 days old. Although it is said Raṅgadevī is considered the elder of the two, just by a few seconds. If you do the transcendental math, 14 years, 2 months, and 8 days means that they are seven days younger than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. This is all very helpful when you go to Māyāpur and you see Rādhārāṇī and you have the eight Aṣṭa-sakhīs there; you’ll learn more about them and you can appreciate them more. Although there is an Aṣṭa-sakhī temple also in Vṛndāvana, near Keśī-ghāṭa down by the Yamunā River. 

So first, we’ll focus now on Raṅgadevī. The *śāstra* say that Raṅgadevī’s complexion is the color of a lotus filament and her clothes are the color of a red rose. And it’s written that she possesses a very sweet temperament. Just like we heard the other day about Lalitā; she has a very fiery temperament because she wants to protect Rādhārāṇī from this rascal boy Kṛṣṇa. So she becomes very fiery; she tells Him, "Go away! Kṛṣṇa comes to bother, go away!" Very fiery. But Raṅgadevī is of a very sweet temperament. And I was reading it was interesting that one of her main services is to apply the red *lākṣā* (lac) to Rādhārāṇī's feet, and also she’s very fond of joking with Rādhārāṇī in the presence of Lord Kṛṣṇa. It’s also stated that amongst the six activities of diplomacy, she’s especially expert in the fourth. What’s the fourth principle of diplomacy? Can anyone tell me? The fourth principle of diplomacy according to our ācāryas is: waiting patiently for the enemy to make their next move. She is also very expert in *nyāya*, which means logic and reasoning. *Śāstra* says because of her previous austerities—of course, she’s eternally liberated, but it’s a pastime—because of her previous austerities, she attained a mantra by which she can just chant that mantra and Kṛṣṇa comes immediately. Sometimes the girls say, "Call Him here!" So she chants her mantra and Kṛṣṇa comes. 

She has three main servants, and their names are as follows: Maṅgalā, Mañju-medhā, and Madanī. She also has her eight assistants. Remember we spoke about Campakalatā? She has eight girls who help her, and Raṅgadevī has eight as well. It’s also beautiful names: Kalāvatī, Śaśikalā, Kamalā, Madhurā, Candra-sundarī, Kamalalatā, and Premamañjarī. 

Scripture says these friends—the word "friends" is used—are all expert in the use of perfumes and cosmetics, burning aromatic incense, carrying coal during the winter, and fanning the Divine Couple in the summer. I couldn’t figure out what it means to be expert at carrying coal, but I’m sure it refers to the devotion by which one is performing that activity. Then I read something really cool about these eight girls: Rādhārāṇī’s friends are also able to control the lions, the deer, and all the other wild animals in the forest. Stop, like that bull—I thought he was coming straight for us! If he was there, boom, our friends were there, boom, stop, you go away. Her friends can control the lions, deer, and wild animals in the forest. 

Now, Sudevī, her twin sister. She looks very much like Raṅgadevī; they’re almost identical twins. So much so that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa sometimes call Sudevī by the name Raṅgadevī, and Raṅgadevī by the name Sudevī. "Sudevī!" "No, I’m Raṅgadevī!" "Oh, sorry." This lecture is called "Twin Talk." So, Sudevī’s color—some things we have to be very elevated to understand—Sudevī’s color is that of black gold. In America, we call oil "black gold" because it’s so valuable. I’m not exactly sure what that means; some things we understand as we make more advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and we may not be able to understand with our limited intelligence and our still impure mind. So we have to wait, wait till we become purified. 

One time, we were sitting with Śrīla Prabhupāda at New Māyāpur; it was his second visit. And in the darśana, out on the lawn actually, Prabhupāda was speaking about how a pure devotee, because of his or her love, sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere and in everything. Just like in the 10th chapter of the *Bhagavad-gītā*, the opulence of the absolute, Kṛṣṇa describes certain features of material nature that are very amazing, very great, and in that way, we can see Him in that. And also, if you’re in love with someone, you think about them all the time. So a pure devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere. So then Prabhupāda said, "Are there any questions?" So I tried to think of a question because I wanted Prabhupāda to see me, you know? Because just to get the glance of Śrīla Prabhupāda was the most satisfying thing in our lives. Just that he could see us and know that we existed, that I was his disciple. So Prabhupāda said, "Yes?" I didn't have a question yet. I forgot, what was I going to ask? So the first thought came to my mind, like, "Could you explain to us more how we’re not the body?" But then I thought, "Prabhupāda thinks I’m really neophyte," so I just want to show him that I’m really interested in going deeper in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So what kind of question could I ask Prabhupāda now? So Prabhupāda said again, "Yes?" "You said that a pure devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere, but in the *śāstra* we see Lord Caitanya is not seeing Kṛṣṇa anywhere, He’s feeling so much separation from Kṛṣṇa, He’s crying and crying and crying. It doesn't seem to make sense. In one sense, the devotee sees Kṛṣṇa everywhere, at the same time He’s feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. How do I understand this?" A big smile. A deep question. 

So Prabhupāda gave an answer—it’s the nature of love—but it didn’t connect with any of us. So he stopped, and he looked at me. He said, "This is a very deep subject matter." He said, "When you come to the stage of advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, when you are very advanced, then you will understand." I just read in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* how one devotee had made Mahāprabhu angry. He said, "I will not..." The devotee said, "Can you meet that devotee?" Mahāprabhu said, "No." Was it Mukunda? Mukunda, "I won't meet him." "Please, you have to meet him." "All right, meet him in 10,000 lives!" And Mukunda started dancing in ecstasy, "He’ll meet me! He said he’ll meet me, he’ll meet me!" So I was thinking, Prabhupāda said one day when I’m very advanced, I’ll understand. Whoa. One day I’ll understand. I haven’t understood yet, but time’s on our side; we’re eternal. 

So Sudevī’s color is black gold. So maybe in some previous lifetime, I can explain what is black gold. It’s... now you remember, Raṅgadevī’s clothes are the color of a red rose and they’re twins, so they kind of dress similar, so Sudevī’s clothes are the color of red coral. Okay, Rosa, you hear? Rosa, I’d like you to go out today and buy two sarees for our twins here. One red coral and one red rose, and they can wear this tomorrow when we’re in Jaipur. I’ll get you red rose and red coral, and I don’t know which one to give to which, I’ll just go like this and you choose, you know? 

Now, Sudevī, one of her main services is called *jala-keli*, meaning related to water. She gets water for the other gopīs, etc., and she’s very expert in decorating the braid of Rādhārāṇī. And she teaches parrots to talk, and she’s also expert in engaging roosters in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Now, I spent 40 minutes looking through the scriptures trying to understand how she engages roosters in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The only thing I could think of is that when it’s time for them to wake up, you know, they make some transcendental sound and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa wake up. That’s as far as I could guess. 

Here’s another one that takes some deeper understanding: she arranges friction between two parties, like partridge birds, demigods, and even the Divine Couple. Like we hear how Rādhārāṇī exhibits *māna*; she gets angry and she tells Kṛṣṇa to go away, then Kṛṣṇa has to think of a scheme how to come to her, ask for forgiveness, and they make up. It’s one of the main themes in Rādhā-līlā, His and hers. And Sudevī is so endowed with such potency that she can control the climate, sunrise, rain, and heat by her special powers. She always remains by the side of her dear friend Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Yeah, she’s very expert in arranging Rādhārāṇī’s hair and decorating her eyes with mascara. She also is assigned the seva of massaging Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. 

Here’s something very interesting: she’s an expert sailor. Think, what ocean does she sail on? But there’s many lakes and reservoirs, and there’s Mānasa-gaṅgā over downhill, so it made sense to me. Isn’t this interesting? I’d like to do all these things too, but I mean, not here; I mean in the spiritual world. I don’t want to be an expert sailor here, ocean of birth and death. Here’s something wonderful: she’s fully aware of the auspicious and inauspicious omens described in the *śakuna-śāstra*. *Śakuna*, who’s expert in the *śakuna*? Certain omens you see in material nature around in Vṛndāvana that’s indicative of something auspicious or inauspicious happening. She knows how to start fires and keep them burning without adding wood. And here’s a subtle thing she knows how to do: she knows which flowers blossom with the rising of the moon. Like most flowers blossom when the sun comes out; there’s certain flowers that blossom in moonlight. There’s one special lotus flower that blooms only when the moon is shining. 

Now, remember all these Aṣṭa-sakhīs are fiercely devoted to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and they’re very, how would you say, upset when one of Rādhārāṇī’s competitors comes close, like Candrāvalī. So, one of Sudevī’s services: she has a special group of maidservants who it’s described roam around Vṛndāvana trying to learn of Candrāvalī’s secrets to inform Śrīmatī Rādhā. Who would like that service? Candravalī, she’s over there, she’s making a plan, I heard, to meet Kṛṣṇa there. So let’s go in front of her now. These particular special group of maidservants, they’re very expert at constructing leaf spittoons, and this particular group of gopīs is very expert at playing music on bells. Sudevī’s friends are also entrusted with the decoration of the Divine Couple’s sitting places. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa roam around Vṛndāvana, they get a little tired, they’ll sit down; as a whole science, how to spontaneously decorate that place for the pleasure of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa when they stop somewhere to talk or enjoy the forest of Vṛndāvana. These gopīs, that’s their service. Okay, quickly, nice decoration, like Dāsa and his wife, they made the mats here today, so they decorated our sitting places. So in the spiritual world, there’s gopīs, that’s their seva, to decorate sitting places of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Everything’s down to a fine detail of love. 

For Sudevī and her friends, this is a nice service: Sudevī and her friends, her maidservants, they’re charged with the protection of all the forest birds, bees, and insects. Even the insects. And I noted that when we first came here, we’re wandering around Vṛndāvana looking for places to take you, we discovered that this was, you know, the forest of Raṅgadevī and Sudevī, and we were asking the *sādhus* if we could come and have a program here. The... in her mood of protecting, the mood of this forest protecting the animals, the birds, the bees, they said, "Yes, you can come, but be very kind to and don’t disturb the animals, the birds, or the insects." 

And as we’re walking up today, we met one *sādhu*; he said to us just that before we started, "Don’t step on the ants. Tell all your people, all your Prabhupāda people, there’s lots of ants out today, do not step on the ants." You understand, Mahārāja? "Oh yeah, sure, sure." So I’m telling you now, don’t step on the ants. That’s the mood here, one of the moods of the forests here, because Raṅgadevī is in charge of protecting the animals, the birds, and the forest. 

As I mentioned earlier, like the other six Aṣṭa-sakhīs, both Raṅgadevī and Sudevī have individual kuñjas, groves, with lakes attached to them around Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Actually, one of those lakes is visible to our eyes even now as we go around Parikrama; we come across... off to the left you may have seen. So other ones are not manifest now, but I found the details about Raṅgadevī’s kuṇḍa if you’d like to hear. We learned about Raṅgadevī’s forest, but she also has a kuñja and a kuṇḍa at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. So concerning her little lake—like Lalitā has a lake—Raṅgadevī’s lake, I can describe it if it takes a little while, but I can describe it if you want what her lake looks like. Who would like to hear? Okay. It’s situated... these are the things you should memorize, not, you know, mathematics and biology and things like that in school; these are the things you should memorize and hold dear to your heart. 

So Raṅgadevī-kuṇḍa is situated in the southwestern corner of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. It’s in a grove which means a grove that’s black color. The *śāstra* say it delivers *pramoda*, or unlimited happiness, *sukha*, to Raṅgadevī. We’re describing the little kuñja, which means like a tiny forested area where the lake is; it’s blackish in color, so it’s called *Rañjan-kuñja*. And everything in that kuñja, even the water in the lake, there is a dark blackish color—you know, not black, but darkish—like there’s lots of tamāla trees there, the vines are all black as well. The *śāstra* say that Rādhārāṇī’s attraction for Kṛṣṇa increases whenever she goes there because everything she sees reminds her of Kṛṣṇa. It’s very interesting; it’s described the ground, the platforms, the pavilions are all covered with sapphires set so close together they impart a blackish hue to whomever and whatever enters the kuñja. *Śāstra* say Kṛṣṇa likes to visit there because while doing so, He’s hidden from persons like Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā. Everything’s darkish there in Raṅgadevī’s little kuñja. So when Kṛṣṇa comes and Jaṭilā is always looking, she looks, "I don’t see Him here. Who’s... who’s Jaṭilā?" You know who Jaṭilā is? She’s Abhimanyu’s mother. She’s always, you know, looking to see if Kṛṣṇa’s associating with Rādhārāṇī because Kṛṣṇa is supposed to be, you know, not there; He’s... Rādhārāṇī is supposed to be with Abhimanyu, her so-called husband, and Jaṭilā is always making sure that’s the case and that Kṛṣṇa’s not getting involved. 

Actually, once—I’ll tell you the story—once Jaṭilā heard a rumor that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were together at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, so she went there as quickly as she could and she came upon them there. But because Kṛṣṇa was completely immerged with the growth, blackish interior, Jaṭilā only saw Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sitting there. And after appraising her daughter-in-law’s chastity, Jaṭilā cursed whoever was spreading the rumors that she and Kṛṣṇa were together, then she left. So that’s a little bit about Raṅgadevī’s kuñja and the kuṇḍa that’s there, the lake that’s there in her forest, the Raṅgadevī-kuṇḍa. 

Sudevī’s kuñja is a little bit different at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and her lake is a little bit different at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. It’s in the northwestern corner of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and it’s the emerald—it’s a green in color. It’s called Sudevī-kuñja, where the vines, trees, birds, and even the bees are green, and all the buildings there are studded with green emeralds. And within a cottage, there’s a platform where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī often goes with her friends and Kṛṣṇa and plays dice. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa play dice. Actually, *śāstra* say that Kṛṣṇa, like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Kṛṣṇa is very much attached to playing dice, but He’s not very skilled at it. It’s perfection and imperfection because it just causes to increase everyone’s love. Somehow or other, when He loses and Rādhārāṇī wins—yeah, they say He loses more often than He wins. At Sudevī’s, there’s a pastime connected to that as well. I think I’ll share it. Once on the advice of Madhumaṅgala, Kṛṣṇa challenged Rādhārāṇī to a game of dice. Another part of Vṛndāvana, it was called Bhū-maṇḍala. Madhumaṅgala said, "Kṛṣṇa, challenge Rādhārāṇī to a game of dice, but do it at...!" Their dice game is a little different than ours, it’s called *pāśā*. The reason why Madhumaṅgala and the cowherd boys actually wanted that dice game to play to take place there was because they were sure it would favor Kṛṣṇa’s victory. In the same way that by playing dice in Sudevī’s kuñja, it all seemed to favor Rādhārāṇī, they figured, "Well, if we go to this particular bit, it’ll favor Kṛṣṇa more and He’ll win there." They said to Kṛṣṇa, "The *vāstu* here, at this big, the *vāstu* is really good; you’re bound to beat her here because you’re always losing over there. So do it here and you’re going to win." Kṛṣṇa, however—there are lots of twists and turns in Vraja—however, the ācāryas say the boys had not considered the fact that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the Goddess of Victory herself. *Jaya* means like all glories or victory, so she’s known as *Jaya-śrī*, she’s the original goddess of victory, *Jaya-śrī*. So they didn’t take into consideration that she’s the Goddess of Victory and probably Kṛṣṇa wasn’t going to win. And one ācārya comments, "Being fully independent, she’s unaffected by *vāstu*, any planetary influence," and there in Vṛndā-kuñja, Rādhārāṇī again beat Kṛṣṇa at the dice. All right, well, okay, got some real Rādhā-go-gopīs here, the boys. 

Ah, so I have one more pastime. Are you... huh? Would you like to hear one more pastime? It’s a special pastime I was saving because the Vraja-vāsīs call it "Rāja-māna-līlā." *Māna* means anger, so it’s called the king of Rādhārāṇī’s *māna* pastimes, Rāja-māna—the king of Rādhārāṇī’s angry pastime. So you ready? Okay. One time, Raṅgadevī and Sudevī went to sell makhan (butter) in a village near to their home here, and lo and behold, lo and behold, who did they meet on their way? Kṛṣṇa, who was standing there with Madhumaṅgala. And you can just guess, Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala refused to let them come by. So Kṛṣṇa stood before them like this; He said, "Ladies, this is my grandfather’s road." All these tax pastimes are a little different, this is the road you walked up. "This is my grandfather’s road. He constructed it. If you want to walk on it, walk on it, you’re going to have to pay me tax." 

So Raṅgadevī and Sudevī, just young gopīs, they said, "There’s no way we’re going to pay you tax, Kṛṣṇa. You... we’ve been through this before!" So Kṛṣṇa had a stick, *daṇḍa*, and with Madhumaṅgala, they broke their butter pots and they fell on the ground. So Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala, they sat on the ground, started eating the butter with big smiles on their face. See? So Raṅgadevī and Sudevī, they were furious with anger and they stormed off to make a report to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And Barṣānā is not far away because these villages are circling around. So they went to see Rādhārāṇī and they shared this whole scenario, how they were going to sell the makhan, and they concluded saying, "Rādhā, it just happens again and again and again! He’s such a rascal!" And Rādhā went... Rādhā went, "Yes, He is such a rascal!" She agreed with... she agreed with them. In fact, she said, "My dear Raṅgadevī and Sudevī, we used to complain to Mother Yaśodā about His mischievous activities, but blinded by her maternal love for Him, she didn’t understand. As far as when we go to Nanda Mahārāja to complain about Kṛṣṇa, He just laughs at our complaint. And Mother Rohiṇī, she sees faults in everything we say. And when we complain to Kṛṣṇa’s brother, Balarāma, He’s just the same, He just laughs! I don’t know what to do." Rādhā said, "My dear girls, if all these venerable souls are unable to do anything, why come to me? We’re hopeless! This rascal!" 

But they had so much faith, so much love, so much devotion for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. They said the following: "Dear, as a bee is controlled by flowers, a peacock by dark clouds, the moon by the darkness of night, a fish by water, and a body by the mind, similarly, Kṛṣṇa is controlled by you." That wasn’t all they said. Listen to this. They said to Śrīmatī: "The whole world is in fear of *kāla* (time), and time fears Mahākāla (Śiva). And Mahākāla fears the goddess Mahākālī, and the goddess Mahākālī shivers in fear of Kālīya Kṛṣṇa. But Kālīya Kṛṣṇa fears the raising of your most beautiful eyebrows." 

So hearing the pleas of her sakhīs and seeing their anxious faces, Rādhārāṇī’s heart melted and she said, "I will see to this matter. Now, you can go." So later that afternoon, while meditating on Kṛṣṇa’s mischievous activities and dealing with her personal sakhīs, Rādhārāṇī manifested her *māna*. She became very angry about Kṛṣṇa; she said, "Enough of this rascal taxing my gopīs! It has to end. This time, for sure, I’ll never see Him again. No more Kṛṣṇa. Finished with Kṛṣṇa, right? I take a vow, I’ll never see Him again. So that it’s over, He can’t be rascal anymore because she’s not going to see Him." But finished, she told her sakhīs, "Never, I will see Him again." 

So suddenly, one of her maidservants ran into her quarters and said, "Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa’s come to see you! He’s walking down the hallway, He’s going to be here in a few seconds, I... I promise my sakhī, you know?" So she ran and hid behind a curtain. So Kṛṣṇa came in. "Rādhā?" He couldn’t see because she’s hiding behind the curtain. "I’m so sorry, I’m here with all my heart and soul to love you, please show yourself to me." 

So Rādhā spoke up from behind the curtain, "And who may I ask are you?" 
So Kṛṣṇa replied, "I am Madana-mohan, the Madu demon-killer." 
So Rādhā said, "If you are a *madana* (a bumblebee), then please go to the garden." 
Looking around, where’s that voice coming from? "So no, Rādhārāṇī, I am Gopāla, I am Gopāla." 
So from behind the curtain, she said, "Then go herd your cows!" 
Then Kṛṣṇa said, "Don’t speak riddles with me, I’m your Ghanashyām." *Ghanashyām* means dark clouds. 
So from behind the curtain, Rādhā said, "If you’re Ghanashyām, then go and feed the thirst of the fields with your rainwater." 
So Kṛṣṇa said, "Oh, priye, what’s happened?" 
So when no reply came, Kṛṣṇa understood that Rādhārāṇī had become very angry. So he was thinking, "Only separation will bring her back to her senses. If she’s separated from Me, she’ll long for Me." This time he stormed out of the palace. 

Now, when Rādhārāṇī was informed by the sakhīs that Kṛṣṇa had left, she started feeling this deep separation within her heart. She started crying, fell down on the ground unconscious. As she fell down, she was saying, "I will never be angry with Kṛṣṇa again! I will never again manifest my mood of *māna*!" Just the opposite to her vow a couple minutes ago—"I’ll never see Him again!" "I’ll never be angry with Him again! I’ll never become angry again!" 

So Raṅgadevī was right there. She said, she brought it: "What did you say?" "I said I’ll never be angry with Kṛṣṇa again! I’ll never manifest my *māna* again as long as I live!" So again, remember we were discussing the day, the sakhīs and the gopīs, they live just to bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together. They can’t bear the separation, they’re always thinking, "How can we unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa?" So Raṅgadevī ran out of the palace. "Kṛṣṇa, wait!" So she looked everywhere, she couldn’t find Kṛṣṇa. She said, "Probably He’s down by the Yamunā River." So she went there. Actually, she found Kṛṣṇa sitting on the banks of the Yamunā. One *śāstra* describes it: Kṛṣṇa had a very sad face, He was just throwing pebbles into the river. So Raṅgadevī came up to Kṛṣṇa and she said, "Kṛṣṇa, why are you so sad? Did your mother chastise you? Did you have a fight with Balarāma, or did you lose something?" Then Kṛṣṇa said something very interesting—one of the mothers, quiet the children down there, yeah—"Did your mother chastise you? Did you have a fight with Balarāma? Did you lose something?" 

Kṛṣṇa’s reply is so heart-touching, it will melt your heart. Kṛṣṇa replied, "Yes, Raṅgadevī, I have lost my everything. It appears to me that the moon has lost its cooling nature, trees have lost their stability, the Yamunā has lost her waves, cuckoos have lost their musical notes; me, I’ve lost Rādhārāṇī." 

So hearing these words, Raṅgadevī’s heart melted, and her anger—because she was angry in the beginning, remember—subsided as well. So although, you know, Kṛṣṇa had tried to tax Raṅgadevī and Sudevī, she gave up her anger. She said, "Śyāmasundara, I will arrange a meeting with you and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī." 
But Kṛṣṇa said, "There’s no hope. I heard about her promise: never to see Me again. She’s very powerful, this gopī, she made a vow never to see Me again. There’s no hope, there’s no way we can be reunited when she is in *māna*. It’s not possible." 
But remember, it’s the heartbeat of the gopīs to reunite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa again, despite any obstacles, no matter what. They have to bring them together. 

So Raṅgadevī, she smiled. She said, "There’s hope, Kṛṣṇa." She said, "Kṛṣṇa, you do not know the true nature of us sakhīs. Sakhīs can make fire and water, we can stop time, we can freeze the sun, we can churn the clouds, we can float hills, we can make the Lord of the three worlds dance by the movement of your, eyes." All the Aṣṭa-sakhīs... "Not all this is like, you know, a *gulab jamun*, then *sandesh*, then sweet rice, then *halavā*—a feast, right? So we’re just taking all this nectar in one by one to Kṛṣṇa. And just as we can control a mad elephant by binding its legs with a creeper of *mṛṇāla*..."—it’s ultra-soft and sensitive segments inside the lotus flower; those little, inside deep, those little segments there, it’s called *mṛṇāla*—"Just as we can control a mad elephant by binding its legs with the ultra-soft and sensitive segments inside the lotus flower, we can bind a mad elephant like you with the soft *mṛṇāla* love." 

So Kṛṣṇa said, "Because of the mercy of you sakhīs, it seems like there’s some hope." 
So Raṅgadevī said, "Yes, I’ll go get my sister Sudevī, and we’ll bring Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī here under the cover of darkness." So they went to Barṣānā, they got Rādhārāṇī, followed Raṅgadevī and Sudevī to where Kṛṣṇa was on the banks of the Yamunā. But as they were going along, Rādhārāṇī was very nervous; she said, "What if someone sees me in this forest on the way to see Kṛṣṇa? What will people think of me? I’m a chaste young girl!" No. But the sakhīs, they take care of all these details so that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa don’t have to worry, that their meeting will take place—that’s their duty. They’re constantly thinking of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meeting, so they made all the arrangements that they could meet. "Don’t worry about people seeing you in the forest." Actually, Sudevī spoke up, "Oh, Rādhārāṇī, do not worry. The darkness of your *kañjalam* (kajal) and the darkness of your shadow will hide you from any person who happens to pass by. Do not worry; I filled your ankle bells with the dust of Vraja, so no sound would come from them. I will cover you with a dark blanket, and Raṅgadevī will walk before us to guard the way with what? A lamp of separation in her hands." 

I want to see that—a lamp of separation in her hands! These things are waiting for us if we stick to the straight and narrow. So that night, Raṅgadevī and Sudevī, they arranged for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to meet, described thus, extinguishing the burning fire of separation in their two hearts, the hearts of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So when this news of... that they finally come together was carried to all the other Aṣṭa-sakhīs in Vṛndāvana, described, "The joy of their hearts knew no bounds, for they live solely for the purpose of uniting Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in their pastimes of love." 

Now, just an interesting note here before we finish: in Kali-yuga, or let us say in Gaura-līlā, Raṅgadevī appeared as Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and Sudevī appeared as Ananta Ācārya Gosvāmī. This is some interesting information for our scholar here. So finish today with some words of wisdom from Śruti, from his *Vraja-vilāsa-stava* śataka 17, text number 3. Because this is all the mercy of Gaura-Mahāprabhu. What would we know unless we brought this understanding of Lord Gaurāṅga? "He fully distributed His causeless mercy to all fallen souls who are devoid of any good qualities, who are the source of unlimited faults, who are most sinful, and who are guilty of all their misdeeds. May that Lord Gaurāṅga, by whose mercy this unfortunate soul came to know about the sweet forms of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the loving abode of Vṛndāvana, become my ultimate goal of life." 

So our good fortune simply increases, the next thing is, and hopefully after hearing all this *kathā*, your heart’s just beating, "Yes, I want to develop this love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa! How do I do so?" I’ll call out for Their mercy: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. So after hearing the glories of this place, these two sakhīs, and their pastimes, there can be some love in your heart, and you can chant with feeling. You don’t have to search for the feeling; now you know what to think about while you’re chanting. Think of these pastimes, all by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda. 

Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda! Thank you very much, Hare Kṛṣṇa.""