"*00286*.*
"### The Sacred Forest of Kuśavana

Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone. Welcome back once again to our continued series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. We are in the midst of a terrible surge in the epidemic here in India, working hard to help the devotees and others, but I was looking forward to giving this lecture today because it is a kind of solace in the midst of all this misery here in India. 

So, I would like to begin today by first of all reminding everyone of the pastime where Nanda Mahārāja once desired to leave Vṛndāvana and visit Mother Gaṅgā in the Himalayan Mountains. We discussed that pastime in detail last year, but I am going to recount it a little bit because there is another pastime that is similar to that and easier to understand if we just touch on this one a little bit. 

You may remember how a sādhū came to Vṛndāvana from Haridwar and told the people of Vṛndāvana how Garuḍa had once caught a big snake, and as he was carrying the poor creature off, they passed over the Gaṅgā River in the Himalayan Mountains. As they did so, the tail just barely touched the sacred Gaṅgā water below, and the soul of the snake instantly left his body and manifested a divine form that resembled in every detail a resident of Vaikuṇṭha. Now, Garuḍa could understand that by the grace of the River Gaṅgā, that snake had attained liberation, and so he personally carried that fortunate soul back to Vaikuṇṭha.

Upon hearing this pastime, you probably remember Nanda Mahārāja decided to immediately go on pilgrimage to Haridwar to take a bath in the Gaṅgā. As he was preparing to go with a few of the older gopas (cowherd men), Kṛṣṇa approached His father and He said, "Father, there can be nothing as purifying as living in Vṛndāvana. Why then should we put ourselves through so much inconvenience just to visit a lesser place in the Himalayan Mountains? If all of you want to bathe in the Gaṅgā, then we can do so right here in Vṛndāvana." 

He said, "Mānasī-gaṅgā, which is flowing over Govardhana Hill, is non-different from the Gaṅgā flowing at Haridwar." So, Nanda Mahārāja thought for a moment and then he challenged Kṛṣṇa, his son. He said, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, we will cancel our trip to Haridwar if Gaṅgā-devī, riding on a crocodile, personally appears in the waters of the river you call Mānasī-gaṅgā." So, Kṛṣṇa said, "All right, let's go there right now and pray to Gaṅgā-devī; surely she will appear to us." 

With that, Nanda Mahārāja and all the cowherd men and other residents of Vṛndāvana left for Govardhana Hill where that Mānasī-gaṅgā flows. When they reached there, suddenly it is described a soft glow appeared at the center of Mānasī-gaṅgā. It was actually a lake—now a river, where it formed a lake at that particular part of Govardhana Hill—and right in the center of Mānasī-gaṅgā lake, a divine form of a woman emerged riding on a great crocodile. 

It was Mother Gaṅgā herself. How do we know? Because she was dressed in a white sari decorated with many strands of pearls, and her complexion was moon-white. She was described as stunningly beautiful, and she carried a pot and a white lotus. Upon her forehead was a benevolent third eye—you hear about that sometimes in Vedic scriptures—through which she saw all phases of time simultaneously. 

The *Vāyu Purāṇa*, in the Gaṅgā-mahimā section, I think it is verses 33, 34, and 35, describes her appearance there in Mānasī-gaṅgā so wonderfully, and I will quote: "Oh Goddess Gaṅgā, you are situated on a white crocodile and your complexion is as fair as milk. You hold two white lotuses in your two hands, and in your other two hands you hold two pots of nectar. I offer my obeisances unto your divine lotus feet which are placed on the white lotus of Gaṅgā water. Your body is very effulgent like millions of winter moons, and you give boons to all the demigods. You are loved by Jahnu Ṛṣi and as his daughter, oh Goddess, your sacred body is decorated with gorgeous jewelry, and the crown of a half-moon decorates your brilliant forehead. You are decorated with white silk garments. Oh Goddess, you give shelter to all the demigods. May I always reside on the banks of your holy waters." Gaṅgā-mā kī jaya!

So, Nanda Mahārāja and the cowherd men, seeing all this, they were convinced that Mānasī-gaṅgā was indeed the Gaṅgā that flows down from the spiritual world through the Himalayas. They accepted those sacred waters, and why not? Because we all know that Mānasī-gaṅgā in Vṛndāvana manifested from the mind of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. So, they all bathed happily in the sacred waters, and they canceled the trip to Haridwar. That is the fitting conclusion; no one left Vṛndāvana.

On another occasion, Nanda Mahārāja, upon hearing the glories of what was known at the time as Kuśasthali, on the bank of the Gomatī River on the shore of the ocean in western India, wanted to leave Braja to visit that holy place. Kuśasthali would eventually become the site where Kṛṣṇa constructed Dvārakā. It is eternally a transcendental abode, but sometimes Dvārakā manifests, sometimes it is not, but that is eventually where Kṛṣṇa settled after leaving Braja and He had His devotees construct Dvārakā. 

Hearing this—that his father wanted to leave Braja to go see that sacred abode—Kṛṣṇa objected. He said, "Oh Father, why do we need to leave Braja to see Kuśasthali? Kuśasthali and Dvārakā, the eternal abode of Lord Vāsudeva, are always present in the area of Braja known as Kuśavana or Kośīvana." That is interesting; Kṛṣṇa said we do not have to go there because Kuśasthali or you could say Dvārakā are ever-present here in Vṛndāvana. So, we do not have to go, just like we did not have to go to the Himalayas. 

As we have discussed on a number of occasions, all holy places in the universe, you could say in creation, have their residence in Vṛndāvana-dhāma. All those holy abodes are actually expansions of their residences in their places in Vṛndāvana-dhāma. As I checked that again, verse 161, he says, *sarvāṇi tatra tīrthāni vividhāni vasanti*. Emphatically, he says one does not have to leave Braja to visit other holy places; it is not necessary. All the holy places, he says there in that verse, are situated in Vṛndāvana. *Sarvāṇi tatra tīrthāni vividhāni vasanti*—all holy places have their origins in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Those are the words of Rūpa Gosvāmī. 

Therefore, we do not have to ever leave Braja. And Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, he writes of course in *Prārthanā*, *Bhakti-candrikā* verse 5: *tīrtha-yātrā pariśrama*. Famous verse: "The struggle to travel to various holy places is simply the mind's mistake, because to make spiritual advancement all one actually needs is the lotus feet of Govinda." *Bhakti-candrikā* verse number 5. And where do you find those lotus feet of Govinda? You find them all over the dust of Vṛndāvana. 

I researched that point some more because I firmly believe that after all my travels around India for the last 50 years and then spending so much time in our beloved Vṛndāvana, I came to the conclusion. So, I found another reference like that. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he also says in his *Kalyāṇa-kalpataru*, in the first branch, song 14, verse 4, he says: *je tīrthe vaiṣṇava nāi, sei tīrthe nāhi jāi, ki lābha hātiyā dūradese*. He writes, "In the holy places where Vaiṣṇavas are not present, I will never go. What is the use of roaming around in such distant places?" This is a Vraja-vāsī; in the holy places where Vaiṣṇavas are not present, I will never go. What is the use of roaming around in such distant places? *Śrī-vrajabhūmi, śrī-vṛndāvana*. So, our ideal place to stay is Braja, full of Vaiṣṇavas.

So again, Kṛṣṇa said to His father, "Oh Father, why do we need to leave Braja to see Kuśasthali? Kuśasthali and Dvārakā, the eternal abode of Lord Vāsudeva, are always present in the area of Braja known as Kuśavana or Kośīvana." At that point, Nanda Mahārāja remembered how Kṛṣṇa had proven that the Gaṅgā was actually present at Govardhana Hill. So now, he asked Kṛṣṇa to show him how Dvārakā was also present in Braja and he did not have to go there to see that transcendental abode. He said, "Kṛṣṇa, if what you say is true, I should be able to see that ocean, the Gomatī River, and the holy city of Dvārakā here in Kuśavana." This is fascinating.

So, Kṛṣṇa again, He agreed. Taking His father by the hand and with His friends, they all playfully—it is described—led Nanda Mahārāja and the seniors, the older cowherd men, to Kuśavana or Kośīvana. I was reading that they were laughing and joking the whole way. It is a cowherd's life; what a wonderful life they have in Vṛndāvana. 

Upon arriving at this Kuśavana, this particular forested area, they first encountered a beautiful lake called Gomatī-kuṇḍa. So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Dear Father, look in this beautiful lake; you will see Gomatī-ghaṭa and also all the wonders of Kuśasthali that you were searching for." So, some of Nanda Mahārāja's friends, you know, they kind of nudged Nanda Mahārāja and they said jokingly—because Kṛṣṇa is just a little boy, so they are just entertaining Him, so to speak—they said to Nanda Mahārāja, "Oh Mahārāja, what can you see? What do you see, really?" 

Kṛṣṇa did not appreciate their humor, so He said something just wonderful—just wonderful—and we can take these words and just imbibe them into our hearts forever in trying to achieve a love for Vṛndāvana. Listen to this: He said, "My dear Father, oh King of the cowherds, we can only see a holy place by its grace. Let us all bathe in Gomatī-kuṇḍa and pray for its favor. My dear Father, King of the cowherds, we can only see a holy place by its grace. The dhāma will only—you can only see the dhāma if the dhāma reveals itself to you." So, Kṛṣṇa said, "Let's just bathe in this kuṇḍa, Gomatī-kuṇḍa, and pray for its favor." 

To satisfy Kṛṣṇa—because they were not convinced yet—everyone changed into bathing clothes and they entered the lake. And as per tradition, you know, all the Vraja-vāsīs offered palmfuls of Gomatī-kuṇḍa water to itself. Like we do when we bathe in a holy river—the Gaṅgā, or the Yamunā, or the Kāverī, or when I was up in the Kali-gaṇḍakī in Nepal—you take the water because it is sacred and you offer it back to the river itself. 

So, when they did that, suddenly everyone saw the full glories of Kuśavana where Dvārakā is, quote-unquote, "present." They saw the ocean, because Dvārakā is situated on the sea; they saw Gomatī-ghaṭa; and they saw the invincible, how is it described? Eternal residence of Lord Vāsudeva, the mighty city of Dvārakā. 

And after this amazingly wonderful vision, Kṛṣṇa returned to His capital with His cowherd associates and the elder gopas and told his subjects what had happened. And from that time on, the Vraja-vāsīs accepted that a visit to Kuśavana and Gomatī-kuṇḍa is equal to a pilgrimage to Dvārakā. What a wonderful pastime! 

So, is Dvārakā and the city of Dvārakā and all its opulence actually present in Braja? Because it is a different mood, isn't it? Actually, the ācāryas say no. They say neither the city of Dvārakā is present in Vṛndāvana, nor any of Kṛṣṇa's associates in Dvārakā are present in Braja. Only the mood is there; this is subtle. Only the mood of Dvārakā is present in that Kuśavana. 

And the next question is, why would the residents of Vṛndāvana be curious about such places, where there is some aiśvarya, some awe and reverence, which is not there in Vṛndāvana? Only the intimacy of love for Kṛṣṇa as a friend, as a child, as a lover. So why would the Vraja-vāsīs like Nanda Bābā and others be curious about such places and want to visit them? The ācāryas say simply because such places have a connection to Kṛṣṇa. That is the only reason. 

I was thinking about that, and I remember Śrīla Prabhupāda once gave the example of the father of a boy. The boy's relationship with the father is at home, although the father spends much of his time at the office. His relationship with the son is at home, because when he is at home he is playing with his son, he is joking with his son, he is wrestling with his son—like that. But the father has another identity at work, at his office. But his son, you know, he knows that, but that is not his rasa with his dad. Maybe sometimes he is curious, like, "Dad, what do you do at the office?" but he is more concerned about wrestling, swimming, and playing with his father at home. 

So when the Vraja-vāsīs show some interest in the Himalayas or Dvārakā like that, it is just a curiosity and only because such places are connected to Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda said the Lord's pastimes in Vaikuṇṭha and the Lord's pastimes in Vṛndāvana can be compared to the father at work and the father at home. Kṛṣṇa in Vaikuṇṭha, that is more of a formal mood, whereas Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, it is more of a playful mood. So the residents of Vṛndāvana, that is their nature; they want to be intimate with Kṛṣṇa, but they may be curious about this Vaikuṇṭha Kṛṣṇa, and in Vaikuṇṭha sometimes that subject comes up, but they never lose the intimacy of love for Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. 

We all know that the mood of Dvārakā and Vṛndāvana is quite different. In Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa's devotees worship Him with love, but such love is mixed again with this aiśvarya, with awe and reverence, and that is fine. In the spiritual world, there are many varieties of ways to serve and love Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa, He desires that love from His devotee. It makes the spiritual world perfect and complete. But in Braja, there is no awe and reverence. The Vraja-vāsīs, they simply see Kṛṣṇa as a lovable child, a friendly friend, and an intimate lover, and above all, Kṛṣṇa prefers that love, that love of the Vraja-vāsīs, to others' love. Strong statement, but we hear that in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Chapter 3, verse 16. Kṛṣṇa says, "Knowing My opulences, the whole world looks upon Me with awe and veneration, but devotion made feeble by such reverence does not attract Me." This was love in the umpteenth degree. 

Now, this does not mean that the love of the Dvārakā-vāsīs is in any way imperfect—no. So how do we understand that? Well, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī says in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, a simple translation is that Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Dvārakā are perfect, they are more perfect in Mathurā, and they are most perfect in Vṛndāvana. It is the perfect explanation. The love of all of Kṛṣṇa's pure devotees is pure, but in Dvārakā it is perfect, in Mathurā it is a little more perfect, but in Vṛndāvana, most perfect. 

So, we as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, we want to attain, by the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas, and we do that by awakening our love for Him. But it is not enough just to love Him; one has to have what is called *rāgānugā-bhakti*, one has to have spontaneous love. In *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī says: he says whosoever enhances their desire to engage directly in conjugal love with Kṛṣṇa but serves Kṛṣṇa exclusively through the path of vaidī-bhakti attains the position of a queen in Dvārakā after some time. That is *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.303. That is an important verse for us to understand: the type of love that one gains through vaidī-bhakti, which means a path of, you know, following all the rules and the regulations of devotional service. That is very important, that is how we begin on the path of devotional service. 

So if you only follow the path of rules and regulations without eventually aspiring for a spontaneous devotion to Kṛṣṇa, *rāgānugā-bhakti*, then we will end up in Dvārakā in the conjugal love as a queen; we will marry Kṛṣṇa. But if one, under the guidance especially of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our Six Gosvāmīs, if one advances to the point of spontaneous loving devotion to Kṛṣṇa, then those devotees go to Goloka in the spiritual skies. It is progressive, and they love Kṛṣṇa in a more intimate way as a gopī or specifically as a mañjarī in our tradition. 

In his commentary to that verse I quoted from *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* by Rūpa Gosvāmī, there is a commentary by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and he makes it very clear. He says, "Only those who perform pure *rāgānugā-bhajana*, or again spontaneous devotion, can achieve the Vṛndāvana which is full of mādhuryā-rasa, or intimate love." 

So again, we know who we are and we know where we are going, and we would like to go—no harm in going to Dvārakā—but we are Gauḍīyas, and we have this golden opportunity through the very deep teachings of our ācāryas. If we become very serious to eventually awaken this spontaneous devotion, it will take us to Goloka. We know that was Uddhava's desire, of course. Now, Uddhava was a Dvārakā-vāsī, but as you know, Kṛṣṇa sent him to Vṛndāvana with some messages after some time because He missed the Vraja-vāsīs. So He sent him some messages from Dvārakā, and He chose Uddhava to deliver those messages. But he had a hidden desire, Kṛṣṇa did, that He wanted to see this spontaneous devotion that the Vraja-vāsīs had. 

So when Uddhava personally observed this spontaneous love of the Vraja-vāsīs, he said: *caritam kṛṣṇa-devasya sarvam evādbhutam bhavet*. Very famous. Uddhava said after seeing the Vraja-vāsīs, "Although the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa are all amazing, still His cowherd pastimes are the most mind-enchanting." Although the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa are all amazing, still His cowherd pastimes are the most mind-enchanting. This is actually a verse from the *Padma Purāṇa*, and it is quoted by a famous Vaiṣṇava called Mukunda Gosvāmī in his commentary to *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, 2.1, verse 210. "Although the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa are all amazing, still His cowherd pastimes are the most mind-enchanting." That is from the lips, that is from the heart of Uddhava; he had seen both, and that was his conclusion. 

Yes, so Braja. And even Kṛṣṇa, when He was in Dvārakā, He was hankering for Vṛndāvana. Even Kṛṣṇa—He is in Dvārakā, He is the King, everyone is worshiping Him there with love but with some awe and veneration, and that is His relationship with those devotees—but in His mind He is thinking of Braja. So if He is thinking of Braja, we want to be in Braja. What is He thinking of? The spontaneous love of the Vraja-vāsīs, particularly His mother. One time, in Rūpa Gosvāmī's *Padyāvalī*, one of our favorites in verse 338, we hear how Kṛṣṇa was crying for the love of Mother Yaśodā. 

It is described one day as Kṛṣṇa was sitting in His palace in Dvārakā, He began crying as He was remembering Mother Yaśodā, and He spontaneously uttered the following verse. It is quite eloquent Sanskrit: "Which mother will now take half-chewed betel nuts from her own mouth and lovingly feed them to me? Now who will subdue me with sweet words when I depart from the path of righteousness and act like a whimsical, naughty child? Now who will say, 'Come here, come here,' wave her arm, place me on her lap, and re-tie my peacock feather when it falls due to playing around in Braja?" Kṛṣṇa, Mother Yaśodā kī jaya!

An interesting note I would like to share with you is how this forested area known as Kuśavana, or sometimes Kośīvana, got its name in Braja, where Dvārakā is present as a mood only—so that the Vraja-vāsīs can come and curiously look at it because it is connected to Kṛṣṇa. So how did Kuśavana, which is Braja, how did that forest get its name? With a little research, we found out that forest got its name from a conversation Śrī Rādhā once had with Kṛṣṇa. 

Sometimes it is called Kuśavana, sometimes it is called Kośīvana. So I was reading that one time—this is interesting—Śrī Rādhā locked herself in a grove in Kośīvana because Śrī Rādhā, she locked herself in a grove in Kośīvana, and when Kṛṣṇa knocked on the door of that grove—this is how the ācāryas describe it—she asked, "Ko ‘si? Ko ‘si? Ko ‘si?" (Who are you?) In Sanskrit, the phrase *ka asi* ("who are you") combines to become *ko ‘si*. So then, a humorous exchange took place between the divine couple. Rādhā said, "Who taps on my door with one finger?" And Kṛṣṇa replied, "Oh crooked girl, don't you know Mādhava is at your door?" And Rādhā said, "Mādhava is the name of spring; has springtime come knocking on my door?" 

And Kṛṣṇa replied, "Certainly not; I am the holder of the Sudarśana wheel." Rādhā said, "Potters hold wheels; are you a potter?" Kṛṣṇa replied, "I am not; I am the person who holds up the entire world." Rādhā said, "The king of serpents, Ananta, holds up the world; are you Ananta?" So Kṛṣṇa is getting frustrated, "No, I am a person who crushes serpents." Rādhā, she is teasing Him, "The king of birds, Garuḍa, crushed the serpents; are you Garuḍa?" And Kṛṣṇa replied, "No, I am Lord Hari." Rādhā said, "Hari is the name of the famous monkey Hanuman, the servant of Lord Rāma; are you he?" So then the Gosvāmī says, the anonymous poet who recorded this humorous discussion concluded: "May Lord Kṛṣṇa, who holds the Sudarśana-cakra and who smiled at these clever words from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, protect us." 

All right, Kṛṣṇa. Now, as I was concluding my preparation for this lecture—it is a little short today because, again, I have other things on my mind and other duties right now here in India—but as I was concluding my preparation, out of curiosity, I checked with my friend Hari Pārśada, the Sanskrit scholar in Mumbai, to see if our dear Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī mentions Kuśavana or Kośīvana. And lo and behold, we found that he does; he has mentioned this forest, Śrī-vana, in his *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa*. 

As you know, we begin a lecture with the praṇāma-mantra of a particular forest that we are visiting. So today, because I did this at the end of my research, today we shall come close to concluding our lecture with the praṇāma-mantra and a few other mantras actually connected to Kuśavana—instead of in the beginning, we will do it at the end here. 

Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī begins in *Bhakti-vilāsa*: "The presiding deity of Kuśavana is Lord Adhokṣaja." That is *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* 194. Then he says, "Obeisances to Adhokṣaja, the presiding deity of that Kuśavana." *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* 199. Then he says, *jyeṣṭha-kṛṣṇa-caturdasyām svayam āgatya mānavam*—on the 14th day of the dark fortnight of the month of Jyeṣṭha, having gone to Kuśavana, one who offers prayers gives limitless benefit to his forefathers. That is *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* 10.30. Then he gives the praṇāma-mantra for this forest that we wandered in and discovered the mood of Dvārakā and the curiosity of the Vraja-vāsīs to see anything connected to Kṛṣṇa. So he gives the praṇāma-mantra for Kuśavana; I was like so surprised when we found it: 

"The auspicious, purifying personification of piety and the giver of limitless benefits." (*Praṇāma-mantra, Bhakti-vilāsa* 10.30). He further says, chanting this mantra 13 times, offer praṇāmas to this forest; one who does so becomes completely fulfilled on earth and also attains the highest immutable destination. 

Then he also says that in this forest there is a lake—we always discover a lake in these forests—it is a lake called Mānasa-sarovara. The praṇāma-mantra for Mānasa-sarovara, it is a bit tricky, this one: "Obeisances to you, oh lake named Mānasa. You are liberation personified; you are the destroyer of sins committed in the mind, and you are always personally happy at Mānasa." So if you bathe in this lake in Kuśavana, then if there are any sins, if you have some bad thoughts—good reason to visit that lake. That is *Vraja-bhakti-vilāsa* 10.31. Then Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa concludes: chant that mantra 10 times while offering ācamana and dipping in that lake; one who does so never sees any unhappiness in their life. Wow.

The last point of interest today: Vaiṣṇava scholars say that the present town of Kośī, which many of you know is just before the town of Vṛndāvana—we would often in the old days, we would drive because it wasn't the Yamunā Expressway that we have now, we would drive from Delhi Airport to Vṛndāvana and we would always pass through Kośī—the scholars say that Kośī is within the forest of Kośīvana, not far from Kośīvana, where we are in; it is maybe what, 20 minutes or 30 minutes from Vṛndāvana, that town, the village of Kośī. And they say that Kośī is said to be the place where Nanda Mahārāja had his granary. One last interesting detail: Kuśavana.

So we always conclude with some prayers. And just as I was taking rest last night to get some solace and to taste some bliss, I was reading our beloved Śrīla Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī's *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*, the *pañcadaśam* section. Man, I just loved these verses! I thought I would share them with you to leave us on a high note. We have been on a very high place from Kuśavana within Goloka Vṛndāvana or even here in Gokula Vṛndāvana. But here is a wonderful—some wonderful verses glorifying Vṛndāvaneśvarī, the Queen of Vṛndāvana-dhāma. He writes: 

"In Vṛndāvana, there is a Goddess of sweet nature and inconceivable actions. Hidden in a bower with handfuls of attractive, fragrant blue flowers, I will speak her mantra, which is not known in all the Vedas and which is not revealed anywhere in the confidential Āgamas. When the mantra is chanted, all great siddhis fall at the person's feet who has chanted it, and by its power, the Lord's bhāva comes into that person's hand. For the person who chants this mantra, there is no rule or prohibition. The dust from the lotus feet of this mantra purifies the knowledge of the Vedas. Its nectar is most sweet, auspicious amongst all auspicious things, and most astonishing. This mantra produces the most unlimited greatness amongst all methods; it is the supreme goal amongst all goals. They say that it is the supreme passionate bliss amongst all passionate types of bliss that can be gained by mantra; it is the secret amongst all secrets. This mantra..." 

And what is this secret? What is this supreme mantra? It is the name "Rādhā." That is the mantra: Rādhā. Chant "Rādhā," Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī says, constantly, without thinking of anything else. 

Thank you so much again for this opportunity to go with you to Kuśavana, get a glimpse of Dvārakā there, hear about the sublime, pure mood of the Vraja-vāsīs, and once again to hear about where we want to go. We want to end up, of course, we would be happy to end up anywhere where Kṛṣṇa is, in any of His expansions, but according to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, this is the supreme goal: *Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma*. And by repeatedly hearing these glories, we will awaken this desire to join the Lord, rejoin the Lord there in the supreme abode. 

So thank you. We will continue our research, and we will be back with you again in a few days. Please, all of you, keep within your hearts and in your prayers all the devotees here in India who are stricken with COVID-19. You can keep all the people in mind because devotees have soft hearts; this country is being ravaged by this virus now, very difficult situation. Keep in mind our beloved devotees in Māyāpur, in Vṛndāvana; some are very sick, unfortunately some have passed away in the last few days. So please keep them in mind, keep them in your mind, that those who are still with us will be protected by Bhagavān Narasiṃhadeva, and those who have left will be guided by Kṛṣṇa back home, back to Godhead. 

Okay, so thank you, see you soon. *Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya! All the twelve forests and the sub-forests and the sub-sub forests of Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya! Back home, back to Godhead!*

Hare Kṛṣṇa, all right. Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""