"*00158*.*
"### The Treasure of the Lotus Feet of Kṛṣṇa

Om.

I was thinking yesterday evening about what to speak on in front of such an august assembly of Vaiṣṇavas and Vaiṣṇavīs, and I immediately thought of your beautiful deities—your beautiful Kṛṣṇa deities. I have traveled the world over and over again, and I have seen many deities, but always these deities come to my mind; they are so beautiful. You are so blessed to be a servant. And naturally, we are taught when we come before the Lord that our gaze is first at His lotus feet, and then gradually our gaze goes upwards to His lotus face. So, I haven't had the opportunity to take *darśana* because I came in and now I am looking the other way. I would like to speak about the lotus feet of your deities with your permission today.

This is *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, 11th Canto, Chapter 6, Verse 7. The demigods are speaking: "Our dear Lord, advanced mystic yogis striving for liberation from the severe bondage of material work meditate with great devotion upon Your lotus feet within their hearts. Dedicating our intelligence, senses, vital air, mind, and power of speech to Your Lordship, we demigods now bow down to Your lotus feet."

In this particular verse of *Grantha-rāja*—we say *Grantha-rāja* often because *grantha* in Sanskrit means book or *śāstra*, and *rāj* means king—the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* is the king of all the many scriptures we have in this great country of India because it is *amala-purāṇa*; it deals only with pure devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the *parama-gati* (ultimate goal) of every devotee: to go back home, back to Godhead, back to Vaikuṇṭha, but beyond Vaikuṇṭha to Goloka Vṛndāvana. It is the topmost planet in the spiritual world. In the realm of Vaikuṇṭha, there are unlimited spiritual planets where the Lord resides with His various devotees in different *rasas*, or different moods. But Goloka Vṛndāvana is the topmost because there, one can have a very loving, intimate relationship with the Lord. Some of our *ācāryas* refer to Vaikuṇṭha as the official kingdom of God, but Goloka Vṛndāvana is where one can be with Kṛṣṇa in a very personal way. So, they say that Goloka Vṛndāvana is the playground of God, and that is our ultimate goal. 

In this verse, the *devatās* are actually praising Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā, and the very first thing they do is glorify His lotus feet. That is interesting, because generally, when you want to flatter someone, you don't praise their feet. But Kṛṣṇa's feet are not ordinary; they are extraordinary. And throughout our *śāstras*, the glories of Kṛṣṇa's feet—their beauty, fragrance, and flavor—are glorified again and again by our great *ācāryas*. For example, in the Third Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, it is described that when the four Kumāras met Lord Kṛṣṇa at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha—I am sure most of you are familiar with that pastime—the *darśana* of His lotus feet had an overwhelming effect on them. Just to see the divine lotus feet, the four Kumāras were overwhelmed. 

Chapter 15, verse 43 of the Third Canto says: "When the breeze carrying the aroma of Tulasi leaves from the toes of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead entered the nostrils of those great sages, they experienced a change both in body and in mind." Even though they were attached at that point to the impersonal Brahman understanding, they were elevated from the Brahman understanding to becoming pure devotees just by smelling the breeze that passed by the toes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, just from that one pastime mentioned in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, we can appreciate that the Lord's feet are very special. So special that, actually, we all know the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī-devī, spends much of her time at those lotus feet. We often see paintings of Lakṣmī-devī massaging the Lord's lotus feet. In fact, those lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa are so full of nectar that even Kṛṣṇa Himself is fascinated by His lotus feet. What? Just consider: His feet are so full of nectar that even Kṛṣṇa Himself is fascinated by them. 

We have all seen that famous painting of Kṛṣṇa floating on the banyan leaf, sucking His toe. He is sucking His toe, and the *ācāryas* explain that this is because Kṛṣṇa is wondering what it is about His feet that makes them so attractive to His devotees. So, what is it? Well, those soft lotus feet are all-attractive. So soft and attractive that the people of Braj, the Vrajavāsīs, become concerned: "What will happen to Kṛṣṇa when He walks barefoot through the forest of Vṛndāvana? The small pebbles will hurt His feet." They are very concerned; they love Kṛṣṇa, they love everything about Kṛṣṇa, and they are always meditating on His lotus feet. So, when He goes to herd the cows in the morning, the Vrajavāsīs are very worried about what will happen to those two lotus feet. 

In fact, one time Mother Yaśodā chastised Kṛṣṇa: "Kṛṣṇa, you should wear some *pādukas*; you should wear some wooden sandals when you go to the forest, because your soft lotus feet may get pricked by the thorns or by the pebbles." Kṛṣṇa said, "Maiyā, no way. No way I'm going to wear *pādukas*. No way I'm going to wear shoes." "But, please, you're hurting the cows." So Kṛṣṇa said, "I love my cows so much. They don't wear shoes, Maiyā. So why should I wear shoes?"

Kṛṣṇa is famous as a cowherd boy; He loves His cows so much. He loves the *brāhmaṇas*, and He loves the cows. But if we look at His *līlā* in Goloka Vṛndāvana, He is spending most of His time with the cows. He goes out all day in the early morning, herds the cows in the pastures of Vṛndāvana, and He comes back late in the afternoon. Maybe He will offer some blessings to a few *brāhmaṇas*, but He spends most of His time—Govinda—with the cows. 

And the Gopīs, Kṛṣṇa's greatest lovers, they are in so much anxiety that they worry when they place Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet upon their chests that their chests may be too hard for the softness of the Lord's lotus feet. And why do we refer to them as "lotus"? Many times when I am traveling in Western countries and I refer to the lotus face of the Lord or the lotus feet of the Lord, people in the West say, "Why lotuses? Why are they called lotus feet?" I mean, we are used to that term, but you go to America, you go to Canada, Mexico, Argentina—you say "lotus feet," and they ask, "Why are you calling them lotus feet? Why are Kṛṣṇa's feet compared to lotuses?" Because they are soft like lotus flowers, they are beautiful like lotus flowers, and they have a little pink color to them, as do lotus flowers. You always see the lotus flowers—they are bluish, but there is some pink there. So Kṛṣṇa's feet are compared to lotus flowers because they have that pinkish hue. Even Kṛṣṇa's toenails are compared to the petals of a lotus flower. 

Regarding Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, Queen Kuntī, in her famous prayer in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (First Canto, Chapter 8, text 22), says: "My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus, and whose feet are engraved with lotuses." 

Now, a devotee hearing this talk might lament that those divine lotus feet are only available at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha, because we heard that the four Kumāras came and they were liberated from the concept of the impersonal Brahman to become pure devotees—just some breeze was coming by, it passed by the toenails of the Lord, and by smelling that, they became Vaiṣṇavas. So one might lament, "Well, I also want to become elevated to the stage of pure devotional service, but I can't go to the gates of Vaikuṇṭha and smell that intoxicating breeze." But no, those lotus feet are available to all devotees. How so? Well, in a bit of an esoteric way, in discussing the glories of our *grantha-śāstra*, *ācāryas* say that the first two cantos of the *Bhāgavatam* are compared to Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet. If you go from the first, second, third, up to the 12th Canto of the *Bhāgavatam*, those different cantos represent different parts of Kṛṣṇa's *vigraha*. *Sat-cit-ānanda-vigraha*—His form is not mundane material elements, but made of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. 

So the *Bhāgavatam*, which is completely spiritual in and of itself, has different cantos representing the different parts of the Lord's body. As we start with the First Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, we learn about Kṛṣṇa. We focus on Kṛṣṇa by studying the first canto, then the second canto, then the third canto—nine cantos before we actually go into the Lord's playful pastimes of Vṛndāvana in the 10th Canto. We begin at the beginning. So, when you come for *darśana* to your beautiful deities, you first look at His feet. You first look at His divine feet, and then you sit down and you hear from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. So the first two cantos of the *Bhāgavatam* are compared to the feet of the Lord. So don't lament, "I can't go to the gates of Vaikuṇṭha and smell the breeze coming over the toes of the Lord to become a pure devotee." I can sit daily and begin from the first canto, the second canto of the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*; that is compared to having *darśana* of the Lord. And we can also have *darśana* of those lotus feet from the beautiful deities—the deities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the deities of Sītā-Lakṣmaṇa-Hanumān, the different expansions of the Lord. We can actually come and see, because those deities are not different from the Lord. 

As that *brāhmaṇa* boy—we hear in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—when the *brāhmaṇa* boy came back to Vṛndāvana to ask Sākṣi-gopāla to act as a witness to a trial that was taking place in Oḍiśā, he said to the Lord, "My dear Lord, You are not a statue. You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda. So, You please come and stand witness for me." And the Lord said, "How can I come? I'm a deity. How can I walk?" The boy said, "Intelligent young *brāhmaṇa*, Lord, if You can talk, You can walk. Will You come with me and stand as my witness?" So when we are coming to the temple and we are seeing the deity, that is our understanding: "My dear Lord, You are not a statue. You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda. And I get the *darśana* of Your lotus feet." 

So bowing down to those lotus feet is very important. Kṛṣṇa stresses this in the *Gītā*, isn't it? Chapter 9, I think it is text 14. I can see some of you are chanting that verse: "Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down before Me." What are we bowing down to? As we bow down, what do we see? The Lord's lotus feet. When you are bowing down, we have no problem bowing down to the Lord. There is that song, "Bow down, Mr. Hari Kṛṣṇa." We don't mind bowing down, because when we bow down submissively, humbly, what do we see? His lotus feet. And by gazing at those lotus feet, we can get the same blessings as did the four Kumāras by smelling the breeze that went over those lotus feet. So "bowing down before Me," these great souls, Kṛṣṇa says in the *Gītā*, "perpetually worship Me with devotion." And this bowing down to the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa and His associates has been going on since time immemorial. 

I was reading just the other day in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. Caitanya describes that when a number of Brahmās from different universes entered Kṛṣṇa's room—you know this pastime in Dvārakā—what was the first thing they did? They all offered Him obeisances with their millions of crowns touching the ground. It created, it is described, a tumultuous crashing sound. And *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* Third Canto, Chapter 2, verse 21 confirms, referring to this pastime, when all the *devatās*—excuse me, all the Brahmās—came from different universes (smaller universes, bigger universes, so to rule or to do their *sevā* in those particular universes). They had different numbers of heads; our Lord Brahmā only has four heads because this is a small universe, but there are some universes where Brahmā is doing his *sevā* and he has thousands of heads. So all these Brahmās came to see Lord Kṛṣṇa to work, and entering into His chambers, they bowed down and it made a tumultuous crashing sound. 

So *Bhāgavatam* 3.2.21 describes that moment. This is real history. We are not interested in the mundane history of this world; it is all quite depressing. But this is the real history that we are interested in. *Purāṇa* means the ancient history of this creation. So that moment is described: "Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of all kinds of beings and is independently supreme by achievement of all kinds of fortune. He is worshiped by the eternal maintainers of the creation, Lord Brahmā, who offer Him the paraphernalia of worship by touching their millions of helmets to His feet." So we want to follow in their footsteps, these great personalities, by bowing down to the feet of the Lord. Those lotus feet touched their heads and they were benedicted. 

Now, besides the four Kumāras, there is another example of how the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa are very dear to devotees, and this is especially relevant to us as Gauḍīyas. That example is the example of Akrūra, when he was making the journey from Mathurā to Vṛndāvana to bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma back to Mathurā for the wrestling match. We, most of you, are aware of that pastime. King Kaṃsa was sending demons every day to Vṛndāvana to kill Kṛṣṇa, but they were unsuccessful. Each and every one of them was unsuccessful. So Kaṃsa devised another plan: "Let's get this Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to Mathurā. I'll invite them on the pretext of a wrestling match, and my wrestlers will easily kill these two young boys." Such a demon, Kaṃsa. So he sent one of his ministers. His ministers were, well, most practically all of them were *asuras*, and they had some *siddhis* that they could change their human form into the form of an animal—for example, a duck, or a snake, or a witch—and in this way go to Vṛndāvana and kill Kṛṣṇa. But he had one minister who was not an *asura*, who was actually a great devotee. It is interesting how history unfolds. This devotee, Akrūra, was a minister in the government of Kaṃsa for a particular reason, I'm sure. So he asked Akrūra, "You take this chariot, you go to Vṛndāvana, and you invite these two boys, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, back to Mathurā for the wrestling match." 

So Akrūra, this great devotee, he was very happy because he would get *darśana* of the Lord. So on the way to Vṛndāvana from Mathurā for the wrestling match, Akrūra is thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord. It is *Bhāgavatam* 10.38.17; he says, "When I have fallen at Kṛṣṇa's feet, that almighty Lord will place His lotus hand upon my head, for those who seek shelter in Him, because they are greatly disturbed by the powerful serpent of time, that hand and those lotus feet remove all fear." We are all fearful in this world. Where do we take shelter? Take shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord. Because this verse describes by taking shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, all fear is removed. And even if we can't come to the temple and take shelter of these beautiful feet of the Lord, you can get that same shelter by chanting: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. Why? Because our *ācāryas* say that fear personified is afraid of the holy names of Kṛṣṇa. 

Now, as Akrūra got closer to Vṛndāvana, he started meditating on what he would do upon arrival. So why is this interesting to us? Because all of us are encouraged to go to Vṛndāvana. It is one of the five *aṅgas* of devotional service. The principal activities: chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, hearing *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, associating with devotees, living in a holy place like Mathurā, like this. So we are all encouraged. Prabhupāda has invited us; he constructed the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir in Vṛndāvana and he invited devotees and people from all over the world. It was a significant event in the history of this great country of India that Prabhupāda established a temple in Vṛndāvana. In fact, next week we are going to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the opening of the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Temple. 

So we want to go to Vṛndāvana. Prabhupāda often said going to Vṛndāvana—you don't accomplish that by buying a plane ticket or taking a train or a taxi; that is not actually going. Going into Vṛndāvana is a certain mood one has to have, a certain consciousness—Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we want to prepare ourselves for entering into Vṛndāvana by following in the footsteps of those who have gone before us, pure devotees. So this pastime of Akrūra entering into Vṛndāvana is very significant for all of us. As he is getting closer to Vṛndāvana, we want to listen very carefully: what did he do? As he did, we will do. So he was meditating. He thought—it is described in the *Bhāgavatam*—he thought, "When I get to Vṛndāvana, I will at once alight from my chariot and bow down to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma." That is the first thing he is going to do. So next time you go to Vṛndāvana, when you are on the plane, and you are on the train, and you are in the taxi from Delhi, you think, "I will alight from my chariot—well, my taxi—and I will immediately bow down to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma." Why specifically Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma? Because Prabhupāda established our temple. He called it Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, because Ramaṇa-retī, where we got the land, that was the place of the wrestling matches of the cowherd boys. The sands of Ramaṇa-retī, cowherd boys. So Prabhupāda aptly named it the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma [Mandir]. *Gaurāṅga* Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma-jī. 

So, when I get out of my taxi, I will bow down to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. And he went on enlightening us: "Their feet are meditated upon by great mystic yogis striving for self-realization. I also offer my obeisances to the Lord's cowherd boyfriends," he says, "and to all the residents of Vṛndāvana." This is... I was reading that Akrūra, so much detail, right? Love is in the details. We have so much detail in Kṛṣṇa. I often say to people in the West, "You are talking about love of God, but how can you love someone you know nothing about? Tell me something about God." I say to them, with all due respect, "Oh, God, He lives up there." "Okay. Anything else?" "Um, well, if I don't worship Him, I'll go down there." "Anything else?" "Um, yeah, He's a God." How can you love someone you know nothing about? So the beauty of the *Bhāgavata*, of this great country of India, is that we have a wealth of knowledge about the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His incarnations and His devotees and His abode and His address and what He likes to eat—everything. Detail. Love is in the details. This is how we can awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa, especially by hearing this *amala-purāṇa*. 

I am giving a class just about His lotus feet. This is a four-hour class. No, I am just kidding. I can speak for hours about just the lotus feet, just the lotus toes, the toenails of Kṛṣṇa. We have so much information, and that is a stimulus for ecstatic love. We are blessed. You are blessed to live in this country because you have access to this knowledge. And now the world is blessed because Śrīla Prabhupāda went to the West to tell people about the toenails of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So, Akrūra—and listen carefully, because you want to follow in his footsteps—Kṛṣṇa says, "One who says he is My devotee is not My devotee, but one who says he is the devotee of My devotee, he is My devotee." This is the way we enter, by following in the footsteps of a resident of Vṛndāvana. 

Like one of my godbrothers told me that Prabhupāda told him, at an intimate moment, one of his secretaries, he said, "I did not want to come to this nasty place, this material world, but Kṛṣṇa ordered me to." And he said, "You just go down to the earth planet." These are Prabhupāda's words, Kṛṣṇa's words to Prabhupāda: "You just go down to the earth planet and you write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I will arrange everything else for you." That is true. So we want to go to Vṛndāvana. My main reason to go to Vṛndāvana is because Prabhupāda is there. I would rather, than go back to Godhead where there's no Prabhupāda, I would rather go with him to Pātāla-loka, preach. 

In fact, one of my godbrothers, Adideva Prabhu, a French devotee, he was a new *bhakta* and Prabhupāda was giving *darśana* to all of us at our New Mayapur community, our farm community, in 1974 or I think 1975, and this devotee said to Prabhupāda, "Prabhupāda, where are you going to go when you die?" You can't ask the spiritual master the question like that, no. "I want, a new *bhakta*—Svāmī, where are you going when you die?" Prabhupāda said, "Oh, I plan to go to Pātāla-loka to continue preaching the message of Śrī Caitanya." So I want to follow him wherever his lotus feet are going. 

One time a devotee said to Prabhupāda, "Prabhupāda, I just want to follow you all over the world." Prabhupāda said, "Well, these two lotus feet are traveling very quickly around the world, so you have to keep up with me—these lotus feet." So by following Prabhupāda's lotus feet, we will end up, ultimately, in Goloka Vṛndāvana. And also Akrūra—here is the details, love is in the details—Akrūra reached Vṛndāvana at sunset. I never knew that he reached, you know... we have heard he goes, all right. So if you go deeply, you find this treasure house of *Bhāgavatam*, so many details as a stimulus for ecstatic love. He reached Vṛndāvana at sunset, and the very first thing that Akrūra saw was Kṛṣṇa's footprints because they are everywhere. Why are they everywhere? Because Kṛṣṇa is running around foot-loose and fancy-free with His cowherd boyfriends and His cows and meeting His Gopīs in the forest at night. His lotus feet are, like, everywhere in Vṛndāvana. So it is the first thing he saw. 

One reason they are there is because—well, it is described, the Gopīs... you know, even now I see in your country, people, the ladies, they sweep with the broom. So the Gopīs, one of their *sevās*—one of the ways of worshiping the *dhāma*—is to sweep the *dhāma* of the vines and the leaves that fall from the desire trees. So the Gopīs are always sweeping the *kuñjas*, the groves of Vṛndāvana, but whenever they come across Kṛṣṇa's footprints in the dust, they back off; they don't disturb them. They bow down to those lotus feet with all the transcendental markings on those feet. They don't disturb them. They would never... "Oh, this is our Lord's lotus feet." So, therefore, because they are never sweeping the lotus, there are imprints of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet everywhere. They don't disturb them. And out of love for Kṛṣṇa, they preserve those lotus feet by carefully side-stepping away. 

In fact, all the residents of Vṛndāvana respect and adore—that's a nice word in English—they adore. My mom used to say, "Son, I adore you." "Mom, come on. I'm 16." "Son, I adore you like a little baby." "Adore" is a nice word. So all the residents of Vṛndāvana, they adore Kṛṣṇa's footprints. How do I know? If you say something in learned circles—you are all learned devotees, you are studying *Gītā* and *Bhāgavatam* and *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*—when you say something, you have to back it up by reference to *śāstra*. So *Bhāgavatam* 10.21.10 says, "O friend, Vṛndāvana is spreading the glory of the earth, having obtained the treasure of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Wow." 

"O friend, Vṛndāvana is spreading the glory of the earth having obtained the treasure of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa." Vṛndāvana obtained the treasure of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa is playing all day in the pastures. So His lotus feet are everywhere. "O friend, Vṛndāvana is spreading the glory of the earth having obtained the treasure of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī." The peacocks dance madly when they hear Govinda's flute, and when other creatures see them from the hilltops, they all become stoned. 

So Sanātana Gosvāmī has written that because in Vṛndāvana Kṛṣṇa always goes barefoot—remember, no *pādukas*—He always goes, why? Because His cows don't wear shoes. So what He said to Yaśodā, "Why should I wear shoes?" So He always goes barefoot. Their footprints, therefore, everywhere you go, there are footprints. And Sanātana Gosvāmī says this makes Vṛndāvana more glorious than Vaikuṇṭha, where Lord Viṣṇu wears slippers. Sanātana Gosvāmī, one of our greatest *ācāryas*. Vṛndāvana is more glorious than Vaikuṇṭha because in Vaikuṇṭha, the official kingdom of God, Kṛṣṇa wears *pādukās*—slippers. 

So, finally, upon seeing Kṛṣṇa's footprints, which—this was his meditation; he was just going to see his Lord for the first time—so he wanted to do it in the proper etiquette: first the feet, then the waist, then the chest, then the lotus face. So he is thinking of the footprints. So upon finally seeing Kṛṣṇa's footprints, Akrūra set the example for all of us who are going to Vṛndāvana next time. He explained, "Ah, this is the dust of my Master's feet." And what did he do? He got off the chariot and he rolled and rolled and rolled in that dust, probably saying, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa." "Oh, Mahārāja, are you saying that when I get to Vṛndāvana in my nice *dhoti* and my kurta and my shawl, I have to roll in the dust?" Yes, because our founder *ācārya*—*ācārya* means he who sets the example—Prabhupāda said on this matter, he actually says in *Kṛṣṇa* book, Chapter 38—I found it just in time to give this class—I was reading *Kṛṣṇa* book and I came across this passage in Chapter 38: Prabhupāda saying to all of us, "As soon as one reaches the boundary of Vṛndāvana, he should immediately smear the dust of Vṛndāvana over his body without thinking of his material position and prestige." Wow. Instruction. 

So next time you get out of that taxi, you remember, Indradyumna Mahārāja came to Pune. What did he say? He didn't say anything. No, no, I remember, he said, "We have to get out of the car, Maiyā, and we have to roll in the dust," and you do that. And Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung in a celebrated song: "When will my mind be purified after leaving the contamination of material sense enjoyment? Only when my mind will be purified after leaving the contamination of material sense enjoyment shall I be able to visit Vṛndāvana." So we are covered with some material desires, and we don't want to go to Vṛndāvana in that way. We want to become purified so we can appreciate Vṛndāvana. So that material contamination will go by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, by taking *prasāda*, by dancing in ecstasy, and by rolling over and over and over and over in the dust; you just get up like that. Actually, I have seen *sādhus*, while they are rolling, they take pictures of the dust and they eat it. So, this pastime shows—pastime shows the proper mood and action when we come to Vṛndāvana. 

And maybe we are not going to see the footprints because our vision is tinged. We need spiritual eyes, but believe me, Kṛṣṇa's footprints are everywhere. But the Lord is so kind that even without that spiritual vision to perceive those footprints, still you can see a few of those prints with your material eyes in Braj. For example, I'll just tell you, because, well, you want to see the footprints. Indradyumna Mahārāja came, you talked about, "Where are all the footprints? I am in Vṛndāvana." Well, one example is halfway up Nandagrāma hill; there is a flat rock upon which Kṛṣṇa sat 5,000 years ago. And the *ācāryas* describe that at that time Kṛṣṇa was—this was quite subtle—Kṛṣṇa was enthralled by His own spiritual potency in the form of Vṛndāvana's forests, rivers, lakes, hills, mountains, and many creatures. The blackish Yamunā reminded Him of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's long braid. The blossoming flowers, of her enchanting smile. And the playful birds, of her restless, magnetic eyes. While thinking in this way, Kṛṣṇa could not contain His ecstasy, and as a result, His body became so warm that He melted the stone that He was sitting on at Nandagrāma, leaving an imprint of His lotus feet for all to see. 

So when you go to Vṛndāvana, when you go on a trek, let's go to Nandagrāma—halfway up the hill there is that flat rock that Kṛṣṇa was sitting on remembering, and His feet melt, and there are the feet. And you can put your head on those feet and be blessed. Not so long ago I was in Bihāra and I went to the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. I wanted to see that place where Mahāprabhu chanted through the jungle and He made the lions and tigers and bears and snakes and everyone chant *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. We went there, we traversed into the jungle, and there's a small temple there, and there are a couple of *sādhus* who live there. You can see the imprints of the animals' feet on the ground where the *kīrtana* was, because the ground also melted in ecstasy because of Mahāprabhu's chanting: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. 

We saw the elephants, but we saw the tigers and the deer right next to them, because in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* it mentions, by chanting the holy names, these animals became freed from envy and fell in love with each other on the transcendental platform. So the deer were embracing the tigers and they were dancing. I saw the tiger's footprints. I saw the deer's footprints. I saw the snake, and I saw Caitanya Mahāprabhu's footprints. He was 7 feet tall. His feet are this big. I have never seen them before. They, with great austerity, with great difficulty, went into the jungle. It is still jungle. In fact, we wanted to go further and our guide said, "No, no, there are tigers, and your chanting will not make them dance in ecstasy." I saw Mahāprabhu's footprint and I bowed down. I put my head there and one of the rocks that made up His footprint went in my head, and I pulled it out and I put it in a *kavaca* that I wear everywhere I go now. And I have a scar from the footprint of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Usually, you get a scar, you want to do some Botox and make it go away. Not this scar. 

So He melted that. So that imprint upon that hill—it's called the imprint of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, *caraṇa*—upon this hill, *pahāḍī*—has made that particular place famous as Caraṇa-pahāḍī. So when you go to Vṛndāvana, "Bābā, where is Caraṇa-pahāḍī?" "Oh, just over there." You put your head on the feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. You can see, just like Akrūra. Actually, there are five—I researched—there are five places in Braj that are called Caraṇa-pahāḍī where you can see the actual footprints of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. You can't see, because we don't have those eyes to see it. Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna, "I give you divine eyes to see My universal form." We need the blessings of Guru, Gaurāṅga, and Vaiṣṇavas to see these things. But until then, we can still see Kṛṣṇa's footprints at five places in Vṛndāvana. And you mark this—you all with your notebooks right now: at Nandagrāma, at Chatra-bhaṭa, at Govardhana, and Kāmyavana, and there is one on Candra-sarovara, Candra-parvata, and one below Candra-parvata. Anyway, you can listen to the recording, and when you go, "I am going to Vṛndāvana!" What are you going to see? There are 60 million holy places. Yes, 60 million holy places in Vṛndāvana. So someone will say, "Where are you going to go?" "I am going to go to the five places that Indradyumna Mahārāja said I can see the lotus feet of Śrī Bṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Yahoo!" 

So our Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda emphasizes the importance and the benefit of worshiping Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet in two verses in *Padyāvalī*. *Padyāvalī* is the verse book of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, just like those of you who are scholarly, you have a little book with the verses you are memorizing, like Viśākhā Prabhu, right? A godbrother has got a big book with all the verses he's memorized since he started Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He is a *śloka-vālā*, *śloka-vālā*. He has those verses. So Rūpa Gosvāmī—his favorite verses he put in a book called *Padyāvalī*. I carry that book everywhere. *Padyāvalī*. And there are two verses in which he reveals to us the benefit of worshiping the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. He writes as follows: "O Madhusūdana, a wise person nullifies any sins he may have done by serving Your lotus feet within his heart. But one who rejects Your service gets sinful reactions, even though he may not have done any sinful deed." And the second verse: "Not by wearing saffron cloth, not by restricting food or other sense activities, not by living in the forest, not by discussing philosophy, not by observing a vow of silence—not, not, but only by even the slightest beginning of devotional service to the lotus feet of Lord Govinda, who enjoys pastimes on the Yamunā River's wide banks, can a person curtail the lustful influence of Cupid. So many things we are doing—if you just worship the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, these things are washed away." 

Now, I won't go on too much longer because, well, you have to celebrate your day here in Mahārāṣṭra by having more *kīrtana*, etc. The marks on Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet—more detail, so much detail. The marks on Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet are described by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his book called *Śrī Rūpa-cintāmaṇi*. Kṛṣṇa has certain marks which distinguish Him from others' feet. He has these beautiful marks; they are described in Śrī, it's... there, He writes that Kṛṣṇa's feet are decorated with 19, bear in mind, 19 wonderful symbols. 

On the left foot: a fish, a half-moon, a triangle, four water pots, a cow's hoofprint, Cupid's bow, two concentric circles, and a conch shell. 
On Kṛṣṇa's right foot are 11 marks: an octagon, four swastikas, four rose apples—not green apples, four rose apples—a thunderbolt, a banner, an elephant goad, a lotus, a vertical line, an umbrella, a disc, and a barleycorn. 

So when you go to Vṛndāvana, if maybe you will see, you will get spiritual vision, you will see Kṛṣṇa's footprints there. But make sure there's a vertical line and umbrella, a disc, and a barleycorn. That will be Kṛṣṇa. And Vṛndāvanī, we might as well mention, because the divine couple—*Rādhā-pāda*—means She is never separated from Kṛṣṇa. She has distinctive marks on Her lotus feet as well, although we only see them on... what is that particular day we get to see Her lotus feet, Gosvāmī? She has 19 symbols on Her feet. 

On Her left foot: a half-moon, a creeper, a bracelet, a flower, a flag, an elephant goad, a lotus flower, a vertical line, an umbrella, a disc, and a barleycorn. 
And on Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's right foot: a fish, a spear, a chariot, a club, an earring, a sacrificial altar, a mountain, and a conch shell. 

And *ācāryas* say that these marks on Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's footprints help the Gopīs to find them when They are wandering around somewhere in Braj. 

So today, I would like to conclude with Śrīla Prabhupāda's beautiful words from his purport to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, First Canto, 11th Chapter, verse 26. Such an appropriate way—just like when you are in a musical concert, sometimes you have to end on a high note. So here is a way, a beautiful, appropriate way to finish on a high note, discussing the lotus feet of your devotee... your deities here, your beautiful deities. This is Śrīla Prabhupāda encouraging us: "The pure devotees are always hankering after the lotus feet of the Lord, which have a kind of honey that is transcendentally relished by devotees. They are like bees who are always after the honey. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the great devotee *ācārya* of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, has sung a song about this lotus honey, comparing himself to the bee. He writes, 'O my Lord Kṛṣṇa, I beg to offer my prayers unto You. My mind is like the bee, and it is after some honey. Kindly therefore give my bee-like mind a place at Your lotus feet, which are the resources for all transcendental honey. I know that even big demigods like Brahmā do not see the rays of the nails of Your lotus feet, even though they are engaged in deep meditation for years together. Still, O infallible one, my ambition is such, for You are very merciful to Your surrendered devotees. O Mādhava, I know also that I have no genuine devotion for the service to Your lotus feet. But because Your Lordship is inconceivably powerful, You can do what is impossible to be done. Your lotus feet deride even the nectar of the heavenly kingdom, and therefore I am very much attracted by them. O Supreme Eternal, please therefore let my mind be fixed at Your lotus feet, so that eternally I may be able to relish the taste of Your transcendental service.'" 

About Rūpa Gosvāmī, Prabhupāda referred to him as one of our greatest *ācāryas*. I would like to conclude, glorifying him with this beautiful verse, *tasmād śrī-rūpa-pādāḥ*: "In this world, the constant, sweet experience of Śrī Rūpapāda, the feet of the beautiful-looking Kṛṣṇa, certainly happens through Śrī Rūpapāda, the wonderful poetry of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Therefore, I take shelter of Śrī Rūpapāda, the lotus feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī."

Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you very much.""