"*00388*.*
"Good afternoon.

Everyone, welcome to a very auspicious event in the midst of a very auspicious seven-week tour along the Baltic coast. As I said, big events should end on a high note, and what can be a higher note than the appearance day of Lord Balarāma? There is so much to say about Lord Balarāma; I could talk for many hours on this topic. Today, there will also be a very auspicious initiation ceremony. The devotees will receive both first and second initiation. Let us dive into the natural flow of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, everything develops for the better.

As for Lord Balarāma, he is, technically speaking, the first expansion of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Indeed, there are many different expansions—an unlimited number—corresponding to different intentions and relationships, in which He develops different tastes and relationships with different types of devotees. Although Balarāma is the first expansion of Kṛṣṇa, Śrīla Prabhupāda often said that there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; there is only a slight difference. The color of Kṛṣṇa’s body resembles a bluish, dark rain cloud, while Balarāma’s body color resembles a light cloud.

A small difference. As we can see now in the sky, there is a gradual change from summer to autumn. If you look at the sky now, you will see the sun shining through the white clouds. This is exactly the color of Balarāma’s body. So, darkish and whitish is the only difference. But Kṛṣṇa is known as the *avatārī*, that is, the source of all *avatāras*. In this sense, a small difference exists; after all, Balarāma serves Kṛṣṇa in two ways, being subordinate to Kṛṣṇa: as a humble servant and as an elder brother. 

How does He serve Kṛṣṇa acting as a humble servant? He manifests all His incarnations in complete bliss. In particular, He incarnates as Kṛṣṇa’s slippers, His sandals. Of course, He acts as slippers at His home; as is known, we wear them only at home, but Kṛṣṇa does not wear these sandals when heading to the pasture. Balarāma is very worried; He says, "My dear son of Nanda, how are you going barefoot? Because there on the ground, there are thorns and stones." And Kṛṣṇa’s answer is this: "Mother, cows don’t wear shoes, so I walk without shoes too." And it is impossible to see the image of Kṛṣṇa in shoes, but the cowherd devotees and all who inhabit Vṛndāvana wear shoes. Sometimes you can see how Nanda Bābā, the king of all the cowherds—*gopa-rāja*, an exalted personality—says to Kṛṣṇa, "Bring my sandals from the house," and he puts his sandals on his head and brings them to his father. This is a manifestation of Balarāma.

He also appears as Kṛṣṇa’s bed, but Kṛṣṇa mostly does not sleep in bed. As if heading to sleep, He goes to bed, but after a couple of hours, He jumps up and slips out the window to meet His beloved cowherd girls. Vraja also appears as Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments, and also manifests Himself as a cane. But He is mainly known as *dājī*, the elder brother. And as you know, the elder brother must take care of the younger ones. As we know, Kṛṣṇa needs care, love, and protection, because Kaṁsa heard a rumor that the eighth son of Devakī would come and kill him. When Kṛṣṇa finally appeared in Vṛndāvana, every single day Kaṁsa sent his demons there to try to kill Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa is *ajī*; He is invincible. Just to show His prowess in front of His cowherd friends, He kills these demons one by one. 

Mother Yaśodā and the trustees of the so-called game Kṛṣṇa plays in Vṛndāvana organize everything in such a way that the demons appear around 12:15, shortly before lunch, so that after killing the demon, Kṛṣṇa could come and have lunch with His friends. Yogamāyā acts in such a way that Kṛṣṇa’s friends forget that He is God, and even makes Kṛṣṇa Himself forget that He is God. He says, "My God, am I really a God?" Such a difference exists between a cowherd and Kṛṣṇa, and this is the topic of conversation between Kṛṣṇa and the cowherds when they are at lunch. They say, "Kṛṣṇa, You are somehow not like us; You are always killing some demons." This was the main event of the day, and on the way home from the pasture, the cowherds discussed these exploits of Kṛṣṇa. When we came home with our parents, we also talked about how Kṛṣṇa killed these demons.

This is the difference between Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, because Balarāma did not kill demons as often. But it happened that one day, Balarāma also killed one of the demons who appeared in the form of Dhenukāsura. The word "Dhenu" sounds exactly like "donkey." So these demons who appeared to kill Kṛṣṇa were ministers in the government of Kaṁsa. They were not animals; they were ministers who, in order to fulfill their functions, also studied black magic. Since they were Kaṁsa’s ministers, they were also *asuras* and possessed mystical powers to transform into a horse, an ass, or a witch to achieve their goals. One day, at a meeting with one of the ministers, Kaṁsa said, "Today you will turn into an ass to cause the destruction of the cowherds and kill Kṛṣṇa there." And as you know, this is the famous *līlā* when Balarāma killed the demon Dhenukāsura. It happened in a beautiful forest called Tālavana. This was the cherished forest that the shepherd boys dreamed of getting into because the tāla trees were hung with beautiful, sweet fruits, but they could never penetrate there. This is a wonderful, delightful game, and since the Tālavana forest is a wonderful place of Kṛṣṇa’s entertainment, one of the prayers is dedicated to it: *maṅgalācaraṇa*. This is a prayer that glorifies a specific place or person.

So in Vṛndāvana, a sādhu, when he begins a discussion of a specific holy place such as Tālavana, for example, chants these prayers with mantras, and we will follow their example. I found this verse in *Skanda Purāṇa*; it says, "Before you is the sacred Tālavana who arranged what was necessary for Kṛṣṇa’s līlā, in which the Lord of the cows killed the demon by throwing him on the tops of palm trees." Therefore, every time you are asked to speak on the day of Balarāma’s appearance, be sure to mention this Tālavana, since it is the place where Kṛṣṇa’s līlā happened. And now you can take notes on my lecture, and then you will have a wonderful lecture.

Also, a couple of years ago, I went to Vṛndāvana, going around various holy places where various entertainments happened. In particular, I visited the Tālavana forest in the hope of finding beautiful fruits there, large fruits hanging from the trees—yum-yum-yum—that need to be taken down and offered to Kṛṣṇa. But unfortunately, in our time, the Tālavana forest has practically disappeared, and there are only a few palm trees left instead of the former dense forest. There is a village which is today called Tāśi, or as some pronounce it, Tāḷī; it is a large village where once upon a time there was a forest, and that is where exactly what we are discussing today happened. Exactly there, He killed the demon Dhenukāsura. We know that Balarāma also killed other demons, but this was the first demon He killed. By that time, as we know, Kṛṣṇa killed many demons which Kaṁsa sent.

In his book *Kṛṣṇa-stava*, there is a wonderful verse also dedicated to this entertainment; this is verse 178. It says about Lord Kṛṣṇa, "O dear friend, You played Your game in the Tālavana forest and Your brother Lord Balarāma killed the Dhenuka demon there." It is necessary to note a very interesting detail: at that moment when Balarāma killed the demon Dhenukāsura, Kṛṣṇa was only six years old. Technically, He was just turning from a small child into a boy. It is at this age of five or six years that boys are first trusted to herd cows. And one fine day during the rainy season, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma went to the forest to pasture cows because there was beautiful, juicy, natural grass. The children had fun; boys like to play. And here it is described how they played—for example, they chased small animals. Did you do anything like that when you were little? Boys and girls do this sometimes, too. 

They played on top of each other—what is this game called, when one leans on the other and jumps over him?—and also entertained each other with jokes. But after some time, the boys got tired: "Oh, I'm so tired," and they decided to take a nap. When Prabhupāda came to America, he heard the expression that you need to take a nap after lunch, but probably he heard this word wrong, so he said that you need to do "a click," and sometimes turning to his devotees, he said, "Now I want to do a click," and the devotees were surprised what he meant. And while they were resting, there was a light breeze—although in the old days it was mostly hot—and this light breeze brought to them the wonderful aroma of tāla fruits. The boys were always hungry. I even think that in our sound tent there is one Balarāma Dāsa. Who is Balarāma here? Please stand up. [Applause] He probably had a good breakfast, but judging by his appearance, he is still hungry, and after 45 minutes, he will get hungry again. His mother is running off her feet cooking for him again and again.

The boys were resting, but when this breeze reached them, they immediately jumped up, and it is very interesting to note what they said at that moment. *Mahā-bāho*, they said, "O Rāma, O Rāma, O Mighty One, O Kṛṣṇa, O our friend. There is a forest of tāla palms nearby, and their fruits are so ripe that their aroma is carried everywhere. And of course, You also feel this smell, Mahā-bāho." It is interesting to note that in this quatrain, the cowherd boys first turn to Balarāma. "Rāma, Rāma." When devotees get into difficulties, they usually turn to Kṛṣṇa. *Canto One, Chapter Seven, Text 22*, here Arjuna says, "O my Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the omnipotent Personality of Godhead, there is no limit to Your various energies, and therefore only You are competent." In the world of suffering, one can find the path to salvation only through You, Kṛṣṇa. I also found in that another similar verse in the *Srimad-Bhāgavatam*, Chapter 2, verse 8; here it talks about Kṛṣṇa, the mighty-armed one who loves His parents so much. "Śālva stole your father and carried him away like a butcher who drags an animal to the slaughter. We are like this with a cart, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, help!" And what did Uttarā do? Uttarā says here, "O God of gods, O Lord of the Universe, You are the greatest of mystics, please protect, protect me, because no one but You can save me from the clutches of death in this world of duality." But here we hear, as they say, "Rāma, Rāma, Mahā-bāho." First, they turn to Balarāma, and then to Kṛṣṇa, saying that You conquer Your enemies. It is unusual to hear how first they turn to Balarāma. He says, "Is this speaking to me or something?" 

And the cowherd boys are here; they say, "We heard that in this forest there lives a demon cannibal named Dhenuka. This demon, his friends, have taken the form of donkeys and do not allow anyone except Kaṁsa to enjoy these fragrant fruits. Let’s go there! Don’t be afraid of demons." It is time; in response, He simply laughed and said, "Let’s go there, yourself, get rid of the demons and enjoy the fruits of your victory." In response, the boys began to tease Balarāma Himself and said, very clearly and distinctly, "O Mighty-armed One! We have seen Kṛṣṇa kill many demons, but besides the fact that You fight with us, we have never seen You show Your courage and bravery with a real opponent." 

"Ah," so said Balarāma, and to the surprise of His friends, He jumped up. The boys in response continued to tease Balarāma, saying, "You are the elder brother of Kṛṣṇa, why do You always take a subordinate position and never kill demons? Do You think that these demons, who have eaten many people and who are so terrible that even birds are afraid to fly over them, are too strong for You, and You allow Kṛṣṇa to kill them?" Hearing this, Balarāma ran as fast as He could in the direction of the Tālavana forest where these fruits grew, and the cowherd boys shouted, "Oh, Balarāma will kill the demons now, let’s run after Him!" Kṛṣṇa ran after Balarāma, and all the other cowherd boys ran after Him. 

And in fear, they cowered and entered this dark, mysterious Tālavana forest. The *Bhāgavatam* describes their mood in which they entered this Tālavana forest. It is said, "Lord Balarāma, the ox, entered the Tālavana fruit forest, and taking these trees with His two mighty hands, He began to shake them with the force of a crazy elephant, causing these ripe fruits to fall to the ground." The sound of these falling fruits—you know how they fall—woke up the demon sleeping nearby, and he attacked Balarāma. The boys became afraid and exclaimed, "What will happen to Balarāma now?" Turning to Kṛṣṇa, they said, "Kṛṣṇa, protect Balarāma!" Kṛṣṇa did not move from the spot. He was just... I always wondered why Kṛṣṇa did not take part in this battle, because He is the older brother, and brothers usually protect each other. I stitched literature, but I leafed through the books, and in the last hope, I opened the *Garga-saṁhitā*. And you know what I found there? Do you want to hear? Who would like to hear that I learned that Dhenukāsura in one of his past lives was the great-grandson of Pṛthu Mahārāja? 

Remember, Pṛthu Mahārāja was born into a dynasty of demons. His father was Vena. Of course, it was an unusual birth because Pṛthu was a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. But for the sake of līlā, for the sake of permission, He appeared in a family of demons, and therefore there were demons in the dynasty both before Pṛthu and after Pṛthu. Thus, he was the great-grandson of Pṛthu Mahārāja. Having torn his father in half, the chronicle of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam said, addressing him, "Do not worry about the fate of your father. By killing him, I gave him the opportunity to gain liberation and also freed him from future births, 10,000 generations of his descendants." The demon was a great-grandson of Mahārāja, and in his time, he did not kill any of the descendants of the dynasty, so he could not enter this sweet forest. Surprisingly, in that life, the name was Sahasra-anīka. I thought of calling someone that, but now I have changed my mind; then they will come to complain, "Gurudeva, you gave me the name Dhenukāsura!" 

And in the past birth, why is it described that once this Sahasra-anīka turned to the heavenly mountain, Gandhamādana? It is useless to try to find this mountain on our planet, since it is on the heavenly planets. So he is here, why did beautiful girls live there, the virgins of heaven, who, thanks to the great attractiveness there on the heavenly planets? And he went to enjoy with them. Unfortunately, he accidentally disturbed there, guess who—Durvāsā Muni himself! Durvāsā, in fear of his curse, was meditating there in a cave, and at that moment, an ox entered there—this Sahasra-anīka—hugging two girls. And opening his eyes, Durvāsā said, "You are disturbing meditation, scoundrel! Therefore, I curse you to be born in the form of a donkey." What is the use of him being born on earth in the form of a donkey? Hearing this curse of Durvāsā, he instantly prayed and said, "Please don't curse me, take your curse back." But a curse pronounced by a qualified brāhmaṇa or sādhu cannot be reversed; it can be slightly modified. And Durvāsā, after thinking a little, said, "Okay, then in two *yugas* you will be born there on earth in the form of a donkey and take part in the pastimes of the two divine brothers, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, and you will be killed by them; you will receive liberation." 

But thanks to the promise given to him by Pṛthu Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa could not personally kill this Sahasra-anīka who appeared in the form of a demon, Dhenukāsura. He rushed towards Lord Balarāma. They saw how naked horses or donkeys are better off getting out of the way, and they are stamping their hooves as fast as they can. Balarāma acted very cunningly. He leaned slightly to the left, caught the ass by the hind hooves, and spun it over His head, threw it onto the top of the palm tree. But then it is explained that after waking up from this blow, he came to his senses and again rushed at Balarāma. But Balarāma again dodged a little, grabbed him again by the hind hooves, spun him around again, and threw him at the distance of one *yojana*. One of them got up again and again rushed at Him. And this time, due to his mystic powers, he increased to the size of this gymnasium, and he grew four horns. And then he attacked the cows, and this horde of cows was scattered everywhere, and then he chased the cowherd boys because they were small. He thought that they were easy prey. 

When I read this description, I wondered how little boys of five or six could resist this donkey demon. This demon was the size of a gymnasium; he had four horns. But then I was surprised to see that each of the cowherd boys had the combined power of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, not only separately, but even them together! So he rushed at the cowherd boys, and then the boys said, "Come on, come on! Attack! Come on!" And when the demon finally attacked, Śrīdāmā hit the ass with a stick. Subala punched him in the face. Kṛṣṇa began to strangle this demon with a rope. The boy, Arjuna, threw the ass high, high into the sky. Sometimes we catch a thrown ball. But this time he didn't catch it, and the demon fell to the ground. And the boy, Vṛṣabha, began to strangle this demon. The smallest of the shepherd boys, whose name was Tejasvī, was about the size of our little Hanuman. Stand up, please. [Applause] 

An equal exchange took place. And this little boy jumped on Dhenukāsura’s back and with his little hands began to try to stitch him up. And Dīpra, another little shepherd boy, began to slap the demon on the nose, and the shepherd boy, Ruta, threw a ball at him. And at that moment, Kṛṣṇa Himself entered the fray. Although He had promised not to fight with the descendants of Pṛthu, He spun him over His head. This demon threw him onto Govardhana Hill; he collapsed on Govardhana Hill. The ass lost consciousness and was unconscious for an hour; then when he woke up, he picked up Govardhana Hill and threw it at Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa caught Govardhana Hill and threw it back at the ass for two hours; so they began to move over, and thus they played with the hill like a ball. And seeing this unusual game, the cowherd boys began to shout, "Haribol! Haribol! Haribol!" Then Kṛṣṇa decided that it was enough. He placed Govardhana Hill back in place, and once again the ass pounced on Lord Balarāma. This time purposefully, and Balarāma said, "Well, boy, look what will happen now." He came out against Me! He grabbed it and spun it around with such speed that the life-air left the ass's body, and he died. 

Kāpīkī came, and then Balarāma threw him to the top of one of the trees. Everyone began to celebrate Balarāma’s first victory. The boys clapped; the demigods were showering flowers from the sky with their hands. But then, as I said, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is getting better and better; something completely amazing happened. I almost lost consciousness when I heard about it, but since there is little time left, next time I will continue this story; it’s too late. You are hungry, okay, okay, okay, okay. When Dhenukāsura remained separated from his body, a soul appeared. Despite everything, it is amazing that he had a spirit soul, and he appeared in a bluish body, dressed in yellow clothes, and around his neck was a garland of forest flowers. The cowherd girls could not believe their eyes. How is it that this donkey appeared in a beautiful, spiritual body, shining like the sun, smiling, pronouncing the beautiful, sweet names of the Lord—not pronouncing like donkeys, and simply speaking the beautiful names of the Lord. And then, under the direction of... [applause]... I am not involved at all, says Mahārāja, under the direction of the *dūtas*, a beautiful airship from the heavenly planets appeared, and having flown around Kṛṣṇa, they took Dhenukāsura and went with him to heaven. 

He further explains the details about the death of the demon. It says that after the death of the ass, Balarāma summoned the *cakra* into his naked cowherd friends, that the demon is really dead. And that is how this entertainment ended. We will finish soon, don't worry. It is explained that Balarāma arranged so this *cakra*, on the way to the head of the demon, on the way, knocked down the tops of the tāla trees from which it rained fruits—sweet, beautiful fruits—to the delight of the boys. And we speak in English that the race is not over until it is over. And at that moment, seeing death, the boys were attacked by the friends, donkeys, and seeing this, they told the boys, "Obey, don't be afraid of anything, continue to enjoy the fruits, we will take care of this," and they began to throw these demons onto the tops of various trees growing around. I am not telling you a fairy tale at all; this is a real *līlā*, real events that were described to us by exalted souls, and which entered upon those who rose from... Vṛndāvana. And when I studied this topic, I learned that in honor of these events, Caitanya visits that place on his pilgrimage. Arriving in Vṛndāvana, He went there, and it is described that He bowed with great respect to the deities of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma located there. 

I thought that it would be fitting to end the class with a beautiful verse written by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, which is part of his *Śrī Vraja-vilāsa* compositions dedicated to the Lord of Balarāma, and specifically to the killing of the demon. So, Dāsa Gosvāmī says the following. He says that the effulgence of Lord Rāma’s transcendental body outshines many millions of shining, rising moons, and the slightest whiff of the fragrance of His unsurpassed power is enough to destroy entire armies of demons. And although He is well aware of the supernatural power of His younger brother Kṛṣṇa, out of love for Him, He never leaves Him alone even for a moment. I offer my obeisances to the enemy of Dhenukāsura, O, who killed entire hordes of Dhenukāsura’s associates in order to protect the cowherd boys and give them access to the forest of Tālavana with its fruits. Please also remove my stubborn smallpox mood and my attachments, and let me taste these juicy fruits of service to You. And at the end, he says, "O Lord Balarāma, who supports the earth, O all-glorious Lord, perfect and ideal one who holds the plow in His hands, O Lord with a thousand heads, O Lord Sankarṣaṇa, eternal Lord, my obeisances to You." 

Rāma!""