So here we are recording the second day of our parikrama. Yesterday we produced a video, and we're doing another video. Why is that?

Because to stress how important this parikrama actually is. Our Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition has a tradition of doing parikrama. I was thinking the other day, when was the first parikrama actually?

In sastras, it's described that the first parikrama began just after Krishna lifted Govardhan Hill, after Indra had been defeated and all the vrajabasis had been saved.

Krishna put down Govardhan Hill, and there was a large feast offered to Govardhan.

And then Krishna Himself took all the vrajabasis around Govardhan Hill with their ox carts and the bullock carts all around Govardhan Hill.

You could say that was the first parikrama. So it was initiated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna Himself.

And throughout our history, all our great acharyas have also done parikrama. Of course, Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, when He came to Vrindavan, He did the twelve forests. And since then, all our acharyas have done. Even our beloved Śrīla Prabhupada has done.

Actually, Sanatana Goswami is famous for doing parikrama. It's described that when he was living here 500 years ago, he would do parikrama every day around Govardhan Hill. And not just the parikrama that we do, we do a program. But it's actually very close to Giriraja Govardhan.

He took the outer circumference of Govardhan. I think most devotees don't even know where that is, where it exists, but it's some distance away from Govardhan Hill. He would do that very long Govardhan parikrama every day. And why, why did he do that so far away from Giriraj?

Because he wanted to be very careful not to step on a Govardhan shila, as none is different than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So he did parikrama on the long route every day so as not to step on a Govardhan shila.

And of course, we know when Śrīla Prabhupada was here, especially when he brought his disciples here in the early 1970s, sometimes he would take them on parikrama as well. I remember I was fortunate enough to be in one of those parikramas with Prabhupada.

We went to some sacred place, Mother Yamuna. And Prabhupada bathed in the river. We did. I remember him walking in. He was effulgent, bathing. And some of the disciples were putting water on Śrīla Prabhupada. It was brief, but he, he also did parikrama when he was here.

So parikrama is so much part of our tradition. We're going on parikrama around the dhama, just like I mentioned yesterday. We're going on this particular parikrama around Vrindavan itself. It means that the dhama itself is an expansion of Lord Balarama, and we're passing by the river Yamuna, which is an expansion of Ishvari Devi.

And as I mentioned, we do parikrama around Giriraj as Krishna Himself.

So it's a very, it's not just a walk in the park. It's a very important part of our devotional service to do parikrama. And of course, we have our Kartik parikramas, our extended parikramas every month in Kartik. Devotees come from all over the world, and we go to different sacred places like this.

And when we're going on parikrama, sometimes newcomers, they look around and they may say, "But it doesn't look exactly like I read about it in Krishna Book, or I heard Śrīla Prabhupada discussing Vrindavan." And it's true.

Nowadays, especially in Kali Yuga, it's not as clean, nowhere near as clean as it was 500 years ago or 5,000 years ago. I mentioned one time, this is because there's a thin film of Maya covering the dhama. Of course, the dhama's not affected by Maya, by illusion, but this is not a thin film of Maya covering the dhama so as to keep the materialistic people away and the Mayavadis away.

Because the devotees, they see through this thin film by hearing from authorities. It is said that a saintly person, he sees through his ears, not through his eyes. So to the material eye, it may appear that Vrindavan is a little dilapidated and dirty and there's garbage and open sewers.

That is a fact, but that's not the real Vrindavan. The real Vrindavan is something completely transcendental. Because according to our scriptures, there's no difference between the Loka Vrindavan and Gokula Vrindavan. When the Loka Vrindavan descends to this world by the mercy of Śrimati Radharani, who agreed to come with Krishna only if Vrindavan came with them, that wonderful atmosphere for their pastimes came.

And so in the spiritual world it's called Goloka, and here in the material world it's called Vrindavan. So we have this faith. Everything is based on faith. Just like Prabhupada said, even materialistic people, they have faith. They have faith in the sciences.

Whatever the scientists say, the common people, they take that as truth. But Prabhupada said one time, faith means to put your trust in something sublime. So sublime is the teachings of our acharyas, who reveal the real beauty of Sri Vrindavan dhama.

And we're going around now, we're not seeing it through our material eyes. We're seeing it from what we've heard from Śrīla Prabhupada and our acharyas and our leaders in ISKCON, those who speak about Vrindavan, like my parikrama guru Deena Bandhu or Bhakti Chaitanya Maharaja.

We've learned from them to see Vrindavan as it is. I sometimes tell the pastime that Prabhupada was speaking about Vrindavan here in Vrindavan and describing it as it's described in Srimad Bhagavatam, especially in the 10th canto, all the pristine beauty of Vrindavan.

And later he asked for questions. And when a devotee raised his hand, he said, "But Śrīla Prabhupada, I don't see it like you're seeing it. There's rickshaw wallahs begging or pushing for money, and there are the open sewers, and there are the pigs." So, "I just don't see it like that." So Prabhupada said, "Yes, that's because there's a speck in your eye." So the devotee had those big, thick, black glasses.

He took his glasses off and started rubbing his eyes like this, thinking, "I'm seeing Vrindavan as it is." And Prabhupada said, "No, not like that. The speck in your eye is a desire for sense gratification." And until that desire for sense gratification is removed, you can't see Vrindavan as it is.

So, as I mentioned yesterday, half the process of Krishna consciousness is chanting Hare Krishna, and marginal cleansing of the heart of all those obstacles between us and Krishna, and everything connected to Krishna, like lust, anger, and greed.

And through the chanting of Krishna, when those obstacles are removed, then bhakti, devotion, the seed of bhakti in our heart, it has that fertile ground to grow and eventually bring our natural love of God. "With the salve of love one's eyes will be opened and one will be able to see Vrindavan as it is." So we hanker for that.

It's called lobha, or greed. We hanker for these things, just like a materialistic person hankers for some sense gratification, some name and fame, some material objects, whatever. We're being trained to hanker for Krishna.

And that mood is present in Vrindavan. That mood is present. Everyone is looking for Krishna, just like the Six Goswamis.

In their prayers, the Sad Goswamis, they're looking, "Where is Krishna?

Where is Krishna?" This is the mood of Krishna consciousness.

And this is what makes Vrindavan. It's so easy to advance in Krishna consciousness when we're going around parikrama here in the dhama.

Our second day going around. We're passing people who are not reading newspapers. We're not talking about, you know, just politics or economy or these types of things that most people, when they wake up in the morning, that's what they start talking about.

No, here in Vrindavan, when we're going around parikrama, we meet vrajabasis. So in this way, you're reminded of Krishna at every step.

And plus, there are so many other people doing parikrama. And even just the people in the villages, or on big days like Guru Purnima here in Vrindavan, there are so many people going on parikrama around Govardhan Hill. You don't even have to walk, you just get caught up in the crowd, and it kind of takes you around.

So this is part of our tradition. And we're loving it, of course. This Vrindavan parikrama is about maybe 12 kilometers long, it's not that easy. But whatever austerities are there, we don't even think about it because we're getting, we're just relishing hearing the people call out Krishna's name, chanting Krishna's names ourselves, seeing the cows, seeing the peacocks, seeing the birds.

The birds are singing. That when the birds are singing, they're singing the glories of Krishna like this.

So this is how we're being trained to see Vrindavan actually as it is, not according to our material sight, but according to the eyes of the sadhus, and of course, the words of God, Krishna Himself, when He speaks about the glories of Vrindavan, as we read in Srimad Bhagavatam.

So here we are out again, second day going around, halfway through, and we're going to continue with great enthusiasm, great greed, to actually one day see Vrindavan as it is, as Gokula. Hare Krishna.