"*00519*.*
"### The Rasa Dance – Part 3

Hare Kṛṣṇa, very, very dear devotees. Welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our most beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhū-tale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti.*

Today, we are continuing with our series on Lord Kṛṣṇa’s rasa dance with the Gopīs. In our last lecture, we concluded with the Gopīs' despondency in being unable to find Kṛṣṇa after He had left the rasa dance with Śrī Rādhā and then abandoned her in a forest grove. As the Gopīs, along with Śrī Rādhā, searched for Kṛṣṇa everywhere, you may remember they soon lost track of His footprints because of the dense darkness in the forest. They decided to return to the banks of the Yamunā River to call out to Him in unison, hoping He would hear their heartfelt pleas and return to them.

Now, it is important to understand just how desperate these young girls were to be reunited with Kṛṣṇa. The illustrious medieval poet Harisuri writes in this regard: "In this world, when even a small object is attained and then lost, it causes immense anxiety to humans. Thus, it is not surprising that these ladies became maddened in the forest after losing the love of their lives, Kṛṣṇa."

As we mentioned in our previous lecture, the Gopīs' feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa drove them to the exalted stage of divine madness where, during their search for Kṛṣṇa, they even inquired from inanimate objects like trees and bushes if they knew where Kṛṣṇa was. The ācāryas go into detail; they say that the Gopīs first addressed three trees: the pīpala tree, the fig tree, and the banyan tree. There was a reason for that, because in our Vedic tradition, the pīpala tree is seen as a representative of Viṣṇu, the fig tree is a representative of Lord Brahmā, and the banyan tree is a representative of Lord Śiva. The ācāryas say that, in essence, the Gopīs were asking Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva, "Where is Kṛṣṇa?" So, when approaching the pīpala tree, they said, "O aśvattha, o aśvattha—let us say the Sanskrit name for the pīpala tree—please tell us, where has the son of Nanda Mahārāja gone?"

Now, it is interesting to note that the Gopīs didn't use Kṛṣṇa’s name; they said, "The son of Nanda Mahārāja, where has He gone?" The ācāryas say this is because they considered Kṛṣṇa the Lord and master of their lives. Just like if you have a boss at work, you don't address him by his first name; you say "sir" or "boss" or whatever. Therefore, the Gopīs didn't want to utter Kṛṣṇa’s name directly; they considered Him their Lord and master. The ācāryas say, so again, the three trees mentioned—the pīpala, fig, and banyan—represent Viṣṇu, Brahmā, and Śiva. That is why here in India people worship these trees; and just as Deity worship is not idol worship, so worship of these trees is not tree worship—it is divine.

Actually, the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* reveals the exalted nature of Vṛndāvana’s trees in the 10th Canto, 35th Chapter, verse number 9: "When the cows wander onto the mountainsides and Kṛṣṇa calls out to them with the sound of His flute, the trees and creepers in the forest respond by becoming so luxuriant with fruits and flowers that they seem to be manifesting Lord Viṣṇu within their hearts. As their branches bend low with the weight, the filaments on their trunks and vines stand erect out of the ecstasy of love of God, and both the creepers and the trees poured down a rain of sweet sap." These are special trees called *bhavī-vṛkṣa*.

With that understanding, the Gopīs continued questioning the trees. They inquired from a *kurubaka* tree—that is a porcupine tree—then a *nāga-keśara* tree—that is a Ceylon ironwood tree—then a *punnāga* tree, and then a *campaka* tree. And when they approached the aśoka tree, they said, "Dear aśoka tree, you are without *śoka* (lamentation). So, if you say *aśoka*, it cancels the meaning of lamentation. You are without *śoka*, lamentation; can you also make us without lamentation?" When they approached a *nāga* tree, they said, "Oh, nāga tree, it is said in sacred literature that the Supreme Lord rests on a nāga, a serpent. Please tell us if the Supreme Lord is residing somewhere near you." Finally, they approached a Tulasī plant, and they said, "Dear Tulasī, has Kṛṣṇa taken shelter of your lotus feet?" Now, the ācāryas say this inquiry is a symptom of their divine madness, for it is Tulasī who takes shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, not that the Lord takes shelter of the feet of Tulasī. 

Then they approached a mango tree. We know the mango tree is considered the king of fruits because of its very sweet taste, so they said, "Dear mango tree, please bestow upon us the sweetness of *mādhurya* for Kṛṣṇa." Like this, they inquired from all the trees in the Vṛndāvana forest. When we think of a particular forest, we naturally think of the unique trees that grow there because of the climate in that area, but the Vṛndāvana forest abounds with unlimited varieties of trees because in Vṛndāvana, all six climates exist simultaneously. In different forests of Vṛndāvana, for the pleasure of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they can wander through different forests and experience different seasons conducive to their loving pastimes. We know the six seasons—we described them before: the joy of monsoon, the pleasure of autumn, the satisfaction of winter, the happiness of the dewy season, the beauty of spring, and the auspicious season of summer. Throughout Vṛndāvana, there are so many varieties of trees.

I was reading a list in one of the scriptures: there’s the *priyāla* tree, there’s the *panasa* tree (the jackfruit), there’s the *kovidāra*—I couldn't find out what that was—there’s the *jambu* tree (the Malabar plum in English), there’s the *arka* tree (which we know is the giant milkweed), the *bilva* tree (which is the bael tree; we get bael fruit), there’s a tree called *asana*, there’s a tree called *bakula* (which means, in English, the Spanish cherry), then *kadamba* (we know the kadamba, the bird flower), and there’s the *nīpa* tree (which is the nīpa palm), just to name a few.

This divine madness of the Gopīs manifested in a variety of ways as they searched for Kṛṣṇa throughout the day and into the next night. Finally, as we mentioned, they decided to return to the banks of the Yamunā to pour their hearts out. We called it in the last class a "unified chorus of song," but it is famous as the *Gopī-gīta*, and that *Gopī-gīta* is enshrined in the famous 31st chapter of the 10th Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*.

The *Gopī-gīta*, from a technical point of view, contains 19 verses. The first 18 are in a special meter—when I was reading it, it is called the *kanaka-mañjarī* meter—and the 19th verse, the last verse, is in a meter called *vasanta-tilakam*. Ācāryas say that these 19 verses reveal the ecstasies of individual Gopīs as well as groups of Gopīs, but they all glorified Kṛṣṇa with the common message: "Please return to us." That is the whole purpose of the *Gopī-gīta*: to get Kṛṣṇa to return to them.

In their commentaries on this 31st chapter of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, the ācāryas say that the Gopīs could not see Kṛṣṇa as they sang, but these ācāryas conclude that Kṛṣṇa was actually hiding nearby and listening to the Gopīs' songs, which the ācāryas describe as "the most perfect *prema-saṅkīrtana*." That is the *Gopī-gīta*; it is the most perfect *prema-saṅkīrtana*. I just love that. Actually, in *Padma Purāṇa*, we hear Kṛṣṇa saying to Nārada Muni: *nāhaṁ tiṣṭhāmi vaikuṇṭhe yogināṁ hṛdayeṣu vā | tatra tiṣṭhāmi mad-bhaktā yatra gāyanti māṁ śubhe*—"I am not in Vaikuṇṭha, nor am I in the hearts of the yogīs; I remain where My devotees glorify My name, form, qualities, and transcendental pastimes." So, who does that better than the Gopīs in glorifying Kṛṣṇa’s name, His form, His qualities, and His pastimes? So Kṛṣṇa is there, but He is hiding.

Some commentators, such as Kavi Karṇapūra and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura—just to say their names is so purifying—say that there were actually two dialogues going on, not only the Gopīs' songs; two dialogues were happening at the same time. One was the Gopīs calling out to Kṛṣṇa to come back to them, and the other—this is so interesting—was Kṛṣṇa replying to their appeals. Of course, because Kṛṣṇa was hiding, He didn't reply to the Gopīs face-to-face, but rather He spoke with them; Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says in their minds. Kṛṣṇa spoke to them in their minds. It is so deep.

Now, this arrangement has been compared to a vīṇā recital, in which the Gopī songs are the melody played by the main strings of the vīṇā, and their conversations with Kṛṣṇa are the sound of the drone strings—you know, you have your principal strings and your secondary strings. I thought that was so nice, a vīṇā recital in which the Gopī songs are the melody played by the main strings of the vīṇā, and their conversations with Kṛṣṇa are the sound of the drone strings. So beautiful.

Another interesting point is the poetic meter of these 19 verses. It’s a little technical, but it’s interesting: in each line, the first and seventh syllables begin with the same consonant, as do the second syllables in all four lines. We don't have time to analyze all 19 verses here today, but I would like to speak on the first verse of *Gopī-gīta* and the last verse, verse number 19. As many of you know, the Gopīs began by singing: "O beloved, Your birth in Vraja has made it exceedingly glorious; thus, Indirā, the Goddess of Fortune, always resides here. It is only for Your sake that we, Your servants, maintain our lives. We have been searching everywhere for You, so please show Yourself."

Here, the Gopīs were saying that Vṛndāvana has always been glorious but has become even more glorious because of the Lord's appearance or His birth there. Vṛndāvana is superior to Vaikuṇṭha because Kṛṣṇa never takes birth in Vaikuṇṭha, but He does take birth, or He appears, in Vṛndāvana. His birth from Devakī and Vasudeva, and then subsequently He goes to Gokula to Nanda and Yaśodā—all those childhood pastimes are so wonderful. He does take birth in Vṛndāvana. In Vaikuṇṭha, they never celebrate Lord Nārāyaṇa's appearance, but in Vraja, either in Goloka or Gokula, we do; it is one of the most popular festivals of the year. It is called Janmāṣṭamī. So Vraja is glorious, but by Kṛṣṇa’s taking birth there, it has become even more glorious.

The last verse is: "O dearly beloved, Your lotus feet are so soft that we place them gently on our chests, fearing that Your feet will be hurt. Our life rests only in You. Our minds, therefore, are filled with anxiety that Your tender feet might be wounded by pebbles as You roam about on the forest path." There are many ways to analyze that verse, but this verse is actually an appeal by the Gopīs to Kṛṣṇa, because the Gopīs were always in constant anxiety that Kṛṣṇa wandered around Vṛndāvana in bare feet.

At this point, Viśvanātha reveals the dialogue we mentioned between Kṛṣṇa and the Gopīs. Actually, throughout the whole chapter in his commentaries, he is revealing the dialogue, but in this particular verse, he says that the Gopīs say, "Kṛṣṇa, what benefit do You gain by wandering barefoot through the forest? We just don't understand." And then Kṛṣṇa replies, in their minds, "I walk barefoot because I want to. I do what comes to My mind. What business is it of yours, My walking habits?" A little strong. What is interesting is that whether Kṛṣṇa speaks kindly or harshly to the Gopīs, their love for Him never wavers. Their words to Him are always expressions of the highest love, but their words can be just as strong as Kṛṣṇa’s words to them. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says here, the Gopīs say to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, no doubt Your feet must be pained, but do You endure that pain just to make us suffer? Perhaps the pain feels like happiness to You because You derive happiness from knowing that we suffer. Please know that we only live for You; indeed, You are our very life. So, as long as You live, we will also live and suffer. Because You are always leaving us, we have to experience so much separation, but we are consigned to this fate by the Creator, who, like You, apparently takes pleasure in making young girls cry."

As the Gopīs spoke of their sorrow and their eagerness to see Kṛṣṇa, they became overwhelmed by deep spiritual emotion and they began to cry uncontrollably. Seeing their unshakeable love for Him, Kṛṣṇa decided to stop testing the Gopīs' love for Him. The ācāryas write: "Then Kṛṣṇa, His ears filled with the Gopīs' beautiful songs, saw that for Him to hide even for a moment longer would be too painful for them. So, He decided it was time for Him to reappear and continue the rasa dance." We can actually see Kṛṣṇa’s purpose had been achieved in leaving the rasa dance with Śrī Rādhā and then leaving her in that pastime; we can see the exalted nature of the Gopīs' love for Him in their search for Him, as well as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s *mahābhāva*, or the highest love for Kṛṣṇa, that had been demonstrated in this particular pastime.

As we mentioned earlier in the class, Kṛṣṇa Himself says that He leaves Vaikuṇṭha just to hear His devotees chanting. So, how then could He remain hidden as the Gopīs' suffering and separation from Him filled one of Vraja's forests with the words of love and longing? He couldn't resist it any longer. Of course, we should never think that the Gopīs' suffering is anything like the suffering we experience in this material world. I found a beautiful verse in *Caitanya-bhāgavata*, Madhya-līlā 9.240, where we hear: *yata dekha vaiṣṇava-duḥkha*—whenever one sees a Vaiṣṇava acting unhappy, one should know for sure that he is actually experiencing the highest spiritual bliss. But what is important here is that the Gopīs had once again conquered Kṛṣṇa with their love, expressed actually through their tears. They conquered Kṛṣṇa with their tears. The illustrious medieval commentator Śrī Harisuri has written, "The most effective way to attain Kṛṣṇa is by crying for Him." What is the proof? It is that the best devotees in the world, the Gopīs, when Kṛṣṇa disappeared, they also sang, danced, roamed here and there, and chanted His name, but nothing worked. Finally, Kṛṣṇa became pleased when the Gopīs cried out loudly for Him.

We are going to stop there. I know we would all like to go on, but we have one more final lecture, Part 4, where we will discuss Kṛṣṇa’s reunion with the Gopīs. So, let us conclude today with words from our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda in *Nectar of Devotion*, Chapter 9, a famous part of *Nectar of Devotion*. Prabhupāda writes: "In other words, one should learn how to cry for the Lord. One should learn this small technique, and you should be very eager and actually cry to become engaged in some particular type of service. This is called *laulyam*. And such tears are the price for the highest perfection. If one develops this *laulyam*, or excessive eagerness for meeting and serving the Lord in a particular way, that is the price to enter into the kingdom of God. Otherwise, there is no material calculation for the value of the ticket by which one can enter the kingdom of God." Then Prabhupāda concludes, "The only price for such entrance is this *laulyam*, or desire and great eagerness."

All right, Kṛṣṇa. So much nectar, going to the treasure chest of Kṛṣṇa consciousness with the help of Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas, and discussing these things which are most dear to our hearts. So, we will be back in a couple of days with Part 4. All glories to all the devotees during this Christmas marathon in the month of December and their helpers who are distributing Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books all over the world. Hare Kṛṣṇa. *Jaya Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara*.""