"*00555*.*
"Hi Kṛṣṇa, everyone. A warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedāntasvāmin iti nāmine.* So, in our last lecture, we touched on the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa swallowing a forest fire in order to protect His friends in the forest named Muñjāṭavī. It was a fire, you may remember, created by Agni-daitya, and in my research, I learned that a short distance from Muñjāṭavī is the forest of Bhadravaṭa. If you look on the map, the forest of Bhadravaṭa and therein is the village of Bhadravaṭa-grāma, which is the residence of a gopī named Bhadrā.

Bhadrā-gopī is a very close friend of Candrāvalī, who we know is Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s chief competitor. The ācāryas say that true to her name, which means auspicious—Bhadra means auspicious—she spreads auspiciousness wherever she goes. And they also write that when Bhadrā heard that Kṛṣṇa had extinguished the forest fire by the Yamunā to save the Vraja-vāsīs, she placed Him, Kṛṣṇa, in her heart to extinguish the fire of burning love for Him therein. But the ācāryas say that Bhadrā misjudged the effect of keeping Kṛṣṇa in her heart, for His presence there merely doubled the flames of her desire of love for Him. As a result of which, they say she appeared very pale, as if burned to ashes. It's very beautiful.

So, Bhadrā is mild by nature, and of all the right-wing gopīs known for their submissive natures, Bhadrā and Candrāvalī are the most tolerant of Kṛṣṇa's misbehavior. The ācāryas give an example that when Kṛṣṇa once offended Bhadrā in a large assembly of gopīs by making her the object of His jokes, at first she patiently tolerated His criticism and continued to think kindly of Him. But it was only when she noticed that one of her less submissive friends responded to those jokes by moving her eyebrows in anger that Bhadrā herself showed some displeasure. It is described by knitting her eyebrows—that's how the ācāryas describe it—she knitted her eyebrows and she shot angry glances at Kṛṣṇa. So, although Bhadrā's temperament is mild, she can put that aside, it is described, to do the needful for Kṛṣṇa's pleasure. And some gopīs, they once observed that she can be soft as a rose or hard as a thunderbolt.

For example, one ācārya was describing that Bhadrā is so faint-hearted that she is afraid to enter a shady grove in broad daylight; she is faint-hearted, she is afraid to enter a shady grove even though it's daylight out. But in order to find Kṛṣṇa, she once searched a forest of tamāla trees on a moonless night, alone and unafraid. And because of her great love for Him, I was reading, Kṛṣṇa often gives Bhadrā ornaments, like once He gave her His famed guñjā necklace. And He is also pleased when His devotees call Him by names connected to her, such as *Bhadra-hṛdaya-nilaya*, which means "He who naps in Bhadrā's heart." Isn't that sweet? "He who naps in Bhadrā's heart." Or sometimes devotees call Kṛṣṇa *Abhi-bhadra*: "He who waited at the meeting place, eagerly listening for Bhadrā's jingling anklets."

So nice details, you know, we've been discussing the details of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs, so here are some details about a gopī. And once, when speaking about Bhadrā, Kṛṣṇa said, "Bhadrā and Śaibyā are very beautiful; both speak sweetly, and both are as graceful as newly flowering vines. And both enchant Me, robbing Me of My peacefulness." And I was reading that after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā, this gopī Bhadrā continuously lamented His absence, as did the other gopīs. It is said that her expressions of grief still echo throughout the woods of Bhadravaṭa to this very day. Quite deep: her expressions of grief still echo throughout the woods of Bhadravaṭa to this very day. And what does that echo say? The echo says, "O bird of my life-breath, even though in your presence your beloved Kṛṣṇa hastily climbed aboard the chariot, still you refuse to abandon this slain body that has become your nest."

So, this very beautiful gopī Bhadrā who we're describing is also famous as one of the gopīs who ran through the night when Kṛṣṇa played His flute at Dhīra-samīra. And in his writings, Śrīla Jayadeva Gosvāmī advises one to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra at Dhīra-samīra and peacefully recall the loving exchanges between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa there. And I also came across a quote by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. He also writes about the special place Dhīra-samīra in his *Sārārtha-darśinī* commentary on the Tenth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. He writes as follows: "Once, as Śrī Kṛṣṇa was walking away from Vaṁśīvaṭa, not far away, a gentle breeze sprang up from His flute playing, and since that time, learned souls have called that area Dhīra-samīra." I'll repeat that: "Once as Śrī Kṛṣṇa was walking away from Vaṁśīvaṭa, not far away, a gentle breeze sprang up from His flute playing, and since that time, learned souls have called that area where that happened, Dhīra-samīra."

Now, in that verse, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he mentions Vaṁśīvaṭa. Vaṁśī-vaṭa is a banyan tree (*vaṭa*) next to the Yamunā river, beneath which Kṛṣṇa once played His vaṁśī to call the gopīs for the rasa dance that we mentioned. Now this particular instance, very famous—this instance where Kṛṣṇa played the flute—took place on the full moon night of the autumn season, which we call Pūrṇimā. We must become accustomed to all these terms; the full moon night of the autumn season is called Śarat Pūrṇimā. Be a beautiful name for a devotee.

And this pastime, so important—this pastime is actually described in five chapters of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* called... this is also important to remember, this pastime is described in five chapters of *Bhāgavatam* called the *Rāsa-pañcādhyāya*. So I thought that we could begin discussing this pastime, because it's quite extensive and it's very deep, you know, and beyond my understanding. But still, these things we need to discuss so we know the goal. We could begin discussing this pastime in some detail today, and such valuable details are found in a number of our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scriptures, which I had to research, including: *Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead*—our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda's summary of the Tenth Canto, chapters 29 and 33; also this pastime is discussed in detail in *Gopāla-campū*, *Pūrva-campū* chapters 23–27; also the *Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa*—I also look through *Kṛṣṇa-janma-khaṇḍa* chapter 29; *Harivaṁśa Purāṇa*, *Viṣṇu-parva* chapter 20; and of course, the books of my dear Godbrother Śivarāma Swami are always a big help for me as well.

So the ācāryas say that this, which—as a result of Kṛṣṇa calling the gopīs at Vaṁśīvaṭa—what happened was the rāsa-līlā, the rasa dance pastime. So the ācāryas say that the rasa dance pastime had its beginnings—we'll go back a little earlier—had its beginnings for all practical purposes when Kṛṣṇa was six years old, almost seven actually, at the end of the first month of winter, which we call Mārgaśīrṣa. Another detail that you can memorize: the first month of winter is called Mārgaśīrṣa. That's what we're in here now in Vṛndāvana; it's actually quite cold outside. So the end of that month, that's when Kṛṣṇa—at the end of His sixth year, almost seven years old—what did He do? He stole the clothes of the gopīs, that *cīra-haraṇa*, and we elaborated on that pastime quite in detail several months ago. And it was at that time that Kṛṣṇa made a promise to the gopīs. He promised the gopīs that He would enjoy with them in the future; not just then, but He said, "We'll come together and we'll enjoy in the future." So the ācāryas say that He intended to fulfill His promise with a rasa dance on the full moon night of Kārtika. That was His plan, that they would enjoy together with the rasa dance on the full moon night of Kārtika.

However, well, that wasn't far away, but it was some distance away. But what happened was that Kṛṣṇa couldn't immediately fulfill that promise to the gopīs, because then a whole string of events eventually took place in the month of Kārtika which delayed that event. First of all, if we study it, you know, like very carefully, scientifically, on the dark moon day of Kārtika, Kṛṣṇa—you remember—He preached the doctrine of *karma-mīmāṁsā* to His father, Nanda Mahārāja, so He couldn't have the rasa dance then. Then on the first day of the waxing moon of Kārtika, Govardhana-pūjā took place, so Kṛṣṇa couldn't fulfill His promise to have a rasa dance with the gopīs in Kārtika. The next day was the feast by the Yamunā—it's a feast we also talked about—but by the Yamunā, then, because Indra became upset... then because the pūjā wasn't for him, then for seven days up to the ninth day, Kṛṣṇa lifted Govardhana Hill with His little finger of His left hand, so no rasa dance. Then on the tenth day of the waxing moon, what happened? The cowherd men discussed the whole incident of Kṛṣṇa lifting Govardhana. Then on the 11th day, what happened? Lord Indra bathed Kṛṣṇa, and on the 12th day, Nanda Mahārāja was kidnapped. So you see the string of events; Kṛṣṇa was not able to fulfill His promise to the gopīs. So finally, on the full moon day of Kārtika, what happened? Kṛṣṇa showed the spiritual world to the cowherd men of Vraja at Kuṇḍa, and with that, the month of Kārtika came to an end.

Kṛṣṇa made His promise in the winter, and then eventually Kārtika came around some months later, obviously, because He couldn't fulfill this promise. So Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Kṛṣṇa* book, "It appears from the statements of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* that Kṛṣṇa had to wait another year for such a Kārtika moon before enjoying the rasa dance with the gopīs." So technically, you could say it wasn't until the age of eight, almost two years later, that Kṛṣṇa was able to fulfill His promise to the gopīs that He would enjoy with them in the month of Kārtika. And that finally happened on a full moon night of Kārtika, as He had originally planned. But just how that rasa dance finally took place—you know, almost two years later—it's very, very interesting. "Seek and ye shall find," and go through these scriptures; it's just like going through a treasure chest where you find emeralds and diamonds and pearls and sapphires. So we find all these wonderful details about Vraja revealed to us by Śrīla Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas. So to find how that rasa dance finally came about, it is described that one day, as Kṛṣṇa was wandering around the Vṛndāvana forest, He found a tamāla tree leaf on the ground—you know, a tamāla tree leaf on the ground—with the following message from Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī written on it. How wonderful. And what was written on that tamāla tree leaf? "Rādhā was writing: Always thinking of Your transcendental beauty, I burn in Cupid's fire. When I hear the sweet strains of Your flute, Your black effulgence appears to engulf Me. I am then lost to You in every way. Still, I find that You are far distant from Me. Alas, I have not yet attained You." Very deep message of love.

So, reading those words of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī on the leaf, Kṛṣṇa—you know—He was inspired. Kṛṣṇa was inspired to arrange this rasa dance that He'd promised the girls earlier, two years ago. So that night at Nandagrāma, it's described in the night, He tucked His flute into His belt, climbed out the window of His room, and hurried towards the banks of the Yamunā. And that, the banyan tree there—soon to be known, that whole place would soon to be known as Vaṁśīvaṭa—and there He played His flute, first calling Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to Vaṁśīvaṭa. I found that was very interesting. We know the pastime, you know, it's described as *tribhaṅga-lalita* on the banks of the Yamunā, and He's playing the flute to call the gopīs, but I didn't know He first called Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And it said that the melody that Kṛṣṇa played to call Rādhā had never before been heard on the earth planet. And the flute's message was: "O Rādhā with the face as sweet as the moon, O creeper of loving pastimes, for a long time Your qualities have been piercing My heart. Please be merciful to Me."

So then Kṛṣṇa played another melody to call all the other gopīs. And an interesting note here: the ācāryas say that except for those gopīs who had previously been sages in the Daṇḍaka forest, all the other gopīs came. All the gopīs came, except the ones that had previously been sages in the Daṇḍakāraṇya; we described that pastime last year. So how did these gopīs come in the dark of the night through the forest? It's described they came by following the music of Kṛṣṇa's flute as it wavered through the forest. They just followed the flute music and they very quickly arrived at Vaṁśīvaṭa, which I was reading—it's described it was supremely attractive, by forest groves, singing birds, fragrant breezes, and moonshine. Then standing beneath the famous banyan tree was Kṛṣṇa, who many of the gopīs were meeting face to face for the very first time.

So Kṛṣṇa, we know, Kṛṣṇa immediately welcomed all the gopīs by saying, "O most fortunate ladies, welcome! What may I do to please you? Is everything well in Vṛndāvana? Please tell Me the reason for your coming here. Please tell Me the reason for your coming here." So these words surprised the gopīs, for it was Kṛṣṇa Himself who had called them to Vaṁśīvaṭa with His flute. Then Kṛṣṇa confused them even more by suggesting that they be chaste girls by returning home and worshipping Him there. So at this point, the gopīs—all these things together—they contemplated, you know, He said, "Go home, worship Me there." So at this point, the gopīs contemplated three things: giving up their lives, falling at Kṛṣṇa's feet, or becoming angry with Him. They were either to give up their lives, follow Kṛṣṇa's feet, or become angry with Him. So at this point, the ācāryas, they comment that Kṛṣṇa's showing indifference to the gopīs was simply to increase the gopīs' longing for Him and to cause them to express their love for Him. So to demonstrate His unlimited mystic potency, at this point Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself to be with each and every gopī. And although the gopīs, I was reading, numbered actually in the millions, each gopī perceived that she was alone with Kṛṣṇa, identity's mystic power. And in this way, the rasa dance began.

However, after some time, Kṛṣṇa began thinking—and again I'll quote Śāstra here—"Because I am enjoying with so many women, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī has been reduced to the same level as the others. If the gopīs think of themselves as Rādhā's equals, they will only quarrel, not dance. I shall now put them in their place and reveal Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's unparalleled superiority." That's what Kṛṣṇa was thinking like that. So then Kṛṣṇa had paused the dance and He said, "Dear girls, it appears that you have all become somewhat tired, so you need a little time to rest. So I am going to visit nearby places and I will be back soon." Then He disappeared with Śrī Rādhā. "I am going to visit nearby places and I will be back very soon," then He disappeared with Śrī Rādhā.

So we're going to conclude there today. We'll leave you sitting on the edge of your seats, because this is quite... it's a long pastime, it has many details, it's quite deep. So we're going to stop there; this is the end of the rasa dance, Part 1, and we'll continue next time, Part 2. And we'll conclude today, just as Kṛṣṇa disappeared with Śrī Rādhā, with a famous quote from Śrīla Prabhupāda in the *Kṛṣṇa* book: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always full with six kinds of opulences, and this is an instance of the opulence of renunciation." This is appropriate here because He's just left all those beautiful gopīs. So Prabhupāda writes: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always full with six kinds of opulence, and this is an instance of the opulence of renunciation. This renunciation confirms Kṛṣṇa's total non-attachment." Prabhupāda writes: "He is always self-sufficient and is not dependent on anything. This is the platform on which His transcendental pastimes are enacted." O glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda! O glories to the residents! O glories to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma! So thank you, Prabhu, and we'll see you in a few days. Vṛndāvana is the Christmas marathon that's taking place right now with books being distributed all over the world. Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""