When Ramanuja was a young man, he had one secret room. His guru desired to give him a very special mantra. His guru said, "I'll give it to you on the condition that you don't share it with anyone. You keep it secret within your heart." He said, "This mantra is so powerful it can free you from material existence and take you to Godhead.

Do you agree to keep it to yourself?" Ramanuja said, "Yes, I will." So, his guru whispered in his right ear, "Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya." This is a confidential mantra.

His guru changed it and hoped that it would elevate his individual soul. He took that mantra and was walking out of the ashram. He was thinking, "Well, if this mantra can free someone from the entanglement of material life and take him back to Godhead, where there's no anxiety, then why shouldn't everyone get it?

Why just me?" If it's so powerful, then it means even a bad person can be delivered.

So, thinking like this, he went to the marketplace. Sometimes in marketplaces in India, there are tall poles. He climbed up the pole and said, "All you good people, come here!

I have something to share with you." He said, "I have received something very valuable and it's free." When you hear something great and valuable is given away for free, you come running. Recently, there was a young man in New York who had a lot of money.

He was kind of an open-hearted, free guy. He took half his wealth and, in hundred-dollar bills, made the same announcement. Out of the third-story window of a New York building, he started throwing out big bundles of hundred-dollar bills. They were floating down like this.

People were grabbing them, and the police couldn't stop it because it was good money, not stolen. He gave a half a million dollars. The only good thing is that there was a second-time devotee nearby doing sankirtan on the street corner.

So he also came in. And then he got so much money. He did the biggest collection ever and gave all his books away for free. He came back and said, "How'd you do it?" He said, "By fellow devotees." There's a saying: If you lose your money, you've lost nothing.

If you lose your health, you've lost something. But if you lose your Krishna consciousness, we've lost everything.

So what is money compared to the value of a mantra which can free one from the cycle of birth and death?

So, what happened is he called all the people and said, "I want to give you a mantra which can free you from material existence and take you to that place where there's no anxiety, you won't suffer." So he initiated the whole town into this mantra.

Because he came here and started getting purified, his guru came and said, "What have you done?

I told you not to do this. You can't share this mantra." But he replied, "My guru, I have offended you. But all these people will go to hell if they don't get this mantra. Let me go to hell as long as all these people can be delivered by this mantra." The guru said, "That's a very nice fellow." And Ramanuja did become a great devotee.

He was the head of the Ramanuja sect. So we have that blessing of joining Lord Chaitanya's Sankirtan movement. We have the blessing of this mantra. Look what we can see. It's a block of blessings. So much can be gained by chanting this mantra.

We should become mad for chanting. We should work as hard for perfection in Krishna consciousness as we worked to try to enjoy this material world before we came to Krishna consciousness.

Let us not make the mistake of the boy who inherited the stamp collection from his father and had something very valuable and gave it away for just a few rubles when it's worth billions. Not only do we have this valuable human form of life, but we have a bona fide Acharya, our founder-acharya, Śrīla Prabhupāda, as our leader, as our master, who's kindly given us this blessing.