"*00568*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees, welcome back once again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti.*

So, in our last lecture, we discussed Kṛṣṇa’s evening pastimes with His friends in a rowdy festival at Nandagrāma, and you may remember that when that festival concluded, Kṛṣṇa pretended to sleep in His bed only to go out on His balcony and play a flute song that attracted all the young gopī girls of Vṛndāvana. With that flute song, He was inviting them to meet for nocturnal pastimes in the Vṛndāvana forest. 

As I read more last night, I was surprised to find that at the same time that the evening stage show in Nandagrāma was going on, simultaneously in Yāvaṭa, where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī lived with her in-laws, Jaṭilā—Rādhārāṇī’s mother-in-law—was encouraging Rādhārāṇī to eat her dinner. She said, "My dear daughter-in-law, since your husband Abhimanyu has already eaten and my daughter Kuṭilā has gone to bed, you should eat your dinner now. You must forgive me for listening to all that village gossip about you and then insulting you. My dear Rādhā, I promise that will never happen again. Indeed, I have arranged that tomorrow Kuṭilā, my daughter, will stay at another person's home because she is also criticizing you." 

Rādhārāṇī was happy to hear these words, but she doubted how long Jaṭilā would actually think like that. As we've discussed many times, Jaṭilā is always suspicious that Śrī Rādhā is secretly meeting Kṛṣṇa somewhere. Anyway, Jaṭilā continued, "Oh dear, I fear I may not be alive much longer; thus, my hopes rest with my son, I bemoan you, and with you, Śrī Rādhā. My dear girl, I think your mother and father must be demigods to have given birth to such a daughter." 

For some time, Jaṭilā carried on like this, smiling at Rādhārāṇī and holding her hand. Then they went to the kitchen, where Jaṭilā sat Rādhārāṇī down and was about to serve her purīs, milk, and sweet rice. But Rādhārāṇī had heard Kṛṣṇa’s flute earlier, again inviting all His gopīs to go secretly to meet with Him that night, and as a result, her heart was racing with the thought of soon meeting Kṛṣṇa. So, she wasn't interested in eating a meal served by Jaṭilā. She said to Jaṭilā, "Mother, you must be tired; please go to bed. I will eat something upstairs in my room." 

Jaṭilā was pleased to be relieved of her duty, so the two of them embraced and they retired to their respective quarters. Rādhārāṇī went to her room, and as she entered the room and closed the door behind her, it’s described she breathed a sigh of relief. Then she sat down to eat at a table arranged by her maidservants—the remnants of Kṛṣṇa’s dinner that evening. Yes, that included lādūs and milk brought from Nandagrāma by Lavaṅga-mañjarī. Lavaṅga-mañjarī brought the remnants of Kṛṣṇa’s prasādam, and I was reading that as soon as Śrī Rādhā touched Kṛṣṇa’s prasāda, her body erupted in goosebumps, or as we say, her hair stood on end. When she tasted the remnants of Kṛṣṇa’s prasāda, her lips trembled, and she became so excited that she almost forgot about eating. So, she mechanically placed a few morsels of Kṛṣṇa’s prasāda into her mouth, and what happened is that tears came from her eyes, down her lotus face, and trickled onto her plate. The touch, smell, and taste of Kṛṣṇa’s remnants made her stunned for some time. 

So concerned that she might be late for this nocturnal meeting with Kṛṣṇa, one of her maidservants said to her very softly, "Oh beautiful girl, you should eat quickly if you want to arrive at the meeting place on time. Lalitā-devī is here now, and Viśākhā-devī is on her way, and they are both eager to go with you into the dark night." 

Now, the ācāryas say that those clever words had the desired effect and Rādhārāṇī gradually withdrew from her trance and began to eat again, although it’s described her throat was still choked with love, making it difficult for her to swallow. Then she laid down to sleep for just a few minutes before leaving home to meet Kṛṣṇa at the rendezvous point on the banks of the Yamunā River. 

Meanwhile, within a campaka forest on the bank of the Yamunā, Vṛndā Devī and her assistants were busy making arrangements for the divine couple’s meeting and for all the gopīs who were coming. It’s described that forest goddesses were busy hanging flower garlands around the grove and lighting lamps that shone like gold; therefore, this entire pastime grove soon glowed with a golden hue that inspired bees to drink honey from flowers. It’s written that this golden glow of the kuñja inspired peacocks to dance and songbirds to serenade everyone. Then it’s written that Vṛndāvana itself kept all the forest creatures—like animals, birds, and flowers—and it even mentions breezes and all the opulence of Vṛndāvana to be fully awake and alert, although it was the middle of the night. Because remember, in Vṛndāvana, everything is personal: the animals, the birds, the flowers, the breezes, and all of Vṛndāvana's opulences. So, Vṛndāvana itself inspired all these things to be fully awake and alert, although it was the middle of the night, to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s nocturnal pastimes. 

Now, all of Vṛndāvana's young gopīs had heard Kṛṣṇa’s flute calling, as we mentioned, and as such, gopīs like Citrā and Viśākhā had lulled their husbands into deep sleep. After quietly dressing and ornamenting themselves by lamplight, they tiptoed out of their homes. Then those gopīs, and all the gopīs for that matter, came and assembled first in Śrī Rādhā’s chambers or her quarters at Yāvaṭa. They all came there, and as Śrī Rādhā rose from bed, these gopīs washed her face and dressed her to blend in with the darkness of the forest caused by a dark moon in the sky—meaning there was no moon or just a sliver of the moon. So, they dressed her in a dark blue sari and a dark blue blouse. They decorated her braid with a black tassel, they smeared musk on her body, and then they decorated her with a variety of dark blue ornaments to match her dress. The whole idea being that they had to move secretly, not to be discovered by anyone through the forest because the forest was dark and they were in dark attire, so no one could see them. This is how the gopīs dressed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī; we've discussed this, I think, in a class last year. 

Then, after putting a blue lotus in her hand, all of her friends came and they embraced her, and they spoke words of assurance that they would all make it safely to the rendezvous site. Then, peering out through the window into the darkness, one gopī asked another, "Saki, do you see anyone out there?" This other gopī answered, "No, everyone is asleep." And with that, all the gopīs—there were many—tiptoed down the stairs and left the palace at Yāvaṭa for the rendezvous. Moving silently through Yāvaṭa village, they reached the edge of the outlying forest, and as they entered the forest, it’s written they let out a collective sigh that the ācāryas say—and I'll quote the ācāryas here—"resembled a sandalwood-scented breeze blowing in from the Malaya Hills." That's what their sighs sounded like. 

Now, they continue, the ācāryas continue, carrying the burden of their youthful beauty, they walked as fast as their full hips and thin waists allowed them to, stopping at times to catch their breath while holding each other's hands for comfort while walking through the dark forest. 

So, in time, this beautiful entourage of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her maidservants approached that particular campaka forest on the bank of the Yamunā where the rendezvous was to be. Then, while most of the girls waited outside of that forest, or you could say the kuñja in particular, Rādhārāṇī entered the grove with a few friends. Now, everyone was hoping that Kṛṣṇa was already there, but He wasn't. How many times have we told pastimes where there's a rendezvous and Kṛṣṇa either doesn't come or He's late? So, Śrī Rādhā waited patiently, but it wasn't long before Kṛṣṇa’s absence started to weigh upon her mind, and finally, she started to cry. So, all her friends came at once to console her, as one gopī said very sweetly, "Dear Queen, do not fear, I will go just now to find your lover and bring Him here. Perhaps someone has held Him up on His way." 

But the ācāryas say that Kṛṣṇa had not been held up by anyone on the way. Rather, the lotus of Vṛndāvana conspired to increase Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s desire for her beloved by making His journey—Kṛṣṇa’s journey—a little longer than expected. That’s so sweet. Kṛṣṇa had not been held up by anyone on the way; rather, the lotus of Vṛndāvana itself conspired to increase Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s desire for her beloved by making His journey a little longer than expected. Everything is to facilitate the loving pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Love reigns supreme in Goloka Vṛndāvana. So, the ācāryas say that Kṛṣṇa knew that Śrī Rādhā was anxiously waiting for Him, so in spite of all dangers in the forest, He fearlessly rushed through the night over secret paths, and in time, He finally reached the shore of the River Yamunā, where Lalitā-sakī found Him and proudly escorted Him to the rendezvous spot at that campaka forest on the bank of the Yamunā. 

The ācāryas write that "the divine couple's meetings can be fully appreciated only by those who have unalloyed love for them, the divine couple, who worship them in the mood of the gopīs and who have received the shelter of one such gopī." They also explained that each time Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet, it's as if it's for the first time. We've discussed that before, but I was reading last night, and it was really exciting that sometimes Yogamāyā even makes Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa forget that they had been together just a few hours before. 

And I was also reading that each time they meet, their bodies erupt in goosebumps, their hair stands on end, and their girlfriends shed tears of joy seeing the divine couple reunited in their midst. This is perfection for the gopīs, to facilitate the meeting of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. One last thing I remember: that whenever they meet again "for the first time," they are unable to speak to each other for a few moments; they're just stunned. 

So, on this particular occasion, with Kṛṣṇa finally arriving at the planned rendezvous that night, Viśākhā-sakī offered Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa flower garlands, and other gopīs offered the divine couple sandalwood pulp, and still other young girls offered them betel leaves. Then finally, one young gopī suggested to the divine couple, "Dear Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, why not behold the beauty that Vṛndāvana forest has prepared for you?" 

Agreeing to this proposal, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa set out together along the riverside, and it’s described, "the greenish effulgence of their combined auras lit the way." Why greenish? Because Kṛṣṇa is bluish-black like a monsoon cloud and Rādhārāṇī is golden, so you take gold or yellow and you add blue, and it makes green. So, it's described the greenish effulgence of their combined auras lit the way. Just imagine in your mind the divine couple walking through the forest; this beautiful aura of greenish effulgence is lighting their way. Everything is self-effulgent in the spiritual world. 

As they walked along, some gopīs scattered flower petals on the path in front of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa while others followed behind, enhancing the atmosphere with humorous chatter and feminine charm. Then there's a nice description of how the divine couple walked through the forest, the different groves along the river, through orchards, marveling at the natural beauty of their own creation, all the while relishing the beauty of a flower as much as the effulgent moon. Now, when I read that, I was thinking that if the divine couple, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, so much appreciated even the tiniest aspects of their creation, how careful we must be not to take for granted the natural wonders of the world around us. 

I mentioned last week that I once described the material nature as mystical. So, while strolling through the forest with the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa came upon a yantra-śālā. A yantra-śālā is a storehouse of musical instruments. We know that there are different storehouses throughout the Vṛndāvana forest; we mentioned one time that Vṛndā Devī in particular arranges for storehouses with different items to facilitate particular pastimes in that part of the forest. So here, this storehouse, the yantra-śālā, contained musical instruments. At the right time, at the right place, everything is organized. 

While Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was taking a vīṇā—you remember that's her favorite instrument—other gopīs selected various musical instruments as well. Lalitā-sakī chose a drum, and as she started beating it, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī smiled and started playing her vīṇā. Then the other girls joined in with their instruments, and finally, Kṛṣṇa eagerly came and played His flute. Thus, this nocturnal symphony caused a chorus of nearby cuckoo birds to sing and a swarm of golden bumblebees to start humming, as well as nearby peacocks to start a lively dance. 

Then Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa put down their instruments—Kṛṣṇa put down His Veṇu, His flute, and she put down her vīṇā—while so many gopīs continued playing, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa began singing. The ācāryas say what were they singing? They were singing of each other's sweetness. Now just imagine the scene: this thousand of gopīs playing various instruments, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have put down their instruments and are just singing of each other's sweetness. So, it's written that the scene made Cupid, the forest, and their own faces—the divine couple's own faces—blossom with a joy so intense that all trace of their earlier anxieties due to separation faded into a distant past. That's so nice. 

So that's the pastime that I wanted to share with you; it's connected to the lecture we gave a few days ago. So much nectar in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Aren't we enjoying chanting, dancing, and feasting in this beautiful month of Kārtika? Only a couple of days left, so I will finish today. Please excuse me again for a short lecture, but this is Kārtika, and we have some wonderful festivities happening at the temple. So, I'll finish today with a verse from *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta* by our beloved Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī:

"Astonishing Vṛndāvana, the secret land of spiritual radiance, like a full moon of sweet bliss, a celestial domain on earth shines above all else. Remember the two attractive swans, gold and black, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, eloquent at describing Vṛndāvana's qualities in the lake of rasa there." 

Thank you. *Śrī Braja-bhūmi Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī jaya!* The month of Kārtika kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the dhāma, kī jaya! Be back in a few days. *Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya!*

Thank you, Hare Kṛṣṇa.""