"*00464*.*
"Hi Kṛṣṇa, dear devotees. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, today we are continuing with our series on Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his service to his beloved Govindajī. In our last lecture, we discussed in detail the arrangements that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī made for the worship of Govindajī after his discovery and installation. That also included the services of Kaśīśvara, that very intimate associate of Lord Caitanya, as well as Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who, as you remember, had a disciple build a small temple for Govindajī in Vṛndāvana. That temple served Govindajī well until later, when a magnificent temple was constructed for Govindajī, the remains of which actually still stand in Vṛndāvana today, and they are regarded as an architectural wonder. I would like to share with you today just how that temple came about. But firstly, I think it's important to give some background of what was happening in India at that particular time. At that time in history, we're talking around the late 1500s, Akbar the First was the Mughal emperor of much of the Indian subcontinent. Now, he ascended the throne in 1556 when his father, Humayun—which we mentioned in a previous lecture—died in an accident. And Akbar ruled his empire actually from Agra, which many of you know is only a 45-minute drive from Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana. I was thinking initially he would rule from Delhi, but he ruled from Agra. Now, it's interesting that when he ascended the throne, he was only 14 years old at the time. But in those days, princes, not only in India but in Europe and other places, were groomed from a young age in ruling, dividing and conquering, diplomacy, and the art of war. And Akbar also had the advantage of the expertise and wisdom of one Rāj Toḍar Mal Singh, who was the finance minister in the Mughal empire at the time.

Now, it's interesting: Rāj Toḍar Mal was a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and Akbar often gave him leave to go on pilgrimage. Actually, I was reading Toḍar Mal is also accredited with translating the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam into the Persian language, and as an experienced statesman, he would be Akbar's advisor throughout Akbar's reign. Now, Akbar himself was unique amongst the many Mughal emperors who ruled India for quite some time. Historically, he's considered a liberal ruler to begin with because he was a patron of arts and culture. I was reading he created a library of over 24,000 books written in Sanskrit, Urdu, Persian, Greek, Latin, and Arabic, and he's famous for establishing a library of extensive works exclusively for women. And he created many schools, both for Muslims and Hindus, throughout his vast empire.

Now, scholars write that he was disillusioned with orthodox Islam, and hoping to bring about religious unity within his empire, Akbar created a, you could say, a spiritual movement of his own with the combined teachings of Islam, Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, and Christianity. But he was also, you know, a ruler—he's the emperor, the king of kings, you could say—he was also ambitious to extend his empire as far and wide as possible. And beyond just fighting battles to achieve that end, he entered into many alliances with both Muslim and Hindu rulers to achieve that goal. And as a result of these alliances, such rulers, you know, Hindu and Muslim, were employed in his vast army in order to conquer and subjugate rebellious kingdoms. Now, historically, one such ruler was Rāj Mān Siṃha; he was the Kachwaha Rāj, or you could say the king of Amber, a state later known, or as we know it, as Jaipur in Rajasthan. He was a Rajput.

And Rāj Mān Siṃha was a staunch devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and he was a trusted general in Akbar's army because of these alliances they made, which served both parties favorably. So historians say that Akbar included Rāj Mān Siṃha in his *navaratnas*, or the nine gems of his royal court. And I was reading—I read extensively, actually—that Mān Siṃha fought 67 major battles. He won 67 major battles for Akbar, so they were quite close, actually. So, one time, Akbar ordered Mān Siṃha to quell a major rebellion that was taking place in Bengal, far-away Bengal. Now, at that time, Mān Siṃha was in Lahore, that city Lahore, which was modern-day Pakistan but of course previously was India. So, he got that order to go to Bengal and quell the rebellion, but he came to Mathurā to take some of his army troops that he had stationed there for the fight in Bengal. Now, while he was in Mathurā, it's really interesting: some of his army lieutenants suggested he visit nearby Vṛndāvana to take blessings from a great saint, they said, whose name was Rūpa Gosvāmī, so they could win the fight in Bengal. So, Mān Siṃha went to Vṛndāvana. But first, he went to take *darśana* of Govindajī in that little temple, because Govindajī by that time was popular. I mentioned in a previous lecture that devotees were coming from all over India to take *darśana*. So Mān Siṃha's first business was to take *darśana* of Govindajī, because he was a Kṛṣṇa-bhakta. Now, as he stood before Govindajī, he was mesmerized by the Lord's beauty, his countenance, his ambiance, and he made a famous vow before the Lord. And that vow was that if Govindajī blessed him to win the upcoming battles in Bengal, he would come back and build the Lord a most beautiful temple in Vṛndāvana. What history is this! So his court poet, who was with him at the time, actually recorded Mān Siṃha's actual words and later wrote them in a manuscript called the *Mān-Prabandha*.

Which I believe is in the royal library now in Jaipur. Now, the poet didn't sign his name out of humility, but he heard the vow and he wrote it down as they did in those days, and here is Mān Siṃha's vow to Govindajī: "Vṛndāvanī, which is praised by all the hosts of demigods, I will respectfully construct a dwelling abode for Śrī Govinda-rāya, as a result of which there will be immense facilitation of the festival of Kṛṣṇa-janmāṣṭamī," unquote. What about now? Much of what we're sharing today comes from the journals and the diaries and correspondence of such personalities like Mān Siṃha, as well as Akbar's secretaries, scribes, and poets who also accompanied him everywhere and meticulously kept records of all that he did and all that he said. That's why we have so much detailed information, because of these scribes. Anyway, after taking *darśana* of Govindajī, the general went to see Rūpa Gosvāmī to receive his blessings for the upcoming campaign in Bengal. And I found a reference in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, which I now have the opportunity to visit daily, that upon first seeing Rūpa Gosvāmī, Mān Siṃha recognized that he was the same personality who was previously positioned as Dabir-i-Khās in the court of Nawab Hussain Shah in Bengal. You know, having an important position in politics, Mān Siṃha knew the various political personalities around India; I mean, he was well-traveled. And in this way, he recognized Rūpa Gosvāmī, and he was deeply impressed how he had become the saint that he was, the pure devotee of the Lord that he was. But I also read that while meeting with Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, he didn't mention his private vow to Govindajī. Now, historical records show that Mān Siṃha was indeed successful in crushing that rebellion in Bengal, and upon returning to Agra two months later, he met with Emperor Akbar and he shared with him the success of his battles—and he personally fought in those battles as well—and how his campaign in Bengal was successful. So during their talks, he mentioned how he had received Rūpa Gosvāmī's blessings, and he also revealed to Akbar his confidential vow to construct the temple for Govinda-deva in Vṛndāvana. Now, being the pious person and liberal ruler that he was, Akbar was actually interested in facilitating the building of such a temple. And from the diplomatic point of view, he also thought it would expand his popularity and thus win the hearts of the Vaiṣṇavas. Again, he was interested in religious unity in the country, in his empire—very interesting person, interesting time in the history of India. So, within a couple of days, Akbar made a decree—granting, from my research in the institute, 135 *bighas*; *bigha* means approximately 84 acres, or 33, I believe it's 33 hectares, but by today's calculations—of property in Vṛndāvana exclusively for Govindajī. Of course, Akbar owns all this land, so he gave it for the deity, for Govindajī. And I saw in the decree that he declared that in the future, any taxes from that land should be used exclusively for the *sevā*—the word there is *sevā*—of Govindajī. Now, that actual decree, that proclamation...

Yeah, well, it's in the institute here. Now, with that decree, Mān Siṃha went back to Vṛndāvana, and he again met with Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and he revealed how he had taken this vow to Govindajī and how he won the battles and the campaign in Bengal, and when he came back, the emperor agreed that a temple should be built. But surprisingly, Rūpa Gosvāmī, who was growing a little older by that time—he was 53 years older than Akbar—he was deeply involved in his writings and discovering the holy places and doing his *bhajana*. You know, and he was happy that Govindajī had his little temple there. He said to Siṃha, "Sir, there's no need to construct a large temple. Śrī Govinda-deva likes the nature of Vṛndāvana." Wow, "Śrī Govinda-deva likes the nature of Vṛndāvana." I wish the modern-day politicians would take that to heart and keep Vṛndāvana as it was hundreds or thousands of years ago, a beautiful rural place with temples scattered here and there. And anyway, that's another discussion. Also, it's said that Rūpa Gosvāmī didn't want a big temple built because he didn't want to disturb or destroy in any way the beautiful forests of Vṛndāvana. But Mān Siṃha himself, being a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and he had taken this vow, and he took it very seriously—if we take a vow to Guru or Gaurāṅga or Kṛṣṇa, we take it seriously—so he had taken a vow to Govindajī, and he was adamant and he kept insisting. So after some time, Rūpa Gosvāmī thought about it, and you know how many people would come and get the *darśana* of Govindajī, et cetera, so eventually Rūpa gave his consent. And I might add an interesting note here that in all the original documents issued in the court of Akbar, he is addressed as "Govinda-rāyājī." I saw that; he's addressed as Govinda-rāyājī in those days. *Rāya* of course refers to the king, but as we know, words and names they often change in time through the centuries. So later, people began referring to Govinda-rāyājī as Govinda-devajī, and then down through time, now we know that deity here in Vṛndāvana is called Govindajī. And if you go down to Jaipur where he's being worshiped, it's Govindajī. But it's interesting. So now after Rūpa Gosvāmī gave his consent, Rāj Mān Siṃha was considering exactly where to build that temple, but eventually, he settled on building it on the *yoga-pīṭha*, the actual hill where Rūpa Gosvāmī had discovered Govindajī. Now, there's a specific reason why he chose that spot. According to the *Ādi-Varāha Purāṇa* and other scriptures as well, this *yoga-pīṭha* hill is in the shape of a *kūrma*, the turtle, and in ancient times, that place was known as *Kūrma-ṭīlā*. Even before the Six Gosvāmīs arrived in Vṛndāvana, it was known as Kūrma-ṭīlā. According to many Vrajavāsīs, it's the very place where Kūrma-deva rested after participating in the churning of the ocean of milk. And I found in a scripture called the *Bhakti-kavaca* it's mentioned that Bhakti-devī's *āsana* in Vṛndāvana is that Kūrma-ṭīlā, or the *yoga-pīṭha* where Govindajī was just discovered. It will make it much more relevant and important to you when you go to this Śrī Govindajī temple and understand the history behind it, the long history behind it. Now, this is all very interesting because Rāj Mān Siṃha was from the family line of the *Kūrma-kula* Kachwaha lineage, the lineage of Lord Viṣṇu who incarnated as a turtle. That's his line; the lineage goes back. So, therefore, he chose that place. So in due course of time, construction began.

Now, in preparation for this class, we went down to the Govindajī temple and we looked everywhere and scouted everything out and talked to the *pūjārīs*, and several devotees were with me who had studied this carefully—the temple and its history—and we discovered on the left side of the temple, on a wall of Govinda's temple, there's an inscription in stone that gives the names of all the main persons who actually participated in building Govindajī's temple. It's inscribed in stone. We photographed it, and I had it translated, and I wanted to read it to you because it's just so interesting, you know? Like, who participated, who did what. Of course, we've never heard of these personalities, but certainly they were special personalities that were chosen by Mān Siṃha, and Rūpa Gosvāmī gave his authorization, and they were in charge of building this architectural wonder. It's there in stone, so it reads as follows: "In *samvat* 34, Vikram *samvat* 1647, or 1590 AD, in the reign of the King Śrī Śāka-bandar Akbar the Great, King Śrīmān, son of King Śrī Bhagavān-dās, of the lineage of Śrī Pṛthvīrāja, of the *Kūrma-kula* Kachwaha family or lineage, made a temple on the *yoga-pīṭha* place of Yoga-māyā in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Śrī Kalyāṇa-dās was in charge of the work on Śrī Govinda-deva's temple. Mārak Canda Chopala was the architect. Śrī Govinda-dās Dilavala was the builder. On Thursday, Guru-vāsar... may all be happy."

Oh boy. So, in a previous lecture, we stated that Rūpa Gosvāmī designed the temple, but when I looked into the matter more, it's not that he actually gave the actual design, but rather he gave indications of how he would like it to be—much like our Śrīla Prabhupāda gave some ideas to be included in our Temple of the Vedic Planetarium in Māyāpura. He didn't actually give every detail of the temple, but he wanted it to be like that—that would include a Vedic planetarium, etc.—so he gave some general ideas. And it's said that when Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī met with this proposed architect of the temple, Rūpa Gosvāmī suddenly went into deep meditation; he went into *samādhi*, it's written, and he envisioned Goloka Vṛndāvana. And when he came out of that *samādhi*, he shared that vision with the architect and told him to construct the temple accordingly. This is what is written in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute. Kṛṣṇa, we're so fortunate now that we have access to that institute; they're very favorable in just giving us a green light to help in any way that we can. I think it's many lifetimes' service; there's 32,000 scriptures. So Akbar gave 13 lakhs of rupees for the construction of the temple at that time. That was around... well, now 13 lakhs was 18,000, but in those days it was his entire budget for one year. Akbar, the Mughal emperor, giving his entire budget for one year to build this temple. So, thousands of workers were engaged, and work went on 24 hours a day, seven days a week. And there were not only workers, but how would I describe it? Whole troops, you could say, of camels and horses and elephants and bullock carts that all came from Akbar's royal court. Now, red sandstone was used with the construction. Those of you who have been here, you'll notice it's very unique; red sandstone was used for the construction. Of course, marble was available in abundance because, well, you know, nearby Jaipur and other areas in Rajasthan, there's still so much marble. But they used red sandstone because in those days, it was a sign of great opulence. Only the palaces of kings used red sandstone, and only royal families had permission to make their houses out of it. I read that it was the first time in the history of India when red sandstone was used to make a temple in this part of India, especially in Vṛndāvana. So, it was all because of the devotion of Rūpa Gosvāmī, and of course the flood of mercy that was taking place on the orders of Caitanya Mahāprabhu to go to Vraja and revive that spiritual abode for the people of that time, for us now, and for the people in the future. We know this saṅkīrtana movement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu is meant to flourish for 10,000 years. So this is some of the initial history; it just makes it so much more interesting for us.

So I've read that countless coconut ropes, made of coconut *coir*—it's called C-O-I-R, like bark—were made in order to lift and to lower heavy stones in the making of the temple. Actually, there's a lotus flower that's in the center up at the top dome in the main entrance; when you come in, a beautiful one-piece red sandstone lotus up there, and I think even today they're trying to figure out how they got it up there because it's so heavy, so massive, so beautiful. But according to what I was reading in the institute, you know, they would use coconut ropes made of *coir*, kind of bark, to lift and lower all the heavy stones in the temple. And above that main compound, seven stories were constructed with many subfloors between those floors for different purposes. It wasn't just seven, but there were subfloors between the main floors. And in the midst of all this, on different levels, there were entire courtyards—entire courtyards for the performances of *yajñas*, and they had dances and dramas and various, you know, recitals, especially I was reading, *bhajanas* and *kīrtanas* to glorify Govindajī. It was massive. And engraved on all four corners of the temple were different *kuñjas* or forest groves, set for *sakhās* and *sakhīs* for cowherd boys and cowherd girls to do their *sevā* for Govindajī. And Gaṇeśa deities were installed in all four entrances to the temple, and I also read at the beginning of every staircase there was a deity of Gaṇeśa.

Now, the temple took 30 years to complete—30 years! Can you imagine? But unfortunately, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī didn't live long enough to see it to completion. But Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, who lived to be 85, being the younger of the six Gosvāmīs, he did see it to completion. And he was so surprised and so satisfied and happy to learn that he actually, upon coming for the, you know, the opening or the final ceremony for that temple—when he saw it completed like that—he actually spoke a very beautiful prayer, you could say *aṣṭakam*, in glorification of the temple. I say "spoke" because he didn't actually write it down; he just saw that finally, you know, the temple was complete and he just, from his heart through his lotus mouth came this beautiful *aṣṭakam* glorifying the Govindajī temple.

So he didn't write it down. However, at that particular time, there was a devotee, a scribe, who was with him, and he quickly wrote down what Jīva Gosvāmī had said. And I would like to conclude today with those very prayers. I know it's a short class, but the next part is the atrocities of Aurangzeb and how he destroys that temple, so I don't want to mix the two. I don't want to mix the two; we'll just conclude with all these, you know, remembering all these wonderful pastimes of, you know, thousands of workers and the blessings of Rūpa Gosvāmī and the powerful Rāj Mān Siṃha and how they all cooperated together historically to glorify Govindajī. And then Jīva Gosvāmī, he sees the temple, and then these are his prayers. I'm not including the Sanskrit because it's quite long, a little technical and detailed, but it's called *Govinda-mandira-aṣṭakam*, the *Govinda-mandira-aṣṭakam* by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī.

1. "Śrī Kṛṣṇa, manifesting a thirst to protect His own devotees, always appears situated on the *yoga-pīṭha*, the divine pastime place here in Vṛndādevī's forest, Vṛndāvana, which is praised by the group of gods beginning with Śiva. Vṛndāvana is thus the major cause of dissatisfaction even in Vaikuṇṭha, Viṣṇu's own realm. And such a Vṛndāvana manifests what is to be known by means of the group of hundreds of scriptures—*śruti*, *smṛti*—through the principle of Śrī Govinda, i.e., Govinda manifests the truth of all scriptures there in Vraja."

2. "Meaning: The best son protected the world in his rule. The good people engaged their respective *dharma* and obtained happiness in the highest degree. The virtuous Vaiṣṇavas always gave him, Akbar, blessings joyfully, because they considered that very place, Vṛndāvana, to be the place of Śrī Govinda, and therefore worth residing in. Under Akbar, such residence was possible." Giving some credit to Akbar.

3. "In this place, Vṛndāvana, his—Akbar's—constant companion, the king named Śrī Mān Siṃha, was like a moon that caused the swelling of the milk ocean that is the glory of Pṛthvīrāja's shining lineage. Mān Siṃha was the son of Bhagavān-dās, who in turn was born of the king Bhāramala. Making the temple by his own strength, Mān Siṃha ever partakes of joy with stable Lakṣmī, prosperity, the goddess of fortune."

4. "Sriman, similar to Sriman Akbar, was another king named again Śrī Mān Siṃha, who was such that when he marched into the enemy's direction he would cause his victorious side to cast aside all doubts and enjoy. Who on this earth does not know of that very lion amongst men? Kings in his camp who fell on the ground and died in wars went to heaven and found themselves to be like a flag-bearer of victory even in heaven."

5. "The victorious King Śrī Mān Siṃha is one born in the royal lineage. His best man, the intelligent Śrī Kalyāṇa-dās, who takes shelter at the lotus feet of Śrī Govinda, must always be victorious, joyfully creating that, his Govinda's temple, speedily. He zealously brought the work to completion."

6. "Śrī Haridās, the foremost leader of those serving the lotus feet of Śrī Govinda, grants love to those who serve Govinda. He is the one by means of whom, from the very beginning, this temple is increasing in the joy of the *rasa* of sweetness of service. He is the one by whom the King Śrī Mān Siṃha duly obtained incredible bliss. May Śrī Haridās always rejoice."

7. "Amongst the architects residing in Delhi is the venerable one named Govinda-dās. Sheltered by Śrī Mān Siṃha, he built this beautiful temple here. He is the cause of happiness and prosperity to the respectable Vaiṣṇavas now and in the future, and thus he himself must ever be made a receptacle of Hari's own compassion."

8. "In this temple work here there is the most imminent Bhagavān and the expert Ugrasena. May the two of them, dispatched by the King Śrī Mān Siṃha, rejoice. Which other one is to be singled out, or who is better, or who is less? Both of them gave help to the other, step by step, and they both gained the highest joy." Then he goes on a few more verses, but not part of the *aṣṭakam* itself, but: "The temple's creation was in the Vikram *samvat* year named *muni* (7), *veda* (4), *candra* (1), and *candra* (1)—i.e., VS 1647 or 1590 AD. Govinda, be pleased by these verses of praises for his temple. This soul, Jīva Gosvāmī, must honor the two named Śrī Rūpa, the performers of service to the master of Śrī Vṛndāvana that was discontinued because of the age of Kali." The end of *Śrī Govinda-mandira-aṣṭakam*, eight verses praising Govinda's temple, spoken by Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. In the year 1727, on the 12th day of the bright fortnight of Bhādra, Vaiṣṇava-dās having written it down by the scribe in Kamyavan. Well, this of course is... it's not 1727, our calculation, but in their calculation the timings are different. So the end of *Śrī Govinda-mandira-aṣṭakam*, eight verses praising Govinda's temple, spoken by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in this year on the 12th day of the bright fortnight of Bhādra. Vaiṣṇava-dās has written it down in Kamyavan. Kṛṣṇa, I wanted to mention that this was actually discovered by one of Vṛndāvana's important Gosvāmīs, Śrīvatsa Gosvāmī, a well-known scholar here in Vṛndāvana. He went to Kamyavan some years ago; he was researching this matter of the construction of this beautiful temple of Govindajī, and while there, he found this particular document written by Vaiṣṇava-dās in one of the old libraries in Kamyavan. Kṛṣṇa.

So, wow, that's nectar. *Bhūmi Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma kī, Śrī Govinda-deva kī*. So we will return in a couple of days and we'll continue with the glories of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī's service to Govinda-deva. As I mentioned, there's some difficult discussions about how the temple was partially destroyed but how Govinda was rescued in time and his wonderful journey protected by the devotees in so many different ways, the service that he gave from Vṛndāvana down to where he resides today in Rajasthan, in Jaipur, the City of Victory, which was really constructed just for Śrī Govindajī. A lot of nectar, the history of all these wonderful devotees who served the Lord in so many various ways. So thank you, Prabhus. I'll be back in a couple of days.""