"*00411*.*
"### The Glories of Kārttika

Welcome, everyone, to our continuing lectures on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana, which is in Uttar Pradesh. I would like to begin by formally offering obeisances to my guru-mahārāja. Welcome, everyone. Today is the first day of the auspicious month of Kārttika, also known famously here in India as the month of Dāmodara. I thought it would be appropriate to begin this month by giving a talk on the importance of Kārttika, as well as the central pastime (līlā) of this month, which is our dear Lord Kṛṣṇa being bound.

First of all, the month of Kārttika is especially favorable for spiritual practices. Just as the hour before sunrise is considered the most auspicious time of the day for spiritual practices, so in the yearly cycle of twelve months, the month of Kārttika is the most favorable month for spiritual practices. The scriptures say: just as Śrī Vṛndāvana is the topmost of all holy places, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the topmost amongst all scriptures, Kṛṣṇa is the topmost of all personalities, Śrīmatī Tulasī-devī is the topmost amongst plants, Satya-yuga is the topmost amongst the four ages, and Mother Ganges is the topmost amongst rivers, so the month of Kārttika is the topmost of all months of the year.

Scriptures say that just as the result of giving 10,000 cows in charity can be obtained by simply offering one tulasī leaf to the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, so the result of taking a bath in all the holy places in creation can be achieved by taking a bath just one morning during the month of Kārttika. The Lord may offer liberation or even material happiness to a devotee, but one who has rendered devotional service in Vṛndāvana, particularly in the month of Kārttika, such a devotee ends up hankering only for pure devotional service. Observing Kārttika, devotees can purify themselves of all sin; we can mature in devotion and we can qualify ourselves for going back to the spiritual world, back to Godhead. Such achievements are confirmed by the story of the Śūdra lady named Kālīpriyā, who lived in Tretā-yuga. This story is found in the Padma Purāṇa, Bhūmi-khaṇḍa, Chapter 24. This lady, Kālīpriyā, was dissatisfied with her husband; she was hankering for a lover, for a paramour, and she really did not like her pious husband.

She spoke very harshly to him, she would feed him all kinds of unclean foods, she neglected her household duties, and she tortured him by acting inappropriately in the presence of other men. Her desires were finally fulfilled when she met a man, a lover with whom she planned to elope. On that fateful night, while her lover waited for her in the jungle, Kālīpriyā slit her husband's throat. Meanwhile, her lover was attacked by a tiger in the jungle and he was also killed. When she came across her dead lover, she was shocked. Wanting to atone for her sins, she went to a holy city where she saw Vaiṣṇavīs—lady devotees of the Lord—worshipping Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with fruits, flowers, and incense, and singing songs, reciting prayers, and blowing conches. She asked, "What are you all doing?" They answered, "This is the beginning of Kārttika, and we are worshipping Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to remove all sin and elevate us to Their abode."

At the end of the month, on the full moon day, she became free from all sinful reactions, and she actually gave up her body on the banks of the Narmadā River. At that moment, the messengers of Yamarāja, the lord of death, arrived. But just as they were about to drag her soul away, Lord Viṣṇu's messengers also appeared. They placed Kālīpriyā on their chariot and took her to the Lord's abode to serve the divine couple eternally. Such is the power of observing the worship of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It is also said that conversely, the sin of neglecting to observe such vows during Kārttika nullifies a brāhmaṇa's brāhmaṇical status.

Our Vedic calendar has a worshipable deity for every month. For the first month of the year, the worshipable deity is Keśava, so that month becomes the month of Keśava. The next month, the worshipable deity is Nārāyaṇa, so that month becomes Nārāyaṇa-māsa. Like that, we are now entering the final month of the year, and the worshipable deity of this month is Dāmodara, so this month becomes the month of Dāmodara.

That is one reason for the name of this month. The second reason is the famous pastime of Mother Yaśodā tying Kṛṣṇa to a grinding mortar with a rope, which took place in this month. Dāma means rope, and udāra means belly in Sanskrit. So, one who has a rope on his belly is called Dāmodara, and that is our Kṛṣṇa.

The pastime of Kṛṣṇa being bound to the grinding mortar in Vṛndāvana took place when Kṛṣṇa was a small child. Ācāryas have described three phases of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana: His kaumāra pastimes when He was a baby, pauganda pastimes when He was a young boy, and kaiśora when He was a teenager. He remains always 16 or 17. Being the Godhead, He is the original person, He is eternal, but by His mystic powers, He never ages beyond youth. We know that Kṛṣṇa was born, or appeared, in Mathurā, but that very night His father Vasudeva crossed the river Yamunā and took Him to Gokula. While in Gokula as a baby, Kṛṣṇa demonstrated His full-fledged Godhood.

Famously, He killed many demons like Aghaśura, but one day, Kṛṣṇa broke open the storehouse, the treasure chest of transcendental love, by performing one of His most famous pastimes: being tied with the rope of Mother Yaśodā's love. It is the crest jewel of the pastimes of vātsalya-rasa—the pastimes of parenthood. Kṛṣṇa relates to His devotees as a child. That is the crest jewel of bhāva. So, let us discuss it; it is the right time to discuss it, the first day of Kārttika.

On the day of Dīpāvali in the month of Kārttika, Dāmodara, Mother Yaśodā was engaging all of her maidservants in various activities. It is described that although she had thousands of assistants, that day she did not give the chore of churning butter to any of her maidservants. This is unusual because Mother Yaśodā is technically a queen; one of her names is Yaśodā, which means she is the principal lady in the house of Nanda Mahārāja. She gives fame; to whom does she give fame? To Kṛṣṇa. The main reason why she decided to churn butter herself was that she was worried that Kṛṣṇa, being the son of a rich man like Nanda Mahārāja who possessed 900,000 cows, was always sneaking into other people's houses to steal milk products like butter, curd, milk, and buttermilk. The Gopīs would say, "He spilt the milk and pinched my boys and ran away," and whenever He would be caught by these Gopīs, He would say, "Māyā, I love butter very much. I don't like dry fruits and cooked food stuffs as much as I like mākhan." She wanted to do it that day, hoping that the tasty butter churned by her would satisfy Kṛṣṇa, and He would become a real gentleman and not go around stealing butter in other Gopīs' houses.

Thinking in this way, she went to the gośālā early in the morning to milk the cows. In that gośālā, there was one cow named Padmagandhā. She was very special because she was fed with the milk of all the other cows. There were eight such cows who were denoted especially for Kṛṣṇa. These eight cows would eat only very fragrant grasses found in special meadows. As a result of these fragrant grasses, the scent that emanated from their bodies resembled the fragrance of night-blooming lotuses. Padma means lotus and gandhā means fragrant, so these were fragrant lotus-scented cows. She collected the lotus-fragrant milk to boil it, and after boiling the milk, she would make curd out of it, and from the curd, she would make butter.

After making the curd on the day of Dīpāvali, she was churning it herself, and the great saint Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that while churning the curd, she sang the glories of the childhood līlās of Kṛṣṇa. Śāstra says that singing is very popular in the spiritual world; they say if a person wants to speak something up there, he or she rather sings a song. Our spiritual master has said that if you want to remember a very important topic, you can make it into a song, and that way you can always remember it. The best topic is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, so you can sing songs. She was singing, "Oh Kṛṣṇa, oh tilaka decoration in the family of Gokula's king, You bring such great happiness to the pious people of Vraja by delighting their eyes with the soothing vision of Your divine form." Kṛṣṇa walked in a wobbly way towards Mother Yaśodā, and as soon as Mother saw Kṛṣṇa, she told Him, "Just wait for a while until the butter is finished." But Kṛṣṇa is not satisfied in Vṛndāvana until He drinks the breast milk of His mother, Yaśodā.

She was relishing the milk—it was boiling over on the stove. So, to save the milk, very quickly she put the Lord down on the ground. Now the great Vaiṣṇava ācārya Hari Sūri says that while Mother Yaśodā was feeding Kṛṣṇa, the Padmagandhā milk on the stove was boiling over for a reason. In the spiritual world, all things are fully conscious—everyone and everything is Kṛṣṇa conscious, fully in love with God. There is no impersonalism in the spiritual world. So, the milk started thinking, "If Kṛṣṇa drinks the breast milk of Mother Yaśodā, then He won't want to drink me afterwards. He will be full. I get Kṛṣṇa’s leftover, and my existence will become meaningless. I am undertaking so many austerities by boiling myself in the heat and the fire—my body is tapas—so that Kṛṣṇa can enjoy me. But that may all be in vain now because He may not be hungry anymore."

Of course, in the spiritual world, there is no birth or death; everything is eternal. So, the milk wanted to witness being spilt into the fire, so it attracted the attention of Mother. Of course, she did that, ultimately concerned about Him because the milk would be later turned into butter for Him. He started biting His lips very angrily; He was upset with His mother. One ācārya writes, "I want to drink my mother's breast milk, and now she's abandoned Me." Kṛṣṇa took a small stone and hit a nearby clay pot. He broke the pot to pieces—well, others say He just made a small hole—then He started crying, pretending, as we say in English, "crocodile tears." But they weren't really, He just basically wanted the attention of His mother. In this way, He was showing a false feeling of being crestfallen by imitating fake tears. They say this is called duplicity, or illusion. But now that He'd broken the pot, He started thinking, "Oh, I'm going to get punished."

So, He went outside where there were other pots of butter that belonged to the monkeys. In a previous life, these monkeys were in Lord Rāmacandra's army because He had an army of monkeys and bears. These monkeys fought on behalf of Rāma to kill Rāvaṇa and all the rākṣasas. Being indebted to these monkeys, Kṛṣṇa was paying off His debt. In the meantime, Mother Yaśodā came back to find Kṛṣṇa, but He had left. All she saw was a broken pot. Seeing His small footprints on the floor, she started laughing, and carrying a little bamboo stick, she followed the footprints outside. At that time, Kṛṣṇa was sitting with the monkeys, and He was looking here and there for fear of being caught. He ran, He jumped up, and ran, but Mother Yaśodā tried to chase Him, but she has a bit of a big build and she couldn't run so fast. What great yogīs and mystics cannot do in millions and millions of years to reach or attain the Supreme Lord, Mother Yaśodā did in a few moments.

Another shining example of the unconquerable Lord being conquered by the power of His devotee's love. As she grabbed Kṛṣṇa, she said, "Oh, you mischievous boy! I am going to bind you in such a way you won't be into any more mischief, nor can you go out with your friends and play." Some ācāryas say it was the ribbon from her hair; it was sufficient to tie Kṛṣṇa to the grinding mortar, but even then, when she tied all those ropes together, it was still two inches short. She couldn't tie Kṛṣṇa up to the mortar. And we hear from our teachers that the two inches of rope that she couldn't get for a while represent two things: eventually, she was successful because of her efforts and because of Kṛṣṇa's mercy. This, of course, is a general instruction in Kṛṣṇa consciousness—that to be successful in any endeavor requires our effort and Kṛṣṇa's mercy.

But in this particular case, the ācāryas give us a deeper insight: as Yaśodā was trying to unsuccessfully bind the Lord, Kṛṣṇa thought to Himself, "Actually, My mother is binding Me for My own welfare." His compassion eventually gave way to mercy. That mercy is one of the many energies of the Lord; it is actually described as the predominant energy. Kṛṣṇa was struggling to tie her son up. The Lord's energies like omnipotence and omniscience were all screaming, "We will not allow the Supreme Brahman to be bound!" But then from the heart of the Lord emerged, you could say, the queen of mercy, the energy called Kṛpā-mahārānī, or Kṛṣṇa-mahārānī. All these other energies who were complaining, they melted away just like butter, and Kṛṣṇa allowed Himself to be bound. From the heart of the Lord came compassion and then mercy, and He was bound by the endeavor and love of Yaśodā combined with His mercy, which is, it is said, reserved only for devotees.

That mercy continued to flow because while being bound to the mortar, He delivered two personalities, two fallen persons who were named Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva. They had taken birth as two giant Arjuna trees in the courtyard of Nanda Mahārāja, where Kṛṣṇa lived. The history of these two persons is very interesting. These two trees were previously demigods. Actually, all the capitals of all the demigods are very opulent; it is not right to hear about the misdeeds of a person, or maybe it is, listening to the glories of the Supreme Lord. Anyway, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva became very degraded. They used to spend a lot of wealth—not just in rupees or rubles or dollars, but in gold coins, in gold bars—that's how they'd spend money. However, they just used it on wine, women, and song, and this made them a little arrogant and proud.

Sometimes, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva used to come to Mount Kailāśa, to the abode of Śiva, to hang out with him. It is a very sacred place, if only because the Mandākinī River, which is a tributary of Mother Gaṅgā, flows there. One time, they had consumed some Varuṇī wine, which is a celestial intoxicating beverage—it is not actually available on Mount Kailāśa; these boys took it from Alakāpurī. They got very drunk, and they were singing and dancing with young girls. After a while, all these boys and girls were swimming and playing in the Ganges River, naked. Yes, when you bathe in a sacred river, you are not supposed to jump around and swim and play; you are supposed to be serious. People generally go to the Ganges to be purified of the effects of sinful life, but here is an example of how foolish persons enter the Ganges to become involved in sinful life. It is not that everyone becomes purified by entering the Ganges; everything spiritual or material depends upon one's consciousness.

The naked young girls of the demigods were very much ashamed and afraid of being cursed; they covered their bodies with their garments. But the two sons of Kubera did not do so. Instead, not caring about Nārada, they remained naked. They were afraid of being cursed upon seeing Nārada Muni, and they quickly put on their garments because they knew that in the past, Śiva cursed Ahalyā, one of their sisters, to become a stone. So they undertook all measures not to offend Nārada. Seeing the two sons of the demigods naked and intoxicated by opulence and false prestige, Devarṣi Nārada, in order to show them special mercy, desired to give them a special curse. And hearing this curse, the sons of Kubera immediately sobered up. He said that after 100 celestial years, they would be liberated by the Lord Himself. They then appeared as these two big Arjuna trees growing near the palace of Nanda Mahārāja.

An interesting note is that the Bhāgavatam says that during this whole episode of their long lifespans as trees, they retained full remembrance of their identities as devatās, even waiting for the time when Kṛṣṇa would come and deliver them. After binding Kṛṣṇa to the mortar, she left, and Kṛṣṇa became restless. He crawled to the center of the courtyard, dragging the mortar behind Him. Being present everywhere and omniscient, Kṛṣṇa was aware of the curse of Nārada Muni. Followed by a small group of children who said, "Kṛṣṇa must want some shade from the scorching sun," or "Kṛṣṇa," as He crawled towards the trees, Kṛṣṇa thought, "Because Nārada Muni is My dear devotee, I will fulfill his words by giving these two demigods whatever that great soul promised them." Between the two trees, the mortar dragging behind Him got stuck, and as He pulled on the rope, He effortlessly uprooted the trees, and they came down with a crash. This crash caused the residents of Gokula to lose consciousness for an entire muhūrta.

During that brief interval, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva offered prayers. Kṛṣṇa's mind was still absorbed in the loving disagreement He had had with Mother Yaśodā. "These two devotees are praising Me for freeing them, but My mother doesn't praise Me; she scolds Me and then ties Me up. The words of chastisement I receive from these Vrajavāsīs are more appealing to Me than the prayers of these two demigods." So, their seeing Him and receiving love from Him were both the results of Nārada Muni's grace. When one is face-to-face with the sun, there is no longer darkness for one's eyes; similarly, when one is face-to-face with a sādhu, a devotee who is fully determined and surrendered to the Supreme Lord, one will no longer be subject to material bondage. The privilege of directly seeing great souls like Nārada Muni will only liberate us from material bondage when we no longer act offensively towards such souls or the Lord's holy name.

The residents, who had heard the loud crashing of the trees, arrived on the scene. "Who has tied you up like this?" And the cowherd boys said, "Well, you know, Kṛṣṇa pulled this mortar between the trees, and when it got stuck, He kept pulling, and these giant trees fell down. Then two effulgent beings came out of the trees, and they talked to Kṛṣṇa, and then they disappeared." They broke out in what is called amused laughter, like, "Really boys, this all happened?" So finally, Nanda Mahārāja and Kṛṣṇa went back home, accompanied by the sound of drums, kartālas, and singing. Yaśodā was home, but it is described she was ashamed for having bound Kṛṣṇa and devastated for having put His life in danger. Mother Yaśodā, she wouldn't leave, and she wouldn't talk to anybody; she just cried. So at one point, Nanda Mahārāja said to Kṛṣṇa, "My son, are you going to go see your mother?" Kṛṣṇa said, "To your child, then whose milk will you drink when you become hungry?"

He said, "Son, if you agree, I will go to your mother right now and beat her." For hearing this, Kṛṣṇa once grabbed His father's fist with His soft hands as tears rolled down His cheeks. "Yes, where is my mother? I want to see her now! Mother, mother, where are you?" He went to Yaśodā's room where He ran to His mother. She was lying on the bed and crying. In happiness, He jumped in bed with her and hugged her and kissed her. Oh, this is the perfection of love—not some temporary love like in this world, but it is eternal; it just goes on and on. Kṛṣṇa in her arms, and all the pain went away from her heart, and her happy crying could be heard throughout the palace. The sound of which made her husband and everyone else present in the palace cry in bliss. By Kṛṣṇa's magical touch, Mother Yaśodā regained her natural effulgence and beauty. She reassured her friends she was all right. This is the essence of Dīpāvali—we should remember these pastimes.

He concludes this heart-touching pastime today: "Neither Lord Brahmā nor Lord Śiva, nor even the goddess of fortune who is always the better half of the Lord, can attain from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the deliverer from this material world, such mercy as received by Mother Yaśodā." So, if we want to be like these fortunate souls of Vṛndāvana and play with Kṛṣṇa, and dance with Kṛṣṇa, and eat with Kṛṣṇa, we have to elevate ourselves gradually to that transcendental platform. By doing so, we will not take birth again in this material world. So, during this month of Kārttika, let's take the time—we're all busy, there's the COVID we're trying to avoid, but let's find time for our most important duty in life, and that is to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, or to achieve prema, love for the Supreme. We have that opportunity as human beings; no other species of life has that opportunity.

It writes: "One who daily sings the glories of Yaśodā's son Kṛṣṇa, which are as cooling as sandalwood and camphor, is not troubled by the days of Kali-yuga. For him, at every step, there is a torrential flood of the sweetest nectar." So, we thank you very much for listening to our talk today from the ancient scriptures and our previous ācāryas and saints. We give lectures twice a week on these spiritual subject matters. Actually, during this lockdown, the last nine months, we have given 100 lectures. But I was asked by many good people in this country if I could give lectures that would be translated into Hindi so the local people could understand. So, I will continue to do so. If I see there's an interest amongst the Hindi-speaking people, I'll continue to also translate my lectures into Hindi each week. I can see by how many views we get on this YouTube: we get about a thousand views from the English-speaking audience, we get a thousand views each class from the Russian-speaking audience.

But this is your culture, this is your Hindu culture, this is your Vedic culture, so I would hope that we get more than a thousand, and if we do, we'll continue translating these weekly lectures into Hindi. Tell your friends; this is a test. Thank you very much from Śrī Vṛndāvana in Bhārat, here in India. Thank you so much, I hope to be speaking to you again.

Thank you.""