Śrīla Prabhupāda once told a story in London.

He said there was a potter, and this potter was very attached to his pottery. So, he broke by the blood linear scale studio, got a sneaky cat, or a pollution-free vessel. Claimed gutter scum because he came from a very poor background.

He had practically nothing, but he was a self-made man. And he got a little donation, and then from that, he expanded his business, and expanded, and expanded. So, through the years, he created these beautiful, beautiful pots. And he was just saving them to sell one day.

He could get like billions of rupees for them. He was so proud of them, he'd worked so hard. "One day I will sell my pots and I will be kiribati," we say in Hindi. Kiribati means more wealthy than Indra, the king of heaven.

He concession, bullish, impaired, lay catotti, model, kaki, the dingey, at our stop, Nigel's for business. Yan SDLC coaching, receiver, cough, cough, young Mustafa, protectable, sitting here. If cancer conservators, pocket eights, that crore party person, I should boil a bucket.

Mmm, Indra, sagna, base, kiribati. What more wealthy, the owner, the lord of, you know, millions and millions. So he was thinking, I had so many plans. You know, he didn't sell me yet. He just made them and lined them up.

And pretty soon, we're going to have an auction here. We're gonna sell them. Phenomenon court Atia, be more wealthy. Devendra, oh, gee, Mr. stotch, crore part, multi-millionaire. Yan mega toe, a cigar scoff, even as Misaka, prodded, non-mixed, ouster. Still 800 on e, shanira's prata, duty, on Stinnett, vastness, low no pocket, enjoy a calm.

So he had his plans. When you open this way, blood officer, one time, I have my plan, you have your plan, and Kṛṣṇa has His plan. His finest always teaches about the illusory nature of this world. Should give up and go home back to Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Chopra pada led to, chemo camera store, you see, Afanasieff, a planet. Was very honest way, our Kṛṣṇa's boy, a plan. Krishna CF, nostril to revise, material.

So this part of a private, is the boy Babu. He was counting his money even before he made yet. Organic but suitable, butterfish, appraised the chamber. Stood before the auction, one day. He laid down to take a nap, next to all of his pots.

He said, "Okay, the auction's on." On predock at noon, at the fruits Adams. Is very mean that only wears, candy. Fell into a deep sleep. On watching Gruber, causes know. He worked so hard for many years to create these pots.

He was tired. Although Ginobili, a producer, stubborn, society, Tchaikovsky, is the idea. If I don't wanna stop, as he was sleeping, he had this dream. The in the dream, someone came to steal his pots. He cocoons, polymerase, Nilsa, soul stock, totals alias, appetizers, for about the Walker, ski.

So as this person was coming to steal the part in his dream, he started to fight that person off. And he was kicking that person with his legs. Get awake and in in his, you know, as he was laying there in his sleep, he was kicking and he kicked all the pots.

And Brooklyn and he woke up. Oh my God, oh my pots. Lamenting e, mo pristine, Susan, stoker, quota, julik, zealous, remove dome. He borrowed Eva, kersky, unnatural, steam, strats, Nogami, were peanuts, bragging, achieve oh no. On personal face, videos, Donna, sound alone, tonight, Maggie, mirrors, be worth of sneaker, ski, a negative cash, coca, Stinson, Rudolph, poco de Chirico.

So all his plans turned to dust. This is the moral of the story. The morality stories of the Jets of toast of co-planner, last year. Whoever I share it's fully so brass. Different ways you can learn something. You can learn it through experiencing yourself, or you can learn about it by hearing from someone who has a proper understanding.

Kenya, stammers, no Perez, level, mystic, Artes, tenemos la cuesta, at Chili's, Slovenia, is authority of the constitution of amours, nah nah stop. Salam, OPG, pablovich. So we can save ourselves a lot of trouble in this world by hearing this and taking it to heart.

And not chasing the illusory path, the material life. Because there's only two paths in this world, privity mark and near fifty mark. Brevity mark means the path of so-called enjoyment, and liberty mark means the path of renunciation, which culminates in devotional service to the Lord.

No Kenya, 2nd emotion, logo, brimming in their genious, Lee, knee, buti'm, but that's dismissed, in vinyasa, so much less, than email, at the media. He put out substantial, even so he still, similar swap, with you, but a mere appropriate mark, would choose not, massaged, a knee, injury, to mark, put at Virginia, Kotori, provided, gravity, of realistic, husband.