Hare Krishna, very dear devotees.

Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

At present time, during the auspicious month of Kartik, nama om. The other day, I was thinking about what to lecture on next when an idea came to me while doing parikramā of Rādhākuṇḍa. We had just begun the circumambulation of the sacred waters when I noticed a very beautiful swing on the edge of the kuṇḍa that I must have passed by many times during the years, but on this particular occasion, it struck my curiosity.

So I decided to inquire about it further, and when I did, I decided that I would share what I learned in today’s lecture. From various maps that I consulted, I found out that the swing is situated on the western shore of Rādhākuṇḍa, and the exact place is called Julena Ghaṭṭa.

Julena Ghaṭṭa, because there was once a banyan tree there, between Tuṅgavidyā and Sudevī’s kuñjas or groves, from which Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would enjoy swing pastimes. And at present, it’s, I guess you could say, a humble stone frame of a swing.

And I found out the locals call it Julena Sthali, that place Julena Sthali, the banyan tree and the swing. So that swing stands there, really, to commemorate the spot where the Divine Couple would enjoy their pastimes of swinging. And invisible to material eyes, still, to this very day, this spiritual lila means it’s unmanifest to those with material vision.

And I found out that the forest there, the forested area, is called Varṣā Harṣa. Varṣā Harṣa means the happiness of the rainy season. That’s the name of the forest, the happiness of the rainy season, because the ācāryas say that, “Whenever Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa want to swing, Vṛndāvana provides clear skies and summer warmth, even in the rainy season.” Whenever Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa want to swing, Vṛndāvana provides clear skies and summer warmth, even in the rainy season.

So, therefore, that forest bears the name, the happiness of the rainy season. And with their transcendental vision, those ācāryas say, and again I quote them: “Attached by two red ropes inset with pearls, a swing of exceptional shape, size, and qualities hangs from a horizontal branch of that enormous banyan tree at Julena Sthali.” Unquote.

Now, more research revealed that that swing, in particular, it has 18 seats. Two for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and their seats are surrounded, it’s described like the whirl of a lotus flower, the whirl of a lotus flower. Their seats are surrounded by 16 other seats, eight for the principal aṣṭa-sakhīs and eight for some special mañjarīs.

And I read that when Kṛṣṇa enthusiastically mounts the swing, Śrī Rādhārāṇī has to be lifted up by Vrinda Devī and the others. She’s very shy. Kṛṣṇa jumps on the swing, but Rādhārāṇī is very shy. So Vrinda Devī has to pick her up with some of the other gopīs and place her next to Kṛṣṇa.

So then, some gopīs, they push the Divine Couple, while others stand around and either sing or tell jokes for the pleasure of the Divine Couple while they’re swinging. Now, if Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa want to swing alone without the sakhīs and the mañjarīs, then the swing retracts those outer seats.

It expands into the seats, it retracts just to have the two seats for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So those sakhīs and mañjarīs, they come down, and then it’s written they push this swing. There are many of them, they push Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa very firmly, you know, you’ve pushed swings before, causing Rādhārāṇī to tremble slightly out of fear and hold on tightly to Kṛṣṇa.

And as the pace slows down, Rādhārāṇī becomes calm again. And as they continue with the swing pastime, it’s described, the Divine Couple’s hair sashes and clothes loosen in the breeze. And the ācāryas say that, “Their sparkling earrings and garlands, as if in a contrary mood, sway in opposite directions.

They both have sparkling earrings and garlands, but as if in a contrary mood, these earrings and garlands, they sway in the opposite directions. Rādhārāṇī is one way, and Kṛṣṇa’s the other way, contrary.” And if the temple it’s written that if the tempo of the swinging picks up again, Śrī Rādhā cries out again for help from her eight girlfriends, the aṣṭa-sakhīs, and they quickly jump onto the swing, and it instantly falls out, in terms of the world of seats, eight seats for the aṣṭa-sakhīs, and they comfort Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

An amazing swing!

It’s described that while swinging with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, those aṣṭa-sakhīs render services to the Divine Couple, because they’re seated very close, like in a circle around them. Specifically, I found out that Lalitā and Viśākhā serve betel nut to the Divine Couple.

Campaka-latā and Citrā fan the Divine Couple with cāmara fans and peacock fans. Tuṅgavidyā and Indulekhā serve nectar drinks, and Raṅgā Devī and Sudevī apply fragrant ointments on the Divine Couple. Now, in addition to this amazing expanding and contracting transcendental swing, according to the Divine Couple’s needs, the swing manifests another amazing quality, and that is that when those eight sakhīs are situated around Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s swing, each sakhī simultaneously, at certain points, sees Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa facing only her.

She’s thinking, “Oh, they’re only looking at me.” And another wonder occurs, when Kṛṣṇa, visible Kṛṣṇa, is visible to all. Actually, it’s said, appears beside each sakhī, including Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and simultaneously embraces all of them. Everyone can see Kṛṣṇa expands and he appears beside each sakhī and he embraces them, including Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

Then Kṛṣṇa resumes a single form. That’s described. And at Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s instigation, Lalitā and the other sakhīs, in turn, sit to Kṛṣṇa’s right. Otherwise, he becomes just himself again. And when Rādhārāṇī desires, at her instigation, she calls the different sakhīs one by one to sit next to Kṛṣṇa.

They sit on Kṛṣṇa’s right, actually. So it’s described he rests one arm on that particular sakhī’s shoulder, and his left arm is always on Rādhārāṇī’s shoulder on his left. So then it’s described that as Kṛṣṇa enjoys in this way, you know, with Rādhā and one of the sakhīs, at one point Rādhārāṇī very cleverly positions Lalitā and Viśākhā on either side of Kṛṣṇa, and she jumps off the swing, and she takes pleasure pushing Kṛṣṇa with Lalitā and Viśākhā on either side.

So the ācāryas say that in this way, all the sakhīs have the chance to sit in pairs beside Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā is there, she calls a sakhī here, another sakhī. But when she jumps down and is pushing the swing, then the sakhīs come and sit in pairs like this, and she’s swinging, and they all get the chance to be with Kṛṣṇa.

And all the other sakhīs and all the younger girls, they are called mañjarīs. While these pastimes are taking place, the other gopīs, they are singing songs that the ācāryas say, “Flow spontaneously from the love-filled hearts. There’s no jealousy, there’s no envy.

Oh, she’s so fortunate, she’s so beautiful, she’s such a wonderful devotee, she’s sitting next to Kṛṣṇa.” But everyone gets their turn. And after this, everyone descends from the swing, even Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī. So a short while later, after Kṛṣṇa very enthusiastically jumps back on the swing, I was reading, Lalitā whispers in Rādhā’s ear, and smiling, Rādhā ascends the swing with 16 gopīs again, eight sakhīs and eight younger mañjarīs.

And then she invites all the younger girls, the younger gopīs, the mañjarīs, all of them, she calls them all, that anyone who wants to ascend the swing to sit with her and Kṛṣṇa is welcome. And the ācāryas have described thousands upon thousands of these young gopīs, these mañjarīs, they get to come up and swing with the Divine Couple.

And then finally, after some time, actually, I’ve seen a painting like that. There’s the swing, and then there are these concentric circles going out, it kind of looks like ad infinitum, which it must be, because there are so many gopīs sitting around the banyan tree with the swing on it, singing in their seats on the swing with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

So finally, after some time, at Lalitā’s signal, all those thousands of gopīs jump off. And now, together, all of them push. You know, before, we heard about the aṣṭa-sakhīs pushing it. Now, all these thousands of gopīs, they’re pushing the Divine Couple so high and so fast that once again, to Kṛṣṇa’s great delight, Rādhā embraces her beloved in transcendental fear.

Now, during such swing pastimes, it’s written that Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants, again, the younger girls, the mañjarīs, they’re able to perform many services, like collecting fragrant flowers, spreading flower petals on the swing’s seats, and covering those flower petals with thin silk cloth.

Throwing flower petals as the Divine Couple swing, they get to sing songs, and they also get to offer āratī to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We have our Gaura āratī, and Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written one Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa āratī song as well. So then, some gopīs, they will swing, they will push the swing, while others stand on either side with betel nuts or betel leaves, sometimes it’s leaves or nuts in hand, so that when the swing slows down, because it’s slowing down, these mañjarīs are very expert in their service.

They can go and place the betel nut in the lotus mouths of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It’s going very fast and then it slows down, and then they come from they put the betel nuts in the mouths of the Divine Couple.

And I was also reading that sometimes during these pastimes, these maidservants, they’re able to climb aboard the swing, and where they serve fruits and other refreshments to the Divine Couple. And the Divine Couple never eat all that they’re offered on those golden plates, those silver plates.

They always leave something for the mañjarīs. So these are, of course, just a few of the swing pastimes that take place at Julena Ghaṭṭa on the banks of sacred Rādhākuṇḍa. And ācāryas have written that, “Such things are visible to worthy Vaiṣṇavas who have received the gift of pure love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, by Prabhupāda’s grace.” May we someday receive that gift to see these things with our own eyes, our spiritual eyes.

So you all, please excuse me if the lecture is a little short today. I’m also quite busy with daily Kartik curriculums. Now, I wasn’t actually planning it because of COVID, but COVID’s gone way down here, at least in Vṛndāvana, and so many wonderful devotees are showing up, not with tourist visas yet, it’s not allowed, but pretty soon.

But they’re coming in with all kinds, you know, devotees are coming in on business visas and student visas and this and that. So they’ve all, like a magnet, they’ve come to this playground of God, this playground of Kṛṣṇa. And devotees are asking me to take them out.

How can I refuse?

It’s a great pleasure, great service. So it’s taking a lot of time and energy from four o’clock in the morning to four o’clock in the afternoon. But I will continue with our lectures, a bit, a little shorter, maybe. So again, excuse me.

I would like to conclude today with words from the lotus mouth, the pen, you could say, of Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, who writes in his illustrious Raghu-vīra-vilāsa-stotra as follows: “By offering her Śrī Rādhā betel nuts, by massaging her feet, by bringing her water, by arranging for her meetings with Lord Kṛṣṇa, and by performing many other services, many gopī maidservants affectionately please Śrī Rādhā, the great queen of Vṛndāvana’s forests.

When the Divine Couple enjoy their pastimes, these maidservants are not at all shy to serve. These younger girls, even when the aṣṭa-sakhīs are present, I take shelter of these maidservants who have Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī as their leader.” Thank you.

We’ll be back in a few days with more nectarian pastimes that you can relish in this auspicious month of Kartik. See you soon.