Today, on this auspicious day of Janmashtami, the divine appearance of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, we find ourselves in Rāval, here in Vrindavan, with a small group of devotees doing kirtan. Rāval is actually where Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī made her appearance. Later on, she transferred with her family over to Vṛṣabhānu, just as Krishna He appeared in Gokul and later He transferred over to Nandagran with His family.

So, this is a very, very special place today here in Vrindavan. You could say this is probably the biggest day of the year for the Vrajavasis, so many Vrajavasis have come here to Rāval, and from here they go to Nandagran.

So, we're following in the footsteps of the Vrajavasis. In the Garga Samita, it's described that when it was time for Lord Krishna to make His appearance at the end of the four yugas, as the yuga-avatar, He approached His divine consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and requested her to come with Him to the earth planet to perform their pastimes, to attract the conditioned souls back home, back to Godhead.

She, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, agreed, but she made a condition: that she would only come if they were accompanied by three things: the forests of Vrindavan, Govardhan Hill, and the river Yamunā. So, Krishna agreed, and Rādhārāṇī agreed to come.

So, it's by the mercy, actually, of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī that Vrindavan dhām has manifested here in the material world. The spiritual world is called Goloka Vrindavan, and when that Goloka Vrindavan comes to the material plane, it's called Gokul Vrindavan. Actually, there's no difference.

The acharyas say there's no difference between Goloka and Gokul, and those whose eyes are purified by devotion, they can see the full glory of Vrindavan here manifests in the material world, here in Vrindavan. My Jaya Karmi, [inaudible]… Jaya Gorakhnath, Yamunā, Jaitra Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

So, we've come here as devotees. You know, as all Gaudīya Vaishnavas know, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the best devotee of Krishna.

She has the *mahābhāva*. We're all aspiring for *bhakti*, for devotion to the divine couple, but Rādhārāṇī, Madhavendra Puri, and Śrī Chaitanya Mahāprabhu are the three personalities mentioned in scripture who have that *mahābhāva*. And she made her appearance here in Rāval.

And just behind me, you can see a pond. Actually, it's nothing more than a pond, but previously this is where the river Yamunā flowed. And one day, her father, King Vṛṣabhānu, and Queen Kīrti-dāśī, near their dwelling here, King Vṛṣabhānu was walking and he found Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, a small baby, floating on a golden lotus.

This is how she made her appearance. Just like Krishna doesn't make...

He's not born into this world, we don't say He's born, He makes a divine appearance. So, in the same way, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s pastime was to make her appearance as a small child floating on a golden lotus down that Yamunā river.

So, he picked her up and he brought her here, and this was the beginning of her childhood pastimes. Actually, not much is said about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And our acharyas explained that’s because Śukadeva Goswami, to speak of the Bhāgavatam, his *iṣṭa-daiva*, his worship of personality, was Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

And if he would speak so much about her, then he would begin to cry and he wouldn't be able to finish the Bhāgavatam. So, Śukadeva Goswami's not speaking so much about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I don't know how much I can actually say here as an aspiring devotee.

But her pastimes began here, and again, she was transferred over to Vṛṣabhānu, and there she displayed the deepest sentiments of devotion for Lord Krishna.

So many pastimes would go on forever, describing the pastimes of Radha and Krishna.

But because she is the best devotee, she's in charge of devotional service. In the Spiritual<bos> Coalition movement, we have experienced that if someone is expert at something, we put that person in charge of that department. This is an example: the best cook becomes the head of the kitchen, the best manager becomes the temple president, the best sankirtan devotee looks after his devotees.

He heads up the sankirtan department. So, the best devotee of the Lord, she who has the topmost, the highest love for Krishna, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she's in charge of devotional service.

So, those who want to approach Krishna for that service, they first approach Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

And that can be seen very clearly when we pray for the divine couple's mercy. When we chant Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, we first approach Hara, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is in charge of bestowing devotional service to her beloved Krishna.

So, here in Vrindavan, it's unique. I would say sometimes that other places you go, holy places in India, are connected to Krishna, and they'll say, "Jaya Śrī Krishna" or "Hare Krishna." But even in Vrindavan, when you approach people, they pass by, they say, "Jaya Radha." Krishna, Krishna, Hare Hare.

Jaya Rādhārāṇī, the Queen of Vrindavan. Actually, her *gopī-bhartṛ-di-devaiḥ* gave her, Vrindavan, Vrinda forest to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So, Rādhārāṇī is actually the topmost personality here in Vrindavan dhām. So, everyone is begging for her mercy. They are coming to Rāval today, they are coming to Vṛṣabhānu, and they are begging for the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, that they can enter into the real, into the eternal Goloka Vrindavan in the spiritual world one day by her blessings and serve the divine couple.

So, somehow, by the causeless mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, we are here today.

We have no qualification, obviously, for being here. We were born in Malaysia, Dhaka, Western countries. But by the divine mercy of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, he has accepted us as his disciples and his followers.

We are being purified by the process, the Yuga Dharma, chanting Hare Krishna.

And by his invitation only, we find ourselves in such a sacred abode, where even the dust of this place, the *braja-raj*, is worshipable. It's actually described that one grain of dust of Vrindavan is more opulent than all the opulence in Vaikuntha itself.

It's a very opulent place. One grain of dust in Vrindavan dhām is worth more than all the opulence in Vaikuntha. Somehow, we're walking on that dust, we're seeing the Yamuna River, we're passing by Govardhan Hill, we're meeting the sadhus, we're going to our temple, as Prabhupāda established, the Krishna-Balaram Mandir, for his disciples and followers to come and nurture their *bhakti* to Krishna.

And for us, the most sacred place actually in Vrindavan is Śrīla Prabhupāda's Samadhi.

Somehow, we find ourselves here. We've just finished a two-month marathon of festivals in Poland. I think those who are following us on Facebook are well aware of those. So, we came here after the festival trip to pray to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī that we can continue our festivals for many, many years, and at the end of our lives, as a result, we will have some *prema* in *bhakti* in our hearts.

And if it is Prabhupāda's desire, we can continue preaching all over the world, all over the creation, but someday he may find us qualified to join his eternal pastimes in Goloka Vrindavan.

So, a special day, a special place, associated with all these Vrajavasis. It's kind of a festive mood, it's like a fair here. This is how the locals observe. But we've seen the sadhus under the trees next to the river there, they're there with their *japa*, their chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, praying in their own way.

So, devotees are approaching this sacred day in various ways. We just consider ourselves the lowest of the low, and as servants of all the Vrajavasis, even the birds, and the dogs, and the insects, we are praying for everyone's mercy so that we can also become a good servant of our Guru Maharaja and serve the people of this world by spreading Hare Krishna and get a taste of *prema* in this lifetime. Śrī Vrindāvan dhām ki, Jai! Śrī Rāval dhām ki, Jai!

Janmashtami, day of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ki, Jai!