"*00143*.*
"# The Transcendental Prince - Kartik Parikrama 2023

I was actually very much looking forward to giving this lecture. We did a lot of research. We spoke last year about Śyāma-mohinī, but I found a lot of new details which I hope that you will enjoy and relish. Of course, Śrīla Prabhupāda elaborates on Śyāma-mohinī in his, I believe, *Kṛṣṇa* book, but just like we find so much wonderful information about Kṛṣṇa, we can also find out so much wonderful information about his devotees. Kṛṣṇa—are you ready? Oh, thank you. 

So, today we find ourselves at Rāma-ghāṭ. It's a sacred place very intimately connected to the sage called Śyāma-mohinī. It was rediscovered some years ago, and a particular group renovated this place in a very nice manner. It's like a sacred archaeological site. When we're finished later, you can walk around; there's a lake down there. They say that the oldest archaeological evidences of Vedic culture were found in that lake, and that might very well be because this pastime of Śyāma-mohinī happened in Satya-yuga. So, I found the *praṇāma-mantra* for Śyāma-mohinī.

All the gurus and the sacred places have their *praṇāma-mantras*, which elaborate on their essential qualities or contributions to spiritual culture. So, here is the *praṇāma-mantra* for Śyāma-mohinī: "Oh, tiger amongst sages, oh, shelter-giver of all living entities, by your mercy please completely fulfill my desire to attain the shelter of Vṛndāvana." Couldn't get better than that. 

Now, Śyāma-mohinī, he actually lived in Satya-yuga, and his father's name was Kanva Muni, and he himself was the son of the sage Ghora. And Ghora was the grandson of Lord Brahmā. Now, this is another history lesson; we’re going way back in time. Now, let me explain that most of us are aware of Vṛtrāsura from the Eighth Canto. Without going into too much detail here, at one point this "demon" Vṛtrāsura was giving a lot of trouble to various sages throughout the universe. It was a problem, so as a result, Indra and other demigods approached a very powerful sage—his name was Dadhīci—to help. You know, we go to the sages for help; they can give us spiritual instruction, they can give some practical advice on how to solve the problems of life. 

So, Indra and the demigods, they approached Dadhīci, and they said, "This Vṛtrāsura is causing so many problems to all the *sādhus*. What do we do?" Actually, they made a request of him—a very unusual request—which they felt could solve the problem. Those of you who read a lot, read Prabhupāda’s books, you’ll know they asked him for his bones. What if somebody asked you for your bones? So why did they ask Dadhīci for his bones? Because *sādhus* are imbued with spiritual *tejas*, potency. Being so deeply involved in spiritual practices and spiritual life, their body is considered spiritual. Therefore, when the great sage dies, we don't burn the body; we place it in *samādhi* out of respect. 

So, why did they want his bones? They wanted to make a weapon from his bones to kill Vṛtrāsura. One symptom of saintly persons is they’re detached from this world; they’ve lost all interest in this world in pursuit of their spiritual goals, whether they be a *yoga-yogī*, a *jñāna-yogī*, or a *bhakti-yogī*. It’s something consistent with spiritual life that you give up something to get something better. And what’s the best? Kṛṣṇa. And Dadhīci, of course, being a sage, he was sympathetic to the welfare of other sages. It’s a type of brotherhood, a spiritual brotherhood. So Dadhīci agreed to sacrifice his bones, to sacrifice his life to save the universe, to save the best thing in the universe. *Sādhus* and *brāhmaṇas* are the best thing in the universe because they’re reminding everyone in the universe, "We shouldn't be here; we should be there in the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭhaloka." So he gave up his life to save the universe. 

So then, Indra and the demigods, they made a very powerful weapon from those bones: a thunderbolt. And to make a long story short—because we want to focus today—Indra took that weapon and he killed Vṛtrāsura with that thunderbolt. We could speak for hours about that pastime, but the thing is, I wanted to mention that after killing Vṛtrāsura, it’s described the weapon didn't calm down. Have you... we’ve all seen thunderbolts. Just imagine this thunderbolt, and it—you know, you don't ever see a thunderbolt just go... Thunderbolts have power from the beginning to the end. This thunderbolt, it’s described in *śāstra*, it didn't calm down, and without wanting to, it started destroying the entire creation. It’s just so powerful; this Dadhīci was a very powerful sage, and this was his bone. The thunderbolt kept destroying the universe, so now there’s really a big problem. The sages tried to solve a problem; now they’ve got a bigger problem. That’s material life. 

Ultimately, as a last resort, what do *sādhus* do? They approach Viṣṇu; they approach Kṛṣṇa. So, seeing this situation where the universe was being destroyed because of this very powerful thunderbolt, Nārada Muni and the demigods, they approached Lord Viṣṇu to ask him what to do. So Viṣṇu, he’s thinking, "You know, this is a problem; this universe is being destroyed by this thunderbolt. What are we going to do?" It’s very interesting, what Viṣṇu... how he solved the problem. He told Indra and the demigods to find a sage of equal caliber with Dadhīci who could personally absorb the potency of this thunderbolt weapon. Dadhīci had given the power through his bones. So now they’re trying to find someone who could absorb the power of that thunderbolt. In this way, sages, they solve problems, because—well, say, for example, at the moment of initiation, the guru absorbs the karma of the disciple. This is part of their duty. And how do they do it? By chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. 

So Nārada Muni is thinking, "Who’s going to do that? Who’s going to absorb the potency of this weapon, which has the power to destroy the universe? What sage is going to agree to do that? Who has the power to do that?" Then he thought—we mentioned him in the beginning, right?—Kanva Muni. He was a powerful sage, and he was living here in Vṛndāvana with his wife, who was pregnant. So one day, Nārada Muni and all the demigods, they came to Kanva Muni and they asked him, "You’re so powerful. Can you absorb the potency of this weapon? On the order of Viṣṇu, you’re the last person who can solve this; otherwise, everything’s going to be finished." So he’s in his, you know, meditation, doing his *yoga*—yes, it’s not a big thing for these sages. They’ve solved the problems of material existence by renouncing this world and being totally absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They don't have any problems anymore. "Oh, bring it on. Okay, Kṛṣṇa... chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa* is the solution to all problems." 

How is chanting *Hare Kṛṣṇa* the solution to all problems? That’s a pretty bold statement. "All problems solved." *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. How? Because when you perfect the chanting, through many, many years of focused chanting from the heart, you become totally Kṛṣṇa conscious, you go back to Godhead, and even in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, one of the 700 verses of *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa says, "Having once gone there, you never return." All problems solved! *Haribol*. So, Kanva Muni, he’s there in his yoga, you know, doing his *yogasana*. "All right, bring it on." And Nārada Muni and the demigods, they watched in wonder as he mystically absorbed the full potency of that thunderbolt weapon. No problem. What’s even more amazing is that he transferred the potency of that weapon to his unborn son in the womb of his wife. "You take it." And the son absorbed it in the womb of the mother—the potency of that weapon which could destroy the universe. 

You have someone... "What was it like when you were a little boy?" "Let me tell you." And when the boy was born, they named him Śyāma-mohinī. Śyāma-mohinī, the sages describe him as follows: "He was thus born invested with the full potency of the thunderbolt weapon, a weapon created from the bones of the mystic sage Dadhīci, a weapon which killed the demon Vṛtrāsura and had the potential to burn the universe to ashes." My dear devotees, that is Śyāma-mohinī. 

So this is happening in Vraja. Vraja has a very vast history, a very rich history in so many ways. So in time, this small child grew up in this forest and he learned all the secrets of the *Vedas*. It’s described, especially the *Ṛg Veda*, from his father, Kanva Muni. And what does one do when one has finished with one's studies? He takes up his spiritual practices. So, immediately after the completion of his studies, Śyāma-mohinī spent 1,000 years meditating under the water in the Yamunā River, performing intense *jala-yoga*. It’s described, *jala-yoga*. Now, during Śyāma-mohinī... can you imagine? We can only stay underwater 4 minutes and 23 seconds—that’s as much as a human being can stay underwater before he has to come up and gasp for air. He’s staying under there for 1,000 years! This is not mythology, a fairy tale for children; this is a fact. This is factual. 

Now, there’s a nice pastime where he was asked for help. It appears that *sādhu*, saintly persons, you know, they’re considering liberation from this world, but when they make some spiritual advancement, the common people come to them for help. They’re always being disturbed; they can't be quiet, they have to help human society. Now, during his meditation under the water for a thousand years, there was a severe drought, which means no water in the kingdom of Ayodhyā, which is, you know, where the pastimes of Rāma took place—Ayodhyā—which of course is very far from Vṛndāvana. So at that time, the king of Ayodhyā was named Mahārāja Mandhātā. He was also a special person; I was reading that he was the father of Ambarīṣa Mahārāja and King Mucukunda. In order to get rid of this drought—there’s no water, you can imagine, no water—Nārada Muni advised this King Mandhātā to hold a *yajña* performed by a great sage named Śyāma-mohinī. There’s no rain, there’s no water, so do a *yajña*. Who can do the *yajña*? Not... Chaitanya is performing an initiation ceremony today at his residence, and that’s where Chaitanya is with all his stuff, you know? Didn't he do a wonderful save the other day at our initiation ceremony? 

So Mahārāja Mandhātā traveled from Ayodhyā to Vṛndāvana, and he went underwater, and somehow or other, under the water, he requested Śyāma-mohinī to come out and perform a month-long *yajña*, which actually ended the drought. And then he said to Mahārāja Mandhātā, "Now can I go back in the water, please? I haven't finished my meditation in the Yamunā water." So he went back in the water. 

Now, around this time, actually quite far away, in Rāmanaka-dvīpa—which we know as Fiji—there was another problem that arose. You see, Fiji was actually one time the whole Vedic culture existed all around the world. So a problem came up in Fiji, which at that time was called Rāmanaka. The problem was—it's not really a problem, because well, eagles are allowed to eat snakes anyway—Lord Viṣṇu’s giant eagle, Garuḍa, whom he often rides on, was coming to that place, that island, and eating the snakes there. Lots of snakes in Fiji. Like you see the birds here, there’s a lot of those little white birds; they follow the cows around. Wherever there’s cows eating grass, you see those little white birds; they’re following around because when the cows pull up the grass, they also pull up the bugs and the worms. So the birds come, they follow behind the cow, and they eat the little worms and bugs that come up from the grass. So that’s okay, who’s going to complain? So gigantic eagles coming, eating all the snakes, and the leader of the snakes got really upset. "You’re eating so many of us!" What was his name? Kāliya. The Kāliya serpent. He was the leader of the snakes. 

So the snakes are doing what snakes do, whatever they do, all of a sudden, "Oh no, Garuḍa is coming! He’s going to eat us!" So the leader of the snakes, Kāliya—there were always these big fights between Garuḍa and Kāliya. This information, this *līlā*, is there for anyone who’d like to read *Garuḍa-purāṇa*. Actually, I was reading because all these things are like *līlās* or pastimes. In one of their fights, one of their fights produced two very beautiful living entities; at that time, two birds were created and born from Garuḍa’s wings, namely the beautiful peacock and the illustrious magpie. That’s how they made their appearance in this world. Isn't that interesting? Now you know how the peacock appeared and the magpie. And Garuḍa goes on... "Oh Lord of Māyā, the adoration, the worship of both these birds on the 10th day of the bright fortnight of Āśvina is considered to be auspicious and fulfills all desires of the performer." Oh, if you have a certain desire—maybe you want to, you know, we’ll just speak quite frankly here—you want to get good marks so you can go on to a good university to get good grades, so you could have a nice job to serve Kṛṣṇa, then on the 10th day of the bright fortnight of Āśvina—considered very auspicious—you worship the beautiful peacock and the illustrious magpie. Then you just go to do your exam with your eyes closed, you get... woo, you got top grades, you can go to the top university! 

So why can you be particularly victorious on that particular day to fulfill a desire to serve Kṛṣṇa? I’ll tell you, because the 10th day of the bright fortnight of Āśvina is known as Vijayā-daśamī, the day that Lord Rāma conquered Rāvaṇa. But to, of course, we all know how beautiful the peacock is, but I didn't know much about a magpie. So I went online and I, you know, found a beautiful photo of a magpie—they’re in Vṛndāvana—and I read a beautiful account about a magpie. The magpies have blue bodies with black throats and white chests. Their tails are long and blue with some white tips, and their heads are black with a slight amount of blue on their cheeks. 

So this kept going on, you know? Garuḍa had fly in for lunch, Kāliya would fight with them, and there was no, you know, no one won. It was just this constant battle with all the snakes being gobbled up. So the snakes were tired of, "My friend, my brother, my sister—they’re all eaten by Garuḍa." They decided, "This is enough," and they went to someone to ask for help. So who did they go to for help? There’s a saying, "Birds of a feather, huh?" Together. So these are snakes; they went to Śeṣa. Please help us. Yes, Śeṣa is very busy up on his heads; he holds up all the planets in the universe, and he’s at every moment reciting a new name of Kṛṣṇa for set eternity and for eternity, every second a new name for Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited attributes and characteristics and pastimes. He’s very busy. So in between giving a new name, he said, "Go to Śyāma-mohinī. He’ll help you." 

So Lord Śeṣa, and he describes Śyāma-mohinī as an all-merciful sage. And Śeṣa told the snakes that Śyāma-mohinī has many good qualities, one in particular that he would feed little small balls of dough like *capātī* dough to the fish in the Yamunā daily as part of his routine. So all the snakes went back to Rāmanaka-dvīpa (Fiji), they packed their bags, and they came, and they took shelter of Śyāma-mohinī. They told him how this gigantic eagle, the bird-carrier of Viṣṇu, was coming to their island, you know, beguilingly eating their kin and kind. And then they said, "He knows we’ve come here to Vṛndāvana, and we’re really afraid he’s going to come here and eat us now. Instead of eating us there on that island, he’s going to come here and eat us. What do we do?" 

Śyāma-mohinī, he pronounced a curse. You know, when the *brāhmaṇas* do a curse, they take their thread like this and they touch water and they pronounce a blessing or they pronounce a curse. He touched the Yamunā water; he said, "Garuḍa, if you ever come to Vṛndāvana to eat the snakes, you will be burnt into ashes." So that news spread, and Śyāma-mohinī became famous as Ahi-śarma. *Ahi* means "snake," *śarma* means "shelter." One time I was on a walk here in Vṛndāvana and I had to get across a field, kind of wet field, you know, they irrigate with water. I had to get home really quickly, so I started walking through this lush field of water. As I got halfway across, the farmer started screaming at me, "Sāmp! Sāmp!" I didn't speak any Hindi. I thought they were like, "How you doing, Swami?" I’m waving at them. "No, Sāmp! Sāmp!" Thank you, thank you. "Sāmp! Sāmp!" And I got to the other side. One came up, you know what *sāmp* is? I said, "No." Cobra, black mamba. So Ahi-śarma, he became famous as he who gives shelter to snakes. And the area where Śyāma-mohinī stayed, you know, under the Yamunā River there, it became known as Ahi-śarma, the place that shelters snakes. 

Now, as we know, there’s a slightly different version of this pastime that states that Śyāma-mohinī had once cursed Garuḍa for coming to Vṛndāvana to eat fish in the Yamunā River. So in that version, Śyāma-mohinī curses Garuḍa as follows: "Oh king of birds, if from this day you eat fish here, you will die at once. That is my curse." This is a highly animated class. 

So now we’re going to go a little deeper. Behind all these *līlās*, there’s various instructions and advice given to us. By doing one thing, Kṛṣṇa or his associates can accomplish many things. In one sense, it’s very nice that this personality, Śyāma-mohinī, was giving protection to the snakes or the fish, whichever version you take, but also, there’s a warning given. In either version, the *ācāryas* say that Śyāma-mohinī was actually guilty of *nāma-aparādha*. What is *aparādha*? It’s the most grievous offense in chanting the holy names of the Lord: to offend a devotee who has dedicated his life to serving Kṛṣṇa. And the version of our *ācāryas*, who see with very clear vision, they also comment that his sympathy for the snakes or for the fish he was trying to protect was "misplaced compassion." Spiritual life is like a razor’s edge. You know, when you shave, you can get—but just a little bit you move, then you get a bloody cheek. So spiritual life is like walking the razor’s edge; you have to be very careful, listen very carefully to guru, *śāstra*, and *sādhu*. 

His sympathy for the snakes and the fishes was misplaced compassion. Why? It’s okay to be kind, it’s okay to be compassionate, but not at the expense of offending a great devotee of the Lord. Again, Garuḍa is an eagle, and snakes and fish—that’s what eagles eat. So cursing him for that is misplaced. He should have found another solution. Bear in mind, he’s not just offending a Vaisnava—of course, every Vaisnava is wonderful—but Garuḍa is in a special category. We honor all Vaisnavas, and we’re especially grateful to great Vaisnavas who are great because they’re concerned about the spiritual welfare of all living entities. How great is Garuḍa? Well, for that, we find the answer in *śāstras*. Perfect questions, perfect answers; any question you have can be answered properly through our *śāstras*. We should all be well-versed in the scriptures. So what does *Bhāgavatam* say about Garuḍa? Sixth Canto, Chapter 8, verse 29. The word *prabhu* is there. "Lord Garuḍa is the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu; he is the most worshipable Lord, for he is as powerful as the Supreme Lord himself. He is the personified *Vedas* and is worshipped by selected verses. May he protect us from all dangerous conditions, and may Lord Viṣṇu, the Personality of Godhead, also protect us from all dangers by what? His holy names, *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa*." 

What a beautiful description of Garuḍa. You don't want to offend him out of some misplaced compassion to save some snakes and some, you know, some fish. Come up with another plan, but not at the expense of offending a great devotee. Garuḍa is mentioned in *Bhagavad-gītā* as the essence of all Vedic knowledge. It takes three lifetimes to read all the *Vedas*, but it’s all there in *Bhagavad-gītā*. Elegance is truth spoken concisely. So 700 verses, you know, and Garuḍa is included. There’s so many things Kṛṣṇa could talk about; he mentions Garuḍa: "Among birds, I am Garuḍa." And as we mentioned, Garuḍa always carries Lord Viṣṇu on his back, and therefore he’s considered the "transcendental prince of all carriers." That’s how the *ācāryas* describe him. He’s the transcendental prince of all carriers. "Oh, the transcendental prince of all carriers is coming!" What a wonderful title. 

So because of this grievous offense by Śyāma-mohinī, some reaction had to come. What are they saying in Australia? "What comes... what goes around, comes around." Like I always say—I often say during my public speeches to, you know, to guests—I recount one time I was in Australia many years ago and we visited an Aboriginal group of people, and they were throwing the boomerang. So I took the boomerang and they showed me, "That’s that," it was far out, came back, and hit—I wasn't, I came back and hit me on the head. I wasn't expecting it! It’s a law of nature. I read something the other day which I wrote down and it might be appropriate, it’s a little subtle, but I hope you’ll catch it: "You’ll never understand the damage you did to someone until the same is done to you." That’s why I’m here. Sādhu, karma. 

And what happened next is what most devotees think about Śyāma-mohinī, but really we first realize how great he actually was, or is. We’ve been speaking for 45 minutes; I just wanted to impress upon you he wasn't some silly person who was under the water, you know, the pastime; he was a great personality. But even a great *mahā-bhāgavata* can fall down, Prabhupāda said, if he hears impersonal philosophy. So the race isn't over until it’s over. We have to be very strict with ourselves until we finally enter into the groves of Vṛndāvana. 

So it happened that one day, this illustrious sage who was empowered with the potency of that thunderbolt, while meditating underwater, he saw two fish mating, and lust manifested in his heart, causing him to—what we say in ISKCON, like a coined phrase—he "fell down." It’s actually described that at that point, that very point, Śyāma-mohinī just got out of the water with a very strong desire to get married. And how did he go about that? He’d been under the water about 900 years or something. Now, you know, sometimes you take a bath and you fall asleep and you wake up and your skin’s all wrinkled. "How am I going to go to the temple like this?" So you can imagine what he looked like after 900 years underwater. But it’s interesting; it’s described, by dint of his mystic powers, he transformed his old, wrinkly body into that of a handsome youth. Where’s Śyāma-vṛndāvana? Is he here? Śyāma, come here! Just do what you’re told. Now imagine Śyāma-vṛndāvana, as, you know, Śyāma-mohinī, underwater for 900 years—old, wrinkly—and then by his mystic powers, here he is! Śyāma-mohinī, handsome boy. To you personally—try to understand—you’re not this body. So by his mystic powers, this old man wrinkled, handsome young man. 

So then he went to see Mandhātā Mahārāja, who by this time—before he was a king, now Mandhātā, he’s Emperor of the world—and remember Śyāma-mohinī had done a *yajña* to help stop the drought. So Mandhātā Mahārāja felt obliged to Śyāma-mohinī for helping him in Ayodhyā that time. "The Emperor, I helped you one time. Can you help me?" "Yes, what you want? Another place to meditate?" "No, I want to be married. Can I marry your daughter?" But Mandhātā Mahārāja was so grateful to Śyāma-mohinī for stopping that drought, and eventually allowed him to become Emperor of the world. He offered him all 50 of his daughters, and it’s written, "Infatuated by this handsome young man, all these 50 princesses they immediately agreed." Isn't it interesting, this personal history? 

So Śyāma-mohinī came back to Vṛndāvana, and it’s described on the northern banks of Mānasi-gaṅgā in the town of Govardhana. Actually, on the strength of his previous austerities and the perfection of his mantras, he manifested an opulent residence replete with parks and gardens and clear water lakes. It’s interesting: although he was, quote-unquote, "fallen," he nevertheless retained his spiritual powers. Like one time, one of our leaders, he was a *sannyāsī* and he fell away from his *sannyāsa* vows. Everyone was criticizing him, and Prabhupāda said, "No one should just enter into that āśrama where one feels most comfortable, in, you know, fulfilling whatever desires he has, so that he can do his real duties to serve Kṛṣṇa." If you’re comfortable in the *brahmacārī* āśrama, there; if you’re comfortable in the *gṛhastha* āśrama, there; just find that āśrama where you’re peaceful, so that you can serve Kṛṣṇa. Don't criticize him, let him be as he is. He’s a good servant. 

Prabhupāda goes so far as to say, "Whether one’s living as a renunciate in the forest or one is a householder with home and many children, what if that person has within his heart a strong desire to serve Caitanya and spread the mission? I take the dust of that person’s feet on my head, whether he’s a *tyāgī* or a *gṛhastha*. It’s not service; service is the main thing." Like when Prabhupāda came, he got all the boys and girls married, and the pioneer work of this movement was actually done by *gṛhastha* couples; *sannyāsīs* came later. So it appears that although he was fallen, he nonetheless retained some of his mystic powers. In fact, Śyāma-mohinī expanded his body into 50 duplicate images to enjoy with the 50 princesses. Have you seen Śyāma-mohinī today? "I saw him there, I saw him there, I saw him, he’s everywhere." And it’s described the gardens that he strolled through with his various wives were fragrant with varieties of flowers, opulent with singing birds and humming bees, and always resounding with the expert performances of professional musicians. And it’s described that his residence was staffed with well-dressed maidservants and valets and furnished with beds, seats, ornaments, bathing facilities, and all the trappings of a royal household. 

So you could say Śyāma-mohinī was, quote-unquote, "enjoying like anything." But it so happens one day Mandhātā Mahārāja came to visit his 50 daughters, but when he saw how his old friend Śyāma-mohinī, who due to his spiritual *tejas* had stopped the drought, how he had become entangled in material life, he decided, "If that might happen to me..." So although he’s the Emperor of the world, he simply took off his royal dress and walked to the Himalayan Mountains and became an ascetic. The *śāstra* puts it very nicely: "This Emperor, this king of the world, suddenly understood that austerity and penance offer greater rewards than those won by royal influence." Think about it—a king, he renounces his robes, his jewels, his reputation, adoration; he just realizes that it’s all temporary and he walks away. So therefore, the *ācāryas* say he suddenly understood austerity and penance offer greater rewards than those won by royal influence. If only we could embrace that within our hearts. 

Now listen to this: despite the fact that Śyāma-mohinī was now living a life of great opulence, Mandhātā Mahārāja still had respect for him as a spiritual personality. Interesting. He knew the history of his friend, Śyāma-mohinī—I’m a great ascetic now, he’s married—but he retained his respect for him as a great spiritual person, obviously because he can expand himself into 50 forms. Can any of us do that? No. This would make a great movie. Fortune, misfortune, fortune, diplomacy, spiritual *tejas*, thunderbolts. This would be, you know, a really popular movie. So here’s the Emperor of the world; he’s surrounded by opulence, and he sees how someone, you know, in the eyes of the public was somewhat "fallen," but because he’s his friend and remembering his spiritual *tejas*, the king takes off his clothes, he goes to Śyāma-mohinī, "I’m going to the Himalayas. Give me a mantra for protection so I don't fall down." 

Māyā’s always there to test the *sādhus*. Are you really sincere about transcending, getting *mokṣa*, getting *bhakti*? Is that what you really want? Okay, here’s some sense gratification to tempt you; are you going to go for it? Yes? Ha, no. We’re always being tested. How do you test if something’s really gold? You test gold by putting it into fire; if it’s really gold, it’ll shine even brighter. So how do you know, how does Māyā know if someone’s really sincere about going back to Godhead, through the trial of austerity or challenge or misfortune? And if our devotion to Kṛṣṇa remain steadfast, Māyā leaves us alone. "Okay, I can't get this guy or this girl, I’ll leave him alone," and you can proceed very... so we have to expect sometimes there’ll be tests. So we want to be protected from Māyā’s influence because she has many tricks up her sleeve. Even great demigods sometimes bewildered by the test of Māyā. So we’d all like to have a mantra to protect us, right? We have it. 

Actually, Prabhupāda had introduced this mantra into our society just before he was going back to India in 1971, because he was very sick and he didn't know if he would be coming back. So one day before *Bhāgavatam* class, he taught these two mantras to devotees. Of course, they’re there in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, but we didn't have that book then. He taught word for word in the Los Angeles Temple. Then he said something very significant—it caught my ear later on—he said, "Lord Nṛsiṁha will protect you in my absence." And if we’re not protected, that means it’s the Lord’s desire; he wants us back home. So that’s the real protection. "Out of here! I’m gone, I’m done with this, I’m going home." So this Emperor was *rājarsi*, it means a saintly person sitting on the throne. "Please give me one mantra that will protect me on the path as I ascend the Himalayan mountains." So *Garga-saṁhitā* describes how Śyāma-mohinī gave the king a very, very, very powerful mantra, a *kavaca*, a protective mantra. It was called Śrī Yamunā-kavaca. I know of the Yamunā āśrama, I never heard of the Yamunā-kavaca, and I found that mantra, but I’m going to keep it secret. Oh, that wouldn't be very nice! Who wants to be protected on the path back home from illusion? 

So the *śāstra* said, addressing Śyāma-mohinī: "Oh fortunate one, please give to me the supremely splendid *kavaca* of Śrī Yamunā, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s queen. I will always keep it with me very carefully." Śyāma-mohinī said: "Oh noble-hearted King, please hear the Yamunā-kavaca which protects one from all dangers and brings one to the four goals of life. One should meditate on dark, four-armed, beautiful lotus-petal-eyed Yamunā, who is seated on a chariot. Then one should meditate on the Yamunā. A *brāhmaṇa* should bathe, face the east, refrain from conversation, offer the sandhyā prayers, sit in the *svastika-āsana* posture on a Kuśa mat, tie his hair with Kuśa grass, and recite the following words: Yamunā, always protect my head. May Kṛṣṇa always protect my eyes. May Śyāma always protect my eyebrows. May Nalinī always protect my nose. May Ānanda-rūpiṇī always protect my cheeks. May Kṛṣṇā-priyā always protect my ears. May Śyāmā-dī always protect my lips. May Sūrya-kanyakā always protect my chin. May Yama-śva-sā always protect my neck. May Mahā-dī always protect my chest. May Kṛṣṇa-priyā always protect my back. May Taṭinī always protect my arms. May Śubhā always protect my loins. May Cārū always protect my lips. May Rorū always protect my thighs. May Āṅgī-bhinī always protect my knees. May Rājīvārī always protect my ankles. May Pāpā always protect my feet. May Pārthā-nātmā-priyā... Pārthā-nātmā-priyā always protect me from everything that is inside, outside, above, below, in the eight directions, and in the entire universe. A person who 10 times recites with devotion this very wonderful Yamunā-kavaca becomes wealthy. A wise *brahmacārī* who eats little and for three months recites this *kavaca* attains a great kingdom; of this there is no doubt. What is not attained within three months by a person who chants this *kavaca* 110 times with devotion? A person who rises early and recites this *kavaca* attains the result of all pilgrimages. At the end of his life, he goes to Goloka, the Supreme Abode, which even great yogīs cannot attain." Wow! 

I think we all have a WhatsApp group that we’re part of, you know? The *rasikas* tell us what’s happening, so I put this *kavaca* on the link so you can all memorize it. So after receiving this mantra, the king bowed down, and releasing all of his servants and ministers and army and leaving behind all the members of his family, took off his royal robes and insignia and put on the torn clothes of a *sādhu* that were lying on the river, and turned and started walking alone north to the Himalayas for a life of penance and austerity and, most important, devotion to the Lord. 

What happened to Śyāma-mohinī? This was a class about Śyāma-mohinī! We followed the king into the Himalayas back to Goloka. What happened to Śyāma-mohinī? This is a long class, it’s the end of the month of *Kartika*, you’re a little tired, but I think it’s important to go on a little longer to know what happened to Śyāma-mohinī. Yes? Well, he continued to enjoy all the heavenly pleasures around him, and ultimately, anyone, everyone in this world enjoying the material pleasures, be they little or big, it all comes to conclusion. "You can't get no satisfaction." If that’s sung by a famous wealthy rock star, what about little old you and me, trying to make ends meet? "You can't get no satisfaction." Especially with his spiritual background, he could come to the conclusion—he could weigh the two things. Like you take a scale and you weigh, you know, two things, and you see which one’s heavier or lighter. He had experienced the bliss of spiritual life, and now he was enjoying the bliss of material life. So he was like, "Okay, I want the spiritual life; it gives the higher taste." Like you compare—you go to the shop to buy mangoes, and there’s a green, you know, you’re going to serve your guest as a green mango, and there’s a ripe mango, it’s yellow with a few black spots, has a nice aroma—"Ah, I’ll take this one for my guest." So if you have a strong spiritual experience, when Māyā tries to attract you, you just go, "Hare Kṛṣṇa." But if you weaken your spiritual practices, if for whatever reason you become weak in your *sādhanā*, Māyā will come, you’ll go, "Um, uh, okay," and you’ll be diverted for some time until you come to your senses and you come back again. 

That’s why generally it takes many lifetimes, but by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the most merciful incarnation, and our guru, who have given us an appropriate way to practice *bhakti-yoga* or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you can make it in one lifetime. I’ve often said that in one of his lectures in the 1930s: "I see no reason why all my disciples can’t go back home, back to Godhead, in one lifetime." But you really have to give it your heart and soul. We have many desires that we have to fulfill to maintain body and soul together, but our main desire should be to go back home, back to Godhead. And to do that, we have to fully awaken our love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, fully 100%. Not to contradict what you talk, but there’s that saying: "Many are called, but few are chosen." We don't want to be left behind; go home, Goloka is waiting for us. In the spirit, he trained us how to get out of this world, and he’ll train us how to enter into that world and perform whatever particular mellow of devotional service is appropriate for the pleasure of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world. That will all be taken care of in due course of time. 

So in due course of time, Śyāma-mohinī, he became dissatisfied with his material pleasures, and he desired to awaken his love for the Lord. So he renounced his family life, and he came here where you are right now. You know that the natural way of life honors *varṇāśrama-dharma*—you know, your *brahmacārī*, *gṛhastha*, *vānaprastha*, and *sannyāsa*—it’s a natural way, gradually renouncing, but always keeping the goal in mind. But you know, whatever, we’re making gradual progress; this is the natural way of human life. So he kind of went through that, Śyāma-mohinī; it’s a good example for us. You know, it’s actually described how he attained that state, how from his, you know, 50 wives and all that opulence. It’s described how he came to that point of actually going back to Godhead. Prabhupāda has said he went back to Godhead and his 50 wives went with him—teamwork! Teamwork. 

*Śāstra* states as follows—it’s very nice, how did he become pure, how did he give up and embrace Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet? Remember, he’s in Vṛndāvana here on the banks of this lake, which is very near to Govardhana Hill. You could consider from an aerial point of view—listen to this, this is the... you know, every endeavor should end with, you know, this is the... I just love this description—"The influence of Govardhana Hill, Kṛṣṇa’s eternal abode, gradually purified the heart of Śyāma-mohinī. One day he found himself sitting alone, contemplating the cause and the results of his fall down. Finally, the spirit of devotional detachment again arose within his heart. He then left his opulent household and, followed by his devoted wives, accepted the *vānaprastha* order and returned to Śyāma-ghāṭ on the banks of the Yamunā River, where in time he and his wives, by his power, all attained ultimate perfection and went back home, back to Godhead." Śyāma-mohinī, *kī jaya!* His 50 wives, *kī jaya!* 

As a result of hearing all the knowledge that we’ve derived—this transcendental knowledge which we’ve shared with you today, particular in relationship to the history of Śyāma-mohinī—the following things should be meditated on. This is what you should take from the lecture today. You know, with our *kalika* brains, we can’t remember everything. It’s hard to. I met a boy the other day who had a what they call "photographic memory." He’s 11 years old, but he could remember things like years and years ago, although he’s so young. Name was Sundar. But most of us don't have that ability, so what should we take from this talk today? What’s the essence of what we should remember? No, there’s actually three things. Number one: the trap of misplaced compassion. Number two: the consequences of *nāma-aparādha*. And number three: the power of Vṛndāvana to purify us and help us attain the lotus feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We heard before, "Due to the influence of Govardhana Hill, Kṛṣṇa’s eternal abode, gradually the influence of Girirāja purified his heart, and he decided to give up and attain perfection along with his wives." So the trap of misplaced compassion, the consequences of *nāma-aparādha*, and the power of Vṛndāvana to not only *darśana*-mārga, purify us, but awaken that pristine *bhakti*, which is a ticket back home, back to Godhead. 

Of these three things, in my heart, mainly I’m meditating on the power of Vṛndāvana, and therefore, based on that, I would like to finish with the following verse from *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, chapter, by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, one of my favorite verses: "O, crowning bliss of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, to me always be like a mother, a father, a good friend, a brother, a kind relative, a lover, a protecting deva, a guru, an observant eye, *prāṇa*, the greatest treasure, the best nectar, a good son, and please always remain within my heart." The great saints, holy names of Kṛṣṇa, back home, back to Godhead! *Jaya! Jaya! Śrī Śyāma-mohinī ki jaya!* Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you. *Haribol!*""