"*00512*.*
"Dear devotee, a very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. First, we offer our prayers to that person who is revealing the dhāma to all of us, Śrīla Prabhupāda. So, in our last few lectures, we spoke about three of the eight aṣṭa-sakhīs, namely Lalitā, Viśākhā, and Citrādevī, all of whom are personal attendants of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. We hadn't really planned it in that way because we spoke about the aṣṭa-sakhīs last year, but as we mentioned in our last talk, with our ongoing research in the prestigious Vṛndāvana Research Institute, more and more information and pastimes have become available, and we should take advantage of them.

Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in his purport to *Bhagavad-gītā* 17.15, and I quote: "The process of speaking in spiritual circles is to say something upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote from spiritual authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time, such talks should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions, one may derive the highest benefit and elevate human society." Then Prabhupāda concludes, "There is a limitless stock of Vedic literature and one should study this." He writes, "a limitless stock of Vedic literature which should be studied."

And in his introduction to *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, he is even more specific about taking advantage of this literature and its authors. He writes, "Many devotees of Lord Caitanya like Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrī Locana dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrī Kavikarṇapūra, Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī..." and then he writes, "and many other great and renowned scholars and devotees of the Lord have prepared many books and literatures on the life and precepts of the Lord. They are unique in composition and unrivaled in presentation and they are full of transcendental knowledge." Many of the great and renowned scholars and devotees of the Lord.

So, with our access now to the Vṛndāvana Research Institute, which has 32,000 ancient scriptures, many of these literatures which Śrīla Prabhupāda is referring to, especially in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, are now available, and more will come in the future as well. The other day in the institute, I was studying the śāstra *Bhakta-māla* by Nābhādāsa, which we quoted several times in the last few months, which was authorized by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. We came across a book called *Maṇi-hāra-līlā* by Priyādāsa. It was nearby on the shelf by the *Bhakta-māla* by Nābhādāsa. There was the *Maṇi-hāra-līlā* by Priyādāsa, and I discovered that Priyādāsa was Nābhādāsa’s grandson. So I started looking through that scripture as well, and therein I found a very beautiful pastime of Campakalatā Sakhī, which has been passed down through disciplic succession for a long time, down to the present day. This pastime of her and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Now we’ll tell you that pastime, but I think first a brief reminder of just who is Campakalatā, so we can better appreciate the pastime.

Now, as we mentioned, she’s one of the eight aṣṭa-sakhīs who have dedicated their lives and souls primarily to the service of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. It’s common amongst the Gopīs of Vṛndāvana that some display more love for Rādhā than they do Kṛṣṇa, while others show more love for Kṛṣṇa than for Śrī Rādhā, but ācāryas say that it’s to be understood that in the hearts of all these Gopīs, they have equal love for both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Campakalatā’s qualities are often compared to Viśākhā, whom we discussed last week. Unlike Viśākhā, however, who’s very bold and very upfront in her dealings, Campakalatā is described as extremely secretive about her activities. And the ācāryas also say that she’s known to be very, very clever. For example, when rival Gopīs like Candrāvalī tried to lure Kṛṣṇa away from Rādhā, Campakalatā knows how to thwart their plans. The ācāryas say, by "skillful diplomacy and logical persuasion." Skillful diplomacy and logical persuasion. And it’s said that Campakalatā is two days younger than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She has a complexion like a cluster of yellow campaka flowers. She dresses herself in clothes the color of a cāṭaka bird, and she’s a master of cooking in all six culinary rasas. You could say like the taste, but it’s very poetic—she’s a master of cooking in all six culinary rasas, which means astringent, sweet, bitter, pungent, sour, and salty. However, her specialty, you may remember from last year, her specialty is making candy, which has earned her the nickname *mṛṣṭa-hasta*, which means "sweet hands." Sweet hands, that’s her nickname, sweet hands.

She is famous for serving the Divine Couple by offering them necklaces—beautiful necklaces—which she makes, and by fanning them very expertly with the cāmara fan. She’s also well known as the leader of the Gopīs who care for the trees, the creepers, and the bushes of Braja. And our śāstras say that as such, she knows where every kind of fruit, flower, and root can be found in Vṛndāvana’s forest. As a result of that knowledge, she’s expert in decorating Vṛndāvana’s beautiful groves and pathways with all these natural ingredients of Vṛndāvana’s forest. And like other sakhīs, she has her own particular kuñja or grove; it’s called Kamalātā, which is situated on the northern bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. And I was reading that in that grove, everything is the color of molten gold. Just try to imagine, everything’s the color of molten gold. And that is actually where Campakalatā has her kitchen, where she prepares all those delicious foodstuffs, all the six culinary rasas, for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Now, in that kitchen, Campakalatā also teaches other Gopīs how to cook, and the ācāryas say that when her students become accomplished in that cooking, they host Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with midday feasts that rival the taste of nectar. Midday feasts that rival the taste of nectar.

Now, it’s written that in all of Campakalatā’s many services, she has eight girlfriends, very close girlfriends, who help her, namely: Padmanayanā, Sunetrā, Kāmadīpikā, Navanītapriyā, Pradīpikā. Just to say those names, you can feel your heart becoming purified.

Now, in Caitanya-līlā, Campakalatā descends as Rāghava Gosvāmī. And during Mahāprabhu’s advent, Rāghava Gosvāmī resided at Govardhana Hill in a cave called Maṇikuṇḍala, and he wrote a book entitled *Bhakti-ratna-prakāśa*. *Bhakti-ratna-prakāśa*. And it’s described in *Bhakti-ratnākara* elaborately how he took Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura and Śrīnivāsa Ācārya on parikramā of Vṛndāvana. Now, this Rāghava Gosvāmī is sometimes mistaken for Rāghava Paṇḍita, who is a resident of Pānihāti in Bengal and is a different Gopī in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. So anyway, for our main pastime today from the scripture I quoted earlier, for your pleasure:

One time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī sent Campakalatā to collect water from the Yamunā for worshiping the sun-god. We all know that as Sūrya-pūjā. So when Campakalatā was approaching the Yamunā river with two big water pots, she noticed that Kṛṣṇa was playing there along with his eternal companion, his intimate friend Madhumaṅgala. And curious, Campakalatā stopped behind a tree to listen to their conversation. As Kṛṣṇa said to Madhumaṅgala, "My dear Madhu, look how pleasant the weather is today. Let us play some games. You give me your ball, and we’ll play catch with it." But Madhumaṅgala said, "I will not give you my ball, Kṛṣṇa, because I’m afraid of losing it. I know how tricky your ways are. I know, I know how tricky you can be. I might lose my ball." Now, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī sometimes refers to Madhumaṅgala in his writings as *vidūṣaka*. *Vidūṣaka* literally means someone who’s humorous, a companion and a jester or a joker. And Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala are so close that Madhumaṅgala knows all of Kṛṣṇa’s tricks as well. So Madhumaṅgala said to Kṛṣṇa, "The other day, I saw you throw Śrīdāmā’s ball into the Yamunā, and it was swept away by the river’s current. My ball is very rare, and I don’t want to lose it." So then Kṛṣṇa asked—you know, Campakalatā was just listening to all this—Kṛṣṇa asked, "Oh Madhu, from where does your ball come from?" So, funny Madhumaṅgala, he replied, "My ball? It’s from my uncle’s sister’s brother’s auntie’s grandmother’s elder son-in-law’s ancestral village. That’s where!" So that caused Kṛṣṇa to laugh. What an answer! And Kṛṣṇa said, "You’re so funny, Madhu, but I promise you I will not throw your ball in the Yamunā."

So Madhumaṅgala said, "Kṛṣṇa, I know your promises have no meaning." Then Kṛṣṇa said with a smile, "Madhu, if I happen to throw your ball in the Yamunā, then I will give you my own ball, which is now at my home." So Madhumaṅgala finally relented, and he said, "Okay, Kṛṣṇa, you are so sweet. No one can ever say no to you. You are so sweet. No one can ever say no to you. So let’s play. But first, let’s set the rules down for our game. And the rules are that if you fail to catch the ball when I throw it, you will become my play-horse, and I will ride you all around as you crawl on your knees. And if you lose, then I will do the same for you." That’s called horsey. So Kṛṣṇa agreed to the rules. He said, "Okay, let’s play." But it’s written that just after a few minutes of playing, Kṛṣṇa dropped the ball and lost the game and had to crawl around with Madhu on his back—horsey! The sweet, intimate, loving dealings that God has with His devotees in Śrī Vṛndāvana. There’s no awe and reverence; they’re just sweet, loving exchanges. Now, it’s written that when the demigods from Svargaloka saw this, they were stunned. They were shocked to see that their Lord, the Lord of the 14 worlds, became a play-horse for His beloved devotee Madhumaṅgala. They couldn’t understand.

Now, as Campakalatā was witnessing this līlā from some distance away, she decided to have a little fun by teasing Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala. So she called out, "Oh Madana-mohana, please help me! Oh Madana-mohana, please help me!" So Kṛṣṇa said to him, "I think someone’s calling me." But funny Madhumaṅgala said, "No, Kṛṣṇa, someone’s calling me. You are not Madana-mohana, because Madana-mohana means 'one who attracts everyone’s hearts,' and I am that Madana-mohana because I attract everyone’s hearts with my funny jokes." So, many playful cowherd boy pastimes. So then, witnessing all this, Campakalatā, she called out again, "Oh Nandalāl, please help me! Hey Nandalāl, please help me!" So Kṛṣṇa turned to Madhumaṅgala and he said, "You see, Madhu, someone’s calling me, not you, because I am the son of Nanda, not you." So Madhumaṅgala said, "Be careful, my friend. There are many ghosts living on the banks of the Yamunā, and they may be calling out like that." So then they decided to go and find out, you know, where this voice was coming from. So, looking around, you know, the forest there down by the banks of the Yamunā, and after some time, they actually came upon Campakalatā, who was filling her water pots on the banks of the Yamunā river. So, when Campakalatā saw Kṛṣṇa and Madhumaṅgala coming, she said, "Dear Kṛṣṇa, please help me to lift this heavy filled water pot onto my head." But Kṛṣṇa, you know, now teasing her, he said, "I will not help you, for I am the son of Mahārāja Nanda. My mother does not allow me to lift water pots onto the servants of other kings."

So Campakalatā said, "Kṛṣṇa, you are so proud!" So, turning to Madhumaṅgala, she said, "Lālā, Lālā, can you help me?" But Madhumaṅgala became very angry, and he said, "Sakhī, how dare you call me Lālā? Lālā means 'a son' in Brajabhāṣā. Don’t you know my name? My name is Śrī Śrī 108, His Highness, Lord of the demigods, master of all arts, singer of all Vedic mantras, knower of all Vedic meters and hymns, the only son of Sūndarpāṇi Muni and the crown jewel of all brāhmaṇas and knowers of the Vedas. How dare you call me Lālā?" So Campakalatā, she laughed, and she said, "Silly Madhu, you’re just a boy just beginning your studies in the sciences you claim to know. I will go now and tell Vṛndāvana’s queen, Śrī Rādhā, of you and Kṛṣṇa’s disrespectful ways. You wouldn’t help me with the water pots." She was a little upset, actually.

So, after managing to place the water pots on her head, Campakalatā went to Sūrya-kuṇḍa and delivered the water for Śrī Rādhā’s worship of the sun-god, Sūrya-pūjā. And as Rādhārāṇī walked back to Bārṣāṇā, where Rādhā lives, Campakalatā told Rādhā everything that had transpired by the Yamunā. And after hearing Campakalatā’s story, Śrī Rādhā made a proclamation to all her maidservants back at Bārṣāṇā that she would not be seeing Kṛṣṇa anymore. "He’s so rude," she said, that they should not make any more special rendezvous for her with him from that day forth. We’ve heard that before. So this news, it spread around Vṛndāvana. It had very little effect on Kṛṣṇa. You can’t go see Rādhā? He’s very determined, very determined to spend time with His eternal consort, Śrī Rādhā. But He had to appease her again because of her *māna*, her anger.

So, a few hours later, Kṛṣṇa once again disguised himself as a beautiful Gopī, this time a Gopī selling colorful bangles for the wrists and the arms. And he appeared at the gates of the palace at Bārṣāṇā, and he set up a shop, and he called out to all the Gopīs in the vicinity in a very beautiful feminine voice. As he looked very beautiful in his Gopī dress and very beautiful bangles, he called out for all the girls to come forward and see his or her products. So, at that point, Campakalatā just happened to pass by, and she noticed this bangle-selling Gopī, and there was something about that Gopī that she found very attractive, very, very attractive. And the bangles were also very attractive; they were described like glowing like the sun in a variety of different colors. So she said to that Gopī, "Dear girl, you must be new in this area. I’ve not seen you before." So Kṛṣṇa, disguised, he replied in a very beautiful feminine voice, "Dear friend, I’m from a very poor family, and I have two sons who are waiting for me to return with some money. I sell the most beautiful bangles of different colors inlaid with beautiful stones. I also have very rare mirror bangles which can reveal the beauty of any beautiful Braja Gopī like you. Do you know anyone in particular who might like to see my bangles?"

So Campakalatā replied, "Oh, dear bangle-seller, you are so beautiful. It is difficult to take my eyes off of you. Your beauty is stealing my glances. Your illustrious body attracts my heart. But do not worry; our queen of compassion, Rādhārāṇī, our queen of compassion, will buy all of your bangles, and she will give you much more than your bangles cost. She is, after all, the daughter of the King Vṛṣabhānu." So Campakalatā took that young Gopī with all of her bangles to Śrī Rādhā’s quarters, where Rādhā sat as effulgent as the sun, surrounded by all her maidservants. And one by one, those Gopīs, seeing all those beautiful bangles, they came forward to observe them. They were looking, but after some time, Śrī Rādhā herself called for the bangle-seller to come forward to show her wares to her. But mesmerized by Śrī Rādhā’s incomparable beauty, this young Gopī selling bangles, just being mesmerized by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she moved very slowly towards Vṛndāvana’s queen. And when she finally came forward very close to Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Rādhā said, "Dear one, you may place one of your bangles on my wrist." But when Kṛṣṇa, disguised as the bangle-seller, took the hand of Śrī Rādhā to put a bangle on her hand, he started trembling and fell down unconscious on the ground, calling out, "Rādhe!"

So, seeing this, all the young Gopīs present became very distraught as they rushed forward to help this young girl, when suddenly Campakalatā noticed a flute, of all things, a flute tucked inside the young bangle-selling girl’s skirt. So she called out loudly, "This is not a Gopī selling bangles; this is Nanda Mahārāja’s clever son who’s once again tricked us with his disguise and made his way into Śrī Rādhā’s quarters undetected by all of us!" So, of course, all the Gopīs expressed their dissatisfaction with Kṛṣṇa’s tricks, but it’s described internally in their hearts that they were overjoyed. Why? Because the whole purpose of their lives is to unite Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa despite so many obstacles placed before them. And as Kṛṣṇa came back to external consciousness, those Gopīs showed their so-called displeasure with him, but then very quickly burst out in cries of, "Well done, Kṛṣṇa! Bravo! Well done, Kṛṣṇa! Bravo!" As Kṛṣṇa embraced Śrī Rādhā, and Rādhā happily laughed, but because of her shyness, she closed her eyes. Then all the sakhīs came forward to perform ārati for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, as Campakalatā concluded. She said out loud, "May Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa always be united with the ropes of each other’s love." Harī Kṛṣṇa. Another wonderful pastime.

So let us conclude today with Rūpa Gosvāmī’s opening verse to his illustrious work:

"May the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa reduce the miseries existing in the material world and nullify all unwanted desires. The pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are like *śikhariṇī*, a blend of yogurt and sugar candy. They overpower the pride of even the nectar produced on the moon, for they distribute the sweet fragrance of the concentrated loving affairs of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the Gopīs."

Thank you, Gosvāmī. We’ll finish there, and we’ll go back to the institutes and do some more research for all of you so we can all relish this wonderful nectar of Vraja-kathā. I thank all of you again.

Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!""