"*00417*.*
"# The Forest of Flowers: Kartika Parikrama 2022

I think for many of you, this is the first time you have ever been to this particular lake. Actually, when I came here in the early 1970s, it was just a big puddle, really. But we can see it has been nicely renovated into a beautiful *kuṇḍa* with beautiful architecture, deities, etc. Interestingly enough, I would like to speak about the other lake that we passed by with that very beautiful architecture there, Kuśum Sarovara.

There are thousands of lakes in Vṛndāvana, but actually, in the greater sense, we are in a forest which is called Puṣpavana. As we know, the general forest of Vṛndāvana is the bigger forest, and it has many sub-forests where Kṛṣṇa has different pastimes with His devotees. But this is one of my favorite forests. Why is that? Well, the word *vana* means forest, but *puṣpa* in Sanskrit refers to flowers. Just like we are all familiar with the *puṣpāñjali*, where we take flowers and offer them to Kṛṣṇa or some distinguished personalities. We do that many times. *Puṣpa* means flowers, and *añjali* actually means folding one's hands with deep respect towards someone. So, we offer flowers like this. Why particularly flowers? On one occasion, Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "Flowers are the smile of Kṛṣṇa," and another time he said, "In this age, flowers are the only opulence left in Kali-yuga." So, in our worship of Kṛṣṇa or our worship of distinguished personalities, we offer this opulence out of deep respect.

Even in material society, a boy offers flowers to his girlfriend, or she offers flowers to him. Flowers are very important.

But it is interesting—I was reading the Tenth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* recently with the commentary by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. He says that in previous ages, people would offer this respect to Kṛṣṇa or distinguished personalities not only with a palmful of flowers—*puṣpāñjali*—but with a palmful of jewels—*ratnāñjali*. How times have changed! In days of yore, they would have jewels, and they would offer jewels to Kṛṣṇa or when the spiritual master came. Just in your minds, imagine a thousand years ago, someone is coming to the temple, and the Lord is there with diamonds, sapphires, and jewels. This is not mythology; this is actual fact here in India. But obviously, now in Kali-yuga, things have degraded quite a lot. Thank the Lord, there are still beautiful flowers we can offer to Him. But anyway, we should understand it is not so much what we are offering, but it is the mood in which we are offering it. We get the same benefit by offering flowers to Kṛṣṇa as they did jewels in the old days. If one has the *bhakti*, the devotion, the love, everybody is [accepted].

In the *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa says to offer Him with love a fruit, a flower, a leaf, or any article; if it is done in that way, He will accept it. We offer flowers for the purpose of worship, but we should also grow our love. This is the real point of Kṛṣṇa consciousness: that love is already there in the heart; we have to water that plant and produce the fruits and flowers of our love and offer those to Kṛṣṇa. Nevertheless, we should try to offer nice flowers that have fragrance. This is the beauty of coming to India because the flowers here still have fragrance. 

When my mother was living some years ago, every day on my birthday, I would send her two dozen red roses. So she said, "Son, why are you offering me flowers on your birthday? It makes sense if you offer them on my birthday, why your birthday?" I said, "Mom, I wouldn't have a birthday if it wasn't for you." So I would always say, "Mom, how do you like the flowers?" She would say, "It's the thought that counts, son, because these red roses, they don't have any flavor, any scent to them; they're just almost like plastic." *Bhakti-vilāsa*, one of our manuals in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, says that one should offer flowers to Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa's devotees that have a pleasant fragrance and have been cultivated in good soil. There are so many nice details on how to cultivate our love for God, our love for Kṛṣṇa: offer Him some flowers that have scent and make sure that they are grown in very good soil.

You know, a particular part of the year we will get in front of Kṛṣṇa and we throw the flowers at Kṛṣṇa, or perhaps on the appearance day of our spiritual master, at the end of the ceremony, we throw the flowers. It is an integral part of our tradition. I was reading in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* that 500 years ago, even Lord Caitanya used to participate in these types of flower ceremonies. In *Antya-līlā*, Chapter 11, verse 238, after the *saṅkīrtana* ended, Mahāprabhu watched this ceremony of *puṣpāñjali*—offering flowers to the Jagannātha deity—then He and all the Vaiṣṇavas returned to His residence. I am always thinking that when I hear about Mahāprabhu, if it is good enough for the Lord, it is good enough for us. So it is part of our ISKCON tradition.

*Puṣpavana* means the forest of flowers. Try to visualize a forest of flowers, not just simple green trees, but a forest of ever-blooming flowers; that is where we are right now. Of course, if you look outside, you don't see too many flowers. It is a spiritual place, but you need spiritual vision to see the spiritual nature of this *dhāma*. Just like there are particular types of movies that you go to where you have to wear these special glasses; when you come into the movie theater, you put these glasses on, and when you look at the screen, it is quite amazing. But you take them off, and the screen is all squiggly and moving; you can't see anything.

It has changed over the hundreds of years. We see open sewers, we see garbage, we see pigs. So someone may think, "Is this a spiritual place?" Yes, those things are there, but in reality, it is a spiritual place because this is where Kṛṣṇa came. This is where God came 5,000 years ago and had His pastimes. It became transformed, but the eyes you need to see are the eyes of love. Only when the eyes are covered with the salve of love can you see spiritual things. That takes practice. You have to purify your vision, and the way we purify our vision is by chanting the names of God; He is the most pure: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*.

There has to be some discipline—*śiṣya* means discipline—so we chant regularly, the vision becomes purified, and one day we will see Vṛndāvana as it really is. Even today, in this spiritual sense, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are still taking place. Therefore, if we could see Kṛṣṇa today, we would see Him wearing flower garlands that are never wilted; they never dry up and they never lose their fragrance. In India, it is called like a *Vaijayantī* garland. A *Vaijayantī* garland is a garland made of these spiritual flowers of five different kinds, and the *Vaijayantī* garland of Kṛṣṇa goes down to His lotus feet; it is a big garland. This is not some type of fantasy or just some poetry or some mythology; this is reality. This world is not reality; it is illusion because it has birth, disease, old age, and death. It is not a perfect world, but there exists a spiritual world where these realities are actually true. You begin to not only hear about these things, but then you begin to realize these things. One time I heard Prabhupāda say in Geneva, Switzerland, and it really knocked me over. Prabhupāda said, "Faith means to put your trust in something sublime."

The material world has plenty of good things, happiness—there is plenty—but there is also distress. So we can't put full faith in something that is imperfect. But we hear from realized persons, from saints, from pure devotees: there is a spiritual world where everything is perfect. So even though we are neophytes, we put our faith, we trust the pure souls who have no selfish motivations; they are just sharing their love with us. We put faith in their words. So there are garlands of flowers that never wilt or fade and remain forever fragrant. My gosh, I would like to see one of those! You know, who doesn't like wearing a garland? But after a few hours, [they fade].

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* Third Canto, Chapter 28, verse 15, Prabhupāda describes these *puṣpa*, these flower garlands, that are ever-fresh. His purport: "From this description, it appears that the flower garland of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is fresh. Actually, in Vaikuṇṭha or the spiritual sky, there is nothing but freshness. Wow. Even the flowers picked from the trees and plants remain always fresh, for everything in the spiritual sky retains its originality and does not fade. The fragrance of the flowers picked from the trees and made into garlands does not fade, for both the trees and the flowers are spiritual. When the flower is taken from the tree, it remains the same; it does not lose its aroma. The significance of spirituality is that everything is eternal and inexhaustible." So this is the beauty of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that there is a wealth of knowledge about everything divine. We have been speaking about a simple flower garland; what about this forest, this forest of flowers? Are there any details in our scriptures about this?

Yes. I will give you some of the details that are about this forest of flowers that we are in. One obvious detail is that this Puṣpavana runs along the side of Girirāja, and it itself was made of many sub-forests. Each forest has a different type of flower, and it is millions of ever-blooming Aśoka trees and other tiny forests that run alongside Girirāja Govardhana with flowers, or a forest of Kadamba flowers, Bakula flowers, and Campaka flowers. These forests are meant to be enjoyed by Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So, when you walk through these different forests of flowers, *śāstra* says you will find benches and sitting places that match the specific flowers that grow there, the same colors. The tree has a golden tint to it, so all the couches and chairs in Kadamba-vana are golden in color. And I was reading some more details about how there are little trails—you know how people like to go on trail walks—there are little trails that go through Puṣpavana, and it is not dust as we know it; it is diamond dust. You walk through diamond dust on the trails of Puṣpavana. It is described, of course, that Vṛndā Devī, one of her services to Paurnamasi, is to keep all the forests very tidy and very neat and clean. It describes that by her potency, the flowers are blooming all year long, and it says that by her potency, it is superior even to the gardens of the demigods.

Like when you go to someone's house for lunch, before the main meal, they give you some peanuts and apple juice. You came to have dinner, and they are giving you peanuts and apple juice; part of the science of eating is that it gets your hunger going. Well, that comes with the main meal, by sharing with you some details with this greater area, we come to the central theme of our talk today.

Because right in the middle of this forest is a beautiful lake called... we were walking from the buses, and we came down, and then we passed that lake on the right-hand side with that beautiful architecture back there. That is where I wanted to go, but the government closed it recently. Of course, all of us are familiar with that particular lake because in one of our books we read that after discovering Rādhā-kuṇḍa and smaller lakes a little further up, Mahāprabhu came to Kuśuma-sarovara, and from there He saw Govardhana Hill for the first time.

Now, I would like to take a few moments to describe to you the origin of Kuśuma-sarovara. It is a pastime that took place in one of the smaller forests of Puṣpavana called Aśoka-vana. So, once upon a time—when in the West we tell fairy tales, we say "once upon a time"—when I first read Prabhupāda's *Kṛṣṇa* book, a summary study of the Tenth Canto, in one of the chapters, Prabhupāda begins, "Once upon a time." He just liked that phrase; it's very poetic.

So, once upon a time in the month of Bhādra, when the trees were especially rich with blossoms, Rādhārāṇī and her friends came to Puṣpavana to collect flowers for a particular festival called Sānjhī. The Sānjhī festival is when all the Gopis, the girls in Vṛndāvana, go and collect flowers, and then they dry them, they crush them, and they make different colored powders. You see sometimes on the streets or near the houses beautiful designs that the ladies make in front of their house from the street; that is from the powdered flowers. So there is a couple of days of the year called Sānjhī where all the girls go and pick flowers everywhere, dry them, and make decorations on the floor. It is just a nice festival.

So, all these young Gopis told their parents, "We're going to collect flowers for Sānjhī," but we know there are always different layers here, different layers of meaning, different layers of love. Actually, they were hoping to go to Puṣpavana to meet Kṛṣṇa. We hear about separation; Kṛṣṇa is here, but the whole purpose of Vṛndāvana is to bring these Divine lovers together: Kṛṣṇa and His eternal consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. So, all the Gopis are always thinking, "How can we bring the Lord together with His eternal consort, Śrī Rādhā?" It is all about love. Vṛndāvana is all about love. For that matter, this world, the material world, is also about love. "She loves me"—sorry, that's not Sanskrit, but that's the theme, and that's nice because by nature we are created to love. But unfortunately, love in this world is temporary. You know, Romeo and Juliet, what a perfect relationship, but unfortunately things come to an end. But in the spiritual world, love reigns supreme. Love for God is the deepest love because He knows how to properly reciprocate the love with everyone that loves eternally. So, while loving in this world, we should also try to awaken our love for the Supreme Lord. He is not an old man with a beard; He is ever-youthful, very beautiful, very attractive, divine qualities, and we can love Him as we love someone in this world.

So, the Gopis came to Puṣpavana, hoping to meet Kṛṣṇa here, and guess what? That day Kṛṣṇa also decided to come to Puṣpavana, as it is described, to enjoy the natural beauty of Vṛndāvana, as He often does. So when He came into Puṣpavana, He saw these Gopis were picking flowers everywhere. These are simple but very sweet pastimes. Kṛṣṇa decided to tease Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. You know, sometimes in loving relationships you tease—our little sister, I would always tease her, and every time I talk to her on the phone, she says, "When I was young, you were teasing me so much." She said, "You were always teasing me," and I said, "Well, that's because you have the ears of an elephant, the nose of a monkey, and the hair of an old witch." She said, "You're still teasing me!" That's what brothers do. So, what we see in this material world also exists in the spiritual world. This world is compared to a reflection of the spiritual world, so as we have relationships here, we have relationships there, but they are all pure and selfless. What is the definition of selflessness in a relationship? Real love means to give more than you take. Give everything to Kṛṣṇa and expect nothing in return; that makes Him happy.

One day, Kṛṣṇa was seeing them picking flowers, and He decided to tease Rādhārāṇī, so He kind of dressed Himself differently, you know, like a gardener, and then He approached them and said, "Why are you girls picking the King's flowers? I'm the gardener here, and the King, His name is King Cupid." So, as a gardener, why are you picking the King's flowers? They just ignored Him, but the plot kind of thickens. Kṛṣṇa said, "You arrogant deities, immediately identify yourselves, for you are destroying the King's forest, hurting your thousands of cows in this forest, or running around with your destructive friends. You dare to accuse us?" So Kṛṣṇa tried to defend Himself because, "We graze our cows under the King's sanction. I am faultless. You, however, are taking flowers without permission; therefore, you should be punished."

Rādhārāṇī replied, "You are faultless, Kṛṣṇa? I mean, while still an infant, you killed a woman, Pūtanā the witch, and throughout childhood you stole anything you could get your hands on, especially butter, and now in youth you killed the bull, the demon Ariṣṭāsura. You are thoughtless!"

So, although Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Controller—by definition God is the Supreme Controller—Rādhārāṇī possesses the deepest love for Kṛṣṇa; therefore, she controls Kṛṣṇa by her love. Love makes the world go round, but that is perfectly true in the spiritual world. So Rādhārāṇī issued the following decree after this argument: "Girls, were these girls falsely stating that this forest belongs to some imaginary King? For impersonating a constable of that King and for the attempted imprisonment of innocent Gopis, this boy must be punished. Yes, tie Him up! Throw Him in jail!" But we know Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa, His *hlādinī-śakti*, His pleasure potency, but she is the tender-hearted aspect of God, much like we have in Christianity the Virgin Mary. She is very kind, she is very compassionate, so we can pray to her to help relieve our sufferings and help us develop our love for Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa's Rādhārāṇī is like that; she is the tender-hearted, compassionate nature of God. Just like Kṛṣṇa is sometimes compared to be like a thunderbolt or a rose, Kṛṣṇa can be like a thunderbolt, but Rādhā, she is like the rose; she is very sweet and she is very compassionate. Therefore, we pray to her first when we sing *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare*. "My dear Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please introduce me to your beloved Kṛṣṇa." As a kind queen that she is, she pronounced an interesting sentence on Kṛṣṇa, meaning, you know, what is the punishment now? And it is very sweet. Would you like to hear it? She said, "This boy is hereby sentenced to the labor of dressing my ruffled hair."

There are different pavilions and shrines and places to go, so they entered a particular pavilion with flower archways, swaying vines, and jeweled lamps, where on the table there were combs, brushes, and a bejeweled mirror. And where is Kṛṣṇa? Busy picking flowers in Puṣpavana to decorate her tousled hair. So, very soon He eagerly returned to this particular pavilion with the baskets overflowing with very fragrant flowers. It gives a very beautiful description as He is coming out of this Puṣpavana, this forest of flowers, coming towards this pavilion; parrots, cuckoo birds, and peacocks followed behind Him, filling the air with their voices, a cacophony of different beautiful birds and singing different Kṛṣṇa-glories.

So there is Rādhā with her beautiful hair ready to be dressed, but Kṛṣṇa didn't know exactly what to do. There is Lalitā-sakhī and Viśākhā-sakhī, the two attendants of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kṛṣṇa said, "Lalitā, is there some water whereby I can purify these flowers? You know, like the other day in the initiation ceremony, we first purified our hands and our body by water with sacred mantras, so we can sit in a ceremony of purification."

Kṛṣṇa, "We have lots of nectarean juices here, but no water." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Then I will provide." And smiling, He took His flute, His *vaṁśī*, from His belt, and He said, "Don't worry, I will summon water from every holy place in creation." And with His flute, He hit the ground like that, and suddenly a lake appeared, filled with glistening, clear water, shimmering in ecstasy at the prospect of serving Śrī Rādhā. And on each of its four shores—because it came in a square form—there were jewel-studded staircases with multi-colored lotuses into the crystal-clear waters of the lake. Then I read something really interesting—I was thinking, you know, my mind, the inquisitive mind—are there fish? And I came across this paragraph where it is described, "Yes, there were jewel fish." What? Ever saw a jewel fish? But how are we seeing it? It is said that a *sādhu*, a saintly person, sees through his ears, not through our eyes. Our eyes are defective, but if we hear pure knowledge from pure souls, we can see things as they are. A saintly person sees with his ears, not with his eyes.

So the lake was full of jewel fish and it was surrounded by opulent gardens and blessed Kadamba trees, which were home to singing birds and hanging flower garlands. Kṛṣṇa needed water for the ceremony, so He tapped His flute on the ground and this amazing lake appeared. And it is described in *śāstra*, even if one were able to search all the heavenly planets, he would never find a lake that could match the beauty, opulence, and sweetness of that. And we all know that lake has always been there for our sake. So next time—actually, in a few minutes, we're going to have breakfast—we are going to walk back past there, back to the buses, which is going to take us to Śacīnandana Svāmī's new project where we are going to have a big *kīrtana*. Yesterday's *kīrtana*, this next *kīrtana*—whoa!

The *ācāryas* say that because that lake, just here, just next to Govardhana Hill, played such an intimate role in Kṛṣṇa's service to Rādhārāṇī, that lake is described as the very heartbeat of Govardhana Hill. So the next time you go swimming there, do remember, do it with great respect. It is liquid *prema*; it is liquid love, and you are bathing in the heartbeat of Govardhana Hill.

An interesting side note is that when the British were here, ruling India for hundreds of years, I think in the 1930s, they heard about this touchstone, the philosopher's stone, that was thrown into that lake and that stone can turn anything into gold. You know, they started believing some of these things, having associated with the *sādhus* in Vṛndāvana. They heard it was thrown into Kuśuma-sarovara. You know, Sanātana Gosvāmī told the boy, "If you want something really valuable, throw away that touchstone; I'll give you the *mahā-mantra*, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra." So the boy threw that stone into Kuśuma-sarovara. That is where it is to this very day, a touchstone. So the British said, "Let's get it," and they actually tried to excavate down, down, down into Govardhana. And even with the equipment they had in the '30s or '40s, they could not find the bottom of Kuśuma-sarovara. It was miles deep, they didn't reach the bottom.

So now you know some of the glories of Kuśuma-sarovara, and perhaps another time we will come here and we will hear the glories of this particular place. It's also an amazing pastime; we will have to wait, but that's what life is about: *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ*—hearing the pastimes of the Lord and His devotees—*ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam*—the heart becomes purified—and buried deep within the heart is this divine love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So we have a bright future ahead of us. Try to remember some of these details that I told you today as you fall asleep tonight, and who knows? Maybe you'll dream of the divine couple. So, we'll stop here; we're going to take *prasādam* now.""