"*00552*.*
"So, dear devotees, welcome back again to our ongoing discussions on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Vande ‘ham śrī-guruḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalam śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāmś ca śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvaṁ sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca*. So, let’s warm up with a very beautiful verse that many of you know about Vṛndāvana from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 10th Canto, 21st Chapter, śloka number 10:

> *barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ*
> *bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām*
> *randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayā pūrayan gṛnda-vṛnde*
> *vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada-ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ*

"The fame of the earth is enhanced due to being splendidly decorated with the marks of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. Upon hearing the veṇu-nāda, the sound of the flute, the peacocks take it as the thunder of the clouds, and becoming intoxicated, they begin to dance. The other animals in the meadows of Govardhana also feel pleasure and become stunned. Thus, the presence of Śrī Vṛndāvana on the earth makes this planet even more glorious than Vaikuṇṭha."

Wow, so it’s very interesting that this verse says that the presence of Vṛndāvana on this planet makes the earth even more glorious than Vaikuṇṭha. So that’s a very powerful statement—that the earth can become more glorious than Vaikuṇṭha. So how can that be? Well, in the spiritual world, in Vaikuṇṭha, Vṛndāvana or Goloka Vṛndāvana is the topmost planet; you could say it’s higher than Vaikuṇṭha. So when Vṛndāvana is present—actually present—on this earth planet, it makes the earth more glorious than Vaikuṇṭha. That being said, someone may ask, "How can Vṛndāvana be on this planet when Vṛndāvana is in the spiritual sky?" And the answer is that Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world expands and comes to the material world, meaning it’s simultaneously in the spiritual world and here on the earth planet. Now, Vṛndāvana in the spiritual world is often called Goloka.

In the *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā 5.17, it is said, "The topmost planet in the spiritual world has many names—Brajadhāma, Goloka, Śvetadvīpa, and Vṛndāvana." And when that same Goloka manifests here on earth, it is called Gokula. Important verse. Now, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says in *Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta* that the glory of Gokula on this earth is equal to the glory of Goloka in the spiritual world. Now we can understand how auspicious, how glorious the earth becomes when Vṛndāvana is here. And Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī writes in *Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta*: "It’s very beautiful. Kṛṣṇa’s activities in Gokula, which is situated on the material plane, are the same as those in Goloka. The only difference between Goloka and Gokula is that Goloka is situated in the highest region and Gokula is manifest on the earth planet." So now, another interesting point is that as Goloka in the spiritual world is obviously eternal, so Gokula on the earth is also eternal. I think many devotees will be surprised to learn that as Goloka in the spiritual world is eternal, so Gokula on the earth is also eternal.

Now, where is that stated? Because Śrīla Prabhupāda said, when speaking in learned circles—meaning amongst sages—actually, if one says something or presents a particular point, he has to be able to back that up with śāstric reference. So what says that Gokula on the earth is also eternal? Well, it is in several places, but I’ve chosen the following: In the first Canto of *Garga-saṁhitā*, there we learn that when the earth was situated on the end of the tusks of Lord Varāha, Mother Earth, Bhūmi-devī, she""