"*00129*.*
"# Three Last Wishes

Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. Well, first of all, I wanted to say how happy I am to be back in Macedonia. In Skopje, one of the major capitals of the world. To the Macedonians. And I am very glad to be here with our team, our cultural conquest team. We are planning to conquer the world with culture. Alexander the Great tried to conquer the world with warfare; we are taking the silent approach. We are doing it with culture. Śrīla Prabhupāda actually said that he was interested in a cultural conquest: the arts, the music, the dance, the song, the poetry, the paintings. We have the best of it all. So it all kind of came together on the Baltic Sea coast in Poland, where we have been doing our cultural conquest for 35 years, and we just decided to go big. So we came to Skopje.

Please, I do not mean to indicate that small is not beautiful. Nice things come in small packages, and my team just loves it here. The weather is beautiful. The pace of life is much slower. The people are really nice. So yes, we are starting off here, and then we are going to go conquer London and then India. So we are starting here. A wonderful program you have all arranged for us. Thank you so much. It will take place on Friday or Saturday—Saturday, yeah. But I thought this evening I would speak about someone that you all know very well, but perhaps our team does not know: Alexander the Great. Let’s give him a little applause. Actually, when we go downtown, you will see how great he is. He is about 20 meters high. They have a beautiful statue of him there because this is historically where he took birth, and of course, his history is like many conquerors. He was unique in that he pretty much conquered the known world at that time, from here in Europe all the way to India. There is actually mention of him in the writings of the scribes of the kings there. But we won’t go into that right now.

What I would like to share with you is that he was somewhat enlightened. Alexander the Great, he was somewhat enlightened, and that we can tell by his departure from this world. To understand the greatness of someone, you don't necessarily have to go through their whole history. Just like to understand what is the ocean—the vast ocean—you don't have to drink the whole ocean. You take a drop of the ocean and the ocean is salted. So, by this little drop of his history, we can actually appreciate him in some ways as a wise man. Because after conquering many, many kingdoms all the way to India, his army was exhausted. By that time, he wanted to go on—I don't know, to China or whatever—but the men were getting tired, so he agreed to come back here. And unfortunately, on that long journey home, he fell ill. There are different versions of what type of illness he had, but he fell ill. So ill that he was actually on his deathbed. He was dying and he knew it. And he composed himself and he left behind lessons for his army, lessons for his country, Macedonia.

Actually, wisdom is universal. Real wisdom applies to all human beings if it is really wisdom. Wisdom means on the transcendental platform. I often say when I am speaking to new audiences about Bhagavad-gītā that the knowledge appeared in India when Kṛṣṇa spoke the Bhagavad-gītā 5,000 years ago on the battlefield of Kurukṣetra, but it wasn't just meant for that time and that place and those people. It is universal knowledge, *rājavidyā rājaguhyam*, and actually, it is meant for the whole world. And that can be understood from just one verse in the Bhagavad-gītā, where Kṛṣṇa says that He is the seed-giving father of all living entities. He is the seed-giving father of all living entities. That means we all have the same original father. So that means we are all brothers and sisters. Yes, we are all brothers and sisters. If you know, brothers and sisters squabble, they don't have war. So this is a peace formula, which I am going to speak about on Saturday. The peace formula. Prabhupāda coined that peace formula: Kṛṣṇa. So that is wisdom. Wisdom is not sectarian. It applies to all of humanity. Like *athāto brahma-jijñāsā*. Now that you have come to the human form of life, what is your business? It doesn't matter if you are Macedonian, Serbian, Australian, or Chinese. Your business is to become self-realized. To understand your deeper spiritual nature, to understand the source of all existence, material and spiritual, God or Kṛṣṇa, and what is your intimate loving relationship with Him? That is wisdom.

So he spoke some wisdom at the time of his death. He actually called all his generals forward, powerful men like warriors, and he spoke something spiritual to them—like what our country is talking about, fighting, and this pose and that, this sword, that weapon. He called them forward and he said, "My dear generals, I have three wishes on my deathbed. I have three wishes. Please carry them out without fail." So they were very surrendered to him. Very surrendered. They would give their life for him. Many did. Many laid down their lives, as kṣatriyas do. So with tears actually flowing down their cheeks, the generals agreed to abide by their king. They said, "What are your three wishes?"

So Alexander, you know he was dying, so the voice is not so strong at death, and death is very traumatic. The soul is being torn from the body, so it is very traumatic, but he was composed. He said very clearly, "My first desire is that my physicians—my doctors, who are all crying—must carry my coffin." When someone dies, the pallbearers—some of that person’s friends or associates or family members—will carry the coffin. He said, "Only my doctors can carry my coffin."

They are all kind of confused. "Well, what about this general or that?" "No, only my doctors. When I die, you take me to my grave. Only doctors can carry my coffin." Then he paused, because that is the art of public speaking. You let it sink in a little bit. He continued, "Secondly, I desire that when my coffin is being carried to my grave, the path leading to the graveyard be strewn with gold, silver, and all types of precious stones which I have collected through all the years in my treasury." You fought many wars, first to collect that "booty," we call it. When you win a war, you can take from the dead bodies. So for many years, from here to Asia Minor to Asia, he had collected so much. So he said, "You take it all when I die, and from where I die to my grave, you just throw all jewels, gold, rubies, emeralds, diamonds." The generals were shocked.

And they said, "Sire, what is your third wish?" They were like, "What? Only doctors carry your coffin? The booty you have collected, you want us to throw it on the ground? We will walk on it to your grave. What is your third wish?" They were leaning over because he was now ready to die. This is my godbrother Kadamba Kan Mahārāja. I think maybe you have heard of him, a great kīrtanīya. He was dying. He was also composed. He is a wonderful devotee, and his last words were, "Mission." So it is a great spiritual warrior: mission. The mission of Prabhupāda, to spread the saṅkīrtana mission around the world. So we can also be composed at that traumatic moment if we are proficient in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. It’s a practice. Practice makes perfect. But if you die with the name of Kṛṣṇa on your tongue... 

My mother died like that. She was an atheist, a staunch atheist. My mother was Phi Beta Kappa—the highest award you can get at America’s greatest university, Stanford. She was honored. She had a trophy. A smart woman, but she was an atheist. It’s a long story. But when she came close to death—I wasn't there—she told my brother, "You know that Bhagavad-gītā that your older brother, Brian, sent me? Go get it. It’s in the garage under the grease, the oil." My brother brought the Bhagavad-gītā to her, and she was in a rocking chair, and for the last six months of her life, all she did was read Bhagavad-gītā. And then she asked my brother, "I think that your older brother has a tape ministry in London. You order all the tapes." My brother said, "Mom, I will do it." So she sat in her rocking chair and she listened to my humble lectures reading Bhagavad-gītā. So when she was dying, this atheist mama, she looked up and she said to my brother, "Peter, don't you lament for me. I am not this body. I am going to Kṛṣṇa."

The miracle of Lord Caitanya’s movement. Miracle means something that contradicts the laws of material nature. We have heard in Christianity, Jesus walked on water, he cured the... So miracle means something that cannot be explained by logic and reasoning, but it happened. So, my mom, Kṛṣṇa, and I am still here trying to make my mom proud. You can chant the name, but it takes practice. You have to go through the ups and downs. You should welcome the tough times that you go through in life because they force you to take shelter of Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes there is no other option. Someone, a loved one is sick, or you are sick, or there is war, or there is this and that. "Oh my God." Yes. Chant His name. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Draupadī, if you read in the Bhāgavatam, she had so many trials. She went through them depending on Kṛṣṇa. And at the end, when Kṛṣṇa saved her, she said, "Let those calamities come again and again and again. Because when those calamities come, I just think of Your lotus feet. There is no other shelter. I think of Your lotus feet. And Kṛṣṇa, by thinking of Your lotus feet, I don't have to take birth again in this material world." So let them come on. So let the good times roll, which means Sunday feast, prasādam, kīrtan, and devotees. But if the tough times come, you also say, "Thank You, Kṛṣṇa. Now I can take real shelter."

So that was Alexander. They said, "He is so composed. What is your third wish, Sire?" "My third wish is that both my hands are kept dangling outside of my coffin." "Like what? Wouldn't that be strange? You know, they are carrying your coffin, your hands are hanging out." It was scary. He wanted his hands like closed, but they had to have some opening. His hands are like that. So Alexander's favorite general—I forget his name—he was by his side, big, strong, rugged, scars all over his body. Ladies like the eyebrows a certain way and the lips a certain way, the injections... oh. Anyway, I live in this world, I see these things. And the men, you know, the six-pack. If you are a kṣatriya, you like scars because that shows that you have gone into battle and you have served. If you are a kṣatriya, it means you are a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. They fought; the Rajput kings fought for dharma. They didn't mind dying. Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā, "You go to the heavenly planets or if you are a devotee, you go back home." They don't mind. So if they get scars, it means they are out on the battlefield. Now we try to hide the scars.

So the general said, "Oh King, we assure you that your wishes will be fulfilled, but tell us, why do you make such strange wishes?" So there was not much life left in Alexander. So he took a deep breath, and now they are just very close to his mouth. He said, "I want my physicians to carry my coffin because people should realize that no doctor can really cure anybody. They are powerless. You cannot save a person who is destined to die. Everyone is destined to die." They are thinking, "I will pay the doctor more money. I will give you half my kingdom." Death will come. Prabhupāda said, "When you die, you have to fly your own airplane." I heard him say it, and I went, "Whoa, when you die, you have to fly your own airplane. No one will be there but you." So take advantage of guru and Vaiṣṇava while you have the time. Don't waste a moment. You cannot buy back even one moment of human life for all the gold in the world. So we shouldn't waste any time. We catch ourselves in frivolous talk, this and that. I am looking at the details because maybe I should be chanting Kṛṣṇa. So that was a nice instruction. Let the doctors carry me, because see, they couldn't save me. Everyone could see the doctors didn't save him. That is my point.

And Bob Dylan, have you heard of Bob Dylan? "He not busy being born is busy dying." And Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā, "For one who has taken his birth, death is certain. And for one who has died, birth is certain." So these are sober talks meant to wake us up. Wake up. Prabhupāda used to say, "Wake up."

So then he said—they came even closer, nobody could figure out the second one. "My second wish, of throwing all the gold, the silver—I don't know if they had platinum in those days—rubies, emeralds, sapphires, diamonds, throw it all on the ground, is to tell people that not even a fraction of gold will come with me. I spent my whole life earning riches, but I can't take anything with me. Let people realize it is a sheer waste of time to chase wealth as your main goal in life." Money is the honey. Money is the honey, it’s so sweet, can't be beat. Not true.

There is a prayer to Durgā. Can you find that, Dēvī? I know on the Polish tour, in the stage dance, they did that; they chanted to that, they danced to that mantra. Everyone was, "Oh, so beautiful. So Kṛṣṇa conscious." It is a prayer to Durgā. Please give me money, give me wealth, give me this, give me... Try to keep you entertained, at least. If you don't know it, I will excuse you. Okay, those who desire material wealth worship Durgā Dēvī with the following mantra: "Oh worshipful mother Durgā, please give me wealth, strength, fame, a beautiful wife, and so on." That was what they were singing. Can you do that one again? In fact, I gave one class many years ago and a guest came afterwards and said, "You are a guru, can you initiate me into that mantra?" I said, "No."

So that was his second lesson: tell people that not even a fraction of gold can come with me. I spent all my life earning riches; it was a waste of time. That was the idea of putting it all on the ground as he walked along. And then they came even closer and they said, "Sire, what is your third wish?" And he said, "About my third wish of having my hands dangling outside of the coffin, can you guess? I wish people to know that I came empty-handed into this world and I am leaving this world empty-handed." With these words, the king closed his eyes and died. A little applause for Alexander.

Actually, you never know who you are sitting next to. Sometimes I travel the world and I see various devotees. I see children, especially, and you see they have this—obviously from past births—they just love to chant or they love to listen. And I will say afterwards, "Did you understand everything I said?" "Of course I did." "How old are you?" "Seven." So, Alexander, whoever he was—some loved him, some hated him—but I think that he had some deep wisdom there. So Kṛṣṇa said the same thing but in fewer words. Elegance—there is a saying in Bengal, "Elegance is truth spoken concisely." So Kṛṣṇa said, *kālo 'smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho*—"Time I am, destroyer of all the worlds." Just like in one small package, whatever we try to acquire, be it gross jewels or subtle fame and name, it is all destroyed. The only thing that is eternal is what? Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Whatever progress you make in this lifetime, whatever progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is guaranteed. It stays with you. What stays with you when you die? Nothing. But whatever progress you have made, because it is service to the Divine, it is service to God, it is service to Kṛṣṇa, it stays with you. And if you make 60% advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in this short duration of life, next life you get a plus 61. You get an upgrade. Like sometimes we travel in a hotel—I stay in so many hotels in my life like the Marriott—and I will go and I will say, "Can I have an upgrade?" "Yes, sir." We will give you a better room. So Kṛṣṇa is so kind; you get an upgrade. 1%, but that is a lot. You have to work for 1%. It’s the world.

So this is the difference between material life and spiritual life. Of course, you know, "Time I am, the destroyer of all the worlds." That means for us individually, not just the worlds, it means death. We have to die. And we keep telling people, they don't want to hear it. "I didn't come to your festival to hear about death." What is the Bhūtanī? What is the translation? Every moment... Yeah, that was when the questions were being asked to the Pāṇḍavas. What is the most amazing thing? "Every moment people are dying, but those who are living are thinking, 'My friend has died, but I should live forever.'" Nobody wants to die. Why? Because our deeper nature, our spiritual nature, is eternal. Not only is the soul eternal, but it is *nitya*, it is ever youthful. Everyone would like to keep between 16 and 18, those years, right? You are so naive and innocent. But that is because the soul is eternally youthful. So people don't want to die. But a saintly person will be very sober: "My time is limited. Let me use it to become Kṛṣṇa conscious." A materialistic person: "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die." That is how they approach death. Eat, drink, and be merry, or no, we say, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare."

But foolish people think—what could be more foolish than thinking that you can cheat death? Kṛṣṇa says, "Time I am, destroyer of the worlds." This includes you. It is the biggest illusion to think that I can cheat death. And perhaps the most famous person was Hiraṇyakaśipu. We all know the story from the Seventh Canto, right? He got a benediction from Brahmā. He got a benediction from Brahmā, the engineer of this universe. He is so smart. He has got four heads. He is a devatā. Devatās have the right to give blessings, but material blessings are temporary. So he wanted to be immortal. He went to Brahmā and he asked... so he tried to cover everything. "I don't want to die in the day, I don't want to die at night. I don't want to die on the land, or the water, or the sky. By the hands of a snake, from the lower planets, a human..." He had covered everything. But we won't go into that now. You know that he didn't cover everything. The Lord is the smartest of the smart. He is the source of all intelligence. So Hiraṇyakaśipu was killed by half-man, half-lion, neither inside nor outside of the doorway, etc., etc. You cannot cheat death. It is not possible.

Or the potter. There was a potter, a sculptor actually. It is a true story; they tell it in Bengal. The sculptor, he was such a... I mean, it looked like 3D nowadays when he sculpted something out of marble, and he painted it so good. So one day, out of curiosity, he went to an astrologer, and he said, "You know, how is my life going to be? Am I going to get married? Where will I live? How much... and when am I going to die?" Astrologers don't tell you when you are going to die generally; it would be too much. But he paid him, bribed him. So the astrologer said, "Okay, you are going to die six months from now, the first week of that month, at 1:03." 1:03! In your sculptor’s home there. So he had it down to the exact minute and the second you are going to die. He wrote it all down. "Whoa, I have six months. I don't want to die. Yamarāja is going to come and take me."

So what he did is he carved nine sculptures of himself in different forms—like this and like this and that and that and like that—and you know he is very expert, and he painted these sculptures. And when the six months' time came, that day came, that hour came, in his studio, he placed them in nine different places, and he stood amongst them. Paused. And these donkeys—like we have horses, like Yamarāja has eight donkeys—and he crashed into the studio and Yamarāja... "Okay, every day millions of living entities are going to my kingdom. I don't have time to wait around, I have to pick them all up today. So this is the sculptor, I have the right address." So, and momentarily, he was bewildered. "Wait a minute, I got... hurry. Which one is it? I heard he was a good sculptor. Which is the real sculptor?" He couldn't figure it out. They all look the same. And inside, the sculptor is laughing, "I cheated death." No, I shouldn't smile.

But there is a saying that we should follow in the footsteps of the Mahājanas, not try to cheat them. So there are 12 Mahājanas, 12 authorities in the science of bhakti, devotional service. Prahlāda Mahārāja. Huh? Bhīṣma. Who are the others? The 12 Mahājanas. Look up the 12 Mahājanas. I am shocked you don't know. That is because you are my student and I don't know. So how are you supposed to know? Who are the 12 Mahājanas, authorities on devotional service? Whoever gets it first gets a piece of Śyāma’s chocolate cake tomorrow. Lord Brahmā, Nārada, Śiva, you are late. Four Kumāras, Kapila, Manu, Prahlāda, Janaka Mahārāja, Bhīṣma, Bali Mahārāja, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and Yama. Yama means Yamarāja. These are the authorities. Our authorities... actually, we talk about guru-paramparā, how important the succession is. So these are the heads of our disciplic succession. Anything what they say is devotional. If what they say is not devotional, they are not the authorities. So Yamarāja is one. So he is very intelligent. So he thought, "Stop this nonsense." You know what he did? He looked around. He said, "Geez, they told me this guy was a sculptor, but his work is really sloppy. I mean, I have... these are the worst work I have seen, any sculpture. Look at the ear there. It is all off. The nose is not straight. Look at that one. The toes bent." He is going on. And the real sculptor, "Hey, what are you talking about? I... All right. Come on!" His false ego. He spoke up. He was complaining, "No, I am a good sculptor!" "Come on. You can't fool, you can't cheat death."

Walt Disney, you know, Mickey Mouse... so when he had cancer in the 50s, he didn't want to die. So in consultation with the doctors, you know, thinking ahead in time, they thought, "Well, you... we will freeze your body, not to death, but just before death, and slow everything down, slow the cancer down. And hopefully, you know, we will find a cure for cancer in the next 10 or 20 years, and then we will unfreeze you and fix you." So this is actually a true story. I don't know if the potter story is really true, but you tell a lie long enough, people start to believe it. I have been saying since 1970 that was a true story. Anyway, it’s a Bengali story, the potter. So that’s what they did in Los Angeles. They had this hospital where they cooled the body down to whatever degree and put him in there, and they were checking, and the cancer was not spreading. About two years later, there was this mass outage of electricity in Los Angeles. It lasted about four or five days, and you know people suffered. There was no lighting, there was no heating, there was no cooling, nothing. And they went to check on Walt Disney afterwards, and he thawed out and died. That was the biggest news on the newspaper. He thawed out because there was no cooling temp. So he tried to cheat death, but you can't cheat death.

And there is the ride to Ahmedabad. You know that story? The ride to Ahmedabad. There was a wealthy man, and he ordered his servant—well, they had a good relationship—he ordered his servant, "Please go to the market and buy some fruits and vegetables for the offering today." So the servant is very loyal. He got down, he has got bags, he goes and he is buying the fruits and vegetables in the market, and he looks into a dark corner and he sees Yamarāja. We always paint Yama like a Mahājana, very... but he has got his... you know, death is terrifying also. This is very terrifying. He saw death. "Oh my God, death has come to take me today. Yamarāja has come to take me." So he grabbed the fruits and vegetables really fast and he ran back to his master and fell over and spilled all the fruits and vegetables. "What is happening?" The master said, "I saw death in the corner of the market. He has come to take me." So the master said, "No, no, you have to go to Ahmedabad." This is like a thousand kilometers away. "You take my horse and you get on that horse and you go to Ahmedabad. You escape here, so Yama can't get you." "Yes, master." So, he got on the horse, "I cheated death!"

So the master was very upset with Yamarāja. So he went down to the market looking for Yamarāja. I wouldn't advise that. And there in the corner, he saw Yamarāja. Walked up. He said, "Yamarāja." "Yes, what do you want?" "Well, um, well, you came here to take my servant to your abode today. I just want to say how upset I am with you that you came here to the market to take him." So Yama said, "What is his name?" So the master gave the name of his servant. Yama pulled out his little black book, "Hm. I don't have an appointment with him here this morning. I have an appointment with him on the road to Ahmedabad this evening."

*Uwaga*, we say in Polish, "Be careful." So it is another Bengali proverb. I don't—you shouldn't really memorize this, which is kind of gross. It is that even if I smeared stool all over my body, I couldn't keep you away when my time came. Don't chant that mantra. Even if I smeared stool over my body, it wouldn't keep you away. Everyone has to die. Of course, those who are pious, who know Vedic culture, who are devotees of the Lord, we know, of course, we have to die also, but we know how to transcend death. We meet death in a different way, with a big smile on our face. "Come on. Back home. Back... I have been waiting for this moment my whole life." I have been telling, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, get out of here. Come on." Like my mom. "Kṛṣṇa!" It takes some courage to have faith in the holy names, to have faith in the holy...

But there are various ways of transcending death. Like, for example, Dhruva Mahārāja. Dhruva Mahārāja was more than qualified to go back home, back to Godhead. So when his time came, the Vaikuṇṭha-vāsīs, the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, they came on a flower airplane. And it is not mythology, it is not utopia. There are flower airplanes. 300 years ago, people couldn't imagine a huge metallic airplane flying in the sky. So don't think it is just some kind of thing; there are flower airplanes, and the Viṣṇu-dūtas come down to take the devotees back to the spiritual world. When will that day be ours? The flower... they are going to be... "I don't want to die." "Come on, you guy. It is really cool. Look at that flower." I am just joking. So they came down to take Dhruva because of his history. You could give many lessons on Dhruva.

So, Dhruva got in the plane. "Okay, let’s go." And he said to the Viṣṇu-dūtas, "Wait a minute, where is my mom?" Mom... really, mom’s like the first guru. Really. Mom and dad, they are the first gurus. So he said, "Where is my mom?" They said, "She is not ready." So Dhruva said, "I am not going back to Godhead without my mom." And the Viṣṇu-dūtas said, "But Kṛṣṇa is waiting for you. You can't, you can't say that. I am not going back to Godhead without my mom." So they are thinking, you know, they are going to get back without Dhruva and the Lord is going to be upset with the Viṣṇu-dūtas. They said, "Oh, let's go get her." So they went back down and they got the mother. By Dhruva’s devotion, by Dhruva’s bhakti, his love for Kṛṣṇa, and a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, she was delivered. So, I am not saying "cheating death," but this is a transcendental way—we are transcending death through devotional service, through the mercy of a devotee. Dhruva’s mom went back to the spiritual world.

Sāvitrī and Satyavān. They, you could say, "cheated" death, but not in a bad way, but in a good way. Satyavān proposed to Sāvitrī, a very pious girl. Her main quality was chastity. She was very chaste. Men can also be chaste. We always think women are chaste, but men can also be chaste. When Rāma left to go to the forest to find Mārīca—the deer was calling His name, actually Sītā wanted the deer—so Rāma said, "I will go get the deer." So He ran to get the deer, and then Mārīca, in the voice of Rāma, said, "Lakṣmaṇa, help." So Sītā said to Lakṣmaṇa, who was guarding her in the forest, "Go help your brother. Go help." He said, "No, no, no, Sītā. This is the Rākṣasa saying Rāma's name. I should stay here and protect you." She said, "You are just staying here to enjoy me," she said to Lakṣmaṇa. She became so... he said, "Mother, I have never looked above your ankles." When he was with her, they were in the palace, "I have never seen more than your ankles, I haven't looked at your body. I have never looked above your ankles." This is chastity. So she was chaste. A woman—that is real beauty, actually.

So they went to the astrologer because he proposed to her. They wanted to see if it was a good match. So they went and he said, "This is, you know, yes, it is a good match, but Satyavān, you are going to die in one year to this day. So I wouldn't go ahead with this marriage." So they went home and they told their parents, and Sāvitrī said, "Doesn't matter. I have given my heart to this boy. I have given my heart to this boy. How can I give my heart to another?" She was so chaste. "I will marry him." So they married and they lived a little outside of town. He was a woodcutter, such a... was cutting wood every day, piling it. A simple job. And the day came, and he was out chopping wood. She was home cooking, hoping it wouldn't happen. And Yamarāja with the donkeys, "Get in the, get in the chariot. You knew this is your last. Get in the chariot." So you don't argue with the Yamarāja. He got in the chariot. The news sped very quickly to Sāvitrī. She dropped the cooking. She ran to the forest just as that chariot was about to take off. She said, "Yama, don't take my husband." He said, "It is his time. Everyone has his time. This was predicted. You know your time." "But please, he is the love of my life. I have given my heart to him. I cannot give my heart to another man."

Yamarāja took off at the speed of light. Sāvitrī, because of her purity, because of her chastity, she had siddhis. She had a siddhi because of her chastity. And she flew behind the chariot. Yamarāja was like, "What?" Was shocked. "Who is this girl? What is this quality? How powerful is this chastity?" So he said, "Go back." "No, please don't take my husband." "His time has come. Please, you know." "No." So she was a smart girl. She said, "At least, if you are going to take my husband, at least bless me with a son." "All right, I bless you with a son." "I am a chaste girl. I can't have a son with anyone but my husband." So Yama said, "You got me on that one. Here is your husband back," and they lived happily ever after. And then I said, "All right, that is not cheating death. It is just transcending death. There are two ways to approach something: the right way and the wrong way."

Ajāmila, he didn't even know he was doing it, you know, he was very attached to his son, Nārāyaṇa. So the son was dying, or he died—he is dead... oh, that is right, Ajāmila... it was a long ride down here, guys. Ajāmila was dying, so when he was dying, he was calling out to that which you love the most. I remember in the 60s, the reporters were coming back from the war in Vietnam—the Americans were fighting in Vietnam—and one reporter was saying that he had seen—he was a reporter and also a doctor—he said, "Most men when they are dying, they call out to their mother." Interesting. The bond between mother and child is very deep. So he would, most of the soldiers, "Mom, mother..." they die. Whatever you love the most, you will call out to. So gradually, gradually, we have to shift our attachments from everything in this world to Kṛṣṇa, and whatever is in relationship, that is in our interest. It is not easy, but we have to. As young boys are attracted to young girls and young girls are attracted to young boys, Rūpa says with the same intensity, but in a transcendental, spiritual way: "My dear Lord, let me be attached to You." That doesn't mean you ignore your family members or your friends or devotees, but you love them as Kṛṣṇa’s parts and parcels. You see the soul, not the body, so love reigns supreme in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So Ajāmila was very attached to his son Nārāyaṇa. Death... name... So the Lord said, "There is that person chanting My name. Go get him. Bring him back." He is just chanting the name of his son; it is also My name. Ātatāyī. He doesn't know he is chanting My name. Go! So he didn't go back to Godhead, but he didn't go to hell either. He took birth. In his next birth, he perfected his devotional service and went back home, back to God. So see how powerful Kṛṣṇa consciousness is, even unconscious, you know, you are chanting around... but if you are chanting the holy name, especially mahā-mantra... Mahāprabhu, He doesn't accept our offenses, He only accepts our service. Therefore, the demigods are begging to take birth on this planet during the time of Caitanya’s movement, and you are in the movement. Some of you were born in the movement, some of you came. It doesn't matter. But if you are in this movement, what does it mean? Not living in a temple, but it means mainly chanting. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

And what about Mahārāja Parīkṣit’s prediction? He got... he made an offense, quote-unquote, to the brāhmaṇa, and he put the snake around his... so that was considered offensive, so therefore the brāhmaṇa’s son cursed him. I see the play every day. It was a long journey here, from Baltic Sea to Macedonia. Where is this, Greece? So he was cursed to die in seven days. So he accepted it. He welcomed death. Actually, there are two verses I found in my studies today where he shows no fear at the moment of death. He sees it as an upgrade. Everyone knows Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.19.15. And I will repeat his words: "O brāhmaṇas, just accept me as a completely surrendered soul and let Mother Gaṅgā, the representative of the Lord, also accept me in that way. For I have already taken the lotus feet of the Lord into my heart. Let the snakebird or whatever magical thing the brāhmaṇa created bite me at once. I only desire that you all continue singing the deeds of Lord Viṣṇu." Transcended death. That is a famous part, right? I think it is in our play, right? "Let the snakebird or whatever magical thing the brāhmaṇa has created, curse me, bite me at once." Like, come on. Like Dhruva, when that flower airplane came because he is such a great devotee, death paid obeisances to Dhruva. And to get into the airplane, Dhruva stepped on his head. Excuse me. He went in the flower airplane.

Then there is another verse spoken to Śukadeva Gosvāmī, 12th Canto, sixth chapter, sixth verse. I found it today. I thought that was the only reference. "My Lord, I now have no fear of Tvaṣṭā or any other living being, or even of repeated death, because I absorb myself in that purely spiritual Absolute Truth which you have revealed, and which destroys all fear." So we deal with death in that way. We have no fear, because Kṛṣṇa... Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa... if Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you. And if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you. If Kṛṣṇa wants to kill me, it can only be better, because we have experienced in our lives that Kṛṣṇa consciousness just gets better and better and better and better. You know, there is ups and downs, but it is like this. It is not like this. There is some downs, but the up and the down... so we stick to the transcendental Jaladuta, and we make it. And of course, we have various mantras of the Nrsiṁha who can protect us so that we can continue serving our spiritual master’s desires.

"I offer my obeisances unto the ferocious and powerful, the great Viṣṇu, the fiery one whose faces are on all sides, the fearful one, the Nrsiṁha who causes the death of death." *Mṛtyu-mṛtyum*—He can kill death. And so you can take shelter of Him. If you are destined to die, He can kill death. Who causes the death of death personified? Who can help one overcome death? So that is very relevant and most relevant in conclusion, because it is getting late. In conclusion, we know how to transcend death very easily, very blissfully, very happily. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.1.14: "Living beings who are entangled in the complicated meshes of birth and death can be freed immediately by even unconsciously chanting the holy names of Kṛṣṇa, which is feared by fear personified." What a great way to end the class. That verse is classic. It is on the tongue of every śloka-vālā. It is such an important verse. We are speaking about death. Here is the way, the best way to transcend it. "Living beings who are entangled in the complicated meshes of birth and death can be freed immediately by even unconsciously chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare," which is feared by fear personified. So, fear not. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa...""