"*00216*.*
"Hi, welcome to Yāvaṭa and Ter Kadamba. We had the good fortune of visiting Yāvaṭa today. We are grateful to our ancestors, Vraja-vāsīs, and especially in recent times, Lord Caitanya and His followers, for maintaining and sometimes rediscovering these holy places so that we can come here. We know that visiting holy places is one of the potent items of devotional service that can awaken devotional feelings even in the neophyte, so we are very grateful to be here. 

Yāvaṭa is the place where Rādhārāṇī came when She was married. There was actually a wonderful palace here, but to Her, it felt as if it were a prison. Of course, we know that Her so-called husband was actually the shadow of Kṛṣṇa, Abhimanyu. So, it is a very mysterious līlā; it was to enable their parakīya-rasa and their meetings. There are many pastimes here of how Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa met secretly, and sometimes Abhimanyu became the butt of jokes and so many things. It was a very wonderful place, and there is an ancient tree here which is also very powerful, having been here for so many years.

After that, we take this wonderful walk through the fields to Ter Kadamba—a beautiful walk. Ter Kadamba, of course, is the place where Kṛṣṇa kept His cows. He climbed up into the Kadamba trees and called them in the evening by playing His flute. When the cows heard His flute, they actually heard each of their names and they would come here. Sometimes Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa would exchange glances at this place. 

In more recent times, this was the place of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s bhajana. That is very wonderful for us because he wrote *Upadeśāmṛta* in this place. There is a very famous pastime where Rūpa Gosvāmī wanted to give his older brother, Sanātana Gosvāmī, something to eat and offer him some foodstuff. Just when he was thinking in this way, this beautiful young gopī came with a pot of sweet rice on her head and said, "Please take this, we just had a wedding in the village." So he offered this to his brother, and later on, they discovered that this was actually Rādhārāṇī who had brought this. They were lamenting that, "We want to serve Rādhārāṇī; we don't want to take service from Her." 

All of these wonderful pastimes took place here, and as usual, we engage in the process of hearing and chanting—especially chanting this mahā-mantra—and this enables us, in some way, to feel and to enter into these wonderful pastimes. It is our place here, so we are very grateful today to be at Ter Kadamba. Let's hope you enjoy this video and can also feel some of the mood of this place. Thank you. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""