Our studio at the moment is really talking about what's happening tomorrow, and it's about a festival. What's happening at this festival?

How many guests will be a part of it with the aim of having a better atmosphere, and this will pass in a beautiful way?

It's from the organization, so let's start with you, in a few details. Let's start with everything that's going on. First, I'd like to stop them. At work, no organization calls friends of the individual. Saturday, with others, came up with the idea for a festival inspired by the Polish tour and the festival where also another girl called Viva Culture organizes a festival on the Baltic Sea, a stop of Indian culture.

What will be heard tomorrow in a city park at school?

We have a kirtan performance, or spiritual traditional music. We have a philosophical part where we perform a mute part of the Bhagavad Gita. We have guests from a Swedish presentation, cloaks presentation of borec vetini. We have a protocol bidet.

In the background, there are other activities. We have five chariots, a different aspect of Indian culture is presented. We have an Indian bazaar, an Indian workshop. We have a chariot where we have Indian specialties, a chariot with books, questions and answers, and many other activities.

Part is to share the spiritual philosophy of ancient Indian yoga. Yoga is becoming popular yoga in the whole world, except for the poses and the sabbath. The goal of yoga is the intention to become spiritually enlightened. The Bhagavad Gita is the oldest spiritual book in the world.

It is the oldest known spiritual book in the world. It is the most popular. Let's get acquainted with the spiritual. And I hope it will be a sunny day with the providence of the Lord. May the wisdom that you share with us be a part of the culture of India.

There is a lot of music, probably, and beautiful wreaths of flowers. Is all that the visitors get?

The art is not just to put on a show or to get a special experience. It is an exotic, joyful diversity of the spiritual culture of India. Together with the dance, the music, they would like to honor. For example, here we give you a flower wreath.

They usually think that it is only done in Hawaii, but in India, it is very normal to give him a tomato as a guest. The ghetto will be able to milk the Indian currency, see a dance. If anyone has any questions about philosophy, for example, who comes from where do they come from?

Who is the purpose of life?

What happens after death?

We put those questions in our lives. The answer to those questions. You can buy various gifts, we also have them. Shato for the whole families, for children, whole families. Personally, I don't think that Navina caused this to be of great interest to all those who want to know more about this culture.

What is this general impression?

Do they really know what those things mean when we look at them?

And maybe we know them like straw. Maybe when we look at them, these colors first do not associate with anything else. They mean they have a dream meaning. The same applies to those who know the clothes. Don't be surprised.

Vito, does Navina know what?

Neither does she know. No, generally no. That's why Stella is here tomorrow to explain to all those interested what this outfit means, what does this mean, what does she do, what does a red dot on the face mean?

For all interested, feel free to say tomorrow, Shato. If I'm too tired to get one like this, I would say it must be something. Nina got this kind of trepidation. Who can try on a saree?

Who can see how she wears a saree?

What does a saree mean?

What are the different, different styles of draped sari?

All those details, I will tell you. Who, maybe this is how we feel?

My acquaintances have a meaning. What is the smell?

Who can we know it from?

The happiness in this event, these colors smell very nice, and the car, who is dying?

Our dear guests, all those who want to experience this, will see it tomorrow in the city park. So our guests will be there to answer all your drinking questions. Life, we are all looking for, and we are all looking for the meaning of life.

Whether it is simply to come to an agreement on this dusty, if it sounds like a Cavinian expression, many even the ancient Indian writings begin with this statement. Now that we have reached a human form of life, now the goal is to seek for the meaning of life.

We have an education, we have a career, we have a family, but humans have intelligence, unlike animals, and we can seek them. The main philosophy is that I am not the body. The body is only a garment. As I am the spiritual power, soul, lotto, we labor to make the material world a beautiful place.

Everyone has problems, but there is a spiritual world from where life is an eternal sex, bliss, and knowledge. The purpose of life is to marry. We can live it eternally blissful life with God. In India, it is called Krishna, that means the most beautiful, the most beautiful person.

One with him can truly satisfy our heart. It is only a surah. Very interesting question, Sekos. I would like to know how much with a little music we can enliven our today's show and your guest Seka in a beautiful way.

We sing a special song called Hare Krishna Mahamantra.

We are here with our show. Our guests started the show in their own style, and we thank you for being a part of Macedonia today. We invite you to be with us again from Monday, and tomorrow in the city pa, village worldly day at the gate, so there you can watch what you have done.

Thank you once again for your attention. Have a nice weekend and see you again from Monday. Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare.