"*00103*.*
"# Two Souls Within Everyone’s Heart

*Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Śrī Guru, Śrī Caitanya, Manomaya, Svayaṁ Rūpa Kṛpāyate. Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityānanda, Śrī Advaita, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsādi Gaura Bhakta Vṛnda.*

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

First of all, I thank you all for the very nice reception. I want to thank all of you devotees from my heart for your very beautiful welcome. I was driving through the streets of Delhi, which is not really a very nice experience—lots of traffic and smoke. But as we came close to this temple, it was as if we had reached heaven. When I saw the view of the temple from a distance, I felt as if I had come to heaven. 

I started searching: "Where are the 33 crore gods and goddesses in this heaven? Are you all hiding?" But then I had the vision of the most beautiful Śrī Vigrahas in this temple. I realized I am actually in Vṛndāvana. During my tour of New Delhi, we have been speaking in different temples about Bhagavān, about God, about Kṛṣṇa. We have visited many temples, and now here in Rohini, we are continuously discussing Kṛṣṇa.

It is very difficult to talk about God in the Western world because they do not have any understanding that God has a personal form. They are pious people, but if you ask them, "Who is God?", they wonder. Would any of you like to say something about God? We all know that He lives somewhere up in the sky, and if I am good, I go there; if I am bad, I go down there. 

If you really want to know about God, you have to come to India. The Lord regularly makes His appearance here—not in New York, not in Sydney, not in Moscow, but in different parts of India. Kṛṣṇa has come, and two and a half hours from here on the Yamuna Expressway, you can go to Vṛndāvana. You can see so many Deity forms of Kṛṣṇa, so many paintings, so many people talking about Him. The people of Delhi are fortunate that Vṛndāvana, the home of God, is so close.

What is the purpose of religion? Whatever religion you choose to follow, the purpose is to awaken love for God. The Vedas say, *athāto brahma-jijñāsā*—now is the time to understand who you are, who is God, and what is your intimate, loving relationship with Him. All religions agree that the goal is to love God. But my challenge in the Western countries is: "How can you really love someone you know nothing about?" 

Many of you are married. What attracted you to your wife or husband? The way they dressed, the way they talked, their humor, the color of their eyes—it is the details that you fall in love with. We are attracted to a person based on the information we have about them. If you want to awaken your devotion, you have to come to India, to Vṛndāvana, Māyāpura, Purī, or Śrīraṅgam. When you see the Lord in these beautiful forms, you will fall out of love with the material world and into love with God. Even if you cannot go to the temple, at home you can study Vedic literature like the *Bhagavad-gītā*, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, and *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*.

Once, a newspaper reporter visited Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, the guru of my guru. The reporter was proud of his newspaper, explaining how they publish so much information. Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura said, "Yes, we are also going to start a newspaper from our Gauḍīya Maṭha mission." The reporter asked, "How can you have a daily newspaper about spiritual life? What will you publish?" Bhaktisiddhānta Mahārāja laughed and said, "We have hundreds of times more things to print. In the *Gītā*, Kṛṣṇa explains that this material world is only a part of His creation, but the spiritual world is unlimited. I can have a newspaper every minute."

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was famous for staying in Dhaka for one month and preaching only on the first verse of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* without repeating himself once. By hearing (*śravaṇam*) and chanting (*kīrtanam*), you remember Kṛṣṇa (*Kṛṣṇa-smaraṇam*). Our Ācāryas teach us that real Kṛṣṇa consciousness means you always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him for even a second.

How can you always remember someone? There are two ways. You can always remember someone if you hate them. The best example is Kaṁsa. Because he was afraid that Kṛṣṇa would kill him, he kept searching for Him. He was so scared that at night he had dreams of Kṛṣṇa. He imprisoned Devakī and Vasudeva and killed their children. A demon never hesitates to commit sinful activities, but he was always thinking about Kṛṣṇa. However, in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says this is not Kṛṣṇa consciousness because the first quality of bhakti is to remember Kṛṣṇa with love.

The second path is love. You listen to *kīrtana*, and through *śravaṇam* and *kīrtanam*, the mirror of your mind (*ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam*) gets cleaned. There is lust, anger, and jealousy in our hearts right now. How will they be cleaned? Not with soap, but by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahāmantra. When you chant, you feel refreshed, just like taking a bath. It is practical and tangible. 

In his *Padyāvalī*, Rūpa Gosvāmī prays: "My dear Lord, I am drowning in this ocean of material existence. You give shelter to the shelterless. Please, just this one time, extend Your hand to me." When you chant, Kṛṣṇa listens. He is present everywhere, and most amazingly, He is in your heart as the Paramātmā (the Supersoul). 

In the West, it is difficult to convince people that they are not the body, but a soul. It is even more amazing when I tell them, "There are two souls in your body: you and God." They hold their heads and say, "It was difficult to understand one; how did two come about?" Śrīla Prabhupāda once joined his fingers to demonstrate the relationship between the soul and the Supersoul.

The good news is that God is the closest to us. He is in our heart. How can you get any closer than that? When I once asked a small child how he thought God got into his heart, he didn't know. We were once in the spiritual world, and as Śrīla Prabhupāda said, "Back to Godhead" means returning to where we came from. We are eternally blissful and full of knowledge, but we made a choice to leave and come to this material world—a place of misery and ignorance, where the air is like smoking four packs of cigarettes. 

Yet, God is so kind that even as we fall, He enters our hearts as the Supersoul. We may forget God, but God never forgets us. One time, I had an argument with my father and told him, "I am leaving home!" He said, "There is the door, son." I went out, but I soon returned because I had no money. In a similar way, we left our home, and Kṛṣṇa gave us the facility to try to enjoy this world. He knows that eventually, we will become frustrated, and when we are troubled, we will turn back to Him. He then directs us to associations like ISKCON. 

*Guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja*—by the grace of the guru and Kṛṣṇa, we get the seed of devotion. The guru fans that small spark until it becomes a volcano of devotion. When that happens, this place—even a city like Rohini—ceases to be a material place and becomes Vaikuṇṭha. 

When you pay obeisance to a Vaiṣṇava, you are paying obeisance to the Kṛṣṇa who is in his heart. I remember a devotee who took *sannyāsa* at a young age. Initially, no one paid him much attention, but as soon as he became a *sannyāsī*, everyone started bowing down to him. He started feeling proud, so he went to Śrīla Prabhupāda and said, "I feel great joy when everyone bows to me." Prabhupāda said, "Don't be proud. They are not offering obeisances to you; they are offering obeisances to the Supersoul in your heart. I am also saluting the Kṛṣṇa within you."

The Supersoul is always trying to speak to us, telling us this is not our real home, but our false ego prevents us from hearing Him. The guru is the external manifestation of the Supersoul. He says what God is trying to say. You can ignore the voice of the Supersoul, but the voice of the guru cannot be ignored.

Once, a painter named Jadurāṇī asked Śrīla Prabhupāda to describe the Supersoul so she could paint Him. Prabhupāda told her it takes a yogī thousands of lifetimes of meditation to see the Supersoul. Jadurāṇī was willing, but Prabhupāda was kind; he described the form to her right then and there. Every painting of the Supersoul you see in the *Bhāgavatam* was created based on his description.

A devotee once asked me, "If the Supersoul is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, why don't we see Him being worshipped in our temples?" I replied, "Because He is already on the altar of your heart. You serve Him by listening to the instructions of your spiritual master."

I would like to finish with a story. Once, Kṛṣṇa was traveling along the roadside toward Mathurā. He was smiling and waving at the villagers. A group of young girls saw Him, and one girl said to her companion, "That dark youth on the chariot is looking at me." Another Gopī objected, "No, you are wrong; He is looking at me." A third girl laughed and said, "You have both misunderstood; He is actually looking at me." The poet says their contradictory claims created a symphony that resembled the sound of waves crashing against each other. Such loving words brought a big smile to Kṛṣṇa’s face.

Śrī Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma kī jaya! Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya! Jai Jai Śrī Rādhe! 

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""