"*00136*.*
"# Two Sacred Ponds: Kartik Parikrama 2023

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Once again, welcome to this sacred place. We have a particularly wonderful setting here, a little private from what else is happening around us, so we can properly hear and chant. We thank the temple authorities for giving us this opportunity. It is an extremely good fortune today to be visiting this sacred abode of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. To set the scene—and I don't know if you can translate it into Russian—I thought we would quote the praṇāma mantra for Rādhā-kuṇḍa given by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and his illustrious *braja-vilāsa-stava*, Chapter 4, verse 1:

*he kṛṣṇa-karuṇā-sindho dīna-bandho jagat-pate*
*gopeśa gopikā-kānta rādhā-kānta namo ’stu te*

"O playground of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, O beautiful Śrī Kuṇḍa, you are able to give all good fortune; I offer my respectful obeisances unto you." 

This is the perfect way to start. Just like when you first greet your spiritual master or an important person, you bow down and chant their praṇāma mantra. So, in beginning to speak about Rādhā-kuṇḍa, we offer our praṇāma mantra. We can also refer to where I could say, as it is now—because this book is all around the world—he famously says that the holy place of Mathurā is spiritually superior to Vaikuṇṭha because Kṛṣṇa took birth or appeared there. And superior to Mathurā is the forest of Vṛndāvana because Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā pastimes took place there. And superior to the forest of Vṛndāvana is Govardhana Hill because Kṛṣṇa raised the hill with His own divine hand and had loving pastimes there with His cows, friends, and the gopīs. But above Govardhana Hill, above Vṛndāvana Forest, above Mathurā, and above Vaikuṇṭha—or any other place for that matter—is the most sacred place of all: Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Of course, in his illustrious *stavāvalī*, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī mentions that great devotees like Nārada, Lord Śiva, etc., they rarely get to see Rādhā-kuṇḍa because of its very elevated status. So, one might naturally wonder how we members of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, with our backgrounds, are allowed to visit here. You don’t have to search for answers; there is only one answer to why we are sitting here, and that is the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, the Founder-Ācārya of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. Of course, that is causeless mercy. He bestowed it upon us even though we weren’t qualified in the beginning. Still, he gave the mercy to us; he gave his love to us. But as we’ve said many times, love is reciprocal. We have a debt we will never be able to pay back to Śrīla Prabhupāda, but we can try by fulfilling what is very deep in his heart: to spread the saṅkīrtana movement all over the world. Frankly, it is our humble service in helping him spread the saṅkīrtana movement that, in one sense, qualifies us to come here. He is the head of the saṅkīrtana movement, and by his mercy, we can approach the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. That is so beautifully expressed by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his *Caitanya-śikṣāmṛta*, text number 88—one of my favorite verses: "To the degree that we surrender to Lord Caitanya’s service, to that degree we acquire qualification for service to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet in Vraja."

Of course, as anyone can imagine, or as we know by the mercy of our ācāryas, the original Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are in the spiritual world waiting for us. So, a perspective person—a person who is eager to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and understand everything—might inquire, "How did these lakes, we say in Sanskrit *kuṇḍa*, how did they come from Goloka to Gokula during the time of Kṛṣṇa’s descent here 5,000 years ago?" Well, it is described in several śāstras, but I’d like to quote the *Garga-saṁhitā* today. Many of you may be familiar with this pastime. One day in Goloka Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa, who was about to appear in this world, requested Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to join Him in His pastimes on the earth. It goes into great detail, but eventually, Rādhārāṇī replied that she would come, but only if the Yamunā River, the forest of Vṛndāvana, and Govardhana Hill descended with them because they need the atmosphere for their loving pastimes. The atmosphere is very important. If you are in *tamas* or *rajas* or goodness, you need an atmosphere—a spiritual atmosphere. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they love *śravaṇa*. And she made this request: "I’ll come, but these three things have to come with us."

Now, last night when I was doing some research, I was very happy to find in Chapter 2, text 7 of *Garga-saṁhitā* her exact words to Kṛṣṇa requesting this. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said, "My heart cannot be happy in a place where there is no Vṛndāvana Forest, no Yamunā River, and no Govardhana Hill." Get the Sanskrit; we get the word from her lotus mouth. So Rādhārāṇī, one of her names is *Anapāyinī*. *Anapāyinī* means she is never separated from Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa agreed, and those transcendental places appeared here in Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana came here to this place. So, because Govardhana Hill appeared, naturally Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa appeared as well, for technically, Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are part of Govardhana Hill. You could go up in a helicopter, or you could ride the drone as Nīlācala Vṛndāvana Prabhu puts it, up in the sky, and you look down, you would see that Govardhana Hill is in the shape of a peacock, like a sleeping peacock. The peacock’s kind of curled like his head is kind of curled like that, and the two eyes of the peacock are Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa.

Now, exactly how Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa appeared here on Earth is described in the śāstra, beginning with King Kaṁsa sending a demon named Ariṣṭāsura to Vṛndāvana to kill Kṛṣṇa. But we will tell that detailed pastime another day, because I’d like to take the time today to glorify those personalities who lived here 500 years ago and revealed to us the glories of the dhāma. The two lakes appeared in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, but in due course of time, these two sacred lakes disappeared from everyone’s vision. But as many of us know, fortunately, they were rediscovered by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu when He visited Vṛndāvana 500 years ago in His youth. Mahāprabhu had pastimes in Navadvīpa. When He took sannyāsa, He went to Jagannātha Purī, but He took a trip around India also, and He also came to Śrī Vṛndāvana. He came back home because He is the combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—*śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya rādhā-kṛṣṇa nahe anya*. 

Now, upon reaching Vṛndāvana—actually it was the year 1515 that He arrived—He just started wandering through the forest of Vṛndāvana. Being *sarvajña*—meaning all-knowing—and being omnipotent, He came here in this area and He inquired from the local people. He said, "Tell me, where is Rādhā-kuṇḍa?" But the local villagers were a little surprised. Excuse me, they asked Mahāprabhu; He said, "Tell me, where is Rādhā-kuṇḍa?" But again, through the millennium, through 5,000 years, the lakes had disappeared, and the local people had forgotten about Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. So, understanding the great importance of this place—as the highest place actually of Kṛṣṇa’s līlā—Mahāprabhu took it upon Himself to discover these two lakes for the benefit of the whole world. He started walking around this area, and in the midst of a large field, which at that time was just behind it, there were two very small ponds. I was reading in detail last night; one was surrounded by kadamba trees, and the other was surrounded by tamāla trees. One ācārya says the ponds were only waist-deep at their deepest point, and the local farmers were using them for irrigation, to take the water and irrigate their fields. There wasn’t much water there, but whatever was there, they were irrigating their local fields. 

So, suddenly they see this tall, effulgent, beautiful sannyāsī jump in one of the muddy lakes, and you know, moving around, and then in the other lake. And He got out and He declared, "I have discovered Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa." And they were like, "What? This is our irrigation pond? This is Rādhā-kuṇḍa? This is Śyāma-kuṇḍa?" And while all the villagers kind of looked on, you know, stupefied, like "What’s going on here?", He offered the following prayer to reveal to them and to us, and for future generations, what actually this is. Standing before these villagers, He said, "Just as Rādhā is most dear to Kṛṣṇa, her lake is also very dear to Him. She is the most beloved of all gopīs." From the mouth of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and the villagers went, "Oh, wow!" And then, overwhelmed with love, Mahāprabhu danced around Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and He danced around Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Then He took some of the sacred mud from Rādhā-kuṇḍa and made tilaka, and He put that tilaka all over His body. Then He left, taking some of that Rādhā-kuṇḍa tilaka with Him. So, nowadays you see often devotees are wearing that dark tilaka because they are following the example of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. 

And Mahāprabhu had come to Vṛndāvana with His servant, Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya. As they were walking away, Bālābhadra Bhaṭṭācārya was again amazed by another pastime of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He kind of looked back at the lake, like, "Wow, that was amazing: Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa." So, as to impress Bālābhadra of the transcendental nature of these lakes, and to impress that also within our hearts, Mahāprabhu spoke the following words to Bālābhadra: "O friend, please meditate on Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is beautified by pavilions draped in flowering vines. This lake is praised by the great splendor of Vraja itself. Its waters are filled with the beauty and sweetness of the divine couple’s amorous pastimes, and it is respectfully worshiped by Govardhana." 

So, both by discovering—rediscovering—Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and revealing their deep significance through these prayers, Mahāprabhu has made this līlā accessible to all of us. Actually, without the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, no one can begin to fathom what is Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Even something so-called insignificant in Kṛṣṇa consciousness—I don’t know what’s insignificant, something small like "I am not this body," that’s a big thing, actually—but only by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu can the people of this age understand anything about spiritual life. He is the guru. With all due respect, all present religious traditions need the mercy of Mahāprabhu to reach perfection. And again, one of my great heroes—and I’m sure your great heroes as well, Śrīla Prabhupāda—he says that very perfectly in his *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* verse 33. Listen to this: "A stone, even if sprinkled with nectar, will never sprout a single blade of grass. A dog’s tail, no matter how carefully stretched out, will never become straight. A dwarf can reach out his arms as much as he likes, but he will never touch the moon. Similarly, those who follow religious rituals without the mercy of Lord Caitanya will never attain ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa." 

But for simply rediscovering Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, it wasn’t enough. He actually desired that these two sacred lakes be excavated so that in the future, pilgrims like us can come and see and even take a bath in them. So, that service, excavating and bringing Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa to their full glory to the eye, that service He entrusted to one of His dearest followers. If you have a very important mission that’s very dear to your heart, you entrust that to someone you have complete confidence in. Just like He had this very strong desire to take the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu to the whole world, particularly through the English medium, so who did He entrust that mission to? We would say His dearest son, Śrīla Prabhupāda. And we see that Prabhupāda was able to do it against all odds. 

So the service of taking those little muddy ponds and making them what they are today, that He entrusted to Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. He is our *prayojana-guru*. *Prayojana* means the ultimate goal of life: attaining a love of God, particularly Vraja-bhakti. It will be quite clear here: love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and in his particular case, love for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And the entire life of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is actually, you could say, a study in excellence. In preparation for this class, I was reading about him last night, and actually, I couldn’t go to sleep. I stayed up most of the night because his life is so fascinating. Actually, he was the first of the six Gosvāmīs to meet Mahāprabhu. He was born in a fabulously wealthy family in a small village in West Bengal, but from a very young age, he showed no interest in material life. And without going into too much detail, at that point in his life, you could say against all odds, he eventually joined Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu and spent 16 years with Him in Jagannātha Purī. 

Now, that’s significant because in those pastimes, Caitanya Mahāprabhu was experiencing the deepest feelings of Kṛṣṇa-prema. For all practical purposes, by that time, Caitanya Mahāprabhu had fulfilled one of two desires, and that was to inaugurate the saṅkīrtana movement for Kali-yuga. But as we all know, Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world was just enamored by Rādhārāṇī’s love. He couldn’t figure it out because He was the object of the love. So, Kṛṣṇa wanted to somehow experience the love of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, so He assumed the form of a devotee as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, so that He could experience what it’s like to love Kṛṣṇa in the highest degree. And we’re talking about deep love—not the love of this world; it’s quite superficial, although it seems deep, it seems complicated, but it’s nothing compared to a drop of Vraja-bhakti. Elegance is truth spoken concisely. Mahāprabhu was the embodiment of that because He left His teachings, the *Śikṣāṣṭaka*, just a few verses—everything is there. 

And about love, what does He say? In this world, there are so many useless... every single song—being quite strong here, it’s going to speak of, you know, so many songs about love on the internet and the movies—but what is real love? "O Govinda, feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment to be like twelve years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain. Kṛṣṇa, I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence. This alone is love, even beyond Vaikuṇṭha, the official kingdom of God." 

So more or less, retiring from His preaching activities—which He had entrusted to some of His illustrious followers—Mahāprabhu retired to Jagannātha Purī, especially into the Gambhīrā. The Gambhīrā room, where He experienced very intense feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa as Rādhārāṇī experiences it. It’s great detail; it’s quite amazing, all the different transformations that Mahāprabhu experienced in these loving sentiments. And Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī witnessed all those pastimes and heard about their essence from Him. But then Mahāprabhu left; He gave up His pastimes in this world and He rejoined His associates in the spiritual world. So, at that point, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he experienced intense separation from Lord Caitanya. As much as you are attached to something, when you lose it, to that intensity you feel separation. 

So let us understand: if you come in contact with the most lovable person—Kṛṣṇa is *mādhurya*, He is the master of all *mādhurya*, He is the king of all *rasa*, loving mellows—if you meet Him and you’re engaged in associating with Him, then you miss Him. Who can imagine what that separation is? And that was felt by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. What else was there to achieve in life? And it was gone. Just like in old Vedic culture, when the king would pass away, his wives would perform *satī* because the pain of burning in the fire was nothing compared to the pain of separation. So Raghunātha dāsa was thinking, "What’s... it’s not... there’s nothing left to live for." So he decided to go to Vṛndāvana and end his life by jumping off Govardhana Hill. But that wasn’t going to happen because there were devotees waiting for him in Vṛndāvana—devotees who had heard about Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and how much mercy he had received from Caitanya Mahāprabhu, whom they felt should share that mercy with others. So it wasn’t going to happen. "I’m going to jump off Govardhana Hill"—no way. 

The news had spread—there was no internet, there was no fax machines, there was no satellite telephones—but still, thousands of miles away, the Vaiṣṇavas had heard of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī who was trained under Svarūpa Dāmodara in the service of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. They were waiting for him. Actually, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he writes so nicely in his *Manaḥ-śikṣā* 113. Listen to this: "The transcendentally attractive qualities of an exalted devotee popularize his presence everywhere, even though he may be hidden from public view, just as musk spreads its fragrance everywhere even when locked away in a tight container." Isn’t that beautiful? It explains how when he arrived in Vṛndāvana, Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī—they were there. Wait a minute, wait, hold on, you’re not... they convinced him that it was better to stay in the world while living on the banks of Govardhana Hill, literally at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and by his example and by his words, share the glories of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the process of devotional service with the whole world. And that he did for 40 years. 

So he went and he sat on the muddy banks of this little pond—it’s still like Mahāprabhu discovered it—and there he just did "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare," which he had learned, realized, and perfected by the mercy of those many years with Mahāprabhu. However, at one point, understanding that Lord Caitanya desired that the holy places of Vṛndāvana be restored, he started thinking of excavating Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, which, again, were still small ponds at that time. This is the nature of a Vaisnava: they may be perfected, but they’re always thinking about the spiritual welfare of others. This is a Vaiṣṇava as compared to jñānīs and yogīs and so forth. The Vaiṣṇava is very... otherwise, how are we sitting here? Prabhupāda—we’re sitting here, but he left to bring us here. So, sitting there thinking, "You know, this Rādhā-kuṇḍa, with just this loincloth and his mālā, just taking a little prasādam every day, I have to excavate this place for pilgrims to come, and it’s going to require a lot of money, a lot of material." He stopped: "I’m a renunciate, how can I think about money? I’ll fall down." Gave up the idea. 

But Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who live here eternally—either in *aprakaṭa* or *prakaṭa*, *aprakaṭa* means manifest or unmanifest times—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are always here. You have to understand that they’re here right now in these unmanifested pastimes. They understood Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s desire in his heart, so they arranged for an amazing, wonderful pastime by which he got the money. He didn’t have to raise a finger; it was a spiritual desire, so they fulfilled it. It’s really mystical what happened. As he was thinking this way, there was this wealthy merchant on his way to Badrīnāth, Badarikāśrama in the Himalayan mountains, with the intention, like many people do, of giving, you know, a lot of his wealth for building a temple for Lord Badrīnātha. This merchant was, you know—I don’t know if you’ve ever been there, Badrīnāth, it’s a real climb—this big sack of gold, and he had soldiers around him, they were protecting him. "I’m going to go build a temple for Badrīnāth, Badrināth," and then he had a dream that night. 

The same time that Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was thinking about but rejecting the idea of collecting money, what did he dream? He had this dream where the Deity in Badrīnātha, Lord Badrīnātha, appeared in the dream of that wealthy merchant. He said, "Turn around, go to Vṛndāvana, a very sacred place. Walk out a little distance, you’ll meet one sādhu, his name is Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. You give him all the money. I don’t need it. You give it to Raghunātha." Had this dream—not a dream, we say vision. They’d almost reached Badrīnāth; they had, I think, a couple kilometers left, right? They hiked all the way up. He woke up; he said, "Gentlemen, turn around, we’re going back down." "What about the gold?" "We’re going to give it to somebody else." Go all the way back down, where’s Vṛndāvana? And he came here to to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. "Where is Gosvāmī?" And he’s this humble, thin sādhu on the banks, you know, of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He’s there. Okay, but as he was handing the money to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī said, "Rather, you give the money to Jīva Gosvāmī," because Jīva Gosvāmī was like a good organizer; he was in the mood of *yukta-vairāgya*—everything can be used in the service of Kṛṣṇa, not for me, but for Kṛṣṇa. He was very expert in organizing, so he took that money, Jīva, and he purchased the land—land that included Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa—and he oversaw all the excavation and managed, you could say, all aspects of the construction we see today with our very eyes. All glories to Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. 

They have this vision, and what you could say, like in a typical mood of... traditional mood of renunciation, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, while all this is going on, you can imagine, he’s just there chanting lakhs and lakhs of rounds. In fact, one of the services of Jīva Gosvāmī, despite everything else he was doing, was that he took very nice care of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Oftentimes, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was so deeply absorbed in *smaraṇam*—in remembering Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—he was unable to relate, could you say for a better word, relate to worldly affairs. He was just somewhere else. So Jīva had to take care of him. We say he was somewhere else; where was he? *Smaraṇam*—he was always remembering the divine pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This is the perfection of life. And these things he knew because in the spiritual world, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is... in some texts, Rati-mañjarī is also known as Tulasī-mañjarī. And as Rati-mañjarī, she is... 13 years and two months old, you could say. As Rati-mañjarī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī engages as a maidservant to Indulekhā, just like Rūpa-mañjarī, who Rūpa Gosvāmī... Rūpa-mañjarī is the immediate assistant of Lalitā-devī, who serves Rādhārāṇī. See how close these personalities are to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? 

Actually, it’s very nice. In his... he prays, actually, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays to Indulekhā as follows. You know, in his *nīta-siddha*, his eternal liberated form, he’s praying to Indulekhā because he or she is her immediate servant. But that prayer is found in *Stavāvalī*, *Prārthanā-daśakam*, text number 9. We’re looking into the heart of an eternally liberated soul of Vraja; it’s so unique, it’s so rare, we’re so fortunate, so blessed. So in *Stavāvalī*, he prays: "May my guru, Indulekhā, instruct me in the art of making beautiful garlands of pearls, jewels, guñjā, and flowers so that I can decorate Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the temple at the center of Vraja." So, often—or all the time—being absorbed in that mood, again, he became, how can we say, indifferent to bodily needs while living at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, so much so people admired him for this. He also became famous as the *vairāgī-śiromaṇi*, or the spiritual teacher of renunciation. Like the Bible says, "You can’t love mammon"—which means sense gratification—"and God at the same time." It’s one or the other. Most people choose the other; it should be Kṛṣṇa. But if you’re not absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you’ll be enamored by all the so-called pleasures of this world. So part of the process of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious is to give up everything material. Ultimately, then, bhakti really begins. 

Now, we can’t imitate him, but we can imbibe the principle of renunciation. How do we, products of Kali-yuga, proceed in renunciation? Well, Caitanya Mahāprabhu says in *Nīti-śāstra* very simply, you can only give up something if you get something better. So if you get Kṛṣṇa consciousness—Kṛṣṇa is present in the sound of His name, "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa"—by tasting that nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s association, all your material attachments will eventually fall away. Have that faith. But we can worship Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and admire him and follow his feet for his standard of renunciation; it can inspire us. We’re fortunate; we have the Bhāgavatam, and we have the person Bhāgavatam. So listen to his standard of renunciation and be inspired to give a few things up today. According to his vows, each day he ate no more than a leaf cup of buttermilk. He offered obeisances 1,000 times a day to the Lord. He chanted at least 100,000 names of the Lord daily. Each day he would offer obeisances to 2,000 Vaiṣṇavas and constantly rendered service within his mind to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, he spoke for three hours every day about Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And from those talks, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, he was a young man, he was listening, taking notes, and from those notes, he wrote *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*. It’s all connected. And we’re connected by Prabhupāda’s mercy. 

And not only that, he took three baths a day in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. It says if one bathes in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, he gets the same love that Rādhā has for Kṛṣṇa, and if one bathes in Śyāma-kuṇḍa, he gets the same love Śyāma has for Rādhā. Now, his mind was so fixed, he never deviated. He did these things every day for 40 years. He did it with such precision. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, who was a witness, writes in a very important verse: *ananta raghunāthera guṇa-gaṇā*. Who could list the unlimited transcendental attributes of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī? His strict, regular principles were exactly like lines on a stone; you can’t erase them. His strict regulative principles were exactly like lines in a stone. All glories to Raghunātha dāsa. On top of that, he daily worshiped Govardhana-śilā, strictly, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu had given it to him. And whenever he met a devotee who had just come to, or just entered into Vṛndāvana, he would embrace that devotee and show him all respect. 

So, all this considered, that’s a lot to do, right? It took him 22 hours a day. It took him 22 hours a day, so sometimes, well, he... that meant he slept two hours a day or a night, and sometimes even not that. Now, it’s important to mention the more you read about this illustrious personality, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, you come to learn that much of his inspiration came from his association with Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Rūpa Gosvāmī in particular, you could say, took Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī under his wing and blessed him in so many ways. Because time is limited, we can’t go too much into those transcendental pastimes, but take it for an absolute fact: they were very close. Rūpa Gosvāmī in so many ways inspired and also took care, as Jīva did, of Raghunātha dāsa. Everyone wanted to render service. Still, one day, later in their pastimes, Rūpa Gosvāmī departed this world, and again, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī had to endure separation. Just as he experienced separation from Mahāprabhu, he had experienced separation from a dear associate of Mahāprabhu. His heart was just broken into pieces. Why does the Lord allow this to happen? Because on the transcendental platform, as it’s said, "Separation makes the heart grow fonder." When you’re missing someone, you think about them. You know, when you’re with them, your few things are going on; when you’re separated from them, your mind’s just, you know, moving and thinking so many wonderful things. 

So, in separation from Kṛṣṇa, the pure devotees, or any Vaiṣṇava, our love for them is increased. And that’s the whole goal of Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is all about love. I often say, "The devotees love Kṛṣṇa more than anyone’s ever been loved before, and Kṛṣṇa loves His devotees more than anyone’s ever been loved before." What a wonderful arena that Prabhupāda is ushering us into, these loving pastimes. They’re just beginning. It will become better and better and better if you stick to the straight and narrow as Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī did. One time in Benares, my illustrious godbrother, Govinda Mahārāja, he was doing a newspaper interview—I think some local newspaper came and was interviewing him—and just asking, you know, like basic questions. Oh, the newspaper reporter, he had a pencil and a paper. He said, "Mahārāja, what’s the goal of this movement? Like, what are you trying to achieve by this International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness?" Young, 22-year-old, you know, aspiring journalist, what can you tell me? What is Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Govinda Mahārāja was a very deep, rāgānuga devotee, so he paused, and he said, "He answered, 'What is Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Crying, crying, crying.'" The boy like, "Did I print this?" "Yes." 

So we can get a... we are just getting a glimpse because we’re trying to come off the bodily platform, but these things are known to us by Prabhupāda’s mercy. We can see the depth of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s love for Rūpa Gosvāmī again in *Stavāvalī*, *Prārthanā-daśakam*. Raghunātha says, "Hare Guru, Vaiṣṇava." We love Guru, we love Kṛṣṇa, we love Guru, and we love Vaiṣṇava equally. It’s all part of the formula. So we can see how much Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī missed Rūpa Gosvāmī after his departure, in the following stanza: "Now that I no longer have the sustainer of my life, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the land of Vraja has become empty and desolate. Govardhana Hill has become like a great python, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa has become like the gaping mouth of a ferocious tiger." These verses help us look into the heart of perfected souls, who are *nitya-siddhas*, who’ve never fallen down. What’s more, our *bhajana-bhakti*, we want to know, "What is *bhajana-bhakti*?" We’re looking into the heart. They’re revealing their hearts to us; we’re so blessed. "Now that I no longer have the sustainer of my life, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the land of Vraja has become empty and desolate. Govardhana Hill has become like a great python, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa has become like the gaping mouth of a ferocious tiger." He’s just mad in separation; everything’s lost. Prabhus, they sing like that. 

Now, we all know that the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, they lived without many personal possessions. They slept under a different tree every night. So many austerities, bathed in the cold lakes in the winter, and did their duties in the hot summers. You know, Vṛndāvana then was not like it is now, you know? You can make phone calls, you can buy ice cream, you can get a... at the MVT, you know? Then there were very hard austerities. But there were places like Delhi, which wasn’t far away, or Agra, where Akbar and different kings lived in great royalty with full... even the common citizens had something. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī could have left Vṛndāvana to practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness somewhere else. But seeing Vṛndāvana like he saw—not as we see, our eyes are beginning to open—he didn’t want to leave this transcendental boat even for a moment. No. What did he see? If we want to see, it’s said, *sādhu-saṅga*, he sees through his ears, not through his eyes. If we want to see, "What is Vṛndāvana? What is Rādhā-kuṇḍa?" Let’s hear in *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, where Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī explains what this is. Listen to how he describes it: "The delightful forest of Vṛndāvana, beautiful Govardhana Hill, and the nectarean area of the rāsa dance, what to speak of other holy places, are not equal to even a single particle of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Let me take shelter of these two lakes, which are more dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa than even His own breath." He loves Vraja, but He especially loves Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. He’s a Vrajavāsī; he’s a lover of Vraja, the playground of God. Famously, he wrote the following: "Even if I have the opportunity to bathe in the ocean of pure love of Kṛṣṇa, and even if I have the pure devotees of the infallible Personality of Godhead as my associates, I will not consent to live even for a single moment in any other place in Vraja. Even if the residents of Vraja appear to be ordinary, and even if they fill my ears with useless talk, I pray that I may remain among them eternally, residing here in Vraja." 

Now we know what to love, who to love, and how to love. Like a true Gosvāmī, he just lived under a different tree every night, not affected by the austerities. Just a tree. Nevertheless, two famous incidents caused Raghunātha dāsa’s well-wishers to construct a simple *bhajana-kuṭīra* so he could safely perform his devotional service. They said, "You have to live in a hut. You have to have a bhajan-kuṭīr; no more under the tree." He was forced by the love of the Rādhā-kuṇḍa-vāsīs. I’ll tell you how that came about. Two famous stories; would you like to hear? It’s not getting too hot, are you awake? Raise your hand if you’re awake. And raise your hand if you’re sleeping. 

So one day he was sitting on the bank of Śyāma-kuṇḍa, actually deeply absorbed in his bhajana, and actually, being so absorbed, he didn’t notice a pair of tigers emerged from the jungle right behind him. And sensing that Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was no threat to them, the tigers actually came to the edge of the lake, only a few meters away from him, started drinking the water of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Those fortunate tigers! But suddenly, a most amazing thing happened. Lord Kṛṣṇa, concerned for the safety of His devotee, appeared nearby to guard Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī from the two tigers. So he’s doing his bhajan; he sees the tiger drinking in the water, it’s dangerous; there’s Kṛṣṇa nearby. So then a few minutes later, Sanātana Gosvāmī was walking some distance away, and he saw Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and the two tigers. He saw... he saw Dāsa Gosvāmī, we say for short, Dāsa Gosvāmī, tigers. He was just about to call out, "Tiger!", but he decided not to call out, ‘cause maybe he would scare the tigers who would eat Raghunātha dāsa. So he remained silent, so that the tigers, startled by Sanātana’s arrival, actually quickly disappeared into the jungle. And Sanātana Gosvāmī, he watched in amazement that as the tigers left, Kṛṣṇa also disappeared. There was no need for Him to remain. Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa, if Kṛṣṇa wants to kill you, no one can save you, and if Kṛṣṇa wants to save you, no one can kill you. There was Kṛṣṇa. "I’ll protect My devotee from the tigers." 

So Sanātana Gosvāmī had seen this all unfold, and when Kṛṣṇa disappeared, he immediately offered obeisances to Kṛṣṇa. Then he came to where... Sanātana Gosvāmī came to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was still immersed in his bhajana, oblivious to anything that had happened. Actually, that spot is called *Manasa-pāvana-ghāṭa*. And when Sanātana Gosvāmī came, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī returned to external consciousness. Seeing Sanātana Gosvāmī next to him, he bowed down and placed his head on Sanātana Gosvāmī’s lotus feet. Sanātana said, "Do you know what just happened? You were so absorbed in chanting the holy names, you didn’t notice two tigers that came there to drink water, but Kṛṣṇa was standing right next to you to protect you." And we might think, "Well, that’s very nice," and yes it is very nice, but Sanātana Gosvāmī saw it in a little bit of a deeper way. He said to Raghunātha, "My dear Raghunātha, we’re supposed to be serving Kṛṣṇa. Please don’t take service from Him again. Rather, take care of yourself by constructing a small hut in which you can do your bhajana. Don’t make Kṛṣṇa serve you. We’re servants of Kṛṣṇa; He’s there guarding you." 

If you get a little hot, we say in Russian... so Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he took the instruction of Sanātana Gosvāmī seriously. He actually requested some villagers to construct a modest hut for him. But that’s not the end of the story. Before the villagers could complete that task, another occasion arose in which Sanātana Gosvāmī saw Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī accept service from Śrī Rādhā herself. Then he got a little stronger on him. Shall I share that pastime with you too? So the second incident happened before they could make the hut, the *bhajana-kuṭīra*, for Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. This second incident began early one morning after Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī had taken a seat on the bank of Śyāma-kuṇḍa to begin chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. And as always, he became fully absorbed; didn’t notice the passing of time, especially the increasing heat that was increasing because of the intensity of the rising sun. And by the time it was 12:00 noon, the sun was directly over his head, and he was perspiring profusely, and his body had become badly sunburned. But he didn’t notice it; he was just "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." 

Then, all of a sudden, unable to tolerate seeing her devotee suffer from overexposure, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī appeared behind—first it was Kṛṣṇa, now Rādhā is behind Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī—covering his head, his body, with the upper portion of her veil to shield him from the sun’s rays, while at the same time exposing herself to the full force of the sun. It’s always longer in Russian. So, once again, Sanātana Gosvāmī happened... this poor *nāma-cārya* of course happened to arrive on the scene. He, this time, he was stunned by the sight of his worshipable Deity, Śrī Rādhā, and the thought of her kindness in serving Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, shielding him from the hot sun. But then, just as suddenly as Rādhārāṇī had arrived, when she glanced at Sanātana Gosvāmī, she disappeared. She smiled at him, and then she disappeared. So, having had this darśana of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī on the banks of these lakes, Sanātana Gosvāmī was overwhelmed with spiritual emotion, and he called out Rādhā’s name and fainted on the ground. Meanwhile, oblivious to the scene, Raghunātha dāsa was still: "Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa..." 

So eventually, Sanātana Gosvāmī came to, and he went over to Dāsa Gosvāmī; it’s described he spoke very softly to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and brought him back to the external world: "Kṛṣṇa!" And once again, he had to explain: "First time, you’re taking service from Kṛṣṇa, and now you’re taking service from Rādhā." But this time, he chastised him a little bit stronger. I’ll share with you what he said: "Our lives are for serving Rādhā and her beloved Kṛṣṇa. What kind of bhajana is it that not only takes service from Rādhā, but also separates her from her beloved? Because she’s somewhere with Kṛṣṇa, she had to leave what... This is very deep. If your chanting and remembering brings you bliss at the cost of inconveniencing Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa, and the gopīs, then what good is your chanting? I told you to build a cottage so that neither Kṛṣṇa nor Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī would have to come and serve you. Now serve them by constructing a cottage at once, do not delay." And that’s what he did. Raghunātha dāsa, "Please build it quickly." And in a matter of 48 hours, there was this very humble, simple hut, a place where he could do his bhajana safely. Nice instruction; very deep instructions, aren’t they? 

So now, that it wasn’t easy to live in Vṛndāvana at that time, it was a very basic existence, but the joy of service to the lotus feet of his Iṣṭa-devī, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, far exceeded any difficulties that he encountered. And he again, he himself has written as such, again in *Stavāvalī*, verse 13: "On the strength of the service I have done to the pollen of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s lotus feet, I’m able to reside even in times of trouble by the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa at the base of Govardhana Hill." He’s summarizing everything we shared with you today. "Protected by Rūpa Gosvāmī’s friends and associates, I chant and hear the holy names of Śrī Rādhā and Mukunda, which defeat even the sweetest nectar. I pray that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī will always protect me." As he is glorifying a Vaiṣṇava, Vaiṣṇavas wanted to glorify him, and this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness: when we glorify each other, not find faults or criticize. That’s not Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In his *Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī*, Sanātana Gosvāmī very lovingly glorifies Raghunātha dāsa. He writes: "Raghunātha has become world-famous for being the friend of Rūpa and Sanātana. He always swims in the waves of the great ocean of love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. The greatest saints say that no one in the world can compare with Rūpa and Sanātana, but amazingly, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has attained a position equal to theirs." 

So let us begin to conclude today with Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s famous cry from his heart to Iṣṭa-devī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, his *Vilāpa-kusumāñjali*, famous text 96: "I am yours, I am yours, O Queen. Please know that I cannot live without you. And bring me to your lotus feet." Deep into the heart of Raghunātha dāsa. And finally, we will finish today in a most appropriate way with Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s words at the end of every chapter of *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*: Kṛṣṇadāsa praying at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Raghunātha, always desiring their mercy, I shall narrate, following in their footsteps. Thank you.""