
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, when I was a young boy, my father had a book in his library; it was called *The Joy of Giving*. As a young boy, I imagined that meant giving sweets out to children, or holding parties for children, or things like that. As I grew older, as a teenager, I would still see that book, *The Joy of Giving*, and I thought, "Well, that meant helping people in need, giving people food, giving people shelter, giving people medical aid," like that. But now, I truly understand the real meaning of that book, that title: "The Joy of Giving." The real joy of giving is actually sharing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because this is what people really need. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura said one time, "The only thing that's really missing in this world, although there are shortages all around, the only thing that's really missing is Kṛṣṇa consciousness." And Kṛṣṇa consciousness is what actually will make people happy. It gives them relief from the struggle for material existence; it gives them hope of going back home, back to Godhead. 

So, as we finished our seven-week tour through Russia and a good 12 days here in Ukraine, I am reflecting on the joy that we've experienced in sharing Kṛṣṇa consciousness with the people of these two countries. This is my real satisfaction in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I can't claim to achieve the level of love of God, but I do feel full satisfaction being able to share my good fortune with others through the simple process of chanting, dancing, feasting, giving people prasādam, and giving them shelter. And we've had that opportunity; we've met and associated with thousands of devotees. We've met a number of non-devotees as well whose hearts have been touched with this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we really have that deep satisfaction of sharing a good fortune with others. It really comes when you go out of your comfort zone, and you go out on the streets, you go to people's offices, you go to where people congregate, and however you can, to share the joy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness with them.

Because this life is now.

I often remember Jīva Gosvāmī’s quote where he says that "perfect," "more perfect," and "most perfect." He is referring to the different abodes of Kṛṣṇa where He performs His pastimes. He said Dvārakā is perfect, Mathurā is more perfect because of the more intimate pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vṛndāvana with His devotees is His most perfect. So, preaching like that—or let us say chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa like that—when you're chanting your japa, that's perfect, because the most important instruction of the spiritual master is to chant sixteen rounds. Congregational chanting is more perfect, with our friends and congregation and devotees. But most perfect is when we go out and share the Holy Name with others, with the non-devotees. And upon Prabhupāda’s order, we had that good fortune to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with others. 

So, although we're a little tired—I’d say we're actually exhausted, and sometimes I think we need spiritual bodies to do the service that Prabhupāda asked us to do—we're fully satisfied. We're packing our bags now and getting ready to go to the next destination, to the next order, the next instruction of our spiritual master, to share our good fortune with others in some other part of the world. Thank you, Prabhupāda, from the bottom of our hearts for giving us this opportunity to carry on your mission. We pray that we can carry on this mission for many more years to come; actually, we pray to carry on this mission for many lifetimes to come. All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana. All glories to the Holy Name. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. All glories to the devotees who are serving Prabhupāda so nicely in Russia and Ukraine. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Namas te.

Hare.

Hari bol.

Hare Kṛṣṇa.""