"*00470*.*
"You were blown by me, and now it is time to go far, as is your duty. Right, my favorite will not hear anything. Gosh, mr. mon and puppies, such a good one to say, but often done when I’ve already got out of the sun. There’s going to have to keep the children, mothers. I’m not sure that’s the best place to have a children’s tent, to my quick side rooms. I bow down to the dutiful mothers, the heads of most fearful mess around, but it is causes mercy I have obtained; I contain the divine mantra, the service of the second section mountain, the association of Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, the local coast, now Ghana and his older brother, should not almost on the subpoena bullet of Mathurā, the blissful abode in denying the divine doctrine and rotor gallo, and the desire in my heart of loving service is Śrī Nityānanda.

Took a language they had more of an Amish balance in, to take you to a divider look for tomorrow. William Chang, employment, brothers, to the off the window, London recording, tomorrow. I don’t know. I offer my respectful obeisances, really of all my sins, paying, may I not give in, defensive in my attempts. Please, to all my numbers, whoever been to, to all, obviously, I offer my obeisances. Today, I’d like to thank all the girls, just kids, have to plan your front of another place, they just kind of down the side; is there a room? What’s in this house here is super nice. I think the mothers, the monitoring network, it, if you have a child, yeah. I’d like to thank everyone.

Through the fall offerings, they just get better and better every year, and this is the result of past lives by taking up primarily the chanting of the Holy Names, the saṅga association of devotees. The heart actually comes to offer purification. The obstacles, debunking, and are blocking manifests in three ways, voice directed in 31, as Mārtaṇḍa Dāsa stated: how do you do, Vaiṣṇava, adapt it. It manifests firstly to find assemble devotees, to the spiritual preceptor, spiritual master, and to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, like a seed in the ground. You plant the seed, and the rains come in the springtime, then that land, which has the possibility of producing a beautiful fruit, flowers with fermented foods, in first manifests of the rule, just pops at the bottom soil.

Twenty percent is growing up, and then it continues to grow; a man becomes real, a human, so love develops in the same way. This is why we wanted to try to encourage us to always chant the mantra in the association of devotees, *ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṃ*. That those are vigilant by the poisonous serpent of Kali-yuga should get relief by the herbal medicine of a sudden chanting the Holy Name of the Lord. It should be my fresh mind, the sale in the association. The combination was very powerful. Just as we understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead from the Nṛsiṁha scripture mastery, we also understand the words of my spiritual master in the association of confidence. Offenses—it was so nice today, I was watching, bringing envious spirit, which presents totally not experience. A dog, brother, the God’s history, be there, often then many of you were crying, appreciation, this is anonymous, they were reading that helped you appreciate; marvel or love you specialize in that room. This is why in the past, part of the Lord’s world, Washington Mahāprabhu with one servant, he began gently holding hands; and because those Holy Names are coming from the mouth of the Lord Himself, you can’t adapt how much potency it causes. Animals, for the darkest religion, comes further, it saved. There’s with the donkey, lecture, animals have only, their business is only four things: eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. Let’s put it up, and also have a very low existence. I was listening to my lecture the prophet of the day, and I’m saying, take for example the dog. A dog, when he’s in trouble, can’t even take shelter, it’s all hard. That’s a visible delight; at least when we have trouble, we can call out to a relative, to a friend, even if a stranger, gone right? If a dog’s in trouble, his own kind, visible.

So that’s the life. Probably would also point out the degradation in animal life by saying the animals don’t have the ability to inquire into their deeper spiritual nature, which is ultimately social salvation. Only human beings can do, *hanta-kāra*, to try to dress now that you’re a human being out, you can acquire—it’s the purpose of life, let’s do it for a start. How else? I don’t know. It’s a condemned existence. You can tell the king puppy dog, little birdie, soft kitty cat, it’s condemned; it’s a condemned existence. We show compassion like in the prayer, my pūjā, disputed prasāda, quite indemnities. So we can hardly imagine, if we could go back in time, if there was some type of transatlantic video, one time machine, we might momentarily find ourselves in such a degraded condition. Yes, since we left the spiritual world, we’ve been there, we’ve done that. Put in a copyright reform, we’ve been in every universe, every species of life, every body. I imagine that’s why, all right, I told my grand-disciple Jīva Gosvāmī, one day very frankly, “Just give this one life to Kṛṣṇa. You did everything else since you left the spiritual world. You’ve experienced everything within this material creation. You’ve been in every universe, every species, every body; are you happy? Are you satisfied?” But if they’ve been content, so just make an experiment: give this one life to Kṛṣṇa. Just one life. You’ve had millions and millions and millions; just take the risk. He said, “And Śrīla Prabhupāda, for the Kṛṣṇa, soon times, have you done that before? You wouldn’t be here, so happens to do it. Just take this one life. It’s short duration, 75, 80; see, I already did that recession.”

So that’s animal existence; it’s such a condemned, that’s why sometimes you go—I’m sitting on a park bench here, I’m somewhere, an insect, qualified, kind of looks, it often brings forth laughter and jokes, but sometimes I just stand there, I reach over, and I just—we’re going to step, roach, floor, next to the bed, honey. We don’t know how powerful, we don’t have the understanding of the utilization, how powerful is that we’re both without living in today, yet he may be able to surpass so many different species of life if you can get a human form, *balā-bābus*, petit, oh, the delivery of the most part, we take the chance to share our mantra, but it will never become a condom. So, when Mahāprabhu was going to the Jharikhanda forest, he chanted very loudly.

That chanting revived the dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which is there in the heart of the living entity. Not just human beings, your heart; a treeless, only suspicion of conscience, that’s something that you get from cemented plates, totally there in your heart. So it’s there, and that became fully manifest. That’s called *Kṛṣṇa-prema*. Sometimes there’s descriptions of his guru-kṛpā, it’s questionably, just like, probably a child under guru, trying to, admitted to one of my mothers, just before passing away, she said, “Umesh, I still have material desires. I’ve been serving a pure devotee for seven years now, I’ve done my very best, I’m so shameful that I have to admit to you honestly, my God, no, I still have some desires.” So, he passed away hearing a tape recording of Prabhupāda, such a nice hiker; everyone else was in poverty. He passed away alone, actually, he was. And after he left, as you know, I’ve encountered this stuff. Prabhupāda wrote the posthumous letter, interesting, something enough. And that letter, Prabhupāda said, “When you die, if you had any material desires still in your heart, Kṛṣṇa is very kind, you go to take birth on this miserable earth.”

You’ve gone to the heavenly planets, *svarga-loka*. In that pleasant atmosphere, you can gradually understand the nature of those desires and engage in devotional service and transfer himself today. How wonderful is this process! And even if we’re not successful and we haven’t overcome lust and anger and greed, there’s still compassion, all right? If you still use, don’t you sit on those things, you have got the message, the others understood, okay, but go to *svarga-loka*. In that atmosphere, it’s a pleasant, fairly pleasant, gradually come to understand, and by engaging in devotional service you’ll go to Vaikuṇṭha. How long for this process? There’s no loss or diminution, this is about what’s more, there’s always problems, small, in commencement, as Confucius said, “The longest journey begins with the first step.” Better to be moving slowly in the right direction than running in the wrong. So how merciful, our Gaura-kṛpā, and probably, because you were hearing the chanting of the mantra, English distribution, I say you’ve got to Kṛṣṇa. Lord didn’t say, “Me, topmost planet, Vaikuṇṭha, on an island.” This is good, most likely he would have gone. I promise, in no time, most of my disciples are aspiring for the ending. Reynolds is just joking, interesting, or Palachi—we’re trying to post-say that might have been the case. But what Prabhupāda appreciated, this was, was driving a taxi. Money he made from a taxi, he gave to the printing of the first Bhagavad-gītā, never forgot, and he inaugurated about the truth in San Francisco, and did it very well. Excellent service. For that service, you can say that if he hasn’t—he wasn’t around, like we have 45, 46 years—that service, Prabhupāda, for so many times and then you have this is beauty. Most of our progress comes from mercy, blessing from the Vaiṣṇavas, from the Guru, and Kṛṣṇa. We may sit properly and chant as best we can, make the best reason, you know, it’s because of our conditioned nature, a source of imperfection, air, still, it’s exception, but really all our progress is coming by the mercy. It’s just your mercy is all the time. So that’s Vaikuṇṭha-bhrātṛ, and the traditional, sometimes Kṛṣṇans express wonderfully merciful, the Kūjā-mūcho, Rājā Kṛṣṇa, straighten her out.

She had an interesting life, but she had some sentiment. Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, fantasy, or what is bigger, *pūtanā*, note, in the theaters, I can only have our productions—hotel—always makes it little kids. Now, something privately, see here, the little Huntsman, forward, above, no, she’s got a costume, long, nose, put on a was a rākṣasī, but... actually, her, like, regarding to take pleasure, he didn’t just kill the animals for food; he took pleasure in causing them to suffer before they die. This is to help us appreciate the power of the Holy Name, Universitas, to scrutinize me. She was she, earth, her substance, and substance, her desire to food stuff, was blood of children. She didn’t accept blood from adults only; she said what she’s, *rākṣasī*—so she would kidnap children and suck their blood. That’s the original vampire story. People like vampire stories nowadays, I see you on the plane in today, and there were different movies people could select. Everyone in my section was watching a vampire. I think, “I’m gonna get out, you’re going to economy,” once I fall asleep. So, Pūtanā, she, *rākṣasī*—śāśvatī, she like Ramachari—and why would you even thought the point, destroy me? So, she was *rākṣasī*, and you know we won’t vote for the pastimes, that, you know, she gave her breasts off to Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa took it. She was coming to kill him, but he took it; all she’s like mother, she’s giving me her breast-up to maintain, he took it like that. He’s so collected, and he was sucking on her breast and he took the milk, and he sucked out her soul, for life, here she died, and she didn’t merge into the form of the void. She didn’t just—sometimes when you’re liberated, you count demons are liberated by Numbers, different orb, and find the thing—she didn’t entertain the form of void, she became a wet nurse. It means when a mother is suckling the child, she’s so busy or she’s killed, there will be another lady who has a child also, who performed the duty of a *dhātrī*—I heard, heard the other Shastras, on wet-nurses—so Pūtanā, the *dhātrī*, she became an intimate servant, and mother—what is that?

And this story is a Rāmāyaṇa, passionless line, toughest *anāthā*, and he mentions how when Śukadeva Gosvāmī was in the world, his mother, for how long? 17 years? Vyāsadeva said what? 16, 16, 16 years. So he was a *māyāvādī*, monist means he was a *brahmānanda*, he was in an impersonal, it’s all one. So inside, outside, what was the difference? He just getting, “I come out, I’m worried, she’s all one.” This is should be there, this is the *līlā*. When he would—when he finally came out, he had been realized, what if she had no interest in any material affairs? Which is often characterized by family life, we fulfill our desires, the family life Kṛṣṇa conscious, who doesn’t, purify ourselves, that’s the safest way to advance. Efficient parts of the material, graduate desires, they, working cooperatively, family, to the *dhāma* or taste of spiritual consciousness. But he came out, “I don’t have anything to do with this,” so it was fully grown and he started, he wanted to go to the forest at least to, so same with other brothers, 9 days, and I ran her, *bāj-amātā* death, did you wait 16 years of delivery, and then he runs away? So his father started following. Śukadeva had no clothes on because he was told, you know, he was a duty, this world, but because he was totally transcendental, when he ran past the lake where young ladies were bathing, they were looking at him and being bashful women, and that’s spiritual, *śamsāra*, they could see he didn’t have any material desires, they didn’t have bother to cover themselves in the lake, they were—ladies have a private place for bathing, lamentable, yeah. But on his way to the forest, he passed by; they didn’t bother to cover. They felt no danger, there was no lust. But when his father, Hārṣa, the Vyāsadeva, because he was a *gṛhastha*, they didn’t cover. He was totally transcendental, but he was in that particular situation, purposes, anyway, they saw him as a very talented son. Śukadeva went into the forest, and Vyāsadeva went back with Nārada Muni, and he thought, “How will I draw my son back home?” And he understood that higher than Brahman realization there’s Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There’s three phases, and I just realizing the Absolute Truth: you realize the Lord in the heart, you realize the all-pervasive nature of the Lord, and ultimately the highest realization is Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world. The other aspects are subservient to this. So he thought, because we see actually that there are a number of cases where impersonals become devotees, for example, the Kumāras, and they’re all so impersonal, but they just tasted the Tulasi leaf which had been on the foot of the *Vaikuṇṭhanātha*—that’s all, it’s over. We need a lot of mercy, a lifetime of *gulab jamuns*, it’s the most kīrtan association of bathing, a Bible, they just have a Tulasi leaf from the foot of the Lord. How powerful is Śrīmatī Tulasī Mahārāṇī! She’s so potent, she appears in the world of men as a plant. In the day, she’s organizing all these pastimes; the spirit becomes this wonderful plant. She was, when the four Kumāras took, and they became devotees, so yes, there’s rarely, if ever, there’s a devotee becoming an impersonal. I have to read that; maybe in Kali-yuga some bewildered devotees may leave ISKCON, join some Māyāvāda, impersonals—we’re speaking about real-life dolls, no, become an impersonal, that’s a step down. So, Vyāsadeva understood these things. She’s the maternal incarnation of the Lord, he’s the author of the Bhāgavatam, he’s the authority, so he said, “Took some sages, you go to the forest, touch some *ślokas* from all about the beauty of the personal Lord, from the Tenth Canto.” His Tenth Canto is like the face of the Lord, full, beautiful. We start from the First Canto, which is the feet of the Lord, and gradually, he meets the waist, chest; we go through First, Second, Third, Fourth, and by the time he reached the Tenth Canto, it is to be understood that we have the knowledge, the *bhakti*, and the purification is there. So to become the Tenth Canto, we won’t misunderstand Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; first, news. So he said, “You go, and your chest, slogans from Tenth, about the beauty of the personal form of the personal Kṛṣṇa.” Warmest, all attracted, and you chants the *ślokas*. So they went, they did, they found it—they didn’t seem to capture it, they didn’t seem to pull him away, bring him into the fold of the *bhakti* court. They came back, so that Vyāsadeva, he said, “All right, you take this particular verse from Bhāgavatam, that—where it’s past—that she-demon Pūtanā was delivered by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, to become an intimate associate.” It is about a particular person. That went, they chanted that verse. It is his heart that melted; how compassionate, how merciful! What is this *Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*, that this *rākṣasī*—and it’s not just, you know, something in the theater, again, she was a *rākṣasī*. He’s sending the messages through—there’s no fax machine, no text messages, there’s spirits that would be nice, and [indiscernible] sending a flowery project to tell the dear, you’re a feeling, realized soul, to fully consciousness. Even the rice which is cooking up, offering, for the consciousness of Kṛṣṇa, cook, you can, it benefits. Again, that’s it, passed that service. Everything is for Kṛṣṇa, in *kīrtana*, for *kīrtana-sahasra*. We call, *praveśana*, Chaitanya, *vīrya*. Even the ground is conscious; everything is there for the service of Kṛṣṇa, different *rasas*, different relationships: servant, friend, parental hood. That Jīva Gosvāmī described that ultimately all serving it—of paramount importance—was just by doing yours, the team is loving Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. So one of the teachers, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, so he became that personality, that pastime took place just so we can understand what is Kṛṣṇa, how merciful Lord is. If it’s that merciful to not even non-devotees, demons, *rākṣasīs*, imagine how much we benefit by taking up the process seriously, following the rules and regulations. So sitting with the others, doing *sevā*, and that which is most dear to our hearts: chanting.

We hardly understand, but we’re just a horrible person, time after time, drops in the ocean, whatever happens. He said, “Different leaders were supported, so Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is *kṛṣṇa-caitanya-mahā-prabhu*, *kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prabhu*, Kṛṣṇa-caitanya, Prabhupāda, he’s the same Kṛṣṇa, but rather than appearing in his original form, bluish-black, thunder-monsoon cloud, he’s taken on the state, the mood of Rādhā in order to understand Rādhā’s love for him.” He took on the mood of Rādhā, because he took on the mood of Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa appearing as a devotee had the complexion of the golden color. What is golden? So because he had the mood, he had the complexion, faces as an index of the life. So what outer appearance is a reflection of one’s inner desires. That’s why I always like to vote, yes, as far as possible, to dress as devotees, to show what is my real desire. I am a devotee, and I’m proud of it. I would like to share my understanding, Kṛṣṇa-consciousness, with all of you people today. That’s when the airport terminal, but when I travel like this, it’s a very rare that I get some agitation or some threats or something; it’s always people come up, especially in China, they respect holy beings, that, “Master, Master,” always talking, “Master, Master.” Mahāprabhu takes on the complexion of Mother Rādhā. So, and what’s interesting, in that verse, Jīva Gosvāmī says, and he often developed that point, that just imagine how merciful is Kṛṣṇa that he delivered Pūtanā! But wait a minute, Kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāma, his name of Mahāprabhu, possessed, during it, more versatile than Kṛṣṇa. What—how fortunate we are to be Gaura-bhaktas. Technically, we’re Gaura-bhaktas, because he’s the latest incarnation, and Prabhupāda, so many instructions are given; the last instructions, the most relevant. So the Lord comes to give *darśana*, he comes to give instruction, he comes to give knowledge. Knowledge is somehow abused, misinterpreted, lost; he comes to us, re-established *dharma* by speaking *Bhāgavatam* and his truth.

So that time were parting, that Lord Dharma has come in the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and he’s even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa. And that was demonstrated when he went to the Jharikhanda forest and chanted. I love the old pilot light, you know? If I don’t like—means it’s a furnace in this house, and although you turn off the gas and you go on vacation, that pot, it lights, always, it’s protected by a district—that we became close, in your armor is a pilot light of training, it was there deep in the hearts of those animals, snakes, rabbits, mugs, bears, lions, lions, tigers, and bears, oh my, hahaha. The village lions, I did rule it, it was about defending me, too, or you could say, “Yes, animals, they did not have the heart.”

Somewhere, he came to check, but he wished I had a pistol, he can fly back to the spiritual sky. Told lots of Kṛṣṇa’s humor in the antics of Charlie Chaplin; he told me, he said, “I am laughing at this movie because I see Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of everything original, and Charlie Chaplin’s humor is original, so I’m seeing Kṛṣṇa, whatever you see, Charlie Chaplin.” But we can try to seek vision, any of you. So these animals were very, this very degraded life, even sleep, maybe, defending, eating the food, the demons, and the renegade animals, born in ignorance, live in ignorance. Dying, Prabhupāda was so kind, and they fully, they became fully Kṛṣṇa-conscious, and described that they were dancing, ecstatic, see now. I’ve seen animals dance, of the service, it’s not so nice. Nowadays, you don’t do like that; was in so much that protection of animals, that society, they didn’t ask, I call that going on, but I’ve seen animals dance, but it’s just an act. It’s just because they get something to eat afterwards, isn’t it? But these animals, they were dancing in ecstatic love of God, because they were in ecstasy and pleasure to their work, for you, Monica. Okay, we’re going about this, we’re, you know, International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, but you can’t become Kṛṣṇa conscious, but the blissful, regardless, where is—he’s even more merciful! Animals are chanting and dancing and considers, the [indiscernible] down—would that be nice to see that? And what’s more, they were crying. What did they, make symptoms, a little God, tears are flowing from my heart, and they were embracing, loving embraces. And Jīva Gosvāmī says this is because they give up their non-envious nature, envious moon, mist, arrogance. And envy is the root cause of all our problems. What type of envy? Envy of God. Because we’re envious of God, we’re envious of all the creatures of God.

It’s not that that, there’s a positive, haha, it’s because of envy he fell from the spiritual world. He portrayed it in different ways, big fish, little, national play, just to get the people to understand this, visual, little fishes, Indians at the big Russian—many ways we portray, the Catholics, they called the cardinal sin, and Jagadānanda Paṇḍita said, *dāitya-yuga-mukha*, we were just at the camera, you know, just a tiny, tiny, tiny, tiny, tiny fraction, not even one percent of the living entities in the spiritual world became a little jealous, because love is something you have choice; it’s nothing force behind. Love is something spontaneous, free, springs from the heart, time, choice, to love. Because we have the choice, that means there’s yes and there’s no, otherwise it’s not choice. So, somehow, some crazy fools like you and me, we said no, we became in this, [indiscernible], okay, we’re trying to make it like *Vṛndāvana*, but every time I come here, it’s gone. So that, emptiness, the cardinal sin, it’s like when you have a boil—I’ve got boils in India, I got scars to prove it, the early days—you get a boil and it gradually builds up. How many of you had a boil? Really, lonely living loves company. That boil comes, and then, you know, you have it, it’s just full of pus; it’s like a big lump, and you, if you just squeeze the pus out—sorry to get graphic here, reading, a graphic—all children should be, thinking, you squeeze it out, but that’s not enough. There’s a core to it, there’s a core to the boil, and you have to go in with tweezers and it’s like it’s like a little core, it’s where the virus resides, to take the tweezers, you pull it out like a stone. Really, that’s a lot of *japa*, and then you’re not going to tell about, then it feels very quickly, a good neosporin, very good. I—so much as a kid, I hate [indiscernible], to tonight, babysitter, Mrs. Gillis, Western songs, during, dark blue dress with white polka dots, assistant over 40, this is Phyllis, she had an accident, should take the tweezers, “Okay, Brian, just hold on tight to my arm.” I caught it, a bug, big lump, you have to get the root out. So to get out of this material world, just take the root cause away; it is envy. And that envy manifests for all Kṛṣṇa’s parts and parcels, root, pull that envy, *vṛndāvana*, that not with clear services and surgical instruments, how did he do it? Holy Names.

That is the instrument that we can also use. It’s not painful like Mrs. Miller’s with the tweezers; he makes that process, that surgical process, a pleasant process. A surgical process? It’s never pleasant; this is a mystery of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It’s simple and it’s alive: chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and your life will be sublime. Prabhupāda said in London, I heard him say, him said, “In real place, who didn’t say, ‘Chant, be happy,’” somewhere online, some devotee did that and it became absolutely dismembered in a progress, because sublime is something more sublime than just happens. Second London’s like this, you can take the tweezers for two, passes austerities and fasting, and so no, you chant, you dance in ecstasy.

And then root cause of our behavior is removed, in the weeds of the choking, the tender creeper of bhakti-devotion, which is just there in the heart, but can’t grow because of the weeds—lust, anger, greed. That’s it. Then it’s free to grow, *vṛndāvana*, you can go healthy physically, healthy emotionally, until intellectually, spiritually. Prabhupāda described the process. So, the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and I often use that term, and I always say that’s a British, it’s true even in America, because it may say so, here’s example. There’s precept; precept means philosophy, but we need more than philosophy, we need example. That’s why when you go on *saṅkīrtana*, people are so, they’re not so tuning the flock, they buy the book because they’re buying you. They meet you, you’re detached, you’re happy, you’re full of joy, you’re bigger, you’re serving your Guru and Kṛṣṇa, Gaurāṅga; you don’t meet people like that. You go find a ruby in every mountain, you don’t find a pearl, any baby elephant, you don’t find sandalwood trees there in the forest, you don’t find sandalwood in every birth; they’re more precious than any of those other commodity. Even mundane common people, when they come in contact with devotees, the *Gaura-śakti* is coming through those devotees, Prabhupāda’s mercy is coming through his representatives—all of you, Prabhupāda said, “You all become Guru and save the world,” become the representative of Kṛṣṇa, and they buy you, they meet you. You’re different, something special about the Vaiṣṇavas. So Mahāprabhu is even more merciful, he gave the example, he said, “Okay, they may be not going to believe this, that you can take out the root cause of material existence, the envy, and all the other bad qualities will follow it.” The way he did, said, “I better show how it works.” He went to the jungle, and he had, as Jīva Gosvāmī says very clearly in the text, *jātīya-nāma-caitanya*, they gave up their—they gave up their envy, and became not envious creatures, and the sign was they were racing each other in loving ecstasy, just like today. There was no envy today; I was thinking this, it was just love, we could cut it with a knife, there was so much devotion. You were so much appreciating the offerings, frustration having one of your heart-felt systems, and I was relishing every word that was glorifying.

Haha, but not in that way, just as I often say, I was quoting one of the offerings, just like a father enjoys seeing his children, though I’ve even taken care of the business at one point, that the child takes over the business. So one day when I leave—when Stalter told me yesterday, said, “You’re gonna live a very long life,” I’m not making a real statement, *bhakti*, she said that, she’s a very well-known devotee, too, she’s, “I just saw your face when I first, I said you’re going to live a long life,” right? Eventually, then you—some of you will receive, you’ll take over the family business. That’s the title of the book of my secret, little book distribution—our family business is to represent, be a representative of Śrī Caitanya, of our Guru and Gaurāṅga; that’s our family, just to represent them and assist in the preaching work. What’s the next one? A qualified spiritual master. This is a good disciple, to be a good disciple; before you can be—find a teacher, to be a good student, teacher. So, it gives me so much pleasure to know that in the future this movement will continue strength after strength after strength to strength, because all of you are excellent disciples. Thank you so much, you’re excellent disciples, I’m very proud of you. I understand the difficulties; I’m also a disciple of life, serve our masters, I don’t feel myself perfectly, I’m trying to become perfect, hmm, for his pleasure only, so that he can use me as an instrument in the *saṅkīrtana* mission. You know, I’m ready to go on birth after birth after birth. I’d—the disciple, my dear god-brother, he told him, so when he was in the [indiscernible] a very unusual question in his room in the Vaikuṇṭha, he said, “Śrīla Prabhupāda, where are you going when you die?” He was an initiate, it was just a new devotee, but you know how children sometimes ask embarrassing questions, and the yesterday he did say something, you know, “Mommy, I...” so he asked a question and that may not have been appropriate, but he was young and innocent, Prabhupāda was dancing on the mantra, said, “Prabhupāda, where are you going when you die?” The devotees were—maybe Oh, Prabhupāda can say to compromise at all, “Yes, I have decided; but I die, I plan to go to the hellish planets to continue Kṛṣṇa consciousness.” What is the compassion of a Vaiṣṇava? It’s just the compassion; it just gets—it becomes more and more, madness, it’s Kṛṣṇa. Then there’s the Caitanya, Prabhupāda did it out to the Western countries, Prabhupāda, our mercy; he was successful, and it wasn’t easy, so much compassion. So let’s go, my dear disciples, progress there, you know, what is the spiritual world without Prabhupāda preaching in heaven and the hellish? I do not know who is Kṛṣṇa, how to serve Kṛṣṇa, I only know my Guru is perfect. There’s that quote, “That like a dying man looks at a picture of the Supreme Personality,” *bhūyo-bhūyaḥ, pādāmbhojaṁ, dhyāyanti-bhaktāḥ*—so a dying man. But I’m thinking, would I go about, different, Prabhupāda, because I don’t know, and if I’m going to know who is Kṛṣṇa, if one day I’m going to be introduced to Kṛṣṇa, it’s Prabhupāda who is going to introduce you, of course. He actually told my god-brother, in a moment of intimacy, he said, “You’ve gone to another, that when you get back to the spiritual world, your spiritual master, he receives you, and he takes your hands, and he leads you into the, into the, into the, and he places this, your hand in the hand, and then he leaves you alone the first position.” Wow, our future, dear devotees, is very bright. Thus, always stay on the boat of ISKCON; even though the Atlantic Ocean sometimes, you stay on the, stay on the boat of transcendental knowledge. We have the human form of life, that’s the goal, we have the wind, which is the very literatures, and we have the captain, the same Kṛṣṇaness, so to speak, and we’re sure if going that, *Vaikuṇṭha*, Godhead, there you have a dance, the word is a song, there’s a festival every day. I’m very happy to have the service of taking you under my wing as best I can, and taking you to the shelter, to the progress, to the state. Thank you so much.""