"*00542*.*
"We are very lucky with you and also that we are in such a holy place, sitting here together. This happened by the grace of the *paramparā* (the succession of the Lord). Reading him in place in Vraja—this gorge is very narrow, and you will need to carefully descend here because it becomes very narrow, and along it, we will descend to the village of Citrā Devī which is below behind this hill. 

The other day we discussed with you that when Kṛṣṇa lived in Nandagrāma, then Rādhārāṇī lived in Varṣāṇā with her parents, Vṛṣabhānu and Kīrtidā. She lived there until she married Abhimanyu and moved to Jāvaṭ. Her main eight *sakhīs* also had their own villages in which they lived, and these villages were located around Varṣāṇā. Just a few meters from here, we find the village of Citrā. Very often, Rādhārāṇī with her friends, like Mañjarīs, passed through this place with dairy products which they sold. You see that this is a very beautiful place, a favorite place for photographers, and people also often pass here. Young girls who are carrying milk, see, and when they walk along this narrow gorge, they don't even hold their legs. I can never understand this. And so, with their dairy products, they went to different bazaars and sold them. 

One day, Rādhārāṇī with Lalitā, Viśākhā, and other *sakhīs* were walking from the village of Citrā with dairy products to Varṣāṇā to sell them. But as Śrīla Prabhupāda said, if a boy catches something in childhood, this is a good sign because when he grows up, he will be very smart. Usually, when a child is too naughty, it worries his parents. However, when Kṛṣṇa was naughty, it brought his parents complete delight. And when Rādhārāṇī and the *gopīs* were walking along this narrow gorge, Kṛṣṇa was already waiting for them here with his friends. Kṛṣṇa was hiding right behind these trees. I don't even know, maybe they are those *kadamba* trees that grew here 5,000 years ago. When the girls were walking and they reached here, suddenly Kṛṣṇa jumped out with all his gang. They lined up and told the girls, "You are not going anywhere today. I heard that you were going to the black market to sell your dairy products. Nothing will work out for you, you liars."

And Kṛṣṇa said, "We came here on behalf of King Kaṃsa in order to stop all these deals on the black market." Rādhārāṇī began to laugh endlessly, and she cooled down very much because she laughed right in his face. "Kṛṣṇa, what are you even talking about? My father, King Vṛṣabhānu, is the king of this place, not Kaṃsa at all." And Kṛṣṇa quickly realized that they had such a very cunning squabble going on. Kṛṣṇa quickly realized and said, "You know, in fact, I was sent here by a king of a higher rank, whose name is... Cupid. Cupid sent us here so that you *gopīs* would pay some tax." And the girls, they are, of course, timid and modest, but nevertheless, each Rādhārāṇī has a fire inside her heart. You can look at this girl; everything immediately becomes clear. They know how to ask for a donation and know how to get their way. As soon as Rādhārāṇī heard this, she immediately pushed the shepherds aside and walked past them. They were about to be defeated by these girls. And what did they do? They started pushing them back.

So, in this very place where we are now sitting, a big crush began as they all began to push each other. Well, of course, you know that boys are stronger—they will be stronger—and they began pushing into a narrow gorge. And at one point, when the battle broke out in earnest, Kṛṣṇa knocked a clay pot of yogurt off the head of Rādhārāṇī. And now, when you and I walk along the gorge, on the left side, you will see stones with white spots on them; these spots remained from that very *līlā* that happened 5,000 years ago. These are yogurt stains. Of course, everyone laughed, but Madhumaṅgala laughed the loudest. He said, "Ha-ha-ha, girls, we are stronger than you! Look, our Kṛṣṇa knocked Rādhārāṇī's pot directly off her head."

And it is said that sometimes secrecy is—how to say—the good side of courage. And the *gopīs*, they decided to go into an ambush in order to think over their plan. How many *gopīs* live here in Vṛndāvana? A wonderful scripture is given in *Rādhā-sahasra-nāma* where it is said that hundreds of millions of goddesses of fortune (Lakṣmīs) live in the spiritual world. We usually think that the goddesses of fortune live in Vaikuṇṭha, but there is one name, Rādhārāṇī, which means that she is the original goddess of fortune. Just as it is said that all expansions of Viṣṇu come from Kṛṣṇa, in the same way, all expansions of Lakṣmī come from Rādhā. So Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she carries out expansions of different Lakṣmīs, and different *gopīs* are just her expansion. In order to recruit help for herself, it was not difficult for her; they came in thousands. And there were only 10 cowherd boys with Kṛṣṇa, and these girls were very angry. Even in the material world, it is said that no one has seen such anger and fire that can be seen in an angry woman. However, all these emotions, they come from the spiritual world where these emotions of an uncontaminated kind exist. They can be angry at Kṛṣṇa, and among them, Lalitā stands out, who can scold Kṛṣṇa very strongly. But all this happens on a transcendental level in order to increase the transcendental emotion of love. 

The cowherd girls were here rejoicing over the victory over Govinda, and at that moment, the whole *gopī* flood came to this territory. All these girls, they surrounded the 12 or 10 cowherd boys and began to pour their yogurt and milk on them. And other *gopīs* surrounded the only Madhumaṅgala and began to pour yogurt on his head. This boy, Madhumaṅgala, began to say, "Girls, girls, you will soon be guilty of drowning Brāhmaṇa!" However, it did not frighten them at all; they poured even more yogurt on him. Madhumaṅgala said, "This is what happens when you get involved with these... I should have only communicated with my own, with my own... with Brahmā. Us Brahmā will never in my life pour yogurt on the boy Brahmā's head!" And then the *gopīs* won. The boys were already laid down here; they lay here and cried, and the girls giggled at them and gradually went away. But in fact, it didn't all end there; it was just the beginning. But I'll ask you to tell me about this. We'll find out about this when we get to the village. 

And before we continue and walk along the gorge where the lotus feet of the *gopīs* and cowherds entered, I'll tell you another story. Up here there is a place called *Māna-līlā*; this is a place of games. It is said that once in the month of Śrāvaṇa, when Rādhārāṇī is with Kṛṣṇa, they began to argue with each other. Kṛṣṇa did something again which made Rādhārāṇī very angry, and when she gets angry, it is called *māna*. She gets very angry and Kṛṣṇa begins to think how to approach her; after all, he apologizes, brings her gifts, and so on. And in this story, Rādhārāṇī is so angry at Kṛṣṇa that she climbed this hill with all her friends and she refused to meet Kṛṣṇa and didn't even want to talk to him. To climb this hill, but they drove him down and said that, "Rādhārāṇī doesn't talk to you, doesn't want to see you. She doesn't want to, and you will never see her again in life." And in fact, this is not the first time this has happened. In fact, these *līlās* happen everywhere in Vraja. For example, this *līlā* of tax collection happens everywhere in Vraja. Soon we will understand; we will be together in a place which is called *dāna-ghāṭī*. So this is not the first time Rādhārāṇī got angry at Kṛṣṇa, and every time Kṛṣṇa needs to come up with something new: "What should I come up with now so Rādhārāṇī will forgive me?" Sometimes he comes and just falls at her feet and begs to forgive him; sometimes he brings her flowers; sometimes he brings her precious gifts. And since Rādhārāṇī loves Kṛṣṇa more than anything in the world, in the end, she always forgives him. 

But this time, Kṛṣṇa ran out of ideas. He did this this way—this was last month, so that means last year she did this. And now what to do? Finally, an idea came to his mind and he said to the boys, "I will change into a girl! I will put on a sarī, all sorts of jewelry. I will go and sing for Rādhārāṇī." "Oh, not that," the boys said, "ew, change into a girl? Oh, we don't have such a plan." I like it very much, and Kṛṣṇa, I became very worried about the Rādhārāṇī; she doesn't separate even for a second, she doesn't part with Kṛṣṇa. This is the divine *cit-tattva*, and this separation actually also brings her transcendental anxiety, and this only increases their affection for each other. It is said that separation only strengthens love. And they tried as best they could; the cowherd girls did everything in their power to dress Kṛṣṇa up as a *gopī*. I don't know if any of our devotees have seen the *līlās* that they stage in Vṛndāvana performances where boys are dressed up as *gopīs*. Well, guys, imagine you will have to wear a petticoat! I wouldn't even know where it ties—in the front or in the back. I've been moving for 40 years and I still don't know, and I won't even try to find out. And a sarī... for me, it's necessary—this is the eighth wonder of the world, 6 meters of fabric—in the end, it still somehow looks beautiful. Very beautiful all things. Well, and imagine him in this. And Kṛṣṇa had to endure all these jokes and jokes that came from the boys' mouths, and in the end, he looked like a girl. And Balarāma said, "Do you really want to go through all this?" And Madhumaṅgala on the hill kept laughing and laughing. 

In the end, they undressed Kṛṣṇa as best they could. They had, of course, different ideas about this. We will hear further in this story. So, in the end, Kṛṣṇa came to this hill. They didn't suspect anything; they didn't see that someone was here. Of course, they had a share of suspicion. "Śiva, tell me where you came from? What is your village? What is your name?" Since each *gopī* has a certain *sevā* (service) in which they live, and a name. This is the problem Lord Śiva faced, and then Brahmā said, "Well, okay, we can try." Of course, we can make one and maybe we will turn him into a *gopī*. But as we discussed the other day, only the most pure-hearted *gopīs*, the highest level *gopīs*, have the right to participate in the *rāsa* dance. And when Lord Śiva approached Rādhārāṇī, they asked, "Oh, come here, what's your name?" Brahmā forgot to tell him, "Your name... listen, where do you live?" He couldn't say that Kailāsa lives [there]. "And what is your service?" But he couldn't say that he destroys all three worlds! Then they realized that this is a man who gave up without any permission; they took their slippers and began to beat him. Brahmā in the end had to save him. 

Brahmā then said, "Okay, then you will have another service, no worse than this service: you can guard." Devotees don't mind taking second, third, fourth, fifth place, since in front of them are all the Vaiṣṇavas who give them their mercy; they don't mind becoming *dāsa-dāsa*. Yes, when Uddhava was in Vṛndāvana, then when he was already leaving Vṛndāvana, he said that, being struck by the mood of love of Vṛndāvana, "I don't mind being born here as a bunch of grass so that beautiful, amazing *gopīs* walk on me, so I would always receive dust from their lotus feet on my head." That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness: we don't mind doing humble and inconspicuous service, since we have a lot of devotees and we receive their mercy. And somehow Kṛṣṇa managed to get through the security post because he said both his name and his service; he indicated his and said which village he was from. They asked, "Well, okay, come in. And what service do you want to offer Rādhārāṇī?" And then Kṛṣṇa said, "I want to sing for her." 

And when Kṛṣṇa appeared in front of Rādhārāṇī, she very tenderly asked him, "Please tell me what service you want to perform today?" And he said, "I want to make it in time." And when he began to sing, his voice was sweet, sweet, madhura. And Rādhārāṇī said, "Something... I have never heard any of my *sakhī* or *gopī* sing so sweetly. Something is wrong with this *gopī*." But Lalitā, she is generally suspicious. She looks at this *gopī* and thinks, "Something is wrong here because, after all, boys are different from girls; something is different. Sarī somehow interestingly dressed, and she sits somehow interestingly, and the intonation of the voice is very interesting." And Lalitā, she always loves to protect Rādhārāṇī. She came up to Rādhārāṇī, in the ear, "Rādhā, something strange is happening here, let's do a—" Young *gopī* sat waiting. And then they came up with a plan because of which they all began to giggle. You are responsible for rewarding devotees for their devoted service; what is the best reward you can get from Rādhārāṇī for your service? A beautiful golden vase? Necklaces of diamonds? Or something? The best gift from Rādhārāṇī is to receive even more service; this is what a devotee prays for. And she said this: "I have prepared such a good gift for you. Something... new clothes. You know, we decided to give you a new set of clothes. Any girl of any age... if she herself decided to give her a new set of clothes, a new petticoat, a new sarī... all my girlfriends, all my *sakhīs*, all my mañjarīs, right now, right here, we want to dress you ourselves." 

He even sweated, and Kṛṣṇa said, "Yes, actually nothing bad; my clothes are completely new, I don't need anything." And Rādhārāṇī said, "And we... let's put it on right now." And Kṛṣṇa will tell me, "I don't need anything in return for my service; my service only expresses my love for you." So for some time, they had this squabble, and in the end, Rādhārāṇī said, "Well, that's enough now, I want to see you in these new beautiful clothes. Lalitā, Viśākhā, let's quickly put them on! I want to see the red girl." And what can Kṛṣṇa do if he is completely in the power of Rādhā's love? This is the philosophy of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas; this is that the Supreme Lord God Kṛṣṇa, who rules the whole world, completely submits to the love of his devotees. Then they began to pull the sarī off this girl. When they reached, the *kadamba* flowers fell out. 

And two big *kadamba* flowers, when they fell out, then all the girls, they just burst out laughing, greeted him, and said, "You can come back to us." Well, then he changed into his normal clothes of Vṛndāvana Kṛṣṇa, and here on the top of the hill, Rādhā with Kṛṣṇa sat on the swing, and so their Jhūlana-yātrā began. And every year a wonderful festival of lamps is held here. In fact, the swings are located in different places, and later in another place, a maha-story on this festival, how two big *kadamba* flowers fell out of this *gopī*, and all the devotees always laugh on this festival. Of course, these games are endless, but we still don't know what happened to the girls when they returned to the village. But we will tell you about it; we will now walk to this village, it's not far, and we will place on the *kuṇḍa* which is called Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa. There are a lot of steps on which we will sit and listen carefully. They still collect taxes; the mood has been preserved. Those... remember that these games are eternal. Therefore, if you want to pass by this teaching, you will probably have to pay taxes. Well, please just don't push and don't fight.""