"*00435*.*
""Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. My dear friend, if you are indeed attached to your worldly friends, do not look at the smiling face of Lord Govinda. As He stands on the bank of the Yamunā at Keśi-ghāṭa, casting sidelong glances, He places His flute to His lips, which seem like newly blossomed twigs. His transcendental body, bending in three places, appears very bright in the moonlight."

So, of course, this is the quintessential verse describing the beautiful deity whom we have had several darśanas with here in Jaipur. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Chapter 1, Verse 19, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī also glorifies along with two other very important deities in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya. These three deities of Vṛndāvana—Madana-mohana, Gopīnātha, and Govinda—have absorbed the heart and soul of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. I worship their lotus feet, for they are the very lords of my heart.

And in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, we hear another beautiful description of Govinda-jī, as He is affectionately known—not just Govinda, when you have an intimate relationship with someone, Govinda-jī.

"In a forest of desire trees known as Vṛndāvana is a golden mansion, and in its midst is a jeweled throne at the place called Yoga-pīṭha. Seated thereupon is Śrī Govinda, a veritable cupid incarnate. He is served there as King, bedecked with divine clothes, ornaments, and other paraphernalia, served incessantly by thousands upon thousands of devotees."

And naturally, of course, Lord Brahmā also glorifies Govinda-jī. Naturally, we say, because He is the head of our guru-paramparā; He is the ādi-guru, in one sense, of our sampradāya. *Brahmā-Madhva-Gauḍīya-sampradāya*—His name is first; He is the original guru, so He should also say something about Govinda-jī: "I worship the original person." And then He goes on to glorify different characteristics.

Govinda has appeared to us. *Jagannātha-svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu*. Oh dear Jagannātha, Lord of the universe, kindly be visible unto me. This mood of searching for Kṛṣṇa is actually the essence of devotional service. Not that "I’ve seen Kṛṣṇa," but "I’m searching for Kṛṣṇa because He is my long-lost lover." This is vipralambha.

The six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, whom Mahāprabhu empowered to speak about devotional service, they were always in this mood: "Where is Kṛṣṇa? Is He here? How do you know that? Where is Kṛṣṇa? Is He just on the banks of the Yamunā? Is He at Keśi-ghāṭa? Is He out at Rādhā-kuṇḍa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?" This is the mood of a devotee searching for Kṛṣṇa: "For so long, I’ve forgotten You. Please be visible to me."

"Oh Lord of the universe, kindly be visible."

So, the Lord very kindly becomes visible to the pure devotees, and then those pure devotees share that vision with us through their speaking about the Lord and by installing the deity of the Lord. Kṛṣṇa, the Lord, is present in the sound of His name in Kali-yuga, and the pure devotees speak about the name, fame, and pastimes of the Lord, and that way we come in contact with Kṛṣṇa. Just like now, we’re speaking about Kṛṣṇa; we’re experiencing Kṛṣṇa. But also, the pure devotees are so kind that they install the arcā-vigraha, the deity of the Lord, so daily we can have His personal presence.

During the ceremony where the stone, or the marble, or the brass deity is present before the devotees, we say prayers: "My dear Lord, please incarnate in this form so we can serve You." And He does so at our request; He is so kind. In case anyone has any doubts, the brāhmaṇa boy said to Sākṣī-gopāla, "My dear Lord, You are not a statue. You are not a statue. You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda." In the last few days, we’ve had the good fortune to come before one such deity, Govinda-deva, or Govinda-jī.

We have many deities in ISKCON. They’ve been installed for five, or ten, or 30 years. This deity of Govinda-jī appeared 5,000 years ago. How many devotees have worshiped this beautiful deity? We mentioned the other day that after Kṛṣṇa disappeared, all the Vrajavāsīs were devastated. Some of them had come with Kṛṣṇa from the spiritual world, but others were ordinary souls like you and me who happened to come to Vraja for whatever reason, or appeared there. But by the association of the Lord, they immediately became pure devotees—that’s called *kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*. There’s *guru-kṛpā* and there’s *kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*. So *kṛṣṇa-kṛpā* means those souls that were present, they also became pure devotees. *Kṛṣṇa-kṛpā*—some special mercy.

Just like someone goes to the university for four or eight years, finally gets a graduation. But sometimes, because of the merits of that person later on, that university just gives them a degree or something—a diploma—without ever going to the university. Because, well, whatever. So that’s special mercy. So sometimes we go through *sādhana-bhakti*, but sometimes Kṛṣṇa says [something] and He gives a devotee Kṛṣṇa consciousness, a pure devotional service, immediately. Wouldn’t that be nice? You don’t have to wait. "After many, many births and deaths, one fully surrendered to Me." What if, like, "Boom, take Kṛṣṇa now"? That happens sometimes.

All of you, or most of you, saw the Tota-Gopinātha deity in Jagannātha Purī. It’s well-known that that deity can give prema to a sādhaka just by coming in front of Him. There have been cases where someone just started chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, started following the regulative principles, and became a pure devotee. That’s why in the beginning years, in the 70s, when I would take the brahmacārīs to Tota-Gopinātha, we’d have kīrtana for 10 or 12 hours and look around: "Who got it?"

Not easily, say. It depends on Kṛṣṇa’s desire. So when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, it was the same; it was a flood of tears. That’s a whole subject. That’s a flood of tears.

So, Vajranābha was the great-grandson of Kṛṣṇa. He came up with a good idea: "Why not install deities of Kṛṣṇa around Vṛndāvana according to the different places of pastimes?" He carved different deities and installed them around so devotees could associate with Kṛṣṇa again because they had the faith. There’s no difference between the deity and Kṛṣṇa. They had that faith: "My Lord, You are not a statue. You are directly the son of Mahārāja Nanda."

One of my godbrothers, in his reminiscence about Prabhupāda, told a very wonderful pastime. Prabhupāda was visiting the Los Angeles temple; there’s a lot of pushing and shoving to get Prabhupāda’s association. So when Prabhupāda arrived, many devotees were crowding around him. As Prabhupāda came in front of Rukmiṇī-Dvarakādīśa, the presiding deities in the Los Angeles temple, and this devotee—somehow or other he got right next to Prabhupāda—as Prabhupāda came before the deities, he started praying to them. Listen to what this devotee has written: Actually, Prabhupāda was not praying; he was simply speaking, not *to*, but *with* Kṛṣṇa.

Prabhupāda said to the deities, "So, I see you are dressed very nicely. Are they dressing you like this every day?" There was a short pause. Then Prabhupāda said, "Oh, very nice. Very good." Which means the deity spoke to him. "How was the bhoga? Are they cooking nicely for you?" A pause. "Oh, very nice. Are you enjoying it? Oh, yes. Very nice." So obviously, Prabhupāda was speaking to the deity and the deity was speaking to Prabhupāda.

So you should have this faith; you should have this faith. So, therefore, Vajranābha ordered the carving of Govinda. And the devotees worshiped Govinda-jī. But through the millennia—millennia means not like a century; it means like a thousand years—through the millennia, Govinda-jī disappeared because there were so many invasions and so many things. This is the material world. Govinda-jī, Gopīnātha, they were lost. But because devotees are always chanting, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare," they pray, "Let me serve You. You’re very far away in Goloka, but You’re very close to us in the form of Your holy name and Your deity. Let—we want to serve You again. We lost it. We want to serve You again."

So if we’ve lost Kṛṣṇa, if we keep chanting, He’ll come back to us again. That is our understanding. If we’ve lost Him in any way, any form, He’ll come back. He knows how we are crying. Our hearts are crying in separation. Those tears will bring Him back. Maybe in another form, but He’ll come back. It’s all His pastimes.

So, how did Govinda-jī come back? He’d been lost for 5,000 years. Actually, the pastime begins in Mathurā. It’s the town next to Vṛndāvana. It’s so exciting. 550 years ago, our Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī and Rūpa Gosvāmī used to beg prasāda—it’s called madhukarī—from seven brāhmaṇa houses every day in Mathurā. They didn’t have a private cook like I do. I have Cuncī; she’s my private cook. I have many secretaries. So, she’s cooking for me every day so nicely. Give her a round of applause.

But they used to beg for their prasāda. So after begging and getting some prasāda, Rūpa Gosvāmī would go back to Vṛndāvana. And the reason he would go back to Vṛndāvana and do parikramā is, he was hoping to find his worshipable deity, Govinda-jī. These are all self-realized souls, pure devotees. They know who is their Deva. They know their eternal relationship, their rasa with Kṛṣṇa. They’re not like us. They know. So he’s always thinking, "Where is my Govinda-jī? I want to worship Him." And he had faith he would find Kṛṣṇa again because Kṛṣṇa, in the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, said: "Go to Vṛndāvana, find the lost holy places, write books on the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and establish deity worship. Find your deity; start worshiping Him again."

As he was doing parikramā one day, he started feeling intense separation from Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya—Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the one Lord became two as Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa became one in the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu who came to this world. So naturally, Rūpa is also feeling so much separation for Caitanya Mahāprabhu because he’s a pure, unalloyed devotee. So he stopped walking and he sat underneath a tree and he wrote what’s called *Caitanyāṣṭaka*. It’s a beautiful prayer about Lord Caitanya in his general series called *Stava-mālā*.

So there’s one verse that’s very dear to my heart; it’s probably dear to your heart as well—*aṣṭakam*, eight verses. So here is one of the verses: how we should hanker for Mahāprabhu, who reveals to us Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. If we want Kṛṣṇa, we have to worship Gaura. Because only by the mercy of Gaura can we understand what is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-līlā. It’s so deep. So, it’s very interesting: he’s looking for Govinda, but he starts feeling separation from Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It’s very significant. In this age, only by the mercy of Mahāprabhu will we find Kṛṣṇa.

So although he’s looking for Govinda-jī, he all of a sudden feels all this sentiment for Mahāprabhu. He’s sitting under the tree and he writes the following: "Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra in a loud voice, the holy name dancing on His tongue as He counts the number of recitations on a beautiful knotted string held in His effulgent hand. His eyes are large, and His long arms bend down to His knees as He performs His pastimes. Will He ever again become visible on the path of my eyes? Will Mahāprabhu ever become visible again before my eyes?"

So, at that very point, feeling separation from Mahāprabhu—which means Mahāprabhu is just relishing Rūpa’s love, you could say—Caitanya Mahāprabhu arranged that Govinda-jī was found. By the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we understand who is Kṛṣṇa. So crying in separation from Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who sent him there, suddenly a cowherd man named Govinda Dāsa, who took care of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s 500 cows, came to see him and was sad to see that Rūpa Gosvāmī was crying in separation.

This is one of his servants, Govinda Dāsa, who took care of Rūpa’s cows. Rūpa Gosvāmī is a renunciant. He had 500 cows. He’s sleeping under a different tree every night. He’s so renounced. He has 500 cows. Yes. Caitanya Mahāprabhu had previously instructed, "When you go to Vṛndāvana, you take care of all the renounced sādhu there." Just like you say, "I like to give the sādhu..." As we just met that one sādhu as we were leaving, you know, he’s the sādhu who cares. No one’s even paying attention. You serve the sādhu. They’ve turned their back on material existence. They’ve turned their back on the darkness, and they’re seeing the light—how would you say, the light of transcendental knowledge coming down from Kṛṣṇa. They’re actually the original ādi-gurus; they’re not ordinary souls, Vrajavāsīs, residents of the land. So He said, "When you go to Vṛndāvana to do those three things I asked you, you also take care of the sādhu."

So you know that Rūpa had amassed a lot of money when he was serving in the government of Hussain Shah, a Muslim ruler. He left; he ran away from that, but he had lots of money. So he took some of that money and he purchased 500 cows, and that milk was used to serve the sādhu of Vṛndāvana.

Rūpa Gosvāmī had 500 cows, and actually, there was a Muslim emperor at that time, his name was Humayun, whose palace was in modern-day Delhi. And he was so impressed—he’s a Muslim, but he was so impressed with Rūpa Gosvāmī—that hearing he had 500 cows, he gave him a large amount of territory of land by which he could graze the cows, and he didn’t have to pay any tax. This is the real history lesson. So, anyway, the person that took care of the cows, Govinda Dāsa, he happened to walk by, seeing Rūpa Gosvāmī cry in ecstasy in separation from Mahāprabhu. So he stopped and he said, "Don’t, my dear master, don’t worry. I have some good news. One of your cows goes daily to the top of that little hillock. That little hill over there; there’s a little hole there. And every day that cow is pouring milk into that hole. Something transcendental is going on." Rūpa Gosvāmī—he said, "One of your *go*—*go* means senses, *go* can also mean cow. One of your *go*s is going daily to pour this milk." So Rūpa Gosvāmī’s meditation changed to Govinda-jī, and he became—for him, that was a sign that Govinda-jī was going to appear very soon from the hillock.

How did he conclude this? The śāstras say that in Vraja-bhāṣā, *go* means cow, and by hearing that word, his *vṛnda*, his meditation on Lord Caitanya, was broken, and he would soon have darśana of Govinda-jī. Another meaning of Govinda is the Lord who maintains the cows of Vraja.

Now, that’s an historic moment. All of it—now, for so long, he’s been feeling separation. Now he’s going to have darśana. *Jagannātha-svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu*. "Oh Lord, kindly be visible." Like, "I’ve been waiting days, years! I’m going to Purī." Now he’s going to have the darśana of his Lord. It’s like the end of a symphony—da da da!

So one great devotee—what’s his name? Actually, I found a very beautiful verse describing that moment. Isn’t that nice? That moment. I found a verse; I didn’t sleep last night. I was looking for this verse. It’s from Govinda-dāsa Kavirāja’s *Śrī-Rūpa-cintāmaṇi-stotra*, Verse 17. Oh my God. He writes about it. Would you like to hear it? He writes:

"Begging for alms in the houses of devotee brāhmaṇas in Mathurā, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is more humble than a blade of grass and more tolerant than a tree, sat under a tree while holding a clay pot and wearing a black woolen chaddar on his shoulder. There, he envisioned his beloved Govinda-deva while crying in happiness and singing beautiful songs about the pastimes of the Lord of Vraja."

So, Rūpa Gosvāmī became ecstatic. He started running around, collecting all the villagers, all the farmers with their instruments, and they went to that hill. They dug, dug, dug, dug, dug down five stories. They went to the hill; they dug down five. Not like we have apartment buildings because they didn’t have, so "stories" means something maybe like that, or something. And suddenly they came to the topknot of Govinda-jī, who just came from the topknot. *Pañca-pātāla-bhūgarbha*—*pañca* means five, *pātāla*—stories situating the earth, the top—notching, digging—up of energy out of the earth. And as soon as they pulled Him out of the earth, all the cows in Vṛndāvana started running. Somehow, you know, in Vṛndāvana, good news travels faster than bad news, whereas in the material world, modern society, bad news travels faster than good news because there’s no good news. They all—you’ve seen cows run, you know—all the cows ran to that, and their—the bells they wear around their necks, they’re all jingling. It was filling the whole air with that beautiful sound, and they arrived at that sacred spot and they all laid down together and cuddled around that hole in the soft dust of Vṛndāvana. You see how cows lay down; thousands of cows laid down.

It’s written that Rūpa Gosvāmī was standing the whole time, supporting himself with a stick, shivering in ecstasy as his eyes were flooded with tears. The cows came first because, I don’t know, they’re very dear to Govinda-jī. Then the different sādhu started coming, and soon Sanātana Gosvāmī, he arrived to meet Govinda-jī. Other sādhus like Lokanātha Gosvāmī, Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī—who’d found their deities already—they also congratulations. And the brāhmaṇa women from Mathurā, they came riding in palanquins, carrying different types of pūjā articles to worship the Lord. And then the *caṭṭarāḍi* brāhmaṇa men from Mathurā, they came to chant auspicious mantras.

And then everyone collected water from the river Yamunā, and along with the milk those cows were just pouring out—milk—they went around, got all the milk from the thousands of cows that were there, made the *kṣīra-mat* and they bathed Govinda-jī, His first bathing ceremony. Actually, it was a huge, elaborate ceremony. We don’t have time, but it’s described in Rūpa Gosvāmī’s book called *Kṛṣṇa-janma-tithi-vidhi*. This whole elaborate abhiṣeka they had—I searched the book out because I’m a sort of pūjārī; I’ve been worshiping deities many years. I was interested: "What’s this abhiṣeka like? Maybe I can, you know, get some ideas how to worship my deities from this book."

And then I became very curious. No one’s mentioning the blowing of conch shells. You know, we always blow—āratī is going to start, āratī is finished. I didn’t see anywhere the mention of conch shells being blown. We do it all the time. So I inquired from authorities, and I read that when Akrūra left Vṛndāvana with Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, he loudly heralded—you could say made significance to the occasion—by blowing a conch shell. "This is a great moment; I’m taking Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to Mathurā to see the King Kamsa." So Vrajavāsīs don’t blow conch shells because it reminds them Kṛṣṇa’s leaving Vraja.

So even today, in some of the Vṛndāvana temples, you never hear a conch shell; it’s only a painful reminder that Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana and never came back—"No, don’t blow the conch."

So after the abhiṣeka, everyone asked Rūpa, "What name? What’s the name?" The local people, "What’s the name of your deity?" Here is his reply: "As the Lord appeared near to a cow—it was indicated *vṛnda* by a cow, *go*—and I was meditating on the Gopāla-gāyatrī while I was facing the sun. Therefore, He should be known as Govinda, the Lord of Rūpa." So they played Holi with the Lord. All the ladies brought different colors—the colors like this—then they decorated His face with various kinds of *makara-rachanā*. *Makara-rachanā*—what’s *makara-rachanā*? It means designs of fishes on the Lord’s body that we paint on their faces, their hands, their arms, and their feet. That’s where you paint the fishes. And why did Rūpa Gosvāmī arrange to have all these colorful substances thrown on Govinda-jī? Because it was Vasantapañcamī. It was the first day of spring. Govinda-jī appeared on the first day of spring. So, what an auspicious day.

And in that mood, later on, Rūpa Gosvāmī composed a beautiful song in glorification of Vasantapañcamī. It’s in his *Stava-mālā*: "Vita-vasanta-vihāra. Oh handsome son of Nanda! Oh Lord who enjoys Vasanta (springtime) pastimes in the fragrant forest of Vṛndāvana, all glories to You! All glories to You!" And then, remembering the beauty of his deity, he continues: "Oh Lord, whose curling hair is splendid with many types of flower buds! Oh Lord, anointed by loving friends with kuṅkuma and powdered camphor! Oh Lord, with a very gentle smile shining on whose lips, gazed by Your friends! Oh Lord, whose restless sidelong glances arouse the loving desires of Rādhārāṇī! Oh Lord, whose jewel necklace moves with Your graceful dancing that enchants the world! The devotees, oh Lord, whose incarnations enjoy pastimes in Sanātana Gosvāmī’s heart! Oh handsome son of Nanda! Oh Lord who enjoys springtime pastimes in the fragrant forest of Vṛndāvana, all glories to You! All glories to You!"

So there’s more. I could go on for five hours, actually. I could go on 24 hours, because in our series on Vṛndāvana a couple of years ago, I think I gave 10 or 12 lectures about Govinda-jī. But this is just a drop in the ocean of *bhakti-rasa*.

So I’m speaking about Govinda-jī at the temple of Gopīnātha because the ground was too wet to sit and speak at Govinda-jī. So tomorrow I’ll speak about Gopīnātha at—where are we going tomorrow? Everyone’s saying at the same time; you say it. Only very beautiful forested area near here. I’ll speak about Gopīnātha there. That’s tomorrow. So yes, in a few minutes you’re going to see Gopīnātha, Lord of the gopīs, found by a great soul at that same time named Madhu Paṇḍita. And that Madhu Paṇḍita—it’s a long story, but if you go, we help create a memorial here, you’ll see a painting that one of my disciples did, Rasikānanda, a painting of Madhu Paṇḍita discovering Gopīnātha in the jungle.

And his coat, his original coat—he used to wear a coat of Tulasī beads—is there; you can see the 500-year-old coat. So the darśana is going to start at what time? 9:00? Darśana till 9:30? Till 9:30 or at 9:30? Till 9:30. Okay. So we’re going to go down now. I see Govinda-jī and I just love to see how the Lord is standing, glorifying. But let us finish with the verse glorifying the Gosvāmī who found Govinda-jī; by his mercy He is present before us. It’s written by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī; he says at the end of his *Manah-śikṣā*: "Placing a straw between my teeth, I pray again and again, birth after birth, that I may be the dust at the lotus feet of Rūpa Gosvāmī."

Okay.""