Hare Krishna!

Today, on our Kartik for Akuma, we're very blessed to come with a large group of devotees. Actually, our group has swelled to 350. Nothing like Radha Kunda, it's 8,000, but very nice devotees from 14 different countries. And we've come to the village of Karjala, which is the home of Champaka Lata, one of the Ashta Sakis, one of the eight girlfriends of Shrimati Radharani.

As we know, Shrimati Radharani, she lives in Vrindavan with her family, but her close girlfriends, the eight Sakis, their villages are around Vrindavan. Like, if you could look up at a bird's-eye view, you'd see all the different eight villages of the Sakis.

And each of those Sakis also has eight very close friends, and they have eight friends, and they have eight friends. It's called Gopi Gaṇa. There are millions and millions actually of different groups of Gopis with different colors of dresses, different attitudes, different services.

There's that saying that "variety is the spice of life," and that's especially true in the pure world of Vrindavan. So, I just like to name the eight girlfriends of Champaka Lata because it's just so sweet. The names: Padma, Nayana, Sūtra, Kama Deepika, Navīna, Priya, Pradipika, Sūkṣma, Sūkṣma, Rūpa, Yukta, Navīna, and Sūkṣma.

So, Champaka Lata, she described that her well, she's two days younger than Shrimati Radharani. Her complexion is like a cluster of yellow champaka flowers. She's a master of cooking in all six flavors. She has a special name actually, she has a nickname.

I never heard that before, that residents of Vrindavan have nicknames. Her nickname is Miṣṭa-hasta. Miṣṭa-hasta means "sweet hands," and she's given that name because she's very expert. Her specialty is making candy for the pleasure of Radha and Krishna.

And she serves the Divine Couple by offering them necklaces, and she's always fanning them with the chamara. When we think this is a spiritual world, there's so many grand activities going on, but it's not so much the activity in Krishna consciousness as the consciousness behind it.

Like Krishna says in the Bhagavad-gita, "One can offer Me with love a fruit, a flower, or a leaf." These are small things, but the main thing, the main ingredient in Krishna consciousness, is devotion.

So, when we get back to the spiritual world, the life in Vrindavan, it's simple, but it's saturated with prema. So, all the activities the Vrajavasis are doing in the village is with pure devotion for the Lord. Champaka Lata is also the leader of the Gopis who care for trees, creepers, flowers, and bushes in the Vana.

She knows where every kind of fruit, flower, and root can be found in Vrindavan's forests, and her particular grove, because each of the Sakis, they have their different groves which they take care of, and where they meet their beloved Krishna.

Her grove, her grove is on the banks of Radha Kunda, and everything there is the color of molten gold. So, these are details, but these are details of love, and these details are very captivating. This is why we fall in love with Krishna consciousness, because we have all these beautiful details of the spiritual world.

And yes, this is her village. So we've come here praying for her mercy. Not far from where I'm sitting right now is the Samadhi Mandir of Vrajanabha. Vrajanabha is the great-grandson of Krishna, and he was a king actually.

He served as king of this area, and after the departure of Lord Krishna, which is not something that most Vrajavasis like to talk about, but after the Lord's departure from this world back to the spiritual world, we can just imagine the separation that the residents of Vrindavan were feeling for Krishna.

Because the nature of Krishna conscious love is that Krishna's devotees, they love Krishna more than anyone's ever been loved before, and that love increases ad infinitum.

So when you lose something, you feel that separation, the intensity of that separation according to the amount of attachment you had. So we can hardly imagine how the residents of Vrindavan felt when Krishna left.

Mahaprabhu Chaitanya Mahaprabhu has given us a little understanding in Sri Shastra. He compares the feeling of separation to be like twelve years, and tears are flowing from his eyes like torrents of rain. So Vrajanabha came up with a nice idea because nobody could do anything, they were just devastated.

So he came up with the idea, which became an, which is an integral part of our Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, and that is that he established deities of Krishna and Balaram, and also Radha Devi, in different parts of Vrindavan to mitigate the suffering of the Vrajavasis.

Because as we know, the deity of Krishna is not different than Krishna Himself.

There was a Brahmin boy who accompanied the elder Vrajavasi. The elder Vrajavasi promised in front of the deity that that boy could marry his elder daughter. But when he got back to Hisar, he changed his mind. So the Brahmin boy went back to Vrindavan and came before that deity of Shyama Gopal, the witness deity, and he asked for his help and his witness in Hisar.

So the deity said, "But I'm a deity, I can't walk." And the little, intelligent Brahmin boy said, "Lord, if you can talk, you can walk." So that way, we can understand that the deity is non-different than Krishna.

And one golden rule in deity worship is that we should always remember the deity is a person. So in this way, Vrajanabha established different deities around Vrindavan. And those deities are still being worshipped here in Vrindavan. Some of them, some of them in, in Jaipur.

One, Keshava, he's being worshipped in Kanpur. He's still here, 5,000 years later. So Vrajanabha's samadhi is here next to the village of Champaka Lata. When samadhis are established, they're established in a holy place in Vrindavan, near a temple or near a place where something happened.

This samadhi, Rudra Nanda's, 5,000 years old. It was discovered just a few years ago by one saint, one Mahatma, one devotee, by historical records. He found it. It's mystical, actually. And he renovated that area. It was just a little rock there marking it, but he built a beautiful mandir there.

And these samadhis are very, very important because by visiting these samadhis of saints, offering obeisances, circumambulating them, offering prayers, and arati, worship, a sincere devotee can actually receive the mercy of these great souls. They are actually present in their samadhis.

One time, a disciple of Acharya, a follower of Acharya, asked if, when we pray to the saints and the Acharyas from previous ages, if they hear. And Bhaktivinoda Thakur's reply was, "Yes, they hear and they also reciprocate." So these relationships from the transcendental platform, they're not limited by time and space.

Our relationship with great saints and previous Acharyas. So when we go to the samadhis, we can pray to those devotees, and they'll hear our prayers and they'll reciprocate with us. This is so important actually. The samadhis in Vrindavan, they're not graves, they're divine places where we can reveal our heart to the saints and ask for their mercy.

Because well, that's the process in Krishna consciousness.

We don't approach the Lord directly. Krishna says, "One who says he is my devotee is not my devotee.

But one is the devotee of My devotees, My devotee." So when you come to Vrindavan, and we go to the temples, we go to the lila-sthanas, but we must also visit the samadhis. Of course, my favorite samadhi is the samadhi of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

And our Krishna Bhajan Mandir.

And myself personally, when I come to Vrindavan, I try to come every year. But when I come, then I go to my first stop, Śrīla Prabhupāda's samadhi, where I make a report of my yearly do, what I've done that year, my annual report of my devotional service.

This is how we keep in touch. So yes, like this, Bhaktivinoda Thakur states that there's an intimate connection to remembering our great saints and attaining eternal residence in Vrindavan. Every devotee desires to eventually live in Vrindavan eternally. That's where our home is, and remembering the saints is integral to achieving that goal.

I'll just read a brief paragraph. Bhaktivinoda Thakur states, "You should all remember Śrīla Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī and all his family members, who are all sincere servants of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. You should also remember the father of Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī.

Always remember all those Vaiṣṇavas who strictly follow the path of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and who are absorbed in bhajan. If you actually want residence in the land of Raja, then you must remember all the Vaiṣṇavas who are followers of the feet of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī." So we've come here to take darshan of Champaka Lata, to walk in the dust of the Vrajavasis of this holy place, to pray for her mercy.

And we've come to this samadhi, the beautiful samadhi of Vrajanabha, remembering all the wonderful deities that he established. And we're doing what we do. This is what we do with Hare Krishna devotees.

Shravanam, kirtanam, smaranam, vandanam – we hear and chant about Krishna, remember Him.

And that's particularly potent when we come to the Dhama. It is said that the results of one's activities here, devotional activities, are magnified a thousand times. So we take advantage. And that's particularly so in the month of Kartik. Senior devotees are speaking.

Our Bhakti Hari Prabhu is leading us in kirtan. And relishing and embellishing. And our hope, our hope is to one time in the future, one day, become a Vrajavasi and take our good fortune back to our countries and bring people back to this transcendental abode, this playground of God.

Champaka Lata, Karjala, Vrajanabha, Gokul, Bhaktivinoda Thakur, Gokul, Śrīla Prabhupāda, Hari Krishna.