Dear devotees, today it's Saturday here in our beloved CH D. It's monsoon season, which means it rains in the hot weather, and it makes it very humid. So yeah, we're quite drenched here, but very blissful being here in Śāntiniketan.

We went to visit the Gaudiya Math because we're planning to give a series of lectures on Gaudiya over the next two weeks before the Disappearance Day of Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī. So you can stay tuned for that. Nearby is the famous 64 Samādhi, where 64 great souls rest in samādhi.

In our Vedic culture, when a saintly person passes away, we don't burn the body. But we consider the body to be spiritual because that personality has used every cell very nicely in the service of Lord Kṛṣṇa. So when the saint passes away, he's placed in samādhi.

This means that his body, as it is, is placed underground, and there's a shrine built above. Devotees can come and pay their respects and remember the preaching and the example of such great souls to inspire us to follow in their footsteps.

It's also explained that through the transcendental medium, one can, you could say, come in touch with such persons in the sense that we can pray to them, and they will hear our prayers. Śrīla Prabhupāda has stated that when we pray to the great souls of the past, even going back millions of years, well, actually, the question was asked to him, "When we pray to the great souls who may have appeared millions of years ago, can they hear us?" And Prabhupāda said, "Yes, they can hear us.

Not only can they hear us, but they can respond." And we all know that in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, despite our sincere efforts to advance, really, we make progress by the blessings of Guru, the blessings of Gaurāṅga-Rādhe, the very Deity itself, by the dust of the caṇḍāla trees.

Everything. But this is especially so with the great souls. Even a moment's association with a great soul can propel us forward in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we're here, and we have taken a tour, and my heart is racing because we may not know these personalities, but we know that in one way or another, they contributed to the glorification of Śrīla Prabhupāda and the propagation of that glorious message all over the world.

Even just by sitting here in Vṛndāvana hundreds or thousands of years ago, they showed us a proper way to live here and to conduct our lives anywhere we live in the world.

I'm going to take you on a little tour here. I can't say any names. It's in Sanskrit, it's in Bengali. But just how do they say, "Feast with your eyes" at the samādhis of all these great souls. Some of them are at least 500 years old.

This samādhi here, you can see the bricks here. Whenever you see bricks like this in Vṛndāvana, this means these small bricks are what they constructed with 400 or 500 years ago.

So this is an indication that this is a very ancient samādhi and a great soul from the past. And there's another one here as well. You can see in time, some of them have deteriorated. But let's go on a little tour here.

While we're doing so, just look for Thomas. He's our photographer-videographer. You can just close in. He'll close in on a few of these samādhis. And the best way to do this is to have pure time to glorify those great souls and glorify the Lords of our hearts, Śrīla Prabhupāda, of course, our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda, who's the revealer of the Gauḍīya Maṭha, by whose mercy we've come here today.

I don't think many of you have been here, you know, the major temples, the different Vaiṣṇava temples, perhaps you don't know this very sacred place here in Vṛndāvana with the 64 sacred samādhis.

So let's... Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare.

Now you can see it. If you're watching carefully, there are many of the samādhis have names on them, for example, Jīva Goswāmī and Bhakti Vinoda Ṭhākura. But these aren't the original samādhis. These are called puṣpa samādhis. For example, as some great devotee passes away in Jagannātha Purī, they'll have his full samādhi there.

But here in Vṛndāvana, they'll establish a puṣpa samādhi.

This means they'll take some article, it's called "teṟā" or something related to that saint, and place it here in this particular samādhi area here. And then, you know, Jīva Goswāmī, part of his parivāra is here, his wife, like that.

So you're seeing different names, Nanda etc. These are many of these are full samādhis, others are puṣpa samādhis, but either way, they're fully transcendental and giving us mercy. So let's continue. Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare.

This is a very blessed day for all of us because here is the full samādhi of Lokanātha Goswāmī, one of the Six Goswāmīs of Vṛndāvana.

He, he didn't have a personal deity like the other five Goswāmīs had. His deity was the, the Bṛhad Gāyatrī Maṭha, which we know is not different than the Lord because he praises all His glories in full. So that was his deity, that is whom he worshiped.

And he lectured every day on the Gāyatrī Maṭha. Maybe one of these days, we'll take you to the place where he read the Gāyatrī Maṭha. We can see that Gāyatrī Maṭha here is the sacred samādhi of Raghunātha Goswāmī. You can see here, it's said Raghunātha Goswāmī there, and you can see here they have a little shrine above the place where he is in samādhi.

We're just going to pay our obeisances. Please give us... So they have a puṣpa bāṭa for him with his parivāra. Where we first stopped, and then here we have his full... Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare.

World distribution, Sanātana, and every town and village of the world. Let's take all the people of the universe back home, back to Godhead. It's been our great pleasure to take you on this little parikramā today. All of us are dreaming, of course, of going on what I've been calling in my lectures, the Grand Parikramā.

It's up to Rādhānātha when that will be. Until then, we could nurture our Kṛṣṇa consciousness here in Vṛndāvana, or as Rūpa Goswāmī says in one of his verses, even from a distance, time and distance don't affect transcendence.

So if in your heart you're speaking of Vṛndāvana and praying to Vṛndāvana and hoping to visit here and one day reside in Vṛndāvana, all your dreams will be fulfilled.

In the material world, you have dreams, but destiny can be very cruel sometimes, depending on what we did or didn't do in the past. But when the Lord or His pure devotees intervene in our destiny and teach us the art of transcendence, the practice of transcendence, which is based mainly on chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare, then we can transcend.

And we can live in Vṛndāvana in our hearts and our consciousness.

So we'll be doing these little videos for you from time to time. We're stuck in Vṛndāvana because of the pandemic.

It's a silver lining for us in the dark cloud. But we've enjoyed this, and have a wonderful day, and remember the vision of all these great saints here who have given you a little bit of their mercy on this day, this monsoon day, here in Śāntiniketan.

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!

All glories to all the assembled devotees!

Thank you.