Dear devotees, today a party has come to a very special part of Vrindavan. We've come to Varsana. Actually, before we walk up the sacred hill of Varsana, we're visiting the village of Citra Devi, called Ciksoli.

Many devotees know that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the Lord's eternal consort, she has a group of girlfriends who are sisters, in many ways. They're called sakhīs. If you go to my apartment or temple, you'll see beautiful Rādhā-Mādhava on the altar, and on either side are the assistants of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the sakhīs.

And one of those sakhīs is Citra Devi. The sakhīs are around the age of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, they're, you could say, nine, ten years of age. And each of those sakhīs has a group of helpers called mañjarīs. They're much younger, six or seven, or maybe even younger than that.

But these are Kṛṣṇa's girlfriends. And each of these eight sakhīs, they have their villages surrounding Varsana. The history of Varsana is very interesting, actually. It goes way, way back. Actually, it's eternal, but the pastimes such that towards the end of a certain yuga, Lord Brahmā was thinking that he'd like to be part of the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa when He came in His Vraja, in His original form, at the end of the Dvāpara-yuga.

So he was thinking what type of service he could do. He was thinking how he could get mercy from the Lord, from Kṛṣṇa. So he performed great penances and great austerities to get the boon that at the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, when Kṛṣṇa came, he could be a hill in Vrindavan.

Why would someone want to become a hill?

We have many spiritual desires. We think, "I'd like to be a pūjārī," "I'd like to be a saṅkīrtana devotee," "I'd like to be a cook and cook for the Lord and for the devotees." Brahmā wanted to be a hill.

He sincerely wanted to be a hill because he was thinking, "If I'm a hill, then I'll get the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The Gopis and the cowherd boys, their soft pink lotus feet will traverse on my head.

What greater benediction could you want than to have the dust of the feet of devotees or the Lord Himself on your head?" So he prayed like that, and that desire was fulfilled.

This is the beauty of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Our material desires may or may not be fulfilled, but our spiritual desires, if they're sincere, in due course of time, the Lord will fulfill them so that we can serve Him to our heart's content.

So, in the Dvāpara-yuga, at the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, when Kṛṣṇa appeared, Brahmā became a hill. Specifically, he became, like you could say, there were four, there was the hill, but there were four parts of that hill. Rises, and those, those hills, and one of those rises is called Varsana, and that is the eternal home of King Vṛṣabhānu and Kīrti-dā, who are the illustrious parents of Vṛṣabhānu, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.

They lived there in a palace. That family, we know that Rādhārāṇī was born in Ravaḷa, but when Kṛṣṇa moved from Gokula to Nandagrāma when He was a little older boy, Rādhārāṇī's parents moved from Ravaḷa to Varsana. And the name, the word, Varsana has a wonderful meaning. Śrīla Prabhupāda describes it means "a shower of bliss." Varsana is a constant shower of bliss because of the presence of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's essence, her form, her attributes, her service, her mood of loving service to Kṛṣṇa.

That place is called Varsana because of that constant flow of bliss. And Rādhārāṇī has that name as well, Vārṣaṇī, the queen of Varsana. So many of her childhood pastimes took place there. She and her girlfriends would roam the wooded areas around there like young girls do in a playful way.

When they had service to do, to take the milk products from where they were being made, the milking the cows, they'd take them to the market. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa would come with his friends and he would stop them, and he would tax them.

The Dāṅgāḷi pastimes. We think of Dāṅgāḷi as a place that Kṛṣṇa left, but there are many Dāṅgāḷi pastimes. It's one of the main pastime locations all over Varsana. And there's a beautiful temple on the top of the hill of Varsana, perhaps part of the original palace, you could say, the palace of King Vṛṣabhānu.

There's a beautiful deity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, a beautiful deity of Rādhārāṇī that was found by Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura. Goswāmī, one famous personality, discovered many holy places there. He found that deity nicely established. So the majesty of the place and the beauty of the place and the mood, the predominating mood of Rādhārāṇī's mahābhāva as present there, her mercies there.

She's one of the three personalities who experiences that special mahābhāva: Rādhārāṇī, Lord Caitanya, Mahāprabhu. So, devotees who want to serve Kṛṣṇa and want to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, they go to Varsana and they pray to her because she has so much love and devotion for Kṛṣṇa, the topmost level to Kṛṣṇa.

She's in charge of devotion. So if we want to serve Kṛṣṇa, which means with devotion, we pray to her to please accept our devotion and then offer it to Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda said one time, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is in charge of devotion.

So even if she sees someone on this earthly planet, one devotee is just joining the temple and wants to serve Kṛṣṇa, she whispers to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear beloved, there's a devotee on the earth planet or somewhere in the creation who is aspiring for You.

Please accept that service." That's how merciful Vṛndāvana Aishwarya is.

She's so exalted, but she's so compassionate. So, we're here today at Varsana, begging for her mercy to be proper devotees of the Lord, to be trained in devotional service. Actually, we pray like that every day: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

My dear Lord, my dear energy of the Lord, Prabhupāda translated, "My dear Rādhārāṇī, O divine energy, please engage me in Your loving devotional service." So we're starting here today in the village of Citra Devi.

She's one of Rādhārāṇī's favorite Gopis. She's very artistic, she's a good cook, she's a musician, so many ways she served. So we're coming to take shelter of her, servant of the servant of the servant of the servant of Kṛṣṇa.

This is the secret of devotional service. In the material world, you don't want to be anybody's servant generally because you get exploited. But in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we want to be the servant. It's our nature to be the servant. And if we're at the bottom of the pile, we get the most mercy, because a Vaiṣṇava is very compassionate.

So we're starting here. We'll come back again and again throughout our lives, visiting different villages. But you'll see in this video, this is a very, very beautiful village. And our group is full of very many beautiful devotees seeking the mercy of the Lord through the medium of Hari-kathā, Kṛṣṇa-kathā, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, taking parikramā and walking up the mountain, Varsana, to the top, and then back down to the bottom.

But we'll take parikramā, which is the natural course of activities when you come to this abode of bliss. Vṛndāvana Dhāma kī jaya! Śrīmatī Rādhā Rani kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā Vinoda Bihārī kī jaya!

Gokula Dhāma kī jaya!

Kadalī Kadam kī jaya!

Back to Home, Back to Godhead!

Me Nah Laki. Hey.