
How deeply a Vrindavan issue edition, much about irani keyed by the causeless mercy of our spiritual master, the founder Chari of International Society for Krishna consciousness, shooter polyp on our perk in the party.

This Karthik has come to the banks of Radha Kunda and Shamu claims. I have no any qualification for speaking about this sacred place and no realizations, but I've been asked to give this interview. And open Amrita. She rueful Goswami gives a hint about the transcendental nature of this pond, this lake behind me, which is the personal bathing place of Srimati Radharani.

He says, "Preeti mama Rita." He describes this water as liquid love. You could say the good love. And again, it's very confidential. This is the bathing tank of the Krishna's dearest devotee, dearest Gopi, eternal consort, on a peony, she who never leaves the association of the Lord.

So we've come here with the blade of grass between our teeth, rolling in the dust of the sacred place, begging for her mercy that we can serve the divine couple. Radharani's in charge of devotional service because she has *mahabhava*. *Mahabhava* means the greatest purest love.

The Lord Krishna, only three personalities have that love: Herself, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, and Madhavendra Puri.

It's described in *Bhagavad Gita* that even great saintly persons, even Devas, even our spiritual ancestors, they rarely, sometimes, if ever, can come to such a sacred place. So how we've come?

We've we've come on the invitation of shooter Pol Pot. And we're doing here what we do in every sacred place in Vrindavan: *shravana* and *kirtan* and *Vishnu* *sharanam*. Specifically here at Radhakund, it's the most sacred place in the three worlds.

One time, one of my god sisters, shooter Pol Pot, this is 1974, 1975, if they meaning my god brothers and God sisters could come here and open a preaching center and do Hari Nam around the sacred lakes every day and distribute books and distribute Purushottam and preach and make devotees.

And interestingly enough, unique occasion, Prophet said no. He said Radha Kunda, Sri Lanka, like he said about Vrindavan in general, he said that Vrindavan is for inspiration. This is the playground of God. Even now, the Lord's pastimes are going on.

They're going on at this very moment for those who have the eyes to see. *Primogeniture tea bhakti* Bhakti Vinoda Thakur, when all the dirty things are gone from the heart and that love of God which rests as a seed in her heart is awoken by the chanting of the *maha-mantra* and service to guru and guru's associate, then one can see those pastimes taking place, even now.

So these are the places of Radha and Krishna's most confidential pastimes.

Actually, Radharani takes her bath every day. Krishna takes his bath in Radha Kunda every day.

They meet here at 12 o'clock every day. Una Mas, he arranged this pastime. Krishna leads the cowherd boys and the cows and he comes here to meet his most beloved.

Such a sacred place. It's said that one who bathes in Radha Kunda achieves the same love that Radha has for Shyam Sundar. And one who bathes in Shyam Kunda attains the same love that Shyam has for Radharani. So these are very deep subject matters.

We come here, we don't stay very long. All the most qualified, elevated devotees come here to refine their last steps in their pure devotional service. It's a process. We are progressing on the path of Krishna consciousness.

We are works in progress. So we're understanding our position. *Dose would have to test artisan got to budget area and Arjuna treatise yet*. Prabhupada said that real bhakti begins when one becomes freed from material desire, specifically from lust. Because lust means for me, and love means for Krishna.

So although we're just getting an inkling of that love, we're getting a drop of that love by the mercy of shooter Pol Pot in our *vittorios*. We're still allowed to come here. Prabhupada allowed us to bathe here. He didn't want us to bathe in a frivolous way.

He wanted us to bathe with great awe and reverence because at this stage of devotional service, that's how we're approaching the Lord. We dress our Radha Krishna deities like Lakshmi Narayan, that's stated by Prabhupada.

We develop that mood of awe and reverence. And then through the process of Krishna consciousness, we become purified.

But still, we're allowed to come here to this place with the highest love and worship God in Krishna, and we pray that we can get a drop of that *prema* and in our lifetimes become pure devotees of the Lord.

In ISKCON, this is we often say this is a preaching movement. This was the mood of Mahaprabhu when he came. Radha Krishna came, Sri Krishna Chaitanya, Radha Krishna, and Ayana, the one became two, and the personalities of Radha Krishna they became one in the personality of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

He's the *yuga-avatara*. Although his experience was in the highest sentiments of love of God, he was an active preacher. And so were all the *Acharyas* who came after him. And so was our beloved Shah Baba. A resident of Goloka Vrindavan.

We're not, we're not supposed to speculate on his relationship with Radha Krishna in the spiritual world.

But when all these divine personalities were here on this earth planet, they were in the mood of preaching, delivering the fallen conditioned souls, sharing. Especially Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave the special message that the topmost planet is Goloka Vrindavan, the topmost love is the love of the residents of Vrindavan for Krishna, especially that the Gopis.

So we know these things, and we know who we are. We know where we're going. What we know what is the goal. But it's a, it's a preaching movement. And we're meant to spend every ounce of our energy assisting shooter Pol Pot to establish Krishna consciousness in the fourteen worlds.

At the same time, Prabhupada wanted his followers to become pure devotees of the Lord. He wanted that we do that by a combination of our *sadhana*, our *bhajan*, and our preaching. So it is appropriate that we come here. Although these are the topmost pastimes, still going on, Radharani's bathing tank, Krishna's bathing tank, their meeting place is Lalita Sakhi.

There are so many transcendental pastimes you can read about in Goswami literature. We're to come here for inspiration, for preaching, but to come here for inspiration to become pure, unalloyed devotees of the Lord. So that we can exemplify that wonderful verse in *Sikshashtakam*: "Govinda, feeling Your separation, I consider a moment to be like twelve years or more.

Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrents of rain." Prabhupada wanted us to come to that stage because that is the qualification for going back home, back to Godhead. The ticket to *Vaikuntha* is pure, unadulterated love for the Lord.

So Prabhupada is happy when we're distributing books. He's happy when we're doing Hari Nam, when doing festivals. And he personally invited us to come to Vrindavan. And his purports in the Tenth Canto, he said he established the Krishna *bhava* on Vrindavan, so his disciples in her old age could retire here and do their *bhajan* and become pure.

So it is appropriate, although it's the highest of the highest, it's appropriate that the neophytes come here, roll on the dust, bathe in the Kunda. Rupa Goswami says, "Once one tries to bathe in this Kunda as many times in his lifetime as possible and become purified, become inspired to preach, and become pure devotees of the Lord." The perfection of Krishna consciousness is one day when we're chanting, tears of love will come from the eyes.

I admit I'm quite far away from that, but I have faith in my spiritual master's words that one day by His grace, I can attain that. And all of us can live in the transcendental world and even depend on and serve the divine couple.

We're very grateful to shooter Pol Pot for bringing us to this sacred water. And we will finish our *parikrama* now, go back to Vrindavan and continue with our Kartik *parikrama* 2019. Vrindavan ki, Mathura ki, Taranaki, but a sham, Keshava, Ganga, Mahaprabhu ki, shooter Pol Pot ki, Jai, Jai Sri.