So, Hare Krishna, it's our good fortune that by the grace of our spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda, we have come to a very historic place in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, the city of Jaipur.

Of course, Jaipur, with all its charm and all its beauty, it's very popular with tourists who come from all over the world. It's sometimes called the Pink City. There's, or there used to be, partially there still is, a wall around the city, and it's been painted a pinkish or saffron color.

But for a Vaiṣṇava, the Vaiṣṇava, it has special significance. Jaipur, well, its very name indicates, Jaipur means the city of victory. Pura, Pura indicates a village or a town, and Jaya means victory, like we say, "Pari pari nirvidyate kṛṣṇa sankirtan." All glory is to victorious Sankirtan.

Mahaprabhu. So, city of victory, in what sense?

Actually, this city was constructed solely, to begin with, to protect the deities of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, and other Vṛndāvana deities as well, like Rādhā-Gopinātha, Rādhā-Dāmodara, Rādhā-Damodara.

These deities are also very popular here. But as we've discussed and mentioned before in these videos, there were foreign invasions into this country beginning a thousand years ago, actually going on for some time. India was conquered by Muslims for hundreds of years, the British ruled here, etc.

And in these invasions, particularly the Muslim invasions, the deities were in danger, and they would destroy the temples, to destroy them. So, in one particular invasion in the 1700s, the deities of Vṛndāvana were attacked, and temples were attacked.

The devotees received notice of this imminent attack just in time. So many, for most of the deities that were in Vṛndāvana, were removed for it quickly overnight.

And the three principal deities returned. Of course, there are seven principal temples in Vṛndāvana, but in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, we first approached Madan Mohan to become free from desire.

We approached Govinda Dev to engage in His service and purify our senses so we can serve Him in unalloyed devotion. And then we approached Gopinātha, and we serve Him in the mood of the vrajabāsīs, pure unalloyed love. So Madan Mohan, Govinda, and Gopinātha, these deities, the focus was on those deities.

They were removed from Vṛndāvana and they went first to Rādhākuṇḍa, where they were served for seven years.

A rumor got out that they were there, so the invaders wanted to come and harm them. So they were taken to Kamāran, and from Kamāran, they were, well, again, they were in peril. So the devotees were thinking, where to take the deities to protect Him?

So one king, one Rajput king here in Rajasthan, this part of India, the kings were known as being very good, Raja Rishis, devotees of the Lord, and very powerful personalities. One king, Jai Singh, I believe it was, the first or second, he offered to give protection to these Vṛndāvana deities, to Madan Mohan, to Govinda, and to Gopinātha.

So it took some time, maybe perhaps a year or more, the deities were removed secretly from Kamāran, down here to this like a desert-like region, you could say, Rajasthan. And they were received by the Raja, Jai Singh. And Amber, yesterday, Amber, I visited Amber, beautiful palace, beautiful forts, and the deities were safely brought to that place.

Over time, different deities arrived at different times, but particularly Govinda Dev, He's given shelter there. And the king, after some time, he said, "You are the Lord Govinda Dev, you have got to live there, you deserve a proper accommodation and protection.

So I will build a city for you, and you would be protected in that city from any invasions." So it took some time, but the king built Jaipur, the City of Victory, meaning that the victory was that the deities were protected.

And Jai Singh constructed the city in such a way that the temple at that time, and to some degree even today, that temple is right in the center of Jaipur. And the king, he built his residence some, maybe a hundred meters from the temple.

And he built his residence in such a way that when he woke up in the morning, and take his bath, and do his various rituals, and he'd walk out onto the porch, and he could look directly into the temple and see Rādhā-Govinda.

This is a real king who rules in such a way is to make sure people prosper materially because that's required so one can be peaceful to worship Krishna.

But he also is concerned about people's spiritual welfare. And in Vedic times, the kings would tax the people to perform yajñas because yajñas cost a lot of money to perform properly. He performed yajñas for the prosperity of society. Krishna says in the Bhagavad-gītā, "In the beginning, I created generations of men and My gods, and blessed them, that by the performance of yajña, yajña, all desirable things will be achieved." So, what is a yajña really?

You could say a yajña means, thank you, it's a way of acknowledging the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So kings like Jai Singh, the first, second, and so forth, their succession, these were Raja Rishis, and they were Krishna conscious.

So Jai Singh built the city, he built a big wall around the city, and the deities have been protected ever since, this is some 300 odd years ago, and no one is able to harm them. And of course, no one can harm Govinda, Krishna.

But He gives us the service, so many different types of services, and one service is to protect Him. So as a result, these deities, eventually Gopinātha came as well, He has a beautiful temple. Madan Mohan came, but eventually went to Karoli, that's another story, another pastime.

Karoli is a city some distance away from here. Rādhā-Vinoda, the deities of Lokanātha Gosvāmī, are here. And Little Damodara, He had to leave Vṛndāvana as well.

Damodara is the deity now sheltered by Jiva Gosvāmī. And that deity was carved by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Gosvāmī carved the deity and gave it as a present. So, very significant, especially this month, this is the month of Damodara, this is Kārttika.

So our, our procurement party of three, almost three hundred fifty devotees, we're relishing going to these different temples and taking shelter of these deities. And if you think about it, it's quite amazing. These deities, who for the most part were established by Vṛndāvana, the great-grandson of Krishna, five thousand years ago, rediscovered by the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, five hundred years ago.

One would naturally think that they should stay in Vṛndāvana, which is a good four-hour drive from here, another state, U.P.

So the history is, they were moved here for a particular reason. So why not take them back?

You would say, "They are Vṛndāvana deities, and they were worshipped with great devotion by the Raja." So how is it that after several hundred years, they remain here?

Well, all you have to do is go to the Govinda temple, the Radha-Govinda temple, the main temple in the city, to see how much devotion the people of this city have for Rādhā-Govinda. And when I first came here in the early '70s, I was just, I mean, I was just amazed.

The first time I walked into that temple, long ago, I came a little early, and I'm ready to see that the door opened, thousands and thousands and thousands of people suddenly streaming in, singing so many devotional songs from the heart.

They have a group of men in the back who, you know, have been singing, telling tradition, singing for hundreds of years, so much devotion. And you just feel the atmosphere is electric with, with bhāva, with devotion for the deity.

And they keep streaming. Actually, they have built, made the temple even bigger, but even now, it can hardly accommodate the thousands of people who come. Literally thousands and thousands of people come every morning before they go to work, before they go to school, before they, whatever their activities at home are, everyone, not everyone, but a good amount of the people of Jaipur come to see the Lord.

That's our tradition. It's called saṁskāra. When saṁskāra means something that makes a deep impression in one's heart. So if you begin your day by seeing the Lord in His deity form, by chanting His holy name, by hearing His glories, by studying the śrīmad bhāgavatam, and finally tasting the foodstuffs that have been offered to Him with loving devotion, Puruṣottama, it creates a saṁskāra, a deep impression in your heart.

So when you go out in the world to work, as we have to do, it's difficult to forget Krishna.

Of course, you're working, but in the back of your mind, in your heart of hearts, you're offering all that work to the Lord because you had that deep impression in the morning. And perhaps because of the nature of that hard work during the day and being in contact with the material energy, we need a boost.

We see the people here in Jaipur, they come back, the same thousands and thousands and thousands, I could say tens of thousands, they come back to see Govinda, Rādhā-Govinda. What have you. In the evening. So impressive to see a whole city Krishna conscious.

We want to make our home Krishna conscious.

We want to make our congregation Krishna conscious, when you see a whole city Krishna conscious.

So therefore, our spiritual master, Prabhupāda, came here, he brought his disciples here in the '70s to see for their spiritual awakening, to see the devotion of the people of this city, to see the deities.

A lot of, I know my God, whether it's Amal Krishna Goswami, he took sannyasa, his Pāṁcama veda, in front of Rādhā-Govinda Dev.

And probably I'd met some of the royalty when he was here. So it's very dear to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. If you have an opportunity, we should come here just to see the beauty, the architecture. The whole city was constructed hundreds of years ago for the purpose of glorification of the deity.

It's just so beautiful, the architecture, the way the town is laid out. You can see here, where I'm sitting, it's unique, somewhat maintained by the city authorities. So even for the purpose of tourism, for the beauty of the eye, in the atmosphere here, you can come.

But mostly to experience the deep devotion that comes from surrendering oneself, offering oneself to these deities that were brought to Vṛndāvana, with the personal deity.

So Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, their history is another, another talk, how the Gosvāmīs found there, actually how they came here. I'll give it enough for a class, but they're here. If you have the opportunity, Vṛndāvana is only four hours away.

Come and drink the beauty of this town, drink the beauty of the devotion of the people of this town, and see these beautiful historic deities, Govinda, whose five thousand years old, and all their glory being worshipped here in the City of Victory, Jaipur, part of Krishna's enjoying glories.

Hari Krishna Hari Krishna Krishna Krishna Hari Hari.