"*00267*.*
"Thank you very much. I understand that it was a difficult task for you after such a wonderful kīrtan to listen to such an insignificant lecture from a person like me. Actually, I have no qualification to speak in the presence of such wonderful devotees. But all of us, followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda, have a duty. This is to share Kṛṣṇa consciousness with each other. By the grace of Śrīla Prabhupāda, and by the grace of all of you, and by the grace of Goddess Sarasvatī, I will try to say a few words. 

How many of you were with us last night? Fine. Last night we talked about the Lord’s pastimes, and we talked about the importance of your charm and their example. And we have been blessed to finish this lecture and see one of our own, Jayananda. Therefore, today we will begin where we have settled. We are talking about human life, but first I would like to talk a little about another devotee. This is the devotee with whom I had the good fortune to communicate personally. Today is the anniversary of his departure. Who among you knows who Jayananda is? Very good. This is a personal saint. There are a huge number of games of Jayananda in his service lived. And below on one of the stories lies a beautiful book about Jayananda, which will help you understand and appreciate the wonderful qualities of Jayananda. 

Jayananda. He was an unusual devotee, a bit of an outsider among those who joined the San Francisco scene. It was the height of the hippie era in San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury district. Some of us in those days lived with long hair and other such attributes. And many people who came to listen to the lectures of Śrīla Prabhupāda in San Francisco—in fact, all the people who came to listen to Śrīla Prabhupāda's San Francisco lectures—were of this type. But Jayananda was completely different from them. He had a higher education, he had a profession, and short-cropped hair. And he wasn't one of those guys who was coming off of drug use, although many were in those days. He regularly came in the morning to listen to Śrīla Prabhupāda's lectures. 

Actually, a little more about Jayananda revealed his life: he had a dark streak in his life during the times when he was struggling. We tell our philosophy how this spiritual teacher saves us from material existence. And Jayananda said that it was exactly like that with him, because he had the same situation in his life; he was already about to commit suicide, because life had no meaning. And Jayananda was also unusual in another way. He actually had a job, and he actually made money. This was very clear to the early devotees. And he paid for the taxi, and all the money he earned, he gave to the living, waking, and the temple of San Francisco. And who among you works in the world and receives money in the world, not in the temple? So, all of you who have jobs, keep your hands up. And all of you who walk around naked while doing this work, please keep your hand up. Got it. 

Accidentally, I woke up early in the morning and completed the entire program. Then he worked all day until the evening. He came to the temple there in the evening. And so he had such a program every day. And eventually, the local devotees realized how sincere and unusual a devotee Jayananda was. And they asked him, "Please become the temple president." And he left his job as a taxi driver and took on the management of the temple. And he was quite an interesting type of temple president. If there was a need to take out the trash, Jayananda would do it. If a car needed repairs, Jayananda would do it. If the toilet needed to be cleaned, I did it. If it was necessary to prepare a meal, I did it. He did everything. And he was always very happy doing it. 

And sometimes, when he was no longer the temple president, you could see that he would do even the most menial service, but he would be absolutely happy. There was one devotee who joined the San Francisco movement in those days. And when he first came to the temple, he saw one devotee—it was Jayananda—taking out the trash. And this parishioner asked, “What are we all doing here?” I’m just taking it out here. And the devotee thought, "If the one who takes out the garbage is so happy and joyful, then I can’t even imagine how joyful the other devotees are." This is what Jayananda was like. He was happy about everything. And everyone loved Jayananda. Not only the devotees, but all the people that Jayananda had dealt with while he was involved in the arrangement of the Ratha-yātrās for years. He was very famous among the local government, among the local shopkeepers, among the local vegetable sellers; he was a very famous person. He had such a personal relationship with each of them; he behaved in such a way that they simply loved him. 

And one day, I think it was about a year later, after Jayananda left the body, the devotees were having problems with organization. And finally, the devotees had the opportunity to see this government official who was creating such harmful troubles. And finally, when they got to this man's office, there were children sitting there, a woman who looked very stern, severe. And the devotees began to explain that we were trying to get permission to hold the festival. But this woman is a baptist, and she said, "Jayananda? I will not talk to anyone except Jayananda. I will deal only with Jayananda." And the devotees who were just then organizing the Ratha-yātrā felt uncomfortable informing her that Jayananda had left his body a year ago. 

And this is a very serious, stern business leader. She stood up and started crying. And she came back and apologized for behaving in this way. And she immediately gave the devotees permission. And then she talked for 5 or 10 minutes, talking about Jayananda, glorifying him, what a wonderful, good person he was, what a kind person he was. And Jayananda was such a devotee that when it came time to organize the festival—and many of you know that when it comes time to organize a festival, there are so many tasks and things to do at the beginning of the festival and so many things that need to be done at the end—he did the festival so that everything would start working together harmoniously. Then at the end, he would clean everything up completely; from beginning to end, he did everything. He was always engaged in service. He was never lazy. 

Some people say that the reason he loved to serve so much was his great love for prasādam. I remember a friend of mine named Jayananda. And he was friends with Jayananda. And once after the end of one of the festivals, it was already late, there were about 2 hours in hand. And they were actually calling him. And Jayananda told me, "I remember I was running and someone started shaking me by the shoulder and said: 'Deva, wake up, wake up.'" And it was Jayananda, who was sitting next to me. And Jayananda said: "Open your mouth, open your mouth." And he put it in his mouth. He says: "Oh, they're not sleeping there yet now. Come on, get up, there's more there." He just loved to eat. 

One day in San Diego there was a huge Ratha-yātrā festival. And Jayananda and all the other Los Angeles devotees went there to take part in the festival. And after the feast, there were a huge number of leaf plates left. And, of course, there were a lot of plates left from the guests, and there was a lot of washing up to do. Jayananda organized one of his most amazing ones. And he, along with the devotees, stood in a circle around the water and took plates and cleaned from them. And one of his favorite types of prasādam was peanut halava with peanut butter. Who has seen or tried halava with peanut butter? Half of your life has passed. Halava. Halava from peanut butter. It's just amazing. And Jayananda not only loved to eat it, but he can also cook it first class. And then, when you, if you are lucky enough to try Jayananda’s peanut halava with peanut butter, you will immediately understand that you have achieved perfection. And I would be lucky enough to try it, peanut halava, peanut butter. 

And Jayananda, if you look honestly, he was such a picture of the ideal of humility. A year before he left his body, he lived near New York, in New York. And I was there too. And there was a huge multi-story building, which you can see in different pictures of New York. And each floor was built in such a way that here this floor was a temple, this floor was an office, here is a floor for mātājīs and so on. And on each floor there was this layout. And every week the president of the temple, he performed such a check to ensure that everything was in a good state. And the commandant on the fifth floor, where I lived, his name was Jayananda. I was his assistant. And the president of the temple went around and looked at each room to check if everything was clean. And each, each room had a small kitchenette. And when we entered the kitchenette on the fifth floor, we saw Jayananda there, who was washing tiles. He very quietly cleaned his own tiles. He wasn't one of those young devotees, but he was 10 years older than us. And the temple president said, "Jayananda, do you even realize that one of the most senior devotees is cleaning your kitchen here?" And when Jayananda couldn't find any explanation, Jayananda said, "But someone had to do it, so I did it." And that's what Jayananda was like. 

And in this temple we had a huge, huge kitchen. And in this kitchen there were four such refrigeration rooms. And it is quite possible that from this column to that column and from this wall to this wall was the size of the kitchen, since it was huge. And in one of the corners all the dirty pots and pans were collected. That is, there were approximately 200-300 devotees who took prasādam two or three times a day, and there was also a restaurant that had many customers. So by the end of the day there was a lot to wash. And at that time I was a pujārī. And we had deities. And the last memory came at 9 o'clock. So after that we had to change them and send them to bed. And the pujārīs, after they had finished all their work, they would come down and head to the restaurant. And if there was even a little bit of prasādam left there, we made sure that nothing was left there. And almost every evening, when we went down there, who do you think we saw there washing a pan? It was Jayananda, one of the most serious adult devotees, the senior devotees; he always humbly washed these pots, and he never sought any respect or special treatment for himself. And I had a good attitude, such a mutually faithful dream. He gave me a book. Back then I was a little more energetic than I am now, because now I'm not really very energetic. That is, 30 years have already passed, and in those days I was always very energetic. And if I needed to finish eating the leftovers, I got even more. And everyone would go and join us after we had dealt with the deity, go down to this restaurant and collect all sorts of delicious sweets, delicious food and have a good, so to speak, social party. And Jayananda came down and he saw us all sitting down, having a feast. But he looked at me and put his hands on his hips. He said, "You just have a battery inside you that lasts a lifetime." Yes, we lost our spirits a little during the translations, but for us it was a great relief from Jayananda. And then he would just leave us and go to the pot to get some soap. 

And also Jayananda spent time, some of it, on these old Dama-bus tours. It was during those times when I was also traveling with this group. And even in these times he always took for himself the most sacred service. He drove the bus, he repaired the bus; he was what was there. And the bus was very expensive to maintain. And when Śrīla Prabhupāda came to New York in 1976 for the first huge festival on the Fifth Avenue, the devotees organized the rental of a huge limousine to meet the living Prabhupāda. And, of course, it was natural for this limousine driver to be a former taxi driver. And he noticed that Jayananda was driving his car again. And he remembered how Jayananda, with the help of his work as a driver, gave him money to print the first book of the *Source of Eternal Pleasure*. 

Another time, when Prabhupāda was in Los Angeles, he inquired if Jayananda had come to the darśana dinner. And he asked: "Where? Please, someone please find him and bring him here." Where do you think Jayananda was? He was outside, picking up trash, something cleaner than the back of the temple. They said, the devotees told him: "Śrīla Prabhupāda wants you to come." And in his great humility, Jayananda said: "No, I can't go and sit down in front of Prabhupāda. I am very dirty." He was one of those devotees who showed his appreciation by doing some kind of service. 

And one of the last moments that I remember between that happened between Śrīla Prabhupāda and Jayananda was the time when Śrīla Prabhupāda came to San Francisco and Jayananda came there and offered his obeisances to him. Prabhupāda looked with his most loving gaze filled with affection and said: "Jayananda, Jayananda." He was so attached to such a sincere disciple. And this is only a small part of the huge glacier about the story of one of our ISKCON saints. Therefore, for all of you there will be a good opportunity to learn something new, to hear something new about him. Because usually, when we hear about Vaiṣṇava saints, we immediately think of those people who were 500 years old back. But he must have been in our times. Thus, we can remember, he knows how dear the Prabhupāda is. And we can also follow in his footsteps, following his example, always engaged in devotional service, pure service.

The life and soul of the community Vaiṣṇavas is chanting, dancing, Kṛṣṇa, and then later. Nothing is needed. This leads us to develop the mood of pure devotion, dedicating ourselves completely to Kṛṣṇa. This denotes the state when the soul is completely purified. And this verse explains how one can reach this level. One must engage in those activities that develop his love for the Supreme Lord. And this activity must be continuous and selfless. And everything that we do is our effort to rise to this level. And the advantage of kīrtana is that it can instantly elevate us to the level of Vaikuṇṭha, a level where there are no worries. And ultimately, through this process, we can feel fulfilled through connection with our devotees, whom we worship for, and Kṛṣṇa in every moment of our lives. 

And Mahāprabhu says that it is He who allows us to feel the very taste of nectar that we strive for every second. And we are very grateful to each other, because if we did not have such a wonderful company of Vaiṣṇavas, we would not have such powerful kīrtanas. It is hard to imagine how we would dance by ourselves in front of the mirror, or say something in this. And understanding the importance of the devotees around us, understanding the importance of community, we begin our day by offering our humble obeisances to everyone. We are grateful that the devotees give us the opportunity to associate with them. And we ask forgiveness for all the offenses that we have committed at their lotus feet, deliberately or unknowingly. 

Regarding the order of congregational chanting of the holy name, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu every year assembled his associates to participate with them in the festival of Ratha-yātrā. And he gave instruction to all his associates to come every year and participate in the kīrtana. Śrīla Prabhupāda, as soon as he got the opportunity in the West, he began a series in all the major cities of the Western world. And, of course, this festival principle has spread in many different shapes and forms throughout the world. And this is one of my most favorite festivals, as well as one of the most favorite festivals in the town of [Name]. I apologize. I'm not sure that even Ukrainians can easily pronounce the name of this city. But anyway, we have been holding our annual festival in this city for ten years now. And everything is so wonderful because we have a family. The International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness is our big family. 

So our disciples and well-wishers and friends come together this time. And this big international family is made up of small families. For example, the spiritual master and his disciples gather for the festival, just as we gather here every year to sing, dance and play. And that's wonderful, because it strengthens the family atmosphere. We still have two days left. Tomorrow we will have a special day, both for me and for everyone. I think for many devotees it is also Nṛsiṁhadeva's appearance day, his birthday; it is a very special holiday. And we will fast until sunrise. We will have many lectures by *abhiṣeka*, kīrtanas, a play, an initiation. And I want everyone to be fresh and well rested. Therefore, today I will finish our program early at 8:00. I want everyone to be well rested and be able to dive very deeply into the nectar of the festival tomorrow. I know many of you have been waiting for us to have kīrtana until 10:00 pm, but my vocal cords are limited in their abilities. If there were other *kīrtaniyas* here, like Girirāja Mahārāja or Madhava, we could, of course, complement them. And it is always good to end on a high note. We will end on this high note. 

I also wanted to thank all the performers at our cultural program. It was very wonderful. We come to this performance to see Kṛṣṇa there. And Kṛṣṇa is already here in the hall. Let's ask. Very good dancing. You have good talent. We have had a wonderful day today, and by the grace of Prabhupāda we still have 2 days ahead of us. *Śrīla Prabhupāda kī jaya!*""