"*00565*.*
"I had to interrupt Shaka’s speech because we have a very unusual guest in the audience who needs no introduction, but you all recognize him. This is Goswami Maharaja, who would also like to read his offering. Stand up and say hello. 

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Dear Indradyumna Maharaja, I am a little worried. Today, on this wonderful day of Vyāsa-pūjā, I would like to congratulate you with all my heart—or rather, congratulate us—on your appearance in this world, and express my deep, sincere admiration. I am your fan. I watch what you do and with what dedication, determination, and scale you do it. And in Śāstara, Prabhupāda told many different stories. I will tell you a story, too.

The day before yesterday—no, yesterday—a man came to meet me. This man is, in general, not a devotee. He is just some businessman. He is a little bit interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness to some extent. I read, oh, I read books. Anyway, I was asked to meet with him. He came and said, "I was lucky; nothing happens by chance. It turns out that the most Indradyumna Maharaja is here now. I read his book. For me, it was very surprising, because, well, sometimes it seems to us that only we read Maharaja’s books, but this is an absolutely distant person, with some kind of weak interest. And yet he knows, and he says, 'Oh, this is extraordinary luck.'" I came, and I immediately felt something special. It turns out that the most Indradyumna Maharaja is here with you. But what can I say? I can say that my admiration is sincere, genuine, and I am very proud of our entire large family. Śrīla Prabhupāda laid the foundation for our movement. And really, among other spiritual movements, at least, well, let’s say, our direction is unique. Why? Because Śrīla Prabhupāda put his amazing energy, his asceticism, his love, and his extraordinary purposefulness into it. But all this would have had no continuation if he had not been able to transmit these same qualities to his disciples and followers. And this is, perhaps, the most amazing thing. Of course, it is amazing that ISKCON exists, and what Śrīla Prabhupāda did is a miracle. But how it exists and what amazing followers Śrīla Prabhupāda has—it is a gigantic miracle. Now, if we look at ISKCON, sometimes, when we look at it from a close distance, we lose real perspective. But the spirit of service and the sacrifice itself that exists among the followers of Śrīla Prabhupāda, among direct disciples, is unparalleled. And, undoubtedly, Indradyumna Maharaja in this constellation, in this galaxy of followers and servants of Śrīla Prabhupāda, is one of the most outstanding stars. And this complete self-sacrifice, this spirit of service, the desire to satisfy your spiritual teacher—this is the most important thing, in fact, and this is the most important thing that we can have. We always remain disciples and followers. And if the main driving force of our life and our heart is the desire to please the spiritual teacher, then this means that our life has reached perfection. I am very happy that I have the honor of being next to Maharaja, breathing the same air with him, sometimes receiving hugs from him. I understand that I do not deserve this, but I am very sincerely grateful to him for this. Thank him very much, and thank you very much for the fact that you, in turn, try to serve your spiritual teacher in the same way that he serves Śrīla Prabhupāda. This is the most important thing—this is the perfection of our life together. Thank you very much.

I will also tell a very short story. When we were in Chicago, when Śrīla Prabhupāda visited this city, we had darśana in his room. Prabhupāda recalled the early days of the movement, especially in the city of New York. He said, "So many wonderful people have joined and helped me in this and that way." And he said that we have a very bright future. He paused for a moment. Everybody was waiting tensely to hear what he would say. But he said very quietly, "But the best will come later." 

I was a very young devotee. I had just joined the movement maybe six months ago. Six months or a year before that, I couldn’t quite understand what Prabhupāda was talking about. And certainly, as our movement grew, I increasingly appreciated those devotees who had joined before me or at the same time as me. And after some time, I even somehow forgot about this Prabhupāda statement that the best will come at the end. At one of the Russian festivals, I enjoyed attending various seminars of preachers. I came to one of Goswami Maharaja’s lectures. He didn’t even notice me because I was sitting in the back row. My student translated for me what Maharaja was saying. I was simply stunned by his lectures. 

I thought that here is an example of a person who received all the grace of Prabhupāda, the guru of the paramparā, in order to do great things in this country. And after the lecture was over, the devotees began to applaud, and the applause did not stop for a long time. Suddenly, this saying about Prabhupāda popped into my mind, that the best will come at the end. I, at least, have seen this in my life. And I understand that one of these people that Prabhupāda was talking about is Goswami Maharaja. We can see how much service he does—especially the service that he has taken on his shoulders: the construction of the Moscow temple, the central temple in Russia. 

And he acts, despite everything. And this temple will be built not so much from bricks and cement and other building materials. All these amazing and sublime projects that are being carried out in our society, such majestic temples as, for example, the central Vedic temple, all these impressive, great projects are built not so much with building materials. This is just the outer shell. They are built thanks to the strong desire in the hearts of elevated Vaiṣṇavas. Once in America, I met one of my godbrothers, and we talked about the Moscow project. And this devotee said, "Well, how is this possible, because this project is so expensive, it costs many millions of dollars, and there are so many obstacles in the way of its development. How can this be accomplished? Even in terms of funding, since there are so many serious and expensive projects in ISKCON now and very few people who can sponsor them, how is it possible to build this temple?" But I looked at him and said very confidently, "Prabhu, you can be sure that this project will be realized, because the person who is behind it is Bhakti Vijñāna Goswami Maharaja." And he is very determined to carry out this project. I am sure that we will see it in this life. We know how Śrīla Prabhupāda, in the very first months, even the very first year in America, did not receive any support. One day he was sitting alone on a bench in the park. 

A man sat down on the bench and could come up to Śrīla Prabhupāda. He saw him sitting alone on a bench. He sat down next to him. And although Śrīla Prabhupāda looked unusual in his saffron robes against the backdrop of New York, this man felt that he was a very, very unusual person. Also, as everyone recognized, for example, when Śrīla Prabhupāda was walking through London, crossing the street, he was accompanied by his servant Śyāmasundara Prabhu; he lagged a little behind him. And when he was crossing the road, a traffic cop stopped him, pointed to our great master, and said, "Look, this man is shining like the sun." And also this man who sat down on a bench near Prabhupāda looked at him and said, "Who are you? Do you have anything—followers, property, like some kind of projects?" And Prabhupāda began to describe all his plans and projects that he was thinking about. Prabhupāda said that yes, I have everything. Many temples, gurukulas, cow protection programs, countless followers all over the world. This man looked at him in surprise and said, "Where is all this? I don't see anyone. Excuse me, Swami, where is all this? You are sitting alone on this bench." And Prabhupāda said that all this is there. "Only time separates me from everything."

One of the names of the Lord is satya-saṅkalpa—one whose desires are fulfilled immediately, the truth in which he is interested will immediately manifest. The same applies to a pure devotee, because a pure devotee is very close, very intimately connected with Kṛṣṇa. Just like Jesus said that "I and the Father are one." Sometimes Christians interpret this to mean that Jesus was God, but the meaning is that Jesus and his Father are one in loving service. As lovers, the family of the son is considered one. A pure devotee has exactly the same desires as the Lord. And the Lord, out of His love, empowers that devotee to fulfill his desire. Just as one day a devotee asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, "If Lord Caitanya is the Supreme Lord, why didn't He spread the saṅkīrtana movement throughout the world?" Prabhupāda thought for a moment and said, "Why? Because He wanted me to do it." This is the competition of love. 

The devotee wants to glorify the Lord, and the Lord wants His devotees to be glorified. This is love. Kindly given the service to grant time, all of Prabhupāda’s desires will come true, and he did not complete all of his service in order to mercifully leave us the opportunity to continue serving the Lord, to continue the mission. Neophyte devotees may think that some obstacles are insurmountable, but sincere devotees understand that in Kṛṣṇa consciousness nothing is impossible. And with each instruction of the spiritual master, we receive authority to put them into practice. 

We know very well how dear Russia and especially Moscow is to Śrīla Prabhupāda. He flew here, despite the difficulties, in order to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness to hundreds of millions of people who have forgotten about God. And in order to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness on a mass scale, it is necessary not only to distribute books and conduct harināmas, but it is also very important to have a large, beautiful temple in which people could be inspired. Therefore, this is a very important project. It is an integral part of Vaiṣṇava culture. We can see that for thousands of years the Vaiṣṇavas have been building temples to worship the Lord. Therefore, this is a very important aspect of devotional service. Without Viṣṇu temples, or Kṛṣṇa temples, we can say that the entire environment, everything that surrounds us, will not contribute to our spiritual development. The heart of Russia requires a beautiful one. And, of course, Russia needs a very large, beautiful temple. And where else can it be built if not in the very heart of Russia, in Moscow? You will probably agree that Moscow is the heart of Russia. And if there is a large, beautiful temple here, people will be able to come here, associate with devotees, serve the Lord, and listen to amazing lectures of the level given by Goswami Maharaja. And, of course, they will immediately decide to become devotees. 

In different centers, in different cores, the community’s growth reaches the level where they need a large temple; they need conditions to continue developing. And when a temple is being built, Kṛṣṇa consciousness develops very strongly. I remember how in 1974, Śrīla Prabhupāda visited our Paris temple. And this temple was so small for all the devotees that everyone there was sitting closely together. Prabhupāda said that you definitely need a large temple somewhere, maybe in a rural area. A large building. The temple president began to say that it would be very difficult. "We have no money; if we build this temple, it will be something like a white elephant. No one will come there. It will be difficult for us to maintain it, and so on." He said, "Maybe in 5-10 years?" Prabhupāda said, "No, now." 

The child is distracting, please. The next day, Śrīla Prabhupāda ordered one of the devotees to start looking through newspaper ads for a suitable building for sale in the region of 400 km. Anything within 400 km from Paris, he was ready. And for the devotees to move anywhere. Although there were few devotees and we didn’t even have money, he wanted to buy a castle for the devotees. And Prabhupāda traveled all over France for 3 days in search of a suitable building. And these trips of his are captured in photographs; for example, the photograph which is in *The Science of Self-Realization*, where Prabhupāda initially took, like this, a wrapped chādara with his head raised, walking forward. This is from that moment. One of my spiritual brothers, Yogeśvara, photographed Prabhupāda a lot during his travels. One time, Prabhupāda said to him, "Well, do you want me to pose for a photo like Napoleon, in Napoleon’s style?" Yogeśvara said, "Yes." Prabhupāda took the rosary, like that. This image was placed in *The Science of Self-Realization*. And that time we were never able to find a suitable castle. But nevertheless, it was clear that this was Prabhupāda’s desire, and the seed of this desire remained in the hearts of the devotees. And less than a year later, we had already acquired the castle, which became the New Māyāpur temple, as the French say. And before leaving, the devotees asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, "But if we buy it, how will we pay for the purchase of this castle?" Prabhupāda said, "Distribute my books. Kṛṣṇa is not a poor man." And we participated in a distribution marathon for a whole year.

We were so determined to fulfill Śrīla Prabhupāda’s wish. I remember myself distributing books for three months without a break, every day. And I did it on the subway. I went into the subway underground before sunrise and came out after sunset. For three months, I did not see the sun. Not once did I see a ray of sunshine for a month. But I never felt happier than during this period in my entire life. One of my brothers, Bhūgarbha, said, "You want to kill yourself?" I said, "No, Prabhu, this is what I draw my life from, because I heard Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī say, 'Preaching is life.'" And of course, I got a lot of benefits from this, but one of the results is that I won the marathon, and the winner of the marathon had the right to wash the feet of Prabhupāda. We had a plan, and we bought a big silver basin and a jug for washing the feet of Śrīla Prabhupāda. It is explained that there are the most powerful means for receiving the mercy of a pure devotee: the dust from his feet, the water from his feet, and the remains of his food. But real success came through saṅkīrtana, through the combined efforts of so many devotees to please the spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa. And we raised enough money to pay for this castle. And I can tell you that after 6 months, 350 devotees had already settled in this new castle, but the Parisian temple still remained filled to capacity. We can see this program is on Thursday evening. It is the middle of the work week. This tent is already filled with people. That is why we need more space and something a little more beautiful. It is a beautiful place, of course, but it is still a tent. But if there is a beautiful temple here with traditional architecture, just for the sake of visiting the city’s landmark, people will come here and, having come here, naturally, they will receive the association of devotees and Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore, I am convinced that this will happen.

Because this desire resonates with the heartbeat of Goswami Maharaja. I am sure that it will be enough for him to do just this one service to return home back to Godhead. But he graciously agrees to share this wonderful ministry with you all. Therefore, you all must get together and do everything in your power to build, so that this miracle of Moscow architecture, the Kṛṣṇa temple in Moscow, will emerge. Many of you are my disciples, or well-wishers and friends. Therefore, on this wonderful day, the day when you have all gathered to celebrate my Vyāsa-pūjā, I want to instruct you, even order you, that you all cooperate in order to carry out this project. 

Usually on a birthday everyone expresses their wishes. The birthday boy is brought a big cake. And this year there will be 62 candles on my cake. But as they say, if the birthday boy blows out all his candles, then any of his wishes will come true. Usually the desire is kept secret. But we have no secrets about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. We tell everyone that Kṛṣṇa is God, and you are all His parts, His servants. Surrender to Him and you will be happy. And I also have a wish that I want to share with everyone on my sixty-second birthday. Therefore, my birthday wish to all students, friends, and followers is that you help Goswami Maharaja fulfill his desire in any way you can, that you devote your strength, your time, your Lakṣmī to creating a bastion of Kṛṣṇa consciousness here for all of Russia. Kṛṣṇa. Thank you very much. Sometimes Maharaja spoke so surprisingly about this project. I was captivated by it myself. My mouth dropped open in surprise. And what sin is there? Sometimes I have some doubts myself, because, well, it really is a very complex project; so much needs to be done. But after such a wish all my doubts disappeared. Thanks a lot. Let’s hug now.""