
The Kirtan last night was out of this world. My beloved deities, your children. Instructions of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

He gave me certain times, special items, like a bead from Jīva Goswami, a purport, a piece of cloth from Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. But he also cured the following 1994. The absolute offering of His Holiness Bhakti Tirtha Swami. So many where I go, I must invite hundreds of Kirtans and Kirtans for me reveals the essence of the Vedic sin, His Sankirtan movement, and the heart of my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

In either case, it's a masterpiece and can be read again and again. So we begin. Mr. Shido Maloney. Dear Prabhupāda, please accept my humble obeisances at your divine lotus feet.

All glories to you on the celebration of your parents' day. While planning a composition for your offering, I was also attending to my regular correspondence. One letter stood out amongst the others. I enclose it here, translated into English for your pleasure.

Dear Prabhupāda, Hari Krishna.

Please accept my humble obeisances. Although he is qualified, I hope you do not mind my writing to you. I have never written to a spiritual master before. He did not know me. My name is Bhakti Flora, and I live in Békéscsaba.

I'm 14 years old, and I live at home with my mother and older sister. In 1992, I went to the Hare Krishna festival with a friend.

I was not interested, but I enjoyed the chanting and dancing at the end. After it was over, I even bought a book, "The Science of Self-Realization." I don't know why. I don't even read. I think it was because of the chanting.

I took the book home and cannot remember even what happened to it. But one day my mother found it, and she was very angry at me. She thought I was being this kind of thing. You see, our family members are very strict Catholics.

They pushed the consciousness with some kind of cult, some kind of brainwashing. Actually, I wasn't even reading the book. I forgot all about it. Somehow, it just appeared. Anyway, my mother was going to throw it in the garbage. My grandmother, who was 68, was in the kitchen at that time.

She would—she lives in the apartment upstairs. She came in out of curiosity, took the book. She looked at it and scolded me in a very heavy way. I thought that would be the end of it. I didn't mind so much, as I wasn't a lot of Maya at that time.

About a week later, I overheard a conversation between my mother and my grandmother. Granny was saying that this was not an ordinary book. She said that what Prabhupada was saying is what Jesus Christ said, and that Krishna is God.

I was very surprised. She said that we should listen to what Prabhupada said and chant Hare Krishna because that was the religion for this age.

They were talking a lot about how Christianity was no more, and the whole was on the Bible. But what Prabhupada said in his books was pure and perfect. My life really took a turn from there. One day my grandmother visited the Nama-hatta center here and began to chant on beads.

She also began to buy Prabhupada's books one after another. She was spending all her attention on buying what she called the beautiful holy Bhagavad-gita. Sometimes she could only afford to eat potatoes, but she kept on buying the books. Devotees even came to her flat and helped her set up an altar.

When I went upstairs, they had taken down all the pictures, put other pictures of Krishna everywhere.

But that was only really the beginning. One night, Granny had a dream about Prabhupada. Something really happened to her then. I don't know what it was, but she began to get very enthusiastic. Next, she began to get the whole family involved.

I mean, not just me and my mother and sister, but her two sons, their wives and six children, as well as all her brothers, sisters, and every relative we have as far back as I can remember. Before, she used to carry a Bible with her and quote Jesus Christ.

Now she had that bond—the Gita in her hand—and quotes the Good Lord Prabhupada. She became a veritable transcendental terror. Everyone in this family now has to chant at least one round. Today, in addition, Granny makes everyone become a vegetarian, including my dog, Secret.

And we offer our food to a picture of Prabhupada and Lord Chaitanya. Now I am also getting out of Maya and chanting and reading a little also. Wherever I go to school, my friends inquire about Krishna because they know I am a devotee.

The whole family now goes to the Nama-hatta, all 16 of us. During the Christmas marathon, all of this—all 16, including Danny—trying to distribute all of us books. Then he would take books, literally, to the market and sell them to the vendors.

Everyone's afraid of her because she's fearless. They all think she's gone crazy, but she doesn't care. Now she is saving to go to Budapest to see the newly installed deities. She has heard that Lord Chaitanya and Nityananda have come to Hungary and are being worshiped there by the devotees.

She says she wants to see God just once in her life. At such a this year's Hare Krishna festival, he was speaking to the guests after having Kirtan.

You must remember my granny because she came up to you and sat down right beside you and asked you so many questions. At the end, you stood to leave, and she stood up, and she kissed your hand. Do you remember?

I also wanted to ask the question that I was shy. Could I please ask you now?

I hope you do not mind. And I want to know, what kind of man Prabhupada was?

He must be so dear to Krishna to spread this message all over the world, even here in Hungary.

What are these books that changed my family so much?

How is it possible that he can speak so powerfully through them?

You must feel very fortunate to be his disciple. How great a man he is. Sometimes when my granny chants in front of a picture of Krishna, she cries.

How does Prabhupada do that?

I want a Kirtan like that too. Granny dreams often of Prabhupada, and sometimes she talks to this picture. Although it says on the cover of the book that he passed away, is Prabhupada dead, or is he still alive?

Do you think I can meet him someday?

I'm sorry, they have gone on so. I would like to be a good devotee one day and help you with temple construction. Could you please answer my questions?

Your servant, Bhakti Flora. And the purport continues. This is his offering to all times. What is this branded mercy that you gave this old lady?

I barely met that you never gave to me. She never met you, never saw devotees, she is not even initiated by you. What is this kindness that you bestow upon her that you do not give to me, your fortunate disciple?

What am I referring to?

It's just this. I think after having come in contact with you for just a few months, what inspiration did you give this granny in that dream?

What did you, what did you do to look in her heart that made her change her life?

In its final days, they made her turn against the current of banality and tradition and strike out alone to change her world. No sympathy, no safety, no association, no institutional support, no boldness. I do not possess. Changes I do not have the strength to meet.

Prabhupada, I want to know, what is it you say to her from your picture when she talks to you?

I have so many pictures, you did not speak to me from them. Although I worship deities daily, I continue to see them made of marble and wood. How is it this old lady has a conviction that has that God has come to her country?

Prabhupada had not given such vision to me. Where did she get the conviction that a Kirtan to the city capital would yield the final goal of her life?

One last thing, Prabhupada. How is it that when Doris's granny chants under the pictures of Krishna, how do you do it?

I want to cry like that too. When will you give me that mercy, Prabhupada?

But this is one letter from one girl who came in contact with you. How many millions of such souls are there who have yet to light, who are directly experiencing your mercy daily, who read her books with implicit faith, whom you talk to in dreams and pictures, whose lives are changed abruptly and rewarded with tears when they chant the holy name?

How many people cross the boundaries of rules and regulations by the strong vote of your mercy and practice and taste Krishna consciousness in a realm beyond logic and argument?

I will try that again. How many people cross the boundaries of rules and regulations by the strong vote of your mercy and practice and taste Krishna consciousness in a realm beyond logic and argument?

I think these people are meeting you every day. How will I acquire their good fortune?

When will you one day bestow upon me some of the special mercy that you give to them?

If I am not to acquire it directly, even after making for it, then I will search out such souls who have reached your mission. I will offer them to you and give them your books and show them how to practice.

I will chant with them as I can, help begin a new perspective. Your greatness, even though I may never fully understand it. Your significant service all touched on the real essence of the. Seclusion is begging for diversity. This is really nothing significant to finish screenplay.

It's just this year, the wake of a disaster that claimed a friend. I brought the walls crumbling down to cut my staff. I look to the road hoping to find you again, to gain your favor. I gave up all that I owned and tried to announce my pride.

Never more cautious of women, insane. I traveled far and wide, moving once in the North, twice in the South, East and West. In time, I learned firsthand at God's creation and your kind mercy as well. So Narottama came claiming all of my wealth.

We remained a welcome friend and strengthened in detachment. For traveling to foreign lands with no place to live, hold on my own. I learned to take shelter in you. And the constant vision of birth and death gave me learned and true to my vows.

In forest, cities, villages, and towns, repeating your words, I roamed with a singer. Mercy as kind as you are in delivering the following devotees came in summer and your death in the fall. In a jungle part of the South, with your saving grace and fingersmates, can be safe, protected, to all old.

I'm happy. Conserve you like this always, fishing and traveling on. As a flowing river remains always cleaning, I created to remain always pure in happiness and distress. He didn't cold. I want to keep fighting on delivering your message as you asked me to while I'm enthusiastic, youthful, and strong.

Prabhupada, the road is long, and there are many dangers in between. Where I caused now, and you must safely on the other shore. So on this day, so full of grace, please hear my fervent prayer. Within my heart, beyond this dart is shining love for you.

So like me, right?

Keep it in the fight and away from Maya's glare. And when all is done and battles won, take me home to you. Namaste. All glories to the assembled devotees. I want to please come back. Yeah, very lucky. By the hypothesis.

So here's a girl goes to the Kirtan.