One more time again, a little louder with your heart, party. One more time again, please, everybody, party.  Hare Krishna, Dear devotees, this is, um, well, the seventh day of our three-week festival here in Rishikesh, India. Again, I brought a crew of, well, now it's almost 90 devotees to Rishikesh.

We rented a beautiful ashram. We're living in the ashram. We're going out daily and we're giving out invitations, in particular, to all the Westerners who are coming here. This Rishikesh, you could say, is a mecca for people interested in yoga.

So many different yoga schools, so many different opportunities for people who come here. But it, I have to say, we look like we're the most attractive thing happening in town. We have a morning program of drop-in meditation. People come and chant japa with us.

We have kirtan in the morning. We have workshops, and we go out, we chant, we dance, we invite people to come. And then many of our devotees are working on cooking a big feast for the evening. It's all free.

Everything here is free. People are going, "It's free?" I say, "Yeah, there are no strings attached.

We just want to share a good portion with you." Even to the point where we brought about 1,500 saris. And all the ladies who come from all over the world, we offer a free sari to them. They put it on.

The ladies dress them. They put on the Gopi dots. Very similar to my formula in the West, like in Poland and American places. I take a festival tour. Sari for free. Gopi dots are free, like that. And prasadam is delicious.

So, this is working because it's Lord Chaitanya's formula. Krishna comes to this material world from time to time, as He mentions in Bhagavad-gita.

But His most special incarnation, very dear to our heart, is Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. It is said that He is even more merciful than Krishna, and we see that manifest before our eyes.

That in this age, most people are of a sudra type nature, just interested in materialistic life. But there is always a spiritual awakening going on in human society. It's always been there. So, for people of this age, this is an ideal formula.

It's very simple: You chant Hare Krishna, you dance in ecstasy, you hear some philosophy to give it substance, to give it all meaning, then you feast on prasadam.

And we're seeing it happening right before our eyes. This is a formula that Mahaprabhu introduced 500 years ago. And it's unique here because, well, we really focus on the people. This is a festival of the people, by the people, and for the people.

And therefore, I can see that our crew, our devotees, 90 devotees from 11 different countries of the world, I've never seen them more happy, because this is a Vaishnava's, this is a Vaishnavi's happiness. We are sad when we see people bereft of Krishna consciousness, and we are elated when we see them get the opportunity for Krishna consciousness.

This is our way of getting detached from the material world, which seems a place where you can be happy. And we experience the pure, undiluted, and divine, and take a higher taste. The mood of Lord Chaitanya to share, and the mood of Srila Prabhupada to share, that was Prabhupada's mood.

He was just giving, giving, giving freely this process of Krishna consciousness.

So, here at our Rishikesh festival, it's happening right before our eyes. Party. My name is Maria. I'm from Poland, and I'm in Rishikesh now on the first Kirtan Fest. And I experience an amazing kirtan with beautiful people, and so much hospitality and openness.

Kind persons, and so much energy at the kirtan, full of love and beauty. One more time, very loudly, with love. I'm from Toronto, Canada. And I actually stumbled upon the Rishikesh Kirtan, like, festival totally by accident. And we have been coming morning and night.

We had plans to go to Vrindavan, we pushed them back because this is such an incredible experience. Spreading the name, chanting with people, connecting to the community. This is such a beautiful vibration, and I have so much gratitude for everyone putting this on.

Hare Krishna.

Love, Devotees. Party. Express. For me, it's something like the modern-day pastimes of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu that we're here for the people. I love all our festivals. In our International Society for Krishna Consciousness, our Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, I love them all.

But I especially like to go out and give the Holy Name to the people. We love the people. We don't see them according to their nationality, the color of their skin, their sex, or their language. How do we see the people?

We see them all as our brothers and sisters. Because Krishna says in Bhagavad-gita, "He is the seed-giving Father of all living entities." So if we have the same Father, we're all brothers and sisters.

That's actually a formula of peace for the whole world. Because, you know, sometimes in families, there's some sibling rivalry, but they don't throw nuclear bombs at each other. So this is something more than just a little yoga festival. We're sending a message all over the world that Krishna consciousness can solve all the serious problems that we have in our modern society.

I could go on for hours about that, but just to let you know, we're very happy seeing the people happy. I sometimes think of the motto of the British Air Force: "To fly, to serve." Bhakti yoga means to serve.

We want to serve it with love, and we're serving our compatriots, our fellow human beings, with this wonderful festival. And therefore, I have to say, this is the happiest I've ever been in my life. Because thousands are coming, thousands are coming.

And every night, we have, you know, thousands are coming to Rishikesh. And every night, we have about 500 people. You'll see in this video, they chant and dance in ecstasy. They're so appreciative. They're getting that taste of the Maha Mantra.

They're getting the taste of prasadam. Nothing could be more satisfactory, satisfying to the heart. This is the kind of festival I enjoy, where we offer the prasadam to the people, to see their eyes light up, to see their smiles, to see them speak to us afterwards.

This is what I came for. Many people said, "This is the, I've said, this is the experience I've been looking for." So, this is the Rishikesh Kirtan Festival. As I mentioned in another video, we don't have to go out looking for people, like we often do on sankirtana.

They're coming to us. They're coming to us, and the right type of people. So, very special. I hope you can appreciate yourselves by watching this video, how nice it is to share Krishna consciousness.

This is a missionary movement. We're meant to always be sharing in a variety of ways. My favorite way in my career as a devotee is festivals, big preaching, maha-mahotsava means a big festival where people come and dance. We are the servants of the people, giving them the pure mercy, Lord Chaitanya's mercy.

It's just so ecstatic. What can I say?

You can see, a picture is worth a thousand words, of videos with a million words. Stick with us. We have three weeks more to go. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, who brought this wonderful process of Krishna consciousness to the whole wide world.

Hariibol. Thank you. Whatever. Thank you. Father S.