"*00306*.*
"There are many definitions of God, but one is that He is the Supreme enjoyer. There is never a moment that He is morose, depressed, or sad, but He doesn't come under the influence of the material energy; so, whatever He does is for His Supreme enjoyment and also for His beloved devotees' enjoyment. This is the nature of love. Actually, in the *Bhagavad-gītā*, He explains that the primary reason He comes is to deliver the *priya*, which means His devotees, which actually means everybody, because He says He is the seed-giving father of all living entities. Especially in Kali-yuga, He does it in a particularly enjoyable way, a joyous way, a novel way compared to the previous ages, and that is that He would go out daily in Navadvīpa at some point with His devotees, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa throughout Navadvīpa, through all the towns and villages. He enjoyed it very much. He enjoyed singing His own sweet Holy names and He enjoyed seeing His devotees sing His own sweet Holy names. Just like someone mentions your name, you know, very nicely—"Hello, excuse me, could you come here?"—you show some interest. So, anyone who chants Hare Kṛṣṇa with interest, He is interested in that person. And amazingly enough, that means the conditioned souls who are on the beach—we are going to go on the beach—these conditioned souls, in their own way, they are going to be attracted to the singing of Hare Kṛṣṇa. And the way you dress, the jewelry, and flower garlands you wear, it’s all very colorful and joyful; they’ll also be attracted, which means in essence, they’re being attracted to Kṛṣṇa. It’s called *tadīya*. *Tadīya* means anything connected to Kṛṣṇa is also divine, especially His Holy name.

I was reading the other day that Jīva Gosvāmī describes in the *Sarva-saṁvādinī* that the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa was present in every age. People have been chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa in this material world forever, fortunate souls, *sādhus*, *śiṣyas*. But in the Kali-yuga, the Lord makes it the predominant process for self-realization, the main way to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. And whereas in previous ages, you know, not everyone could benefit from the process of that age, in this age everyone can benefit just by hearing Hare Kṛṣṇa on the beach. That’s how merciful Lord Caitanya is. Remember, *nāma-cintāmaṇi-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-vigrahaḥ*; Kṛṣṇa is not different than His name. So, we’re taking Kṛṣṇa to the people on the beach in the form of His name. This is historic. Śrīla Prabhupāda said one who speaks the *kīrtana* and one who hears the *kīrtana*, they’re both benefited. So, we’re benefited by going and chanting, and the people who are hearing it, they’re also benefited, even if they don’t know it. It’s called *ajñāta-sukṛti*, unknowing devotional service. It’s devotional service to hear; *śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇam*—*śravaṇam* means to hear. They’re doing devotional service, hearing, while they’re getting a suntan.

Just like 500 years ago, you can imagine how fortunate people considered themselves to be part of Lord Caitanya’s *saṅkīrtana* movement. He was inviting everyone to chant—not just the *pārṣadas*, not just His eternal associates, but anyone who came in chanting, they also felt greatly blessed. "I’m with God, I’m with Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Try to realize our position: by Prabhupāda’s grace and Mahāprabhu’s grace, it’s non-different. We’re also in Lord Caitanya’s *saṅkīrtana* party. He’s present by His desire, His order, and He’s present in the form of His names as well. Devotees have to consider—we utilize our intelligence—it’s non-different in one sense. It’s non-different; we’re out, we’re with Mahāprabhu, with Kṛṣṇa, the *pārṣadas*, and all the *ācāryas*, because they all want it. They worked for hundreds of years and different decades to push forward the movement. We have the backing of the Lord and His devotees; it’s simply amazing. 

These are the modern-day pastimes of the Lord, not any less significant or less potent or less transcendental. These are the modern-day pastimes, and we’re very fortunate to be His instruments. So, when we go on *harināma-saṅkīrtana*, we should never take it for granted. We should never think, "I’ve done this before, I have to go out again." It’s a great honor; it’s a great privilege to come out here on Lord Caitanya’s *saṅkīrtana* party and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa for the benefit of the people. We’re here for the people; we love the people. They are our brothers and sisters; maybe they forgot, but we know through knowledge. So, we are so blessed today to be going on the beach here in Kostrzyn, Poland, on the Baltic Sea. We’re so blessed. Now, we’re inviting people to our festival, but this is also a festival. It’s a little festival, or it’s a big festival, to go out, chant, dance, sing, wave, and smile—that’s what festivals are about. This is also a festival. Going out on *harināma* is also a festival, a festival of the Holy names. And you’ll see—*phala* in Sanskrit means you judge something by the result. The result is thousands of people come to our festivals every day—thousands, not hundreds, every day. Thousands. We’ve been seeing it for a month now; thousands come every day. That’s the potency of Śrī Kṛṣṇa *saṅkīrtana*. They’re completely forgetful, completely in ignorance, but they wake up when they see you chanting and dancing, waving, chanting, and they come to the festival: "What’s it all about?" And we’re seeing through time many of them are becoming devotees. Maybe not joining an *āśrama* or a temple, but many are now chanting at home, many are reading Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books. I see it every year. So successful. 

So, you can take some little pride in it—pride that you’re the servant of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Lord Caitanya—and share your good fortune with all these people. Some of them are in deep slumber: *jīva jāgo, jīva jāgo*. So, the more effort you put into it, the more chances are that such people will also wake up and come to the festival. So, you have to give it your all. Every step we take on the sandy beach—it’s not so easy to walk on the beach; armies, they train in the sand, so we’re walking ours in the sand—but give it your best. Keep smiling, keep waving, keep dancing, and keep praying that the *saṅkīrtana* party will touch the hearts of thousands of people. We’ve got a good 6 kilometers to walk, 6 kilometers, maybe 3 hours more, but I want you to be enthusiastic from the beginning to end in great appreciation for this privilege to be serving Śrīla Prabhupāda and Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this way. Okay, so line up and get ready and be joyful, because Kṛṣṇa consciousness is joyful. We see it in Lord Caitanya’s party; we can emulate that by chanting and dancing in the sand for 6 kilometers for 3 hours on the beach, and you’ll get blessings for this. Coming and spending your summer here, you will get blessings for this. You will make *kṛṣṇa-prema* in spiritual life by coming on this festival tour here in Poland this summer. I guarantee. We’re ready to undergo any austerities for this. It’s like drinking hot sugar juice—it’s burning the lips, the sun, but it’s so sweet, we cannot stop. Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Jaya!""