"*00223*.*
"Very, very dear devotees, welcome back to our lectures on the glories of the twelfth forest of Vṛndāvana. Nama oṁ viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate... So, today, rather than focus on any one particular place in Vṛndāvana as we generally do, I thought we'd just wander through a few forests and visit a few līlā-sthānas here and there in Vṛndāvana. It's okay to just wander around Vṛndāvana. We mentioned this last year, and actually, in the early 1970s, when my godbrother Nanda Prabhu arrived in Vṛndāvana, he went to see Śrīla Prabhupāda in our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir. In his memoirs, he said, "When we arrived in Vṛndāvana, I remember walking into Śrīla Prabhupāda’s room, and after paying my obeisances, I said, 'Śrīla Prabhupāda, what should we do now here in Vṛndāvana?'" So, Śrīla Prabhupāda looked at me, and with a smile, he said, "Just wander. Just wander." He said that to Nanda Prabhu, my godbrother, so it's safe just to wander in Vṛndāvana because everywhere you go, you’re reminded of Kṛṣṇa.

Vṛndāvana is the playground of God, the playground of Kṛṣṇa. It’s not like being "footloose and fancy-free" in the material world where there’s danger at every step. One makes spiritual progress with each and every step in Vṛndāvana, and when the day’s over, you can actually feel the purification, isn't it? After every parikramā, we come back and feel so purified. As the famous American author Henry David Thoreau wrote, "I took a walk in the woods and came out taller than the trees. I took a walk in the woods and came out taller than the trees." In other words, for us, that means when we go to Vṛndāvana and we do parikramā, at the end of the day, we feel so much purified.

So, let’s take off from where we left off in our last lecture. You may remember that we were in the forest of... let me remember, Kāmīvana. So, from Kāmīvana, we’ll walk in a western direction towards Śeṣaśāyī, and in doing so, we’ll pass through a very ancient forest. Actually, it’s described in śāstra; it’s called Koṭarāvana. Koṭarāvana, which I found out is a favorite pastime forest for the cowherd boys—everyone has their favorite forest. So, I read that even during Kṛṣṇa’s time, the trees of that forest were so old that many of them were hollow; the Sanskrit word for hollow is *koṭara*. So, from *koṭara*, we get Koṭarāvana, meaning "hollow forest."

So, Kṛṣṇa and his friends would bring their cows to graze at the forest, and while the cows grazed, the boys—I was reading—would hide from each other in the hollows of the trees. Hide and seek in the hollows of the trees! They loved to visit that place. And it’s also mentioned they would play holī there; you know, we throw the colors. And as a result of their playing holī there, the green foliage of the forest turned into a rainbow of colors. The forest was all green, but the boys were throwing color; they covered the whole forest, and it turned into a rainbow of colors.

Now, one time, after playing all morning in Koṭarāvana, the cowherd boys had worked up an especially, we could say, fierce appetite, but their lunches had not arrived yet. You may remember that, of course, we read how the cowherd boys take their lunches to the forest with Kṛṣṇa, and there’s that description in Kṛṣṇa Book—you know, they’re throwing them back and forth and playing like that. But also, it’s stated that very often their mothers would make their lunches at home and then send their servants to deliver the boys' lunches to them in the forest. So, after waiting—because the boys were really hungry by now—and after waiting for a while, Kṛṣṇa sent a boy up a tree. The boy sat at the top of the tree, and Kṛṣṇa says, "Do you see them coming? Are the servants coming with the lunches?" But the boy cries out, "No," and he climbs back down.

So then, Kṛṣṇa and his friends, they had an iṣṭa-goṣṭhī; they had a meeting about what to do. And during the discussion, one boy—he was like holding his stomach, he’s so hungry—he said, "What can we do so that we don’t starve? I’m starving." So Balarāma said, "Friends, let’s not despair. Just nearby is a village of pious souls. Why not go there and ask them for some milk to tide us over? Surely they will be sympathetic to our plight." So, all the boys cheered; they got up, they cheered, and they ran to the village of the pious souls. Balarāma called it the village of pious souls, where, it’s described, sure enough, they were given *pāya*. *Pāya*—another way of saying milk—and since that time, in Sanskrit, since that time, the village is called Pāyagrāma, the "milk village." Simple, but blissful pastime.

Now, I discovered that there’s another spot in Koṭarāvana called Dadhigrāma. Dadhigrāma. This place is famous because one time Kṛṣṇa stole yogurt, *dadhi*, there. Of course, in Hindi we say *dahī*, but in Sanskrit, yogurt is *dadhi*. So, one time Kṛṣṇa stole *dadhi* from a group of Gopīs who were passing through there, as he often does, and he stole it for his hungry friends. So that place is called Dadhigrāma; *grāma* also means "village." And in Dadhigrāma, there’s a deity of the goddess Pārvatī, the wife of Lord Śiva. That deity is on a little mound, a little hill, just next to a lake, and because the Gopīs would often go there—actually, I was reading they go there every day—and they make offerings to her, so she is also known as Dadhi-devī; Pārvatī is known there as Dadhi-devī, and the lake is called Dadhi-kuṇḍa.

So, one day, as the Gopīs were bringing their offerings—well, they offered many things, of course, to Pārvatī, but they would offer their milk products there as well—so as they were bringing their offerings to Dadhi-devī (interesting name for Pārvatī), Kṛṣṇa and his friends blocked the way and demanded the yogurt pots that the Gopīs were carrying. And as they did this, one Gopī said, "Kṛṣṇa, this yogurt is meant for Devī. Are you not afraid to steal from the gods? What a sin! This yogurt is meant for Devī Pārvatī; are you not afraid to steal from the gods? What a sin!"

But Kṛṣṇa just smiled, and you know, it’s described, he pressed his walking stick into the ground and he said, "Foolish woman, don’t you know that Pārvatī, Sarasvatī, and Kālī are all my maidservants? The best way to serve them is to please me." When Kṛṣṇa said that, some of the Gopīs covered their ears, while others—it’s described—shrieked in disbelief: "Kṛṣṇa, what are you saying?" So, taking advantage of the moment, the Gopīs' confusion, Kṛṣṇa and his friends stole all the Gopīs' pots of yogurt. And then, to prove his point, Kṛṣṇa ran to Dadhi-kuṇḍa, the yogurt kuṇḍa, and right in front of Dadhi-devī, right in front of Pārvatī, he—without offering her any—distributed all the yogurt to his friends, who happily ate it. Then he said, "Girls, just see how happy Dadhi-devī is!" And sure enough, when the Gopīs looked at the deity of Pārvatī, of Dadhi-devī, they saw a very beautiful smile on that deity’s face. A beautiful deity. When they looked, there was a beautiful smile on her face. But the ācāryas say, unwilling to trust their eyes and minds, the girls covered their faces with their veils.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Now, there’s another interesting holy place in a nearby forest called Khadiravana. I told you we’re going to wander from forest to forest. There’s another forest called Khadiravana. I think it’s 10-3, *Bhadra-śukla-caturthyam*, on the fourth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Bhādra, having gone to Khadiravana, one should offer prayers in a pure, surrendered mood. Then he gives the praṇāma-mantra for Khadiravana: "Nama oṁ... having multitudes of splendor, obeisances to that forest which bestows benediction even on demigods and Gandharvas."

And then he gives a praṇāma-mantra for a lake—again, lots of lakes—a lake called Iṣṭa-kuṇḍa. It’s situated in the very center of Khadiravana. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, he writes, "Obeisances to you, O king of tīrthas, O kuṇḍa born from the bathing of Mādhava, obeisances to you who bestow the four goals of human life: *dharma, artha, kāma*, as well as *mokṣa*." So the name of this forest comes from the word *kāyaro*. *Kāyaro*. I’ll explain. One time, when Lord Balarāma was coming back for a visit to Vṛndāvana in a chariot, having spent many, many years with Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā—you remember that; everyone knows Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, they left Vṛndāvana on the chariot of Akrūra, they go to Mathurā to fight the wrestlers, and eventually Kṛṣṇa killed Kaṁsa, but then Kṛṣṇa moved eventually to Dvārakā. Both Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma went to Dvārakā, where Kṛṣṇa ruled for many, many years and fought many demons to protect the Vrajabāsīs and the residents of Mathurā, etc., but they were living there a long time.

Now, it’s described that Balarāma left at one time to come back to Vṛndāvana, and as he was—you know, he left on a chariot—and as he’s entering into Vṛndāvana, he saw a group of very surprised cowherd boys as they entered this particular forest that we’re talking about now. They looked at him in astonishment; he smiled and said, "*Kāyaro?*" Which means, "What’s the good news? What’s the good news?" Thus, the name Khadiravana, from *kāyaro*, "What’s the good news?" A nice name for the forest. So the cowherd boys replied, "The good news, the good news is that you, Lord Balarāma, have come back to Braja! What could be better news for the cowherd boys in particular?"

So, this is really interesting, actually. Really interesting that Balarāma is coming back to Vṛndāvana, but not with Kṛṣṇa. Balarāma is coming back, but it’s not mentioned that Kṛṣṇa came back. Actually, we often hear that after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, he never returned. And it may sound cruel, but there’s good reasons why he didn’t come back. Number one, Kṛṣṇa didn’t come back because he needed to rid the world of powerful demons like Jarāsandha, who could—or were—planning to attack Dvārakā, Mathurā, and Vṛndāvana.

Another reason, more subtle, perhaps the most significant reason, was that by staying away from Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa was increasing his devotees' love for him in separation, a theme that we’ve very often explored in the last 14 months, an underlining theme. He stayed away to increase his devotees' love for him through separation. Now, the Bhāgavatam describes this. It mentions in Tenth Canto, 47th chapter, a very interesting verse: "When her lover is far away, a woman thinks of him more than when he is present before her." This is Bhāgavatam indicating how separation makes the heart grow fonder. Bhāgavatam says, "When her lover is far away, a woman thinks of him more than when he is present before her." And that is absolutely true on the spiritual platform. That’s why Kṛṣṇa stays away, and it works; their love increases *ad infinitum*.

Now, of course, there are statements in our śāstra that Kṛṣṇa did come back, or even that he never left. In the *Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta* by Śrīla Rūpa Goswāmī, Kṛṣṇa never takes a step out of Vṛndāvana. And even if he does, Śrī Rūpa says in the same *Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta*, he says he was only gone for three months. He was only gone for three months. And Śrī Rūpa Goswāmī says even in that time of that short three months that Kṛṣṇa was away from Vṛndāvana, he would appear to some Vrajabāsīs in their hearts. He writes like that—he’s away, but he would appear to some particular Vrajabāsīs; he would appear within their hearts, it says. And such appearances in the hearts of certain devotees, *Nectar of Devotion* describes, that’s called *prākaṭya* or *āvirbhāva*, when the Lord appears in the heart of some special devotees.

So yes, how do we accommodate these two apparently opposing views, that Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana but then again he didn’t leave Vṛndāvana? Well, Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī resolves this issue by explaining that Kṛṣṇa has two types of pastimes in Vṛndāvana. One is called *aprakaṭa-līlā*, which means unmanifested, and secondly, *prakaṭa*, or manifest. His unmanifest pastimes are going on eternally in Vṛndāvana; they’re always going on, they never stop, but only pure souls can see them. Those who have *prema-bhakti*, they can see those pastimes; have no cessation, they’re just going on and on and on and on. And his manifest pastimes, like when he appeared on the earth 5,000 years ago, are when everyone could see him, even demons, obviously. So, *Viṣṇu-dharmottara* says that in his unmanifested pastimes, which only pure souls can see, Kṛṣṇa never leaves Vṛndāvana. But in his manifest pastimes, he leaves and doesn’t come back.

And that he doesn’t come back, Śrīla Prabhupāda confirms in a purport to verse 10 of *Upadeśāmṛta*. Prabhupāda writes, "Indeed, sometimes Kṛṣṇa puts the Gopīs into extreme suffering by separating himself from them. Nonetheless, they cannot forget Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā, the Gopīs became most dejected and spent the rest of their lives simply crying in separation from Kṛṣṇa." So, there’s an indication that Kṛṣṇa didn’t come back, although there are times when he does come back. And it’s subtle, but I’ve tried to explain it as best I can. So today, we’re dealing with the pastime where Kṛṣṇa... we’re dealing with a pastime in the sense that Kṛṣṇa never comes back to Vṛndāvana, but Balarāma does. And the minute he enters into Braja, he says to some very surprised cowherd boys, "What’s the good news?"

So actually, this pastime of Balarāma coming back to Vṛndāvana, this pastime is described in its entirety in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*—for those of you who are very studious, studying Bhāgavatam, you know, Tenth Canto, chapter 65—and also it’s described in more detail in the *Harivaṁśa*, another very authorized śāstra for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. And in those two śāstras, it’s explained that after the departure of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma from Mathurā into Dvārakā, the residents of Vṛndāvana were experiencing intense pangs of separation. Intense. But Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were feeling the same things of separation, being separated from the Vrajabāsīs.

And according to Śrīla Jīva Goswāmī, one day, Balarāma revealed to Kṛṣṇa his desire to return to Vṛndāvana: "I want to go back." So Kṛṣṇa said to him, "Be patient, my brother. Today or tomorrow, I will send you there." And a few days later, when they were walking together, Balarāma started to cry, and he said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear brother, how is it that you have not returned to Vṛndāvana? Our father and mother’s hearts have been burning in separation from you. I don’t understand your intentions; it seems as if you have forgotten them." So Kṛṣṇa replied famously: "*Hanta, hanta*—alas, alas! Vṛndāvana dwells always within the chambers of my heart. How can I ever forget Vṛndāvana and the residents there?" *Hanta, hanta*—alas, alas! "Vṛndāvana dwells always within the chambers of my heart. How can I ever forget Vṛndāvana and the residents there?" Now, that’s a very famous quote from Kṛṣṇa, how much he loves Braja, how much he loves the residents of Vṛndāvana. We always hear how much, you know, the devotees love Vṛndāvana; here we’re hearing how much Kṛṣṇa loves Vṛndāvana.

Then he went on to say, "But Nanda Mahārāja has instructed me that I should never disobey our parents, Vasudeva and Devakī, in Dvārakā, who will never allow me to return to Braja. Unable to go against their wishes, the wishes of my parents, I could not return. But I am greatly suffering. If somehow you can get them to change their desire—in other words, to change the desires of Vasudeva—and go back to Vṛndāvana," Kṛṣṇa says, "then in great happiness, I’ll depart for Braja immediately." So Balarāma actually went to Devakī and Vasudeva, and he asked them if he and Kṛṣṇa could finally return to Vṛndāvana. And after thinking about that proposal for a few minutes, Vasudeva and Devakī agreed that Balarāma could go, but—quote—"Out of fear that Kṛṣṇa would not come back to Dvārakā, they said Kṛṣṇa could not go"—unquote.

The śāstra, and in his commentary on the Tenth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes: when informed of that, you know, Balarāma’s proposal to Vasudeva and Devakī, he writes that the senior members of the Yadu dynasty, they said, "Kṛṣṇa’s beloved girlfriends are famous for their pure ecstatic love, and his parents in Braja are extremely protective of him. Kṛṣṇa is controlled by pure love, so how will he be able to leave them and come back to Dvārakā?" That’s from Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary in the Tenth Canto. He’s quoting the senior members of the Yadu dynasty; he’s able to see within their hearts, within their minds. They not only did Vasudeva and Devakī not agree that Kṛṣṇa goes back to Vṛndāvana, but all the seniors in Dvārakā—let me recite that again—the seniors, the members of the Yadu dynasty, they’re not in favor of Kṛṣṇa’s going back to Vṛndāvana. They say, "Kṛṣṇa’s beloved girlfriends are famous for their pure ecstatic love, and his parents in Braja, Nanda and Yaśodā, are extremely protective of him. Kṛṣṇa is controlled by pure love, so how will he be able to leave them and come back here to Dvārakā?" So nobody was in favor.

So at this point—I mean, they agreed Balarāma could go—so at this point, one may question how Balarāma himself could leave Kṛṣṇa behind and return to Braja alone. They’re tight, we hear—I thought that’s a proper expression—but we often refer to them, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, plurally—Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, singularly—as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The only difference between the two—because Balarāma, of course, is the first expansion of Kṛṣṇa—the only difference is that Kṛṣṇa is bluish-black like a monsoon cloud, and Balarāma is white like an autumn cloud. Otherwise, they’re identical, just the colors. How can they separate? Actually, *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Ādi-līlā chapter 5, verse 4, there I saw that Balarāma is referred to as *svayaṁ-prakāśa*, the second body of Kṛṣṇa, the second body of Kṛṣṇa. So how could he bear to leave his beloved younger brother?

Seek and ye shall find. The answer is found in the first verse of this 65th chapter of the Tenth Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. When describing this pastime, we hear—Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he in that particular verse—we won’t quote; there’s a lot of Sanskrit there—but there’s the word *utkaṇṭhā*, which means "intense eagerness." So, according to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Balarāma had such an intense desire, such intense eagerness to return to Vṛndāvana that his—I’m quoting Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura—"that his sobriety, his discrimination, and his sense control had vanished." I do remember this is a transcendental pastime, but his sobriety, his discrimination, sense control had vanished. So he was determined to go, out of intense desire and intense eagerness to be back in Braja, to be with the Vrajabāsīs and exchange loving sentiments. He was even willing to forgo Kṛṣṇa’s association and to go on.

This is really getting into the details of Vraja-bhakti, but it’s written also that Kṛṣṇa himself was inclined to let Balarāma go. He so much loved Balarāma, and he loved Balarāma in Braja. He considered that the earth was fortunate because Balarāma’s lotus feet had touched her surface in Śrī Vṛndāvana. So actually, Kṛṣṇa, at that—you know, when all these discussions were going on—Kṛṣṇa was inclined, and he recited a verse glorifying Balarāma that he had previously quoted in Vṛndāvana. Well, in Dvārakā, he quoted this verse that he had previously quoted in Vṛndāvana. And what is that verse? He’s inclined to let Balarāma go back to Braja: "This earth has now become most fortunate because you, Balarāma, have touched your grass and bushes with your feet, touched your trees and creepers with your fingernails, and because you have graced her rivers, mountains, birds, and animals with your merciful glances. But above all, you have embraced the young cowherd women of Vṛndāvana between your two arms—a favor hankered after by the Goddess of Fortune herself, a favor hankered after by the Goddess of Fortune herself." So Kṛṣṇa was inclined, "All right, go back to Braja, you’ve made that place more auspicious by your presence, but above all because you’ve embraced the young cowherd women of Vṛndāvana with your two arms."

Yes, so a lot of sentiments, a lot of emotion going on in Dvārakā, all centered on Braja at that point. So Kṛṣṇa, according to the Bhāgavatam, with this pastime is described, as I mentioned earlier, Kṛṣṇa told Balarāma to go. He said, "Although I have consoled the people of Braja through the mouth of Uddhava, you must also give sweet instructions to those people of Braja. Now get up on your chariot alone and go quickly so that no one will see." We know that, you know, to console the residents of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa had sent his messenger Uddhava with messages to console them. But Kṛṣṇa said, "You must also give some sweet instructions to the Vrajabāsīs," and actually, Kṛṣṇa gave some letters to Balarāma as well to give to the residents of Vṛndāvana, as we’ll hear later.

So Balarāma left. He left with the Dvārakāvāsīs' permission, with Vasudeva and Devakī’s permission, and with Kṛṣṇa’s permission to fulfill that—in his intense desire to see Braja and be with the Vrajabāsīs. They all agreed, and his departure is very sweet. Although Kṛṣṇa said, "Go very quickly so no one sees"—actually, no one saw—but it’s very sweet because I was reading that as Balarāma left Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa accompanied him for some distance with tears in his eyes, and finally Kṛṣṇa turned around and returned home to his palaces in Dvārakā.

So *Harivaṁśa* and the Bhāgavatam state that Balarāma went so quickly from Dvārakā to Vṛndāvana that—quote—"other travelers on the road could barely see him on his chariot." He went so quickly that other travelers on the road could barely see him. That’s Bhāgavatam. And the *Harivaṁśa* says that before entering the forest at Koṭarāvana in Vṛndāvana, Balarāma stopped the chariot and he quickly changed his opulent princely dress of Dvārakā back into that of a cowherd boy in Braja, cowherdsmen in Braja. Now again, we remember he met the boys—like, "Wow, Balarāma, you’re back!" Balarāma said, "What’s the news? What’s the good news?" And the good news is you’re back. And that news spread very quickly. In material societies, bad news travels very quickly, but in spiritual cultures and spiritual societies, good news travels very quickly. The word spread that Balarāma had returned to Vṛndāvana, and everyone, of course, was happy but sad that Kṛṣṇa wasn’t with him. But it’s described that the Vrajabāsīs, knowing how attached Balarāma was to Kṛṣṇa, were grateful that he had still made the journey without Lord Kṛṣṇa. They were grateful for that. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives the following verse regarding this sentiment that the Vrajabāsīs had to Balarāma—that knowing how close he was to Kṛṣṇa, he left for their benefit to come to Vṛndāvana. This is how the Vrajabāsīs felt; this is a Tenth Canto, 65th chapter, verse 3. It’s so beautiful, this is the Vrajabāsīs: "Let us repeatedly glorify Lord Balarāma! Although he is the original personality of eternal bliss, Nityānanda, he felt pained by his love for the residents of Braja, and thus he went to see them, even at the cost of leaving Lord Kṛṣṇa." This is them reminiscing: "Let us repeatedly glorify Lord Balarāma! Although he is the original personality of eternal bliss, and that name is Nityānanda, he felt pained by his love for the residents of Braja, and thus he went to see them, even at the cost of leaving Lord Kṛṣṇa."

Then the Vrajabāsīs, they brought Balarāma to a quiet place, and they had him bathe, and they fed him, and they offered him betel nuts. And the next day, Balarāma separately visited all the houses of Braja to meet everyone. And the people said, "We had faith that today or tomorrow two of you would return. We have passed our time in that way only, Balarāma, maintaining our lives, holding your feet. We pray that one day you bring Kṛṣṇa back from Dvārakā." So it’s described that, you know, although Balarāma was happy in Vṛndāvana, he was also sad—he was missing Kṛṣṇa. The ācāryas put it so nicely: "Even if a blind man experiences happiness through all of his senses, he still is not completely happy because he cannot see. Similarly, even though Balarāma visited the home of all the Vrajabāsīs, he did not feel happiness within, for Kṛṣṇa was the Lord of his life, both to him and to the people of Vṛndāvana."

So he’s there, but something’s missing, just like a blind man; he can, you know, experience happiness, but not completely because he can’t see. And through his senses he can experience that, but because he can’t see, it’s not perfect. So in the same way, Balarāma’s back in Vṛndāvana, the cowherd boys were there, his Gopīs were there, everyone’s there, the Kṛṣṇa’s missing. Nice analogy. So let me remember, a few days later, Lord Balarāma went to see Kṛṣṇa’s Gopīs because, as we mentioned before, Balarāma has his group of Gopīs and Kṛṣṇa has his group of Gopīs. So Balarāma had a letter from Kṛṣṇa to Kṛṣṇa’s Gopīs. So Balarāma went there with the intention of pacifying them in their separation from Kṛṣṇa. So the Gopīs asked Balarāma—it’s like it touches your heart—"Balarāma, does Kṛṣṇa remember his friends, his father, his mother, his lovers, or even his house? We think not. But still, our hearts keep following him." This is *Vṛndāvana-vipralambha-bhāva*. He’s gone, and they have so many reasons to reject him, to forget him, they say, "Still our hearts keep following him." They said, "But what is the use of speaking about him?" And then they started to cry.

So, taking pity on the Gopīs, Balarāma took out Kṛṣṇa’s letter that he’d sent for them, and here’s the letter: "My dear Gopīs, all the messages that I have sent you after leaving are full of promises that I will return. My words cannot be untrue. I am most anxious to return, and quickly killing the remaining seven or eight enemies of the devotees, I will come to Braja in seven or eight days." So at that point, all the Gopīs, they looked at each other, and they said, "Hopefully... maybe this time it’s true." Even, you know, we’re still aspiring devotees; when we hear these things, you can hear your heart flutter, right? We’re just aspiring devotees, but Kṛṣṇa is, by definition, all-attractive, so something comes—that’s the proof of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it has to come, because it’s all true. So this, when they heard this message—"you know, I’ll be back in seven or eight days"—the Gopīs, their hopes came: "Maybe at this time it’s true."

So the ācāryas, they conclude that Balarāma visited Vṛndāvana, gave the residents of Vṛndāvana hope. And the ācārya says that by hearing such pastimes like this of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, this should also give us hope, that you know, by hearing, our hearts become purified and Kṛṣṇa consciousness becomes something more real, and our *rādha*, our faith, increases. Then it gives us hope that you know, we’ll become purified and with purified hearts will attract the attention of Kṛṣṇa. And they give the ācārya’s given analogy: they give the analogy of Balarāma’s plow and Kṛṣṇa’s flute. As we know, Balarāma carries a plow; plows the fields, takes out the weeds, prepares the... that’s what plows are for. He used it to drag the Yamunā closer, of course, and that’s a weapon. But they give the analogy that, well, the Kṛṣṇa—Balarāma carries a plow and Kṛṣṇa carries a flute, and they say that with the plow of Balarāma’s mercy, we can pull out the weeds of material desires in our hearts. And when our hearts are free of all material desires and we awaken our love for Kṛṣṇa, we will be attracted by the sweet sounds of Kṛṣṇa’s flute calling us back home, back to Śrī Vṛndāvana. And you can’t hear that flute if you have too many material desires. So Balarāma means the source of spiritual strength; we can pray to Lord Balarāma to get spiritual strength to relinquish whatever material desires are remaining in our hearts. And when our hearts are pure, then or that—that fertile ground is there—then that *bhakti-latā* seed of devotion can begin to grow by watering it with the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare...

And when Kṛṣṇa sees that there are pure desires to serve him and to love him, then the ācāryas say he’ll play his flute, and that flute will call us back to Śrī Vṛndāvana. And it’s so nice like that, the plow and the flute, giving us hope. This should give us hope. Kṛṣṇa says in the Gītā that we should engage in this process, as previous ācāryas have done. We’ve heard in śāstra how many great souls and how many fallen souls have achieved the Lord’s mercy and returned back home, back to Godhead. So like that, we hear these līlās, we hear these līlās, and they give us hope. We may be far from the goal, but we should never lose hope that we can make it. And I thought that in that regard, I always pick a verse to finish the lecture with. I think we can finish the day with a relevant quote from Śrīla Prabhupāda’s *Nectar of Devotion*, chapter 18.

And Prabhupāda, quoting previous ācāryas: "I have no love for Kṛṣṇa, nor for the causes of developing love of Kṛṣṇa—namely, hearing and chanting—and the process of bhakti-yoga, by which one is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa and fixing his lotus feet in the heart, is also lacking in me. As far as philosophical knowledge or pious words are concerned, I don’t see any opportunity for me to execute such activities. But above all, I’m not even born in a nice family. Therefore, I must simply pray to you, O Gopī-vallabha Kṛṣṇa, maintainer and beloved of the Gopīs; I simply wish and hope that some way or other I may be able to approach your lotus feet. And this hope is giving me pain because I think myself quite incompetent to approach that transcendental goal of life"—unquote.

And then Prabhupāda comments: "The purport is that under this heading of *āśā-bandha*, one should continue to hope against hope that some way or other he will be able to approach the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord." And we have that hope because someone’s leading us, isn’t it? Sure and certain, someone’s leading us to those sweet lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a very capable guide, perfected soul, Vrajabāsī. And so the conclusion is: we stick very close to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s lotus feet. One day, we’ll be able to see the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Vṛndāvana. One time, a disciple, he said to Śrīla Prabhupāda, "I want to always remain very close to your lotus feet," and Prabhupāda smiled; he said, "Then you have to be quick," he said, "because the lotus feet are traveling very fast all over this earth, spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So, keeping in the mood of—or qualified to share—our good fortune with others, we’ll always remain close to those lotus feet, and one day, we’ll have darśana of the lotus feet of all the residents of Goloka Vṛndāvana. Jaya! Thank you. Our wanderings took us through a couple of amazing forests today, and as I always say, I’ll continue with my studies, and we’ll continue our wanderings in a couple days. Thank you, thank you, thank you, Prabhus, for this wonderful opportunity.""