Many of you heard the story of how I got the right to tell his story. It was reported when I accompanied Śrīla Prabhupāda on a flight from New York to London and how his suitcase with books for translation was lost while the secretary disappeared.

All of you are busy and free, someone needs to be left to find the suitcase. I hid behind a pillar and no one saw me. Someone asked, "What about this guy?

We asked him to wait." At first, of course, it was a little difficult, but then I thought that, in fact, this is the instruction of my spiritual teacher. So, I'll be happy to wait. Madan Mohan Das pulled over the suitcase.

Of course, I didn't want to go to the temple because I told the devotees I would meet them at the temple. I had been hungry for several days. He sang rarely, and all the devotees accompanied him to the right to extend them there.

They went behind the parquet, froze in the distance. I remained in this cold airport in the dark with this unfortunate suitcase. You can't curse God because it was the books full of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He offered his respects, and everyone was confused.

What was this guy doing?

When I was studying it, it was heavy because it contained all the comments on the scriptures that had only been written. And that was very… such an active, determined person, divorced, cedar, with you, Vasilina, here's such music, your channel, and here's Phil.

Yes, it was not only heavy, but without it, it was also burdened with knowledge. This feeling of frustration. And I didn't even have money to take a cart, so I had to drag it. They had hooks at the blinds.

It was a typical London wind, and the rain was pouring down with loose, sweet drops. It was dark and damp, rainy. Finally, I stopped a taxi, put my suitcase down, got in, and the taxi driver asked, "Where are you going?" The young man was looking for the whole house, number seven on the shore.

The device. Some problems. The problem. Come on, and London, London traffic jams after Moscow's are the worst. They're ready to challenge us. And when I finally got to the temple, two hours later, the entire lecture and even the feast were completed.

One, you know, who prepared them for themselves. Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Good things will spread faster than bad things, unlike the material world. And the tigers, who knows everyone is too full. When I came in and the reserve soldiers, and when I came in and saw that there were all the casualties sitting behind the god, leaning on the wall, and there are fingerprints on their paper plates, and they are scraping off the last drops, and there will be nothing on their plates.

Accordingly, the cauldron was cabbage. I arrived with big suitcases. We asked, "And who are you?" "I am very hungry." He said, "Well, you know, the feast was so wonderful that it was hard to resist the second helping." I took second helpings several times.

Said that the gulag fashions were so wonderful that I had as many as twenty-five pieces of filming. I asked, although there was one left. He was blowing. Well, what white color?

He tapped himself on the stomach, which was so inflated that it jingled like a pair of punk or heights. They never said about falling. Gave the best lecture of all time. Such a guy, I felt completely miserable. But I didn't know that I would be luckier than anyone else.

I would never have anything interesting. I'm dragging this suitcase up three flights of stairs. There was a knock on the door. No one answered. And I opened the door, and I dragged the suitcase with my back. The secretary of the commission was shaking it.

And suddenly I heard the secretary's voice, "Propaganda, Kumara, be careful. Such a woman will get lost." I turned around, video collected, heating in front of me, resins older, disappeared. Short in stature, and a couple of words, because Bengalis are short.

Evidence of a frame on signs. Thanks to his spiritual power, thanks to pure love, the regiment. He seemed like a real giant. And although I physically looked down at him, it seemed to me that I was looking up at him.

And I remember that the thought flashed through my mind that although he would fall by seventy, he looks like a boy. I bowed. I have [music] on my back. I thought that if I ever got a tattoo, although I am categorically against any tattoos, but if I suddenly did it, it would probably be Kaluga, probably the outlines of a palm on my back.

I remember exactly how, in what place, he was such a custom in choosing such a dream. And I know that this is, of course, something. This is not normal. The statement of this valley and the foot is the material body, of which clap.

He said something and left. And after some speaking, I managed to get up. And I looked at the surprised secretary. "I'll disappear." "I need a craving." "Who said?" "Unbelievable!

I've never seen that a wire is the thing. He hit you so hard on the back." A button. "I'll say that I noticed the calculation of losses, site." "I asked what he said." "Triple H, and ate." He blushed. It was a very emotional moment of algebra and find M&M's.

He said about falling, he said that in this material world there are a lot of difficulties and obstacles, but when I take you spiritually, everything will be easy and airy. I often remember getting ready in the year. I think that it could be another one.

Which [music], an order, although we are devoted and for a long time in this world, we have to endure. I didn't ask for dates to go. Another question here, Aldridge, and although we decided to go to the spiritual world, no longer to live in a hut in the real world, nevertheless, external conditions continue to act on us.

That is, as well as how fan blades rotate by inertia, even if you unplugged it from the outlet. So you can see that we go through birth, illness, old age, a feeling that at the bottom affects death. Will come for.

No, we do not despair. We move on. We do not complain because we are on the same path, and one fine day he went to that place. It is attached easily and sublimely, as I say, the cap. We will have a claim for the spiritual world.