"*00266*.*
"We want to remind you once again that we have come to a very, very important place in Vraja; it is called Ter-kadamba. In Sanskrit, *tera* means to call, and *kadamba*, of course, means Kadamba trees. 5,000 years ago, and even 500 years ago, there were a large number of Kadamba trees here. This is not far from Nandagram, so Kṛṣṇa came here to graze the cows, and at the end of the day, He, along with His flute, called all the cows back; this is the origin of the name *tera*—to call. In fact, the Kadamba trees play a very significant role in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes. For example, the famous color of Kṛṣṇa's clothes is yellow, and it is compared to the saffron pollen that falls from the Kadamba flowers. There is also a drink made specifically from honey that bees bring from the Kadamba flowers; it is diluted with water and infused somehow so that it turns into a delicious, intoxicating drink that Kṛṣṇa drinks with the Gopīs. We know from all the stories that Lord Balarāma is attracted to, or is the master of, all intoxicating drinks.

He is the source of eternal pleasure. It is said that Balarāma sometimes gets drunk from His favorite drink, a wine infused with Kadamba flowers. Regarding this, in *Nectar of Devotion*, Śrīla Prabhupāda quotes Rūpa Gosvāmī, who writes that Balarāma says, "O My dear Kṛṣṇa, please tell me why the whole world is trembling and why this moon is becoming more elongated, and why are you all members of the Yadu dynasty laughing at me? Please return to me all the drinks that are made from the honey infusion of Kadamba flowers."

Rūpa Gosvāmī prays that Lord Balarāma, being in a state of transcendental intoxication, would be pleased with us. Kadamba trees play a very important role in *līlā*. For example, there is a description that He jumps from a Kadamba tree into the Yamunā in order to fight with Kāliya, and He also climbs a branch of a Kadamba tree in order to steal clothes from the Gopīs. Kṛṣṇa is known, as the verse says, for enjoying the *rāsa* dance in the Kadamba forest. There is also a description that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī really loves to watch Kṛṣṇa when He stands in the background of Kadamba trees. All *pujārīs* know that Kadamba flowers are ideal for weaving garlands, and of course, all Kadamba trees in Vraja are *kalpa-vṛkṣas*. I thought of a very good example: once, after Kṛṣṇa disappeared from one of the many *rāsa* dances, the Gopīs, trying to find Him, began to turn and ask the Kadamba trees where He was. Also, after Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, Yaśodā-mātā, being in great anxiety and madness, began to ask and swear by the Kadamba trees, asking where her son is. Let’s remember that these are not just Kadamba trees; these are devotees in the form of Kadamba trees. Therefore, it is not surprising that when Kṛṣṇa left, the Kadamba trees also missed Him and wanted to meet Him. 

Thus, in *Nectar of Devotion*, in the first chapter, Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that one devotee tried to calm a Kadamba tree because it was upset due to the fact that Kṛṣṇa had not touched even the shadow of this tree for a long time. The devotee, turning to the tree, said, "My dear Kadamba tree, don’t worry; after Kṛṣṇa defeats the Kāliya snake in the Yamunā river, He will come back again and fulfill your desire." This is so that you understand who the Kadamba trees are. But the most important thing is that when Kṛṣṇa sees a Kadamba tree, it reminds Him of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī by the color of her body. When Rādhārāṇī sees a Tamāla tree, it immediately reminds her of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, these trees are very significant in the pastimes of Rādhārāṇī.

Imagine when the time comes to collect all the cows. Kṛṣṇa quickly climbs one of the many Kadamba trees here and begins to call them. There are 900,000 cows in total. Kṛṣṇa has 900 beads on His counter. We have 16 beads on our counters, and He has 900,000 beads for each name of the cow. We heard from Śrīla Prabhupāda that Kṛṣṇa began to take care of the cows around the age of 5 years; this is called *paugaṇḍa*. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* (10.13.28) that from birth to the end of 5 years, this age is called *kaumāra* (childhood), and from 5 years to 15 years, this age is called *paugaṇḍa* (adolescence/youth). We recently celebrated the day of Gopāṣṭamī with you. This is the moment when Kṛṣṇa begins to graze the cows. It was a big event because people flew all over Vṛndāvana about it. Mother Yaśodā was very proud of her little boy because he was now quite big and would begin to take care of the cows; this was the pride of all of Vraja. She came up with a wonderful idea: on this day of the Gopāṣṭamī festival, to dress Kṛṣṇa like a prince. She dressed Him in multi-colored silk clothes. He had a huge turban on His head, a lot of precious jewelry, and also a large number of peacock feathers in the turban. But such clothes of a prince were very impractical for cowherd boys, because usually they wear very simple clothes and have a stick in their hands. Kṛṣṇa was very embarrassed; He said, "Mom, but cowherd boys don’t dress like that." Mom replied, "This is such a holiday, this is the day of your first outing with the cows. Everyone will celebrate, so I have to dress you up very nicely." 

And here He is, all dressed up, handsome, in silk clothes, with a huge turban, all in jewelry, and His mother brings Him out so that everyone can meet Him. Suddenly, the reaction of the cowherd boys is such that they start laughing loudly at Him. They had never seen Kṛṣṇa dressed up like this. They said, "Wow, He dressed like a prince to herd cows! I wonder who came up with this idea." The cowherd boys just fell to the ground and laughed; they were lying on the ground. Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes that, in fact, Kṛṣṇa was standing there and He just blushed red. His mother saw His condition, and because Kṛṣṇa is a deep blue color, when He blushes and turns red, this color is very clearly visible on His cheeks, because it is visible in contrast. 

Such silence was restored because everyone was perplexed by the sight of Kṛṣṇa in the role of a prince. Then, all the cowherd boys pounced on Kṛṣṇa and simply tore everything off Him—these royal robes—and they dressed Him as an ordinary boy. The only decoration they left Him was, of course, His flute, His peacock feather, a small horn for calling the cows, and a stick for herding them. Mother Yaśodā and all her maids were horrified at what was happening, but the cowherd boys were pleased and moved away to a distance, saying, "Now this is our Kṛṣṇa." We discussed this with you: the cowherd boys, being in *sakhya-rasa*, communicate very closely with Kṛṣṇa. They wake up very early, and after that, they come to wake Him up. Of course, Kṛṣṇa is sleeping very deeply at this moment because He is tired after meeting with Rādhārāṇī. 

They come to wake Him up, and I began to think: but if the cowherd boys wake Kṛṣṇa, who wakes the cowherd boys themselves? You know who the cowherd boys are? Every day, Lord Balarāma is the first one who wakes up in order to wake up all the cowherd boys. This can be read in the book *Preta-bhāva-ratnākara*; it is written there. He describes the cowherd boys and tells very interesting things about Vṛndāvana. Do you want to hear? You need to see the kingdom of King Vṛṣabhānu at dawn. In this place, there will be the sound of the roṣa (anger) of Balarāma, and then, after the morning rituals, they meet with Śrīdāmā and Sudāmā. They go to Nandagrāma to see Kṛṣṇa, crazy with *prema*. They go to the house of Nanda Mahārāja all together, and with great happiness, they shout, "Kṛṣṇa, wake up! Kṛṣṇa, get up!" And when Kṛṣṇa hears His friends, He wakes up. 

After that, Mother Yaśodā bathes Kṛṣṇa and dresses Kṛṣṇa, and then Kṛṣṇa has breakfast, which is prepared for Him by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Her girlfriends. A very interesting event happened when Kṛṣṇa first went out to graze cows on the day of Gopāṣṭamī. All the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana gathered to see Him go to the pasture to graze cows for the first time. This happened not only on Gopāṣṭamī, but since then it happened every day before Kṛṣṇa went into the forest. All the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana gathered to see Him off. In the evening, the whole city and the whole village gathered to meet Kṛṣṇa. It was a great festival in the morning and in the evening. This is the meaning of the fact that in Vṛndāvana there is a festival every day. The place where all the Vrajavāsīs gather to see Kṛṣṇa off or meet Him in the evening is called Nanda-baiṭhaka. Of course, Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā are the first to come to this place, and they are the last to leave. On that first significant day, when the boys and Kṛṣṇa went out to graze cows, Nanda and Yaśodā saw them off to the last and then turned around to go back. But Mother Yaśodā could not stand it; she turned around at the last moment and again tried to cling to the figure of Kṛṣṇa with her gaze and burst into tears. "Lālā, will you want to eat butter when you get home?" And the last thing she saw was Kṛṣṇa encouragingly waving His hand at her, saying, "Yes, Mom." 

Once I read that when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma went to graze the cows, Mother Yaśodā wanted to go after them, and Kṛṣṇa said, "Balarāma, look, there Mom is following us. You are the elder brother; go tell her." And Mother Yaśodā has such a stately figure that it is hard for her to walk quickly. Balarāma comes back and says, "Mom, you can't go with us," but she continued to follow them. And then Balarāma says, "Mom, you can't follow us; this *līlā* is only for boys." We talked about this: for different devotees, there are different places in Vṛndāvana because they are in different *rasas*, and these *rasas* do not mix. Someone was offended by the fact that Kṛṣṇa was leaving, and someone was rejoicing that Kṛṣṇa was coming. The residents of Nandagrāma were, of course, sad that Kṛṣṇa had left. And who was rejoicing that Kṛṣṇa would come? Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes about this. When Kṛṣṇa went into the forest with His cows, then all the trees, lianas, insects, inhabitants of the forest, and animals were rejoicing and saying that Kṛṣṇa had returned, Kṛṣṇa had come. He gives a very good analogy: just as when householders hear a *saṅkīrtana* group approaching, they are filled with ecstasy and offer their obeisances, similarly, all the trees and lianas of Vṛndāvana are filled with ecstasy at the moment they hear Kṛṣṇa's flute from afar. They immediately begin to offer their obeisances and bow down. It is a very good comparison, because you have probably experienced that moment, for example, when *saṅkīrtana* comes out from somewhere in the temple and they sing "Hari Hari," and you begin to feel inner ecstasy—you want to run out and join them. Also, the trees of Vraja were filled with ecstasy when Kṛṣṇa approached. The *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* adds that Tulasī experienced special joy, and we know that Tulasī is Samārīndā, and it was the Tulasī trees that experienced the greatest joy from Kṛṣṇa's approach. 

When Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma are grazing cows somewhere in the forests, sometimes Mother Yaśodā sends a certain Gopī to check if everything is okay with them. They try not to be discovered. They spy, they run up, and look out from behind a tree to see if everything is okay with the boys. Then she comes back, and Mom also says with trepidation, "Have you seen my boy? Is everything fine with them? What else is He doing there?" There are several famous verses from *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* where these Gopīs talk about what Kṛṣṇa is doing in the forest. We have so many different examples, and everything connected with Kṛṣṇa is so attractive; it is very easy to fall in love with Him. So, if Kṛṣṇa is your lover and someone asks you about what He is doing during the day, you must know what He is doing and be able to tell about it. If this is your true lover, you don’t even have to speculate because it is written in the king of all books, *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*. Who tells us this? The Gopīs themselves. 

"Tell us about the noble Mother Yaśodā's son, who is an expert in all arts and skillfully grazing cows, and has now invented a new style of playing the flute. When He presses this flute to His lips, which are the color of *bimbi* red, and takes the highest note and depicts new melodies, then Brahmā, Śiva, Indra himself, and other main demigods become confused upon hearing these sounds. Despite the fact that they are the most intelligent authorities of this universe, they cannot understand the basis and reason for such music, so they simply bow their heads." 

One might ask: why do we speak so much about cows? Why do we give them such an important place? Every time I see an image of Kṛṣṇa, He is always with cows. In the *Vedas*, they say that in Kali-yuga there are seven personalities who prevent all the inhabitants of Kali-yuga from going to hell. Kali-yuga is a very dark time, and there are seven things that keep civilization from going to the darkest depths: cows, brāhmaṇas, the *Vedas*, pious women, truthful and honest people, *tyāgīs* (those who perform austerities), and those who give donations. If there were no such people on this planet, then Kali-yuga would be even more terrible. 

Ter-kadamba is the best, ideal place for Kṛṣṇa's cows, and a certain kind of grass grows here which is very green and juicy; the cows adore it. The very first day when Kṛṣṇa went to graze the cows, He brought them here to Ter-kadamba, but He did not forget how the boys mocked Him at that moment when His mother undressed Him like a prince. He remembered everything and He wanted to take a little transcendental revenge. Behind us there is a beautiful lake called Śyāma-talā. He came here first, and He had the opportunity to cover the entire surface of the lake with green leaves, making it look as if it were solid earth. Imagine just a lake, its surface completely covered in leaves; it seems as if it is part of the earth. He said, "Oh my dear friends"—and it should be noted that friends were always ready to do everything for Him—"Could you run? Look there in the distance at the end of this field; there are beautiful flowering trees, could you bring me some?" Always looking for an opportunity to somehow serve Kṛṣṇa, the boys ran with the force of the wind, very, very quickly. As soon as they ran to the edge of the lake, they all fell into it. They were completely soaked, they were all wet, and Kṛṣṇa laughed. The one who laughs last laughs best. We talked yesterday about how the cowherd boys play, and their laughter carries everywhere in Vraja. Here, Kṛṣṇa Himself was laughing, and one describes that Kṛṣṇa's laughter began to shine from His smile. A large number of amazing events happened at Ter-kadamba.

The trees grow very beautifully here; they lean so much that they make like a house for us. It is currently winter, but in fact, it is still hot, and we are lucky that we can sit here in the shade of these trees. One more event takes place here because it is here that the first meeting between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa takes place during the day. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma come here to graze the cows, and Rādhārāṇī with her cowherd girls carries milk and dairy products on their heads to sell them at the market. It happens right there. At this moment, the boys are sometimes late because Kṛṣṇa's games are so hard and intense. This is the first *tera*—this is Kṛṣṇa's first call when He climbs a tree and starts playing the flute. In this way, He calls all those who overslept and were late for the first game. When all His friends have gathered, Kṛṣṇa waits for the moment when Rādhārāṇī and Her girlfriends begin to pass by. You know that Kṛṣṇa likes to joke; this is part of their games. The cowherd girls pass here to sell their dairy products, and they already suspect and feel that Kṛṣṇa is probably up to something. Kṛṣṇa sits there on the road and milks a cow, and as soon as Rādhārāṇī comes close, Kṛṣṇa immediately squeezes the teat of the cow in such a way as to splash Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's face. She screamed in surprise, and all the Gopīs ran away. At that moment, Rādhārāṇī was left without protection, and Kṛṣṇa, not at a loss, approached Rādhārāṇī and stole a kiss from her cheek. The cows were not visible, and this could be contemplated only by completely spiritual, liberated parrots from the very top of the tree. 

The next time when Kṛṣṇa climbs a tree to play the flute, He calls the Gopīs. He climbs the branches and plays the flute in order to inform them that the dairy products that they should bring Him for lunch are delayed. The third time, he climbs a tree and plays the flute in order to collect all His cows in the evening; He does this on the flute and by name. When this happens, it is described that it is around 5:30 p.m.; this time is called *godhuli*. After that, having collected everyone, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma go with the cows back to Nandagrāma. Despite the fact that the cowherd boys spent the whole day with Kṛṣṇa, they simply cannot be calmed down; they talk in great detail about what happened during the day, especially discussing all the intricacies of the battles that Kṛṣṇa had with the demons. 

When all the cowherd boys with Kṛṣṇa come closer to Nandagrāma, they begin to play all the musical instruments—flutes and their horns—announcing that they will soon return. All the inhabitants of Vraja come to the place where they were escorted. The cowherd women in their homes are overwhelmed with joy by hearing the sounds of the flute and horns and the cries of the boys; leaving all their household chores, they run towards the road. Nanda and Yaśodā also come, leaving all their duties; they run as fast as possible to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. Then, Mother Yaśodā meets her son, embraces Him, and takes Him home. Then each boy goes to his own home, surrounded by his loved ones. Śrīdāmā and Sudāmā embrace Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa pleases them with the words that He speaks. 

There are games of *nitya-līlā*—unmanifested games that are always happening, but we just cannot see them now. Because it is such a unique place, Rūpa Gosvāmī chose it for his *bhajana*, and it was here that he wrote one of his most transcendental literatures: *Vidagdha-mādhava*. He wrote about *sambhoga* (meeting with Kṛṣṇa) and *vipralambha* (separation from Kṛṣṇa). He sat under a certain Kadamba tree, and when he wrote down the story of how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī suffered in separation from Kṛṣṇa, at the same time, the Kadamba tree under which he sat began to shed its leaves and flowers, thus showing that she is also crying and grieving. When he wrote about that moment of the joyful meeting of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī with Kṛṣṇa, suddenly, unexpectedly, the tree began to blossom and new leaves began to quickly appear on it. 

While Rūpa Gosvāmī was here, the day of the appearance of his Guru, his elder brother, Sanātana Gosvāmī, came. But Rūpa Gosvāmī lived here in complete renunciation; he had no means, and he became worried, thinking, "This is the day of the appearance of my elder brother, my Guru, Sanātana Gosvāmī, and I have nothing to offer him." Tears dripped from his eyes, blurring the manuscript that he was writing. Suddenly, nearby, he saw a beautiful Gopī who was carrying some kind of food, and she said, "The elders in my village are worried that you live here on only berries, fruits, and roots, and we have prepared some food for you. Please accept it." Later that day, he offered what this girl brought him. Sanātana Gosvāmī and he honored it together, and as soon as they honored it, they experienced all the signs of ecstatic love. He said, "I once experienced all eight signs of ecstasy only when I drank the milk that Prince Gopāla gave me. Tell me please, where did you get these ingredients? Where did this food come from?" When they realized this was none other than Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī herself, they were overwhelmed. You will see here this very unique place; there is a diorama which depicts the moment when Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī comes and feeds them. 

Today I would like to finish with the words from *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta*. He writes: "I bow to Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī, who from their hearts manifested into this world the king and queen of Vṛndāvana, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. They revealed their games and descriptions in the Vedic scriptures. They are worshiped by all devotees in the mood of *anurāga*."""