"*00538*.*

Welcome back once again to our Kārttika parikramā 2022 here in the transcendental abode of Śrī Vṛndāvana. I have a group of close to 400 devotees with me from 12 different countries, and every day we are going out from Śrī Vṛndāvana to the greater Braja Maṇḍala area in eight buses. Usually, we drive for an hour or an hour and a half to get to these different places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Today, with great relish, we have come to the village of Kāmāi. The village of Kāmāi is the home of the śākhā-sakhīs. As we know, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī has eight very close girlfriends who attend to every need; they are called the aṣṭa-sakhīs. When Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī left Rāval, where she was born and grew up, to come to Barśānā with her parents, the sakhīs’ parents also moved, and they established eight villages around Barśānā. So, it is very nice to go on parikramā to Rādhārāṇī’s home, Barśānā—it is one of the main places that devotees go on parikramā—but it is also nice to visit the eight villages of her aṣṭa-sakhīs. They stay very close to Barśānā so they could render service at any time. So, we have come to Viśākhā’s village. Actually, I will share with you the names of the villages of all the sakhīs. Of course, Rādhārāṇī, Barśānā. And Lalitā-sakhī, her village is called Gāon, meaning village. And again, Viśākhā, her village is called Kāmāi, where we are now. Citrā-lekhā, her village is called Ciṭhīlā. Indulekhā, her village is called Añjanoka. Campakalatā, Karahalā is the name of her village. Raṅgadevī, which we visited a few days ago, her village is called Raṅgolī. Tuṅgavidyā, her village is called Dhabala. And Sudevī, one of the aṣṭa-sakhīs, her village is called Sunaharā.

So, Viśākhā is a very special personality. When we go to our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, we see the altars. On the left is Gaur-Nitāi, in the middle is Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, and on the far right is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-Sundarānanda. As we are looking at the deities, on the left is Lalitā, and on the right side of Rādhārāṇī is Viśākhā. Hey Viśākhā! It is described that she is the second most important of the eight gopīs. The first place, you could say, is Lalitā-sakhī; she is the main sakhī for Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She is very fierce in nature, she is very protective of Rādhārāṇī, and she sometimes challenges Kṛṣṇa, "Don't get too close, don't argue with Rādhārāṇī like that." Viśākhā is the second most important, but we shouldn't think that she is any less important than Lalitā-sakhī or any of the aṣṭa-sakhīs. They all have different services which they perform—a variety of services which makes everything complete for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

It is interesting that Viśākhā was born at the exact same moment as her dear friend Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. The Gosvāmīs are so kind; they give us so many transcendental details to enrich our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They have given us how old this personality is, how old that personality is, etc. So, we learn from the Gosvāmīs that Viśākhā is the same age as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. And what is that age of both of those girls? 14 years, 2 months, and 15 days of age eternally. Let's say Kṛṣṇa, He is eternally 16; as He grows up, He doesn't age beyond that. So, Rādhārāṇī is 14 years, 2 months, and 15 days of age in her maturity, and so it is with Viśākhā, etc. Nice details. It is described that Viśākhā's clothes are always decorated with stars and that her complexion is like lightning. That is a powerful statement. It is like you are out in the nighttime and then there is a storm, and then you know—wow, you look at the lightning, it attracts your attention. So, wherever Viśākhā is present, her ambience is just like light; it draws your attention. She has many services, it is described, but her main service, it is very interesting, is to resolve the lovers' quarrels between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa quarrel sometimes, but it is not like a quarrel in this world where "I'm right and you're wrong," and after the quarrel, "I don't like you anymore." No, all of these pastimes in the spiritual world are there just to increase each person's love for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's love for that personality. So, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa quarrel, but when they make up, it is very sublime. Viśākhā’s main service is to resolve these arguments; she is very expert at that. Actually, I was reading one pastime the other day where Rādhārāṇī became very angry at Kṛṣṇa, so she went to a kuñja and she was soaking in her anger, never going to meet Him again. And Kṛṣṇa heard that she would never meet Him again; He became very upset. So, He was trying to think or devise ways to meet her—it is a common pastime in Vṛndāvana—but He couldn't figure out how to do it because she was so angry. So, He went to Viśākhā, who is expert at resolving these quarrels, and He said, "What can I do?" So, she advised Him to dress up like a gopī and go to her. And Kṛṣṇa has a very beautiful voice, and she said, "You, in that dress of a gopī, you go next to her and you sing with your beautiful voice about her glories. Perhaps that will touch her heart and cool her down." So, that is what Kṛṣṇa did. Actually, the gopīs dressed Him up, and they said, "Now, what's your name?" He came up with the name Śyāmasakhī. So, He was able to enter into the grove because He was singing so sweetly and in a feminine voice. Rādhārāṇī called Him over, she sat down, and Kṛṣṇa was singing very sweetly. So then, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī wanted to reward this new gopī for her beautiful singing, so she took off a strand of pearls and she put it around Śyāmasakhī's neck—around Kṛṣṇa's neck. But as she was doing that, Kṛṣṇa, disguised as a gopī, grabbed Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's hand. He said something very beautiful; He said, "Dearest Rādhā, if you want to reward me, then don't give me a strand of pearls, but relinquish to me that necklace of anger so dear to you, the one you wear so close to your heart. That is the only gift that I desire." So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she realized, "Oh, this is Kṛṣṇa," and she gave up her mind like that, she gave up that necklace of anger. So, this whole plan was devised by Viśākhā just to give you one example of how many times she comes in between them and brings them together, because this is the mood of all the sakhīs. The younger girls have helped, the mañjarīs, they are all—their mood is to always bring Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa together. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can't bear separation, and neither can all these gopīs bear separation from Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So many pastimes in Vṛndāvana, it is just bringing the Divine Couple together so that everyone is happy. Of course, this is all very deep and very intimate, but these details have been given. It is an open secret—it is not a closed secret—because it is attractive to the mind in a spiritual way. Kṛṣṇa is called Manohara by His name, fame, pastimes, etc. He attracts us, He attracts our mind to Him. Manohara. So, these details are revealed. Although they are very deep, why? Because we have a very deep attachment to this material world. Birth after birth after birth, we remain enchanted even though we are suffering. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says in one of his songs, "Here I am in the middle of a holocaust, trying to enjoy myself." So, despite the complexities and material life, we remain attached; Māyā has many tricks. So, we need something very powerful to stop being attracted. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says you can only give up something if you get something better. So, what is better than material life? Spiritual life. And what is the essence of spiritual life? Ultimately, that we are all servants of Kṛṣṇa; we have to get back home, back to Godhead. So, when our Ācāryas describe the pastimes, the very deep, loving pastimes of the spiritual world, we give up our temporary, false love for this world and we enter into the reality of real love in the spiritual world. So, we can hear these things. Actually, Śrīla Prabhupāda, in his introduction to his *Kṛṣṇa* book, which is a summary study of the 10th Canto of *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, he says that it is remarkable, actually—he says that "One day, this *Kṛṣṇa* book, which is a summary," we have all read *Kṛṣṇa* book, "he said, 'One day, this *Kṛṣṇa* book will give solace to my devotees who are feeling,'" he says, "separation from Kṛṣṇa." One day, this *Kṛṣṇa* book will give solace to us when we're feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. So, he addressed these subject matters.

Another one of Viśākhā's services is to dress Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. She loves that service; she is the one who takes charge of dressing Rādhārāṇī. I was reading that one day she was dressing Rādhārāṇī, and Rādhārāṇī said, "You know, my dear Viśākhā, I am just hankering to smell the beautiful fragrance of my Divine Lord Kṛṣṇa. His bodily fragrance, everything about the Lord is transcendental and divine." So, she said to Viśākhā, "Just one day, I'd like to smell that fragrance of my beloved Lord again." So, when I read that, you know, naturally with an inquisitive mind and going in the proper direction, I was wondering, "What is Kṛṣṇa's transcendental form? What is the flavor of the Lord's body?" His body is *sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha*; it is made of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. It is not like a material body with an unpleasant odor; it is transcendental. I thought, "Where can I find that?" So, I was reading that afternoon in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, *Antya-līlā*, Chapter 19, I think it is verse 91, and there Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī quotes *Govinda-līlāmṛta* wherein I read the fragrance of the Lord. It satisfied my curiosity. I just like to share that with you because this is how Rādhārāṇī was thinking during the service that Viśākhā was rendering. So, here is a description of the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa's form:

> "The scent of Kṛṣṇa’s divine body surpasses the aroma of musk and attracts the minds of all ladies. The eight lotus-like parts of His body distribute the fragrance of lotuses mixed with that of camphor. His body is anointed with aromatic substances like musk, camphor, sandalwood, and aguru. Well, my dear friend, that Lord, also known as the enchanter of Cupid, always increases the desires of my nostrils."

So, that pastime—I mean, there are unlimited pastimes, and we can't cover them all—but Prabhupāda said one time, "You are trying to understand the nature of the ocean, so you take just a drop of the ocean, you taste it, you can understand the whole ocean is salty." So, by hearing these pastimes as revealed by Ācāryas, we get a little idea of what the spiritual world is like, and that grows into an intense desire to get back home, back to Godhead. That is why it is important to hear and chant, especially during the month of Kārttika. It is a special mercy in this month; it is a special time. Just like the hour before sunrise, it is described as the best time of the day for spiritual practices. So, this month of Kārttika is the best month of all the months for spiritual progress. And if you can come here or just hear about these pastimes in Kārttika, that will nourish your *bhakti-latā-bīja*.

So, she has different services, Viśākhā. Besides her service of advising Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in their loving affairs, she is also in charge of counseling Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī when she is feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. And again, she takes pleasure in dressing. So, she is a very dear gopī, a very dear sakhī of Kṛṣṇa, and it is important to hear about her because in a number of our temples—I know here in Vṛndāvana, when you go to the Vṛndāvana temple, the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir established by you—you first take darśana of Gaura-Nitāi, through whose mercy one can understand Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Then we take darśana of Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma in the center, and on the far right is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. And again on the left is Lalitā and on the right is Viśākhā. So many times, devotees come in front of these Lordshships, and we know about Kṛṣṇa as we are hearing about Him often. We talk about Rādhārāṇī, calling out to her for her mercy: *Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare*. We want to know who is that personality we are calling out to for mercy? She is standing in front of us on the altar with Kṛṣṇa. So, we like to hear about Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and then who is Lalitā and who is Viśākhā? Unless we hear about them, their transcendental nature, their characteristics, their pastimes, their service, which is kind of a blank stare... but we want to see Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa with knowledge; it is called *tattva*. First, we understand our position in relationship—God is very great and we are very, very small. We establish that relationship, and then more and more, as we hear about the Divine Couple, we want to render different types of services. As we know, in Vṛndāvana, when you become very advanced, you will naturally be attracted to the Lord as a servant, you will see Him as a friend, you will see Him as your child, you will see Him as your lover. This is the progressive state of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So, we have to hear about this person. How can you love someone you know nothing about? That is the beauty of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement spreading all over the world. Pious people believe in God, that is the first step, but unless you know about God's name, fame, form, pastimes, paraphernalia, how can you actually love Him? So, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is offering the greatest gift we have to the world, to explain everything about Him and His associates so people can love Him and go back home, back to Godhead.

So now, you have heard a little bit about Viśākhā. So, when you go to Māyāpur and you see on the altar with the eight sakhīs, the aṣṭa-sakhīs, you can look at Viśākhā with some understanding and appreciate her even more. You come to Vṛndāvana, please come to Vṛndāvana, run to Vṛndāvana when you can. You will see Viśākhā on the right there. Next time, now you know a little bit more about her. And I would like to finish with two prayers. One prayer by Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī addressing Viśākhā-devī; he writes:

> "I pray that Viśākhā-devī, whose voice is sweeter than the queen of cuckoos, may teach me the art of beautiful singing. I pray that by singing during a nocturnal rāsa dance, I will please the youthful Divine Couple, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and I will obtain from them and their affectionate associates many necklaces of golden jewels as my reward."

And finally, a beautiful prayer from... I like this prayer because he is praying in a very humble way that he is following and he has sinful desires—of course, he doesn't, but it is... we can memorize this prayer in our condition, where we are works in progress, we are getting there. But we, too, can pray to Viśākhā, and not just exalted mahā-bhāgavatas like Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, but we can also, in our own way, pray to her. And how to do so? We will take that advice from Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. He prays:

> "O bestower of benedictions, O causelessly merciful Viśākhā, within the society of the beautiful damsels of Vraja, you are the closest replica of Śrī Rādhā herself. Therefore, overlooking my hundreds of offenses, please be kind upon me and accept me as your maidservant."

So, when you come to Braja, please take darśana of Viśākhā here. We also know that she is so kind, she appears in other ways. Well, the Yamunā River, according to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the Yamunā River is an expansion, so her mercy is all-pervading. And we know that in the pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, from *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, we know that she appeared as Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya—Kṛṣṇa's past life—so she is very kind, and she has come to welcome us back to the Divine Abode of Goloka Vṛndāvana. Let us all follow in her footsteps. O glorious Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dhāma. Vrajapura Program of 2022. See you soon with another video. All right. Well, thank you.""