As part of our visit to ISKCON Mayapur this month, we decided to take a group of 90 devotees to visit the most holy place of Kanai Natashala. It's quite far away; it's near Rampur, and it's a six-hour drive north of our community.

It has actually been mentioned numerous times in *Caitanya-charitamrita* and also in *Caitanya-bhagavata*. One such mention in *Caitanya-charitamrita* is *Madhya-lila* 1.227: "Krishna Caitanya's pastimes.

In the morning, Lord Caitanya left and went to a place known as Kanai Natashala." While there, He saw many pastimes of Lord Krishna.

So, we all know, of course, that Lord Caitanya made His appearance here in Navadvipa, Mayapur, and He spent His childhood here. And when in time He became famous as Nimai Pandit, that was when Lord Caitanya was young. Sometime later, in His early twenties, His beloved father, Jagannath Misra, passed away.

And as per tradition, Mahaprabhu, as a *grihastha* at that time, went to Gaya in Bihar to perform *pinda*. *Pinda* is a ceremony whereby one's ancestors can be delivered from material bondage. Of course, Jagannath Misra didn't need to be liberated.

So, the actual reason, the underlying reason that Mahaprabhu went to Gaya, as explained by our *acharyas*, was to meet His spiritual master, Ishvara Puri. It's a long story, but after meeting Ishvara Puri, Lord Caitanya was initiated by him. And the actual initiation, interestingly enough, he was entered, he was initiated into the 18-syllable Gopal mantra.

Although Mahaprabhu, of course, appeared to deliver the world through the Hare Krishna Maha-mantra, historically, he was initiated, as was the custom at that time, by Ishvara Puri into the 18-syllable Gopal mantra, which is chanted by Vaishnavas, as we know, to worship Krishna.

It's part of the seven Gayatri mantras. Sri Jiva Goswami writes in his commentary on *Brahma-samhita* that one aspect of chanting the Gopal mantra is that it makes, quote, "the pure soul run after the all-attractive Sri Krishna, the Lord of Gokula, the land of cows and divine milkmaids," unquote.

And this was certainly the case with Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It's described in *Caitanya-bhagavata*, *Adi-khanda*, 17.115 to 137, that as a result of this initiation, Mahaprabhu was constantly calling out on his way back to Navadvipa, "O Krishna, where can I find You?

O Krishna, where can I find You?" Mantras are very powerful.

And in his book, *Sri Chaitanya Charitamrita*, Krishnadasa Kaviraja Goswami describes Caitanya Mahaprabhu's return from Gaya to Navadvipa, how he became mad for Krishna.

And Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura writes, as if a person who's witnessing Mahaprabhu's travel on the road from Gaya. So that person says, and I quote, "I saw the most extraordinary person on the road from Gaya. His form was very handsome, and he wore, just like a thundercloud.

His eyes rained tears, and he rolled about on the ground. His voice choked up in the ecstasy of love of God. All glories to that Lord." Now, on the way, by, you could say, by His own divine arrangement, Mahaprabhu came upon a Gupta Vrindavan.

Gupta Vrindavan means a hidden Vrindavan. Gupta means hidden, just like the word *gopi* comes from the word *gupta*. The *gopis* keep their love secretly in their hearts because of social customs. And, um, how was it described as a hidden Vrindavan?

Well, it's quite deep, but it's described as a hidden Vrindavan because Kanai Natashala here in Bengal is one of the places of Radha and Krishna's pastimes.

How is that possible?

In *aprakata-lila*, *aprakata-lila* means unmanifested to the material eye. Just like Krishna appeared, everyone could see Him, but when He left, He still remains in Vrindavan performing His pastimes, but unseen to the common man.

So Kanai Natashala is one of the places where Krishna had pastimes, but in *aprakata* [unmanifested].

Now, one day, while Mahaprabhu was in Kanai Natashala, on his way back to Navadvipa, he sat down in a solitary place and meditated on his 18-syllable Gopal mantra that he had received from Ishvara Puri. Now, as he did so, Krishna in all His glory suddenly manifested and appeared before him, fulfilling his desires.

He feared Krishna appeared to Caitanya Mahaprabhu as actually a young cowherd boy.

And many of you know there's a famous BBT painting of this pastime in the *Caitanya-charitamrita*, and there's a beautiful tree there, and Gopal is appearing before Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and actually, he embraces Caitanya Mahaprabhu. But then Krishna disappeared at that point.

Lord Caitanya fainted. It's all described. And after some time, he regained external consciousness, and shedding tears, he called out for Krishna, saying, "O my dear Krishna, O Hari, my life and soul, why did You go?

Where did You go after stealing my heart?

I saw You, my Lord, but now where, where have You gone?" So then, absorbed in sentiments of ecstatic love, Mahaprabhu recited a number of beautiful verses about Krishna, and after that, he rolled on the ground crying out very loudly, "Where did you go, leaving me behind, my dear Krishna?" Described in our scriptures that Krishna is very much loved by Srimati Radharani.

But being the object of that love, he can't understand the depth of her love. So, wanting to understand God's love for Him, Krishna appears as Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

So, in this way, we see, just as Radha is always pining for Krishna, Mahaprabhu is also always pining for Krishna.

Day after day like this, he had two reasons for coming: to experience about His love and to spread the chanting of Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna Krishna, Hari Rama, Hari Rama, Rama Rama, all over the world.

So, this particular point where Mahaprabhu had *darshana* of Krishna at Kanai Natashala, the *acharyas* say that Mahaprabhu became very agitated in ecstatic love and floated in the ocean of devotional feelings of separation from Krishna.

And it's also described that essentially, this is interesting, interesting, it was the first time that Lord Caitanya became fully overwhelmed with ecstatic love. The *acharyas* say, thus setting the stage for His future *sankirtana* for spreading or sharing such love all over the world.

Krishnadasa Kaviraja Goswami writes in *Caitanya-bhagavata*, *Madhya-khanda*, verses 180 to 195, very beautifully: "Quote: It was this encounter, it was this encounter with the hidden Vrindavan, Kanai Natashala, that shaped Lord Caitanya and impelled him to start his sankirtana movement.

Before visiting Kanai Natashala, he had played the role of an invincible scholar, but after being in Kanai Natashala, he adopted the role of a devotee with an extraordinary devotion never before seen. Krishna then," he continues, "later returning home to Navadvipa, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu started the sankirtana movement in the mood of searching for Krishna." Now, after all this historical, overwhelming experience, Mahaprabhu will return to Navadvipa, and everyone could see a definite change in him because he got initiated into mantras.

Mantras change the heart. So the inquirer from him now, you know, what caused such a transformation during his visit to Kanai Natashala?

So with tears in his eyes, Mahaprabhu said, "While returning from Gaya, I came to a village named there. I saw a young boy of exquisite beauty. He had a glowing dark complexion, the color of the bark of a *tamala* tree.

His curly hair was decorated with wild flowers. He wore a beautiful crown with a peacock feather stuck in it. All his jewelry and gems shined brightly like the sun." That was his vision. So when he said that to the residents of Navadvipa, he again fainted, and the devotees picked him up, chanting Krishna, Krishna.

And it's written that they pacified him to some extent, but he still couldn't remain calm, always searching for Krishna. "Where is Krishna?

Where is Krishna?" he cried out.

So the Navadvipa devotees suggested at that time that Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself lead them in *kirtan*, just so he could be pacified, because when you're chanting Hare Krishna, you're having direct association with the Lord because He's present in the sound of His name.

So he did like this, and he was somewhat pacified. And the *acharyas* say that in this way, he started the *sankirtana* movement, which ultimately, by chanting the Hare Krishna Maha-mantra, brings one to the stage of searching for Krishna and loving Krishna.

In *Caitanya-charitamrita*, *Madhya-lila* 17, text 60-61, this particular mood of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, which was manifested at Kanai Natashala, it's described by Kaviraja Goswami, quoting Lord Caitanya. Kaviraja Goswami writes, "Alas, where is Krishna, the treasure of my life?

Where is the lotus-eyed one?

Alas, where is the divine ocean of all transcendental qualities?

Alas, where is the beautiful, blackest youth dressed in yellow garments?

Alas, where is the hero of the *rasa* dance and the milkmaids?

Where shall I go?

Where can I find You?

Please tell me, I shall go there." In summary, it is the place where Lord Caitanya had *darshana* of Krishna as he returned to Navadvipa from Gaya.

And upon returning to Navadvipa, as the Yuga Avatar, He introduced the *sankirtana* movement of chanting Hare Krishna, whereby any soul anywhere in the world can eventually see the Lord face to face, as Mahaprabhu Himself did.

So, we are very fortunate. We were there. We went to this place and we saw the tree, the same tree, it's 500 years old, it's still there. And Śrīla Bhakti Siddhanta Sarasvati Thakura went there in the 1930s and established a stone plaque there, saying that this was the actual place of this pastime, and he also installed some commemorative lotus feet of Lord Caitanya on that spot.

So, we saw that. And it's gone. It's a little bit of a long story, but in the 1990s, ISKCON acquired that property. So, we have our ISKCON center there. It's a little remote, not a lot of people go there, but a beautiful temple with Radha-Krishna deities and a beautiful view of the Ganges and so forth and so on.

So, we were very enliven to have this special *darshana* of Kanai Natashala and the tree and the plaque and everything, and we're very happy to share it with you in this video and hope that one day you too can go and visit this most auspicious place of Kanai Natashala.

All by the mercy of. Hare Krishna.

Thank you, David.