"*00482*.*
"# Why Did It Take You So Long To Save Me - Surat, South India

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

I’d like to begin by thanking the organizers for inviting me here this evening. It’s very nice to be with all of you ecstatic devotees. There are so many devotees in Gujarat—I can’t count them all! I’m sure this is pleasing Śrīla Prabhupāda very much. Everywhere I go, there are Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities; this is showing that Mahāprabhu’s proclamation that His holy names would go to every town and village of the world is coming true. 

So this evening, I’d like to speak by the mercy of my spiritual master, Śrīla Prabhupāda. From the 8th Chapter, verse 15:

> *mām upetya punar janma duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*
> *nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ*

"After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogīs in devotion, never return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the highest perfection."

Purport by Śrīla Prabhupāda: "Since this temporary material world is full of the miseries of birth, old age, disease, and death, naturally he who achieves the highest perfection and attains the Supreme Planet, Kṛṣṇa-loka or Goloka Vṛndāvana, does not wish to return. The Supreme Planet is described in Vedic literature as ādyā and akṣara and paramā gati. In other words, that planet is beyond our material vision and it is inexplicable, but it is the highest goal, the destination."

Mahātmās, great souls, receive transcendental messages from the realized devotees and thus gradually develop devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and become so absorbed in transcendental service that they no longer desire elevation to any of the material planets, nor do they even want to be transferred to any spiritual planet. Mahātmās, they only want Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s association, and nothing else. That is the highest perfection of life. This verse specifically mentions the personalist devotees of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. These devotees in Kṛṣṇa consciousness achieve the highest perfection of life; in other words, they are the supreme souls.

So, in this famous verse of the *Bhagavad-gītā*, Kṛṣṇa gives His opinion about the nature of this world in which we live. He says it is a temporary place full of so much suffering. So we should take His word for what it is; He is the Supreme Person, His words are perfect and complete, and logically, who knows the world better than God? He created it, He is maintaining it, and under His will, it will be unmanifest in a period of time. Doesn’t the architect of a building know that building that he designed better than anyone else? Doesn’t the owner of a patent know the product better than anyone else? We all know Steve Jobs; he’s left this world, but everyone knows Steve Jobs. When he spoke about Apple products, everyone listened. And when Bill Gates speaks about Microsoft products, people listen. So, when the Creator of this cosmic manifestation speaks about this world we live in, we should listen to Him. It’s temporary and full of so many problems. 

Of course, this is not the first time that you’ve heard this. All the speakers in *Gītā* and *Bhāgavatam* repeat it over and over and over again, but the sages say that repetition of a point is necessary to fully understand it. 

There’s a difference between *jñāna* and *vijñāna*. *Jñāna* means knowledge and *vijñāna* means realized knowledge. Like a new devotee will say, "I am spirit soul, I am not the body," but a realized advanced devotee, he’ll say, "I am not this body, I am spirit soul, part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa." So, how do we get from *jñāna* to *vijñāna*? Try to learn these truths by approaching a spiritual master, inquire from him submissively, and render service to him. The self-realized souls can give you knowledge because they have seen the truth. So the important word is "serve." You ask questions to the spiritual master, you get his instructions, and you serve those instructions. And by serving those instructions, the *jñāna* becomes *vijñāna*. You hear the spiritual knowledge—"Okay, sounds good"—but by serving the order of the spiritual master, that knowledge becomes like a light on. "Oh, now I can understand!" 

In days of yore, in previous ages in this country, it was much easier. The student would live in the āśrama of the Guru from 5 to 25 years of age, and the spiritual master would only have to repeat something three times, and their students would not only understand it, but by serving the Guru in the āśrama, they would realize it. But this is not Satya-yuga, this is not Tretā-yuga, this is not Dvāpara-yuga; I’m sorry Prabhupāda, this is Kali-yuga.

> *tataś cānudinaṁ dharmaḥ*
> *satyaṁ śaucaṁ kṣamā dayā*
> *kālena balinā rājan*
> *naṅkṣyaty āyur balaṁ smṛtiḥ*

"O King, religion, truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy, austerity, duration of life, physical strength, and memory will diminish day by day because of the powerful influence of the age of Kali."

This is bad news. If you read the newspaper or you go on the internet, there’s so much bad news, but this is the worst news: that we live in the age of Kali, and all good things diminish day by day. Śrīla Prabhupāda told my godbrother, Viṣṇujana Mahārāja, that in the advanced stages of Kali-yuga, there will hardly be anything to eat because the impious, sinful people will have killed off all the bulls and the cows. Because there’s no bulls, there’ll be no way to plow the fields and get grains and fruits and vegetables. They exploited the Earth to the point where there’s no oil left inside Mother Bhūmi, so their tractors won't work, and there’s no cows and bulls to plow the fields, so there’ll be no food. So Viṣṇujana asked, "What will people eat?" Prabhupāda’s eyes got very big; he said, "They will eat each other." It’s hard to believe, but things could get that bad. But two or three hundred years ago, if people knew how bad the Earth is now, they wouldn’t believe it. Because of our artificial life standard and because of greed, there’s this problem with the climate—it’s getting hotter and hotter and hotter—and they wouldn’t think 300 years ago this was possible.

One of my godbrothers said to Śrīla Prabhupāda, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I just want to distribute your books in this lifetime. In fact, I want to distribute your books life after life after life." That’s a nice sentiment, isn’t it? Prabhupāda wanted his books distributed, so the disciple said, "Me, you’re my Guru, life after life I want to distribute books life after life after life." Prabhupāda said, "No," he said, "I want my disciples to go back home, back to Godhead. It’s going to get worse and worse. Kali is going to get worse and worse." He said, "You try to go back to Godhead in this lifetime." Prabhupāda wanted his books distributed, but he also wanted each one of us to become pure devotees. We stress the importance of Prabhupāda’s instruction to distribute books, but don’t forget he wanted us to read the books, and practice the books, and go back to Goloka-dhāma.

Just like one of my heroes in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. You know the story. He appeared just after Lord Caitanya departed this world. Narottama, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Śyāmānanda Paṇḍita—they carried on the *saṅkīrtana* movement after the Lord left, and their lives are amazing. What stalwart preachers they were! But if you read the poems of Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, you’ll see that he was a very deep devotee; he was *rasika-bhakta*, a lover of Rādhārāṇī. So we want to become like Narottama; he’s our hero, but it begins by understanding. 

One time Prabhupāda said, "This material world is no place for a lady or a gentleman." You’re never going to become Kṛṣṇa conscious if you’re attached, if you’re mystified—"Oh, this world has so much to offer me." Nope. We’re very fortunate to have this advice of Lord Kṛṣṇa in the *Bhagavad-gītā* that this world is temporary and full of suffering. We’re blessed to hear that. 

Because sometimes when you look at this world, it looks nice, huh? It looks nice. For example, when you look at a beautiful forest—well, you go to the foothills of the Himalayan Mountains, so many beautiful lakes, many trees and flowers—it looks so nice, this world. What is Kṛṣṇa talking about? But a saintly person, he sees with his ears, not his eyes. What’s actually happening in that beautiful forest? Actually, what’s happening in that beautiful forest, there’s a bitter struggle going on for there. Every living entity is food for another living entity. 

*Jīvo jīvasya jīvanam*: those who are devoid of hands are prey for those who have hands; those devoid of legs are prey for the four-legged; the weak are the subsistence of the strong, and the general rule holds that one living being is food for another. That’s what’s happening in the forest. Animals, mostly, they’re looking for food; it’s called *anveṣaṇa*. *Ana* means their prime objective in life is to fill their stomachs. Even the pretty trees are engaged in a bitter struggle for water and light. There’s a lot of competition with other trees, so they’re struggling for water and to get the light of the sunshine. There’s a bitter struggle between the beautiful trees. Where’s the enjoyment? It’s a struggle for existence. And in this forest of illusion, we’re engaged in the same business. Prabhupāda wrote in his *vyāsa-pūjā* offering to his Guru, "Struggle for existence, the human race; the only hope is divine grace."

Gosvāmī in the *Bhāgavatam* describes material enjoyment as *gandharva-pura*, a house in the sky. There’s no house in the sky. Elsewhere, he describes it as the egg of a horse—wait a minute, horses don’t have, don’t give eggs; chickens give eggs. So what’s he trying to say? You’re thinking there’s enjoyment here, but there’s no enjoyment. Gosvāmī says the conception of good and bad in this world is wrong; it’s all bad. Nevertheless, Māyā-devī, she’s very expert in making the whole thing appear very nice. Even great demigods are confused by her ingenious schemes. That’s, isn't that the first verse of *Bhāgavatam*? By Him, Kṛṣṇa, even the great sages and demigods are placed into illusion, as one is bewildered by the illusory representations of water seen in fire, or land seen on water. So, if great personalities like Brahmā and others can be illusioned by this world, what about little old you and me?

To show the power of illusion, Prabhupāda once told the story of the great Duryodhana—how Duryodhana, the great teacher, was illusioned. One time, Duryodhana, he wanted to visit the imperial palace of the Pāṇḍavas, which had been constructed by Maya Dānava. Now, Maya may have been who he was, but he was very intelligent. If you read the Mahābhārata, you know Duryodhana was very intelligent. So when he entered into this palace of the Pāṇḍavas, he saw what he thought, as he was walking into the palace, a body of water. So as he was walking towards that body of water, he walked into it and he lifted up his royal robes so as not to get wet. But actually, by the arrangement of Maya Dānava, it wasn’t water; it was an amazing crystal floor. It appeared like water, but it was just a crystal floor. So what he did is he walked in and pulled up his coat, and all the ladies in the palace saw his underwear. They were laughing. Then he kept walking and he came to a real pool of water, but he thought, "Oh, this is crystal again." So he thought he could walk across the crystal, so he didn’t pull up his robes; he just walked and boom—fell into the water. You see, illusion—very powerful, Maya Dānava. So next, he came to a crystal door; he thought it was open because it was crystal, he could see through it, he thought there’s no door there, and bumped his head into it. Then he approached what appeared to be another crystal door, and instead of bumping into it, he tried to open it, but there was no door, and he fell on his face. 

So he’s a great personality in one sense, and because of this, all the ladies in the palace, they were laughing; he was so embarrassed. But in laughing at this story, we’re laughing at ourselves, because we’re still somewhat influenced by the tricks of Māyā. Māyā’s greatest trick is to cause us to think, "I am the body." It’s not easy to overcome this illusion that I am the body. Oh no, I’ve been a devotee for 25 years, I’ve given many lectures, someone may say that I’m not the body, I know I’m not the body. But let me say that if the idea of sense gratification comes into your mind and you contemplate it even for one moment, you’re still in the bodily concept of life. Prabhupāda says sometimes in a lake, if you look at the lake, little bubbles come up from the dirt at the bottom of the lake—little bubbles, you see. So sometimes, because of our many births in this material world, these little ideas of sense gratification may appear in your mind. "Where did they come from? I’ve been chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa for so many years, what’s going on?" It will happen, naturally; we’re still in this world, we’re not out of danger. So sometimes material thoughts may come to your mind, and if you understand you’re not the body, you’ll say, "No, go away." And if you’re not so advanced, you may daydream—"Oh no, I shouldn’t think like that"—but you did, so you’re still on the bodily concept. 

These material desires are unwanted guests. Just like if someone comes into your home to spend the weekend—some relative—and you’re just really upset that this distant relative is there, you have some problems with him or her, how do you get rid of them? It might be too impolite to say "go away," you don’t want to do that. So I’ll tell you how to get rid of unwanted guests: don’t feed them. Right? Your mother-in-law is staying with you and you say in the morning, "In this house, we don’t have breakfast." She says, "Okay, I’ll fast till lunch." "In this house, we don’t have lunch." "Oh dear, I’ll have some snacks." "No snacks allowed in this house." "All right, then I’ll wait to dinner." "No dinner in this house." So she says, "Well, I’m leaving then." "Oh, I’m so sorry to hear that," in a cynical way I’m saying. She says "I’m leaving," "Oh, that’s too bad." 

So no offense to mother-in-laws, I’m sure there’s many wonderful mother-in-laws out there; I’m just using them as an example. If you don’t want unwanted guests in your house, don’t feed them. So if you don’t want these unwanted guests, these material desires, in your mind, don’t feed them. Don’t think about them. Just ignore them and they’ll go away. As long as we’re in this world, these thoughts may come, but we’re not going to entertain them. That’s devotion: "No, go away." If sense gratification comes to the mind, we should think like Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura:

> *bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir*
> *anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ*
> *prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syuḥ*
> *tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo 'nu-ghāsam*

"Since my mind has been engaged in the transcendental loving service of Kṛṣṇa, realizing ever-new pleasure in Him every moment, whenever I think of mundane pleasure, I spit at the thought, and my lips curl in distaste."

So this is the trick of Māyā, to make us think, "Ah, I am the body; eat, drink, and be merry for tomorrow we die." But you may be one of those rare souls, a devotee of the Lord, who can overcome that illusion and realize that you’re part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. 'Cause Māyā has another trick—she has lots of tricks up her sleeve—but her, the two big tricks that she offers the conditioned soul is to think "I am the body," the second trick is to think "I am God." Both are big illusions. 

"I am the body"—that’s a big illusion. But you know, in your country here, in Bhārat, in Bhārat India, there are so many persons who are thinking "I am God." Very popular, Śaṅkarācārya—with all due respect—he promoted this illusion that "I am God." Mr. Māyāvādī, I’m not a great philosopher, but I have one question for you: if you’re God, why are you struggling in this world with birth, disease, old age, and death? Is that one of your *līlās*, Mr. God, to suffer in this world? No, God is the Supreme Enjoyer. You’re not God; you’re a dog. Yeah, "Woof, woof, I am God. Woof." 

So to overcome these two misconceptions—that I am the body and I am God—it’s not easy. It takes discipline, it takes the determination in spiritual life to overcome these two obstacles to becoming an unalloyed lover of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It’s possible. *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* Madhya-līlā 19.146 and 147 say the following:

"Among the followers of Vedic knowledge, most are following the process of fruitive activity and distinguishing between good and bad work. Out of many such fruitive actors, there may be one who is actually wise. Out of many such millions of wise men, one may actually become liberated, *mukta*. And out of many millions of such liberated persons, a pure devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa is very difficult to find."

That’s you. You won’t admit it, you’re very humble, but you’re special souls who are not attracted to the materialistic way of life or the illusion of becoming God. You turned your back on material existence to the sunshine of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So how to achieve that goal of becoming a pure devotee and not interested in any illusion? Well, one of the ways is to associate with devotees, because Vaiṣṇava devotees have understood the process, the yuga-dharma, the means of becoming liberated and becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious. They have learned that secret—that in the age of Kali, the most easiest and sublime means of rising above illusion, becoming enlightened, is to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda encourages us in the same way: give up the association of evil persons, partake of the association of saintly persons, perform pious deeds both day and night, and always remember the flickering nature of this material world. That’s a simple process. Chant, dance, chant, dance, have some guḍa-feasts; very simple. But you have to be patient, because it takes time to *tarpana*—purify—the nasty things within the heart before the *prema* arises. 

Śrīla Prabhupāda once said to one of my godbrothers, "If I revealed all the material attachments that are there in your heart, you’d faint." But this mantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa, is so powerful; it not only purifies the hearts of sinful reactions, it uproots the material desires which are the cause of those sinful reactions. And what’s more, when the garden’s cleaned, the beautiful *bhakti-latā-bīja*, the pure seed of bhakti, your devotion for Kṛṣṇa, it can grow very healthily, very quickly. But it takes everything you’ve got to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Just like if you’re a businessman—many persons in Gujarat, they’re famous as businessmen; a Gujarati can go anywhere in the world, even the North Pole, and make money—but to the same degree that you want to make money in this country, in this region here in Surat, with the same determination, you have to try to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. You can’t hold back even a little bit. It’s called *śaraṇāgatam*; it means fully surrendered. 

And in order to inspire us how to give up everything and just depend on Kṛṣṇa, there’s a beautiful, beautiful story. Just to give up everything and just depend on Kṛṣṇa: "Kṛṣṇa, help me, I want to be Your devotee." 

Kṛṣṇa, once, Draupadī came to Lord Kṛṣṇa. It was just after her painful experience of having been lost in the gambling match and humiliated by the attempt of Duḥśāsana to strip her naked in a public assembly. She came to see Kṛṣṇa afterwards. She said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, why did it take You so long to save me?" You all know, it’s in your DNA, you know how Draupadī was saved. Kṛṣṇa eventually incarnated as her śāṛī so she couldn’t be stripped naked in the front of so many men, but it took some time for Kṛṣṇa to appear as the śāṛī. "Kṛṣṇa, why did You take so long to save me? You could have in the very beginning become the śāṛī and saved me." 

So Kṛṣṇa said, "Listen carefully, Draupadī. At first, you called out My name, 'Oh Kṛṣṇa, oh Kṛṣṇa, He Kṛṣṇa.' Not 'oh Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,' like sometimes we chant 'Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.' If I call you, you know, I say, 'Oh, Mr. Sharma, come here,' if I say, 'Mr. Sharma, come here,' how will you come? If I say, 'Mr. Sharma, come here,' no, you’re not going to come. 'Mr. Sharma, please come!' So if you chant 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, come Kṛṣṇa!' So Draupadī, you said My name, but then you took shelter of Arjuna and Bhīma. You said, 'Arjuna and Bhīma, can’t you see what is happening to your wife? They are violating my chastity right before your eyes! Arjuna, Bhīma, do something!'" 

So Kṛṣṇa said to Draupadī, "So I thought at that time I wasn’t really needed because you weren’t calling Me; you were calling Arjuna and Bhīma." Then Draupadī said, "Okay, but after that You should have come." Kṛṣṇa said, "But after that you took shelter of Droṇa, the teacher of the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas. You said, 'Droṇa, you’re a brāhmaṇa, how can you tolerate this?' Draupadī, again, you weren’t calling Me, so I thought I wasn’t needed. After that, you took shelter of Bhīṣma, the powerful warrior and most respected great-grandfather. He wouldn’t help. So then you went to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and then you went to all the kings. So I thought I wasn’t needed because you were asking the help of all these personalities. And then, finally, you tried to protect yourself by holding your śāṛī with two hands. So I was thinking, 'Draupadī thinks she’s very strong, she thinks she can fight Duḥśāsana, maybe I should go?' Then you let go of your śāṛī, you held up one of your hands and called out to Me. So I thought, 'Draupadī, you’re calling Me, but you’re still holding on to a part of your śāṛī with your own hand, believing in your own strength.' Only when you raised both of your hands to let go of your śāṛī—raised both hands and called out to Me, 'He Kṛṣṇa, He Govinda!'—did I come. Why did I come? Because I knew you only wanted Me. I knew you only wanted Me; you were only dependent on Me. So as you gave your full self to Me, I gave My full self to you in the form of that śāṛī." 

It’s very interesting. We hear the Daśāvatāras—Matsya, Kūrma, Narasiṁha—here’s another incarnation not mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Kṛṣṇa comes in the śāṛī-incarnation! He’s a supreme mystic. "And all of them, as they surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly," Kṛṣṇa says. So if you only want Kṛṣṇa 50%, just surrender 50%. If you only give 75%, you’ll only get 75%, Kṛṣṇa says. But if you give everything to Kṛṣṇa, your full self, Kṛṣṇa will give His very self to you, and that’s perfection of life. 

So we have to be like Draupadī. We have to give everything up and just call out to Kṛṣṇa to please deliver us from this duḥkha, this temporary material existence. So raise your hands and repeat after me: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. 

Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda! Jaya! Śrī Harināma-saṅkīrtana ki jaya! Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you.""