"*00523*.*
"Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana.

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine. Namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.*

All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.

So, the other day, while discussing the Śāradīya Rāsa-līlā pastime, we stated that it takes place in the autumn season. At that time, we mentioned that śāstra says there are six seasons in Vṛndāvana present at all times, existing separately in different forests for the pleasure of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We will mention them again: the six seasons are known poetically as the joy of monsoon, the pleasure of autumn, the satisfaction of winter, the happiness of the dewy season, the beauty of spring, and the auspicious season of summer. 

That is so nice. I was reading that the ācāryas say these seasons are particularly important to Kṛṣṇa, for each of them in their own way allows Him to associate more closely with Śrī Rādhā, who is the source of His ultimate happiness. These ācāryas write that in summer, Śrī Rādhā is the camphor, sandalwood paste, and moonlight that cools Kṛṣṇa’s limbs. In autumn, she is the enchantment of the rāsa dance, enjoying pastimes with the king of dancers. In winter, she is the woolen yellow garment that protects His divine body from the chilly winds. In spring, she is the charming beauty that makes Him blossom with happiness. In the monsoon season, she is the graceful malāra melody amidst torrential rains that give delight to His heart. In the dewy season, she is the supreme Goddess of Fortune who defeats Kṛṣṇa in pastimes of love.

So, six wonderful seasons in Śrī Vṛndāvana. However, it is very interesting that further research reveals there are actually three other seasons, and they are when autumn and winter appear together as a pair, when the dewy season and the spring appear together as a pair, and when summer and monsoon combine together as a pair. Each of those pairs is another season; in this way, Vṛndāvana has nine seasons. 

But here is a surprise—this is a real surprise—there is a tenth season as well. What is that? It is when the six seasons, along with the three pairs of seasons, all appear together at the same time in the unmanifest pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Unmanifest pastimes are called *aprakaṭa* pastimes, and these pastimes go on even after Kṛṣṇa leaves for Mathurā and down to the present day. They are always happening here in Vṛndāvana, but they can only be seen with spiritual eyes. So, the ācāryas say that at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, from time to time, all nine seasons are present at the same time, making a final tenth season in Vṛndāvana. Wow.

So, I thought today we could discuss one season in detail, and that is the winter season, because here in India and in the northern hemisphere, it is wintertime. To set the stage, I would first like to explain that whatever season Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa visit in the various forests—because these seasons appear in different forests—their pastimes most often take place in select small gardens or groves called *kuñjas*, where they relax and entertain each other with conversation, loving words, riddles, and jokes. We actually sing about these *kuñjas* daily just before Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: *Jaya rādhe mādhava kuñja-bihārī*. 

All glories to Rādhā and Mādhava, who enjoy together in the *kuñjas* of Vṛndāvana’s forests. But one might ask, what exactly makes a *kuñja*? Our ācāryas have written that the corners of a *kuñja* are formed by four tall Kadamba trees which have many leafy branches that hang down to make natural canopies—you can see this in your mind—and each of these four trees is encircled by two creepers or vines that appear like pairs of lovers embracing. It is written that these creepers mix with the flowers, leaves, and fruits of these trees to create a very beautiful display of color. The four walls of these pastime cottages—they are also referred to as *keli-mandiras*, so beautiful *keli-mandiras*—are made of flowering mādhavī creepers, and varieties of colorful flowers also hang down to make the tops or the domes above the cottages. It is written that when the wind blows, these dangling flower creepers act as natural fans to refresh Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. The ācāryas also say that the sweet sounds of bees and cuckoos echo through the *kuñjas* that are lit by self-effulgent vines. Musk deer also scent the air, and cāmarī cows sweep clean the forest floor with their long, bushy tails. 

So these are *kuñjas*, and these *kuñjas* are where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy in any particular season. Now, about the winter season: Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa very much prefer this winter season because the chances of meeting each other become greater due to Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā’s restricted movements because of the colder weather. Also, I was reading that if Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā suspect or try to catch Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa somewhere in a forest, they cannot do it because of the intense winter fog; they just cannot see. You know, when a fog rolls in, it is very difficult to see anywhere. In the winter here in India, especially here where we are now in Vṛndāvana, very often a big fog rolls in; you cannot see even your hand in front of you sometimes, so it makes it difficult for them to catch Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 

So one day, in order to take advantage of these winter conditions, Paurṇamāsī and Vṛndā Devī came to Yāvat to meet Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and they said to her, "O Rādhe, Queen of Vṛndāvana, you have withered in winter just like the sunflower shrinks in the presence of the moon, but in reality, you are like a bonfire—an old bonfire which is cold ash on the outside, but inside, the fire is still burning. So, in your heart, we know that it is burning with the fire of separation from Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, Queen, we are here to take you from this harsh winter to Hemanta-santoṣa-kuñja, where your sakhīs have made a warm, pleasant environment for your pastimes with Kṛṣṇa, and with the fire of your love, we will decorate that forest grove." So poetic.

Literally translates as "the *kuñja* of satisfaction during the winter season," and we will see why. Wearing a warm coat made out of silk and cotton woven together, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī started walking through the forest to this, and the śāstras described this for us. As she is walking through it, the scriptures described what she is seeing. They describe the forest as golden red with ripe mangoes, orange with ripe tangerines, yellow with star fruit, black with bell fruits, white with lodhra flowers, and bright green with rich foliage and trees. 

So when Śrī Rādhā reached the designated *kuñja*, she became intoxicated—it is described—with the sweet aroma of agarwood smoke that some gopīs were burning there for her pleasure. Entering the *kuñja*, it is described, *śī-sādana-uṣṇa-avedī*. Now, *uṣṇa-avedī* is a warm seat made out of sawdust from auspicious trees and cotton fibers all mixed together. As she sat down there, Kṛṣṇa suddenly appeared behind her and He put His hands around her face and covered her eyes. Now, at that point, Lalitā smiled and she asked, "Śrī Rāthe, guess who this is?" So Śrī Rādhā tried to touch Kṛṣṇa’s hands, but Lalitā said, "No, no, no, you cannot cheat." So Rādhā smiled and said, "The fragrance that is coming to my nose is telling me that this is Kṛṣṇa. The air flowing and touching me is telling me this is Kṛṣṇa. My own breath is telling me that this is Kṛṣṇa, and my thirsty eyes are telling me this is Kṛṣṇa. Every pore of my body is telling me this is my beloved Kṛṣṇa." 

So she said, "O Kṛṣṇa, with the touch of Your lotus hands, this cold winter does not appear harsh to me anymore. Let us go to the bank of the daughter of the sun god, Yamunā Devī, who flows with warm water in the cold season and cold water in the warm season." Yamunā Devī kī! So Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa went to the banks of the Yamunā river and they sat on the same āsana together, and they wrapped themselves up in a cotton-filled blanket, it is written. 

So then Śrī Rādhā said to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, just look at this winter moon. Sometimes he is behind one cloud, and other times he is behind another cloud; he is changing clouds every minute, just like You who change gopīs one after another." So Kṛṣṇa was a little embarrassed, but He smiled and He said, "Oh, observe the moon more carefully. He is actually very stable; it is only that the clouds are moving, giving the impression that he is moving. In the same way, I am always stable, but the gopīs come and go; I am always stable, but the gopīs come and go." 

So then, quickly changing the subject, Kṛṣṇa smiled again, and He started reciting a poem revealing again how dear this winter season is to Him because, again, it gives them special opportunities to come together. This is His poem. He said: 
"O Rādhe, the true friend of mine is the winter season who always brings me near to you. O my friend the white moon, you appear to make two lovers come together and rejoice. O cool breeze of this winter season, you destroy the pain of separation within my heart. O true friend of mine, the winter, o true friend of mine, the winter." 

This was Kṛṣṇa’s poem. So just then, I was reading that all of the eight aṣṭa-sakhīs of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī came forward with golden pots full of hot khicṛī along with four items: pāpadams, pickle, chutney, and ghee. Śāstras say that the fragrances of such khicṛī are capable of putting even renunciates into the ocean of six rasas. So Lalitā said, "O divine couple, please accept this hot khicṛī which is filled with dry fruits and flowing ghee, and which will make you supremely blissful." So Kṛṣṇa, He took a spoon of khicṛī and with His hand He offered it to the mouth of Śrī Rādhā. Then Rādhā took a spoon of khicṛī and offered it to Kṛṣṇa’s mouth. So in this way, they together enjoyed this delicious preparation.

And I read that this pastime takes place every time Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enter this particular forest where winter resides in Vṛndāvana. Now, to some listeners or viewers, it may sound odd that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy a pastime feeding khicṛī—it is often thought of as a very simple, nice, but simple basic food—but let us bear in mind that in Vṛndāvana, even the most simple thing as khicṛī becomes glorious when offered to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in pure devotion, or if that khicṛī is prepared or touched by the hand of a pure devotee. 

In sharing his memories of Nārāyaṇa Dāsa, he said it is very beautiful—he was remembering, you know, those videos of memories of Śrīla Prabhupāda that Prabhupāda’s disciples have—he said, "Once in the La Cienega temple, which is in Los Angeles, on the occasion of his spiritual master’s appearance day, Śrīla Prabhupāda cooked a pot of khicṛī. He said that khicṛī was his spiritual master’s favorite dish. Prabhupāda cooked it using polished, split dal, and it had a creamy consistency, he said. And there were 30 of us at that celebration, and there were many other dishes besides khicṛī since it was a holiday; everyone was in a jolly mood, talking and chanting, and we all got a dab of Prabhupāda’s khicṛī on our plates. But by this time, the khicṛī was cold, but we all popped a little into our mouths, and when we did, everyone in the prasādam room fell silent." 

Something about that prasādam was charged with what must have been—well, he said *gopī-bhāva*, Nārāyaṇa, *gopī-bhāva*—there was ecstasy involved in that prasādam. We were struck by it. Every exquisite feeling that Prabhupāda had for his spiritual master was present in that khicṛī. We had the chance to experience that. Then he went on to say, "We realized that Prabhupāda had given us an extra special benediction; he had allowed us to open the door a little and peek into what his world was like, through the prasādam prepared with great love and devotion for his spiritual master."

So khicṛī—actually, you may also be surprised to learn that here in Vṛndāvana, every year on the day after Gītā Jayantī—the ISKCON world, the devotee world just celebrated this Gītā Jayantī recently, a couple of weeks ago—so every year on the day after Gītā Jayantī, on Vyañjana-dvādaśī, all the temples in Vṛndāvana celebrate a khicṛī festival for one month, day and night. The Goswāmīs in those temples, they offer delicious khicṛī to the deities and then to the devotees. This is a very old tradition actually, here in Vṛndāvana; I was reading about it in manuscripts that were told to be four or five hundred years old in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute. Every year, this festival is observed in all the prominent Vṛndāvana temples, including Rādhā-Ramaṇa, and actually, during this particular time, each and every home in Vṛndāvana makes khicṛī for a month up until the 14th of January, usually around that time, or what is known as... So such a wonderful khicṛī pastime during the auspicious winter season.

So we will conclude today with some very beautiful verses about all of Vṛndāvana’s seasons from one of our favorites, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī’s *Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta*. On the beauty of Vṛndāvana’s seasons, he writes:

"Vṛndāvana is brilliant with the wonderful virtues of all seasons, more splendid than all splendor, sweeter than all sweetness, more beneficial and auspicious than all auspiciousness, more pleasantly cool and fragrant than all pleasant coolness and fragrance, and a wonderful ocean of bliss greater than all happiness. All glories to Vṛndāvana’s beautiful trees, which are eternal, full of knowledge and bliss, more splendid than the moon and all the stars, covered with numberless leaves and branches, respectfully served by all the splendid seasons, and opulent with the cooling shade that breaks all the burning sufferings of this world.

"Meditate on two new splendorous personalities wearing wonderful new garments and ornaments of new flowers, blossoms, and buds, newly meeting together, splendid as new sapphires and gold, and flooded with the nectar of new amorous passion in Vṛndāvana, where the glories of all seasons shine at the same moment. May the very wonderful nectar that wonderfully shines on the Yamunā’s shore in beautiful Vṛndāvana, wonderful in all six seasons on the wonderful breezes and on the autumn moon there, and that rests on Śrī Śrī Rādhikā-Mādhava, the two treasures of transcendental virtue, be seen within my heart."

All glories to the six seasons, the nine seasons, and the tenth, the ten seasons of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. All right, Kṛṣṇa, I hope you enjoyed all that nectar about the seasons and about the tenth season and the khicṛī pastimes. Hare Kṛṣṇa, thank you, and once again, we will be back in a couple of days with more nectar from the eternal Śrī Vṛndāvana. 

O glory to the winter season kī! It’s cold here now. Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi kī!""