"*00562*.*
"Hare Krishna, everyone. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. *Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine, namaste sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe*. So today, I decided to continue with Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s winter pastimes. As we’ve mentioned several times in previous classes, Vṛndāvana is blessed with six seasons: the joy of monsoon, the pleasure of autumn, the satisfaction of winter, the happiness of the dewy season, the beauty of spring, and the auspicious season of summer. 

Now, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī refers to four of these seasons in his *Gopāla-virudāvalī*, text 24. He writes: "O Lord charming as spring, O Lord pleasant as summer, O Lord splendid as the monsoon season, O Lord with the limitless playfulness of autumn, O Lord with the handsomeness of winter." 

Our ācāryas write that each season has its own unique characteristics of climate, foliage, fruit, harvest, animals, and birds, and these qualities become prominent during specific times. In summer, the tiṭṭibha birds sing like *dundubhi* drums; in the rainy season, the peacocks dance at the first sign of rain; and in the winter, the forest resounds with the sweet sounds of partridges. That’s really sweet. 

Now, there are a number of pastimes that we’re all familiar with that take place in Vṛndāvana’s winter. For example, the chastisement of the Kāliya serpent, wherein after punishing Kāliya in the Yamunā river, Kṛṣṇa warmed Himself in the sun at *daśādī-khelā-ṭilā*—that little knoll, that little hill near the Yamunā river. Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī makes note of this in his famous *Vraja-vilāsa-stava*, text 82. He writes: "Once, accompanied by the gopas, gopīs, and surabhi cows, the supremely opulent, noble, and magnanimous Kṛṣṇa felt very uncomfortable in the winter cold. Twelve suns then appeared at that place, and with great devotion, warmed the Lord with their intense shining. I eternally take shelter of the sacred place which bears the name."

Also, study of śāstra reveals that during the first month of the winter season, the young, unmarried girls of Gokula, the gopīs, observed the vow of worshipping goddess Kātyāyanī. We spoke on that pastime a lot, but that happens also in the winter. They worshipped the goddess Kātyāyanī with that famous mantra: *kātyāyanī mahā-māye mahā-yoginy adhiśvari, nanda-gopa-sutaṁ devi patiṁ me kuru te namaḥ*. They prayed to her: "O goddess Kātyāyanī, great potency of the Lord, O possessor of great mystic power, mighty controller of all, please make the son of Nanda Mahārāja my husband. I offer my obeisances unto you." This was their prayer. 

But further study of the śāstras revealed that, you know, for pastime’s sake, those gopīs’ parents actually arranged for those gopīs to be married to cowherd men. Thus, after a short time, those girls were expected to move from the homes of their parents to the homes of their new husbands in order to take up the duties, it’s described, of chaste wives. But the ācāryas say that these girls’ minds were fixed on Kṛṣṇa, and to them, the prospect of such a move was worse than walking through a wall of fire—that’s how the ācāryas write it. The prospect of moving into the homes of their new in-laws was worse than walking through a wall of fire. Those young gopīs were thinking as follows, and I quote here: "Separated from Kṛṣṇa, my father’s home has become like a prison for a king, but if I have to go to my mother-in-law’s house, it would be like living in a prison meant for criminals." That’s what the girls were thinking. It’s written that their misery showed on their faces, and their parents had no idea what to do. What’s more, their new mothers-in-law were angry that they were hesitating, and the villagers were critical. So the gopīs’ parents—these girls who refused to leave home—what did they do? They turned to Yogamāyā for a solution to this problem. 

So then, Yogamāyā—it’s really interesting—Yogamāyā took the young girls to the homes of their new husbands and their new in-laws, but Yogamāyā created duplicates of the girls so that they never had to have intimate contact with their husbands. She created duplicates of the gopīs so they never had to have any intimate contact with their husbands, and thus they remained pure for Kṛṣṇa. Oh, glorious to Yogamāyā! 

Now, this new situation, despite the fact that they were living with their husbands, allowed them to have contact with Kṛṣṇa. For example, while walking here and there in Vṛndāvana, with the various duties—taking milk products from here and there—sometimes Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs would pass by each other, and they would exchange sidelong glances. One time, Kṛṣṇa had an idea to play His flute in a certain way so as to attract the gopīs at the right time to where He was standing in the forest. 

He thought as follows, the ācāryas write: "I will play a tune that will bewilder and attract the gopīs, especially Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I just need to find the notes to which those girls are most susceptible, to which their senses will be attracted." This was Kṛṣṇa’s plan. So what did He do? Kṛṣṇa began experimenting with different flute melodies. We told a similar pastime last year, but this is more complete. He began experimenting with different flute melodies. One day, He played a tune—He’s experimenting—He played a tune that stunned the cows, who gave up eating grass in favor of relishing the flute song with their ears, and it’s described, tasting the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s face with their eyes. So He’s experimenting with different tunes. So this tune worked on the cows. 

The next day, Kṛṣṇa tried another tune, and with this tune, all the forest animals and birds were stunned. And like the cows, they all stood still where they were as if they had been confined, it’s described, to invisible cages. So He’s experimenting with different melodies. On the third day, the tune that Kṛṣṇa played attracted the deer, who flocked to Him in mass, and it’s described, mesmerized by His attractive appearance, they worshipped Kṛṣṇa with love-filled eyes. Just try to picture that in your mind: they’re standing there next to Kṛṣṇa, and they’re worshipping Him with love-filled eyes. 

Now, the gopīs—ultimately He wanted to attract the gopīs—the gopīs were aware of these practice sessions, and they went to Kṛṣṇa’s mother, actually, and they said, "O Mother Yaśodā, your son, who is expert in the art of herding cows, has invented various novel styles of flute playing." They were taking notice of Kṛṣṇa’s experiments. Then, it’s described by our illustrious ācāryas that on the fourth day, Kṛṣṇa played another tune, which attracted the demigoddesses, the ladies of heaven, Svargaloka, who it’s described were so bewildered by that sound that their clothes loosened and their ornaments fell off. 

Now, on the fifth day of this experiment, Kṛṣṇa played a melody, it’s described, so powerful that all animate things became unconscious and all inanimate things came to life. I like that one! Kṛṣṇa played a melody so powerful that all animate things—things that move—became unconscious, and all inanimate things that don’t move came to life. So the ācāryas say that the gopīs remained unaffected by that particular melody, but they mentioned that the river Yamunā was deeply moved by that flute playing. Actually, when the Yamunā river heard that flute song, I was reading, she stopped flowing and became completely bewildered. Her waves swelled, and her waters trembled. Then, changing course, completely changing course, she flowed towards Kṛṣṇa and offered lotus flowers to His feet. So sweet, *bhakti-līlās*—just sweet, sweet, sweet. Nevertheless, that melody somehow didn’t attract the gopīs. Kṛṣṇa was not yet successful. So it’s written He just kept trying new melodies day after day. They tried to say that these melodies mesmerized the clouds overhead and Vṛndāvana’s mountains, including Govardhana Hill. The few melodies He tried afterwards, they mesmerized the clouds and Vṛndāvana’s mountains such as Govardhana Hill. 

So the description goes on and on. But Kṛṣṇa finally found the proper tune, and just in time, because feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs had become frantic to the point that their in-laws—their new families—their in-laws thought that their sons had married mad women. That’s how frantic the girls became in separation from Kṛṣṇa. So their in-laws were thinking, "Our sons have married mad women." But the most disturbed of all the gopīs was Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who at one point was actually thinking that she would like to become a bamboo flute. She wanted to become a bamboo flute, and we can understand that desire of hers. In her thoughts, the ācāryas have given us her thoughts; we’re so blessed. She was thinking as follows: "The flute is fortunate because, as a male, it does not have to be shy like us gopīs. Thus, it rests in Kṛṣṇa’s hands and transforms the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips into beautiful music that causes the rivers to swell and the bamboo along the riverbanks to shed tears in the form of honey." I pray—the ācāryas say—thinking: "I pray for the body of a bamboo flute. I reject this body of a supposedly respectable woman. No other type of body can relish what the flute does as Kṛṣṇa plays it with eagerness and affection." 

Right along with her thoughts, she goes on to think: "The day I become a flute, my consciousness will certainly err. No doubt I will forget my identity, but Kṛṣṇa will remember me as the gopī who became a piece of wood from suffering and separation from Him." So deep: "But Kṛṣṇa will remember me as the gopī who became a piece of wood from suffering and separation from Him." Of course, we know eventually Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs’ intense desire to be with Kṛṣṇa was fulfilled, as we discussed recently in our series on the rāsa-līlā. For when Kṛṣṇa later played His flute at Vaṁśīvaṭa, you remember, all the young girls came running, and eventually, they danced with the Lord for an entire night of Brahmā. 

So if we study that pastime carefully—you know, how Kṛṣṇa was dancing with the gopīs and then He left the rāsa-līlā and said, and then He reunited with them—we can understand that sometimes Kṛṣṇa distances Himself from His devotees simply to increase their attachment to Him. I was reading *Navadvīpa-dhāma* the other day, and in chapter 14, I found a very beautiful verse related to separation. You know, it’s interesting, because as I’ve said many times, at our particular point in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we’re just trying to connect with Kṛṣṇa, to reconnect with Kṛṣṇa actually. That’s our whole focus. We’re chanting "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, please give me some service, I want to connect with You." So how does this separation fit in? In chapter 14, there’s a beautiful verse: actually, Lord Rāmacandra is speaking to Sītā-devī, so listen to what He says: "My dear wife, there are two ways My devotees feel love for Me: in union with Me and in separation from Me. Although My eternal associates like you and My mother desire union, I mercifully give you separation, because the distress of separation from Me is actually the topmost bliss, and the union that follows yields a happiness a million times greater than ever before." 

The science of *vipralambha* spoken by Lord Rāmacandra. 

Now, a famous and very much loved Vaiṣṇava poet, his name is Nāgarīdāsa—Nāgarīdāsa—he shares with us a very beautiful separation pastime in his famous work called *Śarada-māna-līlā*. Nice name for someone! He wrote a book called *Śarada-māna-līlā* which is famous here in Braja, and I’ll share that pastime with you. He writes that once during the winter season—because this is part two, the winter season—he writes once during the winter season, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa, so she sent Lalitā-sakhī to tell Kṛṣṇa about her condition. So Lalitā-sakhī went to Nandagrāma, where Kṛṣṇa was sitting in a room called Tivārī. 

So much detail. Kṛṣṇa was sitting in a room called Tivārī, and Tivārī means literally the "warm room." Bear in mind it’s winter. He was sitting in the warm room, where it’s also described there were dark-colored curtains that were hanging everywhere, and the smell of aguru smoke prevailed everywhere, or we say *ūd*. Sometimes *ūd* is called perfume oil, which we use in pūjā. So Kṛṣṇa was sitting in this warm room, He was dressed in cotton-filled silk garments—they’re called *fargūl*—and He was sitting in front of a burning coal pan called *aṅgīṭhī*. 

So Lalitā said to Him: "Kṛṣṇa, despite the cold winter weather, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is burning in separation from You. Her lotus-like face has now faded by this separation." So Kṛṣṇa was concerned. So the poet writes that Kṛṣṇa got up very quickly and He left with Lalitā to where Rādhārāṇī was waiting. And our poet Nāgarī, he describes that the divine couple they met like the sun meets the fog in winter, like fire meets cotton, or like warmth meets cold. He’s a poet! Their meeting was like the sun meeting with the fog in winter, like fire meets cotton, or like warmth meets cold. Poetry is meant to bring forth some emotions—in our case, spiritual emotions. 

So they met, and after some time, the divine couple decided to take a walk outside, you know, to the winter forest, so to keep them warm in this cold winter weather, two sakhīs—I was reading—walked before them with burning coal in an iron pan. This is the old days; now we have different ways. But just imagine the divine couple walking through the beautiful winter forest with two sakhīs carrying burning coal in an iron pan, and so that their feet would not feel any cold, two other sakhīs walked before them throwing white and black sesame seeds on the ground, with the idea that by stepping on those white and black sesame seeds, there’s a cushion, so they didn’t have to feel the cold on the ground. Wow, nectar! 

After a while, you know, they’re walking, and then Kṛṣṇa, wanting to glorify Rādhārāṇī, He expressed Himself, but the ācāryas say perhaps not with the best choice of words. He wanted to glorify Rādhā, but perhaps He didn’t use the best choice of words for it—and it’s a pastime, it’s a līlā—so He said, "My dear Rādhe, the opulence of Vṛndāvana is simply the shadow of the beauty of your opulence." And listen carefully: "The opulence of Vṛndāvana is simply the shadow of the beauty of your opulence." 

So at that point, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eyebrows, they curled in anger, *māna*, and she said to Kṛṣṇa: "Kṛṣṇa, what are you saying? Shadows are never bright, they’re always dark. And because you are the color of a dark monsoon cloud, Vṛndāvana is actually your shadow." So you know, after Kṛṣṇa argued the point for a while, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī went into deep *māna*, anger. Comparing her to a shadow, or her opulence to a shadow, she became angry. And at that point, Lalitā-sakhī, in order to bring Rādhā out of her *māna*, her anger, she said something very interesting. She said, "Dear Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, as a shadow is controlled by the body, as moonlight is controlled by the moon, as a *cātaka* bird is controlled by the sun, as the bee is controlled by the lotus, as the *cakora* bird is controlled by the rain, as the body is controlled by the soul—similarly, the master of all the gopīs is under your control. Please be merciful to him and forgive him." 

But Rādhā replied, "Lalitā, some offenses are difficult to forgive. Just let Kṛṣṇa do some austerities now." So at this point, Kṛṣṇa turned and He said to Rādhā, "Dearest Rādhā, please put your *māna*, your anger, aside; otherwise, the brother of *māna*, or separation, will come and separate us again, like he separated us before." So these words, Kṛṣṇa’s words, melted Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s heart. She gave up her *māna*, and they both embraced each other. And then the poet says, "Then the demigods started playing drums, and the gopīs, they started offering winter sweets made of eight types of fruit seeds." *Tri-bhadan* Kṛṣṇa! Winter sweets—I’d like to find that recipe to offer my deities because it’s winter now here in Vṛndāvana, I’m wearing a warm chadar—winter sweets made of eight types of fruit seeds. That’s what they offered to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And because everything was resolved at that point, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa continued their playful pastimes in Vṛndāvana, and the poet concludes: "May the winter season always bind the divine couple in the ropes of love and engage my mind in always singing their glories." Hari Kṛṣṇa. 

What nice winter pastimes. We often think of winter as an austerity, but in Vṛndāvana, it’s just a source of joy for the divine couple and all of their devotees in Vṛndāvana. Oh, glorious, the winter pastimes in Śrī Vṛndāvana. So let us finish; we shall finish with some beautiful words from our beloved Viśvanātha Cakravartī, wherein we hear Vṛndā-devī addressing these six seasons of Vṛndāvana personified. She’s addressing them: "Oh seasonal goddesses, adorn the forest for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure. O goddess of springtime, go to Govardhana Hill and stay at the Rāsa-sthalī. O goddess of autumn, stay on the bank of the Yamunā in the land of desire trees—in the land of desire trees. Oh, all of you seasonal goddesses, surrender everything to the service of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and it’s for us to give fun and astonishment to your masters, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Be blessed, O limitlessly fortunate goddesses. The rainy season should stay east of the kuṇḍa, the autumn to the south, the *hemanta* (the season between autumn and winter) stay in the west, or winter stay in the north, spring should stay in the trees around the Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and summer inside the water to make *jala-kelī*, or water pastimes, successful." 

So then he writes, hearing these words, the six seasons, that are experienced like no one else, offered their obeisances to Vṛndā-devī and the sakhīs and went to do their services as was proper. For who will not endeavor to become blessed like this? The end. Hi Kṛṣṇa. 

Wow, so winter pastimes. So when you’re... many of you are in the northern hemisphere, so it’s winter, and our philosophy culminates in always remembering Kṛṣṇa and never forgetting Him. So even in the cold winter, you can remember some of these pastimes and be warm inside. All right, Kṛṣṇa. Thank you very much, prabhu. We’ll go back to our studies, and we’ll come back and discuss another of the six seasons—or remember we have nine seasons, we have ten seasons actually in Vṛndāvana—we’ll be back soon in a couple of days. Oh, glorious. 

Right.""