"*00235*.*
"Thank you. Hare Kṛṣṇa, everyone. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. Welcome to Vṛndāvana’s winter wonderland. In this video, we would like to share with you the beautiful sights and sounds of Braj in the coldest months of December, January, and February. Vṛndāvana is actually blessed with six seasons, known as the joy of monsoon, the pleasure of autumn, the happiness of the dewy season, the beauty of spring, the auspicious season of summer, and the satisfaction of winter.

In the *Gopāla-virudāvalī*, text 24, it refers to four of these seasons. He writes: "O Lord charming as spring, O Lord pleasant as summer, O Lord splendid as the monsoon season, O Lord with the limitless playfulness of autumn, O Lord with the handsomeness of winter." Each season has its own unique characteristics, such as climate, foliage, fruit, harvest, animals, and birds, and these qualities become prominent at specific times. In summer, the *tittibha* birds sing like *dundubhi* drums; in the rainy season, the peacocks dance at the first sign of rain; and in the winter, the forests resound with the sweet sounds of partridges. 

Of course, we might wonder how winter, which is often harsh and unrelenting, can be a source of happiness for life in Vṛndāvana. But we shouldn’t think of winter in the spiritual world like winter in the material world. In fact, one time a devotee asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, I read that there is snow in the spiritual world. How can Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy in the cold snow?" Prabhupāda smiled and replied, "In the spiritual world, the snow is warm." Something similar to the reply he gave one time when a disciple asked him, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, are there mosquitoes in the spiritual world?" Once again, Śrīla Prabhupāda smiled and said, "Yes, they don’t sting; they sing." 

So, please enjoy this wonderful video about all the sights and sounds, as well as the wonderful people of Braj, as they go through—blissfully, with a little austerity of course, but very blissfully—doing their devotional service in the winter wonderland of Vṛndāvana during this period. Hare Kṛṣṇa.""