"*00270*.*
"Hi Kṛṣṇa, very dear devotees. Welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana.

*Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale, śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine.*

So, I am happy to be back, having recently had COVID like so many devotees—and actually millions of people—around the world. As many of you have experienced, COVID can be a painful ordeal, so I spent as much time as I could reading and hearing more about Vṛndāvana’s pastimes—Vṛndāvana-līlā—as advised in the *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* to free oneself from suffering. 

In *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam* 1.1.4, we hear:
> "O sage Sūta, after Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the most respectable devotee, the son of Vyāsadeva, heard the pious questions of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, he thanked the king with great respect. Then he began to discourse on topics concerning Kṛṣṇa, which are the remedy for all sufferings in this Age of Kali."

So, keeping in touch with Kṛṣṇa is the way to free ourselves from all suffering. And because Kṛṣṇa lives eternally in Vṛndāvana, either by living here or by discussing the glories of Vṛndāvana—even from far-off places like Sydney, London, New York, or Alachua, Florida—one can remain in contact with Kṛṣṇa and be free from anxiety, stress, and suffering. That is one reason that we have been discussing the glorious Braja for well over two years now.

I was reading the other day that in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* (1.2.213), it describes nine specific ways that one can remain in constant touch with Braja—with Vṛndāvana—from anywhere in the world. He writes *śrutāmṛta*. And this is the translation: it bestows all of one's desires when She (meaning Mathurā-Vṛndāvana) is:
1. *Śruta*: Heard about.
2. *Smṛta*: Remembered.
3. *Kīrtita*: Glorified.
4. *Vāsita*: Desired for residence (to live there).
5. *Prakṣita*: Even seen from a distance.
6. *Gata*: Actually attained.
7. *Spṛṣṭa*: Just touched.
8. *Āśrita*: Taken shelter of.
9. *Sevita*: Served.

Then, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s commentary to this particular verse—he writes that the word *prakṣita* means seeing Vṛndāvana from a distance or going near to it without direct contact. He writes that *āśrita* means accepting Vṛndāvana as one’s shelter or residence. And he also mentions *sevita*; he says *sevato* means serving Vṛndāvana by cleaning it, beautifying it, and repairing old temples. I thought that was really interesting.

As members of this great International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, we should all hanker to live in Vṛndāvana constantly by either residing here or just by continuously hearing about Vṛndāvana and all the pastimes that take place in that transcendental abode. It says you can either live here or not live here, but if Vṛndāvana is in your heart, you’re in Vṛndāvana. 

He writes in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* (1.2.294), a famous verse: *kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam*. A devotee should always think of Kṛṣṇa within himself and should choose a very dear devotee who is a servitor of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. One should constantly engage in topics about that servitor and his loving relationship with Kṛṣṇa, and one should live in Vṛndāvana. If one is physically unable to go to Vṛndāvana, he should mentally live there. We’ve mentioned this verse so many times in our series. And if we, as members of ISKCON, can truly imbibe this instruction, then when someone asks us, "Where do you live?", we won’t say Sydney, London, New York, or Orlando, Florida; we’ll say, "I live in Vṛndāvana." How can we say that? Because there’s that famous axiom: "Home is where the heart is."

So, how do you fall in love with Vṛndāvana? How do you fall in love with anyone? By association. It’s not that you fall in love immediately; true love takes time to get to know someone and appreciate them, to have affection, and then love. It’s the same with Braja. If we can't live here—such as I’m very fortunate for the last two years—we can be in Vṛndāvana by constantly hearing Vṛndāvana-līlā, which essentially means the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the different devotees in Braja. And if we are fortunate to live here, either physically or by mentally residing here, nothing could be better than that.

In the *Padma Purāṇa*, I found a verse in the *Pātāla-khaṇḍa* section where Lord Śiva says to Pārvatī. He says, "Aho" (that’s a way of greeting), "the sweet land of Mathurā-Vṛndāvana, where Kaṁsāri Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides eternally, is very valuable and fortunate. Even the munis and the devatās desire to always live there." That verse is also quoted by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in his *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* (1.5.43).

So, while I was ill, I was also able to do a little more research on the winter season in Vṛndāvana. I thought we’d finished with lecture number two, but actually, I kept reading and I found more information about winter—part three here—which I’d like to share with you today.

To begin with, it’s said here in Vṛndāvana that spring is the king of all seasons. Kṛṣṇa Himself says that; many of you may know in *Bhagavad-gītā* (10.35): *gāyatrī chandasām aham*. "Of the hymns, I am the Sāma Veda; I am the Bṛhat-sāma; and of poetry, I am the Gāyatrī. Of months, I am Mārgaśīrṣa (November-December); and of seasons, I am flower-bearing spring." And as we all know the differences between winter and spring, we might wonder how winter, which is often very harsh and unrelenting, can be a source of joy and happiness for the Divine Couple. It’s one of the six primary seasons, as we’ve been discussing.

Of course, we shouldn’t think of winter in the spiritual world like winter in the material world. In fact, one time a devotee asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, "I read that there is snow in the spiritual world. How can Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa enjoy in the cold snow?" Śrīla Prabhupāda just smiled and replied, "Well, in the spiritual world, the snow is warm." Something similar to the reply he gave one time when a disciple asked him, "Are there mosquitoes in the spiritual world?" Again, Prabhupāda smiled and said, "Yes, but they don’t sting; they sing."

But of course, we know that Mother Pourṇamāsī and Vṛndā-devī, who arrange all these amazing pastimes in Vṛndāvana, they do arrange for cold weather as a stimulus for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s loving affairs. As we mentioned in our first lecture on winter, the cold weather in winter usually keeps Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā inside the Yāvaṭ palace, giving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa the liberty to freely roam the Vṛndāvana forest as well as to sit together in a kuñja (a little forest) while sharing a warm blanket. And it’s for these reasons and more that winter in Vṛndāvana is actually a cause for celebration for the Brajabāsīs and an opportunity for increased *sevā*, or service, especially for their many deities here in Vṛndāvana.

Winter service in most Vṛndāvana temples, I was reading, lasts for 40 or 45 days, which includes, as we mentioned previously, the daily offering of *kicṛī*. We spoke briefly about that, as well as offering thick woolen blankets to the many deities in the temples here. There are thousands and thousands of temples, and everyone’s life revolves around these temples—and even the home temples, where everyone has their deities, or most people have deities. Everything just revolves around Kṛṣṇa; Kṛṣṇa is the center of Braja.

During the winter, service is increased. They make *kicṛī* because it warms you up, for the deities; and they have, they offer nice blankets to the deities. Actually, I was reading these blankets are called *gaddal* in the local language, and these blankets are all filled with cotton. And in the temples in the winter, each day the deities are massaged with what they call "warm perfumed essential oils." They take the oil, the perfume, and they warm it. Especially, there’s certain oils that have a warm characteristic to them, like saffron and henna oils; they use that a lot in the winter here. They massage the deities with these oils, these warm oils, before they bathe the deities with warm water.

After their baths, the deities are dressed in very colorful outfits, such as hand-stuffed cotton shawls. And the deities wear special kurtas called *bhagā-bundīs*; devotees also wear *bhagā-bundīs*. They are tied—the kurta is tied—and the deity also wears a *la-bhaṭṭā*, a long dress which is reversible and very heavy in weight. I’ve been to a number of temples now in the winter here, and you see these *la-bhaṭṭās*, these long dresses; very elegant looking. The deities look so beautiful in those long dresses. 

And when the weather gets really, really cold—like right now, it’s really, really cold—the pujārīs also dress deities in *pharguls*. We mentioned, I think, *pharguls* in lecture number two; *phargul* is a type of overcoat. In the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple, for the entire winter months—there’s actually two months, we’ll discuss that later—for the entire winter months, devotees cannot have darśana of Rādhā-Ramaṇa’s lotus feet. Why? Because in winter, He wears woolen socks. I remember the first time I saw that, "Whoa, the Lord’s wearing socks!" Yeah, you don’t see His feet so much in winter because He’s wearing socks. 

In the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple, special care is taken to keep Rādhā-Ramaṇajī’s surroundings very warm with silver pots full of burning coal, or sometimes wood, but generally coal. If you go to the temple, you’ll see these silver pots there, and they’re burning with smoke coming out from the burning coal. In Rādhā-Ramaṇa’s temple specifically, any and all curtains are replaced with very colorful, thick ones. In other seasons, you don’t need thick, but in the wintertime, all the curtains in the temple are changed for very thick, very colorful curtains, also stuffed with cotton. And each day, as night approaches, again, huge blankets are offered to Rādhā-Ramaṇa so that He can sleep comfortably.

In a similar way, a little research showed, each night in one of the Daujī temples in Vṛndāvana—there’s a number of Daujīs; "Daujī" means the older brother, Lord Balarāma—there are many Balarāma temples in Vṛndāvana where this is just Balarāma. So, one of the famous Daujī temples in Vṛndāvana (Daujī Balarāma and His consort, of course, Revatī), they are offered, in this one temple, a giant quilt made with 75 meters of cloth and 12 kilograms of cotton. That’s a big, big quilt because it’s a big deity; I’ve seen that deity. 

And I also read that Daujī’s winter dress is made of 56 meters of warm, colorful fabric. And His *kicṛī*—because we were mentioning earlier in other lectures how *kicṛī* is offered to the deities during winter specifically and they distribute it to the pilgrims—so this particular deity of Daujī, His *kicṛī* is made of rice and lentils, of course, cooked in pure *ghī* with lots of nuts and warming spices. We heard of warming oils, warming perfumes, so His *kicṛī* is made with warming spices like what? Saffron, nutmeg, cloves, and pepper. You can write that down; if you have deities, you can make *kicṛī* for them. It’s our tradition—our tradition is Braja, our culture is Vṛndāvana, the eternal Vṛndāvana. So when they make a *kicṛī* for that deity, they put in saffron, nutmeg, cloves, and pepper. And then, placed on the side of the plate of *kicṛī*, they put pickles (meaning we say *ācāra* here), *pakoṛās*, *dahī* (yogurt), jam, butter, and sweets. And the sweets are made with sesame seeds and jaggery; jaggery is a pure type of sugar. Sesame seeds and these are all really interesting facts because, you know, deity worship is such an integral part of our ISKCON movement. Śrīla Prabhupāda brought this wonderful process to the Western countries, so you can offer your deities sesame seeds and jaggery sweets in these cold months.

One of the pujārīs there told me at Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple—now we’re back to the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple—when they make these offerings of *kicṛī* to Rādhā-Ramaṇajī, the pujārīs, they sing devotional songs with various musical instruments while Rādhā-Ramaṇajī is eating for His pleasure. The pujārī at the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple shared with me one of those songs. The lyrics for one of those songs—so here are the lyrics; this is what Ramaṇajī is hearing while He is relishing the *kicṛī*:

> "Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī feeds Rādhā-Ramaṇa delicious *kicṛī* soaked in cow *ghī*. They’re singing this along with fried *kacoṛīs*, spicy pickle, and four kinds of vegetable dishes, all accompanied by *pāpaḍams*, wild cucumber, yogurt, and sweets. Gazing longingly into each other’s lotus eyes, the divine lovers share sweet conversation while the silver coal stove gives fragrant warmth. This is beautiful. Rādhā-Ramaṇa sits on a low wooden seat and happily enjoys this delicious *kicṛī*. When He finishes, they’re singing, Yaśodā-māyī offers Her very life to Him in the form of ārati."

This is what they sing. And at another temple—not the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple, Daujī—oh yeah, I was reading that in the famous Baṅke-Bihārī temple. Baṅke-Bihārī, like you hear it all over Vṛndāvana, one of the more popular temples. Baṅke-Bihārī temple: each winter morning, Baṅke-Bihārī specifically is offered sweet butter with saffron and saffron *halavā*. In the afternoon, He is offered saffron sweet rice, and in the evening, He is offered saffron milk. All these beautiful details of Braja—this is our culture. We have to imbibe this, we have to practice it. We want to be Brajabāsīs; we have to be like the Brajabāsīs to get back home, back to the spiritual world, specifically to Goloka Vṛndāvana.

So, further research revealed that in the Dvārakādhīśa temple in nearby Mathurā—there’s a beautiful Dvārakādhīśa temple there—each day those deities are served saffron milk and *śoṇṭh*. Which I found out is a savory made with saffron, almonds, dried ginger, and other warm ingredients—couldn’t get the whole recipe—saffron, almonds, dried ginger, and other warm ingredients.

Now, moving on. One of the more popular festivals held here in our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana during the winter months is in the Rādhā-Vallabha temple, a very famous temple. Rādhā-Vallabha: each day, the deity wears different disguises. This is their way they celebrate. Now, Rādhā-Vallabha temple, they celebrate in the winter. Each day, Rādhā-Vallabha—extremely beautiful deity, it’s His beautiful black eyes made from jewels—He wears different disguises. After Maṅgala-ārati, they dress Him in different disguises. For example, the pujārīs told me one day He may be dressed as a bangle seller—you know, selling bangles—it’s a disguise. The next day, they may dress Rādhā-Vallabha as a fruit vendor, and they say the next day they’ll dress Him as a *sakhī*, like that. In these moods, these different moods, the devotees meditate that Kṛṣṇa is venturing out to meet Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī in Barṣānā. What a nice meditation this is. This is how we should fill our minds. He’s venturing out to meet Rādhārāṇī in Barṣānā. And these disguises—the idea is that these disguises help Him to deceive Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā, who, despite the cold, may be out there searching for Him. Once in a while, when He’s with His beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, because He’s in the disguise, they don’t recognize Him.

Now, the pujārīs there told me that Rādhā-Vallabha’s *kicṛī* is particularly famous. You know, everyone has their favorite deities, right, whatever temple here, and that’s your favorite deity, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa, like that—Gaur-Nitāi. The pujārīs were telling me that Rādhā-Vallabha’s *kicṛī* is particularly famous, and I said, "Why so?" They say because it’s made of 18 ingredients. 

And what are those 18 ingredients? Superfine basmati rice, moong dal, rock salt, white pepper, cumin seed, nutmeg, cloves, green and black cardamom, cinnamon, mace, bay leaves, cashew nuts, raisins, almonds, pistachio nuts, coconut, dates, and again, saffron. Saffron is really important here in the wintertime; that’s the nature of—that’s the way that makes Rādhā-Vallabha’s *kicṛī* so special. And of course, they say it’s enriched with the sumptuous addition of *ghī*. They actually have a saying here in Vṛndāvana: "*Kicṛī ghī, kīnī juṛī*." "*Kicṛī ghī, kīnī juṛī*" means *kicṛī* floating in *ghī*. And this *kicṛī* is served to Rādhā-Vallabha along with pickles (*ācāra*) of various kinds, and also a preparation of concentrated milk and a ginger sauce. Now, there’s another preparation offered to Rādhā-Vallabha in winter that is considered a real delicacy of which the exact recipe is a well-guarded secret. It’s made from ginger ground on a stone mortar with a stone pestle along with—here’s part of the recipe—black salt, rock salt, pomegranate seeds, black currants, black pepper, cumin seeds, and some other very tasty secret ingredients that no one except for Rādhā-Vallabha’s pujārīs have knowledge of. And this preparation, loved both by the Lord when it comes as mahā-prasāda and by the devotees, has been kept a secret for 500 years.

Now, technically, winter in Vṛndāvana actually consists of two months. The month of Mārgaśīrṣa, which we’ve mentioned and quoted several times, but also the second month is called Pauṣa. During Pauṣa, it gets really cold—much colder in this second month of Pauṣa—and due to the cold during this time, I was reading actually in the Vṛndāvana Research Institute that in Pauṣa, to the deities during this month of Pauṣa, flowers are only offered on top of the deity’s clothes. They put the clothes on and then the pujārīs never directly have flowers touch the deities themselves, like on their neck or something like that, or on their hands, because the flowers are cold, because it’s winter. So, the flowers never touch. When it’s winter, the flowers never touch, so they just go on top of the clothes like that.

And considering or discussing the worship of our beloved Govindajī, the deity of Śrīla Rūpa [Gosvāmī], who we lectured on extensively several months ago: throughout this month of Pauṣa, the deity of Govindajī, He’s offered a very special dish called *Keṣṭhār-anna*. Of course, we know Govindajī is in Jaipur, but they worship Him as well in the mood of Vṛndāvana. And we have our Govindajī temple here in Vṛndāvana as well; it was the original temple. So the deity of Govindajī, He’s worshiped with a special dish called *Keṣṭhār-anna*, which is made with eight different types of grains. The pujārīs in the Śrī Govinda temple, they follow a book called *Govinda-dvādaśa-utsava-praṇālikā*, which describes the details of rituals and ceremonies and everything—cooking, etc.—to be offered to Govindajī throughout the 12 months of the year. So there’s lots of details on how to worship Govindajī in winter.

So, on the first day of Pauṣa Pūrṇimā, the pujārīs, they begin by offering a special dress to Govindajī. And this outfit, I was told, is all white and consists of *sūtan*—*sūtan* is a type of tight pants—with a *kaṣṭī*, a type of skirt, and a *vaghā*, an outer coat. In your mind, you can see that He’s wearing tight pants and a kind of skirt and an outer coat. You may have seen paintings like that of Kṛṣṇa. And all of these different parts of His dress are embroidered with gold thread called *kiraṇa*. On that day, the first day of that month of Pauṣa, Govindajī—Govindadeva—is given a very special flower garland on top of His clothes, as we mentioned, and also an exceptional *mukuṭa*. As many of you know, *mukuṭa* means a crown. And that crown that Govindajī wears on that day is called *Mayūra-mukuṭa*. And actually, it has the form of a peacock feather made entirely out of gold. On that first day of the second month of winter, if you can go to Jaipur and see Govindajī, His crown is a gold peacock feather. And that’s the only day of the year that Govindajī wears that ornament. Put it on your calendar!

So, that’s some details about worshiping the deities in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma during the winter months here in Braja. 

Before concluding today, I’d like to share with all of you a wonderful winter pastime that’s found in the writings of that famous medieval Vaiṣṇava poet, the highly respected Nāgarīdāsa, who writes in his writings that once, on a foggy winter afternoon in the month of Mārgaśīrṣa, the first month of winter, Kṛṣṇa—this is such a beautiful pastime—Kṛṣṇa asks... He asked Śrī Rādhā, "O Rādhē, what is your favorite color?" 

Wow. "O Rādhē, what is your favorite color?" 

And Śrī Rādhā replied, "My favorite color is the color of the tamāla tree, the color of a dark evening cloud, the color of a dark bumblebee, the color of my *kajjala* (eyeliner), and the color of dark night."

So then Kṛṣṇa said, "O Rādhē, you’ve named many colors, but they are all similar to My complexion. Why didn’t you just say that My complexion is your favorite color?"

So Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī replied, "Kṛṣṇa, it is true, Your complexion is My favorite color. But most of the time when You’re not with Me, those colors are all that I have to remind Me of You. When You leave Me, My eternal friend, the pain of separation from You never leaves Me, and thus that separation always reminds Me of You, Kṛṣṇa. The color of that pain is blue, like a sapphire gemstone, which always adorns My heart in Your absence. The night comes and goes, the sun rises and sets, the moon appears and disappears, summers leave and winters come—everything goes and other things come—but the separation I feel from You, Kṛṣṇa, never leaves Me. It stays with Me always. O Kṛṣṇa, the green leaves of Vṛndāvana, where we enjoy our pastimes, also remind Me of You; therefore, green is also one of My favorite colors. The color of Your dress, yellow, is imprinted inside of My eyes while feeling separation from You. But when My ears hear the news of You coming My way to greet Me, My heart again attains peace, and that pure, white peace satisfies Me; therefore, white is also one of My favorite colors. But the bliss of meeting You is not present yet in that white color. When You actually meet Me and embrace Me, Kṛṣṇa, I see the color of love. I see the color of love on the road everywhere; the whole Braja becomes decorated in red, like a bride, to celebrate the meeting of You and Me. Therefore, I love red, the color of loving exchanges."

Then Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, she shyly said to Kṛṣṇa, "And My dear Kṛṣṇa, what is your favorite color?" 

So Kṛṣṇa replied, "O, My girl, the color of Your eyes—the color of Your eyes is My favorite color. Let Me behold Your beautiful, blue eyes forever." 

Now, Lalitā-sakhī was standing nearby, and after listening to this whole conversation, she offered a rainbow-colored, warm coat to the Divine Couple so that they wouldn’t be disturbed by the cold winter. They shared it, and then she offered them—according to our poet Nāgarī—seven-colored sweets to eat. And then he says Vṛndā-devī came forward and welcomed the Divine Couple into a kuñja called *Indra-dhanuṣ*. *Indra-dhanuṣ* literally means Indra’s bow. But His bow in this world takes the form of a rainbow. Here in India, when people see a rainbow, they call out, "Oh, just see the Indra-dhanuṣ, the bow of King Indra, Lord of Heaven." 

So the poet Nāgarī, he goes on to say the kuñja that they were in was warm from the depth of all colors and was decorated with different gemstones. This kuñja floor was red as rubies, the pillars were like blue sapphires, the walls were green like emeralds, the gates were white as pearls, the roof was yellow like gold, and the arches black as jet stones, he writes. *Raṅga-bihārī* Kṛṣṇa and *Raṅga-bihāriṇī* Śrī Rādhā started playing in this warm, rainbow kuñja together. And in that playful atmosphere, when the sakhīs said, "Hold something red," Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa—the Divine Couple had to hold some red objects within the kuñja. They had to run, and actually the first one who held some red object in the kuñja... And when the sakhīs called out, "Now, hold something black," the Divine Couple had to run and find something black in the kuñja. And whoever missed the opportunity to touch such a colored object first was the loser in the game. 

The loser, and the poet Nāgarī, he writes that, "As was always the case, Kṛṣṇa lost the game of colors, and thus Śrī Rādhā became famous all over Vṛndāvana as the Queen of Divine Colors," another name for Śrī Rādhikā, the Queen of Divine Colors.

And then our poet, Vaiṣṇava poet Nāgarī, he concludes with a very, very, very beautiful prayer with which I will also conclude this lecture today. He writes:

> "The pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa along with Their sakhīs never end. May I always live in Vṛndāvana, nourishing myself by eating the remnants of the sakhīs there. I will decorate my body with the dust of that sacred abode and satisfy my eyes with darśana of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Each day I will drink the clear water of the Yamunā. I pray to Braja-dhāma that in this way I can sing the glories of kuñja-nikuñjas. I pray to Braja-dhāma that in this way I can sing the glories of kuñja-nikuñjas."

I just love that part: "I can sing the glories of kuñja-nikuñjas and always live with the saints of Braja."

*Jaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa!* All glorious to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the name. Thank you so much for watching. This was really, really—having been away for a couple of weeks, having been sick, to come back to this service to all of you, it’s very *śantuṣṭi*, very satisfying to my heart. And I think our next lecture will be about spring, because after winter comes spring, and there’s so many wonderful pastimes about spring. Maybe we’ll get four or five lectures about spring. 

So thank you so much. *Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda! Śrī Śrī Gaur-Nitāi kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma kī jaya! Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara kī jaya! Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī kī jaya!*""