"*00474*.*
"Meeting the moon, the ocean of liquid nectar of love for Kṛṣṇa. Now we will take a fascinating journey upstream. Instead of a pilgrimage, many people year after year—harmless—because this is how Kṛṣṇa's lips remained. They expressed dissatisfaction with Brahmā, who created eyes that blink and cannot see Kṛṣṇa. Who can imagine what kind of luck you will give him? Who embraced Kṛṣṇa in all the ways available to her. Caressed. I will give him a piece of his body. And now, in this liquid, make any nectar. We will have a fascinating journey throughout the day with our dear spiritual teacher, Govinda Mahārāja. Behind me, I left the Madana-mohana temple, which is visible here on the horizon. To our left, there are steps and a pontoon bridge, which is washed away by the Yamunā River every time during the flood season and then replaced. And near the island... air pontoons. At this time of year, the Yamunā River is so shallow that even a child would be in front, so we will have to attract our boats. The virtuosity of courage to lead our boats so we do not run aground and stop them in the right place. Beautiful panoramas and views leave no one indifferent. Śrīla Gurudeva does not part with his camera and I photograph all the significant memorable places in order to take a piece of this story with me. A long journey through the countries of Europe where he is engaged in preaching. Here you can see even the entry where I offer flowers so that you can perform pūjā for immunity, and now the captain will board his ship. Our journey will begin from this moment when we step over the deck of this cruiser. Literally a few moments separate us from that participation. All the boats will depart. Now all the passengers have loaded and sat in their places. Everyone is just waiting for the command to go upstream. Upstream.

A place called Bilan. This will give us enough strength and energy. Maybe we will swim to this place where the goddess Lakṣmī performed penance. Kṛṣṇa should be reached in order to get there. As I seat all the passengers, I urgently give a gift every year, to as many people as possible because this is his way to earn it, apparently. Surprises for this day, and Maharaj, it is great luck that these devotees can be together to go on this boat ride. Our boat has already set off.

Luck, she became very happy to welcome the devotees. Now the whole party is assembled. The side of the boats looks like a children's amusement park where little cars try to hit each other as hard as possible. Such a pile of boats in one place, it's simply unbearable. So, until we open the other boats, we still haven't managed to clear this pier; people shout and swear, boats hit each other, boatmen are nervous, poles rest on the ground. One way or another, we are already almost ten meters from the shore, and by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, we will finally set sail from here. All this looks like a small flotilla of boats that sets off for unknown lands, or a merchant flotilla that carries large quantities of bright, beautiful, classy goods, heading to other unknown shores. We've been loading up for ten minutes now, trying to either swim somewhere, where you'll swim from, until the drift is coming, that in the river you can collide with two boats docked. There are a lot of them here.

Now, we caught up with another one; eight boats in the center are just colliding with each other, and in this boat, you can see some familiar faces. On the opposite bank, we saw a colony of turtles that were enjoying the sun, either to warm themselves peacefully or just a huge number. They asked to say hello to the Mahārāja, but the boy doesn't want to. But we want to. You can raise your hands up and jump a little from the joy of your heart. Jump, jump. I noticed that during the travel, many of the devotees began to chant. In theory, you shouldn't have been; you were looking for benefits for the day after yesterday's day off. Devotees would have been resting or shopping, but in fact, during our time, the best thing is to just sit and chant. 

At least we must repeat sixteen rounds of the mantra every day. Of course, in the West, many devotees even barely manage this minimum, but here it should be a real minimum, and we must use every free minute. Early one morning in the large building next to my house, I saw an elderly sādhu reading śāstras. I went in and there was a small calf. When I passed by this saintly figure, he started reading to me. Of course, I don't know what it was, in what language. Most likely, they ran up. I eavesdropped for a while and then asked, "I'm curious, what are you reading?" He looked at me and a very wide smile appeared. He said something with big eyes. I even felt a transcendental jealousy of his affection and immersion in the text.

I was lucky. I realized that this affection had not grown by chance because this book was quite worn and well-read, that is, he had read it a lot. I went out to do my business, but when I returned it was already 11 o'clock, and when I looked in, I saw that the same sādhu was still reading. I ran into him again in the evening, at sunset, about six or seven o'clock, and I looked in again; we sat there and read. I thought I should also have an excuse, some share of responsibility, but I think it's not serious enough, and really, we need to work on our own. So he tells us that the nature of our body will be, that is, stronger, the real quality of our sādhanā will be checked, and in the moment if you have free time, of course, we visit the places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, so it's important to deepen your study. Believe me, that these merchants will not disperse in different directions.

Someone once suggested to devotees such a small house, like a cottage on the shore. If you clear yourself from the ignorance of the world, you will conquer the senses yourself. This was earlier, a nice small house at the very beginning of the movement, and with Śyāmasundara, they ran and probably told him that someone wants to donate this small house right on the shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He, the former Mukunda, said, "Yes, of course, take it. We will conduct harināma for many hours every day, we will conduct programs in this house." But Śrīla Prabhupāda arrived in time and said, "No, there is no need to preach there. Rādhā-kuṇḍa is intended for the enjoyment of bhakti, this is what you are here for." He wanted us to dive into the mood of the dhāma, and when we return in such a mood, our preaching in the West becomes effective.

One person spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness throughout the world. All societies of devotees can hardly support it. Keep in mind that any service you perform here at the holy dhāma gives thousands of times greater results, but also insults bring a thousand times more reactions. So why should we try to repeat on free days for 64 rounds? Practice is important. After all, for hundreds of years, this has been standard practice for the devotees. Of course, we have an excuse that we preach, but if we don't preach here, then we can try to do it one day. 

One day, Mother Mālati, in Bombay, fell ill with hepatitis and she had to be sent to the hospital. She is usually very active, but due to illness, she couldn't do anything except sit on the bed. Repeating on the rosary can be accompanied by... On the weekend, Prabhupāda very graciously came to the hospital to visit her. She began to apologize. She said, "Prabhupāda, I'm very sorry that I can't do any service. I only sit and repeat." Prabhupāda laughed and said, "In fact, this is the goal of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all day long."

But since you are American boys and girls, you are so restless, one needs to create for you different types of activities in service. And if you develop a taste for bhajana, then you won't fall asleep when your spiritual teacher speaks. And if you sang and told about pastimes for an hour and a half, well, you will be alert. We perform various types of service together, such as chanting; this is the mercy of Mahāprabhu. Their standards say that joint chanting of the holy name is so powerful that it can awaken a taste for devotional service. If we achieve perfection in joint activities, we will no longer have to talk about this world. In this case, we have all the possibilities of these types of activities in the spiritual world. The cover of this book is a wonderful picture of how the devotees worship, and it shows the Lord conducting kīrtana with his companions. Of course, this picture can be understood in different ways, but they are the same personalities. Those who serve Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vṛndāvana in female bodies come together with Lord Caitanya to perform saṅkīrtana.

If you achieve perfection in the practice of harināma saṅkīrtana in this world, you will be able to continue it in the spiritual world. Sarasvatī Ṭhākura says that a person receives the mercy of Lord Kṛṣṇa's mission. When Mahārāja sang this wonderful song describing the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, I looked at the picture and thought that this is what he taught us: to glorify the Lord together. He whispered in my ear at the end, "Wonderful, where should they be together?" I at least hope, not to mention the progress, that what he says will come true. But of course, thanks to the hard work, the spiritual qualification of serving Kṛṣṇa develops.

But in fact, I want to get better, that is, I want to correct my statement. This was a statement not only about the dhāma, but this was a statement about being again on the shore. And although it is now a little warmer than usual because it is the middle of the day—twenty to two, almost noon—but since winter is approaching, it's wonderful here. Behind me is the river, directly in front of me I see the domes of the temple, and to my right, a wonderful forest park—also Vṛndāvana—and on the opposite side, the landscape of the city.

The Madana-mohana temple is, of course, the first, which will give ears the title of coolness. It is described how when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, the Vrajavāsīs were immersed in the ocean of separation from Kṛṣṇa. At that moment, the Lord's great-grandson came up with a wonderful thing. In order to slightly ease the pain of separation, he decided to cut out the deities that would completely resemble God. Install them in different places for the sake of the devotees. He cut out quite a few deities that were installed in different parts of Vṛndāvana so that those suffering from separation from God could come and worship. It was almost as good as the personal presence of God. Śrīla Prabhupāda explained to us that the Deity is not different from the Lord; the Lord fights for us to our heart's content.

We know this story when a young brāhmaṇa asked the Deity Sākṣī-gopāla to come to him as a witness. The village promised to give his daughter in marriage. Most doubted, but the brāhmaṇa said, "You're not just a stone statue, you're the Lord himself, the son of Nanda." Almost 5,000 years ago, almost 50 centuries passed, and as they say in history, many invaders came to India, marauders; about 1,000 years ago, Muslims first appeared in this country. Today, here is a selection... Babur, then Tīmūr, attacked. Tīmūr was from Samarkand. Once I invited the devotees to Tīmūr's samādhi to explain this. We stood there silently looking at the grave of Tīmūr. Do you understand the concepts of Mānasa-pūjā? We said, "Do you understand what Mānasa-pūjā is here?" And because of these marauders and invaders, pūjārīs were often forced to stop. They hid the Deities at the bottom of the lake, carried them, buried them, and hundreds of years passed. Pūjārīs were sometimes avoided, sometimes killed, and therefore there were two. No one found them. They disappeared.

Instead of finding more, they take a box where Kṛṣṇa is. And he said, "They surfaced." It was part of Lord Caitanya's plan when he sent the Gosvāmīs to Vṛndāvana so that they would find these ancient Deities, so that they would reveal the lost Kṛṣṇa pastimes and write books of consciousness. Historians usually skip this, but as you know, they found the ancient Deity of Kṛṣṇa and continued to worship. Even before they appeared, it is described how they conducted a pilgrimage to all the holy places of India. And not far from the temple of the house, past which we passed on the left side, there is a place called... and in this place, our Advaita Ācārya from Pañca-tattva initially spent his time in bhajana. He saw that part of the Deity's body was peeking out from under the ground. He called out so you could dig up the Deity, and he called this place... I don't know how long this Deity was here in Vṛndāvana during his parikramā. Well, all this time he bowed to the Deity.

Sanaātana Gosvāmī once met a young boy. Advaita Ācārya sometimes went into the area of Mathurā where he lived and saw that several boys were playing with some dark youth. One child was amazing—you would burn with love. When Sanātana Gosvāmī saw the Lord, he was amazed because he looked very handsome with curly hair, big lotus eyes, broad chest, slender waist, and other charming features. Yes, of course, I know what kind of youth they were. Vṛndāvana. Don't think that this is impossible. The Lord can appear before the eyes of devotees. Once, Prabhupāda together with the disciples chanted the mantra, and one disciple, Damodara, appeared; he was so tall, attractive, so very correct. He asked who it was that had been on him—he didn't see him—and the devotees said he just arrived. All of Vṛndāvana... bring him here. He asked this young man, "Preach, get caught for what reason?" and he said, "I have been with one of our spiritual brothers, we preached in the south." "How old are you?" "19 years old." "And you preach? There is a girl, a God-sister, we study big books, we memorize them." This, for that time, was unusual because we were all under the guidance of some mentors.

And this young man with... "There, we preach until the day ends, then we'll go to Vṛndāvana." Prabhupāda thought for a minute and said, "You can see, but I would take care of accepting this young man." You are currently in the dhāma itself. Rūpa Gosvāmī lived there; go pray to Rūpa Gosvāmī for instructions. And this young man, this brahmacārī, sat for four or five hours in front of the samādhi of Rūpa Gosvāmī, prayed, repeated the mantra, and then returned. Prabhupāda asked, "Well, how are we? Is the guru ready to accept?" And not only by the grace of Rūpa, but you, we have the opportunity to communicate with these great personalities. One of the students asked him, "If we turn to the previous ācāryas, whether they hear us?" And he said, "Yes, they hear us and answer our prayers."

They collected with their buddies. A compartment for him. New clothes for the first day. We'll go through the initiation ceremony. He said, "I don't believe you. We don't know you at all. Maybe you made it all up." Well, he rushed over and said, "You can ask Prabhupāda yourself." They went to ask Prabhupāda. And there was an initiation ceremony. Some devotees took the first, second initiation, but these two devotees, called Paramahaṁsa and... they received it at 19 years old. This ceremony took place in the temple. It was a wonderful ceremony. Did anyone see it? Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmī themselves didn't participate. Therefore, this is an unusual movement. Such great devotees participate in it, who inspire and push us.

In this, it seemed like the Rūpa-Sanātana Gosvāmī influence. I saw this handsome young man who, after a short time, ran off with friends for lunch home. Sanātana Gosvāmī also, and the friends would both have looked in the window, saw that this boy was there in the house and he knocked on the door. As soon as the knock was heard, this boy ran to the altar, jumped up and stood in such a pose. To order the friends to pass you places, of course, you cannot, but since it was such an exalted spiritual family, Madana-mohana responded to their mood of devotion. I play the role of a family member. Sanātana Gosvāmī would often sit for hours, and when this boy opened the door, Sanātana Gosvāmī told him, "You have such a beautiful Deity, but you can no longer treat him simply as a family member, that is, there are certain strict rules and restrictions." This boy felt very confused, and that same night, Sanātana Gosvāmī had a dream. Most likely, it was somewhere here in Vṛndāvana. And in this dream, the same Madana-mohana appeared before him. "Dear Sanātana, why did you start talking like that with this brāhmaṇa, because his family is direct, they do not need to worship me in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state archives." He quickly woke up and went to Mathurā, and it was time to change things himself. But when this brāhmaṇa, for example, saw him, he said, "Sir," and ran to the altar, took the Deity and brought it to Sanātana. He said in a hurry that he had a wonderful dream in which the Lord told him to give it to him.

Sanātana Gosvāmī received his Deity, Madana-mohana, whom we worship. It turns out that future moments with a character that binds the resource are bought. It is he who could show. Kṛṣṇa has another heaven, but how does he attract minds? Madana-mohana denotes God as Cupid, and more modern, the one who attracts Cupid. Such is the story of how this Deity was originally installed in Vṛndāvana by the great-grandsons themselves. Kṛṣṇa-candra. And a little later we will also be able to learn how everything. Rūpa Gosvāmī found his Deity, Govindajī, who was under Mount Go-vardhana. We know that there are many temples in Vṛndāvana, about 7,000, but of them, seven are the main ones. And since they had no money to maintain them, other devotees built beautiful temples for worship.

When we stopped at the temple, Madana-mohana bowed to him on the top of the hill, and most likely most know the story very well about how Sanātana Gosvāmī was on the hill, near which flowed to him, how the boat of one merchant was sailing, which was stuck aground. The merchant asked for the Deity's help, he prayed, the boat was removed, a million decided the site is now. This temple is being updated and restored because it is an archaeological site. But we are going to see this temple not as an archaeological site in any way as some antiquity. This is not how we treat the temple. We come to Vṛndāvana, they have more internal than this external mood. Of course, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is an internal process of gradual development of pure devotion to the Lord himself. A devotee, of course, keeps his level of development of Kṛṣṇa consciousness a secret; doesn't share them with anyone who is not at the same level. But if we tell others about these lunches, then their [the Deities'] mercy can all greatly decrease. We should go as a single band; we will deliver, but it is certain that we must put more effort into what different types are pleasant to serve—words, kīrtana, and service in place of one percent. This place from the office—there is an authoritative process, how can we penetrate the secrets of the saint.

And this temple, and the atmosphere, it is very important to us, I know because my friends with the Mahārāja for many years, this temple, especially the samādhi of Sanātana Gosvāmī, is one of the most Govinda Mahārāja's favorite places in Vṛndāvana. He really likes the instructions of Sanātana Gosvāmī, and therefore he really likes being with the Deity itself. First, we go to the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, and then he attracts Cupid. We heard from the scriptures, the affection of men and women is the basis of material existence, and they themselves, with their own place to live, are attached to each other. And this, of course, is falsely attached because, as we know, this attachment to Kṛṣṇa betrayed him, their fishing, but in this world, women and men are attached to each other not only because of separation, but also because of separation, they exist and continue to exist materially.

The division of anger and greed is three brothers who lead far from new cups, and what can we say about the block? They lead us through clouds. One of the early years, 1968, Prabhupāda says that in the department, this is public enemy number one; no evil cuts off the senses. Our report cards and desire are based on the division of the desire to enjoy, regardless of whether Kṛṣṇa is the cause of our confusion in the material world. I say that many exalted devotees fell on this path because of the temptations caused by money, women, and fame. How can we, ordinary inhabitants of the earth, resist these desires that determine even demigods? No, and often a person's salary, girls and horses, stained, remember the śāstras. The moral ideas of the oil workers, the quotes of a quarter of X, which says that we can give up what we have if we delete a page with what is killed in a hurry. 

The Lord specifically comes here to this world in order to manifest his games of salvation, pleasant destruction of the demon, establishing religious principles, completing the game is so beautiful that if we see these games or hear about them, they are so wonderful that they free us from separation. In the Vedas it is described that the games of Lord Caitanya are so beautiful in the spiritual world, but in the material world they are even more attractive.""