 Hare Krishna,

I'm sitting here on the banks of the Yamuna River, the most sacred river, at her source high in the Himalayan mountains. This place is called Yamunotri. It's one of four sacred dhams in this part of the Himalayas, in the state of Uttarakhand.

This place is sometimes referred to as Devbhumi because there are so many sacred places, so many holy places. I've come here with a group of devotees. We'll be visiting Gangotri and Kedarnath and Badrinath for centuries, for millennia actually, you could say since the beginning of time, at the beginning of creation, great sages, yogis, mystics, they've come to these sacred places for their purification, uprooting material desires, and ultimately awakening our love of God.

Particularly potent is to come to this very source where this sacred river Yamuna, or we'll be going in a few days to the source of the Ganges. It falls actually from the heavenly planets. The source, of course, of these sacred rivers is the spiritual world, and that's very significant.

Just like different avatars come from the spiritual world, Krishna, the source of all avatars, is called avatar.

He comes and when His expansions come, or when His pure representatives or His devotees come, they come for our welfare, for our spiritual welfare. So this water trickles down from Vaikuntha, you could say. In the case of the Yamuna River, she flows down from Goloka Vrindavan.

And our acharyas have described that Yamuna Devi, her personality, she's an expansion of Vishakha, one of the eight principal gopis attending to Krishna.

So she comes here to this world as two different avatars, as two different saintly persons, as does Tulasi Devi, all for the benefit of human beings. And by taking that in her sacred waters, again, jatu-karma, and all the dirty things in the heart are purified, those nasty material desires that keep us bound up life after life, gets thrown to a distant place.

And especially Yamuna Devi, she's actually even more sacred than the Mother Ganges. Ganges is most sacred, but Ganges, we become free from sinful activities. But the acharyas say by bathing in the rivers of the Yamuna, one can develop pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Shri Krishna, and His eternal consort.

We believe in devotional service. So my target, my aim, my sister. So we made a great effort to come here. It's not easy due to a lack of time and some physical disabilities in our group. We came by helicopter.

We had a very generous sponsor who came here quite quickly. But it's quite arduous to me in these mountains. Flying, we walked six kilometers, and what a hell that was!

Even that was not so easy. And then we make that endeavor to develop that, that love for the Supreme Personality of God. So it's an adventure. In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says that He is adventure.

So those who like adventure, then they should take up this type of adventure. Go to holy places. Don't go to some place for sense gratification and material enjoyment, become more entangled in material life. But the adventurous spirit, it's there so that we can find out who we are, who is God, and what is their intimate relationship with God.

That's a path. So if you take a path to go somewhere, this is the real path, the path back home, the path back to the spiritual world. So devotees of the Lord, all classes of transcendentalists, they come here for these reasons, to develop love.

It's so painful analogy about it. And Yamuna, she's particularly very merciful. Here at Yamunotri, there's a beautiful temple, and in that temple, there's a deity of Yamuna, a deity of Ganga, her sister. Ganges. And in the middle, there's a deity here.

Lakshmi. Yamuna Devi is very darkish in color, dark blue. Mother Ganges is very white. Yamuna's blue. She is the daughter of the Sun God, actually. She has a twin brother who's also dark in color. Her twin brother is Yamaraja.

Twins. They were born from Surya Dev and his wife. So Surya Dev wanted to have children, but his wife was a little hesitant to conceive with him because he's very fiery by nature, he's the Sun God. So she sent her shadow.

Acharyas say she sent her shadow, and Surya Dev conceived with the shadow. Therefore, Yamuna Devi, she's into the darkish in color. And Yamaraja, why does she come?

That's how you see them in the temple there. Mysteriously, or by the arrangement of the Lord. Here at Yamunotri, there's a beautiful hot spring because it's quite cold here. You can see I'm dressed in very warm clothes. And though her waters are icy, icy cold, on but by her arrangement, there's a spring which bubbles up very warm water.

So pilgrims come here and they first bathe in her sacred cold waters and then they go bathe in the warm water. She's so kind. And what is her ultimate kindness?

That she helps us to become returned residents of Goloka. She is one of the five personalities who grants eternal residence in Goloka. And from here, she'll flow down to the plains, into the plains of India, and into Vrindavan. And there, pilgrims also bathe in her sacred waters because she is one of the five personalities who grants eternal residence in Goloka.

And Krishna bhakta, that is our goal, go back home, back to Godhead, specifically Goloka Vrindavan.

Serve the Lord and His associates there in that circle. Those we're sitting here at Your lotus feet. Just the external beauteous captivates the heart. What to speak if we pray for that spiritual vision by mentioning purity of heartfelt chaste?

Not just to see these things in the spiritual way. And how to do that?

We can reach. We can hear from the acharyas. Let me finish with a beautiful prayer from the Chaitanya Chandramrita. How we can appreciate in a deeper spiritual way these sacred waters here high in the Himalayas. O River Yamuna, you are the blissful spiritual water that gives love for the son of Nanda Maharaja.

Because you have descended from the spiritual world, you can vanquish all our offenses and the sinful reactions and impurities in our lives. You are the creator of all auspicious things in the world. O daughter of the Sun God, kindly purify us by our pious activities.

O Yamuna, O river Yamuna, O Char Dham, key will be the key. Shripala, five key, Golok, Vrindavan. Hare Krishna.